

THE PATTERN OF CATECHISTICAL DOCTRINE AT LARGE: OR A Learned and Pious
Exposition Of the Ten COMMANDMENTS, With An INTRODUCTION, Containing the Use
and Benefit of Catechizing; the general Grounds of Religion; and the truth of
Christian Religion in particular; proved against ATHEISTS, PAGANS, JEWS, and
TURKS.

By the Right Reverend Father in God LANCELOT ANDREWS, late Bishop of WINCHESTER

Perfected according to the Authors own Copy, and thereby purged from many
thousands of Errors, Defects, and Corruptions, which were in a rude imperfect
Draught formerly published, as appears in the Preface to the Reader.

Ecclesiastes 12. 13. Fear God and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole
duty of Man.

1. Corinthians. 7. 19. Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing, but
the keeping of the Commandments of God.

LONDON, Imprinted by Roger Norton, and are to be sold by George Badger, at his
Shop in S. Dunstans Churchyard in Fleet Street.

Anno Dom. 1650.

THE CONTENTS.
The Exposition of the Introduction.
CHAP. I. Page 1 1. That Children are to be taught and instructed in Religion
proved out of Heathen Philosophers, out of the Law, the Gospel. 2. That this
instruction ought to be by way of Catechism. What Catechizing is. How it
differs from Preaching. Reasons for abridgements or sums of Religion.
Catechizing used in all ages; before the flood; after the flood; under the Law;
under the Gospel; after the Apostles; in the Primitive Church. Reasons for this
custom of Catechizing. CHAP. II. Page 9 The duty of the catechized. 1. To come,
and that 1. with a right intent, 2. willingly, 3. with preparation; which must
be, 1. in fear, 2. by prayer. Other rules for coming, 1. with (...), 2. with
purity of heart, 3. in faith, 4. frequently. The second duty to hear or
hearken. The necessity of hearing. The manner, 1. with reverence, 2. with
fervor of spirit, 3. with silence, 4. without gazing, 5. hear to keep. How the
word must be kept in our hearts, 1. by examination, 2. by meditation, 3. by
Conference. CHAP. III. Page 14 Of Religion in general, and the foundations of
it. The four first steps. 1 We must come to God, as the only way to true
happiness. No happiness in riches proved by diverse reasons. Nor in Honor.
Nor in pleasure. Nor in moral virtue. Nor in contemplation. General reasons
against them all, that felicity cannot be in any of them. because they cannot
satisfy. 2 They are not perpetual, but uncertain. In God only is true
happiness to be found. CHAP. IIII. Page 19 2. The way to come to God is only
by faith, not by natural reason alone, as the Manichees held; reasons against
them. The way by faith more certain. The necessity of belief. Rules for coming
by faith. CHAP. V. Page 22 3. That we must believe there is a God. Misbelief in
four things. 1. Autotheisme. 2. Polytheisme. 3. Atheism. 4. Diabolisme. The
reasons of Atheists answered. Religion upholds all states. The original of
Atheism, from 1. Discontent, 2. sensuality. CHAP. VI. Page 25 That there is a
God, proved. 1. By reasons drawn out of the writings of the Heathens
themselves. 2. By the frame of the World: Objections answered. 3. By the
beginning and progress of arts, etc. 4. By the necessity of a first mover. The
beginning of things cannot be. 1. By Chance. nor 2. By Nature. 5. By prophecies
fulfilled. 6. By the artificial framing the bodies of all Creatures. 7. By the
soul of man. Reasons why so many Atheists. Natural notions of a diety. The
Conscience. 8. From the miserable ends of Atheists. CHAP. VII. Page 29 The
fourth step, That God has a providence over man. Reasons against divine
providence answered: why God permitts evil: general reasons for a providence,
particular reasons from all sorts of creatures. That second causes work not,
nor produce their effects of themselves without God. That Gods providence
reaches to particulars. That God is to be sought, and that he rewards them
that seek him. CHAP. VIII. Page 34 The four religions in the world. Of
Paganism, reasons against the plurality of Gods. That there can be but one God
proved out of their own Philosophers: that their religion was false. How man
came to be worshipped. How beasts. Of the Miracles and Oracles of the Gentiles.
CHAP. IX. Page 37 Of Judaisme. The positions of the Jews. 1. That the Messiah
shall have an earthly kingdom at Jerusalem, confuted. 2. That Jesus is not the
Messiah. The contrary proved by Jacobs prophecy. Genesis 49. 11. By Daniels
seventy two weeks. Dan. 9. 25. By diverse other reasons. 3. That the Messiah is
not yet come. The contrary proved by sundry arguments. CHAP. X. Page 41 Of
Christian. This religion proved to be false by seven reasons. CHAP. XI. Page 42
Of Christian religion. The truth thereof in general proved. 1. By the antiquity
of it, out of the Heathen authors themselves. 2. By the continuance and
preservation of it. 3. By the certainty. 4 By the end it leads to, viz. to God,
it gives all honor to him. Deprives man of all. Other reasons. It restraines
carnal liberty allowed by false Religions; reaches to the heart. It contains
mysteries above man's capacity. Teaches contempt of the world; requires
spiritual worship. Confirmed by miracles beyond exception. Prophecies. CHAP.
XII. Page 48 Special reasons for the Christian Religion, as differing from the
Jewish. It purges the soul: shows that God is (...): the testimony of the
Apostles and Evangelists: the knowledge of what they wrote: their honesty: the
credit of the story: testimony from Pagans: the star at Christ's birth: the
cross sacred with the Egyptians: the miracles at Christ's death: the Progress
of Christianity by weak means, opposed by power and learning: contrary to flesh
and blood: the excellency of the promises: power in conversions: the truth of
Christ's miracles: the constancy of Martyrs: the ends of the Apostles: the
Devils testimony against himself. CHAP. XIII. Page 52 Of the two chief parties
that lay claim to Christian Religion, Papists and Protestants. Their difference
about interpretation of Scriptures. The Churches authority, in expounding
Scriptures. An additional Observation out of the Authors other works. Rules
about the sense of the Scriptures. Means for finding out the true sense: other
means controverted. Addition about the Churches power in matters of Faith,
whether infallible. Decrees of Councels: Consent of Fathers. The Pope not
infallible. CHAP. XIIII. Page 58 Christian religion divided into the Law and
the Gospel. Additions about the use of the Law. That the Law of Christ is part
of the second Covenant, etc. The judgment of the Author out of his other
books. That the Gospel is lex Christi. The Law handled first. Reasons for this
order. What the Law teaches, and what the Gospel. CHAP. XV. Page 62 In the Law
four things. 1. The work to be done. The Decalogue the Pandects of moral Laws.
The Laws moral known before Moses, written in men's hearts, proved in
particular. In every Law there is evil to be avoided, and good to be done, both
must concur. S. Paul's three rules of pie, just, sobrie. S. Augustine his three
rules, contrary to three rules of corrupt nature. 2. The manner of doing
riquires, 1. totos, 2. totum, 3. toto tempore, 3. The reward. 4. The
punishment. CHAP. XVI. Page 83 That the moral Law of God written by Moses, was
known to the Heathen. 1. The act or work was known to them, as it is proved in
every precept of the Decalogue, yet their light more dim in the 1. 2. 4. 10. S.
Paul's three rules of pie, sobrie, just, known to them. 2. They knew the manner
of performance, toti, totum, semper. 3. They knew the rewards and punishments.
CHAP. XVII. Page 68 Questions about the Law. 1. Why it was written by Moses,
seeing it was written before in men's hearts. How the light of Nature became
dim, three causes of it: it was deserved in three respects. Why the Law was
given at this time. Why only to the (...). All the four parts of a Law, are in
the Law written. 1. The Act. 2. The Manner. 3. The rewards. 4. The punishments.
2. Whether any can keep the Law. How God is just in requiring that which we
cannot perform. An Addition about power of keeping the Law evangelical. Adam
lost his ability, not efficienter, but meritorie, God always gives, or is
ready to give power to do what he requires, if we be not wanting to our selves.
How Christ has fulfilled the Law: how we keep it by faith. 3. Why God promises
life to the keeping of the Law if we cannot keep it. CHAP. XVIII. Page 73 Of
the preparation before the giving of the Law. 1. To make them willing, by
consideration of 1. his benefits, 2. Gods right, as Lord, 3. Their relation, as
Creatures, etc. 4. That they are his people. His Benefits past and promised.
Three motives to love. 1: Beauty. 2. Neernesse. 3. Benefits: all in God. 2. To
make them able, by sanctifying and cleansing themselves: that ceremonial
washing signified our spiritual cleansing: how we came to be polluted: how we
must be cleansed. Why they were not to come at their wives. Of the danger and
abuse of things lawful. 3. That they might not run too far, bounds were set. Of
curiosity about things unnecessary. CHAP. XIX. Page 79 The manner of delivering
the Law. 1. With thick clouds. 2. With thunder and lightning. 3. With sound of
a trumpet. The terrible delivering of the Law, compared with the terror of the
last judgment, when we must give account for the keeping of it: the comparison
in all the particulars. The use of this. CHAP. XX. Page 80 The end of the Law
as given by Moses. 1. It brings none to perfection, and that by reason of man's
corruption: as appears, 1. by the place, a barren wilderness, a mountain which
none might touch: 2. by the mediator Moses: by the breaking of the Tables,
etc. 2. It brings us to Christ, because given by Angels in the hand of a
Mediator. It Was to be put into the Ark: Given fifty days after the
Passover: Moses had a Veyl: the fiery Serpent: our use of the Law, to know our
debts as by a book of accounts; then to drive us to seek a Surety to pay the
debt, viz. Christ; amd to be thankful, and take heed of running further into
debt.


The Exposition of the first Commandment.
CHAP. I. Page 83 Of the Preface to the Decalogue. Two things required in a
Lawgiver. 1. Wisdom. 2. Authority: both appear here. Gods Authority declared.
1. By his Name Jehovah, which implies, 1. that being himself, and that all
other things come from him; 2. his absolute dominion over all the Creatures:
from which flow two attributes. 1. His Eternity. 2. His Veracity, or truth. 2.
By his Jurisdiction, thy God; by Creation, and by Covenant. 3. By a late
benefit, their deliverance out of Egypt. How all this belongs to us. CHAP. II.
Page 87 The division of the Decalogue: how divided by the Jews; how by
Christians. Addition 6. That the four fundamental Articles of all Religion are
employed in the four first Precepts. Of rules for expounding the Decalogue. Six
rules of extent. 1. The affirmative implies the negative, and e contra. 2. When
any thing is commanded or forbidden, all of the same nature are included. 3.
The inward act of the soul is forbidden or commanded by the outward. 4. The
means conducing are included in every precept. 5. The consequents and signs.
6. We must not only observe the precept our selves, but cause it to be kept by
others, left we partake of other men's sins, which is, 1. Jubendo, by
commanding. 2. Permittendo, by tolleration. 3. Provocando, by provocation. 4.
Suadendo, by persuasion. 5. Consentiendo, by consenting. 6. Defendendo, by
maintaining. 7. Scandalum praebendo, by giving scandal. CHAP. III. Page 94
Rules of restraint in expounding the Law. False rules made by the Pharisees. Of
Custom. Addition 7. Of the force of Church Customs. 3. Three rules of
restraint: 1. By dispensation. 2. By the nature of the Precept. 3. By conflict
of Precepts. Antinomia, wherein these rules are to be observed; 1. Ceremonial
Precepts are to give place to moral. 2. The second table is to give place to
the first. 3. In the second table, the following Precepts are to give place to
those before. Rules to expound in case of 1. Obscurity, 2. Ambiguity, 3.
Controversy. CHAP. IIII. Page 98 Three general observations in the Decalogue.
1. That the precepts are all in the second person. 2. All but two are Negative.
All but two are in the future tense. Observations general from the first
precept. 1. Impediments are to be removed, before true worship can be
performed. 2. The worship of God is the foundation of all obedience to the
rest. 3. That spiritual worship, is chiefly commanded in the first precept.
Addition 8. About the distinction of inward, and outward worship. CHAP. V. Page
100 In the first Commandment three things are contained. 1. We must have a God.
2. We must have the Lord for our God. 3. We must have him alone for our God.
The sin opposite to the first is (...): to the second is false Religion: to
the third mixed Religion. How our nanture is inclinable to those sins. Reasons
against them. CHAP. VI. Page 102. In the first proposition of having a God, is
included, 1. Knowledge of God, wherein, 1. The excellency, 2. the necessity, 3.
how it is attained. The contrary forbidden is, 1. Ignorance, 2. light
knowledge. What we are to know of God. Impediments of knowledge to be removed.
Rules of direction to be followed. CHAP. VII. Page 110. The second inward
virtue commanded in the first precept, is faith. Reasons for the necessity of
faith. Addition 9. Concerning the evidence of faith, and freedom of assent. The
certainty of faith. Of unbelief. Addition 10. Concerning the nature of faith.
Means of believing. Of trust in God for things temporal. The trial of our
trust. Six signs of Faith. CHAP. VIII. Page 120. The third inward virtue is
fear of God. Addition 11. Of the seat of faith. Reasons why God should be
feared. Of (...) and servile fear. How Fear and Love may stand together. The
sins forbidden. 1. Want of Fear, 2. worldly fear. Motives to fear taken from
Gods judgments. The signs of fear. CHAP. IX. Page 128. The fourth inward
virtue, is humility. The nature of it. The properties of it. Of Pride, The
nature and degrees of it. Signs of Pride. The punishments of Pride. Of forced
humility. Of counterfeit humility. The means of humility. The signs of
humility. CHAP. X. Page 136. Of the fifth inward virtue, Hope. Hope and Fear
come both from Faith. The several uses of Hope. The nature and exercise of
Hope. Of Presumption and Despair. Reasons against both. Means to strengthen
Hope. Signs of true Hope. CHAP. XI. Page 142. The sixth duty is prayer. The
end of prayer, Gods Glory. The necessity of it. The power of prayer. The parts
of prayer. 1. Deprecation. 2. Petition. Why God denies some things we ask. 3.
Intercession. 4. Thanksgiving, which consists of, 1. Confession. 2.
Complacency. 3. Promulgation. 4. Provocation of others. The excellency of
praising God. The properties of true prayer. The helps to prayer. Signs of
faithful prayer. Of causing others to pray. CHAP. XII. Page 154. The seventh
virtue required, is Love of God. That God is to be loved. Of mercenary and free
Love. The excellency of Love. The measure of Love. The opposites to the Love of
God. 1. Love of the world. 2. Self-love. 3. Stupidity. 4. Loathing of God. All
the motives of Love are eminently in God. 1. Beauty. 2. (...). 3 Benefits
bestowed. Six signs of Love. Of drawing others to love God. CHAP. XIII. Page
163. The proper effects of Love. 1. Obedience. 2. Patience. How Obedience
arises from the Love of God. It brings glory to God two ways. Is better then
sacrifice in four respects. Reasons why we should obaudire Deo. There be three
speakers: 1. God, who speaks 1. By his Word, 2. by his Works. 2. The World, 3.
Our selves. These do obloqui, gainsay what God says. The measure and quality
of Obedience. Of disobedience, that it is a great sin. The degrees of it. 1.
Neglect. 2. Contempt. Motives to obedience Signs of obedience. CHAP. XIIII.
Page 170 Of Patience. How it arises from the Love of God. The necessity and
excellency of patience. Afflictions are either corrections or trials. Reasons
of patience in both. Of counterfeit patience in Heretics and others. Stupidity
no true patience. (...) thereof. Of fainting under the cross. Means of
patience. Signs of patience. Of working patience in others. CHAP. XV. Page
178. The second thing required in the first Commandment, To have the true God
for our God Reasons hereof. Of true Religion: this is the true pearl to be
sought. Three rules in seeking. The extremes of Religion, 1. Idolatry, 2.
Superstition, 3. Profaneness, 4. Novelty; of which three degrees, 1. Schism,
2. Heresy, 3. Apostasy. The means of true Religion. The signs of procuring it
in others. CHAP. XVI. page 182 The third thing required in the first
Commandment is, to have only the true God, which includes sincerity. Reasons
hereof. The contraries to sincerity. Means of sincerity: Signs of sincerity.
Of procuring it in others. CHAP. XVII. page 184 Of the last words in the first
Commandment, Coram me, in which is implied Integrity. Reasons for it. Of
Hypocrisy, and reasons against it. Signs of a sound heart. An observation
from the first words. Non habebis. They are in the Future tense, and imply
perseverance. Reasons for it. The extremes. 1. Constancy in evil. 2.
Inconstancy in good. Four reasons against Backsliding; signs of perseverance.
Of procuring it in others.


The Exposition of the second Commandment.
CHAP. XI. page 192 The general parts of this Commandment. 1. The precept. 2.
The sanction. The precept is negative, forbids Idolatry, and implies the
affirmative. 1. That God must be worshipped as he requires. 2. That reverence
must be showed in the performance. Reasons why this and the fourth Commandment
are larger then the rest. Reasons for the affirmative and negative part.
Addition 13. That the making of Images was absolutely forbidden the Jews, and
in that respect the precept was positive and reached only unto them. Addition
14. Whether all voluntary or free worship be forbidden under the name of
will worship. CHAP. II. page 196 That God will not be worshipped by Images: the
several words whereby Image Worship is forbidden: why God appointed the making
of Cherubims, and the brazen Serpent: Reasons against worshipping of Images:
the original of Images: four occasions of the use of Images; some in times of
persecution, some in times of peace. CHAP. III. page 202 What the Romanists
allege out of the Fathers, ancient Liturgies and Councels for Images. Add. 13.
Of S. Chrysostomes Liturgy. Add. 14. Of the second Nicene Council. The words
mistaken in the capitular of Charles the great, and in the Synod of Frankford
and Paris. Testimonies of the Fathers against Images. CHAP. IV. page 204 The
five Rules of extent for expounding this Commandment. Of the affirmative part
of it. In Gods outward worship are two things: 1. the substance. 2. the
ceremony. The first consists of 1. Preaching. Addition 15. How preaching is a
part of Gods worship. 2. Prayer. 3. Sacraments. Addition 16. The Eucharist
considered as a Sacrament and a Sacrifice. 4 Discipline. CHAP. V. page 208 Of
Ceremonies in Gods worship. The use of them. 4. Cautions to be observed abont
them. The means of preserving Gods worship. The signs. Addition 17. Concerning
customs and traditions of the Church. The 6. Rules of causing others to keep
this Commandment. CHAP. VI page 210 Of the manner of outward worship, no
reveronce nor worship to be performed to Images. 1. The distinction of (...)
and (...) examined. 2. That evasion, that not the Image, but God by the Image,
is worshipped, taken away. 3. That they are Laymens books, examined. 4. That
Images are to put us in mind of the Saints, examined. Addition 20. About
Images and pictures for memories sake. CHAP. VII. page 214 The affirmative part
of this precept, concerning the manner of outward worship. 3. Reasons for
outward bodily worship. Outward honor consists 1. In the sign. 2. In the act.
Of the sign, by 1. Uncovering the head. 2. Bowing the body. Of the act or
deed. 1. By being at Gods command. 2. By doing his work or service. Of the
gesture of Reverence. 1. In public and private prayer. 2. At hearing the word.
3. At the administration of Sacraments. 4. At discipline. The sins against
these. In public worship must be. 1. Uniformity. 2. Fear. 3. The heart must be
present. 4. Silence. 5. Constancy, to tarry till all be done. The means of
outward worship. The signs. CHAP. VIII. page 221 Of the second part of this
precept. The sanction, or penalty. This is the first Commandment with a
penalty. Reasons of it. The parts of this sanction. 1. Gods style. 2. A
commination. 3. A promise. 1. Gods style by 1. his power. 2. his jealousy. How
jealousy is ascribed to God. Why humane affections are ascribed to God. CHAP.
IX. page 224 Of the Commination, wherein. 1. The censure of the sin. 2. The
punishment. 1. In the censure. The sin, viz. of Idolatry, Is called. 1. Hatred
of God. How God can be hated. 2. Iniquity. The punishment, visitation upon the
children. The (...) of this punishment, by, 1. The greatness. 2. The
multiplicity. 3. The continuance. Of Gods justice in punishing the sins of the
fathers upon the children. That it is not unjust, in respect of the father, nor
2. of the sin. The use of all. CHAP. X. page 228 The third part of the
sanction, a promise of mercy. Gods rewards proceed from mercy, which is the
fountain of all our happiness. His mercy is promised to the 1000 generation:
the threatening extends only to the third and fourth. The object of his mercy,
such as love him. Our love must be manifested by keeping his Commandments. How
they must be kept. The benefit: they will keep and preserve us.


The Exposition of the third Commandment.
CHAP. I. page 231 The general scope of the third Commandment. Of glorifying
the name of God by praise. The manner how it must be done. Several motives to
stir men up to the duty. CHAP. II. page 234 What is meant by Gods name. The use
of names. 1. To distinguish. 2. To dignifie Gods name in respect of his
Essence, Attributes, and works, and how they are to be reverenced. What it is
to take his Name, as glorious as necessary. Glorifying his Name inwardly,
outwardly by confessing, defending it, remembering it, honorable mention of it
threefold, it must be (...) often, (...) well spoken of, (...) venerable.
Applied to our own actions by prayer, and to others by blessing, etc. Of
glorifying it in our lives. What it is to take Gods Name in vain, in respect of
1. the end, 2. agent, 3. the work. CHAP. III. page 239 Of taking Gods Name by
an oath. The causes and grounds of an oath. The parts of it, Contestation,
Execration. How God is glorified by an oath. What is here commanded. 1. To
swear. In what cases. For Gods glory. Man's necessity. For the public good. The
Oath Ex Officio whether lawful or no. Of private and voluntary oaths. 2. To
swear by God, not by Idols or Creatures. 3. Not to take his Name in vain, but
to swear in 1. Truth, in oaths assertorie, promissorie. 2. Judgment. 3.
Justice. Against voluntary oaths, whether lawful. Of swearing from the heart.
The means to be used against vain swearing. The signs of keeping this
Commandment. Of drawing others to keep it. CHAP. IV. page 250 What a vow is.
Whether a bare purpose without a promise. Whether a thing commanded may be the
matter of a vow. The necessity and use of vows, in respect of God, of our
selves. What things a man may vow, se, suos, sua. Vows in the times of the
Gospel. Of performing vows. Qualifications in a vow, for the person, the
matter. The time of vowing. Of paying our vows. CHAP. V. page 255 Of glorifying
Gods Name from the heart. The means of glorifying it. The signs. Of causing
others to glorify it. The second part of this precept, the Commination.
Reasons why such a threatening is here denounced. Gods punishing the breach of
this Commandment by visible judgments. God is jealous of his Name.


The Exposition of the Fourth Commandment.
CHAP. I. page 259 The excellent order of the Commandments. Why God himself
appointed a set time for public worship. Why this Commandment is larger then
the rest. Six special things to be observed in this Commandment, which are not
in the rest. The general parts of it. 1. The precept. 2. The reasons. In the
precept. 1. The affirmative part what is meant by Sabbath: what by sanctifying;
How things sanctified differ from other things. God sanctified it not for
himself, but for us. We must sanctify it. 1. In our estimation of it. 2. In
our use of it. CHAP. II. page 262 What is commanded here. 1. A rest. 2.
Sanctification. Rest is required not for it self, but for the duties of
sanctification. Reasons that the Sabbath is not wholly nor principally
remonial. Addition 21. out of the Authors other works declaring his meaning in
two things. 1. That the Lords day is Jure Divino. 2. That the Jewish Sabbath is
abolisht by Christ's death, proved by him at large, out of Scriptures, and
Antiquity, in his Speech against Trask in Star Chamber. CHAP. III. page 268
Additional considerations upon the doctrine of the Sabbath, laid down in seven
conclusions. 1. It is certain some time is to be set apart for public worship,
proved by Schoolmen, Canonists, and Reasons. 2. Certain that the law of Nature
does not dictate the proportion of seven or any other in particular. 3. It is
most probable that the seventh day was appointed by God from the beginning, as
a day of public worship in memory of the creation, and did oblige all
mankind: though the symbolical or typical rest afterward was enjoined to the
Jews only: This proved from Scripture, Fathers, Jewish Doctors, late Divines,
reasons, etc. How the Fathers are to be understood that deny Sabbatizing before
the Mosaical Law. 4. The Lords day is of divine institution, proved by
Scripture, Fathers, public Declarations of the Church, Edicts of Princes,
Canonists, some Schoolmen, late Divines. 5. The fourth Commandment is in
force: for the moral equity, that at least a seventh part be given to God;
literally it requires only the seventh day from the creation, not a seventh
day. The day altered by the Apostles by special authority. 6. The rest of the
Iewish-sabbath partly moral, which continues still: partly symbolical, which is
expired. How the rest of the Lords day differs from the rest of the Sabbath,
rest from ordinary labors forbidden by God, but the special determination left
to the Church. How the Lords day succeeds the Sabbath. 7. The Sabbath kept with
the Lords day by the Primitive Christians till the Council of Laodicea was not
in a Jewish manner. CHAP. IV. page 276 Reasons of this Commandment. 1. Gods
liberality in allowing us six days, and requiring but one for himself. 2. The
seventh is his own proper day. Who are comprehended in the prohibition. 1. The
Master of the family. 2. Children. 3. Servants. 4. Cattle. 5. Strangers. The
general reasons of this precept. 1. Gods rest from the creation. Addition 22.
Moral reasons sometimes given of a ceremonial precept. The reason why a rest,
and why on this day, are different things: out of Maimon, Abenezra. 2. Reason,
the benefit coming to mankind by the creation. 3. Reason, God blessed the
seventh day. CHAP. V. page 280 How far this rest is to be kept. Why this word
remember is prefixed. Such work to be forborne, which may be done before or
after. Necessity of a vacation from other works that we may attend holy duties.
Man's opposition to God, when he bids rest, then we labor, and e contra. Six
works in particular forbidden the Jews. Whether the same be absolutely now
forbidden the Christians. Rest necessary only for the means of sanctification,
or the practice of it, as in works of mercy or necessity. Sabbatum Bovum and
Asinorum. Sabbatum aurei vituli. Sabbatum Tyri. Sabbatum satanae. CHAP. VI.
page 285 The second thing commanded, is sanctification, which is the end of the
rest. The kinds of sanctification, public and private. How the holy Ghost
works in us sanctification. The special acts wherein the sanctification of the
day consists. 1. Prayer. 2. The Word read, and preached. 3. Meditation of what
we have heard, and upon the works of God out of Psalm. 92. 4. Conference. 5.
Praise. 6. Sacraments and discipline at special times. The end of these means,
our sanctification, and Gods glory. CHAP. VII. page 291 Works of mercy proper
for the Lords day. They are of two sorts. 1. First Corporeal, feeding the
hungry, etc. Burying of the dead a work of mercy. Such works proper for a
festival. Objections answered. 2. Spiritual. 1. To instruct, counsel, and
exhort. 2. Comfort. 3. Reproof. 4. Forgiving. 5. Bearing with the weak. 6.
Prayer. 7. Reconciling those that are at odds. CHAP. VIII. page 294 The second
rule of Homogenea. Fasting reduced hither. Commanded under the Gospel. 1.
Public fasts for averting of evil of punishment, which is either malum
grassans, or impendens, or of sin for procuring of good. 2. Private fasts, and
the causes of them. The parts of a fast. 1. External abstinence from meat,
sleep, costly apparel, pleasure, servile work, alms then to be given.
Secondly, internal humiliation for sin, promise of reformation. The third rule,
our fast and observation of the Lords day must be spiritual. CHAP. IX. page 298
The fourth rule of the means and helps to keep this Commandment, viz. 1.
Places. 2. Persons. 3. Maintenance. 1. Of public places for Divine worship.
The place as well as the time holy, and both to be reverenced. Addition 25. out
of the Authors other works, concerning the adorning of Gods house, and against
Sacrilege in profaning it. Addition 26. Further additions concerning
Churches, or places of Gods worship: set places used from the beginning: the
necessity of them from natural instinct. Their dedication and the use of it.
God is sole proprietor, as of places, so of all the Churches patrimony. All
humane propriety extinct by dedication: the Clergy have only usum, ac fructum;
no fee-simple by the Law Civil or municipal in any man; but a quasi feudum
only. CHAP. X. page 280 Of persons set apart for Gods service. The mission,
choice, the reverence due to them. The benefit received by them, spiritual, and
temporal. Preservers of Kingdoms. Humane laws and policies not sufficient,
without a teaching Priest, etc. Examples in diverse Monarchies and Kingdoms.
CHAP. XI. page 304 Of maintenance for such as attend at the Altar. Schools and
Colleges, seminaries of the Church. The ancient use of them among the Jews,
when they were in Egypt, and afterward in Canaan. In the Primitive Church, care
to be taken against admitting Novices or young men into the sacred Calling.
Maintenance due by the Ordinance of Christ is, 1. Tithes. Reasons that the
tenth is still due under the Gospel, to the Priesthood of Christ. Addition 27.
About Tithes. That the tenth part was sacred to God from the beginning by
positive Divine Law obliging all mankind, and still in force. The Law of
Nature dictates not the proportion. Humane Laws and Customs about the modus
decimandi to be followed, provided that they give not less then the true value
of the tenth, if otherwise, they are void. 2. Oblations always in use in the
Church. Addition 28. about Oblations some may be due and limited, by Law,
Customs, Contract, or necessity of the Church; others voluntary and free. No
power in the Magistrate to alienate things dedicated to God. CHAP. XII. page
308 The two last rules. 1. The signs of keeping the day. 2. Of procuring the
observation by others. The conclusion.


The Exposition of the fifth Commandment.
CHAP. I. page 310 Of the sum of the second Table. The love of our Neighbor,
How the second Table is like the first. 1. Of the act, Love. How Christian love
differs from other love. The fruits of it. The parts of it. 2. The object, our
Neighbor. Who is our Neighbor. Degrees of proximity, and order in love. 3.
The manner of love, as thy self. This must appear in 1. The end. 2. The means.
3. The manner. 4. The order. CHAP. II. page 318 The division of the
Commandments of the second Table. Why this is set here between the first and
second Table. The parts of it, 1. A precept. 2. A promise. In the precept. 1.
The duty, Honor. 2. The object, Father, and Mother. The ground of honor. 1.
Excellency. 2. Conjunction. The order of honoring, differs from that of love.
Why God did not make all men excellent, and fit to be superiors. All paternity
is originally and properly in God. In man only instrumentally. The Hebrew and
Greek words translated (Honor) what they properly signify. The necessity and
original of honoring Superiors. Government a Divine Ordinance. Power,
Principality, and Excellency (...), (...), how they differ. Honor due to them
all: To natural Parents, to the Country where we live, to Princes, to spiritual
Fathers, to Magistrates. In respect of excellency of gifts, honor due. 1. In
respect of years. 2. Of the gifts of the mind. 3. Of outward estate. 4. Of
benefits received. CHAP. III. page 325 The mutual or reciprocal duties of
superiors and inferiors. 1 Love. 2. To wish well and pray for one another.
The duties of inferiors. 1. Honor. Inward, and outward, 2. fear. 3.
Subjection and obedience, active and passive. 4. The protestation of our
subjection, by honoring them with our estates. The manner how this duty must
be performed. CHAP. IIII. Page. 330. The duties of superiors in four things.
Addition 29. Of the end of government, and whether the people be above their
governors? The manner how they must govern. Whether honor be due to one that
is evil? Whether he must be obeyed in maio? Of disobeying the unlawful commands
of a Superior. Add. 30. Of obedience in things doubtful. CHAP. V. Page 341
The first Combination, between man and wife. The special end of Matrimony,
implied in three words. 1. Conjugium. 2. Matrimoniam. 3. Nuptiae. The office of
the husband. 1. Knowledge to govern his wife. 2. Conjugal love. 3. To provide
for her and the family. The wives duties answerable to these, officia
resultantia, Duties arising from these. The duties of Parents and children. The
duties of Masters and servants. CHAP. VI. Page 355 Of Tutors or Schoolmasters,
and their Scholars or Pupils. The original of schools and Universities. Mutual
duties of Teacher and Scholar, as the choice of such as are fit and capeable.
The particular qualifications of a Scholar: Solertia, Docilitas, Diligentia. 2.
About instruction Instruction helps the natural and infused light, so does
prayer and reading the word, etc. The Scholars duties answerable to these. The
particular duties of a Teacher. The duties of those that are to be taught. The
resultant duties of both. CHAP. VII. Page 365 Of honoring spiritual fathers in
the Church. The excellency and necessity of their calling. Four sorts of
ministers in the Church. 1. The thief. 2. The hireling. 3. The wolf. 4. The
good shepherd, whose duties are. 1. To be an example to his flock 1. In
himself. 2. In his family. The peoples duty answerable to this. 2. To use his
talent for their good. Rules for doctrine, and conversation. The peoples duty.
1. To know their own shepherd. 2. To obey and follow him. 3. To give him double
honor 1. Of reverence. 2. of maintenance. CHAP. VIII. Page 373 Of fathers of
our country, Magistrates. The duty of all toward their own country. God the
first magistrate. Magistracy Gods ordinance. Power of life and death given to
kings by God, not by the people. Addition. 31. That regal power is only from
God, proved out of the authors other writings. The ends of Magistracy. 1. To
preserve true religion. 2. To maintain outward peace. Magistrates compared to
shepherds in three respects. The duties of the supreme power, viz of Kings, and
of inferior officers. The duties of subjects to their Prince. CHAP. IX. Page
383 Of fathers by excellency of gifts. The honor due to them, is not debitum
justitiae, as the former, but debitum honettatis. 1. Of those that excel in
gifts of the mind. The honor due to them. 1. To acknowledge their gifts. Not
to envy or deny them. Nor to extenuate them. Nor undervalue them: Nor tax them
with want of other gifts. The duty of the person gifted. 2. To prefer such
before others, to choose them for their gifts. Reasons against choice of
ungifted persons. The duty of the person chosen, etc. 2. Of excellency of the
body by old age, and the honor due to the aged. 3. Of excellency by outward
gifts, as riches, Nobility, etc. Reasons for honoring such. How they must be
honored. 4. Excellency by benefits conferred. Benefactors are fathers. Rules
for conferring of benefits. The duties of the receiver. CHAP. X. page 391 That
this law is spiritual. The duties of Superiors and Inferiors must proceed
from the heart. Special means conducing to the keeping of this commandment.
Signs of the true keeping of it. CHAP. XI. page 396 The second part of this
Commandment, a promise of long life. Reasons why this promise is annexed to
this Commandment. How this promise is made good. Reasons why God sometimes
shortens the days of the godly, and prolongs the days of the wicked.


The Exposition of the sixth Commandment.
CHAP. I. page 400 Why this Commandment is placed in this order. How it
coheres with the rest. Of unjust anger, the first step to murder, how it
differs from other affections. Of lawful anger. Unlawful anger how prohibited.
The degrees and fruits of it. The affirmative part of the precept, to preserve
the life of another. The life of the body, and the degrees of it. The life of
the soul, and the sins against it. The scope of this Commandment. CHAP. II.
page 404 Of murder in general. The slaughter of beasts not prohibited, but in
two cases. Of killing a man's self, diverse reasons against it. Of killing
another: many reasons to show the greatness of this sin. The aggravations of
this sin from the person murdered. CHAP. III. page 407 The restraint of this
Commandment. 1. That Kings and Princes may lawfully put malefactors to death.
That herein they are Gods ministers. Three rules to be by them observed. Their
judgment must not be. 1. Perversum, nor 2. (...) patum, nor 3. Temerarium. 2.
That in some cases they may lawfully make war. In a lawful war is required. 1.
Lawful authority. 2. A just cause. 3. A just end. And 4. A right manner.
Addition 32. Of the causes of a just war. Some other cases wherein a man may
kill and not break this Commandment. First, for defense of his life against
sudden assaults. Inculpata tutela. Secondly, by chance, and without his
intention. CHAP. IV. page 412 The extent of this Commandment. Murder
committed. 1. Directly. 2. Indirectly. A man may be accessory to another death
six ways. A man may be (...) to his own death diverse ways. Of preserving
life. CHAP. V. page 414 Of the murder of the soul. Several sins against the
life of the soul. How (...) may be accessory to the death of his soul. This
sin may be committed both by them (...) have charge of souls, and by private
persons. That this law is spiritual, according to (...) third rule. CHAP. VI.
page 417 The fourth rule of avoiding the Causes of the sins here sorbidden. Of
unjust anger, and the fruits of it. It consists of, 1. Grief. 2. Desire of
Revenge. The effects and fruits of it. 1. Toward Superiors: Envy. The causes
of envy: the greatness of this sin. 2. Toward Equals. 3. Toward inferiors.
The suppuration or breaking out of anger against Superiors. 1. By the eyes and
face. 2. By the tongue, 1. by murmuring, 2. tale-bearing, 3. backbiting.
Against Equals, by 1. dissension, 2. brawling, 3. railing. The fruits of anger
in Superiors. 1. Threatening. 2. Scornfulnesse. The last fruit of anger, viz.
murder of the hand. CHAP. VII. page 421 Of the means against anger. How to
prevent it in others. How in our selves. Anger must be, 1. Just in regard of
the cause. 2. Moderated, for the measure. 3. We must labor for gravity. 4. For
love without hypocrisy. The virtues opposite to unjust anger. 1. Innocence. 2.
Charity. In the first, there is 1. The Antidote against anger, which consists
in three things. 2. The remedy in three more. How charity prevents anger. The
fruit of charity, Beneficence. 1. To the dead, by burying them. 2. To the
living. And that first, generally to all. Secondly, specially to the faithful.
Thirdly, to the poor by works of mercy. Fourthly, to our enemies. CHAP. VIII.
page 424 Rules for the eradication of unjust anger. 1. To keep the passion from
rising. 4. Rules. 2. After it is risen, to suppress it. How to carry our
selves toward those that are angry with us. 1. To give place. 2. To look up to
God. 3. To see the Devil in it. Of the second thing in anger, viz. Revenge.
Reasons against it. If our anger have broken out. Rules what we must do. Of the
act. viz. requiring one injury with another. Rules in going to law. The sixth
rule of causing others to keep this Commandment.


The Exposition of the seventh Commandment.
CHAP. I. page 428 The scope and order of this Commandment. Of Marriage. The
institution and ends of it, explicated out of Genesis 2. 22, 23, 24. Married
persons are, 1. to leave all others; 2. to cleave to one another. Rules for
those that are to marry. Duties of those that are married, general and special.
CHAP. II. page 433 The dependence of this Commandment upon the former. The
ends, for which it was given. The object of this Commandment, concupiscence or
lust of the flesh. The several branches and degrees of the sin here forbidden.
Diverse reasons against the sin of uncleanness. CHAP. III. page 438 Of the
degrees of this sin. 1. The first motions, or cogitationes ascendentes. 2.
Suppuratio, the festering of it inwardly. 3. subactum solum, the fitting of the
soil, which is, 1. By excess. 2. By Idleness. Excess is, 1. By gluttony: the
effects of it. Opposite to which is the virtue of temperance, which consists in
modo, in measure: Which respects, 1. The necessity of life. 2. Of our calling.
3. Of pleasure and delight: Wherein are 5. Rules. 1. For the substance of our
meat. 2. For the quantity. 3. For the quality. 4. Not to eat too greedily. 5.
Not to often. 2. Of excess in drinking, in what cases wine is allowed. CHAP.
IV. page 442 Of idleness: the second thing which fits the soil for this sin.
Diverse reasons against it It consists in two things. 1. To much sleep. 2. Want
of exercise when we are awake. Against sleepiness. 1. Rules for 1. the
quantity. 2. the manner. Of idleness in our callings. The remedy against sleep
and idleness. CHAP. V. page 444 The fourth degree. Irrigatio soli, the
watering of the soul by incentives and allurements to this sin, which are
either. 1. In or about our selves, or 2. In others. Of the first sort are, 1.
Painting. 2. Strange wanton apparel. 3. (...) gestures. Of the second sort are,
1. Lewd company, and obscene books. 2. Obscene pictures, and wanton dancings.
Of modesty the virtue opposite. CHAP. VI. page 446 The fifth degree, the
breaking out of this sin. 1. By the eye. Secondly, in the speech. Thirdly, by
the symptoms foregoing the act. The virtue opposite is, shamefastness. Of the
outward acts of uncleanness. 1. Self pollution, or nocturna pollutio, whether
always a sin. 2. Bestiality. 3. Sodomie. 4. Whoredom, scortatio. 5. Poligamy,
whether lawful. How this sin of uncleanness may be committed in matrimony,
some rules about marriage. How out of matrimony. 1. With one allied, which is
incest. 2. With a stranger to us, but married to another, which is adultory.
Many aggravations of this sin. 3. With such as are not married, as 1. By
keeping a Concubine. 2. By deflouring. 3. By fornication and wandering lust. 4.
By prostitution. The highest pitch of this sin, is to defend it. CHAP. VII.
page 453 The remedies of this sin. 1. Chastity of a single life. 2.
Matrimonial chastity. The means to preserve us from this sin. Of drawing
others to keep this Commandment.


The Exposition of the eighth Commandment.
The coherence, and dependence of this commandment, upon the former. The object
of it the desire of riches. The scope of the lawgiver, in respect of. 1.
Himself. 2. The church. 3. The commonwealth. 4. Private persons. Of right and
propriety. How meum and tuum came in. Of right by first occupancy, and
prescription. Reasons for propriety. Of propriety, jure belli, four things
included in propriety. CHAP. II. page 462 Of alienation and the several sorts
of it. Of free alienation. Illiberal, by contracts, which are of three sorts.
1. Do ut des. 2. Do ut facias. 3. Facio ut des. Of contracts by stipulation,
promise, writings. Real contracts, by caution, pledge, etc. Personal, by
suerties, hostages etc. CHAP. III. page 463 Of the desire of (...). For
regulating whereof we must consider. 1. The order, in respect of. 1. The end.
2. The means. 2. The measure of our appetite which must be guided by four
rules. Of the suppuration of this sin, by (...) love of money, the branches
of it. Of subactum solum, the soil fitted. (...) the jaundice if it. 1. In the
eye. The foaming at the mouth. The (...) of theft here forbidden committed. 1.
In getting. 2. In the use of riches. CHAP. IV. page 463 Of unjust getting in
general. The kinds of unjust getting. 1. By rapine and violence. 2. By fraud.
The first is either under pretense of authority, or without any pretense. The
former is. 1. For a man's own benefit. In times of war, or in times of peace:
and this is either by power or authority, or by pretense of Law. 2. For his
Neighbors detriment. Unjust getting without any pretense of authority or Law,
is either Piracie by sea, or Robbery by land. The affirmative part. 1 That
every one have a lawful calling. 2. That he labor in it. CHAP. V. page 224 The
second way of unjust getting. viz. y fraud, or close theft. The lawful ways of
acquiring. 1. By gift. 2. By inheritance. 3. By industry, wherein are to be
valewed, 1. Labor. 2. Hazard. 3. Charges. Of right, by damage. Of money, the
measure of Contracts. Close theft is, 1. In Contracts. 2. Out of Contracts. In
Contracts, is 1. By selling that which cannot be sold, as, the gifts of the
Spirit, things annexed to spiritual offices, things consecrated to God,
benefits, as loan of money etc. 2. When there is not a proportion between
laborem and praemium. 3. About buying and selling, in respect of. 1. The
measure. 2. The commodity. 3. The price. CHAP. VI page 471 Of theft out of
contracts. This is 1. In the family, by 1. by Purloyning. 2. Mis-spending. 3.
Idleness. 4. Withdrawing ones self from service. 2. Without the family, is 1.
Of things consecrated: by (...). 2 Of things common, and those either public
or private. Of theft personal and real. The aggravation of theft, in regard of
the poor, etc. Against enclosing of Commons. The conclusion, about unlawful
getting. CHAP. VII. page 473 Of the virtues opposite. 1. Just getting. 2.
Restitution, commanded both in the Law and Gospel. That we must make
restitution, not only of what is unlawfully got, but of some things Lawfully
got. As 1. Of what belongs to another by gift. 2. Of things deposited. 3. Of
things found. 4. Of things lent. 5. Of what will prejudice the public, if it
be detained for our private benefit. CHAP. VIII. page 477 Of the second
general, viz. unjust keeping. The right use of riches is, 1. in respect of a
man's self: the sins opposite, 1. Parsimony, 2. prodigality; two degrees of it,
1. to spend unreasonably, 2. Above ones means. 2. In respect of others, viz.
the poor, where we are to know two things: 1. How we held our riches, or by
what tenure: 2. What we are to conceive of the poor. A threefold necessity, 1.
of nature, 2. of our person, 3. of our estate and condition. Several motives to
communicate to the poor. CHAP. IX. page 485 That this Commandment is spiritual.
Of Covetousness: diverse reasons against it. The means to keep this
Commandment. 1. (...). 2. To walk in our ways, which that we may do. 1. We
must have a lawful calling. 2. We must be persuaded that riches are Gods gift.
3. We must live according to our means. 4. Observe the rules for getting and
using of riches. CHAP. X. page 488 Rules to be observed, 1. in just getting. 1.
By Donation. 2. By Industry. 3. By Contracts, wherein must be considered, 1.
The need we have of the thing sold. 2. The use. Three degrees of a just price.
1. Pium. 2. Moderatum. 3. Rigidum. 2. In just using, wherein are rules. 1.
Concerning our selves. 1. For preserving our estate. 2. For laying it out. 2.
Concerning others, giving 1. to God, from whom we receive all, 2. to the poor.
Rules for the measure and manner of giving. Motives to stir us up to give to
the poor. Of procuring the keeping of this Commandment by others.


The Exposition of the Ninth Commandment.
CHAP. I. Page 493 The words expounded. What is mean tby (Non respondebis) in
the Original. Addition 34. about the meaning of the word (...) respondere. What
is meant by (witness.) Four witnesses. 1. God. 2. The Conscience. 3. Men and
Angels. 4. The Creatures. What is meant by (false,) what by ( contra against)
what by ( Proximum, Neighbor.) The coherence and dependence of this
Commandment. The scope and use of it. 1. In respect of God. 2. Of the Church.
3. Of the Commonwealth. 4. Of private persons. CHAP. II. Page 498 The
necessity of a good name. The sin forbidden in general. Wherein, 1. The root of
it. 2. The suppuration, or rankling of it (...), by false surmises and
suspicions. 3. The fitting of the soil, by readiness to hear false reports. 4.
The watering of the soil, by busying our selves in other ones affairs. CHAP.
III. Page 501 The outward act, of which two branches. 1. False words. 2. Idle
and vain words. Of false speaking in general; this is two fold. 1. In
judgment. 2. Out of judgment. In judgment by false witness. Of lies in
general. Six persons in every judgment, who may be guilty of false witnessing.
1. The Judge. 1. By cherishing Law suits. 2. By deferring justice. 3. If his
judgment be, 1. usurped, 2. rash, 3. perverse. 2. The Register, by making
false records. 3. The Accuser, 1. by accusing falsely, 2. upon uncertain
grounds, 3. by prevaricating. 4. The defendant, 1. by not confessing the truth,
2. by appealing without cause, 3. by not submitting to the sentence. 5. The
Witness, 1. by not declaring all the truth, when he is lawfully called, 2. by
not delivering the innocent, though he be not called, 3. by delivering the
wicked by false testimony. 6. The Advocate, 1. by undertaking an evil cause, 2.
by perverting the Law. Of giving false testimony in Elections. CHAP. IIII. Page
507 Of false witnessing out of judgment. Four things to which the tongue may
do harm. The branches of this kind of false witnessing. 1. Contumelious
speaking. 2. Taunting. 3. Backbiting; which is, 1. By words. 2. By letters. 3.
By deeds. 4. In all these a may be false witness, though he speak the truth.
CHAP. V. Page 509 Of reproof or fraternal correption, the virtue opposite to
flattery. Of flattery, which is. 1. In things uncertain. 2. In things certain,
and those either good or evil. Of boasting and vaunting a man's self, and its
extreme. CHAP. VI. Page 512 Of a rash lie, an officious lie, a merry lie. Four
cases wherein a man seems to speak contrary to the truth, but does not. Of
Mendacium Facti, the real lie, by (...). CHAP. VII. Page 514 The second general
branch of the sin forbidden, viz. Vain speech. Three ends of speech. 1.
Edification. 2. Profit. 3. Grace and delight. Of the means whereby this
Commandment may be kept. Of suspicion. Rules about it. 1. For the manner.


The Exposition of the Tenth Commandment.
CHAP. I. Page 521 Reasons against the dividing of this Commandment into two.
The dependence of it. The scope and end of it. CHAP. II. Page 523 The thing
prohibited, Concupiscence which is two fold: 1. Arising from our selves; 2.
From the spirit of God. The first is either, 1. from nature, or 2. from
corruption of nature. Corrupt desires of two sorts: 1. vain and foolish; 2.
hurtful or noisome. The danger of being given up to a man's own lusts. CHAP.
III. Page 525 How a man comes to be given up to his own desires. Thoughts of
two sorts. 1. Ascending from our own hearts. 2. Injected by the Devil. The
manner how we come to be infected: Six degrees in sin. 1. The receiving of the
seed. 2. The retaining of it. 3. The conception. 4. The forming of the parts.
5. The quickening. 6. The travel or birth. CHAP. IV. Page 528 The ways whereby
a man is tempted of his own lust. 1. There is a bait. 2. A hook. The same ways
used by the Devil and the World. The affirmative part of this precept. Renewing
the heart and mind. The necessity of this Renovation. The means of
Renovation.


A Table of the Supplements or Additions, Wherein the sense of the Author is
cleared in some places where it was obscure or doubtful: and some things are
handled more fully, which were omitted, or but briefly touched, etc.
Introduct.
CHAP. XIII.
1. Concerning points clear and controverted. Addition
p 52 2. Of peoples submitting to the judgment of the Church. p 55 3. Of the
Churches power to interpret the Scriptures. p 57
CHAP. XIV.
4. That the Moral Law is an essential part of the Gospel, or second Covenant.
p 58
CHAP. XVII.
5. About man's ability to keep the Law of Christ by his Grace. p 71


Com. 1.
CHAP. I.
6. That the 4 fundamental articles of all Religion are employed in the four
first Precepts. p 88
CHAP. III.
7. Of the force of Church Customs. p 95
CHAP. IIII.
8. About the distinction of inward and outward worship. p 100
CHAP. VII.
9. Concerning the evidence of faith, and freedom of assent. p 111 10.
Concerning the nature of Faith. p 115
CHAP. VIII.
11. Of the seat of faith. p 121


Com. 2.
CHAP. I.
12. That the making of Images was absolutely forbidden the Jews, and in that
respect that the precept was partly positive, and reached only to them. p 193
13. Whether all voluntary and free worship be forbidden under the name of
will worship. p 194
CHAP. III.
14. Of S. Chrysostomes Liturgy. p 202 15. Of the second Council of Nice. p
203
CHAP. IV.
16. How preaching is a part of Gods worship. p 205 17. About the Eucharist,
whether it may be called a Sacrifice. p 207
CHAP. V.
18. Concerning customs and traditions of the Church p 210 19. Of Images for
memories sake. p 214


Com. 3.
CHAP. I.
20. What is literally meant by taking Gods Name in vain. p 231
CHAP. IV.
21. Concerning the nature of a vow. p 250


Com. 4.
CHAP. II.
22 The Jewish sabbath ceremonial, the Lords day unchangeable. p. 263 23 Of
ceremonies. p. 265
CHAP. III.
24 The whole doctrine of the Sabbath, and Lords day, largly handled in seven
conclusions. p. 268
CHAP. IIII.
25 That moral reasons are sometimes given of ceremonial precepts. p. 279
CHAP. IX.
26 Of adorning Churches. p. 299 27 Of the antiquity, necessity, and sanctity
of places for public worship. p. 299
CHAP. XII.
29 About tithes and their morality, that they are still due, not jure
naturali, but by positive divine law from the beginning. p. 306 30 Of
Oblations. p. 308


Com. 5.
CHAP. IV.
31 Of the end of government, and whether people be above their Governors. p.
331 32 Of obedience to just authority in things doubtful. p. 339
CHAP. VIII.
33 That the power of Princes is only from God, proved out of the Authors
other writings. p. 373


Com. 6.
CHAP. III.
34 Of the causes of a just war. p. 407


Com. 8.
CHAP. VII.
35 Concerning Restitution. p. 475


Com. 9.
CHAP. I.
36 About the meaning of the word (...) respondere. p. 494


Errata.
PAge 1. line 24. read 24 tracts of his Catechizings. p. 24. l. 10. r. take
away religion, and you take away faith. p. 43. l. 27 r. which may be gathered
out of, etc. p. 53. l. 9. r. assure p. 54 dele (seems to be according to the
Council of the H. G.) and read the same words at the end of the next line
before, thus, which seems, etc. In the Marg. add Acts 17 11. p. 53. l. 36.
r. God bestows this gist upon the learned, yet all those that are learned
have not the gift of, etc. p. 58. l. 25. aster ( fail) add, S. Augustine
against Julian, and most of the Fathers upon John 6. 53. affirm it, so does the
Milevitan Council, and Pope Innocent (...) it, (...) now this is generally
rejected. p. 68. l. 2. r. dim p 73. l. 38. dele totam lineam, and l. 39 r. and
they (...) grounded. p. 75. l. 49. r. to make willing. p. 82. l. 7. r. brazen
serpent. p. 85. r. (...) p. 99. l. 56. r (...) Commandment. p. 104. l. 30. r.
perfectio. p. 127. l. 52. r senses of seeing and hearing. p. 129. l. 8. r.
about their necks. p. 153. l. 14. r. it lies l. 15. r. make it fructify. l.
ult. r. to have. p. 154. r. must join, not etc. p. 168. l. 41. r. infernum. p.
171. l. 53. r. under the flail, etc. p. 186. l. 24. r. discover l. 41 for (
four) r some. p. 203. l. 15. r. of Images. p. 239. l. 25. r. (...). p. 240. l
11. r second cause. p. 241. l. 13. r. other proofs. l. 19. r. other proofs. p.
250. l. 41. r. lib. 3. l. 44. r. Azor. 1 part. moral. The two next paragraphs
ought to be in Ital. p. 260. l. 57. r. Aetiologie. p. 266. l. 43. r. are moral.
p. 275. l. 14. r. by wresting. p. 279. the Annotation is transposed, it should
come in after line 31. p 294. l. 25. r. kind of (...). p. 297. l. 52. r.
confession. p. 299. l 39. r. not to destroy any. p. (...). l. 47. r. instruct
them. p 312. l. 3. r. (...) not. p. 317. l. 27. r. they are. p. 321. l. 12. d.
as are. l. 14. dele ( and not only for it self, but also.) p. (...). l 2 r.
lays this ground, that God would have all to be saved, this is his ultimate,
etc. p. 328. l. 26. r to God. p. 333. l. 6. r. a superior. l. 36. r. to
profit. l. 47. r. thus governed. l 51. r. proud manner p 339. l 31. r. love of
parents. p. 361. l. 51. r. and a difference l. cad. r. the Apostle makes. p.
365. l. 23. r. this purpose p. 373. after line 25. the Paragraph should be in
Italique. p. 377. after line 32. the Paragraph should be in Ital. p. 378. l.
19. r fieri non. p. 403. l. 42. r. not only. p. 420. l. 33. r. crying. p. 433
l. ult. r. in show. p. 440. l. 47. d. with surfeiting. p. 453 l. 13. r. pray at
some times. p. 482. l. 30. r. fruits as. l. 33. r. tenths and. p. 485. l 2. r.
and storms. p. 487. l. 17. r. jeasts. p. 489. l. 53. r. aims at. p. 495. l. 1.
d. though. l. 40. r. this course. p. 497. l. 42. r. not only. p. 498. l. 10.
r. fatteth. p. 502. l 10. for ( from) r. in. p. 506. l. 13. d. not. p. 517. l.
44. r. sift. Other Errors there are which the Reader is desired to correct.

THE PREFACE
READER, here is offered to thy View, a posthumous Work of a Reverend, and
Famous Bishop, one of the greatest Lights which the Church of Christ has had
in this latter Age, and the Glory of our English Church, while he lived; A Work
which may merit thy Acceptance, in Respect both of the Author, and the Subject
which it handles.

Of the first I shall need to say little, the very name of Bishop Andrews
proclaiming more, then if I should say that he was a judicious, profound, and
every way accomplished Divine, an eminent Preacher, a learned Antiquary, a
famous Linguist, a curious Critic, a living Library amongst Schclars, the
Oracle of our Church, and such a Priest, whose lips preserved knowledge, and at
whose mouth the Law was to be sought. What admirable height of Learning, and
depth of Judgment, dwelt in that Reverend Prelate, he that would know, may
read in those living Images of his Soul: And as his other works praise him in
the gate, so this which is now presented to thee, though composed in his
younger years, when he was Fellow of Pembroke Hall in Cambridge, Anno 15. 85
will demonstrate, that the Foundations were then laid of those great Parts and
Abilities, wherewith he was furnished, when he came to the Episcopal Chair, and
the ground work of all those other learned Labors, wherewith he afterward
enricht the Church; for in these Lectures, or College Exercises (which were
heard with the public applause of the whole University, where scarce any
pretended to the Study of Divinity, who did not light their Candle at his
Torch) it will appear, that he had even then, gone through the whole
Encyclopedic of Divine and Humane Learning, and that as he was a rich Magazine
of all Knowledge; so he had here contracted the Quintessence of all his vast
Studies, and the high conceptions of his great and active soul, into these
Lectures, as into a common Treasury; for he that shall peruse this Book, shall
find, besides his perfection in all humane Learning, Philosophy and the Arts,
his exquisite knowledge in all the learned Languages; and that besides his
skill in the sacred Text, (wherein his greatest excellency lay) he had read and
digested the Fathers, Schoolmen, Casuists, as well as modern Divines, that he
was thoroughly versed in all kind of Antiquities, and Histories, in Theology,
Moral, Scholastic, and Polemick, and no stranger to the Laws, both Civil and
Canon, and which seldom concur in one, that he was eminent, as well in the
Rational and Judicial, as in the Critical and Historical part of Learning; so
that what one of his Schoolmasters foretold of him, that he would be literarum
lumen, was verified in those College Exercises, wherein this Light began to
shine betimes, and to cast his Rays both far and near; and what a Reverend
Prelate said of him in his Funeral Sermon, may visibly appear to any Eye, in
this great Herculean Labor, that those things which seldom meet in one Man,
were in him in a high degree, Scientia magna, Memoria major, Judicium maximum,
at Industria infinita; His Knowledge was great, his Memory greater, his
Judgment exceeded both, but his Labor and Industry was infinite, and went
beyond them all.

For the Subject, it is the Decalogue, or those Ten Words, in which God himself
has epitomized the whole duty of Man, which have this Privilege above all
other parts of Scripture, that whereas all the rest were divinely inspired, but
God made use of Prophets and Apostles, as his Penmen, here God was his own
Scribe, or Amanuensis, here was Digitus Dei, for the writing was the writing of
God. Exodus 32. 16. and 31. ult.
These are the Pandects of the Laws of Nature, the fountains from which all
humane Laws ought to be derived: the Rule and Guide of all our Actions,
whatsoever Duties are variously dispersed through the whole Book of God, are
here collected into a brief Sum; whatsoever is needful for us to do in Order
to Salvation, may be reduced hither; for this is totunt Homin is, the
Conclusion of upshot of all (says Solomon) to fear Ecc'es 12. 13
God and keep his Commandments; and the Apostle tells us to the same purpose,
that circumcision avayleth nothing, nor uncircumcision, but the keeping of the
Commandments of God. And therefore, as Philo says, that the Jews used to refer
all that they found in the Law of Moses to these ten heads, (as the
Philosophers reduced all things to the ten predicaments,) not that they were
all literally comprised there, but because for memories sake, they might be
reduced thither; so has the Christian Church reduced all the duties of a
Christian to the same heads, which she has enlarged, and made more
comprehensive, as partaking of a greater measure of the Spirit then they had,
and aiming at a higher degree of perfection in all Christian Virtues.

There is indeed a generation of men sprung (...), such as S. Augustine wrote
against long since, in his Book contra adversarium legis and prophetarum, that
under color of advancing Gods free grace in man's salvation, and affecting
Christian liberty, would abrogate the whole moral Law, as if it Jer. 36. 23.
were worthy of no better entertainment among Christians, then Jehoiakim gave
to Jeremies prophecies, when he cut the Sea the fourth Addition Introd. c. 14
p. 58
roll in pieces, and threw it into the sire. And how far the tenets and
principles of some others (who would seem to abhor such opinions) have promoted
these pernicious doctrines, I shall not need to show; sure I am, that while
some teach: that the Gospel consists properly of promises only, that the moral
Law is no part of the condition of the second Covenant, nor the observation of
it (though qualified in the Gospel) required now in order to salvation, that
the promises of the Gospel are absolute, and that Faith is nothing else but an
absolute application of them, or an absolute relying upon Christ for the
attaining of them, without the conditions of repentance and new obedience; that
Christ came only to redeem, not to give any Law to the world; that after a man
is in Christ, though he fall into the grossest sins, which are damnable in a
man unregenerate, yet he is still, quoad praesentem statum, in the state of
salvation, and though Romans 2. 1, 2.
he may lose the sense and feeling, yet he can never lose jus ad vitam, his
right to heaven, what sins soever he walks in: I say, whilst men teach such
doctrins, and yet cry out against Antinomians, Libertines, and other Sectaries,
what do they in judging others, but condemn themselves, for they grant the
premises, and deny only the conclusion. If such doctrines were as true as they
are common, this Author, and all others, that have written on this subject,
might have spared their pains, and therefore we may say with the Psalmist, It
is time for thee Lord to work, for they have destroyed thy Psalm. 119. 126.
Law. These men are like to Licurgus (who being cast into a frenzy by
Dionysius) in that distemper thinking to have cut Apollod. de Orig. deor. l 3.
p. 57.
down a vine, with the same hatchet slew his own son; so these being possessed
with a spiritual frenzy, which they call zeal, when they lift up their hatchet
to cut off some errors, which like luxuriant branches have sprung up about the
Law, these do unawares cut down the Law itself, both root and branch, making
the observation of it arbitrary in respect of Salvation, or as a Parenthesis in
a sentence, where the sense may be perfect without it.

Such Errors are far more dangerous, then many that were held by the old
Heretics, which were chiefly about matters speculative, whereas these reflect
upon matters of practice, and whilst they strike at the root of obedience to
the Laws of Christ, they do directly take away the very way of Salvation, to
the certain ruin of peoples souls, and do utterly overthrow the foundation
both of Church and Commonwealth; so that wheresuch doctrines prevail, nothing
but confusion, and dissolution of all Government can follow, as sad experience
in too many places shows; where the genuine fruits of such doctrines, appear to
be no other, then to rob the Priest of his honor, the Prince of his power, the
people of their Discipline and Government, Pastors of their Flocks, and Sheep
of their Pastors, Preachers of their Churches, Churches of their Reverence,
Religion of its Power, and the World of all Religion. S. James would have us to
try our Faith by our Works, but these men will have their works tried by their
Faith. To the pure all things are pure; if Faith be in their heart, God can see
no sin in their actions. We read of the Scholars of one Almaricus of Paris, who
held, that what was deadly sin in others, yet if it were done by one, that was
in Charity or the state of Grace, it was no sin, or not imputed to him, for
which they were condemned as Heretics. These men seem to be spit out of their
mouths, for they would have sins distinguished not by their nature or object,
but by the subject in whom they are: and hence they hold, that all their own
sins, though never so great (they being believers and elect) are at the most
but infirmities, which cannot endanger their salvation, but the sins of all
others are mortal and damnable, which impious doctrine with the rest above
mentioned from which it flows, howsoever they be varnisht over with fair shows
of advancing the free grace of God, and the merits of Christ, and the
depressing of man's power, yet are indeed no other then the old damned Heresy
of SimonMagus, who, as Theodoret says, taught his Disciples, they were free
from the obedience of the law, and was condemned by the Ancient Church in
Vasilides, Carpocrates, Epiphanes, Prodicus, Eunomius, and other impure
wretches, and is called by Luther himself (whose unwary speeches have given too
much occasion to these doctrines, ultimus Diaboli flatus; The last blast of the
Devil.

Against these and such like doctrines, which make this and all other books of
this nature superfluous, we must know; That though the Decalogue, as it was
given by Moses to the Jews, was a part of that Covenant which God made with
them on Mount Sinai, and Sinai belonged properly to them, as appears both by
the Preface, wherein their deliverance out of Egypt is urged as a motive of
obedience, and by four other passages in the precepts, which have peculiar
reference to that people, as that symbolicall rest required in the fourth
precept in remembrance of their rest from the Egyptian bondage, and the promise
of long life in the land of Canaan, in the fifth. Yet seeing that the substance
of it is no other then the Law of Nature written in man's heart at the first,
and that by Christ our Lawgiver it is made a part of the Gospel or second
Covenant, though with some qualification) therefore it obliges all Christians,
and that under the highest pains, and is therefore justly called the Law of
Christ. All the parts of the Moral Law we may find required in the Gospel,
though upon other grounds then those were laid by Moses, (this second Covenant,
being established upon better Is. 33. 22.
promises) we have the same rules for our action, the same Ja. 4. 12. 2. 8.
duties required, the same sins forbidden; the difference is this, that here
God accepts our obedience in voto at our first conversion, when he freely
pardons our sins past, and expects the actual performance afterward in the
course of our lives, and admits repentance after lapses, whereas the law, as it
was part of the other Covenant, requires perfect obedience without any
intermission, otherwise we having higher promises, and a greater measure of the
spirit being now dispensed under the Gospel, a higher degree of obedience to
the law is now required, which is yet no way grievous or burdensome to a true
believer, for the power of Christ's spirit, and the height of the promises, make
the yoke easy, and the burden light. Therefore Christ's tells us expressly he
came not to dissolve the law, but to fulfill it, or to fill it up, as the Greek
(...), imports, because he did enlarge and perfect it; and therefore Theo
phylact makes the Law of Christ, compared P. 28. in Eu.
with that of Moses, as (...), the Painting to life, to the (...), or first
draught in black and white, and says that Christ did not (...), not destroy
the first draught, but fill it up as a painter perfects a picture with the
colors and shadows, after the first draught, and with him do generally concur
the rest of the Fathers: Basil Bas. in psalm. 10 Ori. cont. Cells. l. 5. p. 259.
says, that whereas the old law says, thou shall not kill, our Lord (Christ)
(...), giving more perfect laws, says, Thou shall not be angry. Origin says
that the laws of Christ Chryso. to. 3. p. 93. ed-savil.
are (...), better and more Divine, then all those before him. S. Chrysostom
calls that Sermon upon the Mount (...) the very top of Philosophy, and says,
that Christ's giving of laws, was (...) the time or season of greater and
higher precepts. Among the Latins, Tertullian says, Christi leges supplementa
necessaria esse disciplinae creatoris, that the Ter. l. 3. contr. Marcion. c.
16 and 4. contr.
laws of Christ are necessary supplements to the laws of the Creator, and
Christus Dei Creatoris praecepta supplendo Marc. p. 524.
etconservavit and auxit, that Christ preserved and increased the laws of God
the creator by filling them up. S. Augustine Aug. To. 4 de ser. doi. in monte
l. 1.
says, that Christ fullfilled the law by adding, quod minus habet what was
deficient, and sic persiciendo confirmavit, and so confirmed it by reducing it
to more perfection. And again upon those words (except your righteousness,
etc.) Nist non solum ea quae inchoant homines impleveritis, sed etiam ista quae
a me adduntur, qui non veni solvere sed implere, unless ye not only fulfill
those, which men have begun, but also what is added by me, who came not to
destroy the law but to fulsill it, etc. By which and many more testimonies out
of the ancients that might be produced, it appears, that concerning that
excellent Sermon upon the Mount, wherein the sum of Christian Religion, and the
way to life is chalked out by him who is the way and the life, their opinion is
far from truth, who say, that Christ does not there promulge or deliver any law
as necessary to salvation, but only that he expounds the Moral law given by
Moses, and cleers it from the false corrupt glosses of the Pharisees, which is
directly contrary to the constant and unanimous doctrine of the Ancient Church,
and to the text it self: for though it is true that Christ does therein often
reflect upon the expositions of the Jewish doctors who had corrupted the law;
yet withal it is as true, that in those chapters he delivers the Christian
law, and therein brings up the Moral law to a higher pitch, then ever it was
by Moses. This appears by that opposition so often made in that Sermon, between
what Moses said of old, and what Christ says, you have heard what was said to
them of old, etc. Ego autem dico vobis, but I say unto you, etc. Which
opposition, as also the Syriack and other translations do plainly show, that as
( vobis) is rendered (to you) and not (by you) so ( veteribus) ought to be (to
them Tert. Clemen. Hill. Epiph. Basil. Chryso. Ambros. Hier. Theoph. Euthym.
of old) not, (by them of old) and therefore our translation as it puts the one
reading in the text, so it puts the other, which is the true in the margent.
Now (those of old) were no other then those to whom Moses first gave the law,
and not the lawyers, and Pharisees of those latter times, so all the Greek
writers agree, and the Greek (...), imports as much, which is usually in other
places referred to the times of Moses and the Prophets, Luke 9. 8. 19.
and not to latter times, and Acts 15. 7. 21.
2 Cor. 5. 17.
2 Pet. 2. 5.
which puts the matter out of question; The words which our Rev. 12. 9. and 20.
2.
Savior says, were said to them of old, are no other then the words of the
law delivered by Moses, either in the same very words, or in the sense. Those
words, Thou (...) not kill, are in Exo. 20. 30. And whosoever shall kill, shall
be in danger of a judgment, are in Levit. 21. 21. Numb. 35. 16, 17, 30. Thou
shall not Commit adultery, are the words of the law. Exodus 20. 30. He that
shall put away his wife, let him give her a bill of divorce, in Deuteronomy. 24. 1.
Thou shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform thy vows to the Lord. Exodus
20. 7. Numb. 30. 2. Eye for eye, and tooth for tooth, (which was permitted in
Judgment) Deuteronomy. 19. 21. Levit. 24. 20. Deuteronomy. 19. 21. Thou (...) lovethy
neighbor, viz an Israelite, Levit. 19. 18. Deuteronomy. 23. and hate thine enemies,
viz. Those seven nations whom they were to destroy, and to make no league with
them: nor to show them mercy. Exodus 34. 21. Deuteronomy. 7. 1. to whom the Amalekite
is added, with whom they were to have perpetual war. Exodus 17. 19. Deuteronomy. 25.
14.

We see then that Christ is so far from taking any thing away from the Moral
Law, that he rather adds more to it, and therefore the matter of the Decalogue
is still in force, and belongs to Christians as much as to any; Nay faith it
self (which some of late have transformed into a mere Platonicall Idaea
abstracted from good works) I mean that Faith to which Justification and
Salvation is ascribed in Scripture, See the Hom. of faith etc.
includes obedience as to all the commandments of Christ, so to the moral law,
as the very life and form of it, without which as S. Jam. (...), it is as a
body without a Soul, for what is Faith but a relying or trusting upon Christ
for salvation according to the promises of the Gospel; now seeing that those
promises are not absolute, but always require the conditions of repentance and
new obedience; it can be nothing but a shadow of faith when these conditions
are not. Its true that (to believe) in the proper and formal notion, is nothing
else, but to assent to the truth of a proposition, upon the authority of the
speaker, And (to believe in one) signifies properly to trust and rely upon him,
and does not in its formal conception, considered barely and abstractly by it
self, include the condition of obedience or any other. And therefore we may be
said to believe or trust in one, that requires no condition of us, but when the
words are referred to one that commands or requires something of us to be done,
and promises nothing; But upon such condition of obedience, as nothing is more
certain, then that Christ never promises remission of sins or life eternal,
but upon condition of Repentance and new obedience, In this case to believe in
Christ must of necessity include obedience to the commandments of Christ, as
the very life of faith, without which it is a mere fancy: and hence some have
observed that in the New Testament, faith and obedience, and unbelief and
disobedience are often promiscuously used for one and the same. First, because
that to trust or believe in one that promises nothing but to those that obey
him, and to obey him in hope of what he has promised, are all one: and
therefore that absolute affiance or unconditionate belief of Gods mercy in
Christ, which some make to be faith in Christ, is that (...), one of those
first and primitive errors from which those doctrines of Antinomians and other
Sectaries that would dissolve the law, do follow with ease. When Christ
upbrayded the Jews for not believing John the (...). 21. (...).
Baptist, though the Harlots and Publicanes believed, who doubts but that his
meaning is, that the one repented upon Johus preaching, which the other did
not, although (to believe in the proper formal notion) signifies nothing else
but to assent to the truth of what he said. Hence S. Aug. says, Non solum
bonam vitam inseparabilem esse a fide, sed and ipsam Aug. (...) and (...) c. 23
esse bonam vitam, that a good life, is not only inseparable from faith, but
that faith is good life it self; and S. Cyprian, Quomodo se in Christu credere
dicit qui non facit quae Christus facere praecipit, How can he say that he
believes in Christ, who does not the things which Christ has commanded. And
before them Irenaeus tells us, that Credere in Christum est voluntatem ejus
facere, to believe in Christ is to do his will. As for that general faith, of
the latter Schoolmen, and the Romanists, which they make to be nothing but an
assent to revealed trueths for the authority of God the speaker (I say the
latter Schoolmen, for some of the Elder where they speak of fides charitate
formata, which they make to be true faith, mean nothing else, but that which S.
Paul calls, faith Gal. 5. 6.
Ja. 2. 22.
working by love, and Saint James, faith consummated by works) As also that
faith of some amongst our selves, who would have it to be nothing but a
persuasion that their sins are pardoned in Christ, etc. Neither of these have
any necessary connection with a good life, and therefore neither of them is that
faith to which the promises of pardon and Salvation are annexed in the Gospel.
Not the first, as themselves acknowledge, and appears by Bellar. who labors
to prove by many reasons that true faith may be in a wicked man. Nor the
second, for how does it necessarily follow, that if a man believe all his sins
past, present, and to come to be forgiven, that therefore he must needs live
according to the Rules of Christ, whereas the contrary may rather be inferred.
That he needs not to trouble himself about obedience to the commandments in
order to remission of his sins, or salvation, who is persuaded that all hissins
are pardoned already, and that nothing is required of him for the obtaining of
so great a benefit, but only to believe that it is so. And if they say, that
the sense of such a mercy cannot but stir men up to obedience, too much
experience of men's unthankfulness to God confutes this, The remembrance of a
mercy or benefit does not necessarily enforce men to their duty, for then none
could be unthankful to God or man,

Besides it is a pure contradiction, which all the Sophistry in the world can
never salve, to say, that a man's sins are pardoned by believing they are
pardoned, for they must be pardoned before he believes they are pardoned,
because the object must be before the act, and otherwise he believes a lie, and
yet by faith he is justified and pardoned, (as all affirm) and the Scripture is
evident for it, and so his pardon follows upon his belief, and thus the pardon
is both before and after the act of faith; it is before, as the object or thing
to be believed, and yet it comes after, as the effect or consequent of his
belief, which is a direct contradiction.

True faith then is a practical virtue, and establishes the Law; and as this
is the proper work of true faith, so to direct and quicken our obedience
thereto is the whole scope of the Bible. There is nothing revealed in the whole
Scripture merely for speculation, but all is referd some way or other to
practice. It is not the knowledge of Gods Nature and Essence, but of his will,
which is required of us, or at least so much of his Nature, as is needful to
ground our faith and obedience upon. That observation of some is most true,
That in the Scripture, verba scientiae Connotant affectus, words of knowledge
do imply affections and actions answerable. To know God, is not so much to know
his Nature and essence, as to Honor and obey him, which those that do not, are
said not to know him, though they know never so much of his Nature To. 1. 28.
Ps. 95. 10.
and atributes; knowledge without practice, is with God accounted Heb 9. 7.
ignorance, and hence are all sins termed (...) ignorances. Thus to know
Christ, or to believe in him, or to believe the Gospel, Includes in the
Scripture sense, repentance, new life, and indeed the whole duty of a
Christian, because al these duties ought to follow upon this knowledge or
belief, and are actus imperati, as the Schools speak, acts which flow from
belief, though the actus elicitus, be only an assent to the truth. And hence
some of the most eminent and Ancient Schoolmen have determined, that Theology
or Divinity is a practical science. Theologia est scientia affectiva, etc.
Principaliter (...). in proem. in Sent. q. 3. conclus.
ut ipsi boni fiamus, says Bonav. Theology is an affective knowledge, whose
chief end is to make us good. The same is (...).
affirmed by Alex. Hales, Gerson and others. Scotus maintains Sent. q. 4. p. 14
col. 3.
the same conclusion, Theologiam esse simpliciter practicam, That Durand. in 1.
Theology is simply practical, and Durand proves it by unanswerable Sent.
Did.
1. q. 5. sol. 10. col. 1.
reason, quia ejus operatio circa objectu^ suum non consistit in Contemplatione
veritatis, sed dirigit in prosecutione operis ut patet in centum locis
Scripturae. Et mirum esset si non sit practica, cum considerantes Scripturam a
principio usque ad finem, etc. Pro una Scripturae columna in qua agitur de pure
speculabilibus, sunt plus quam quingenta folia, in quibus agitur de pure
practicis. The operation of Theology about its object consists not in bare
speculation of truth, but in directions for our practice, as appears in an
hundred places of Scripture, and therefore it were strange it should not be a
practical Science: seeing if we consider the Scripture from the beginning to
the end, for one place which treates of matters speculative, we may find five
hundred which handle things merely practical.

This then being the scope of all revealed truths in Scripture, and the proper
end of Theology, to direct us in our practice, This book wherein all those
practical truths are distinctly handled, and explained, cannot but be of
great use to all whose care is to work out their salvation. And if he was
accounted the wisest man among the heathen by the Oracle, that brought
Philosophy out of the Clouds into Cities and Houses, that is from air and
vain speculations to practical precepts, no doubt but they shall be counted
wise Scribes in the Church of God, that laying aside fruitless controversies
and Polemick disputes, wherewith peoples heads have been so troubled, that the
power of Religion is in a manner quite lost, bend their studies and endeavors
to urge this unum necessarium, the practice of those moral and Christian
duties, wherein the life of Religion consists, and which will bring glory to
God, benefit to others, honor to our profession, and sure comfort to the soul,
when all other comforts fail. This practicing of what we know, will be the
surest Antidote against the growing errors and Heresies of the times, for if
any man will do the John 7. 17.
will of God (says Christ) he shall know whether Psalm. 25. 14.
the Doctrine be of God or no. Faith and good conscience go both in a bottom,
he that lets go the one, will quickly make shipwreck of the other, All
apostasy, begins in practice, and errors in the life produce errors in
Judgment, for when the will is corrupted the understanding is darkened, and the
apostle tells us, that those which are given up to strong delusions, are such as
receive not the truth in the love of it. Whereas practice These. 2.
10. 12.
is a sure preservative against defection, this will make a man whose knowledge
is less then others, remain steadfast in times of trial, like a fixed star
while others of greater parts like blazing stars may shine for a while, but at
length vanish into smoke.

That which is the scope of this work, to urge the practice of Religion, and
was no doubt, the end propounded by the learned Author, when he at first penned
and delivered these Lectures, is also the end aimed at in the publishing of
them at this time, and though many others have written upon the same Subject,
whose labors I shall not any way disparage, yec I doubt not, but he that shall
read and peruse these labors of this Reverend Author, will find them to be
as useful and profitable as any hitherto extant in this kind, and that they
contain, the most full, complete, learned, and elaborate body of Practical
Divinity, that has been hitherto published, and that scarce any thing of note
is to be found on this large subject in any Authors Divine or humane, which is
not here with admirable judgment, clearnes of method, and fullness of
expression digested. And considering how this subject is handled, neither
superficially and slightly as too many have done in our own Language, nor yet,
so coldly and Jejunely, as diverse of the Casuists in their large and intricate
disputes, who inform the Judgment, but work not upon the affections at all,
but that as the matter is solid in it self, so it is clothed with emphaticall
significant words, adorned with choice sentences, apt allusions, and
Rhetorical amplisications out of the best authors; besides pregnant
applications of Scripture, and sundry critical observations upon diverse texts
not vulgar nor obvious, it will be hard to say, whether the profit or delight
of the reader will be greater. And as the works in regard of the general
subject may be useful for all persons of what rank soever, so I doubt not but
it may be of special use for the public dispensers of the word, especially
the younger sort of Divines, who besides many directions for useful and
profitable Preaching, may find also variety of excellent matter upon any
practical Subject without Postills or Polyanthea, and directions for deciding
most cases of conscience, which out of the grounds here laid may be easily
resolved.

Now concerning this Edition, and what is herein performed, I am not ignorant,
what prejudice attends the printing the posthumous works of any; how easy it is
to mistake the sense of an Author, especially where the work was not perfected
by himself, and that diverse things in men's private papers would have been
thought sit to be altered, omitted, or enlarged by the Authors themselves, if
they had intended them for public view; for which, and diverse other reasons,
it might have been thought sit, not to publish, what the Author had kept so
long by him, and had not fitted for the Press, nor those reverend Persons, to
whose care his Papers and Writings were by his late MAJESTY committed,
intended to divulge; for who would presume to put a Pencil to a Piece, which
such an Apelles had begun: yet considering, that there is already a rude
imperfect draught, or rather some broken Notes of these his Lectures, which had
passed through diverse hands, already crept forth in Print, to the great wrong,
both of the Living and the Dead, and that the same is about to be reprinted, it
was therefore thought necessary in vindication of the Author, and to disabuse
the Reader, to publish this Copy, there being no other way to prevent the
further mischiefs of that Edition, then by another more perfect; for though I
deny not but that there are many good Materials, in that indigested Chaos,
which is already set forth, which an expert Builder may make good use of, yet
the Reader will find the whole to be nothing else, but a heap of broken
rubbish, the rudera of those stately structures, which that skilful Architect
had made, which have been so mangled and defaced, so scattered and dismembered,
like Medeas Absyrtus, that they appear scarce shadows of themselves, so that
had the learned Author lived to see those partus ingenii, those divine Issues
of his brain so deformed, he might well have called them, not Benjamins, sons
of his right hand, but Benonies, sons of sorrow; for I am confident, there has
not been exposed to public view a work of that bulk, stuffed with so much
nonsense, so many Tautologies, contradictions, absurdities, and incoherences,
since Printing was in use: there is not a Page, scarce a Paragraph, seldom
many lines together in the whole Book which contain perfect sense; the Method
quite lost in most places, the whole Discourse like a body whose members are
dislocated, or out of joint: as if it had been tortured upon the rack, or
wheel, so that the parts cohere like the Hammonian sands, sometimes whole
Paragraphs, whole pages, yea, diverse sheets together are wanting, as in the
tenth Commandment, where the one half is left out, and half of the ninth is
added to supply that defect; and the whole work, so corrupted, mangled,
disjoynted, falsified, interpolated, and the sense of the Author so perverted,
that the Author might well say of the Publisher with the Poet, Quem recitas
men's est, etc. At male dum recitas incipit esse tuus; the Book was his at
first, but by this strange Metamorphosis, the Publisher has made his own.

That the world therefore may not be longer abused by a shadow obtruded for the
substance, here is presented the Authors own Copy, revised and compared with
diverse other manuscripts, which though it were not perfected by himself, nor
intended for public use, yet being the only Copy he had, as is acknowledged
under his hand in the beginning of the Book, and containing many Marginal
Notes, and alterations throughout the whole made by himself in his latter
years, as it seems, it may well be thought to contain the mind and sense of
the Author more fully, then any of those Copies in other hands. This coming
into the hands of one of those, to whom the perusal of his papers were
committed, who was informed of the wrong done by that other Edition, and that a
more perfect one was intended and desired, out of his love to the memory of the
deceased Author, and his eminent zeal for the public good, considering of how
great use the work might be, he was easily induced to part with it for so good
a purpose, whereupon by an able, industrious and worthy Gentleman, who has
otherwise deserved well of the public, and had some relation to the Author
whilst he lived, the work was taken in hand and revised, the sense in many
places restored, defects supplied, and the whole discourse brought into a far
better form, then that wherein it had formerly appeared. But considering that
to purge this Augaean stable, and to restore a work so much corrupted, and
whose best Copies were imperfect, was no easy work, and that it contained such
variety of all kind of Learning, both Divine and Humane, that he who would
revise it, must not be a stranger to any, and that many Eyes may see more then
one, such was his Ingenuity and Modesty, that he was willing and desirous to
have the whole again revised, and brought to the touch, by some other, who as
he conceived, might have more leizure and abilities then himself; whereupon it
was again resumed, and after much labor and travail, was at length brought to
this form, wherein it now appears: wherein, that the Reader may know what is
performed in this Edition, he shall find.

1. The true sense and meaning of the Author (the chief thing to be looked
after in the publishing of other men's works) restored in many thousand places,
which were corrupted and mistaken, whereby the Author was made to speak
contrary to what he thought, as if he had seen some vision after his death, to
make him change his Judgment in his life time. This, as it was a work of much
difficulty, requiring both time and study, by diligent comparing of places,
weighing of Antecedents, and Consequents, viewing several Copies, and
consulting with the Authors quoted, etc. so the Reader will find no small
benefit thereby, arising from this Edition. 2. The Method is here cleared,
which was in a manner quite lost in the former Edition, and without which the
Reader must needs be in a Maze or Labyrinth. This being the chief help to
memory, etconducing much to the understanding of the matter. 3. Many
Tautologies, and needless Repetitions of the same thing are here cut off, and
those many great defects, wherein diverse Paragraphs, Pages, and whole sheets
were formerly wanting are supplied and added. 4. Whereas in some passages the
sense of the Author might seem obscure or doubtful, and not to agree so well
with his judgment, expressed in his other works, composed in his latter and
riper years; his meaning therefore is cleared and vindicated, by adding his
latter thoughts, upon the same points, which are either collected out of his
other works, which were perfected by himself, or the Reader referred to those
other places, where he may be more fully satisfied. And where some things are
omitted, or but briefly touched, a supplement is made out of his other works,
or where it could not be had out of them, there is added what was needful to be
supplied without prejudice to the Author, and what is conceived agreeable to the
declared Doctrine of the Catholic Church of Christ, and of this Church in
special; which (that the Reader may distinguish it from the words of the
Author) is put in a different Character, save where, by mistake the same letter
is used.

And here, as in some other points, so in particular about the Sabbath, wherein
the Author might be mistaken by many of both sides, out of his other works
compared with this, here is declared what his Opinion was in that Controversy;
and that it was no other, then which I conceive to come nearest to the truth)
that as the symbolical rest, proper to that Nation, is abolisht, so the
substance of the Precept is moral, and that the seventh day was hallowed by God
for a time of public worship from the beginning, in memory of the Creation, by
positive Divine Law, obliging all mankind; Instead whereof the Lords day is
set apart for the day of public worship, by the Apostles, as extraordinary
Legates of Christ, in memory of the Resurrection, which is to continue
unchangeable to the end of the World. This, as it is showed out of the Authors
other writings, so for the more full clearing of all questions upon this
subject there is added a large discourse, containing the whole Doctrine of the
Sabbath and Lords day, laid down in seven Conclusions, Chap. 7. in Com. 4.
wherein I conceive, there is some thing offered, which may givc some
satisfaction to those that are moderate of both sides.

5. For the better help of the Reader, every Commandment is divided into
Chapters, and the Sum or Contents of each Chapter, with the method how they
stand, are prefixed to every Chapter or Section. All which Contents, together
with the Supplements or Additions, are set together at the beginning of the
Book, that so the Reader may at once have a general Idaea of the whole Book,
and of what is handled in each Precept, and so may the more easily find any
thing he desires to read, without much Labor or enquiry.
Thus the Reader may in part conceive, what is done to render this work the
more useful to him. And if the style be not so accurate and exact, as in the
Authors other sermons, he must consider, that as it was not polisht by the
Author, nor fitted by him for the Press, and that in the revising thereof,
there was more regard had to the matter then to words; so having passed through
diverse hands, it cannot seem strange, if some incongruities of speech do still
remain: Errors we know of one concoction are not easily corrected in an other,
and waters will contract some tincture from the Minerals through which they
pass: besides that, the errors and mistakes of the Printer, which could not
easily be prevented, may in many places obscure or pervert the sense. Let this
therefore be taken in good part, which is intended for the public good, and
what shall be found needful to be corrected (as who can walk in so rough a path
and never stumble) shall God willing be rectified in the next Edition; in the
mean time make use of this, and if it shall contribute any thing to promote the
practice of Religion, which is the scope of the work, the Publisher has the
fruit of his Endeavors and ends of his Desires; who desires further, the
benefit of their Prayers, that shall reap any benefit by his Labors. In this
Preface, Page 3. line 17. read asserting. l. 33. r. Laws. l. 38. r. wallows. p.
4. l. 11. r. they. p. 5. l. 10. r. Basilides. l. 21. for four r. some. p. 6. l.
10. r. (...). p. 8. l. 15. r. where. l. 34. d. first. p. 7. l. 19. r. truer. In
the ensuing Page del. Exposition of the.


AN INTRODVCTION To the Exposition Of the DECALOGUE.
Containing certain General pracognita about Catechizing, Religion, the Law.
etc.

CHAP. I.
1 That Children are to be taught and instructed in Religion proved out of
Heathen Philosophers, out of the Law, the Gospel. 2 That this instruction ought
to be by way of Catechism. What catechizing is. How it differs from Preaching.
Reasons for abridgements or (...) of Religion. Catechizing used in all ages;
Before the flood, After the flood, Under the Law, Under the Gospel, After the
Apostles, In the Primitive Church. Reasons for this custom of Catechizing.

BEfore we proceed to the ensuing Catechism, we will first premise something
concerning the necessity of Catechizing Youth, and the duties of the
catechized, by way of preface. And for this we have sufficient warrant, not
only humane, but divine also.

Clemens Alexandrinus (Tutor to Origin) intending to write his (...), or three
books of Pedagogy, or instruction of Children prefixed before it, his (...), or
admonitory Oration. And Cyrill Bishop of Jerusalem writing twenty four several
Catechisms, in the front of them, has a preface which makes up the twenty
fifth, which he calls (...), or (...), an Introduction, or Preface, And both
these are built upon the example of King David, who being at one time (among
others) determined to catechize Children, calls them to him, saying, Come ye
children and hearken unto me, and I will teach you the fear of the Lord; a
Psalm. 34. 11.
plain preface before catechizing. The like introduction did his Son make.
Hear, O ye children, the Instruction of a father, and give ear to learn
understanding. Pro. 4. 1.
So that you see our warrant for an introduction, or preface.

Now out of these texts, three points naturally arise. 1. That it is a thing
not only pleasing to the Lord, but also commanded by him, that children be
instructed in the fear of God. 2. That their teaching must be, by way of
catechizing. 3. What is required of the (...), the catechized, that the
catechizing may be fruitful, and not in vain viz. to come and hearken, or give
ear.

There have been some, of opinion, (as may be seen, as well in the writings of
the Heathen, as in the story of the Bible) that Religion should not descend so
low as to children, but that they are to be brought up licentiously and allowed
liberty while they are young, and not to be instructed, before they come to
riper years, and then they should be instructed in Religion.

1. The heathen tell us of that, (...) is in the beginning of the Philosophers
moral (...), a young man is not a proper and fit Auditor of Moral Philosophy.
And it was the Orators opinion in his defense of Caelius, Dandum est aliquid
(...), (...) deferbuerit. Liberty is to be given to Cic. pro M. Caelio.
Youth, till its heat be abated. And one of their Poets. Qui deos voluptuarios
(...).
contempsit juvenis, is aut amabit, aut (...) senex. He that despises
pleasure, while he is young, will either dote or be mad, when he comes to be
old.

To answer this (we say,) that if there were any weight or moment, in the
authority of the Heathen, the whole consent, and practice of them in general,
were to be preferred, before some few men's opinions. And, for their practice,
it is certain, that catechism or instruction of youth, was ever in use among
the Gentiles, for we find in Porphiries questions upon Homer, this saying,
(...). These things we understand by the instruction of our childehood. And
Salons (...) sacred admonitions, learned by Eschines, showed that it was usual
in Athens for youth to be taught. The history also of the Heathen, makes it
plain, that their children were instructed, and so dealt with; for it was a
custom among them, not to poll their childrens heads, till they were
instructed in (...) in the sacred admonitions: from which time they were
allowed to carry tapers in their shows and festival solemnities, and then were
called (...), Torch or Taper-bearers. Phocylides also says, (...). It is
necessary, to teach a child while he is young, to do well. And (...), in his
golden verses, and Plutarch in his book of the education of youth, and Plato
in Euthym. are all of the same opinion.

Concerning that which Aristotle has in his morals, it must be acknowledged,
that he meant, de (...): and non (...) quod fieri debuit: else, he is to be
called back to his de Rep. (...). etc. It is expedient for little children to
be Lib. 7. cap. 17.
drawn from evil speeches and sights, which may hinder their proceedings in
virtue: and it is his rule further, that it is necessary, to teach them, as soon
as may be, all things that are good.

Lastly, against the Orator, standing at the bar, and pleading for his fee to
excuse de divinat. 4
a lewd young man, his own serious (...) are to be alleged, Refrenanda and
(...) Offic. l: 1.
est, etc. and maxim haec aetas a libidinibus and voluptatibus arcenda est.
This age (meaning youth) is most (...) to be kept from lusts (...) pleasures.
And in another place he is of a flat contrary opinion to his first. Qui
adolescentum (...) ignosciputant (...), falluntur, propterea, quod aetas illa
non est impedimento (...) studiis. They are much (...), that think way should
be given to Ad Herenn. 4
the licentiousness of young men, because that age is no let or hinderance to
good learning.

In the Scriptures there are two places, that discover some to be of the same
opinion. 1. Pharaoh being requested by Moses that the Israelites might go with
Exo. 10. 9.
their children to worship the Lord, makes a scoff at the motion, and says:
Not so, go ye now, that are men: as though religion pertained not to children;
2. In the Gospel when children were brought to Christ to bless them; the
disciples not only forbade them, but rebuked them, that brought them, as if
Mat. 19: 13.
Christ and children had nothing to do with each other. (...). 18. 15.


For the first we see that Moses stands stiffely to his proposition, and (...)
not accept of Pharaohs offer for the elder, except the younger might go also.

For the second, our Savior opposes his disciples, and commands them not to
hinder, but to suffer and further their coming to him, telling them that the
Maa. 15. 9.
kingdom of heaven belonged as well to them, as to elder people, pronouncing
those accursed, that should keep them from him, or (...) lay a stumbling block
before them by ill example.

That instruction is most necessary for children may be proved out of the Law.

1. The Law was not only given in respect of those of riper years, but to the
younger sort, and that to cleanse their ways: as the Prophet David speaks.
Psalm. 119. 9.
2. The Jews observe, that there is mention made of children three times in the
Decalogue, and of these three places, two of them are directly set down, for
(...) children in duties of Religion, as in the observation of the Sabbath, and
honoring Parents, one in each Table. 3. Again God in the same Law gave
commandment to Parents, to inform and Exodus 12. 27.
(...) their children, why the Passover and other religious ordinances were
commanded. Yea though children shall not ask of their Parents, yet God (...).
6. 21.
lays a charge upon them to see their children instructed in his Laws. And
whereas many hold it not material or to be regarded what children do, and that 7
they are not to be examined and censured for their childish acts, though
wanton, and wicked, the Holy Ghost confutes such people by the Wise man, who
says, (...) semi is suis (as some translation has it) even a child is known
by his doings, whether his work be pure, and whether it be right. Prove. 20. 11.

2. And as God would have (...) instructed in his Laws, so if when they are
taught (...) admonished, they refuse good counsel, it will fall out, that such
as are evil affected and obstinate, he means to destroy, as in the case of
Elies sons, who hearkened not to the voice of their father, because God would
(...) them: 1 Samuel 2. 25.
and of the forty two children of the city of Bethel, who were devoured by
Bears, for mocking the Prophet Elisha. Whereas on the other side, God gives 2
Reg. 2. 24.
a blessing to such children, as are willing to be instructed, in his fear, and
the ways or his commandments.

3 To this, the Hebrew proverb may be added. There are to be seen in (...)
souls of all sizes: that is, death (the reward of sin) seizes upon the young
as well as upon the old, and the young as the old shall be judged by their
works. I saw the dead (says saint John) small and great, stand before God, and
they Rev. 20. 12.
were judged according to their works.

4. Again from the gospel, Exemplum dedi vobis, I have given you an example,
John 13. (...).
says our Savior, of whom the Divines rule is. Omnis actio Christi (...)
nostra est, Every action of Christ is for our instruction. And he has left an
example Luke 2. 46.
and president for children: in that at twelve years of age he was found in the
Temple with the Doctors, both hearing and asking them questions, and so
submitting himself to Catechizing.

5. When the chief Priests and Scribes were sore displeased at the children
that mat. 21. 15, 16
cried Hosanna to our Savior: he approved of their song of praise, and quoted
a text for their justification out of the Psalms. Out of the mouth of babes and
Psalm. 8. 2.
(...) have thou perfected praise, and upon that act of theirs, one says, Non
minus placet Hosanna puerorum, quam Hallelujah virorum, The Hosanna of children
pleased Christ no less, then the Hallelujah of men.

6. In the gospel, Christ's charge to saint Peter, was not, to feed his sheep
only John 21. 15.
but his lambs also, and his lambs in the first place: because the increase of
the flock, depends chiefly, upon the forwardness and thriving of the lambs:
for they being (...) and looked to, less pains will be taken with them, when
they come to be sheep.

7. When thou vowest a vow (says the Preacher) defer not to to pay it. All
(...). 5. 4.
stipulations and solemn promises, must be performed as soon as we can. But in
our Baptism we made a vow, to learn the fear of God; therefore we are to
perform it, in the prime of our youth: and the rather, because, whereas by the
direction of our Savior, the disciples were to teach and baptize, yet in
singular Math. 28. (...)
favor to the children of the faithful, this privilege is given, that they
first may be baptized and then taught. (...) says, (...) because God has set
it in the second place, do not thou set it in no place. It should be first,
therefore as soon as may be. In ep. (...). tract. 3.


Saint Augustine says. Quare (...) Magister extrinsecus, (...) sit intus. To
what purpose is it, to have an instructor, or teacher outwardly, if he be not
within also. And (...) when we come to age, there is not (...) a casting off,
and rejecting of government, but (...), a change of the governor. Seeing then
that children must have teachers and governors within them, before they be
freed from Tutors and governors without them, it is necessary that we begin to
teach them betimes, lest at the quitting them from the outward, they have
neither the inward, nor the outward; but be like the sons of Belial, that is,
be under no yoke, nor government at all.

9. The very Heathen, could see an aptness, and disposition in their children,
to vice, and we may perceive their inclinations, and propensity to profane and
scurrilous jeasts. Therefore, we are to take the advantage of their
dispositions betimes; and to employ and exercise them in things that are good,
to which (if they be well ordered) they will be as apt, as to bad. For no
doubt, but if children can say of themselves, Bald-head to Elisha, they may be
easily taught, to say Hosanna to Christ.

10. That time is ever, to be taken, which fitteth any thing best: but the time
of youth is most fit, to learn, in respect of the docibility of it: They are
like to a new Mortar, which savoureth most of that spice, which is first beaten
in it: and to a new vessel; that retains the sent of the first Liquor, which
was (...).
put into it. Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit (...), Testa diu. As also,
in respect, that this age is free from those cares, and passions, which the
world infuseth into men of elder age, as ambition, malice, adultery,
covetousness and the like, which have been great remoras, and impediments in
matters of religion, to those of riper years. So much for the time when, now
for the manner how children are to be (...).

(...) I will teach or catechize you, says David, in this text. (...). 2
Although an argument from the name proves little, yet (...). 34. 11.
it explaineth well: the English and the Latin follow well the Greek (...)
The Etymology
which seems also to be proportioned from the Hebrew word (...) to iterate or
to do any thing the second time, or of (...) which signifies first acuere, to
whet, or sharpen, to make it the fitter to enter. And 2. repetere to go over
and over, the same thing, as we use to do with our knives upon a whetstone;
And in both these, are contained the duties both, of Catechist, and Catichized.
Of the first, by making his doctrine, the easier to enter, by giving it such an
edg, by a perspicuous method; as that children, may not only understand, but
carry away also, what he delivers to them: of the later, by often going over
that, which he is taught, as a knife does a whetstone, and to repeat and
iterate it, till he have made it his own. So that we see, that in (...) and
(...) to resound, is included, an iteration, from which word, we have our Echo
in English. (...) is indeed to sound the last syllable, and such sounders
happily, there are enough: but (...) is to sound the whole, after one again.
And such is the repetition which is required, of the right and true (...) young
catechized Christians; and those places, are called (...) that give the whole
verse or word again.

(...). The (...). Clemens.
Catechism is the doctrine of Godliness or Religion first declared by the
Catechiser to learners, of which afterward account is given by the learners,
to their instructor. And it is thus distinguished from Preaching.

1. Preaching, is a dilating of one Member, or point of Religion into a just
Treatise.

Catechizing, is a contracting of the whole body of Religion, into an (...) or
Sum.

2. Preaching is applied, for the capacity of all sorts of people, old and
young. Catechizing is appointed only for the younger sort, and those which are
ignorant. 3. In Preaching, there is no repetition, required from the Auditors.
In Catechizing, an account, or repetition, is to be exacted from the
Catechized.

Now upon these differences, 3 things are to be considered, or 3. queres are to
be made.

1. By what warrant Abridgments or Sums are made. 2. What we have to warrant
teaching of children, by way of Catechizing. 3. Upon what grounds, answers are
to be made by the Catechized.
1. The warrant for the first we have from Christ himself, who in his answer
Matthew. 22. (...).
to the Lawyer, reduced the whole Law under two heads, The love of God and our
neighbor.

2. Again, our Savior catechizing Nicodemus, made an Epitome or Abridgment
John. (...). 16.
of the Gospel, under one head. Sic Deus dilexit Mundum, So God loved the
world, that he gave (...) only begotten Son, that whosoever believed on him,
might not perish but have everlasting life.

3. Solomon also, in his book of the Preacher, reduces the whole duty of
(...). 12. 13.
man into two heads, 1 fear God, 2 and keep his commandments.

4. Saint Paul in his speech to the Elders of Ephesus, draws the principles
Acts 20. 21.
of Religion, to these two; (...) and Repentance. Repentance toward Hebr. 6. 1.
God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. And in another place. Repentance
from dead works and faith toward God.

5. The (...) are of opinion, that teaching by way of Sum, is meant 2. Tim.
1. 13.
by Saint Paul, when he speaks of the form of sound words, and of That form
(...). 6. 17.
of Doctrine, and the proportion or analogy of faith. 12. 6.


6. Lastly, (...) (we know) have their (...), Lawyers their (...), Philosophers
Isagoges: and therefore Divines may have their Epitomes.

If we demand a reason hereof, our Savior shows us one, that we may (...).
22. 37.
be able (...) to have a dependence, or be able to refer all our readings and
hearings to certain principal head, thereby to enclose or limit our study. And
the Rabbis say, that the 2 heads (to which Christ reduced the Law and the
Prophets) were (...) legis, an hedge of the Law, containing the heads of the
general doctrine, lest we should wander in infinito campo, in too large a
field, and so waver.

Clemens calls it (...) basis, a foundation or groundplot, (...) (...) a first
or rough draught of a Picture.

And as these abridgments are for our shorter, so for our more easy attayning
to the knowledge of that, which may (...) us to salvation. And such were the
sermons of the Apostles, when they baptized so many hundreds in one day.
Concerning which it is well aid, (...); Thanks be to our blessed God who has
made necessary doctrines compendious, and doctrines which are not compendious,
not so necessary. But here we must take with us a double Proviso.

1. That we remain before Gods judgment seat (...) inexcusable, 2. Pet. 3.
(...).
if we seek not his knowledge, being made easy by a short compendium. 1. Cor.
14. 20.
Ephesians. 1. 13.
2. We must grow in grace, and in the knowledge of Christ: And we must not be
(ever) hildren, but men in understanding. And after we have heard the word of
truth (so compe diously delivered) we must trust and believe in it, being the
Gospel of our salvation.
We are not to (...) at a stay, but proceed and profit every day, and make
progress (...).
John. 5. (...).
in our knowledge: for as there are places in scripture (as is before said)
where every lamb may wade; so are there also deeper places, where an (...) may
swim. We shall never be so perfect, as to be free from (...), Search the
scriptures.

For teaching children by way of Catechizing is no new thing. 1. It is
warranted 2
even before (...) flood. The offerings and sacrifices of (...) and Abel are
(...). (...). 3, (...).
a strong argument to induce our (...), that they had been instructed by their
father Adam, in matter of Religion. And though the word was yet (...) (...),
not (...) written from the Creation, till after the flood, yet Gods worship
could not have continued, had instruction ceased and not been used.

2. After the flood (in the time of Abraham) the scripture bears witness,
Genesis 18. 17.
that he taught his children and family the fear of the Lord. Ab condam (...)
ab (...)? says God, shall I hide (...) (...) the thing that I will do? for 19.
I know him that he will command his children etc and they shall keep the way
17. 1.
of (...) Lord. And what he would teach them is evident, by the sum (...) the
Law delivered to him by God. Ambula coram me etc. Walk before me 18. 18.
and be perfect. As also by the sum of the Gospel. In thy seed shall all the
nations of the earth be blessed. 22. 18.


Th fruits of this catechizing and the effects thereof appeared first, in his
son Genesis 24. 63.
Isaac. The tex says, Et exiit Isaac ut oraret in agro vesperi, and (...) went
out to pray in the field at eventide, And secondly, in his servant, who (...)
he 12.
undertook his masters business, 1. began with prayer. 2 he ended with prayer
and thanksgiving for his (...) success, 3 showed his care in performing his 27.
Masters busin sse, he would not eat, though he had traveled far, until he
had declared his message. 33.


3. And as this appears in Adam concerning the instruction of his children
before the flood, and in Abraham after it, and (...) the Law: so it is not to
be doubted but that there were diverse other godly men, in both ages, that
successively (...) 14.
instructed their children, receiving it as a duty by tradition, so to do. For
there is no writing extant till Moses time, though it appears by Saint Jude,
that something was proph sied by Enoch, who was the 7th from Adam; and that the
story of Job seems to be more ancient then that of Moses life and actions
though the Church place Moses first, to whom by tradit (...) was conveled the
story of former times, and perhaps Moses his story might be first written.

4. Besides the divine goodness so disposed, that no age from the (...) to the
time of Moses, should want some godly men, successively to deliver his will to
their child en. As before the flood (...), Seth, Enos, Kenan, (...), (...),
Enoch, Methusalem, Lamech, of which number Adam and (...) (...) the whole time
from the Creation to the flood, which fell in the year of the world 1656. For
Adam lived 930 years, And Methusalem 969. and (...) in the year of the deluge.
So that Methusalem living 243 years with Adam, must needs be well instructed
by him, concerning all points of Religion, and that (no doubt) (...) his youth,
as also were they that were born between them.

5. After the deluge God sent into the world many excellent men also before the
Law. As Noah, Sem, Arphaxad, Sale, Heber, Peleg, Reu, Serug, Nachor, Their
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. and no doubt, ((...) it appears that Abraham
instructed his family) but that he also received instruction from his Parents,
(...) his from theirs before them. For Noah lived 950 years, and was 600 years
old at the time of the flood: and no question, but he was well instructed, by
conversing with so many fathers of the first age of the world. And his son Sem
lived many years with him, being born 98 years before the deluge and therefore
wanted no documents. Now for the posterity of Abraham, we find (...) (...) was
grandchild to (...) (by Levi) as Jacob was to Abraham, and li: ved many years
with his father Levi, and his grandfather Jacob, and benig grandfather to
Moses, it is Probable that he with his son Amram (...) Moses in God service as
their predecessors had instructed them. And thus much for the time before the
Law written.

6. Under the Law, immediately after it was given, God gave command to the (...)
to instruct their children. And that four several ways,

1 They were to teach them diligently. The word [teach] there, in the original
signifies to whet, or sharpen, which by the learned is expounded to (...). 6.
(...).
(...) rehearsing. 2. They were to confer and talk with them, about the Law,
in the house, Deuteronomy. 6. 8.
morning and evening, and when they walked with them abroad. 3. They were to
bind the commandments for signs upon their hands, and 9.
as frontlets before their eyes, that their children might continually take
notice of them. 4. Lastly, for the same intent and purpose, they were commanded
to write them upon the gates and posts of their houses. Psalm. 34. 11.

7. The practice of this (after the law made) we may see in David, who, in the
Text before quoted, says, Come ye children, hearken unto me, and I will teach
you, etc. and more particularly toward his son Solomon, as he professes
himself. I was my fathers son (says he) tender and only beloved in the sight
of my Pro. 4. 3. 4.
mother, and he taught or catechized me. And this he did not only as he was
Pater-familias the father of a family, but as a Catechist in public before the
people. And thou Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy father, and serve 1
Chro. 28. 9.
him with a perfect heart. Nor did Solomon discontiue this practice, for he
instructed his son Rehoboam at large, as may be seen in his first seven
chapters of 2. Reg. 12. 2.
his Proverbs. So was young king Jehoash instructed by Jehoiada the high Priest.

8. Under the captivity and after (because there are no examples in writing
Susan. 3.
extant in the Scriptures, but that Apocryphal of Susannae, of whom it is
said, that she was instructed by her parents in the law of Moses) we must
repair to the records of Josephus, who affirms that there were never less
among the L. 1. Antiq.
Jews, (...) four hundred houses of catechizing, where the law and the Talmud
were expounded. And it is recorded that there was an act made at Jerusalem,
that children should be set to catechizing at the age of (...) years; whereunto
Saint Paul seems to have relation, (...) catechized out of the Romans 2. 18.
Law.

9. Under the gospel, there is an express precept or commandment to Parents,
Ephesians. 6. 4.
not only to enter their children, (...), but to bring them up in nurture and
admonition. And it was Saint Paul's practice, as you may see by a 1. Cor. 14. 19.
passage to the Corinthians, (...), that I may catechize others.

We find three eminent persons noted to us in Scripture, that were catechumeni
catechized.

The first was Theophilus, of whom Saint Luke testifies; It seemed good Luke
1. 3, 7, 8.
to me (says he) to write to thee in order, that thou might know the
certainty of those things (...) concerning which thou were catechized or
instructed.

The second was Apollos, of whom also Saint Luke gives this commendation, Act.
18. 24.
that he was mighty in the Scriptures, and (...) this man 25.
was catechized or instructed in the way of the Lord.

The third was Timothy, of whom saint Paul testifies, that he had known the 2.
Tim. 3. 15.
the Scriptures from a child. And in one place mention is made both of the
Gal. 6. 6.
Catechist and Catechized. (...) etc.

After the Apostles times the first Catechist of any fame, was the Evangelist
Mark in Alexandria, after him Pantenus, then Clemens, Origin, Cyril of
Jerusalem, Gregory Nyssen, Athanasius, Fulgentius, S. Augustine and others. And
that there were catechumeni in the Church in all ages, may appear by the canons
of diverse Councels.

Hegesippus (converted from Judaism to Christianity) in his Ecclesiastical
story reports, that this work of catechizing wrought so great effect, that
there was no known commonwealth inhabited in that part of the world, but within
forty years after our saviors passion (...) superstition was shaken in it, by
Catechizing So that Julian the Apostata, the greatest enemy that ever
Christians had, found no speedier way to root out Christian religion, then by
suppressing Christian schools and places of catechizing: and if he had not been
as a Cloud that soon passes away, it might have been feared, that in a short
time he had overshadowed true Religion.

1 And when Catechizing was left off in the Church, it soon became darkened and
overspread with ignorance. The Papists therefore acknowledge that all the
advantage which the protestants have gotten of them, has come by this
exercise: and it is to be feared that if ever thy get ground of us, it will be
by their more exact and frequent Catechizing then ours.

3. Concerning the third quaere. The reasons why this custom of catechizing by
way of question and answer, has ever been continued, seem to be these.

1 Because of the account every one must give. Our Savior tells it us. reddes
Mat. 36. 12.
rationem, we must render an account. And every man will will be most wary in
that for which he must be accomptable. (...). 2 Because we are all, young and
old, to give an account of our faith. Be ready (says Saint Peter) always to
give answer to every one that asks you a reason 1 Pet. 3. 15.
of the hope that is in you, a solid reason, not a phanatique opinion.
And by this we shall be the better fitted to these four necessary duties 1 of
examining 1 Jon. 4 1.
the doctrine we hear.

2 Of examining our selves before we hear the word, and receive the
sacrements. 1 Cor. 11. 28
2. 13. 5.
3 Of admonishing our brethren, which we cannot do, unless we be fitted To.
15. 14.
with knowledge. 4 Of adhering to the truth. Because being children we do
imbibere errcres, ergo exuendi sunt et induendaveritas, we drink in errors,
which must be shaken of, and our loins must be girt with truth.
The Heathen man advises us, that in all our actions we propound to our selves
Ephesians. 6. 14.
Cui bono. What good will arise by that we go about? In this certainly the
fruit is great, diverse ways.

1 It will be acceptable to God to spend our hours in his service. To. 12. 1.
2 We shall learn hereby to know God and his son Jesus Christ. Whom to John.
17. 3.
know is life eternal. 3 It will procure length of happy days in this life.
Deuteronomy. 11. 21.
4 Lastly the fruit of it is holiness, and the end everlasting life. (...). 6.
21.

Now (...) the fruit is so great, we are to take especial care, that the hours
we spend in this exercise, be not lost, and so we be deprived of the fruit. For
as in natural Philosophy it is held a great absurdity, ut aliquid frustra fiat,
that any thing be done in vain, or to no purpose, and in moral ut sit (...)
that there be a vain and fruitless desire, so in divinity much more. S. Paul
uses it as an argument to the corinthians to prove the resurrection, that if
there should be none, then both his preaching and their faith were in vain. And
in another place, he did so forecast his manner of the conversion of the
gentiles ne forte currat in 1 Cor. 15. 4.
vanum, lest he might run in vain Therefore as the same Apostle desired the
Corinthians, Gal. 2. 2.
not to receive the grace of God in vain: so are we to be careful, that 2 Cor.
6. 1.
we hear nothing in vain, lest we be like those in Jeremy, that let the
bellows Jer. 6. 29.
blow, and the lead consume in the fire, and the founder melt in vain, upon
which place says the gloss, that all pains and labor which is taken with
such people is in vain and lost.

But the word of God cannot be in vain in three respects.

1 In respect of it self. 2 In respect of the Catechist. 3 In respect of the
Catechized.
1 In respect of it self it cannot be in vain. For God himself maintains the
contrary. Esa. 55. 10. 11.
As the rain comes down (says he by the Prophet) and the snow from heaven,
and returns not thither, but waters the earth, and makes it bring forth
and budd, that it may give seed to the sower, and bread to the eater. So shall
the word be that goes forth out of my mouth, it shall not return to me void,
but it shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing
whereto I send it.

2 Nor can it be in vain, in respect of the Catechizer, or him that delivers
it. I have labored in vain (says the Prophet) I have spent my strength for
naught and in (...): yet surely (mark that) my judgment is with the Lord, and
my work with my God. The pains which the Catechizer takes, is not in vain,
because God (seeing he has done his part) will accept of his endeavors,
though his (...) reject and Esa. 49. 4.
(...) them. And if the son of peace be there, (...) peace shall rest upon him,
if not redibit ad vos, it shall return to you again, says Christ to his
disciples. And the Apostle Luke 10. 6.
most plainly (...) We are unto God a sweet savor of Christ, in them that are
saved, and in them that perish. Therefore we ought to be very careful 2 Cor.
2. 15.
how we behave our selves in hearing.

3 Lastly, it cannot be in vain to the Catechized. If we come to hear with a
good Mat. 13. 23.
intent, the spirit of God takes order, that the word shall be profitable, and
fruitful, like good seed sowed in good ground. And to this purpose it is, that
Saint Gregory says. Cum verbiboni auditores (...), pro reficiendis eis majora
doctoribus intelligentiae dona tribuuntur: (...) enim Doctori verbum Dominus
pro gratia tribuit auditoris. in (...).
When hearers come with a good appetite to hear the word, the teachers are
enabled with (...) gifts of understanding. For ost-times God gives his word to
the teacher, in favor of the hearers.

CHAP. II.
The duty of the catechized. 1. To come, and that 1. with a right intent, 2.
willingly, 3. with preparation, which must be, 1. in fear, 2. by prayer. Other
rules for coming, 1. with fervency, 2. with purity of heart, 3. in faith, 4.
frequently. The second duty to hear or hearken. The necessity of hearing. The
manner, 1. with reverence, 2. with fervor of spirit, 3, with silence, 4.
without gazing. 5. hear to keep. How the word must be kept in our hearts, 1.
by examination, 2. by meditation, 3. by conference.

Now that it may be the more fruitful, two duties in this text are required of
them: The Duty of the Catechized
(...), et auscultare. To come, and to hear, or hearken. It is the nature of
the Holy Ghost, to comprehend and comprize many things in few words, much
matter in short speech.

(...) come, The first duty required is, to come to Church. Our presence must
be the psalm. 122. 1.
first part of our Christian obedience. I was glad (says the Psalmist) when
they said Esa. 2. 3.
unto me, we will go into the house of the Lord. And the Prophet says, many
people shall go and say, Come and (...) us go up into the mountain of the Lord.
The Jews have a proverb, Blessed is he that dusteth himself with the dust of
the Temple. Alleging that of the Psalmist, One day in Gods Court is better
then a thousand. psalm. 84. 10.


1 And yet our coming to Church will avail us little, if we come as they did
of Esaias. 29. 13.
whom the Prophet speaks, that is for fashions sake, fear of punishment,
disfavour 11
or the like, rather then for any good will we have to come thither. For to
such the word shall be (as the same Prophet tells us) as a sealed book that
cannot be opened. Therefore if it stood in our election, and that all censures,
and rubs were removed, that we might be at liberty, to come or stay at home,
yet are we to come, and to come well affected, because the Holy Ghost has
said, Venite come. For to come only at Gods call, and not well qualified, is
no more then the Centurions servant did at his command; therefore in so coming
we shall do God no great service.

The people went three days journey into the wilderness after Christ. And
there Mar. 8. 2.
were some that heard Saint Paul, while he continued preaching till midnight.
But Act. 20. 7.
our coming and hearing will little avail us, if it be not with a good intent,
for even psalm. 105. 31.
the flies, lice, grasshoppers and caterpillars came at Gods commandment.

2 But we are not only to come, but to come Libenter with a willing mind, to
be bettered by our coming, not to hear news, as the Athenians, nor as (...)
to Christ, Act. 17. 22.
hoping to see some miracles done, but diligenter and ardenter with diligence
and zeal. Luke 23. 8.
Saint Augustine calls the peoples act of following Christ three days in the
wilderness, Monstrum diligentiae, a diligence more then ordinary. We must be
like those, that to hear the Apostles resorted daily and with gladness to the
Temple; and, Act. 2. 46.
(in Solomon's phrase) wait daily at his gates, and at the posts of his doors to
hear; Pro. 8. 34.
that is without weariness or intermission. (...) says, Non sunt istae
institutiones, sicut homiliae, These Catechizings are not as Homilies, for if
we miss a sermon, we may redeem it again, but if we miss this exercise, we
loose much benefit. It is compared to a building, of which, if any one part be
wanting, the whole edifice must (...) be unperfect. Therefore we must follow
the Apostles counsel (...) and redeem the time, for the neglect of Ephesians. 5.
16.
this duty cannot be excused by multiplicity of business, for though a
provident care Mat. 22. 5.
be lawful, yet when it hinders us from coming to God, it (...) sin. Nor can
pastime privilege us, for there is no other reason given that Esau was evil,
but that he Genesis 25. 7.
was a man of the field, or lived in the fields, and loved his game and
pleasures. And it was Exo. 32. 6.
the Israelites fault; Sedebat populus edere, surrexit autem ludere, the people
sat down to eat, and rose up to play. This was spoken to their reproach and
infamy. And therefore it is well said of One, Men's otiosa nihil aliud cogitare
novit, quam de escis, aut quam Leo.
de ventre, an idle man thinks of nothing but his belly. And another, Nihil in
sancto Hier ad Demetr.
proposito otio deterius est, nothing hinders holy intentions more then (...).
Nor the spirit of sloth. The Prophet tells the Jews, The Lord has covered you
with a spirit of slumber, and has shut up your eyes. If a man have not a mind
to go to Esa. 29. 10.
this exercise, it will not excuse him, he must rouse up himself, and remove
all impediments. But if sickness seiz upon us, or some extraordinary occasion,
that cannot be avoided, necessitates us, and keeps us back at any time from
this duty, we are to follow the Apostles rule before mentioned, and redeem the
time by our better future diligence.

3 Now forasmuch as we know, that every comer is not welcome, but he that Mat.
22. 13.
comes in his wedding garment, that comes prepared as he ought: and that we
(...) King Hezekiah would not proclaim a solemn passover til the Priests and
Levites were 2 Chr. 29. 34.
prepared: and that King David, though he had taken as good order as he could,
yet 1 Chr 29. 17.
(not confident of the abilities of himself (...) his people) betook himself to
prayer, that God would prepare their hearts. And that in the gospel the office
of John the Baptist Mat. 3. 3.
was to prepare the way of the Lord, and to make his paths straight. Lastly
that the (...). 12. 47.
servant which prepared not himself was severely punished. We ought to fit our
selves to this duty by way of preparation, for certainly this is a most
necessary duty Amos. 4. 12
required in every one that desires to know God. Prepare to meet thy God,
says the Prophet. And Barnabas in his sermon to the Antiochians (the first
that were called Act. 11. 23.
(...)) exhorted them, that with purpose of heart they would cleave unto the
Lord

And this every one ought firmly to believe, that whosoever intends to be an
Auditor must hear upon this consideration to make use of his hearing, in the
course of his life, and put in practice what he hears. The Psalmist says, That
a young man must rule Psalm. 119. 9.
himself according to the word, to the end that he may cleanse his ways. And
he, that practices not what he hears, fails in the first point.

Our Savior called the doctrine of the Pharisees Leaven: and Christian
doctrine Luke 12. 1.
may be called fermentum Christianum, Christian Leaven, whose property is to
change 1. Cor. 5. 6.
the whole lump into its own nature and quality. So if we hear the word of God,
it must be leaven unto us, and turn the whole lump into the taste of it self.

If it be not so with us: but that we hear continually without preparation or
practice, there is a bitter place against us, we shall be like roots, bearing
gall and wormwood, Deuteronomy. 29. 18.
bitterness it self. And thus much for the general notion of preparation. Now
for the particular, how we ought to prepare our selves. The Rabbis prescribe
forty eight rules to this purpose, which may be reduced to two.

1. Praeparate in timore, prepare your hearts in fear. Take heed to thy feet
(says the Preacher) when thou entrest into the house of God. That is, come not
to Gods (...). 5. 1.
house, to hear his holy Word, carelessly or unreverently, but with reverence
and fear. We are not to come thither as to an ordinary place, but with an awful
preparation, as Genesis 28. 17.
in Gods presence. How fearful is this place (says Jacob) this is none other
but the house of God. And it is fearful in respect of the majesty of God, more
fully here then Psalm. 2. 11.
in other places, as being the presence chamber of God, where he will be waited
upon 5, 7
with all due preparation and respect. Serve the Lord with fear, was king
David's counsel, and it was his practice too. I will come into thy house (says
he) and in thy fear will I worship toward thy holy Temple. 2. Another reason
that we should be qualified with fear when we come, is, That Proverbs. 1. 7.
because (as Solomon speaks) fear is the beginning, or head, and chief point of
wisdom, it must needs be the groundwork and foundation of our preparation. The
fear of the 19. 23
Lord (as he also) leads unto life. It is the high way to all other Christian
duties. psalm. 85. 9.
His salvation (says the Psalmist) is nigh to them that fear him. It stands us
(...) pro. 23. 17
upon to be thus prepared, else the Wise man would have spared this (...). Be
thou in the fear of the Lord continually.
In (...). Preparation by prayer, is the other main point (...) our selves,
before we come: and indeed it is the salt that seasons all holy duties. King
(...) (as Psa. (...).
you heard before) practiced it, and began his very prayers with prayer. Let my
1. King. 8. 9.
prayer (says he) be set forth in thy sight etc. And (...) made way by prayer,
to the dedication of his Temple. Daniel set his face unto God by prayer, and
while he was Dan. 9, 3.
in this act of preparation, the Angel was sent to him to let him know, that
his petition 20.
was granted. Solomon prayed to the Lord for wisdom, and you may read that God
1 King. 3. 9. 10
yielded to his request. Cornelius was initiated into the Church by this means:
and Saul, by it, of a persecuter became Paul an Apostle for Behold (says God
to Ananias) he Act. 10. 9. 11.
prays. Saint Augustine calls it, gratum Deo obsequium, an acceptable service
to God. in Math.
And (...). Nihil potentius homine (...). Nothing more powerful then a man that
prays. Nemo nostrum (says Saint Bernard) parvi pendat (...), (...) enim
(...) quod ipse ad quem or amus, non parvipendit (...), let none of us make
light account of prayyer, for I tell you, that he to whom we pray, does not
lightly esteem of it. For indeed as Saint Peter (...) us, Gods ears are open
to prayers. And (...) we see that 1 Pet. 3. 12.
King David often prepared himself by those kind of prayers, which the
fathers call ejaculations, or short prayrs, of which the hundred and ninteen
(...) is full. As, open Psa. 119. 18.
thou mine eyes, that I may see the wondrous things of thy Law: and when he
(...) 37. 25.
any extravagant thoughts to seiz on him. Averte oculos, Turn away mine eyes
from beholding vanity. And when he grew dull in spirit, Quicken thou me. With
these and the like we must prepare our selves.

Now as these are the two rules for preparation, so are there four other for
our coming.

1 Venite (...), in fervore spiritus, with fervency of spirit. Our coming must
not be cold, not Lukewarm, like the Church of Laodicea: lest we be spued Rev.
3. (...).
out: but fervent and zealous. Be fervent in spirit, says the Apostle. And in
another To. 12. 11.
place; It is good to be zealously affected in a good thing. If we come to
hear, Gal. 4. 18.
we must come with a longing desire. Zeal is compared to oil; which keeps the
lamp ever burning. It was one of King David's (...). I have (...) for (...)
commandments. The zeal of the Gentiles, says Saint Ambrose, (...) them life
Psa. 119. 40.
everlasting, whereas the coldness of the Jews caused their loss of it. (...)
(...), 131.
Nullum est (...) tale sacrificium, quale est (...). (...) no sacrifice in
psalm.
so acceptable to God, as the zeal of the spirit, And as it is well (...) to
him, so he in Ezekiel.
he rewards it. He satisfies the longing soul, says the psalmist. He that
comes (...) qualified, never returns empty. Ps. 107. 9.
2. Venite in puritate cordis. Our coming must be also in purity of (...). K.
David asks the question, who shall ascend to the hill of the Lord, or who
shall rise up in Psalm. 24. 4. 5.
his holy place? and answers (...) in the next verse: even he that has clean
hands and a pure heart. Our thoughts and actions must be pure and undefiled,
else 19. 8.
there is no coming to Gods house, no bettering our selves by coming (...). For
the word of God (being pure) will not enter into them that are (...). (...) and
2. Cor. 6. 15.
Belial cannot accord. But Cor purum (...) est Dei, gaudium (...), (...) Hug.
de. (...).
spiritus sancti. A pure heart is Gods court, the delight of Angels, and the
(...) of the holy spirit. This is the second. 3 Venite in fide. Come with the
garment of faith too. If thou (...) believe, all Mar. 9. 23.
things are possible to him that believes. A believer, though in the
estimation of men he be of small understanding, yet shall he be able to
conceive and (...) sufficient to work out his salvation We see it in the
Apostles; who though they (...) poor, ignorant, and simple fishermen diverse
of them, yet coming to Christ by 1 (...). (...).
faith, were able to confound the wisest, and most learned men in the world.
But without faith it is impossible to please God, and if to please him,
certainly (come (...) (...). 11. 6.
as often as we will) to reap any good from him. For he that (...) to God (as
it is in the same verse) must believe that God is. The (...) shall live by his
(...), (...) Ab. 2. 4.
the Prophet, and according to our faith shall we receive benefit by our
coming, for it is by faith that we have access to grace. And the Apostle (...)
that the Jews To. 5. 2. 9. 32.
were excluded from the promise, because that which they sought for; was not by
faith. This is the third rule. 4 Venite frequenter. Being fortified with faith,
(...) frequently and often, then you cannot come too often. Not upon the solemn
fast only, once a month perhaps Psalm. 81. 3.
will serve the turn, but as we say in our liturgy, Day by day we magnify
thee. Every (...). 2.
day will I bless thee (says the psalmist) We want daily bread, bread,
necessaries for (...). (...).
our sustentation every day, therefore we are to come every day to beg it, and
God is to be blessed daily, because of his daily benefits. The apostles were
daily in the Temple Act. 5. 42.
preaching and breaking bread and suerly they were not there alone, there were
some Auditors, some communicants. We are not to think so meanly of God, that we
may command his blessings if we take our own times to come for them, at our own
leisure, therefore si nolumus (...) querere Deum, queramus voraciter, queramus
(...). in sermon. 24.
(...), queramus (...). Says Barnard. If we mean not seek God in vain, seek
him first truly, and then often and with perseverance and diligence. For
delectatio, (...) etdiligentia ex se (...), seque necessario consequuntur
delight love and diligence do mutnally and necessarily follow one another.
Being thus prepared and qualified, when we come, we shall be fitter for the
second part of this Text, Auscultate. Hearken. which is the second part.

2. Auscultate mihi, hearken unto me. He that has ears to hear let him hear,
says (...). 14. 35.
our Savior. God complains by the Prophet, that the people drew near to him
with Ex. 29. 13.
their mouths, and honored him with their lips: but they had removed their
hearts far from him. This is a present absent. The Heathen observed that
soloecisms may be committed in hearing as well as in speaking. In this respect
therefore, it is required that we be so present, that we give ear, and our
hearts be as near as our bodies. Sacrifice and meatoffering Psalm. 40. 6.
(says the Psalmist) thou did not require, but mine ears have thou opened.
And it was a blessing which God promised by the Prophet to the kingdom of
Christ, Esa. 32. 3.
That the eyes of them that see should not be dim, and the ears of them that
hear shall (...). Pharaoh was of opinion, that Religion was an idle man's
exercise: and Exodus 5. 17.
(...) that all duties of religion lie upon the Speaker. But Christ makes
(...). 8. 18.
it a great matter to hear well, and therefore gives this caution, Take heed
how ye hear, and he gives a reason because to him that hears well the Spirit
will reveal more, and from him, that hears not well, shall be taken away,
that little he had before. It will not be therefore altogether impertinent to
take a view of the several qualifications (...) to a true and right hearer,
which are these.

1. (...). Hear with fear and reverence, not with too de singularitate (...)
(...) boldness (...) confidence: (...) multo been timere, quam male fidere,
says S. Aug. It is much better (...) fear well then to be too confident. For
as an awful respect and holy fear is required in our preparation before we come
to Gods house, so is it to be continued while we are there. And as the reason
of fear in our preparation and coming thither was in respect of Gods presence
there, so there is no less reason of our reverent deportment in hearing, in
respect of the majesty of the person speaking, and the matter he delivers to
us. (...) audis, quod Dominus tuus dulcis est, attend quid diligas; (...) quod
rectus, attend quid time as. Vt amere and timore (...), excitatus, (...) in
psalm. 45.
(...), when thou hear, that God is gracious, mark what thou art to (...):
and when thou hear that he is just, mark what thou art (...) to fear, that
stirred up by the love and fear of God, thou may keep his law. There was a
great punishment inflicted on them in the law, that offended against this duty.
The man that will do (...), and will not hearken to the Priest that stands to
minister before the Lord thy God, etc. even that man shall die. When the
Apostles did break bread Deuteronomy. 17. 13.
and prayed, it is (...), that, fear (...) upon all the Disciples. And
therefore is that counsel. Act. 2. 43.
Let us (...) God acceptably, how is that? With reverence and Godly fear. Heb.
17. 28.
2. Again (...) and (...), with cheerfulness of spirit, not Col. (...).
dully or coldly, or sleepily. We must not so carry our selves in our hearing,
as though 2 Cor. 9. 7.
we could (...) in our (...) to be out of the Church before Gods message be
fully delivered Lev. 6. 143.
to us, whatsoever we do to God we must do it heartily and cheerfully, whether
Mat. 26. 40.
it be in the work of charity or piety. The fire upon the Altar must never go
out. Act. 20. 9.
sermon. de apperitione.
(...) ye not watch with me one hour, says Christ to his Disciples. We see
what punishment (...) to sleepy (...). Non (...) coelorum, neo otio and (...),
says (...), the kingdom of heaven is not the lot of sleepers, nor is the
blessedness of eternity promised to those that are (...) with idleness and
sloth. 3. Auscultate in silentio, in silence without talking. There is a time
to be silent, Eccl. 3. 7.
says the Preacher, and when can this be better, then when God speaks to us.
Keep Es. 41. 1.
silence before me, says God. And the Prophet (...) speaks home to this point.
Zach. 2. 13.
Ab. 2. 20.
The Lord is in his holy Temple, let all the earth keep silence before him. It
was the practice in the Primitive Church, the disciples were silent, when the
Apostles preached. Act. (...).
All the multitude kept silence, and gave audience to (...) and Paul. Nay the
very Heathen, before their sacrifices and mysteries began, had an Officer that
cried to the Assembly, Hoc agite, (intend this only) Leave talking and be
still. 4. The next is, (...) aberratione oculorum, hearken without gazing. Our
eyes must not (...) every where, as if we were in a marketplace. We see the
Disciples Act. 1. 11
Luc. 4. 20
were blamed for gazing. It is left upon record for our instruction, that when
our Savior preached, the eyes of all the hearers were fastened upon him, which
(...) a stayednesse in them, and a resolution to take notice of what they
heard. When we come to hear, we must make a covenant with our eyes, as Job did.
Besides we are to note, that there is more emphasis in the word Auscultate then
in Audite the one being Job. (...). 1.
but the hearing of a noise or sound, and the other to hear with attention, to
listen and mark (...). This difference we may observe in diverse places of
Scripture. When God promised blessings to the obedient Jews, he says not: If
thou shall, hear the voice of the Lord thy God, but, if thou shall hearken
diligently into the voice of Deu. 28. 1, Esa. 32. 3.
the Lord thy God. And the prophet. The ears of them that hear shall heanken,
to (...) the difference between hearing and harkening. Now if the eyes wander
it is impossible that the ears should hearken, or the mind observe, what is
spoken. And when the eyes are fixed, (...) great hope that they all concur.
Therefore it is that the (...) Pro. (...). (...).
says. Let thine eyes observe my ways. And the eyes of a fool are in the ends
of the 17. 24.
earth, every where wandering. 5. Lastly, Auscultate ut retineatis, Hearken to
keep, not to forget what you (...) Luke 11. 28
this virtus (...) a retentive faculty makes a hearer complete. Blessed are
they (says Kev. 1. 3.
our Savior) that hear the word of God and keep it. So says saint John,
Blessed are they that hear the words of this prophecy, and keep those things
that are written therein.
On the contrary, If any be a hearer of the word, and not a (...), he is like
unto a (...) 1
man beholding his natural face in a glass, etc. So may we say of them that
hear, and lay not the words up in their hearts. A Rabbin compares such ears to
an hour glass, that when one glass is full of sand, it is turned, and the
sand (...) into the other. These kind of ears, are ever the worst, not worthy
to participate the mysteries of 2 Pet. 1. 19.
God. There must not be only a laying up in our memories, but in our hearts
too, till the day star arise in our hearts.

Among the Schoolmen there is an opinion quod cor non facit non fit, that
which Exo. 7. 23.
the heart does not, is not done at all. Pharaoh returned to his house, but the
thing he Deu. 6. 6.
heard did not enter into his heart. And therefore it was that God said. The
words which I command thee shall be in thine heart: and in that place, this
order of (...) is prescribed plainly. We are in these days for the most part
greedy of Pro. 1. 4.
(...) a vain superficial kind of knowledge, but our knowledge should be, to
give 2. 10. 11
to the simple sharpness of wit, to the young man knowledge and discretion.
And when wisdom enters into thine heart, and knowledge is pleasant unto thy
soul: discretion shall (...) thee, and understanding shall keep thee. So that
the writing, committing to memory, and talking of that which we hear, should be
to this end, to work deeper impression in our hearts, to practice it.

And that we may do this the better, there are three things required in us. 1.
Examination. 2. Meditation. 3. Conference.

1. For the first, it is to be done by following our Saviors counsel,
Searching the John. 5. 39.
Scriptures, not running after Diviners, and Soothsayers, but the Law and the
Testimony Es. 8. 19.
according to that of the Prophet. Saint Luke testifies of the (...), that
they were more noble then they of: Thessalonica, why? because they searched the
Act. 17. 11.
Scrpturs daily. The Preachen or catechizer must not do all for us something
we are to do for ourselves. If we mean to (...) to the knowledge of God, let
us Lam. 3. 49.
search, says the prophet. And the preacher gave his heart to search out
wisdom, that Eccl. 1. 13.
is by the holy scriptures That which I knew not (says holy Job) (...)
searched out. Saint (...)
Peter gave testimony of the Prophets, that they searched and enquired
diligently Job. 29. 16.
the things which concerned their salvation. Thus must hearers search the
scriptures, 1 Pet. 1. 10.
not as if they could understand them without their teachers, much less to
judge their doctrine, but to confirm their (...) in what they hear.

Meditation is the second duty. We are to meditate and ruminate, as well upon
the Paul, after he had prescribed rules to Timothy 1 Timothy 4. 15.
how to order himself, gives him this counsel also. Meditate upon these things,
Phil. 4. 8.
give thy self wholly to them, that thy profiting may appear to all. And after
a general exhortation to the Philippians, he concludes, with, Finally brethren,
etc. think on these things. The reason is given by S. Augustine, Quod habes,
cave ne perdas, take heed thou lose not that which thou have gotten by reading
and hearing. If we only hear and read, and think not afterward upon it, it is
to be feared that we shall not be bettered by that which we have either read or
heard. This duty has ever been in practice with the Saints of God. Isaac went
out into the fields to meditate. (...). 24. 63.
And king David did often so, as appears by the 119 Psalm, in diverse places.
Psalm. 119.


The last duty is conference. And this is done, either, First, by Auditors
among Malachi: They that feared the Lord, spoke often one to another (yet not
(...). 3. 16.
in Conventicles.) And the other we have in the Prophet Agge, Ask the Priests
concerning Agge 2. 11.
the Law. The reason is given by the former Prophet, The Priests lips preserve
Mal. 2. 7.
knowledge, because he is the (...) of the Lord of Hosts. If then in reading or
hearing we be at a stand, the Scriptures being a deep Sea to wade through,
repair to the Priest, confer with him, and desire his direction. We see our
Savior while he was young took this course, his parents found him not only
hearing the Luc. 2. 46.
Doctors, but conferring with them, and asking them questions. Though it be the
common saying that Experience is the Mother of Knowedge, yet (...) conference
is the Grandmother, for it begets experience.

Now (as the Prophet speaks) Hic est omnis fructus ut auferatur peccatum, this
is (...). 27. 9.
the fruit and end of all these duties, to take away sin. As in diseases there
are bastard Fevers, which have (...) verarum febrium, symptoms and signs of
true fevers; so is there also (...) pietas, bastard religion, which has
specious shows of true (...). Seeing then that preaching and catechizing may
fail, and that, as our Savior 1 (...). 13. 8.
tells Martha, Vnum necessarium est, there is one thing needful: while we have
the Luc. 10. 42.
great blessing of the Word, that (...) necessarium, let us hear it, and God in
it. Lest Prove. 1. 28.
it happen to us which the Wiseman and the Prophet foretold. They shall cry
unto (...). 3. 4.
the Lord, but he will not hear them, why? because they hated knowledge. And as
it was with Elies sons, they hearkened not to the voice of their father,
therefore the 1 Samuel 2. 25.
Lord did slay them. Let us therefore labor by hearing to come to the
knowledge of Ephesians. 3. 4.
God, and no doubt but God will have a respect to our hearing, and of
Catechumeni, make us proficients; give a blessing to our endeavors: we will
conclude this point, with a saying of S. Cyril an ancient Catechist, Meum est
docere, vestrum auscultare, Dei perficere. It is my part to teach, yours to
hear, and Gods to perfect and give a blessing to that which I teach and you
hear. And so much for Venite and auscultate.

CHAP. III.
Of Religion in general, and the foundations of it. The four first steps. 1 We
must come to God, as the only way to true happiness. No happiness in riches
proved by diverse reasons. Nor in Honor. Nor in pleasure. Nor in moral virtue.
Nor in contemplation. General reasons against them all, that felicity cannot be
in any of them. 1 because they cannot satisfy. 2 They are not perpetual, but
uncertain. In God only is true happiness to be found.

THe work of Religion whereof we are to treat, is compared by our Savior to a
structure or building, and the teacher to a Master builder by the Apostle, and
the Principles of Religion to a foundation. Now in a building the principal
care ought (...). 7. 24, (...).
to be, to make the foundation sure, to dig deep enough, and lay the foundation
upon 1. Cor. 3. 10.
a rock, and not upon earth or sand, lest the Devil, by undermining shake the
foundation, Heb. 6. 1.
and ruin the whole structure. And this laying of a slight foundation is the
fault (...). 6. 48, 49.
of the builders of this age.

Now to find when we have a firm foundation, we are to examine,

1. Whether the grounds of Religion be true or false. 2. Whether warranted by
Scripture? 3. How we know that there is a God. 4. What regard God has of Man.

But they which without further examination presuppose these for granted, build
no deeper then the earth, leave advantage to the adversary. And we know that
many have undermined the very foundations, affirming boldly, that there is no
God. Insomuch as the Devil bringing his floods and storms has shaken the
dearest of (...) children. And therefore that we may begin at the hard Rock, we
will ask these four questions.

1. An sit (...)? whether there be a God. And this is against the (...). 2. An
curam gerat mortalium, whether he have a care of man, and such a care, as that
he would give him his word, to reward the good, and punish the evil, against
the semi-Atheists, the Epicures. 3. An Scripturae (...) sint (...) verbum,
whether the Scriptures we use, (...) true Word, against Turks and Pagans. 4. An
ex hoc verbo vere sit fundata religio (...), whether the Scripture being Gods
Word, our religion be truly grounded upon it, against Jews and Heretics.
For the first and second, our warrant and direction is from the Apostle. He
(...) Heb. 11. 6.
comes to God must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that
seek him. Wherein three things are observable.

1. That the end and fruit of our religion is to come to God. 2. That the means
to attain to that end or fruit is by believing. 3. That we must believe
concerning God these two things, viz.
First, Esse Deum, that there is a God.

Secondly, Bonis bonum tribuere, malis malum, that he gives good things to the
good, and evil to the wicked.

1. That the end and fruit of our religion is to come to God, is the first
step. There Psalm. 4. 6.
has been much beating of the brain to find out true felicity; the reason is,
because naturally every man desires that which is good. The (...) tells us as
much, that it De civ. (...). l. 19. c. 1.
was that which men thirsted after in his time. There (...) many that say, Who
will show us any good? S. Augustine says, that Varro had observed in his book
of Philophy such variety of opinions concerning this summum bonum, chief good,
that they amounted to 288 Sects, as he calls them. And the reason that man is
naturally (...) of good is, because no man of himself is happy. The Epithets
given to man makes this plain enough, as Nudus, Miser, Naked, Wretched, (...),
(...), a feeble creature, a true emblem of infirmity, and the like. So that
happiness not being in man himself, it must needs accrue to him by coming to
some other thing, that is, to God.

It is true and undeniable, that while man kept Gods Commandments, and
submitted his wisdom to Gods will, he was partaker of Gods goodness, and in
the state of happiness. But disobeying his will, and departing from him, he
became miserable many ways. For first he fell into sin. Secondly, into shame.
Thirdly, into fear. Fourthly, into travel, care, and vexation, of body and
mind. Fifthly and lastly, into death, lost all his former happiness, and fell
into a sea of misery and infelicity, which cannot be repaired, but by coming
again to God.

There are some of several opinions, that think a man may enjoy true felicity
in this world, and of himself, without having an eye to God. They may be
reduced to five sorts.

1. Worldlings conceive true felicity to consist in wealth. 2. Politicians in
honor. 3. Epicures in pleasure. 4. Stoics in moral virtues. 5. Platonicks
(...) contemplation.
Against these severally in order we shall make some exceptions.

1. Riches are not the Summum bonum.
1. Wealth is not to be desired in regard of it self, but only to supply the
(...) of nature, as food, raiment, etc. to preserve Nature from sailing or
decaying, or to repair or amend it, but not to bring it to a higher estate,
above Nature, for that riches cannot effect, but that which is true felicity
can do both.

2. The end of man is better then man it self, but these are worse then man;
for a man for his life will give the whole world. If he were possessour of all
the wealth in the world, he would part with it to save his life. The devil
could say, skin for skin, and all that a man has will he give for his life.

3. It were strange, that happiness should consist in that, of which, much
dispute has ever been, whether it be good or evil. Seneca says, Semper
eguerunt interpret, the resolution is yet to make.

4. They cannot make a man good that is possessour of them, though they make
him great.

5. The Celestial Creatures are blessed and happy, though they enjoy them not.

6. They are not always profitable, but sometimes hurtful.

7. If it should be granted that true felicity consists in them, then men
should not be esteemed by what they are; but by that they possess: and then a
man's full bag is better then himself.

8. The goodness of riches consists in the use and spending of them, and by
that reason, summa esset foelicitas, in discedendo a foelicitate, a man's chief
happiness were to part with his felicity.

9. As no man esteems the goodness of a sword by the richness of the (...),
or a horse by his trappings, so neither can a man be judged good by the
abundance of his wealth.

In these respects Wealth or Riches cannot be true happiness.
2. Happiness is not found in Honor.
1. For Philosophers themselves say, that Honor est virtutis umbra, Honor is
but the shadow of virtue, and we know, that we ought to follow the substance
(which is virtue) and leave the shadow.

2. In Honor, there must be as well the Honourer as the Honored: and of
necessity, there are more Honourers then Honored: so that there are many
unhappy, and but few in felicity: if honor should be happiness.

3. As men may be honored by some, so they are despised and envied by others,
therefore men in honor are foelices in part, happy in part only, and
therefore not truly happy.

4. If it be objected, that if men be not honored by all, that are honor
digni worthy of honor, it is their faults that should honor them; this brings
us back to the first answer, That honor is but the shadow of virtue, and
therefore not happiness it self.

5. Honor is good, if it were sine sera etclave, without lock or key, without
dependence, which it is not; for honor depends upon other men's mouths, and
has no stability. Now that felicity, which is as mutable as a Camelion, cannot
be true happiness. We see it to be true in our Savior, for by the same people
that he was honored in a triumph to Jerusalem, within few days after he was
led in a disgraceful manner to be crucified.

Therefore in Honor consists no true happiness.
3. In Pleasure, there can be no true felicity.
1. The very frame of the body speaks against it: for there are but two parts
of it, (as the Epicures hold) capable of it. 1. For the one they wished to be
like Cranes. And for the other like Sparrows.

2 Seeing man is spiritual and intellectual, and pleasure sensible, in
following delight, he descends to a thing inferior to himself, but felicity
must be in summo, above him. Seneca wished rather to have been unborn then to
have been born to this end, Super lectum jacere vinum potare etc. As the
Prophet has it, To lie in bed, Amos 6. 4, 5, 6
and drink wine etc.

3 Man should be more miserable then the beast, if pleasure should be his end.
For Apage (...) latebras querit, Away with such happiness as hides it self in
corners.
they use pleasures openly and freely, while man is ashamed to use some
pleasures in public view. Again thy do it without remorse of conscience, and
man after the act of pleasure is (...) in conscience; yet no man will say, that
beasts have true felicity.

4 Again, the Philosophers hold, that pleasure without moderation is not good;
(...)
and if pleasure be true felicity, then the virtues of Temperance, Abstinence,
Continency, etc. were lost. Temperantia est abstinentia a voluptatibus,
Temperance (defined) is abstinence from pleasures: so that if pleasure be true
felicity, and that without moderation it is not good, then it follows that
abstinence from felicity, is (...), and that he is continent who abstaineth
from felicity.

5. Plutarch is confident, that if an Epicure knew that he had but one hour to
live, and were put to his choice, whether he would spend that hour in sport and
pleasure, or do some notable act to eternize his name, that he would make
election of the latter, and thereby condemn his own opinion of felicity in
pleasure himself.

No true felicity then in pleasure.
4. Nor yet in Virtue.
1. The virtues in which the Stoics place felicity are merely moral, and they
are only to pacify the disordered passions of the mind, our affections: and
the pacifying of them is to bring ease to our actions: and every action (...)
propter finem, for some end: there being therefore other ends besides these,
there is no felicity in them.

2. Every virtue has its several use, as Justice to preserve peace, fortitude
to procure peace, and the like: therefore these have further ends then for
themselves, and so are not true felicity.

3. Prudence (accounted by them the prime virtue) is nothing but to direct us
to the end, and is not the end it self: therefore not felicity it self.

In Virtue then no true felicity.
5. Neither in contemplation.
1. For it is an absurd thing in nature, that any thing should be long in
getting, and short in fruition or enjoying: but contemplation is ever in
getting, so that it cannot be long in fruition: therefore no felicity in it.

2, Our contemplation is only in posse, in what may be, and to be happy is
(...) in actum, to be drawn into action, but to say that this posse may be
brought to a perfect act, were absurd; for there is no man can say, there is
nothing but I know it.

3. By their own confession, we know not the essential form of any, no, not of
the most vile Creature, and we are ignorant in most familiar things to us: and
how much more dim and unperfect is our knowledge in more divine natures, and in
God himself, of whom we know nothing but by privation: as that he is not
finite, and comprehensible and the like.

4. They testify of themselves that they know nothing. Hoc (...), me nihil
scire, said Socrates, this one thing only I know, that I know nothing.
Aristotle confessed that he had spent his time, and had only (...) Owls eyes in
contemplating heavenly essences. Simonides that the more he contemplated on
Gods essence, the farther off he confessed himself to be. Heraclitus cried out,
In (...) est, it is so deep I cannot sound it. And maxima pars (...) quae
scimus, est minima (...) quae ignoramus, the greatest part of that we know, is
the least part of that we know not.

No felicity then in contemplation.


Thus much for particular exceptions against these opinions of felicity, now
generally against them all demonstrative.

That there is no true happiness in any thing besides God.

The Philosophers propound two things in their (...). 1. Terminus appetitus,
(...), contentedness or satisfaction of the appetite. 2. Perpetuity or
continuance of that satisfaction.

1. To come to any thing but to God, non facit terminum appetitui, it
satisfies not our appetite, for ut ponatur terminus appetitui, to set a bound
to our appetite there must be (...) contentedness. And this cannot be without
satisfaction. Nor can any thing satisfy the appetite, but God alone, because
it was ordained to receive God: all the world is too little to fill it. Saint
Augustine says, Domine, tu fecisti me propter te, nec quiescat anima mea,
donec veniat ad te, Lord thou have made me for thee, and my soul will not be
satisfied till it come to thee. For without God there is (...) universal good,
therefore some want, and consequently a desire to have that which is wanting,
and the appetite being unsatisfied, unquietness follows, and so no felicity.

2 This is apparent in the example of riches, and the desire of them (...)
Desire and appetite has its name from (...) a word expressing an earnest
motion; ardere, flagrare cupiditate, to burn, or flame with (...): in which re:
spect it is called ardens appetitus, an ardent desire. Now if a man heap never
so much wood upon a fire, though at the first it seem to put it out, yet by
little and little the fire waxes bigger by reason of it, and is as apt to
receive more wood, as it was in the beginning. And so it fares in the desire of
riches, the more matter is ministered, the less the desire is quenched, but
still increases till it come to be infinite. Quomodo ejus sitim extingues,
cujus sitis expatu crescit? How then will you quench his thirst, who the more
he drinks, the more he may. Therefore there is no worldly thing that can
satisfy man's appetite. Riches were not made to fill a man's mind, no more then
Learning to fill a bag, or the air to satisfy an hungry belly.

3. Presuppose that the mind could be capable to receive or be satisfied with
riches, yet are they not proper to the soul of man: and the rule is Oportet
(...) desideranti, That which is principally desired should ever be given to
the desiring.

4 But grant all this, yet when a man has all he desires, yet he may have a
new appetite, and so, after he has filled one bag, he may desire to fill
another (...). 30. 15.
and after one Barn, another. Hence it is, that such are compared to the
Horseleeches two daughters, that cry Give, Give, and to the greedy Mastiffe,
that swalloweth up whole morsells, as fast as they are cast to him. And this
appears most plainly in Alexander, who shed many tears, because there were no
more worlds for him to conquer. Theocritus says of the covetous man. That
first he begins with Mill (...) errant in (...) agni, I have a thousand Lambs
feeding in the mountains, and having gotten a thousand, his desire goes higher
by degrees, and says, (...) est (...), he is but a poor man that can number
his cattle; or tell how many he has.

Therefore we may well conclude, that all ways which tend not to God are
unnatural, and so are all other desires: they are like to drink to an
hydropical man, they satisfy not, but bring us out of the way, so that we
shall never come to our journeys end, nor enjoy true felicity by them.

1. The other is perpetuity. And where this is wanting, there arises fear of 2
loosing the felicity we have, which begets disquiet and anxiety, and so no
selicity. But this perpetuity is not, neither can it be in any thing but in God
alone: for though we continue, yet shall all things else pass, as it was with
Job, Job 1.
and the rich man in the Gospel. We get them not without great labor, and
(...). 12. 20.
being gotten, they are (as the Prophet speaks) but as a spiders web, which
(...). 59. 5.
may suddenly be swept away: or as a Cockatrices egg, he that eats of it
dies, and that which is crushed breaks out into a viper. Saint Augustine
says of them, Si non habent finem suum, habebunt finem tuum, if riches have
not an end, the owner will.

2. The uncertainty of these things appear in this, that money is subject to
the violence of thieves, merchandise to storms at sea, cattle to the rot,
buildings to casualty of fire, as casual are they all as uncertainty it self;
like to a brittle glass subject to perish by a small knock. Saint Chrysostom
has an excellent (...) Matthew. (...).
expression to this purpose, Omnia bona mundi triplex interitus tollit: aut ex
(...) ipsis veterascunt, aut (...) Dominorum consumuntur, aut ab extraneis
dolo, vel violentia, vel calumnia diripiuntur, the good things of this world
pass from us three ways; either they become old or worth nothing of
themselves, or they are consumed by the riot of their possessors, or they are
taken away by the deceit, violence, or cavillation of others.

Therefore no perpetuity in them.

3. But in coming to God there is both (...) safety, and (...) stability, and
therefore in God and in him alone is true and perfect felicity, for as Christ
said to the Woman of Samaria, Whosoever drinks of this water, shall never
thirst, if thou will have the water of life, go to the John 4. 13.
(...), for in font (...), there is satiety: so if we will have true felicity,
and the summum bonum the chief goodness, we must go to God the fountain of all
goodness. God is universale bonum, primum bonum, fons boni, etc. universal
good, the chief good, the fountain of goodness, etc.

This is verified by David, In thy presence (says he to God) is fullness of
joy, Psalm. 16. 11.
there is terminus appetitus, a bounding of the appetite, and at thy right hand
is pleasure for evermore, there is perpetuity. The contrary is proved by
Solomon, who (through the whole book of the Preacher) confesses that he found
nothing under the sun but vanity. Yea the very Heathen themselves acknowledge
as much. The Sybils oracles (...) signifying, to have prosperity from God,
(...) that the only felicity of man consists in coming to God. And Pythagoras
golden verses, Plato in his tenth book de republica, and in Phaedone, Hermes,
Plutarch, Simplicius upon Epictetus, Iamblichus de mysteriis, etc, all of them
confess as much.

To come is either in itinere vel in appulsu, either in the journey, or in the
arrival, and the last step is commonly adventus, the advent or coming, so there
is duplex foelicitas, a two fold (...), viae, and vitae, of the way, and of the
life, of the way, which is, finis penultimus, the penult end, and of the life,
which is finis ultimus the (...) end. Or as the Rabbis, there is foelicitas
atrii, and triclinii, the happiness of the porch, and of (...) parlour, we
attain only the former in this life, and so as children are accounted freemen,
quia spe liberi, because free through hope, so are we happy in this life, quia
spe foelices, because happy through hope, vita quam hic vivimus, non est vita
nostra, sed via ad vitam, coetera hic habent vitam suam, the life we live here
is not our life, but the way to life, other things have their life here. And
therefore Hebrews 6. 19. the estate of a Christian is compared to a ship tossed
upon the sea, his felicity to an anchor which is fastened in heaven, within the
vail, and hope is the cable which holds him from sinking till he come to enjoy
the end of his fai h. etc.

So that the felicity of the Philosophers is disproved, 1. By special
exceptions, 2. By general demonstrations, 3. By experience, 4. By their own
confession.

We may conlude this point with that of Saint Augustine. Domine (...) nos
propter (...).
te, and inquietum est cor nostrum, donec pervenerit ad te, says Saint
Augustine, Lord, thou have created us for thine own sake, and our hearts will
never be at quiet, till we come to thee.

CHAP. IIII.
2. The way to come to God is only by faith, not by natural reason alone, as
the Manichees held; reasons against them. The way by faith more certain. The
necessity of belief. Rules for coming by faith.

How to come to God.
THe second general point is, that the means to attain to the end (that is to
come to God) is by faith. Omnis motus ab appetitu est, every motion is
prosecuted by desire, and ut moveatur cognoscenda est via, we must know the way
before we (...) to motion, for ignoti nulla est cupido, a man has no lust or
desire to attempt that whereof he is ignorant. Therefore in the first place the
way must be known to go to God, before we can come to him.

There are two ways to come to God, one held by Heretics which is by the
reach of reason. 2. The other held by Christians, which is by faith.

1. The Manichees (as Saint Augustine testifies of them) in opposition to the
Catholics, 1
held that men were to come to God by reason, and not by belief: and therefore
vaunted, that whereas others did imponere jugum credendi, impose a yoke of
believing upon men desirous to come to God, that they would bring men to God,
by opening fontem sciendi the fountain of knowledge only, they would effect it
by demonstration. This way because it was most plausible grew strongest, and
prevailed long: In so much that if any Philosopher had entered Christian
religion he first became a Manichee: which appeared by Faustus the Manichee,
whose heresy was most dangerous and of longest continuance.

The like sectaries are in our days, who are called by the learned (...), that
must have a reason (forsooth) of every thing: and as long as you go with them
in the way of reason, they will keep you company, so far will they go with you,
and no further.

Therefore we are to prove, that the way to God by belief, is most convenient
and necessary, and that the way by reason without faith is the worst and most
inconvenient. By Reason


1 If we must come to God by reason only and knowledge, then it will (...)
follow, that none shall be saved, but the learned, and those of excellent wit
and capacity: for none but they are capable of demonstration: but that way (of
all oath) is most inconvenient, that but few only can go in. This is, as if
many undertake a Journey together, and because some can climb hedges and
ditches, the rest must pass that way also. But Gods way is Via regia. The
kings highway.

2 Again, besides the excellency of wit and apprehension, there are great
pains necessarily required to come to knowledge: and many are so weak by
nature, that they cannot take the pains that shall be needful to acquire it:
many also are so employed in several affairs, that they cannot spare so much
time as is requisite: and many (as we see by daily experience) that bend
themselves that way, are cut off before they can attain to it: so that we may
say, that if there were no other way to get the knowledge of God but by reason,
there would be few that should enjoy that felicity: But God has prescribed a
more compendious way: we need do no more, then believe, and (...) we have
attained it.

3 And whereas they object as Porphirie did to the Christians of his time, that
too much Credulity is a sign of levity, and was an hindrance to many in coming
to God by belief, we may 1 answer them by another saying of their own. Nemo
credulus, nisi credis stulto aut improbe, No man is to be accounted credulous,
but he that shall believe a fool or a knave. And of folly and impiety God must
needs be acquitted, lest we fall into Blasphemy. for Deus, as he is perfecta
veritas perfect truth and cannot deceive, so is he perfect wisdom and perfect
righteousness too, even righteousness, truth, and wisdom it self, and cannot
err, therefore it is no danger to be taxed with credulity, for coming to God
by belief.

Now, that this way by believing is the surest and most certain way, cannot be
denied, because faith is grounded upon the word of God, though published and
set forth by man. And this appears by four effects or circumstances, as
Origin sets them down.

1 As healing of incurable diseases, such as were the leprous, hydropique
paralytique, (...).
and men possessed with unclean spirits, which Physic could not cure. 2 By
raising and reviving men from death. 3 By shaking the powers of heaven. 4. In
that simple and unlearned men, in one hour proved excellent, and wonderfully
skilsul in all the tongues.
And therefore, there must needs have been a divine power in them that wrought
these things, whereby appears the certainty of the effect, though not of
thecause.

2 A second answer to Porphiries objection is. That the suspicion of credulity
appears rather in the way of reason, then faith: because,

1 There being two hundred eighty eight several opinions of Philosophers, and
every one of them having a reason for his summum bonum or felicity, there must
needs be many cross ways among them; And the way of truth being simplex and
(...) but one, it were impossi le for a man, among such diversity of opinions
to be in any certainty, and therefore necessarily must fall into the tax of
greater credulity. 2 Aristotle says, there is no necessary thing without mixture
of contingency in it: (...). 10.
and therefore there can be no absolute demonstration, and consequently there is
nothing subject to knowledge without contradictory opinions. And this being so,
what can be more uncertain? 3 But chiefly in the knowledge of prima emia things
that have the first being, they confess themselves to be in the dark, they
transcend their understanding, as well in respect of the object, because they
are (...) immaterial, without matter, as of the fountain or cause of our
knowledge, because Principia rationis a sensibus (...), the senses are doors
letting in what reason works upon. 4. And in Metaphysiques Deus etcoelestia
fensibus non subjiciuntur, God is above nature, and sense can give no reason
nor rules concerning Celestial matters: our reason and understanding are
confounded; but they are simple and unconfounded. Therefore we cannot come to
God by reason alone, we must find out some other way. 1. The way of necessity
then must be by faith. For take away belief, and overthrow By Faith 1.
all commerce, men will be friends to none, nor any to them. Saint August.
says, that if upon our report of that we have seen, to another that was not
present, nor did see that which we related, he should not believe it, unless
we make proof of every circumstance conducing to the sight thereof, nonne
adigerit nos ad insanidm? would it not almost drive us into madness? 2. Again
he says, If a man should come to me and say, Show me the true way by de
utilitate credendi ad Homrat. c. 10.
reason, and I reply, thou come but in the way of dissimulation and
hypocrisy, not out of any good meaning: then will he make protestation of his
integrity and good intent, and explain it with words, as well as he is able:
then I say, I believe you Sir, yet you cannot persuade me to it by reason. And
seeing you will have me believe you, is there not as great equity, that you
should believe me, seeing that your believing me redounds not to my benefit,
but your own? Who dares call in question the word of a Prince? And God being at
least as good as a Prince, ipsius (...) non credere quanta impietas? it were
great impiety not to believe his Word. Therefore the way by belief is not
altogether to be rejected. There are many things that cannot be demonstrated by
reason, yet of necessity must be believed; as a father to be a father. A man
that would travail to a place which he knows not, must believe those that have
been there. And if a man returning from travail, report that he has seen such
aman, or such a place, it were hard he should not be believed except he bring
proof, or witness, it being impossible to make demonstration by reason, of
that (...) the like.

So much for the necessity of belief.
In the way of Faith, we are to observe four Rules.
1. It was the Rule of the Heathen, that into what art soever a Scholar was
initiated, Oportet discentem credere, the Scholar must believe his Master: for
whatsoever good we receive at the first, we receive it from our Teachers. And
this ground, has this principle, Actio perfecti in imperfecto recipitur, we
are imperfect before we can come to any perfection, first imperfect, then
perfect. Wood receives heat from fire before it can burn and be fire. So
learners receive knowledge by faith from others, Esa. 7. 9.
before they come to be perfect themselves. This is confirmed by the Prophet,
Nist credideritis, non stabiliemini, if you will not believe, surely you shall
not be established.

2. When we have received by belief, then we may seek for demonstrations,
either a prieri, or a posteriori to confirm our belief, because, ut virtutum
(...), ita and religionis principia quaedam in nobis innata sunt, some
principles of religion as of other virtues are inbred and natural to us, though
much defaced and depraved by humane corruption: and principia religionis non
sunt inter se contraria, the principles of religion are not contrary one to
another, for then we should never come to any certainty of true knowledge. But
reason and religion agree; and the true worship of God is proved by the
principles of natural reason. True reason is (...) help to faith, Act. 17. 18.
and faith an help to reason: but faith is the Lady, reason her dutiful
Handmaid. Eaith Romans 1. 19.
and right reason are not contrary, but as a greater and a lesser light, yea
faith is samma ratio.

3. Having thus submitted our selves to belief, and strengthened it with
reason, we must look for an higher teacher. For though faith be a perfect way,
yet we being unperfect, walk unperfectly in it: and therefore in those things
which transcend nature and reason, we must believe God only, and pray to him,
that by the inspiration of his holy spirit we may be directed, and kept in this
way.

4. Because this inspiration comes not totally at the first, all at once, we
must grow to perfection pedetentim by little and little: and come up by
degrees, till it please him to send in full measure to us. Festinandum lent we
must hasten, yet slowly, and take heed of, and avoid praepropera consilia rash
attempts: according to the Prophets rule, Qui crediderit non festinabit, he
that (...) shall not make haste, Esa. 28. 26.
but go on according to the Apostles gradation, Add virtue to faith, and
knowledge 2. Pet. 1. 5.
to virtue, etc. and so by degrees.

And thus much for this point of via ad Dominum, the way to come to God. 1. By
believing. 2. By strengthening that belief. 3. By expecting the Spirit for our
Directer. 4. And lastly by proceeding by degrees, in a right path.

CHAP. V.
3 That we must believe there is a God. Misbelief in four things, 1.
Autotheisme, 2. Polytheisme. 3. Atheism. 4. Diabolisme. The reasons of
Atheists, answered. Religion upholds all states. The original of Atheism, from
1. Discontent. 2. Sensuality.

THe third point is: that we must believe there is a God. This is our third
station or journey: for our better preparation and strengthening wherein, we
are to note four obstacles or errors, which the Devil lays in our way.
Misbelief seen in four points.

The first is Autotheisme. When Adam was in the state of perfection, it was
impossible Alexander by his flatterers persuasions was drawn to believe himself
to be a god; but being wounded at a siege, he cried, hic sanguis hominem
denotat, his blood showed plainly to be a man. And the Emperor Claudius that
was in the same humor, being scared with a clap of thunder, fled into his
tent, and (hiding himself) could cry out, Hic Deus, Claudius non est Deus, this
is God, Claudius is none.

The second is Polytheisme. Because God was a help to Man after his fall, in
making

The third is Atheism. When this multitude of Gods grew so great, as that the
(...).
Poet said of them, Quorum nascuntur in hortis numina, they had gods growing in
their Gardens: it soon became a question, and a doubt was made, whether there
were a God or no. And this was the cause (as some conceive) why Diagoras first
broached this doubt.

Lastly, Diabolisme. After that the Devil had brought the World thus far, it
was Appollonius, Tyaneus, Jamblicus, and Julian the Apostata, who being of no
religion, fell to worship the Devil, and proved Necromancers, Sorcerers, and
Conjurers. The like success he had in the East Indies, where the Gospel was
preached by S. Thomas the Apostle. The people in after ages falling into
contention about religion, they grew at length to worship him in an image
called Thor, and continue his worship to this day.

We shall insist especially upon the third Error, Atheism.

They which have stood in defense of this error, set down these five Heads for
their grounds.

1. That there was a time when there was no society among them, but that they
wandered promiscuously like (...). 2. That by the wisdom of some excellent man,
they were reduced into society, and became sociable, being made a political
body. 3. That to contain men within their duties, and to preserve this society,
laws were enacted. 4. That these laws being not able to bridle them, and keep
them in order, another course was invented: which was, to persuade men, that
there was (...); an invisible power, that took notice of men's secret actions,
and would punish them for their offenses, either in this life, or hereafter,
and that severely, as well in soul as body.
This they say, but prove nothing, and yet themselves will yield to nothing,
nor be persuaded to any thing without great proofs and demonstrations, and so
condemn themselves by their own practice. Nor can they allege reason or
authority, all these grounds being false.

For first, if there were Nomades, such kind of people, as they allege, yet
they became so, not generando, by creation, but degenerando, by degenerating
from that whereunto they were created: either being outlawed by othere, or
(...) themselves from society, for some notable offense committed by them.

2. That a society was made from these Nomades, is as untrue: for (...) a (...)
est animal politicum. Of himself man is naturally a (...) and sociable
creature: and political societies began first in Families, and from Families
they (...) to Villages, and from them to Cities, etc.

3. Laws were made after Religion, Religion was long before Laws, as the very
Poets and other Heathen Writers testify. For in (...) time there was Religion,
and yet no Laws other then the wills and pleasures of Princes, known then: and
their own stories testify, that Laws came into the World 1000 years after
Religion. But when men began to degenerate, and that Religion became too weak,
not powerful enough to keep such brutish people with in their bounds; then
were Laws enacted, to be as bridles to untamed and unruly horses. But more
particularly of these.

1. The universality of the persuasion of the worship of God, is not only
written in the heart of every man, but it is confirmed by the consent of all
History; for there is no History but it describes as well the Religion, as the
manners of the people, and therefore it is impossible to be the invention of
man. As for instance. The Nations and Countries that have been discovered
within these hundred years, by the Spaniards and Portugals in the Americane
part of the World, both in the South and West, which had no intercourse or
commerce with any other Nations: the Natives whereof, though in a manner they
seemed barbarous, as having no apparel to cover them, nor laws to govern them,
yet were they not without a kind of Religion, and something they had which
they called and worshipped as a god, though they had nothing, but either
natural instinct to lead and direct them to it, or general and unquestioned
tradition continued from the first parents of mankind.

2. Nor can it be truly affirmed, that these Nations should have learned their
religion merely from others bordering upon them, in respect of the difference
and (...) of Religion among them: there being as much variety therein as is
possible and without the least proportion or likeness of one religion to
another; though in conditions they be very like. But all inventions will have
some analogy with the (...). For as soon as the Jews came to worship an
invisible thing, God himself, all the Gentiles worshipped things visible, as
the Heavens, Stars, Planets, Elements, Birds, Beasts, Plants, Garlic, and
Onions, some a piece of red cloth hanging upon a pole, some, the thing they
first met with, they worshipped all the following day: Therefore it is evident,
that Religion came not merely by Propagation from one Nation to another.

3. Falsehood can claim no kindred with Time, for truth only is Times (...),
or rather we may say more truly, that truth is beyond all time. (...) delet
dies, naturae indicia confirmat. Time obliterates the fictions of (...)
opinions, but confirms the right and true (...) of nature. Therefore
whatsoever is besides truth, and brought in by man's invention, or any other
way, wears (...), but (...) is, was, and shall be perpetual, never wears out.

4 If it be objected, that the reason, why Religion continues so long, is,
because they are kept in awe by it, that otherwise would be exorbitant. This is
an argument against them, that make that objection. For falsehood and truth are
not competible, cannot stand together. And they will not say that policy is a
fained thing in a Commonwealth. Therefore if Religion uphold policy, it must
needs be true, and not fained, for truth needs no fained thing, nor falsehood
to maintain it. The very Heathen confess, that Religion upholds all politic
states and commonwealths, and that it is the Backbone of them, And that it is
so, we may see it by three things.

1 It preserves faith in mutual transactions and commerce. For take away faith
or fidelity from among men, and men would not trust one another. There would be
no dealings, no commerce at all. 2 It preserves temperance; for without
Religion, the headstrong concupiscence, and unbridled affections of men would
not be kept in true temper and order. 3 It preserves Obedience, and submission
to Government; No people without Religion would be subject to Authority, no one
Country would obey one Prince: and so, no Kingdom would subsist.
Now concerning the Original of Atheism, the very persons that forged it, and
the just time and place of that forgery cannot easily be shown.

The person or first broacher of it (as some conjecture) was Chaem the youngest
son of (...), whom the Heathen call Cambyses, who upon the Curse of God and his
father denounced against him, began it. Egypt was the place and the time
(accordto Josephus) was about Anno Mundi 1950. This man seeing himself deprived
of all future joys gave himself to sensuality, and brutish pleasures in this
world, and began to teach, that there was no God, but fell to worship the
Devil; from whence he was called (...) the great Magitian. This is the opinion
of some. But doubtless whosoever was the Author, the time was ancient, and not
long after the deluge. For then, as the world increased with people, so it was
fruitful in sin and impiety. So that near to these times, it must needs take
its original And surely, those things that were the true causes of it
afterward, doubtless gave it the first being. Namely,

1 Stomach, anger, and desire ofrevenge. 2 Sensuality, and delight in the
pleasure of this life, drowning all thoughts of a better life hereafter.
1 For the first, we may see it plainly in Diagoras, who as Diodorus Siculus
and Suidas report of him, became an Atheist, affirming that there was neither
God, nor Religion. Because when he had written a book of verses, which pleased
him so well, that he intended to publish it, one stole the Poem from him: and
when for this fact, he was brought before the Senate of Athens, and took his
oath that he had it not, yet afterward put it forth to public view, not in
Diagoras name, but in his own. And because this perjured person was not
presently stricken with thunder for his perjury, and abusing the name of their
Gods and the authority of the Senate, Diagoras immediately turned Atheist. The
like is to be observed in Porphyrie and (...), who at the first were
Christians, but for some wrong done to them by some of the Church (as they
conceived) for which they were not punished, became plain Atheists, though they
were termed but Apostata's

For the second, which is sensuality. This motive drew Epicurus and his fellows
to be come Atheists: and to hold this brutish opinion that there came an
extraordinary benefit to them, because they might more freely enjoy their
pleasures without restraint by any fear of future punishment. At the first
they held with Diagoras, that there was no God. The main reason of their
brutish opinion was grounded upon this; Ede, bibe, lude, post mortem nulla
voluptas, there was no hope of pleasure after this life, because the soul was
not immortal. But the very Heathen contemporary with them confuted them
therein, and thus proved the truth against Epicurus.

1 In things that are corrupted together, corruption takes hold of the one as
well as the other, both at once: but in age, when the body is weakest, the soul
is strongest: therefore it is immortal.

2 The perfection of the soul appears most, when it abstracteth and
separateth it self most from the body: and therefore in the greatest separation
of all others which is by death, it will be most perfect.

3. Saint Augustine says, that the soul is the subject of truth, but no
subject of truth can decay, no more then truth it self, therefore the soul is
immortal.

But as Archesilaus a chief Academique, seeing with what difficulty men
attained to knowledge, and with what pains small learning was gotten, took a
short course, and held that there was no knowledge at all. So these Epicures,
seeing that Religion restrained men from all licentious actions, and pleasures,
and how hard a thing it was to lead a Godly life, took a short course, and held
there was neither God nor Religion. And as a Thief is desirous to have the
light put out, that being in the dark his doings may not be seen, and thereby
be quit and free from the reproof and check of men: so do these desire to
extinguish the light of Religion, because they may take their pleasures more
freely and not be liable to the check of Conscience.

CHAP. VI.
That there is a God, proved. 1. By reasons drawn out of the writings of the
Heathens themselves. 2. By the frame of the World. objections answered. 3. By
the beginning and progress of arts etc. 4. By the necessity of a first mover.
The beginning of things cannot be. 1. By Chance. nor 2. By Nature. 5. By
prophecies fulfilled. 6. By the artificial framing the bodies of all Creatures.
7. By the soul of man. Reasons why so many Atheists. Natural notions of a
diety. The Conscience. 8. From the miserable ends of Atheists.

That there is a God.
THus much for the Negative: Now for the affirmative point, That there is a
God: the belief whereof we may be confirmed in by incorrupt reason, even from
the writings of the Heathen themselves.

1. There is a first mover, a first cause in all things, else there should be
before every mover another mover, and so in infinitum. And so of causes: and if
so, this absurdity would follow, that infinite causes must have infinite times
to produce infinite effects.

2. If there were no first cause, all would be instrumental causes, and no
principal. And seeing no inferior cause works without a superior, and that
if there were not a principal and supreme mover of (...), there would be no
effects. Therefore, etc.

3. There is a Devil, therefore a God. There is a spirit in the world set upon
mischief, which seeks to endamage men in their goods, and quantum fieri potest,
as much as he can, to bring all mankind to destruction, as is plain in
sorcerers and witches. And as he is bent to the utter ruin of mankind, so he
would have effected it long before this time, had there not been a superior
power to restrain his malice. So that they were enforced to believe, first,
that there was a Devil, and afterward esse Deum, qui ejus potestati
resisteret, and quasi jura daret Tyrannidi, that there is a God, who resists
the Devils power, and sets bounds to his tyrannous maliciousness.

4. Another reason is from the frame of the world. There was a founder of it,
the old Heathen Poets acknowledged a (...) a first Creator, from which these
reasons may be gathered.

1. Though we dig long, and cannot come to the root of a tree, or find out the
head of a spring, yet we know, the one has a head, and the other a root: so
though we cannot easily come to the knowledge how the world had a beginning,
yet sure we are that a beginning it had. And Damascen reasons very
demonstratively, that it had a beginning, because it is always in alteration
and change. 2. Where diverse things of great discrepancy in nature, are reduced
and brought into a sweet harmony and concord (as in a Lute) we may argue and
conclude, that surely some skilful Musician has tuned and accorded them: So
nothing being fuller of variety and contrariety of natures then the world, and
the creatures in it, we must needs confess, when we see what agreement, and
sympathy and consent is among them, that some excellent and skilful one, has
made this harmoniacal consent. 3. Of all things in the world, as laws,
learning, arts and the rest, the beginning as well of them, as of the Inventors
of them are known: for so the Heathen confess. And Pliny has written much in
his natural history to this purpose. Diodorus Siculus faith, that laws came
from the Jews, and order in commonwealths from the Chaldeans: but this
doubtless came also originally from Gods people, and by humane reason and
different occasions was varied from the first institution.
Now whereas they object, that Ex nihilo nihil fit, of nothing can nothing be
Object. 1.
made. The answer to (...) is, Alia est conditio rei dum fit, alia cum facta
est. Nutritur Answ. 1.
quisque in utero per umbilicum, post partum per os, the condition of things in
their creation and after their creation is different: A child in the mothers
belly is fed by the navil, after the birth by the mouth.

And for that they say, that we know not, whether motus the motion, or Movens
Object. 2.
the Mover were first, and therefore no beginning can be proved, we say, That
Answ. 2.
we can no more certainly affirm, whether the systole or diastole, the rising
or the falling of pulse were first, and yet we know, that the pulse and the
heart from whence it comes had a beginning: and so say we of the motion and
Mover.

Seeing then, that of every thing, a beginning there was, it must needs be from
one of these three. 1. From Chance, 2. Or from Nature, 3. Or from God.

Reasons against Chance.
1. From Chance it cannot be. For if a man travail through a wilderness or
desert forte fortuito by chance. If a man should see a circumference or a
triangle (as Aristippus did) upon the sea shore, he would soon imagine that
some Artist or skilful man had drawn it, and that it came not by Chance. No
more are we to ascribe the making of any thing to fortune. For in our common
talk, the generation of things we attribute not to Chance, but the corruption
we call mischance. As when we see a house burnt, or the like, we use to call it
a mischance. But things of generation and invention, we ascribe to art or
counsel. In the Argonauts of Apollonius, the silly Countryman that saw the
first ship arrive at Colchos could say (...) it had some skilful Pilot to guide
it. 2. In fortuitis or things by chance there can be no order observed, no more
then in casting of dice: but in the world there is a most excellent order in
all things, except in the actions of men which are corrupt and confused. 3.
Chance and purpose can never agree, for fortune is defined to be praeter
propositum besides and contrary to purpose. If a man do any thing of purpose,
it were absurd to say that he did it by chance. But in the world there is a
manifest purpose: for there is an eye, and that eye has its object, that
object its line, that line its medium and species, and so a counsel and mutual
destination. So that it is not from Chance.
Reasons against Nature.
1. The beginning was not from Nature. If it were, then all things must be
reduced to it, and there must be a natural reason given for all things. But
this cannot be: for the Philosophers cannot give a reason in Nature, for the
ebbing and flowing of the sea. For the colors of the Rainbow. The strength of
the neither chappe, which is able to knap in sunder even Iron it self, and yet
has a very weak upholder. For the heat of the stomach, which consumes any
meat, and yet hurts not it self, nor any parts about it, and even the
virtues, they make them not all natural, but some (...) heroical and coming
from God. 2. If nature were the beginning of all things, then should nothing be
done against nature, because nothing can oppose it self against the chief
cause. And if nature had that power of it self to produce and set on work so
excellent a frame as the world is, it would be of as great force to preserve
and continue its course. But this it does not, for we know that the sun stood
still at the command of Joshua against natures course, and the sun had an
Eclypse in the full of Josh. 10. 12.
the moon against nature at our Saviors passion. Luke 23. 33.

Seeing then that the beginnings come neither from Chance nor Nature, it must
neceslarily follow, that all things had their beginning from God, which we
prove thus.

1. All the Prophecies show, the same which foretell things to come in plain
terms: of which things there was no reason in nature: as that of Cyrus a
hundred years before his birth. Of King Josiah three hundred years before he
was borne. And that of reedifying of Jericho, five hundred years almost before
it was repaired by Hiel: and all these in iisdem terminis, in the same words
set down in those prophecies.
The orderly and artificial framing the Creatures at the Creation tells us
plainly, that Nature was not the beginning, but God, for even them, whom
neither miracles nor Pliny was astonished at the little Gnat, that by her
trunck makes so great a noise, and says, that without a supreme power above
nature that creature could not have been so made. The like he acknowledges
upon the sight of the Butterfly. And Galen after he had blasphemously treated
of the most excellent parts of man, when de usu (...).
he came to one part of the least account, falls into admiration of it, and is
constrained to name and confess God, and say, that he has sung hymnum Domino
in describing it.

Now as we are taught by those things which are without us, that there is a
cause above Nature, so likewise by the things that are within us.

For first we have a soul (as we said before) endued with reason and
understanding,

1. Because it knows not itself, neither any parts of the body, but by
Anatomy, at omnis causa novit effectum every cause (if it be reasonable)
knows its effect, not only after it is brought forth, but before, and by
what degrees it is so produced. Our father in begetting, and our mother in
conceiving, know not what is begotten, what is conceived: but, in causa
principali necessario requiritur, ut cognoscas effectum antequam existat, and
dum est in producendo, in the principal cause it is of necessity required, that
it know the effect before it be: and while it is in producing.

2. Again, after we are brought forth, we cannot command every part of us, as
thearteries and pulses that they beat not: and therefore it is plain that we
proceed not, nor are causes of our selves, but we are necessarily to seek a
cause elsewhere. For as there is none in the world that has reason but man: so
none above reason but God. And therefore Aristotle says (...), 9 ad (...).
reason comes of a better thing then reason. And the Poet Aratus is quoted
Acts 17. 28.
to this purpose by Saint Paul (...) we are his generation.

3. In our souls are certain sparks of the light of nature, principles of
undoubted and infallible truth: as to honor our parents and superiors, to do
as we would be done unto, to defend our selves from injuries, to keep promise,
to hurt no man, and the like, without observing whereof, no society could be
maintained, among which this is one. That there is a God, and that he ought to
worshipped. And howsoever all other may fail, yet this never, as having taken
deeper impression in men's minds (that are not come to the height of Atheism)
then the rest. Insomuch as the pride of man's nature which will stoop and yield
to nothing else, is content to submit to this, and will rather worship a piece
of red cloth, then have no religion at all. And this is so fast and deeply
rooted in man, that it cannot be removed, unless you pluck out heart and all.

But then it is objected, That if this Notion be so general, how comes it that
Object. 1.
there are so many Atheists? To which may be answered.

1. With Seneca, Mentiuntur qui dicunt se non sentire esse Deum, nam etsi
(...). 1.
tibi affirmant interdiu; noctu tamen and sibi dubitant, they lie that say,
they do not think there is a God, for though in the day time they tell thee so,
yet in the night they doubt of it within themselves.

2. But a better answer may be framed to this objection. A man may proceed to a
great degree of hardness of heart, and blinding himself, yet this rule must be
observed, Specimen naturae cujuslibet, a natura optima sumendum est, the trial
or essay De natura (...).
of every man's nature or inclination is ever to be taken from off the best
parts, and not of depraved nature. And Tully says, If we will know what nature
is most universal in man, we must take our argument of what he is from the
better sort of men; now there are some sorts of men so addicted to the world
and the flesh, and the pleasures of them both, that they are so loose and
dissolute, that you can no more judge what is naturally in them, then of the
taste of a sick man.

But yet, though their hearts be fat, and they besotted as the horse and mule,
yet if God put his bit into their mouths, those natural sparks we speak off,
will break forth and darkness will not be able to obscure the light.

And this is to be seen in the worst of natures upon these occasions.
1. If trouble and danger assail them, then, as the Persians in Aeschylus that
were routed at the lake Strymon by their enemies, and to avoid their fury, must
needs pass the ice ready to be thawed with the suns heat, or staying be every
one put to slaughter: though before they held that there was no God, yet then
fell on their knees and prayed to God to let the ice bear them. 2. If sickness
lay hold on them, then with Diogenes the Atheistical Philosopher being
tormented with the strangury, they will detest their former Atheism. 3. Or
lastly, if age come upon them, then with Cephalus (as Plato has it) they (...).
will say, while I was young, and was told of Styx and Acheron, I scoffed at
it, and thought there were no such places: now I am old, I begin to doubt and
say, what if there be such. So that we see, that danger, sickness, and old age
will drive men to confess, that there is a God.
But another main argument is this. There are in us natural notions of God,
and

1. There is a power in the soul which takes notice of the difference between
good and evil, against Pyrrho, who said, that there was nothing in it self
simply good Genesis 9. 22.
or evil. Cham, though an ungodly man, yet thought it an uncomely thing for his
father to lie as he did: there was a power in him, to distinguish between
decorum and 14. 21.
indecorum, good and evil. The King of Sodom would recompense Abraham good for
good. Esau would not kill his brother Jacob, while the days of mourning came,
27. 41.
namely, while his father lived. Absalom, though in rebellion against his
father, yet (...). (...). 16. 17.
rebuked the same wickedness in his friend Hushai. And Judas though he would
betray his Master, yet would not do it in open manner, but gave a privy token,
Quemcunque (...). 26. 28.
osculatus fuero, whomsoever I shall kiss etc. So then, seeing the most wicked
and evil are desirous to seem good, and (though being evil in themselves)
reprehend it in others, itappears plainly that there are notions in our souls
to distinguish between good and evil.

Now there must be a ground for this distinction, and it is not of man as
Pyrrho would have it: for then every thing which is at man's appointment, must
be good Genesis 3. 11.
or evil: but it must be from a nature above man, and so it leads us to God,
an unchangable nature. Who told thee that thou wast naked, faith God.

That there is a God, may be found from a maine part of oursoul, the Conscience
Object.
that Conscience thus vexes them, lest their fact be revealed, and they
thereby brought (...).
within the danger of the Law. It may soon be answered. For let one of these
commit some great offense in the wilderness, or in the dark, where no man sees
them, yet shall he never be at rest, he shall have his surda verbera, as Pliny
calls them, secret whips and wounds; yea, he shall be constrained to reveal it
himself, either in sleep or madness: or (as Plutarch speaks of Bessus) he
shall think, that the fouls of the air will bewray it. Religion then, is not a
devise, as they hold, or would have it, neither shall it be so accounted, as
long as they have Gods deputy and vicegerent (...). 9., 36.
within them. And our Savior quoteth this Text out of the Prophet to condemn
(...). 66. (...).
such Atheists. (...) little non morietur. Their worm dies not. Therefore there
is a God.

6. Lastly to end this point. It is a manifest argument to prove that there is
a God that even them which have denied this truth by their lives God has
confuted by their strange and remarkable ends, so that some of them have bin
forced to confess him at their death. As Pherecydes the Syrian, being in his
jollity at a banquet with his friends, and boasting that, he had lived long and
yet had never sacrificed to any God, Athen.
within a short time after miserably ended his days, devoured by lice. So
Diagoras the Philospher, (who for his impiety was called Atheos the Atheist)
was the ruin of Extrop
his country Melos by the Athenians, for maintaining this wicked opinion. And
Julian the Apostata being overcome by the Persians, and wounded to death with
an arrow, plucked it out, and his blood issued forth, dying miserably, was
forced to confess, that he was overcome by his hand against whom he had
formerly written blasphemous (...).
books, and spoken Atheistically: yet dying said, Vicisti Galilee. Lucian (at
the first a Christian, and afterward a blasphemous Apostata) keeping a kennel
of hounds for his recreation, shut them up, and went abroad to supper, where he
uttered many blasphemies against God: and at his (return meeting his dogs mad,
died miserably being torn in pieces by them. Apion against whom Josephus wrote)
scoffing at the Old Testament, and especially against circumcision, was at the
same time stricken by God, and in the same place with an ulcer, and was made a
spectacle for all such as in after times should follow his example. And lastly
to (omit others) Machiavel rotted in the prison at Florence, as the Italian
histories testify.

These and many other Atheists, though they denied God in their life time, yet
at their death were forced to acknowledge and confess him. And therefore as it
was written upon Zenacheribs tomb, (...), he that beholds me, let him be
religious, and acknowledge Gods hand. So may we say, (...), look upon these men
and their end, and learn to stand in aw of God.

CHAP. VII.
The fourth step, That God has a providence over man. Reasons against divine
providence, answered: why God permitts evil: general reasons for a providence,
particular reasons from all sorts of creatures. That second causes work not,
nor produce their effects of themselves without God. That Gods providence (...)
to particulars. That God is to be sought, and that he rewards them that seek
him.

Gods care of mankind.
The next station is. That God has a care of men, to reward the good. For it
is 4
not sufficient to know God in his Essence only: but in his Providence also.
For as to deny that God is, is Atheism, so the doubting of his Providence and
care over the Creatures is Semi-Atheisme. Nay if we look at the moral effect
which the persuasion of a Deity works among men, it is all one to deny his
Providence, and to deny that he is. And this was the Epicures error, who though
they were forced by reason to know that there was a God, yet they held, That
God had no care of man. Now of Gods providence there are four opinions.

1. That God has no intercourse with man, but has drawn the Heavens as a
Curtain between him and us, that we should not know or see, what he does, nor
he what we do. 2. That there is a providence, but that it extends only to
general things, and so is a general providence, setting in order second causes,
but reaches not to every particular individual thing. 3. Another opinion
grants a providence as well of particulars, as generals, but that it is idle,
as a spectator only, that beholds men act upon a stage, and neither rewards,
nor punishes. 4. The last (...), that as he has providence over both sorts,
as well particular as (...) neral, so he does not only behold, but reward the
good, and punish the evil. And this is the truth, which Christans hold.
The chief reasons which they use to alledg in maintaining that there is no
providence at all, are chiefly three.

1 The adversity of the good, and the prosperity of the wicked. For say they,
(...) 1
vlla esset providentia, bonis been esset, malis male, if there were any
providence it would go well with the good, and ill with the bad. 2. That
although many abuse the gifts of God, yet he gives them promiscuously. And
therefore, if there were a providence, the use of the gift would have been
given with it, and no gifts would have been given to them that should abuse
them. 3. That the manifold (...), and evil effects in morral and natural
things show, that if there were a Providence, God would not suffer so many in
either.
1. To the first, we answer. If a man were absolutely good, no adversity would
betide him, and if absolutely evil, no prosperity: but no man in this life is
absolutely good or evil, but as the best are not without some evil, so the
worst not without some good; And therefore it stands with the justice of God,
to punish that evil which is in the good with temporal punishments in this
life, and to reward the good which is in the wicked, with temporal blessings:
that he may reward the one, and punish the other, in the other life. Hence it
is that saint Augustine, says, Domine hic secabic ure, modo ibi parca, Lord
cut and burn, afflict me here, so thou spare me hereafter. We know what the
Devil, said to God, in Jobs case. Does Job serve God for naught? Therefore God,
Job. 1. 9.
to stop the mouths of the wicked and Satan, punishes the Godly here. And
hence it is, that if good men live in prosperity, the Devil is ready to object,
that their acts are but hypocritical: therefore God to make it appear, that
the Godly serve him not in respect of temporal blessings, and that virtue in
them is not mercenary, but free, he often times lays afflictions on his
children, which they bear willingly.

2 The former answer might have served to confut this second reason: for as in
only the first, if it had been bonis been, well to the good the Devil had
well said, Does Job serve God for naught? so in this case, If God had given the
use of the gifts with the gifts themselves to every one, the Devil would have
said, Job can do no other but serve God. He is not left to his own election,
God has in a mnaner enforced him to it, and so his actions are not praise
worthy, nor deserve any reward. For what extraordinary matter is it for fire to
burn, since it is its nature and property. But when some of the wicked have as
excellent gifts bestowed on them, as the godly have, and yet they abuse them:
it takes away all cavils and exceptions from (...): and makes much for the
commendation of the Godly, and for the just reprofe and punishment of the
wicked.

3. To the third we say, that though there be defects, and evil effects, yet
God is not the cause of them: he has no part either in the evil action, or
with the evil doer. Omnis actionis imperfectio, non a Deo, sed a male se
habente instrumento, the imperfection of every action is not of God, but from
the indisposition or perverseness of the instrument. In a Creple the soul is
the cause of motion, and is in no fault, but the distortion of the body which
is the instrument of the soul. So every action is from God, but if it have any
deformity, it is of the crookedness of the instrument. Now God (...) evil in
these respects.

1. Per privationem gratiae, by justly for sin depriving men of his grace, and
thereupon follows a defect of good: for if there were no defect, his infinite
goodness could not have been so clearly seen, nor would there have been any
variety of good things, but one good only. 2. If there were no defect, there
would have been no order or degrees in things. 3. Many virtues would have been
superfluous, as Justice, Temperance, etc. 4. Because it is necessary, that God
should be loved for his All Sufficiency in the highest degree: and there is
nothing that makes us love God more, then for the enjoying of his benefits: and
his benefits are never more highly esteemed, then when we want them: for bonum
carendo magis quam fruendo cernitur, we discern and find what is good for us,
more by being deprived of it, then by enjoying it. So that were there no
defect, we should not be so sensible of the good which we want. 5. Nor would
God ever permit evil,, but that thereby he can take occasion by his infinite
wisdom and goodness, that a greater good may arise. As we plainly find, that
from the greatest evil that ever was committed (the betraying of our Savior)
God took occasion to draw the greatest benefit that ever befell mortal men,
namely, the Redemption of mankind. So much in answer to the first opinion.
Now to prove that there is a providence, 1. In generals. 2. In fingular and
particulars. 2.
3. Not only by the ordinary course of secondary causes, but immediately from
God himself.

There is a providence in general matters.

1. It is natural to every one, ut curet quod procreavit, to have a (...), a
natural love and affection to that which it brings forth; and this being the
gift of God in his creatures, Astorgia is a vice, and to be reproved in man,
Hebr. 12.
and therefore cannot befall God, but when it seems to fall in God, by his
laying afflictions and troubles upon any of his creatures, it is not (...) or
want of love to them, but a manifest providence over them, for whom he loves he
chastens, and thereby furthers their chiefest good.

2. No wise Artificer will give over his work before he have finished it, and
brought it to perfection: but every day God brings forth some new thing, some
new effect, things which are tending to perfection, for things are yet daily in
generation, and therefore God has his providence over them to bring them
thereunto.

1. In particulars. We see (with Aristotle) that the sea is far higher then the
land,

And if any say, that the water and earth make one sphere or globe, and
therefore the swelling of any part, is only in appearance, that spherical
figure being the natural figure of the whole; yet herein providence plainly
appears, in that some parts of the earth are made hollow, to be receptacles for
the sea, which otherwise should by order of nature cover the whole earth, and
so the dry land appear for the use of Men and Beasts.

2 The next reason is from Plotinus. fetched from the Plants, which if they
stand between two kinds of soil, soil of two natures, one dry and barren, and
the other moist and fruitful, they will naturally shoot all their roots to the
fruitful soil. As also from lilyes and marigolds and diverse other flowers,
that of themselves naturally close toward evening with the Sunset, lest they
should receive evil and corrupt moisture in the night, and in the morning open
again, to receive the heat of the Sun.

3. The next is from Birds. Our Savior in a sermon to his disciples concerning
Luke 12. 24.
Gods providence, bids them observe and mark well. Consider (faith he) the
ravens, for they neither sow nor reap, they have neither storehouse nor barn,
and yet God feeds them. And King David testifies the like, that the Ravens
are fed of God. And it is reported, that their young ones being forsaken by the
damme and left bare, Psalm. 147. 9.
a worm arises out of their doung, creeps up to their bill, and feeds
them.

4. The fourth is from fishes. Aristotle reports, that the little fish
Pinnothera entering league with the Crab, takes a stone in her mouth, and when
the Oyster opens against the Sun, swimmeth in with the stone in her mouth, so
that the Oyster not being able to close again, the Crab pulls out the meat,
and they both divide the prey.

5. The next is from Beasts. we see that the Providence of God has taken
order, that wild beasts should not be so generative as Tame, least by their
multiplicity they should do much harm. Secondly, Though they be naturally
desirous of prey, yet God has so disposed, that when the Sun arises in the
day time, (when they might best fit themselves) they get them away, and lay
them down in their denns; and Man goes forth to his labor (and works
securely) till the evening, as the prophet speaks. and when man goes to his
rest, then go they to seek their prey. Which must Psalm. 104. 22. 23.
necessarily be a great argument of Gods grovidence.

6 And so generally from all living Creatures; by discerning their several
places of nourishment. As the silly lamb, among a multitude of Ewes, to choose
out its own damme. As also in avoiding things noysom and hurtful to them: as
the Chicken to run away at the noise of a Kite, even almost as soon as it is
hatched; the lamb to flee from the wolf, and the like.

7. From the extraordinary love of parents to their children, though never so
deformed, in as great measure, as if they had no defect in nature.

8. Lastly from the sudden cry of every Creature in distress, for which no
reason can be given, but that it is vox naturae clamantis ad dominum naturae,
the cry of nature, to the God of nature, as some of the Heathen have bin forced
to confess.

And thus we see the providence of God in particular, concerning which
Theoderet In his 10.
has written against those that were of opinion, that providence was but as a
Clock, Sermon. de providentia.
which after the plummets are plucked up, goes afterward of its own accord.

The Third particular to be proved is, that the effects we see come not merely
of second causes, or by nature, nor by chance, but mediatly or immediately from
God.

First not by nature or second causes alone. Means or Nature.


1. We say that means work nothing of themselves, no more then bread can
nourish of itself. For there is a staff of bread (as the Prophet tells us)
which if it be broken, Ezec. 4. 16. 5. 16
bread itself will do us little good. Christ calls it the word, and the
psalmist hidden John. 6. 32.
treasure, which without Gods blessing will be put but as into a bottomless
bag: as Psa. 17. 14.
the Prophet speaks. This the Philosophers acknowledged, and called it
Infusion of Aggai. 1. 6.
strength, nature, and efficacy into the Creatures. And it must needs be from
the first, and not from the second cause.

2. Sundry things are effected without means: as because men should not think
Genesis 1.
the Sun to be the sole cause of Light, God created the Light before the Sun.
Likewise he created fruit with the seed, because we should not think, seed
alone to be the cause or means of fruit. And we see in these days preferment
cast upon some men that neither seek nor deserve it,

3. We see also some effects wrought contrary to Nature. As when Christ opened
John. 9. 6.
2 Kings 2. 19.
the eyes of him that was blind, with clay, which naturally is more proper to
put Genesis 39.
out the eyes then open them. So likewise Elisha made the the salt water fresh
and sweet by casting salt into it. Joseph's imprisonment, was the means of his
preferment. And the unlearned Christians confounded the learned of their time.
Therefore the effects depend not on means, or nature only.

2. not by chance.

Fortune has not the command of the issue and event of war, as some profane
men See the Epitome. folio. 63.
have given out, Sors domina campi, that Chance is the predominant Lady of the
field; but we Christians know, that God is a man of war, and fights for his
servants, and gives them victory, or else for their sins, and to humble them,
gives them into their enemies hands, and makes them Lords over them: and the
heathens themselves made their worthies, Diomedes, Ulysses etc. prosperous by
the assistance of some god, and therefore in their stories, usually there went
a vow before the war, and after the victory, performance. In the very drawing
of Lots (which a man would think to be Chance, of all other things) we see, it
ordered some times by special providence against Chance; so that it must be
confessed that somewhat was above it, as in the case of Jonathan, and Jonas.
And therefore it is that the wiseman says, The lot is cast into 1 Samuel 14. 42.
the lap, but the whole disposing of it is in the Lord. Hence the mariners in
the ship Jon. 1. 7.
pro. 16. 33.
where Jonas was, used this casting of lots acknowledging a providence, of God
therein.

And upon that which they call Chance medley it cannot depend, for there is
also Providence. Herodotus reports of Cambyses, that being hated by his
subjects for his cruelty, the people not unwilling to have another usurper, in
his absence, it came to his ears: he furiously alighting from his horse with
intent to to have gone against the usurper, his sword fell out of the scabbard,
and run into his thigh or belly and killed him, which this Heathen writer
ascribes to Providence, not to chance medley. And the Philosophers conclude,
that chance is nothing else, but an effect of causes far removed, and if of
them much more of things near together, which plainly are to be referred to the
divine providence. And it is a greater argument of providence to join things
far asunder, then those which are nearer, and better known. Therefore the
various effects we see cannot be ascribed only to Nature or Chance. To all
which might be added that unanswerable argument from the fulfilling of
prophecies, which necessarily proves a divine providence.

Thus we have seen, that there is a Providence in general. 2. That it works
even when there are secondary causes. 3. Now that this Providence reaches and
extends to particulars as it does to generals, and rewards each particular
man, is proved by Philosophy and reason, thus.

1. The philosophers make Providence, a part and branch of Prudence: and
Prudence is a practical virtue, and practical virtues have their objects in
singularibus in particulars.

2. Now it is certain that all the Attributes of God, are every one of equal
latitude and longitude. His power is over all and extends to every thing, for
virtutis est maxim pertingere vel remotissima, that is the greatest power that
reaches to things farthest off. And his providence and goodness is of no
less extent then his power.

3. There Is no man but will confess, that it is a more commendable thing to
provide for every particular, then for the general only. And therefore it is,
that is storied for the commendation and honor of Mithridates, who having many
thousands in his army, was able to call them all nominatim, by their names:
then si quod melius est, non agatur, if the best be not done, it must needs be
out of some defect in the Agent, but there is none in God.

4. Now for the rest of the Creatures. If God have a care of heaven, which has
not the use of its own light or motion, but is to make inferior things
fruitful, and cattle have use of herbs, etc. and man of cattle, and all other
things, and the philosophers telling us, that that which has the use of all
things, is principal of all others; man having the use of all, must needs be
principal: therefore, si sit providentia Dei in reliquas creaturas, ut in
principalem se extendat, necesse est, if the providence of God extend it self
to the rest of the Creatures, it necessarily follows, that it extend it self to
the principal.

5. King David first considers the glory of the Heavens, then the eternity of
Psalm 8.
them, and wondreth how God could pass by those most glorious bodies, and put
the soul of man (the most excellent creature) into a most vile lump of clay and
earth. Man is the most excellent of all other of Gods artifice: for other
Creatures know not their own gifts. The horse, if he knew his strength, would
not suffer his rider upon his back; therefore the occultation of the gift from
that creature which has it, and the manifestation of it to man that has it
not, is an argument that man is Gods Count-Palatine of the whole world, and
cannot be exempted from Gods providence.

6 And this is that which made Saint Chrysostom in a godly zeal (being
displeased with man) to say, Appende te homo, consider thy self well, O man,
art not thou better then all creatures else? Yet is Gods providence over the
vilest of them, and so from them to man, and more especially to good men: for
if he have a providence and care of those that only have his image by nature,
then where two images meet in one, one of nature, and another of grace by
Christ, much more: for similitudo magnes amoris, likeness is the loadstone of
love, and amoris providentia, and providence of love. If God care for all
mankind, then much more for these, who as it were hate themselves to love him,
those that lose themselves to find him, and that perish to live with him.
Therefore his providence is over particulars.

The second branch of this part has two things considerable. 1. That God is

1. In the first place then God must be sought, for facientis finis est ipsemet
the end of the actor is himself, and God being his own end, it must necessarily
follow, that he wills all things for his own, either profit, honor, or
pleasure.

1. For his profit we cannot seek him; for none can redound to him from us. 2.
Nor for his pleasure, for wherein can we pleasure him? 3. Therefore it must be
for his honor, for to that end did he create us, that for his honor we should
seek and serve him.
2. The next is that he rewards such as seek and serve him. Where there are two
relatives, there is a grounded mutual duty between them as between a father and
a son, love and obedience: between man and wife mutual love: between Master and
servant, care and service: between the Creator and Creature, providence and
honor. Now between God and his true servants that seek him faithfully, there
is reverence and love, and reward for it. And though we be but verna Domini
Gods bondmen, and are bound to keep his laws, because he is our Legislator,
Lawmakers: yet he has promised reward to them that keep them, and does not as
kings, who give laws, and yet give no rewards to them that keep them, but
punish the breakers of them: Gods goodness is greater to us men.

And as God has a reward for his children that seek and serve him, so has he
retribution, viz. punishment for them that neglect him, and break his
commandments, which we might easily prove, both by ancient and modern story.

So that we may conclude this point, that Gods providence is manifest in
rewarding the good. And so much against the Epicure.

CHAP. VIII.
The four religions in the world, Of Paganism, reasons against the plurality
of gods. That there can be but one God proved out of their own Philosophers.
That their religion was false. How man came to be worshipped. How Beasts. Of
the miracles and Oracles of the Gentiles.

THe next point to be handled is, That the Scriptures of the old and new
Testament are only true, and that all other either Oracles or Books of
Religions besides those are false and erroneous.

The Apostle has set this for a principle or ground. That though there are
(...) 1. (...). 8. 5., 6.
that be called Gods: But to us there is but one God. And if but one God, then
but one true Religion. In the search whereof we come into a Quadrivium, or way
that has four turnings, viz. the four principal religions of the world, In
which the greatest part of the world have sought God. These are,

1. That of the Heathen in America, and in the East Indies and (...), and in a
great part of Tartary, who worship the Creatures, etc. and this is called
Paganism. 2. That of the Jews scattered through the world, and this is called
Judaisme. 3. That of Turks and Saracens in Asia, part of Africa, and Europe,
and this we call Turcisme or Mahometanisme. 4. That which Christians hold,
which is called Christianity.
Now seeing that according to the Apostles rule, there can be but one true. It
rests to prove which of them is so. The Amperours Ambassador being at
Constantinople, with the grand Signior or great Turk, and espying in a cloth of
estate four Candlesticks wrought, with four candles in them, three whereof were
turned upside down (...) the sockets, as if they were put out, and the fourth
of them burning, with this Arabique inscription, Haec est vera lux, this is the
true light, questioned the meaning thereof, and was answered, That there were
four Religions in the world, whereof three were false, and the other (which was
theirs) was the true. Let us therefore examine which is the true, and which the
false, and first begin with

1. Paganism. And this had once spread it self over all the earth, except one
corner of Syria: and it cannot be denied, but that in the knowledge of arts,
policy, and Philosophy, the Heathen exceeded all other nations, and their light
shined that way, brightest above others; and that in these things we have all
lighted our candle at theirs. And yet as the wisest of us may wonder at them
for their extraordinary natural and humane knowledge, so the simplest of us
may laugh at them, for their absurdities in the worship of God, so dim has
their light burnt in matter of Religion.
The Apostle in the place last quoted has two arguments against them, to prove
that there must needs be but one God, and they erred because they had many
gods, many lords. And indeed many they had. Varro makes the number of them
30000 whereof there were 300 Jupiters, besides a number called dii majorum
gentium, and minorum, and dii tutelares, tutelar gods, etc. and as S. Augustine
speakeh Quis numerare 1. 4 De Civ. Dei.
potest? the number was so great, that no man could reckon them.

1. He, from whom al things are, can be but (...)
one. The reason is, Inferior causes are resemblances of superior, and they
of the Highest: but we see in all inferior causes, many branches come from one
root, many parts are ruled by one head, many veins from one Master-vein, and
many rivers and channels 1. Cor. 8. 6.
from one fountain. So in Superior causes, there are many causes from one, as
many lights from one, and many motions from one motion: therefore in the
highest cause, this unity must needs be after a most perfect manner.

2. In quem omnia concurrunt, in whom all things meet, as lines in the center.
In the mutual order of nature all things depend upon one another, Mutuus ordo
in se invicem est propter conjunctum ordinem in uno, that mutual order which
is, is from order joined in one, as all things flow from one, so they return to
one again. Therefore one, and but one God.

But their own reasons are sufficient to convince them, for Pythagoras says,
that si potest as infinita est, tum natura infinita, quia accidentis capacitas,
non excedit capacitatem subjecti, if the power be infinite, the subject in
which that power is, must needs be also infinite, because the capacity of the
adjunct exceeds not the capacity of its subject. And there can be but one
infinite, therefore but one God. If we grant two infinites there must be a line
to part them, if so, then they are both finite, and have several forces, and
being divided, cannot be so perfect as if they were joined together and both
one. But there can be no imperfectnesse in God. Therefore we cannot admit of
two Gods.

Again, as Lactantius argues. If there be two Gods, and Gods attribute being

The advice of Pythagoras to his Shcolers was to search, till they came to
(...) Aristotle's drift was to seek for primum, the first, and the omnium
primum, and the primum ex primis, the first of all. Plato in his first epistle
to Dionysius gives him this rule, that in those epistles which he writes of
certain truth, he begins with (...) God, and in those which contain doubtful
things, he begins with (...) Gods, making God his note of truth, and Gods of
uncertainty. (...) rule to his Scholars was, Dicite plures, and dicite nullum,
say there be many Gods, and say there be none: and Sophocles held in truth,
Vnus est Deus, there is but one God. So that among themselves they muttered the
truth, howsoever either for fear of punishment, or disturbing the peace of the
Commonwealth, they thought fit to suffer the people to live in their error of
Polytheisme.

But because Saint Augustine says, that in the Primitive Church the
Philosophers De civ. Deil 4
were ashamed of their multiplicity of Gods, and therefore gave out, that the
Ancients were never so absurd as to worship many Gods, but only gave one God
diverse names, to distinguish their effects, and not conceiving that there were
diverse Gods, but ascribed power to one God only, we will consider it a little
further.

1. For first, it is certain that they had diversity of Gods, 2. and secondly
they erected several images to them. Now if they were circumscript, then could
they be no gods, for Deus non potest circumscribi, quia infinitus God cannot be
circumscribed, because he is infinite, and if an image could express them,
they were circumscript.

2. Again, the whole course of Heathen religion sought no further then their
eye led them, struck no further then the skin, looked only after outward
actions, they neither would nor could search into the reins, nor had any remedy
to restrain the heart and mind and the vices thereof, as hypocrisy, etc. but
true religion, such as is that of the Christians, forbids concupiscence, and
bridleth the affections, strikes deeper then that of the Heathen, therefore
have the Heathen, neither true God nor true Religion.

3. They attribute but particular honor to particular Gods, in respect of the
particular benefits they conceive, that they receive respectively from them, as
to some for the benefit of physic, to some, for their good success in war and
the like, but that God only is to be honored, whose providence extends
universally, and has power alike in all things, which as they confess theirs
had not, and there fore are not Gods.

4 Again the objection of Cyrill to Julian (which made him to stagger) is
strong against them. That it being the sin of the body which defiles the
soul, the soul had need of something to purge and cleanse it: but their
Religion having nothing in it to cleanse the heart and soul as well as the
body, cannot be the true Religion.

5 That their Gods were no Gods but men appears, in that their parents were
known and confessed by the Heathen writers themselves, as of Hesiod in his
Theognia. Tullie de natura deorum and others; as also by Cyril against Julian,
Augustine in his books de Givitate dei; Eusebius de preparatione Evangelica,
but best by Gregory Nyssen, etcyprian de vanitate Idolorum. And Alexander the
Great in a private conference with Leo a priest of Egypt, was informed by him
that the Gods of the Graecians and other nations came out of Egypt, and that
the religion of the Greeks came from Egyptians by the means of Cecrops and
from Phaenicia by Cadmus. That the Romans had theirs from the Greeks, by Numa
Pompilius. And the Egyptian Gods were but men, for their descents were known,
as Hermes Tresmegistus, and Esculapius, who descended from Vranius and
Mercurius, and yet these were reputed to be their Gods.

6 Again Their Gods were not only Men but wicked men. For Religion being
nothing but a faculty to make men perfect, and fit them for a more blessed
life, by framing them in fimilitude to the actions and perfections of God,
their Gods as they were but men and no Gods, so were they men of wicked lives
and conversation, stigmatyzed with rapes, adulteries, and the like sins, as not
only their own stories testify of them, but other historians also without
exception as Eusebius, Cyrill, (...) against Appion, Athanasius, Origin,
Tertullian, Lactantius, and others.

But here will be made a question, or objection consisting of 2. parts 1. If
their Objection.
Gods were but men, how came they to be worshipped Cultu divino with divine
honor. 2. And secondly, how came Beasts to be worshipped by the Heathen with
the

1. To these may be answered. First, that after the flood, there being, a
general Answer.
revolt from religion and the true worship of God, except that among the Jews,
there was infuced this Maxim into the minds of many, that men were to worship
them that did them good, or delivered them from evil.

2 Another cause of divine worship given to men, we have from out of an anthor
not now extant, named Sanchuntathon.
Porphyries relation, that Ninus having obtained the Monarchy, erected an image
to the honor and memory of his father Belus, and because he would have it no
less respected by others then by himself, he made it a sanctuary for
offenders and debtors. So that many having received benefit by it, and withal
thinking to ingratiate themselves with In Iside et Osyride.
Ninus (who then bare absolute rule) instituted feasts upon certain days to
it: at which times they adorned the Image with garlands, and made hymns which
they sang to the honor of father and son. Now the ground of this institution
being forgotten, they which succeeded in after times became so superstitious in
this service, that they made prayers and offered sacrifices to this image,
which was the same Bell, which in the broader dialect of the Hebrews was called
Baal. Thus images erected to the memory of men's virtues became to be
worshipped, when the cause of their erection was forgotten. And from
Prosopopeia's and Apostrophes to the deceased they began to pray to the very
images.

2 For the diefying of Beasts, the answer is this. Plutarch reports, that
Osyris being King of Egypt, and dividing his kingdom into Provinces, gave a
several badge or cognizance to every one, according to the quality and
condition of each province, as most natural to the things most abounding in it:
as to that which consisted most in (...), he designed an Ox: to that which was
most plentiful in woods, a Dog: to that wherein was most meadow, a Clod with a
little grass on the top, which we call a Turfe: and to that wherein was most
water, a Crocodile. These he erected upon poles and placed them between his
several provinces. Posterity forgetting to what end these were erected,
conceived in them some Divine nature and power: and thereupon, he which lived
by the plough worshipped the Ox, calling it Apis: the Huntsman the Dog, calling
it Anubis: the Grasier the Clod, calling it Isis, etc. And upon this, this
kind of Idolatry had its original.

The next objection is, If they were not Gods, how came some of them to work
Object.
Miracles, and give Oracles.

1. The first is thus answered. That there is difference between true, and
false Answ. 1.
Miracles, the one being profitable to mankind, as raising the dead to life,
and healing incurable diseases, which not they nor their Magicians could ever
perform, but only wrought such as were fictitions and imaginary: and some of
them were unprofitable, such as were Simon Magus his making a mountain seem to
remove: and (...) Manlius his cutting a whetstone in two pieces.

2. Concerning the Oracles of the Gentiles, Porphyrie says, that as great
things were done by the Magicians of his time, as by those whom they supposed
to be gods. Besides the Oracles which they uttered, were ever either ambiguous
(being indeed not the Oracles of their Images, but of Devils that spoke in
them, (as Eusebius affirms) or often times false and frivolous, nay sometime
contradicting one another, and might have been as truly conjectured by
politic or wise men from the disposition or concurrence of causes.

3. And it is a strong argument, to prove that these oracles were uttered by
the Devil, in that many of them were cruel and inhumane, tending to the
sacrificing of men unto them, whereas if they had been from God, they would
have been rather to the preservation, then to the destruction and defacing of
Gods image and workmanship. And when they would seem to be more mild, upon
deliverance from war or danger, they commanded the institution of Gladiatores,
sword-fencers, whereupon ensued much bloodshed and murder. And if they were not
the cause of cruelty, yet of all kind of obscenity, for if they enjoined not
the sword-playes always, yet at other times they commanded Stage Plays, the
effects whereof Saint Augustine describes at large, whereby men grew to such a
height of all lasciviousness, that the Romans de civ. l 4. c 26
and Greeks banished them out of their territories, and made a decree, that all
Stageplayers should die intestate.

4. Lastly it is common in Homer and Virgil and the Philosophers concerning
their Gods, that if they named but Styx or Cocytus, they themselves would be
afraid and tremble, and all the images would be in a sweat, jurato per Stygem
terrorem Deorum, having sworn by Styx the terror of the Gods. Now we know that
no Prince is afraid of his own prison. And Socrates said, that a man might as
well swear by an In Apolog.
Onion or a Leek, as by Jupiter, and used much to inveigh against the Athenian
Gods, affirming them to be none, for which he was convicted: yet Laertius
reports, that not long after his death there happened such a plague, that
they never felt the like before or after. And consulting with the Oracle about
the cause, they were answered, that it was for putting the Innocent to death.
In recompense therefore to Socrates they erected an Image, and ascribed divine
honors to him that had dishonored their Gods: thereby condemning themselves,
their own Religion, and their Gods. For this cause some of them misliked the
Heathen Religion: but not finding a better they would not alter the old. And so
much of Paganism.

CHAP. IX.
Of Judaisme. The positions of the Jews. 1 That the Messiah shall have an
earthly kingdom at Jerusalem, confuted. 2. That Jesus is not the Messiah. The
contrary proved by Jacobs prophecy. Genesis 49. 11. By Daniels seventy two weeks.
Dan. 9. 25. By diverse other reasons. 3. That the Messiah is not yet come. The
contrary proved by sundry arguments.

THe second Religion is Judaisme, or the Religion of the Jews. The controversy
between whom and us Christians is concerning Christ, whom we profess, and they
deny. And because they acknowledge the Old Testament to be Gods word, as well
as we, our proofs to maintain our affirmation shall be out of it, and those
authors which are in most account with them.

The positions which the Jews hold are these.
1. That the Messiah shall have an earthly kingdom, and that this seat of his
court shall be at Jerusalem. 2. That Jesus is not that Messiah. 3. That the
Messiah is not yet come.
1. For the first, if they would give credit to the Caldee paraphrast, and all the ancient Rabbis, as Rabbi Jonathan, Rabbi Simeon, Rabbi Moses, Rabbi
Hakedosh, that lived before the coming of Christ, the controversy would soon be
at an end. but they give most credit to their late writers, who were all moved
with envy aagainst Christ.

2 It was foretold by the Prophet, that the Lord has laid upon him the
iniquity of Esaias. 53. 6. 8.
us all. But this they shift off, saying it was meant of the whole people. But
in a few verses after, the prophet says, Morietur pro populo suo he shall die
for the people. And it were absurd to say, that the people should die for the
people; and therefore it must needs be meant of Christ.

3 It is said in the psalm. They have pierced my hands and my feet. They part
my Psalm. 22. 18.
garments among them, and cast lots upon my vesture. Which words cannot be
understood to be meant of David, but of Chrst.

4. The Prophet says. Rejoice O Daughter Jerusalem, behold thy king comes
zach. 9. 9.
unto thee meek and humble sitting upon an ass etc. And the prophet Daniel
says After 62. weeks, i. e. 70. seavens of years, shall Messiah be cut off.
This the elder Daniel 9. 26.
Jews could not conceive, and Philo Judeus understood it of the sanctification
of the High Priest: but he might have easily gathered, that this place was
meant of the Massias, Math. 11. 3. 2, 7.
by John Baptist sending two of his disciples to Christ, to know whether he was
the Christ or not. But that place of Daniel so troubles the Rabbis, that
Rabbi Moses Ben Nisa fell into blasphemous speeches, and said that the Prophet
was deceived and overseen.

5. The prophet Agge calls him the desire or expectation of the Gentiles: but
if the Messiah should be only king of the Jews, what desire or expectation
could the Gentiles have of him? it being small comfort for a nation to have a
stranger Dent. 17. 15.
to rule over them, and indeed it was a thing forbidden the Isralites in the
Law.

6. Forasmuch as it cannot be denied, that the Messiah should bring felicity to
all the world, how can Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and the dead be benefited by
him, if his kingdom should be upon earth, they being dead many hundred years
before? And in putting this off, by saying, that all true Jews shall return to
life again, they become more absurd then before; for how could that little Land
of Judea, or the City of Jerusalem, or the Temple (which they say should be no
bigger then it was) be able to contain all the Jews that ever were.

7. Lastly, they are by (this position) utterly injurious to the souls of the
faithful, to call them out of a heavenly paradise Abraham's bosom, to an
earthly Paradise.

Their second erroneous tenet is, That Jesus is not that Messiah.

1. It is said in the prophecy of Jacob. The Scepter shall not depart from
Judea, nor a Lawgiver from betwixt his feet, until Shilo come. It is certain,
that before the captivity it was always in Judah, and in the captivity, they
had one of their brethren, who was called Rex captivitatis the king of
Captivity. After the Captivity it continued, till Arostobulus and Hyrcanus
striving for it, they were both dispossessed, and Herod an Idumean placed in
their room, in whose time Christ came according to the prophecy: and then the
Scepter departed quite from Judah. The Jews denied Christ their king: and ever
since have bin subject to the Scepters of several Gentiles.

2 If they object against this prophecy, that the Maccabees were not of the
Tribe of Judah, but of the Tribe of Levi: we answer, that we must distinguish
of the prophecy, Genesis 49. 10.
thus, That either a king or a Lawgiver should be of the Tribe of Judah: and it
is apparently manifest, that there was a Lawgiver in that Tribe till Christ
came. For they confess, that Simon Justus, whose Nune dimittis we have in our
Liturgy, was the last of them, and that ever sincee, the whole company of
their Sanedrim was dispersed, and the number never made up again.

3. And if they understand or conceive that the word (...) does not signify a
Scepter, but a Tribe, and that it is meant, that Judah should be and continue a
Tribe till Shiloh come, they assent to us Christians: for the Tribe of Judah
continued distinct and unconfounded till Christ the true Messiah came: so that
our Savior Jesus was known to be of the Tribe of Judah, of the City of
Bethleem, and of the posterity of David. Nor did the Jews, ever in the Gospel
cavil at this: which they would have attempted, had the confusion of this Tribe
given them just occasion. But not long after Christ's death all the Tribes were
confounded. And the Emperors of Rome, after they had heard, that Ex Judea
nasceretur Dominus orbis, that in Judea the Lord of the world should be born,
presently labored to root out the Tribe of Judah, and forced them to confound
their Genealogies, and upon all miscariages and rebellions of the Jews, slew
many thousands of them, and caused the rest to be dispersed into all coasts
adjoining, or to live in miserable slavery in Palestine.

4 The Prophet Daniel receives an Oracle from God by the Angel, that from the
Deu. 9. 25.
time the Oracle was given, there should be seven weeks, and 62. weeks, and one
week, in the latter half of which last week Christ the Messiah preached, and
was slain and put an end to all sacrifices. Now what these weeks are is showed
in the scripture, that they should signify so many weeks of years, not of
days, so accounting every week for seven years, it makes 49. years: and so
many years was the Temple in building: for three years were spent in providing
materials and gathering themselves together, and 46. years in building, as the
Jews told our Savior. After (...). 2. 20.
the (...) of the second Temple and the walls of Jerusalem, there followed 62
sevens, and one seven. So that from that time, to the Death of the Prince
Messiah were 490 years, or 70 times seven times.

5 The prophet Haggai says That the glory of the latter house shall be greater
then (...). 2. 9.
the glory of the former. Now in the first Temple were glorious things; As the
Ark of the Lord; The Pot of manna; Aarons rod; the shewbread; etc. And the
second Temple had none of these, and yet the prophet says, that the glory of
the Latter should exceed the glory of the former: how this prophecy should
hold, they will never show, unless in the time of Christ the Messiah, whose
presence made it more glorious, then the other things did the former, for we
know that 40 years after our Saviors death the Latter Temple was destroyed.

6 Petrus Galatinus says, that the disciples of Rabbi Hillel considering these
prophecies, (though they lived 50 years before Christ's time) hoped the Messiah
should be born in the age that they lived, being induced thereunto, by the
saying of Esaias in the person of the Lord; I the Lord will hasten it. And
especially by Daniels (...) of the seventy sevens. Esa. 60. 22.
Daniel. 9. 24.


7. That in Esa (...) with (...) final was apprehended by them for a great
mystery, and that (...) in that place signifies 600. for 600 years between
Esayes time, and Christ's.

8. The Jews say further, that the prophecy of the second Temple (which was a
still voice coming from the Lord) should not cease, and that the Temple should
not open, till the Messiah came. And they have confessed, that this voice ceased
in Christ's time, and in Herod's days, and that the veil of the Temple rent in
two pieces, and never after came together.

9. Besides these, the continual sending to and fro, by the Jews and John
Baptist, Esa. 9. 7.
and the disciples questions to our Savior argues, that there was a (...)
expectation Luc. 2. 25. 38.
that the messiah should come at that time. As also the speech of Simeon, his
waiting for the consolation of Israel. And the speaking of Anua, of the
Messiah, Mark. 15. 43.
to all that Looked for redemption in Jerusalem: and Lastly, Joseph of
Arimathea's looking for the kingdom of God to appear, show that in those very
times, many religious men had great hope of comfort to be brought to them by
their Messiah. Lib. 16. 17. 18.


10. Again there were at that time, more then at any other, many counterfeit
and salse Messiah's, either eight or ten as Josephus, testifies. As Herod, from
whom the Herodians, Judas, Theudas, and others, and among them, Bar Cosba the
younger, who was in such estimation among them, that all the Rabbis save one,
confessed him to be the Messiah.

11. Suidas reports, that it was related to Justinian the Emperor by Philip
a Luke 4.
Mat. 11.
merchant of Constantinople, who had the report from one Theodosius a Jew, that
in the Catalogue of the Jews Priests was found (...) Jesus the Son of God and
Mary: and that he had been admitted into the society of the Priests also, else
he could not have been permitted to preach either at Nazareth or Capernaum,
being of the tribe of Judah.

12. To these we may add that which they hold, that after Malachy, in the
second Temple they should have no Prophet; till the Messiah, and that the
Temple should stand, till he should come. And we see that our Savior
prophesied of the Luke 19. 3.
destruction of the Temple which accordingly came to pass.

13. Lastly, that for the crucifying of our Savior, the prophecies of Amos,
and Amos. 2. 6.
Zachary were fulfilled in the eversion of the City and desolation of the
Jews. A (...). 12. 3. 10
thing so strange, that the very Heathen seeing it, said, that the hand of God
was against them. For of it self Jerusalem was so impregnable, as that it might
(...) with the strongest piece in the world; Besides, Vespasian was forced to
forbear the siege a long time, for want of water to refresh his army: in
so much as he offered them not only large proffers of peace, but that they
should set down their own conditions, so they would yield, all which they
stubbornely refused. But it is observed (and certainly it was because of Gods
wrath against the Jews) that in the greatest distress of the Romans for want
of water, upon a sudden the little brook Silo (which for many years had been so
dry, as that men passed over it on foot) did so swell and rise with water,
without any natural cause, that it served abundantly for Vespasians whole army.

And to afflict the Jews the more, the Lord sent such a plague into the City,
that (besides many thousands slain in the siege) they wanted ground within the
walls to bury their dead, and were forced to cast them over: and such a famine,
that they were compelled to eat their own children.

Titus hereupon made the first breach into the city, and that at the brook
Cedron, where the Jews apprehended Christ, and at the same feast in which he
was taken, to wit, the passover. He caused them to be whipped, as they
scourged our Savior, and sold 30 Jews for a (...), as they sold Christ for
thirty denaria or pieces of silver.

In the prophecy of (...) it is said. For three transgressions of Israel, and
for Amos. 2. 6.
four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof, because they sold the
righteous for silver etc. The Jews being urged to tell of whom the prophet
meant this, (having no other shift) say, that it was spoken concerning Joseph,
who was sold by the Patriarchs for silver. But this prophecy was never more
fully accomplished, then in our Savior the true Messiah, and in themselves,
concerning the vengeance. For therefore suffered they that misery before
mentioned and never since have been released, but scattered over the world
almost these 1600 years; hated of all nations, and become little better then
bondslaves, forsaken and scorned by all, insomuch that whereas thy were wont to
hire Rabbis to teach them, the Rabbis are now forced to hire the Jews to be
their Auditors.

The last (...) position or tenet of the Jews is, that the Messiah is not yet

To answer them in this point (besides some of the arguments against their
second error which fit this also) 1. It is said by the prophet, but thou
Bethleem Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands of Judah, yet out
of thee, shall Nica. 5. 2.
he come sorth to me, that is to be Ruler in Israel, whose goings forth have
been from of old, from everlasting. This has been, and is confessed by all, to
be a plain prophecy of the birth of the Messiah in Bethleem. And now there is
no such place as Bethleem, nor any memorial, where it stood: which shows
plainly, that it could be prophesied of none but Jesus, who was born there, and
that he is the Messiah. In which respect they are put to their shifts to make
this answer. That he was born there before the destruction of the second
Temple, but has ever since layen obscure insome place, God knows where, for
they know not: but he will at length manifest himself. But this answer Saint
Augustine and others have sufficiently confuted, though it be in it self scarce
worthy of confutation.

2 Again, Julian the Apostata, thinking to work despite to the Christians,
gave An. Marcellus.
leave to the Jews to reedify the Temple, and they attempting to lay the
foundation of (...)
it, were hindered by flames of fire, that brake out of the earth, which burnt
their timber work, and dispearsed the stones: and though the Emperor (to
encourage them to it again, supplied the Jews diverse times after with money
toward the redifying it, yet shall the fire burst out of the earth and
overthrew that they did.

3. Since which time there arose one, that took upon him to gather together
again, the dispersed Jews, who called himself Moses Cretensis: this man to make
himself great in their opinions, would take upon him to divide the sea, and
with four hundred of his fellows would go through it dry-shod: but he and they
were all miserably drowned, their friends, that stood upon the shore to see the
event, being not able to save one of them.

4. Lastly the time prefixed by their Rabbis, when their Messiah should come,
is expired, and they frustrate of their expectation. The time which some of
them allotted to it was twelve hundred years, some thirteen hundred and
ninety, some more, some less. Some of them affirming, that the world should
continue but six thousand years, which they thus apportioned. Two thousand
years before the Law, two thousand years under the Law to Christ's time, and two
thousand years after Christ, under grace: of which are past above five thousand
five hundred and seventy years already, and therefore the expectation of their
Christ is now vain, and so is their Religion. So that now they are so ashamed
of their former accounts and calculations, by failing of and in them so
grossly, that they forbid all men to make any more, and that on pain of death.
Thus are they given up and led spiritu vertiginis, so that though their eyes be
open, yet they will not see, and their hearts are hardened, that they will not
understand, as was Esa. 44. 18.
prophesied of them long since.

And thus much for Judaisme.
CHAP. X.
Of Mahometanisme. This Religion proved to be false by seven reasons.

The third Religion is that of the Turks and Saracens called Mahometanisme.

THese Sectaries, though they agree with us, that there is but one God, yet in
Mahomet is the last, and must finish all Prophecies.

Against their Religion there are seven demonstrations to prove the falsity of
it.

1. Because it cannot abide the touch; for they hold that it must not be
disputed of on pain of death: no question must be made of it: it must be taken
upon trust: whereas Truth delights in nothing more then in trial. Veritas
nihil veretur, nisi abscondi, it fears nothing more, then that it should (...)
come to light. And in this point, Mahomets disciples are like men that pay
brass for gold, saying it is good, but will not suffer it to be tried. 2. If
ever there were book stuffed with those which are called Aniles fabulae, old
wives tales, it is their Alcaron, which is every where fraught with most
ridiculous untruths. Andreas Maurus a (...), and a Bishop quoteth nine hundred
Sect. 1. c. 8. 15. 15.
untruthes in it, whereof two are in one Section. 1. That the Virgin Mary was
sister to Moses, and 2. That Abraham was the son of Lazarus the Beggar, neither
of them being contemporary by many hundreds of years. 3. Their Doctrine is
carnal and foolish, placing happiness in pleasure taken in things visible, and
sensible, and has many fond relations: as that Mahomet (being in heaven) did
see not only Gods face, but felt his hand, and that they were seventy times
colder then ice. And that the Angels have bodies and heads, and one of them
seven thousand heads. That the Devils are circumcised, and therefore chap. (...)
have bodies. That the stars are nothing else but candles in a round glass
hanging down by chains: and the (...) foolish and absurd doctrines are
contained in the book of their religion. 4. His promises are merely carnal too,
fit for none, but Heliogabalus; such are chap. 35. 52. 54. 62.
those of his paradise, and honors, with the lusts of the flesh. And his
precepts are licentious giving indulgence, to perjury and swearing, to revenge,
and murder accounting it an impious thing non ulcisci injuriam, not to revenge
an injury. Chap. 3.
Their practice confirms their permission of Polygamy: for every man may have
four wives and more Concubines. They favor Adultery, for no 23.
Adulterer is condemned without four witnesses. For the sin against nature, and
coupling with Beasts, they have a toleration, nay, they which offend most this
Chap. 16.
way are reputed the holiest. And for spoiling and robbing of others in via Dei
(as they call it) in the way of God: we see by experience, that it is so common
with them, that it is dangerous travailing in those countries, except there be
an hundred, or two hundred in a company. 5. Mahomets Miracles are set down, but
without witness or possibility of truth. As that he being a child, and
driving cattle (for that was his profession) the Chap. 92.
Angel Gabriel took a lump of blood out of his heart, and closed it again. This
lump he affirmed to be the original sin in man, but Anatomists say, that there
is no such blood in the heart. Another as gross as this is, That he being with
one his of kinsmen abroad in a clear moonshine night, his Cousin requested
him to cause the Moon to come down, and to divide it self: and that the one
half of it, might come into his kinsmans sleeve, and the other into the other
sleeve, and come whole again out of his breast, and then ascend again, which it
did. But it is a great wonder that the Astronomers at that time missed her not
from heaven: seeing they have noted the very least Eclypse: but indeed it was a
private miracle between them two: and a man of mean understanding would
conceive it impossible, that so great a body should come into a little pair of
sleeves. 6. The means of propagating his Religion was unnatural and cruel, that
is by the sword: for God (as he affirms) delivered a sword to him, to compel
Chap. 15.
and force men, that otherwise would not be persuaded to adhere to his
Religion. 7. Lastly, this Religion and Christianity increased not the same way,
for Christianity was propagated by being killed, Turcisme by killing;
Christianity by Truth, the other by perjury; Christianity by the word of God,
the other by the policy of men has increased to that growth and height it is.
And therefore (as we said of the two former, so here) this Religion is false
and to be consemned.
CHAP. XI.
Of Christian religion. The truth thereof in general proved. 1. By the
antiquity of it, out of the Heathen authors themselves. 2. By the continuance
and preservation of it. 3. By the certainty. 4 By the end it leads to, viz. to
God, it gives all honor to him. Deprives man of all. Other reasons. It
restraines carnal liberty, allowed by false Religions; reaches to the heart. It
contains mysteries above man's capacity. Teaches contempt of the world; requires
spiritual worship. Confirmed by miracles beyond exception. Prophecies.

THe last and true Religion is Christianity which being in the last of the four

Saint Peter says, concerning this religion, we have a more sure word of
prophecy, etc. that is, we are certain and assured, that the Scriptures are
true, and so were 2. (...) 1. 19.
they, from whom we received them. And though there be but a small portion of
them immediately from God, yet the rest which were delivered by the Ministry
of Man, were inspired into them that left them to us, by the spirit of God, and
therefore we must hold them as infallible truths. And that the Scriptures and
Christianity are so, is to be proved by four arguments, 1. from the antiquity
of them, 2. from the continuance and preservation of them, 3. from the
certainty of them. 4. From the end whereto they tend, for we are to (...) both
the word of God and Christian religion in all the arguments subsequent, except
some few.

1. Touching the Antiquity, we say, that seeing that a man is to come to God by
religio est copula relationis, religion is the (...) of relation between God
and Man, the Creator and the Creature.

2. Tertullian says, quod primum, id verum, that which is first, is true, and
this De (...) adversus (...).
maxim holds as well in Religion, as in other things. For the Philosophers
say, Prima entia sunt maxim vera, the first essence are most real and true.
Because that as the ttuth is an affection of that, that is, so falsehood is an
affection of that which is not: for falsehood cannot consistere in suo, sed in
alieno, consist in any thing which is its own, but from another. Therefore
falsehood must be after truth. But the Christians religion is in some sort
included in that which the Jews had before Christ, so that (...) Law may be
called the Old Gospel, and the Gospel the new Law. In the Law is Evangelium
absconditum, the Gospel under a vail: in the Gospel is, Lex revelata, the
revealed Law. So that the Jews agreed with us till the coming of Christ, and
then left us.

As for the Heathen Religion, part of their stories, which are the records
thereof, is fabulous and part true.

1. That part which is fabulous began with their gods, and their original:
further then that they cannot go. And Homer and Orpheus write not of them till
after the Trojan war, and lived after the time of Moses above eight hundred
years, and almost three thousand years after the Chronology of the Bible began,
which is testified by diverse of their own writers.

2. And if their fabulous part come short of our religion for Antiquity, then
much shorter must that part needs be which is true. For Varro (who lived not
above fifty years before our Saviors time) says, that the true Story of the
Heathen could not be derived above 700 years before his time. And it is sure
that the most ancient records of theirs which are true, began with the seven
wise men of Greece, of whom Solon was the chief and most ancient: and he was
contemporary with Croesus, he with Cyrus, and Esdras with him. Now Esdras was
one of the last Canonical writers of the old Testament. So that we may safely
conclude this against the Heathen religion, that almost the whole story of the
Bible was written, before any authentic writer or record was extant of the
Heathen story: and most part of it was written before the fabulous part of it
was delivered to them in writing.

Their ancientest Historiographer is Herodotus, who begins his story with
the acts of Croesus. By all which we may plainly perceive, that Christian
Religion is of far greater antiquity then the Heathen. This also we may add,
that whatsoever is either good or true in their Religion was had from the
Jews. For the Druides among the Gauls, and the Bardi (an offspring of them)
derive all theirs from the Greeks, as also the Romans, and the Greeks, from
Cecrops an Egyptian, as also the Carthaginians from Cadmus a Phoenician. Now
Phoenicia bordereth northward upon Jury, and Egypt southward. So that all that
was good in the Heathen Religion must be derived from the Jews.

The wise men of Greece enquiring of their Oracles, how they might get wisdom,
and from whence the knowledge of arts was to be had, received this answer, that
it was to be had from the Chaldees. Solus utique Chaldeus sapiens, the Chaldean
was truly the only wise man. Which speech in the Greek idiotisme denotes
some particular part of the Chaldeans, which was the Jews. For Abraham coming
from Chaldea, was reputed a Chaldean, and the Jews from him, were termed
Chaldeans.

Orpheus also the Poet says, that when God (being angry with mankind) had
destroyed all, he revealed all knowledge and wisdom uni Chaldeo', to one
Chaldean only. And Plato in his Epimenides referred all learning uni Barbaro.
If we enquire who by this Chaldeus or Barbarus was meant, the Egyptians tell
us, by calling him Theut, which in the Chaldee language signifies a stranger,
which in all probability must be applied to Abraham, who was by God called out
of Chaldea. And Eusebius (out of Manetho) testifies, that Abraham was had in
such reverence in those parts, that their chiefest Exorcisms were wont to be
per deum Abraham, by the god Abraham. And the same Manetho alleges, that in
many places of those countries, in their Temples, and elsewhere, his name was
written, and engraven for memory of him.

Again the verses of Phocylides the Poet (who lived in the fifty ninth
Olympiad) seem to be translated verbatim out of the Law of Moses, and may be
particularly pointed at, in Deuteronomy, Numbers, and Exodus.

But to examine their own records, Plutarch says that Solon fetched all his
wisdom from the Egyptians, and Plato his from Chaldea. Strabo says, that
Pythagoras had daily conference in Mount Carmel, and that in that mount were
ambulachra Pythagorea, Pythagoras walks, and there be some of the Heathen that
report him Lib. 16.
to be circumcised.

Eusebius says, (out of one Clearchas a Peripatetick) that though Aristotle
were Lib. 4 de praepar Evang.
never in Egypt, yet he daily conser'd with an Egyptian or a Jew. And Demetrius
Phalereus (that was Library keeper of Ptolomeus Philadelphus in Egypt) told
him, that he heard the Disciples of Aristotle say, that diverse Philosophers and
Poets had attempted to translate the Old Testament into Greek. And in the same
book, in the Epistle of Aristobulus, it is said, that part thereof was
translated before the Persian Empire began, long before it was translated by
the Septuagint, or seventy men. But it appears, that it has pleased God in a
most strange manner to leave some Register or Chronicle in every famous Nation
of it: as among the Egyptians, Manetho: Sanchoniathon among the Phoenicians:
Berosus among the Chaldeans: In Asia Minor, Rabbi Abidelus: among the Persians
Megasthenes, etc. In Herodotus we shall find the story of Sennacherib: the
edict of Cyrus, and almost the whole prophecy of Daniel, though somewhat
corrupted. Lib. 2.


It is storied by Josephus, that Alexander being to travail toward Persia, and
hearing that the Jews denied to pay him tribute, and for some other affronts,
(as he conceived) came toward Jerusalem, with purpose utterly to destroy the
Jews. Whereupon Jaddua the High Priest in his rich and white ornaments,
accompanied with other Priests, met him in the way. As Soon as Alexander cast
his eye (...) Jaddua, and remembered that in a vision he had seen one in all
resemblance like (...) him, who had encouraged him to attempt the conquest of
the world; and (as (...) he had been a God) suddenly alighted, and (...) down
worshipped before him, but being admonished thereof by Parmenio, he said; he
worshipped that God whose Priest he was, and afterward, when Jaddua had showed
him, and expounded (...) Prophecy concerning his Monarchy, he gave large
privileges to the Jews, and dismissed them honorably.

After his days by the means of Ptolemy in requital of the Interpreters pains
taken in translating the Bible, the Jews Religion was much propagated. Laertius
in the life of Epimenides says, that the Athenians consulting with the Oracle,
concerning the cause of a great plague among them, were answered, that they
were not to sacrifice to their own gods (as in the Acts) but to another which
was above Acts 17. 23.
theirs, and had sent this plague among them: and withal that they must appease
him by Sacrifice. But the plague nevertheless continuing, they sent again to
know, where they should sacrifice: the answer was, they should let the beasts
go voluntarily, and where they staid they should sacrifice. The horses hereupon
were turned loose with sacrifices upon their backs, and they stayed in the
street of Mars, in a fair broad place, where they built an Altar, and dedicated
it (...), to the unknown God. The like is in the Roman story.

The Romans in memory of a victory obtained of their enemies, erected a Temple
to Bacchus, calling it Templum pacis (...), the everlasting Temple of peace.
And afterward consulting with their Oracle, how long it should continue,
received this answer, Donec peperit virgo, while a virgin should bring forth a
child, which because they conceived would never be, they called it eternum. But
at the time when Christ was born, in the shutting up of an evening the Temple
fell to the ground of it self.

And thus much for the Antiquity of Christian religion, and consequently for
the truth of it, according to the Maxim of Philosophers. Quod primum, id verum
that is true, which was first.

The second way to prove, that Christianity is the true Religion, is the
Continuance, and preservation of the scriptures, (...) that Religion, is
grounded.

And this is so miraculous, as that no Religion devised or framed by Man, or
any false God cannot show the like. For it is plain, that the Jews were more
under subjection to other kingdoms, and oftener in Captivity and bondage, then
any other Nation in the world. As under the Egyptians, Philistines, Moabits,
Amorits, Assyrians, Persians, Graecians, Romans, etc. And yet, though all the
Nations about them bare them deadly hatred, and sought to suppress their
Religion, and that Antiochus the Great bent himself wholly to abolish the
Copies of the Law, yet were they so wonderfully preserved, that they perished
not. We see, that the works of Philosophers, Lawyers, Physicians, and the like
who were accounted excellent in their professions, which were highly esteemed,
and for preservation whereof, all means have been used, yet many of them have
been lost, many come into the world unperfect, and many very corrupt: yet on
the other side, though the Jews were a people very odious and contemptible to
other nations, and though much labor has been to suppress their Law; yet it
stands firm and incorrupt, withont addition or diminution, whole and perfect,
notwithstanding all the worlds malice. And as of the Bible, so may it be said
of their Religion, though they were transported into other Countries, and in
Captivity to strange nations, they never changed it, whereas experience has
taught us, that with changing countries, people commonly, or many times change
their Religion.

The third proof is, the Certainty of our Religion. Whereas all other Religions

1. It is most sure, that what Religion soever has his original from Man,
grows by little and little, by degrees, to that which they call perfection:
But at the delivery of the Law of God, all that was necessary for the Church
before Christ was delivered most absolutely by Moses, all the duties toward
God or man required in that state of the church, being contained in his books,
and to which nothing is or could be added, or detracted from it, and in the
decalogue is the sum of all moral duties; for all may be reduced to some of
those heads. 2. For Contradiction, Man's Laws (as the Apostle speaks) are sealed
with Yea 2 Cor. 1. 19. 20.
and Nay; but the Law of God, with Yea and Amen And the Fathers prove, that all
Contradictions which seem to be in the scriptures, may be reconciled by the
several Rules of contradictions in Logique. 3. That theirs are Counterfeit may
appear by this, that the best of their Authors have obscured their works, and
kept them from the view of as many as they could, for fear of discovery of
their falsities: and the best of their works, have been corrupt in some points,
and gone abroad into the world, under the name of false Authors, and sometime
those which have been supposititious or counterfeit have so nearly resembled
the style of the Authors, whom they have so (...), that they could hardly be
distinguished from those that which were his own. But Gods Daut. 31. 26. 17. 18
rule in giving his Law was contrary to theirs: for he will have a Copy in the
side of the Ark, another for the Prince, one for the High Priest, and for every
Priest one, and the like for every Tribe: and commanded the people to have
chief sentences of it expressed in their hangings, in their frontlets, in the
fringes of their garments, in the eyes of all men, that whatsoever evil should
betide them, it might not be one whit impaired: nor would so many worthy and
wise men have dyed for it, as did in the time of (...) had they suspected it o
have been counterfeit in the least degree. 4. That theirs is Questionable, is
thus proved. In all theirs, something has continually in succeeding ages been
altered and amended, something abrogated, and something added. But in the Law
of God there has been no such thing. For none of the Prophets ever went about
to correct that which Moses commanded, or to add to it, but in all their
writings they have confirmed and approved, what he did.
The (...) way or argument to prove that Christianity is the true Religion, is

1. From the end whereto it tends. Whatsoever man produces or brings forth
(as unregenerate) it must needs have proprias hominis passiones, the proper
passions of a man, and they will desire and seek to have man their end. But
Christian Religion makes God the end, and acknowledges all things to come from
him, as Saint James speaks, and therefore attributes all honor to God.
Finis veroe Religionis, Jam. 1. 17.
est honor (...), the end of true Religion is Gods honor, and professes, that
as God is the author of all essence, so also of all good, therefore all honor
is to be given to him, none else must share with him init. But so does no other
Religion but the Christian, all other seek man's honor, either in whole, or in
part.

2. The Poets and Philosophers have much stood upon the natural power and
abilities of man's free will, and given him his igniculos and semina naturae,
sparks and seeds of nature, and thereby make him author of his own perfection
by (...) and increasing what nature has bestowed on him. But our Religion
acknowledges nothing good to be man's, but that all good comes from God, and
must be referred to him. Again, in God there must be an unity, therefore that
Religion is false, that acknowledges any more Gods then one. And one of their
own says, that Moses Diod Sie.
went out of Egypt merely, because he would worship but one God. The Turks,
though they seem to hold that there is but one God in Essence, yet when it
comes to this point, that there is but one God that does good, then they will
have their Mediators to that God, and so consequently many Gods: but we have
but one Mediator.

3. Now because we hold, that there is an innate and natural darkness in every
unregenerate man, therefore it cannot be, but that in the Religion prescribed
by man, something that is good is not commanded, and something that is evil is
not prohibited, and but that some lawful things are omitted, and some unlawful
permitted: which we see plainly among the Athenians: for with them, the breach
of faith was of so small account, that Graeca fides the Greek faith grew into a
proverb. So likewise by that of Spartaneum furtum the Lacedaemonians theft, we
may gather the little regard they had to punish that sin. And so likewise by
the Lupercalia, Floralia, and Bacchanalia among the Romans, what liberty they
took in wantonness and excess, may easily appear. No Nation of the Gentiles
observed the whole Decalogue, or indeed any of the Commandments entirely; nay
they were so far from keeping that of Neconcupisces, as that they thought
Concupiscence no sin: and for the rest, though they had some particular Laws
respectively against the breach of some commandment, as against adultery,
incest, and the like, yet they dispensed (...).
with them, as persons, time, and place, ministered occasion to them. Which we
may see in the story of a King of Persia, who being desirous to marry his own
sister, and knowing that there was a Law against incest, brake his mind to the
Magi, desiring their opinions: they told him, that though there were such a
Law, yet there was another, that the King might do what he would. Whereas our
Religion is so far from dispensing either with that, or other the Laws of God,
that the saints of God had rather suffer death, then them to be broken; as in
the case of John Baptist, who told King Herod, Tibinon licet it is not lawful
for thee to have thy brothers wife, though Mat. 14. 4
it cost him his head for saying so.

4. Another argument to prove the truth of our Religion is, that both it, and
the Scriptures by which we are guided, go to the heart, whereas other Religions
pierce not the skin. These stop the streams, theirs make the Lusts of the
flesh, but affections, Adiaphora indifferent things to be avoided or not, ours,
by prohibiting Concupiscence, stop the fountain of all sins.

5. Again, it is a necessary consequence, that, that which cannot come from
man, comes from God. But there are some things in Scriptures which are truly
Metaphysicall, and exceed the capacity of man, as that Jehovah Elohim is one
God and three persons, trinity in unity, that God should become man: that God
should take upon him to be the redeemer of Mankind, and that by his stripes and
suffering punishment man should be healed: that God should create a world, and
out of that, gather a Church to himself. These things and more cannot be
comprehended by man, and are not to be conceived but only by our Religion.

6. Not to conceal the faults of a man's parents or friends, or to speak
against a man's own country, stock, kindred, or his own self, is a thing
altogether unnatural, and cannot come into any, but by a supernatural power.
But we see, that Moses, when no necessity compelled him, spared (...) ot his
own stock, but spoke against his brother Aaron, for making the Golden Calfe,
nor his sister Miriam in the case of murmuring, no, nor his own self at the
waters of strife, and committed the same to writing, that Posterity should take
notice of these things: Yea, and dispossessed his own children from succeeding
him in the Magistracy, constituting Josuah in their stead: these acts cannot
agree with the natural man, but must needs proceed from a higher cause:
therefore the writers of these Scriptures, must of necessity be inspired by God
himself.

7. Whereas the whole scope of Philosophers, and of the Law makers among the
Heathen was, to teach how Princes might enlarge their territories, and taught
it as a point of wisdom, to win by all means the favor of princes, and great
men; this Religion teaches contempt of life, the world and worldly honors in
respect of God: and such was the practice of the prophets, who were so far from
seeking. the favor of Princes, that they reproved them to their faces, when
Gods cause was in hand. Therefore this Religion is spiritual, and proceeds; not
from man.

8. Again, we know that as God is a spirit, so must his worship be spiritual
and this is the scope of the Scriptures, that God be honored without Images or
shadows. And though in the unity of God, that there is but one God to be
worshipped, false Religion may agree with the true, yet in this point it does
not, their Religion and the worship thereof being only corporeal, not
spiritual. For though in the Old Testament there be many Ceremonial worships
prescribed, yet God disclaimeth Esa. 1.
them all, yea he abhors them, if they be performed without the inward
Psalm. 51. 17.
worship; and sets down the way of worship, wherein he most delights, namely
in a broken and contrite heart and spirit. Therefore as man is bodily, and his
motions fall within the compass of the Body, so is that worship, which comes
from him, bodily, whereas Gods worship is spiritual, and not corporal only.

9. To these may be added by us, that we had Miracles and Oracles to confirm
our Religion, as they did to strengthen theirs. And those beyond theirs in
diverse respects.

1. The Miracles mentioned in Scriptures were not done in a corner, but openly;
as were they which were done by Moses, upon Pharaoh in the sight of his
servants. 2. They were notfrivolous or vain, but profitable and beneficial. 3
They were not imitable nor (...) by Magique or man's art: for what Magician can
divide the Sea, or cause the Sun to stand, as in Josuahs time, or make the Suns
shadow go back, as in the dial of Ahas, or to rain Manna, as in the
wilderness; 2 Timothy 3. 8.
Jannes and Jambres are not able to stand against Moses.
2. And for our Oracles they were not as the Oracles of the Gentiles, that
spoke placentia, pleasing things, or, as they themselves say, did speak such
things as their Kings would have them speak: nor are they ambiguous or
doubtful, such as theirs, that needed Delium interpretem, some Apollo to
explain them: and in that respect (as Porphyrius testifies of them) they ever
had their Postica, back-doors, evasions to help them. But ours are void of
flattery, and are certain, some of them being (...). 9. 27.
fullfilled 500. some 1000. years, some 3000. years after they were, uttered,
as the enlarging of Japhets tents, (which happened not till the calling of the
Gentiles) and the like.

So much to prove the truth of both Testaments, as our religion agrees with
that of the Jews. Now follow some reasons proper to the confirmation of the
truth of Christian Religion.

CHAP 12.
Special reasons for the Christian Religion as diff ring from the Jewish. It
purges the soul, shows that God is (...) The testimony of the Apostles and
(...); the knowledge of what they wrote, their Honesty. The credit of the
story. Testimony from Pagans. The star at Christ's birth. The cross sacred with
the Egyptians. The miracles at Christ's death. The progress of Christianity, by
weak means, opposed by power and learning; contrary to flesh and blood; the
excellency of the promises, power in conversions. The truth of Christ's
Miracles. The constancy of Martyrs, The ends of the apostles. The Devils
testimony against himself.

Saint Augustine (out of (...) ( de regressu animae) one of the greatest
enemies that Lib. 10.
ever the Church of God had) says, that there is no true Religion, that
confesses de Civ. dei c. 32.
not, that the soul of man (...) to be purged, and adds, that the Platonists
received from the Caldeans, that the soul of man, non potuit perfici (...) per
principia: and we know that Platos principles were (...), the Father the mind
and love, which was an enigmatical speech of our Trinity. But no Religion
teaches To. 8. 3.
the purgation of the soul, but ours. And it teaches, that the word took the
similitude of sinful flesh to purge away the sin of Man. Therefore our
Religion is the true, all other are merely fabulous. For their Exorcismes and
sacrifices are merely corporeal, not spiritual, and the Christians God is not
like the Heathen Gods.

2 God is (...) a lover of man, he delights not in cutting of throats, or
burning men to ashes, like to the Devils, to whom virgins, babes, old and
young men were sacrificed. And the sacrifices in the old Law were used in these
2 respects. 1 To be Types of things in the Gospel. 2 To admonish men, that they
have deserved to be slain and sacrificed. But God is so far from the
sacrificing of men to him, that he himself came down from heaven, and suffered
for us, offering himself a sacrifice for our sins, and what greater love can
there be, then that a man should give his life for that he loves, there can be
no greater (...) then this.

3, For the credit of the Gospel, we have Evangelists and Apostles for
witnesses; And in witnesses two things are required, Knowledge and Honesty.

1. For skill and knowledge, That which our witnesses have left us upon record,
is not taken upon trust, but they related it as eye witnesses. And none of
theirs, either Homer, Plato, or any of them can say, as Saint John said, That
which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked
upon, and our hands have handled. For they had theirs from others, and but upon
bare report. Besides, neither any of their ancient or latter Historians, though
they hated the writers of the Scriptures, durst at any time offer to set pen to
paper against them. 2. For the honesty of our witnesses, there can be no better
reason or proof given, then that which Tacitus gives to confirm the testimony
of an honest witness, which is, Quibus nullum est mendacii (...), that have no
reward for telling an untruth. And certainly, the Evangelists and Apostles had
nothing for their pains, nay they were so far from that, as that they sealed
their testimonies, with the blood of Martyrdom. 3. For the credit of the Story
itself. We know, that the Sybils oracles were in so great credit among the
Heathen, that they were generally believed. Now, if they be true, which we have
of them, as there is no question but many of them are, (diverse of which we refer
to Christ, being mentioned in their own writers, Virgil, Cicero and 1 John. 1.
1.
others.) it will follow, that nothing can make more in their esteem, for the
credit and truth of the Nativity, life and death of Christ, then their Oracles,
for we may see almost every circumstance in them. And by reading their verses
diverse of their learned men were converted to Christianity, as Marcellinus
Secundanus and others.
4. Tacitus and Suetonius say, that about Christ's time it was bruited through
the world, that the king that should rule over all the world, should come out
of Jury, and for this cause it was that not only Vespasian, but Augustus and
Tiberius (who had heard the like) had a purpose to have destroyed all the Jews,
even the whole nation of them, because they would be sure to include that Tribe
out of which this king should come.

5 Coelius Rhodiginus and Volateranus upon their credits leave us this in their
writings that among the Monuments of Egypt was found an Altar dedicated Virgini
pariturae, to a Virgin that should have a child, like to the Temple of peace
before mentioned, that should stand Donec peperit virgo, until a virgin should
bring forth a child. And Postellus testifies from the Druides, that they had an
Altar, with this inscription Ara primo-genito Dei, an Altar to the first
begotten of God.

6. Suetonius says, that in such a year (which was the year before Christ's
birth) in a fair day, at the time of a great concourse of people at (...),
there appeared a great Rainbow (as it were) about the Sun, of a golden color,
almost of equal brightness with the Sun. The Augur's being demanded the
reason, answered, that God would shortly (...) humanum genus, visit mankind.
And upon the day that our Savior was born three Suns appeared in the
firmament, which afterward met and joined into one. The Augur's being likewise
questioned about this apparition, their answer was, that he was then born, whom
Angustus, the people, and the whole world should worship: whereupon (as it is
storied) Augustus at the next meeting of the Senate, gave over his title of
dominus orbis terrarum Lord of the whole world, and would be so styled no more.

7. But the most remarkable thing that happened at Christ's birth was the star
mentioned in the Gospel, and confessed by the Heathen themselves to be stella
maxim salutaris, the happiest star that ever appeared for mankind. Pliny
calls it, Stella crinita sine crine A blazing or hairy star without hair.
Upon the appearance Lib. 2. c. 15.
and due consideration of which star many were converted to the truth, as
Charemon among the stoics, and Challadius among the Platonists, who meditating
upon the strangeness of it, went into Jury and became Proselytes.

8. Now concerning the death of Christ we find, that the ancient Egyptians,
(who used no letters, but Characters or Hieroglyphiques) when they would
express vitam aeternam, everlasting life, they did it by the sign of the
Cross, whereby they deciphered the badge of our salvation, which concurred
with the manner of Christ's death.

9. The next is, the two wonders or strange accidents mentioned by the Holy
Ghost at the death of our Savior 1. The general Earthquake. and 2. the
universal Eclypse of the Sun, so often cast in the teeth of the Heathen.

1 For the first, they are not ashamed to confess it. As (...) himself, and
Trallianus Lib. 2. c. 25.
and Phlegon say, that it came not of any natural cause. For in nature, every
thing that is moved must have an (...) somewhat to stay upon, but this
Earthquake went through the whole world. 2 For the Eclypse, many were converted
by reason of the strangeness of it, as Dionysius and others. For all (...) of
the Sun are particular, this general and universal. This happened at the feast of
the Passover which was 14a Lunae, the fourteenth day of the Moon, when it was
just at the full, which is clean opposite to the Rules of Astronomy, and man's
reason.
10. It is reported, that in the reign of Tiberius, presently upon this
Eclypse, there was a general defect of Oracles. Of which argument Plutarch has
a whole Treatise; in which he says, that a man in great credit with the
Emperor sailing by the Cyclades, heard a voice, as it were, coming out of
those Islands, saying, that the great God Pan was dead. The Emperor hearing
this report, sent for the Augurs to know who this Pan should be, but they could
give him no satisfaction Niceph. l. 1. c. 17.
herein. And one asking counsel at the Oracle at Delphos about these things was
told, that it was (...) Puer Hebreus, an Hebrew child, that had silenced them.

11. (...), Tertullian and Justin Martyr testify, so does Eusebius, that (...)
Tero. c. 5. in Apolog.
wrote to Tyberius, about Christ's miracles (after his death) and that he died,
and suffered as an innocent person. Whereupon Tiberius wrote to the Senate,
commanding them Eus. l. 2. c. 2.
to deifie him. But the Senate refused, because Pilate had written to Tiberius
and not to them. A chief man in this opposition was Sejanus, who afterward
came to a miserable end.

12. The next, and none of the least general arguments to prove the truth of
Christian Religion, is the progress of it. For whereas nature and reason teach
us, that in every action fit Instruments must be had, and used, or else the
action will prove defective and vain: and that the matter must be well fitted
and disposed before we can work it: in this case there were neither. For in the
eye of man, there could be no unfitter instruments then the Apostles, they
being rude, unlearned, and most of them Mechanique Men: And for the matter to
work upon, they had it altogether unprepared, nay clean against them. For the
Jews, continued the hatred to the Disciples, which they had born to the
Master, continually persecuting them. And the most learned among the Gentiles,
were the greatest opposite to that which they endeavored (namely the
propagation of the Gospel) as might be: as,

Vlpian the greatest Lawyer, who wrote many books against it and the
Christians, Galen the greatest Physician, Plotinus the greatest Platonist,
Porphyrius the greatest Aristotelian, Libanius a great writer in the Greek
tongue, Lucian a great scoffer, and Julian the great Sorcerer, who not only
made Dialogues between Christ and Peter, to breed hatred and contempt against
Christianity, but (being Emperor) bent all his force against it, prohibiting
Christian schools, etc. Besides, if we consider the ten bloody Persecutions,
wherein many thousands of Martyrs suffered, and that in most horrid and
barbarous manner, and kinds. To which if we add (which was touched before)
the unaptnesse of the instruments, and the matter (the World) so rigid, ill
disposed, and harsh to work upon, and yet to have the work effected, it cannot
but be confessed, that Christianity is the true Religion, and that magna est
veritas, and praevalet, great is the truth, and prevails.

13. In the next place, if we consider how averse and unpleasing to flesh and
blood the precepts of this Religion are, we must confess the premises to be
true. For they give us not leave to be Libertines, or licentious and carnal, as
the Religion of the Turk, of which we spoke before. For instead of taking
revenge of our enemies for injuries done unto us, we are bound by them to love
our enemies, and to speak good of them that persecute us. Instead of committing
folly with a Woman, we must not so much as cast our eye upon a woman, to lust
after her, there is not the least thought Mat. 5. 28.
left at our pleasure. Non concupisces. Instead of covetous heaping up of
riches, we must leave all for the truths sake.

14. The promises contained in the Scriptures to them that shall observe this
Religion, are not of the nature of those in the Religion of the Epicures and
Turks, etc. that is, honor, preferment, wealth, pleasure in this World, and
the like; but the contrary, Mat. 10. 17.
as, They shall whip and scourge you; they shall bind and lead you whither
Mark 13. 11. (...). 34.
you would not; take your Cross and follow me, and leave all and follow me.
But this a man would think were not the way for sequimini me, follow me, but
discedite a me, depart from me; rather a deterring and disheartning, then any
manner of persuading. And in this there is a great resemblance between the
Creation and the Regeneration. In the first, something was made of nothing, and
here nothing to confound something, that we may plainly see and (...), that it
is digitus Dei, qui hic operatur, the finger of God that brings this to
pass, that strength should be confounded by weakness, something by nothing.
Therefore this Religion cannot be but Divine.

15. Again, if we consider the times when Mahomet began to broach his forged
Religion, we shall find it to be in a dissolute time, a time of idleness and
ignorance, when Heraclius and Constans ruled the Empire, the first being an
incestuous Prince, one that married his brothers daughter, and exasperated the
Saracens, in denying them pay in his wars: the other being a Monothelite, and
bloody, having murdered his brother, both of them giving opportunity to the
Saracens, not only to enlarge their territories, but to propagate their
Religion. And if we shall observe the Ecclesiastical story well, we shall find
that Age very much destitute of learned and pious men. Whereas on the contrary,
when Christianity began and prevailed, the world was never so full of eyes,
never so many learned men, as the Scribes and Pharisees, the Greek
Philosophers, etc. yet it pleased God to work upon the hearts of many of them,
in converting them to it; as upon Paulinus, Clemens, Origin, Augustine,
Ambrose, and others, especially many of the Jewish Priests before these. Acts
6. 7.

16. And indeed Conversions are a great argument of the truth of Religion. The
most memorable whereof we see in S. Paul, who was a zealous Pharisee, who not
only had a warrant from the Counsel at Jerusalem to apprehend and imprison all
sorts of people addicted to Christianity, but was a principal actor in the
martyrdom of Saint Stephen. And yet he (neglecting the preferment he was like
to come to, by this his forwardness) was content upon a sudden, to expose
himself to all dangers and disgrace, to whippings, perils by sea and land, etc.
and to embrace this, as the true Religion. And if any say, he aimed at honor
and esteem among Christians, his practice shows the contrary: for when the men
of Lyaconia would have sacrificed to him and Barnabas, with great zeal he
opposed it, they rent their clothes and ran in amongst them, and told them,
they were men like themselves, so far were they from vain glory.

Insomuch as Porphyrius said of him, that it was great pity, that so great a
Scholar, and so near to preferment, should have been converted to Christianity.
The like may Hier.
be said of Origin after him, the fairest for preferment of any in his time,
who being scholar to Ammonius, and preferred by him before Plotinus (afterward
loaded with honors in the Commonwealth) yet he was content to leave all, and
to betake himself to a poor Catechists place in Alexandria, where he was every
minute in danger of his life. Never in any other Religion appeared the like
examples of life and manners, as in those of the Christian Religion, as of
fasting, abstinence, continence, justice, repentance, fortitude, and other holy
virtues; insomuch as Plotinus (an unpartial witness) admiring their fortitudes
said of them, Soli Christiani mortis contemptores, Christians are the only
despisers of death.

17. It was an objection of the Jews we know, that our Savior wrought his
miracles, Ep. ad Aug.
malis artibus, that he cast out Devils by Beelzebub. But the heathen
Philosopher Longinus was of another belief. For, says he, They say that your
Savior wrought his miracles by the skill he learnt in magic while he was in
Egypt, but I hardly believe it. For I reason thus with my self: If he were a
Magician, and wrought by inferior spirits, he could not triumphare de diis,
triumph over the gods. And we may reason thus with ourselves, that if he and
his followers wrought this way, they would never have commanded such austerity
of manners and life, and forbid all such unlawful means. But sure it is, that
the Christians of the Primitive Church were of such innocent life, that Pliny
the second testifies to the Emperor Trajan, that there were never more
innocent people then they: and gave him counsel, that if any of them were
accused for Christianity he should enquire after them, because it was contrary
to the laws of the Empire, otherwise, that he should forbear to trouble them,
if there were no accuser.

18. The next general reason to prove the truth of Christianity is, the
constancy of those that suffered for it: not only of men able, and of strength
to endure misery, but of old and feeble men, weak and frail women and young
children: and that in so ambitious a manner, as that they conceived they could
attain to no greater honor, then to receive the Crown of Martyrdom in defense
of it. As we may see in the story of the woman with the child in her arms,
that crossed the Pro-Consuls horse hastily, and being asked the reason,
answered, lest she should come too late to suffer with the other Christians,
whose names he had in his bill to be put to death, for I also (said she) am a
Christian.

Tertullian has an excellent passage concerning this constancy of Christians:
Nature In Apolog.
(says he) teaches every man to be touched with shame or fear for the evil he
commits, and therefore malefactors desire to hide themselves, to shun
discovery, trembling for fear of apprehension: Being taken and accused, they
deny the fact, and confess not easily though tortured. They lament when they
are condemned, and rage against themselves, imputing it to the malignity of
fate, or their stars, and renounce the fact, as knowing it to be evil. But
Christians do not so, none of them is ashamed, none of them repents, but in
that he was a Christian no sooner. If any man take notice that he is so, he
glories: if he be accused and interrogated, he conconfesseth freely and
voluntarily; being condemned, he is thankful. What evil is in all this? What,
is it evil that he has no shame, fear, denial, repentance, or lamentation?
What evil is it when the guilty person rejoices? whose glory it is to be
accused, and whose punishment is his happiness, etc. Now there is no sect of
the Philosophers, but one Edict commanding it to be left upon pain of death
would dash it, as it did in the case of Pyrrho and his fellows: but no Edict
could, or has ever Glenced this Religion: No (...), either by pen or sword
could ever suppress it, but the Christians ever tired and made their
persecutors weary.

19. Another argument is, the horrid end of the opposers of Christianity. For
all the opposers and persecutors of Christians, from and before the first
persecution under Claudius, to the tenth under Dioclesian, and all the
Emperors that signed the Edicts against Christians, came to fearful,
miserable, and untimely ends, except only Libanius the Philosopher, that was
converted to Christianity by S. Basil. As Herod, eaten with lice, Judas hanged
himself, (...) died in exile, Sejanus had a traitors death, etc. So that one
(alluding to the bad success of persecutors) said to an Emperor, Parce nobis,
si non nobis, pace tibi, si non tibi, Carthagini. Spare us, if not us, yet thy
self, if not thy self, yet be good to Carthage.

20. The Devils testimony against himself may be another argument. For it is a
maxim in Law, that how ill soever the witness be disposed, yet his testimony
is to be taken, cum (...) in dedecus suum, when that which he testifies is
against his (...). 5. c. 18.
own reputation. And Zozomen has a story, that Julian the Apostata being at
Antioch, and desirous to know why the Oracle at Daphnes in the suburbs of that
City had not given answer as formerly it had done, went thither, and having
offered his sacrifices, the Oracle, or the Devil rather in it, answered, that
he could not satisfy his expectation, till the body or tomb of Babylas the
martyr were removed, so hard a matter it was for the Devil to do any thing
there, where the bones and ashes of a poor Christian lay. And Tertul
challengedthe Emperor Severus (who raised the fifth persecution against the
Christians) concerning his religion, saying, Suffer me to come into your
Temple, and have conference with any of the spirits in the images there, and if
I or any Christian force it not to confess as much as the foul spirit in the
Gospel confessed, and to come out of the image, let your religion prevail, and
ours take the foil. And surely the Emperor had taken that large offer, had he
not feared the event.

21. Lastly, Plotinus confesses, as Cyprian and Origin report, that Apollonius
Thyaneus, and other of the Heathen, attempting to raise the images of Jupiter,
Mars, etc. and effected it: but they all confessed, that endeavoring to raise
the image of Christ, they and their spirits were forced away with confusion.
This also (to close up this point) may be added: that their gods were afraid of
Styx, but now we have found him before whom Styx itself, and all the powers of
Hell do fear and tremble.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the two chief parties that lay claim to Christian Religion, Papists and
Protestants. Their difference about interpretation of Scriptures. The Churches
authority in expounding Scriptures. An additional observation out of the
Authors other works. Rules about the sense of the Scriptures. Means for
finding out the true sense: other means controverted. Addition about the
Churches power in matters of faith, whether infallible. Decrees of Councels,
Consent of Fathers. The Pope not infallible.

ANd now having found out the true way, and being thus far entered into it, we
are come where it is divided into two. For there are two sorts of Christians
that lay claim to the true way, and each party pleads possession of it, each
thinking the other to tread in a by-path, and to be out of the right way. We
will therefore examine, which of the two are in the right.

Christian Religion, as it now stands in these parts of the World, consists of
Papists and Protestants. It will not be amiss therefore, because the Papists
build upon the Word of GOD as do the Protestant, to examine the main point
between them in difference, which is about the interpretation of it: and to
whom this interpretation belongs properly.

Hear what the sense of this reverend Author was in his latter years,
concerning Addition 1.
points that are manifest, and matters controverted, in his sermon on 1 Timothy
3. 16. page 18, 19. concerning points clear and (...).
Blessed be God that among diverse other mysteries, about which there are so
many mysts and clouds of controversy raised in all ages, has yet left us some
clear, and without controversy, manifest and yet great, great and yet manifest:
a false conceit is crept into the minds of men to think the points of religion
that be manifest, to be certain petty points, scarce worth the learning. It is
not so. Those that are necessary he has made plain, those that are not plain,
not necessary. This were a mystery, yea a great one, (Religion has no greater)
yet manifest, and in confesso with all Christians. A way of peace there shall
be whereof all parties shall agree, even in the midst of a world of
controversies. That there need not such ado in complaining, if men did not
delight rather to be treading mazes, then to walk in the ways of peace; for
even still such a way there is, which lies fair enough, and would lead us sure
enough to salvation, if leaving those other rough labyrinths we would be but
shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace. Yea further the Apostle does
allure us, that if whereunto we are come, and wherein we all agree, we would
constantly proceed by the rule, those things wherein we be otherwise minded,
even them would God reveal to us. Ephesians 6. 15. that is, he makes no
controversy, but controversy would cease, If conscience were made of practice
of that which is out of controversy. Phil. 3. 15.

The Papitts hold that the Scriptures are to be interpreted by one of these
four ways. 1. Either by the Fathers. 2. Or Councels. 3. Or the Church. 4. Or
the Pope, whom they call the chief Father of the Church. Concerning which we do
partly agree, and partly differ from them.

1. We hold that there is a certain and infallible rule, viz. the Word of God,
whereupon a man may rely, else we may begin to build, but not upon a Rock, and
then our building will be subject to be overthrown and beaten down with every
blast of false doctrine.

2. That the Scriptures (as Saint Peter tells us) not being of any private
interpretation, 2 Pet. 2. 20.
we are to beware that every man interpret it not after his own fancy, because
(as the same Apostle speaks elsewhere of Saint Paul's epistles) some things 3.
19.
are hard in them to be understood, which they which are unlearned and unstable
may wrest, which ought not to be: but we are (as Hilary says) refer sensum
Scripturis, non auferre, to give to the Scripture its proper sense, not take it
away, or devise one for it.

3. We hold, that God has given the gift of interpretation to some (as Saint
Paul affirms) and they are such to whom God (as he says) has revealed it by
his 1. Cor. 12. 10.
Spirit; that is, a natural man cannot interpret them aright; nor yet the
vulgar or 12. 10. 14.
common sort, whom (as Saint Augustine says) non vivacitas intelligendi, sed
simplicitas credendi salvos reddit, rather their simplicity in believing, then
vivacity or quickness of apprehension and understanding brings to salvat on.
And if the Eunuch a man of great place, were not able to interpret without
Saint Philip, much less the vulgar sort. But God has bestowed this gift upon
the learned, and to those of the learned which have the guist of
interpretation. The extraordinary gift of interpretation, is one of those
(...), 1 Cor. 12. which God gave at the first planting of the Vide (...) in 1
Cor. 12 and 14.
Church, with the other gifts of tongues, miracles etc. Sometimes to men
unlearned, and this was not tied to any one rank of men: but the ordinary power
and gift of interpretation always was and is in the Church, and the Bishops,
and Pastors thereof.

4. Now forasmuch as God (according to Saint Paul) divides his gifts singulis
prout vult, to every one according to his good pleasure, it were hard to
restrain it to 1. Cor. 12. 11.
any one Order (as to that of Bishops) as some of the more rigid Papists would
have Lib. 10. c. 7.
it. And Stapleton (one of them) when he had done all he could to maintain his
tenet, in the end was forced to confess, that God gives these gifts
extraordinary, as well to others, as to them,: as well to Amos a Herdsman,
called and gifted extraordinarily, as to Jeremie a Priest. Yet Andradius, and
others of them hold, that the interpretation of Bishops assembled together, may
be taken howsoever.

5. Now concerning the sense of the Scriptures. As it is well said by the
Lawyers, that Apices juris non sunt jus, so is it in the Scriptures, not the
letters or words, but the meaning is that which is Scripture indeed. To find
out which Aquinas gives these rules.

1. In matters of faith and manners, nullus sensus sumendus nisi literalis,
none but the literal sense is to be taken. 2. In point of exhortation or
instruction, uti licet sensu tropologice, uti patreubique, it is lawful for us
to use a figurative sense, as the fathers often did. 3. Albeit a man may draw
sundry consequences a contrariis, (...), etc. by contraries, similies, and the
like, by the rules of Logique, yet the literal sense, can be but one, in one
place. 4. That is to be taken for the literal sense of every place, which the
construction will bear, if it lead not into an absurdity, and then it must
needs be a trope.
Now seeing there must be an Interpretation, and it must be that which is
literal, unless it draw an absurdity with it: we are now to come to the
examination of this sense; and because we must never look to stop the mouths
of sectaries and heretics, but they will still find an occasion or place to
wrangle upon, we must therefore bring them to one of these two inconveniences.

1. Either to drive them to condemn themselves in their own hearts. Tit. 3. 11.
2. Or because the Devil does so much blind the understanding of some, that
they 2. Tim. 3. 9.
will not understand reason, we may argue so long with them, till their folly
be made manifest to all men, as the Apostle speaks.
We are to know that as in all other Sciences, so in Divinity, the judgment of
every thing is to be taken ex principiis from the principles. And concerning
the principles lib. 2 de doct. Christ.
in Divinity, which are the Scriptures, S. Augustine says, In eis que sunt
aperte apposita, inveninutur omnia quae pertinent ad fidem moresque vivendi, in
those things which are plainly set before us, we may find all things belonging
to faith and good life. And Saint Chrysostom, Manifesta sunt que sunt ad mores
and fidem necessaria, etc. homil. 3 in 2 These. c 3. de locis Theolog.
those things are apparent, which are necessary to faith and manners: and
Mclchior Canus says, that there are diverse places, of which none can give any
other then the literal sense, or can wrest them, except he have a mind to
wrangle. And Ireneus says, (...) 2 here is. c 46, 47.
that the plain places make the principles, by which all other of dubious
understanding must be judged.

Now the means to find out the true sense of the Scriptures are many, but may
be reduced to six.

1. Some means there are wherein all agree, as namely, there is, pietas and
diligentia adhibenda, goodness and diligence must be used. And in the first
place, Prayer. S. Augustine says, Oration postulet, lectio inquirat, meditatio
inveniat, contemplatio degustet and digerat, let us ask by prayer, seek by
reading, find out by meditation, taste and digest it by contemplation. 2. The
second means is by conference of places. Saint Augustine says, that the de
doct. Christ. (...) 2 (...) 8.
less plain place in Scriptures, is to be referred to that which is more
plain, and the less in number to the more in number. 3. The third seems to
be according to the counsel of the holy Ghost, Inspectu fontium, the better to
discern the signification of the words to consult with the Original tongue;
with the Hebrew for the Old Testament, and with the Greek for the New. 4. To be
acquainted with the phrase of the holy Ghost, and this is to be gotten Heb. 5.
10.
by the knowledge of the Dialect, Idiome or Style of the holy Spirit, as the
Apostle speaks, by use to discern it, as the crucifying of the flesh,
mortifying the concupiscence, etc. for sometimes the holy Ghost in Greek, sends
us to the holy Ghost in Hebrew. And these three last are for understanding of
words, the two next are for understanding of sentences and chapters. 5. The
first is that which the fathers call Oculus ad scopum, to have an eye to the 1.
Tim. 1.
intent: as what was the intent of giving the law, in setting down such a
prophecy, doing such a miracle, and the like: as Saint Paul to Timothy
reasons from the end of the law, against those that made evil use of the law.
So says Hilary, Ex causis dicendi, habemus intelligentiam Doctorum, we find
out the meaning of the learned, by finding out the cause why a thing was
spoken. 6. The last is that which the wise men among the Jews say, we must
look round about us, behind and before us, that is, we must well weigh the
Antecedents, and Consequents, and every Circumstance, to understand any
sentence and chapters, whereof we doubt.
To these may be added those of Ireneus and Augustine, That every one of these
l 2 c 45. 47.
rules serve not for every thing, but to diverse things, diverse ways and
means may de doct. Christ. l 2.
be applied for the true understanding of words and sentences in the Scripture.
And therefore Stapleton committed an error.

1. Because he perceiving that some of these rules were not necessary to all,
concluded that it was not necessary at all. 2. Because we attribute not the
interpretation of the true sense of every place, to each one of these, but to
all together, he therefore concludes that they were not sufficient at all.
Now besides these means, and those of prayer and diligent study wherein they
agree with us, they propound these four following (as is before said) and hold
them infallible.

1. The interpretation of Scriptures by the fathers. 2. The exposition of them
by Councils. 3. The practice of the Church. 4. The definitive sentence of the
Pope.
Concerning the first and second of these in general we say, that as there may
arise some doubt or scruple in some places of Scripture, so may there also in
their expositions. And for the two last a question may be made, whether the
Chuch they mean be a true Church, and whether the Pope may not err in his
sentence.

Again, as we unfeignedly hold and acknowledge, that some of their means are
commendable, yet we say that they are not allowable, where they are evidently
contrary to our rules or without them. And if ever they took the right course,
it was by using our means, and if they erred, it was by relying wholly on
theirs, and excluding ours. But take their means without or against ours, and
they may err.

As the word of God is the rule and ground of faith, so it cannot be denied but
that Addition 2. of peoples submitting to the judgment of the Church.
the expounding and applying hereof, is in ordinary course left by Christ to
the Church, to whom he has committed the feeding and government of his Flock,
for Christ commands all to hear the Church; and the Prophet tells us, the
Priests lips are to preserve knowledge, and they shall seek the law at his
mouth. Mal. 2. and if the duty of the Church be to teach and instruct her
children, no question, but it is their duty to learn of Deuteronomy. 17.
her, and to submit their judgments to hers: yet this makes her not infallible
in her Math. 18. 17.
Ephesians. 4. 11. 14.
determination, but gives her this privilege, that she ought to be heard, and
believed, Hec. 13. 17.
unless it appear evidently, that for some corrupt and sinister end she
prevaricates from the truth. It is not possibility of erring, but actual erring
which makes our faith uncertain, for otherwise one that beholds the sun could
not be certain that he sees it, for there is a possibility of error in the
sense in judging an object. It is sufficient therefore to make our faith
certain, if the rule be infallible, and that it be applied with moral evidence,
so that the propounder do not then actually err, though he be subject to a
possibility of error, and that after the use of moral diligence fit in so
great a matter, there appears no probable cause why we should not assent, nor
any reason why in prudence we should doubt; so Suarez. himself. Dsp. de fide 5
sect. 1 number 5. non requiritur infallibilitas permanens in proponente, sed
sufficit quod actu non erret licet errare potest. Obedience to the Churches
decrees does not necessarily infer her infallibility, for then the civil
magistrate, natural parents, and all superiors must be infallible, because
obedience is due to them by divine law, and yet we know they ought to be
obeyed, unless the thing commanded be evidently unlawful. And therefore none
ought upon probable reasons to reject the determination of the Church, or of a
lawful Council, for besides that the command from God, of hearing the Church is
clear and evident, and therefore we ought not upon reasons that are doubtful or
not evident to reject her doctrine: but follow that rule tenere certum,
dimittere in certum, besides this, I say, the Church and her governors have
more, and more certain means of finding out the truth then any private persons
have, as the prayers of the pastors, their fastings, disputations, their skill
in divine things, wherein their senses are exercised, and (which follows
thereupon,) a greater assistance of the spirit, and the best means (as where
many learned and pious men meet from diverse parts of the world) to know what
the judgment of all the Churches is in the matter in question, and what has
been the received sense which from time to time has been delivered to the
Churches; now it is a received rule among the Casuists, that in things
doubtful, after diligence used, one may safely and ought to acquiesce in the
judgment of the major part of pious and learned men. Reginald prax. lib. 12.
n. 90, 91. and l. 11. n. 25, 26. Besides this the Church is in possession of
her authority, and therefore ought in things doubtful to be heard, for in
dubiis melior cst conditio possidentis, but if the contrary be evident, then
the case is not doubtful. So Thom. etcajet. (...). (...). q. 104, 105. and
after him all the Casuists. Those that would be satisfied in these points, may
read them learnedly and acutely handled, by Baron. late Professor at Aberdene,
in his Book de objecto fidei formali, Tract. 5. In Bishop Bedels letters,
Chillingworths safe way, etc. cap. 2, etc. and others.

The fundamentals of Religion which are absolutely necessary for all to know
and practice, are plainly set down in Scripture, and of them there is no
controversy; in matters doubtful the safest way is to submit to the judgment
of the Church, yet not neglecting other means, as prayer, reading, meditation,
conference, etc. especially practicing what we know, fol. 7. 17. and so we are
sure to be kept from all damnable errors. In all other professions, common
reason teaches, if any doubt arise, to submit to the judgment of the skilful
in those professions, as in Law, Physic, etc. although they have no such
special promises as the Church has from Christ of being lead into all truth,
and if this be not observed in the Church, it must needs prove destructive to
all order, and overthrow the being of a Church, taking away that distinction
which Christ has set between pastor and people, when all shall presume to
interpret, and to be as wise as their teachers, as we see now by woeful
experience. We submit to the judges in point of law, yet no man thinks them
therefore infallible, and so may and ought we to submit to our Bishops and
Pastors in point of Religion, so as not to oppose their determinations, but
reverently to receive what they deliver, when the contrary shall not evidently
appear: I say evidently, for in doubtful things if their judgment may not turn
the scale, when it hangs in aequilibrio, either there is some fault in the
beam, or their authority is very light. And therefore external obedience is
required at least, so as not to oppose publicly in things we assent nor to.
This agrees with what our learned Author has left in his other works,
composed in his riper years, when his judgment was fully settled, by which this
and what else he delivered in his younger time ought to be expounded and
corrected. In his sermon on Matthew 6. 17. p. 223. he tells us, that no man
has God to be his Father, that has not the Church to be his Mother, and that
once and twice order is taken in the Proverbs, as to keep to the precepts of
our father, so not to set light by the laws of our mother, Proverbs 1. 8. and
17. 25. Ira patris and dolor matris are together in one verse, he that grieves
her, angers him, and he cannot but grieve her that little sets by her wholesome
orders -- but now she erres, or at least is said to err at every bodies
pleasure. etc.

Now come to the particulars.

1. For the fathers, It is a vain speculation, to believe that the fathers
concur yet, where they all agree, as in articles of faith and matters
fundamental, wherein we find a joint harmony, their exposition ought to be
received, for therein they deliver the sense of the whole Catholic Church
derived from the Apostles, which in such points is by Christ's promise free from
error, otherwise Christ might have no Church.

2. In their expositions, they did not usually keep the literal sense, except
in point of controversies which fell in their times: for in their Homilies they
followed the tropological or figurative sense, drawing from thence diverse
necessary doctrins, and applications necessary and tending to good life and
manners. So says S. August. contra Julian. that in controversies which fell
not in their times they spoke more carelessely.

3. Again, Basile says of Dionysius a Father, that he spoke many things (...)
Epl. 4.
disputationis gratia by way of disputation, not (...) definitive positively
against against the Heretics of his time: and therefore in many things the
fathers must be taken to have spoken per modum contradicendi, non docendi, by
way of contradiction, and not positively.

4. Cardinal Cajetan affirmed in the Council of Trent, that if he knew a true
and sound exposition upon any place of Scripture, not used by the fathers, he
would hold, and maintain it contra torrentem omnium Doctorum and Episcoporum
against the current of all Doctors and bishops. And Andrad. says as much, and
all of them use to deny the fathers in their schools. And now in regard that
the fathers often dissent, they lean to that which the greatest part of the
fathers say.

5. There was a controversy between Saint Augustine and Saint Jerome, whether
Epl. 1 1.
Saint Paul's reproof of Saint Peter were real or not? Jerome maintaining that
Saint Gal. 2. 10
Paul did it only pro forma formally, and Augustine that he did it simply, and
from his heart. And though Jerome quoted the opinions of diverse fathers to
strengthen his, yet Augustine would not alter, holding this among other rules,
that we are not to regard quis, but quid, not who, but what any man speaks.
And Jerome himself in his own exposition of the Psalms, says, that he had
delivered diverse thing, contrary to the tenet of those times: that is, in
matters praeterfundamental, wherein liberty of dissenting may be indulged.

6. Lastly, the Papists themselves reject the exposition of many of the Fathers
Matthew. 16. 18
upon this text, [ Tu es Petrus, etc. Thou art Peter and upon this rock I will
build my Church.] many of the Fathers holding, that it was meant of Saint
Peter's faith, not his person. As also they leave all the rest of the Fathers,
and adhere to Saint Aug. only in the division of the commandments: for the
current of the Fathers divide them as we do, but they following Saint Augustine
make but one Commandment of the first two, and divide the last into two: but
these were not matters of faith. But S. Augustine was carried away in this, by
a conceit of having but three commandments in the first Table in reference to
the Trinity, as may be seen in his division of the Decalogue.

For the Councils which are divided into Action or Agitation of a point, and
Canon.

1. In the Action commonly is such error, that they are forced to lay all upon
the Canon, and say, that it matters not much what the premises be, so the
Conclusion be good.

2. And for the Canon, we may find in some Councils, that the Canons of one
are flat and direct against another, as in the case of marriages of Priests,
some for them, some against them. We see the two Councils of Constance and
Basile, both (...), and both confirmed, one by Pope Martin the fifth, and the
other by Eugenius the fourth. The Bulls of which (though the Canons agree) be
opposite to each other. The one holding, Concilium posse errare, non Papam,
that the Council may, but the Pope cannot err: the other, Papam errare posse,
non Concilium, that the Pope may err, but the Council cannot. And the Canon of
the Council of Ferrara holding against that of the Council of Florence, one,
that the Pope is above the Council, and the other that the Council is above the
Pope. All this shows, that Councils are not simply infallible, but may err,
now where it is evident that they err, being drawn into parties and factions,
by corrupt interests, none is bound to believe their determinations, but where
there is no such evidence they ought to be obeyed, as those authorized by
Christ to direct and guide us in matters of salvation, and even when we are not
bound to believe their decisions, yet for the peace of the Church their decrees
tie us to external obedience, that is, not to oppose them, if there be no
fundamental error.

For the Church and the practice thereof. This is as uncertain as the other.
For the De spiritu sancto. e 27.
were Arrians. So that in this there is both ambiguity and peril. And Basile
says, that in the case of Baptism, the Children at the first were dipped but
once, and afterward de trina (...).
thrice, and we know at this day, they are but once dipped. Addition 3.


It is true, these show that the Church is not simply infallible, especially in
such points Of the Churches power to interpret scriptures.
as these, which touch not any fundamental article, and that particular
Churches may differ in some lesser points, and yet maintain the same faith, and
keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace: but all this hinders not,
but that the Church is the ordinary interpreter of Scripture to her children,
and that they ought to submit to her because she is accountable to God for
them, Heb. 13. 17. and that none ought to reject her doctrine upon probable or
doubtful reasons, but upon such as are evident, that is, such as not only seem
evident to them, for every contradicting spirit will affirm the most doubtful
things to be evident to him, but such as to other pious and learned men not
interested seem evident. Reginald. l. 17. c. ult. n. 234. This seems to have
been the judgment of this learned Prelate in his latter thoughts. As sermon. on
Act. 2. 42. p. 27. where he has these words, fit to be written in letters of
gold. The ancient fathers thought it meet, that they that took upon them to
interpret the Apostles doctrine, should put in sureties, that their senses they
gave were no other, then the Church in former time has acknowledged. It is
true, the Apost. spoke from the spirit, and every exposition of theirs was an
oracle, but that was their peculiar privilege, but all others after them, are
not to utter their own fancies; and to desire to be believed upon their bare
word, but only on condition, that the sense they now give be not a feigned
sense, but such an one as has been before given by our Fathers, and
forerunners in the Christian faith. Say I this of my self (Says the Apostle)
says not the Law so too, give I this sense of mine own head, has not Christ's
Church heretofore given the like: which one course, if it were strictly held,
would rid our Church of many fond imaginations, which now are stamped daily,
because every man upon his own single bond is trusted to deliver the meaning of
any Scripture, which is many times naught else but his own imagination. This is
the disease of our age. Thus he.

The last way they prescribe is that of the Popes. And that they may err in
Jerome says that Damasus Pope, did consent ad subscriptionem hereseos to the
subscription of heresy: and Ambrose reports that Liberius the Pope, though
for a while he was orthodox, and for not subscribing to the condemnation of
Athanasius he was banished into Thrace, but shortly after he became an Arrian,
and at one of their Councels subscribed to heresy. Honorius the first, after
his death was accursed and condemned, in the thirteenth Action of the sixth
general Council of Constantinople, held anno 680. under Constantinus Pogonatus
the Emperor, quia impia dogmata confirmavit, for confirming wicked opinions:
which were those of the Monothelites. But to shift off these things, they have
nothing to say, but that the Councils were corrupt, and not only they but the
writings of Beda shall be corrupt. So that we see that none of these rules
severally are infallible, Let us see them a little together.

In the administration of the Sacrament of the Lords supper to infants, we may
see they fail: for S. Paul says, Let a man examine himself, and so eat, etc.
which a Child (...). Cor. 11. 28
cannot do, And in this and other things wherein they fail, they are forced to
say, We believe not the Fathers, because they say it, but because they say it
according to rules. And if they believe it in respect of the person that
speaks, not the quid, the reality of the thing, they err much, though
Stapleton say, that the interpretation of a Bishop, though unlearned, is to be
preferred before that of a learned Divine, because of his office and authority.
Andradius yet says, The Fathers are to be believed, not in whatsoever they
say, but in whatsoever they say according to their rules: and so say we.

And thus much for the Preface.
CHAP. XIIII.
Christian Religion divided into the Law and the Gospel. Additions about the
use of the Law. That the Law of Christ is part of the second Covenant, etc. The
judgment of the Author out of his other Books. That the Gospel is Lex
Christi. The Law handled first. Reasons for this order. What the Law teaches:
and what the Gospel.

Summa Religionis.
IN the next place, we are to treat of the Sum of Christian Religion it self
in it self. And this according to the ancient division consists of

1. The Law. 2. The Gospel.
The Law, that is, the moral Law, as it is explicated and enlarged by Christ,
is a part Addition 4. that the moral Law is an essential part of the gospel or
second (...).
of the condition of the second covenant, and therefore an essential part of
the Gospel, which consists not barely of promises, but of precepts too, and
those more high and perfect then any before Christ, and therefore is the Gospel
in the Scripture often called the Law of Christ, and so usually styled inall
antiquity. The moral Law, as it shows men their sins, and so convinces them of
the necessity of Christ, so the knowledge of it may be needful before the
Doctrine of faith: but as it is the rule of Christian obedience, and a
condition of the second covenant, which is the most proper consideration of it,
so it ought to follow the doctrine of faith, and so it does in the most
authentic Catechism of this Church, viz. that in the common prayer Book. It is
true that, Luther and after him many Protestant Divines in their heat against
the Church of Rome about the matter of justification, seem to make the Gospel a
Doctrine consisting merely of promises, and to say that Christ gave no Law, but
only explicated and vindicated the Law from the false glosses of the Scribes
and Pharisees, in Matthew. 5. 6. and 7. as if the moral Law were no part of the
Gospel, or what Saint Paul speaks of the Law of Moses, and the works of that
Law were to be extended to the Laws of Christ also, and the works of the
Gospel, and that the only or chief use of the Law now, is to bring men to
Christ, from which and other the like principles unawares by them laid, and by
the vulgus of our Divines swallowed without examination, the Antinomians,
Libertines, Familists, and other Sectaries have by necessary consequence drawn
those damnable Doctrines, which these Divines little dreamt of, or if they had
considered, I suppose they would have revised these principles and retracted
them, or else have spoken more warily then they have done. The truth is, that
in that sermon on the mount Christ delivers the new Law or Law of the Gospel,
wherein the substance of Christian religion, and the way to salvation is
contained, and that he does not therein only barely expound the Decalogue
given by Moses, but as a Legislator delivers his Law to be observed by all that
believe on him according to the tenure of the second Covenant, was the constant
opinion of all the Fathers, and of the whole Church, as among others is fully
proved by the incomparable H. Grotius both in his comments on Matthew. 5. and in
his book de (...) belli and pacis, l. 1. c. 2. n. 6. and if any desire a list
of names, and testimonies of Fathers, and ancient writers to that purpose, they
may read them in a tract written by a learned and judicious Divine Dr Hamond,
in the passages between him and Mr Cheynel p. 129, 130 etc. And that this
learned Prelate was of the same mind, is evident in his other works perfected
by himself, especially in his sermon on Psalm 2. 7. p. 16, 17. where among
other things we read thus. The very Gospel has her Law, a Law Evangelical
there is, which Christ preached: and as he did, so must we do the like. It is
not without danger to let any such conceit take head, as though Christian
Religion had no Lawpoints in it, consisted only of pure narratives: believe
them, and all is well. And true it is, that such points there be, but they are
not all, there is a law besides, and it has precepts, and they are to be
preached, learned, and as a Law to be obeyed by all. Look but unto the grand
commission (by which we all preach) which Christ gave at his going out of the
world. Go, says he, preach the Gospel to all nations, teaching them to observe
the things which I have commanded you: lo, here is commanding, and here is
observing: so the Gospel consists not only of certain Articles to be believed,
but of certain commandments also, and they are to be observed. Now I know not
how, we are clean fallen from the term Law, that we are even fallen out with
it, the name of Law we look strangely at, we shun it in our common talk, to
this it is come, when men seek to live as they list. We have Gospel'd it so
long, that the Christian Law is clean gone from us: and I shall tell you what is
come by drowning this term, Law, Religion is even come to be counted res
precaria, no Law, no no, but a matter of mere entreaty, general persuasion,
etc. The reverend regard, the legal vigor, the power, the penalties of it are
not set by. The rules, no reckoning made of them as of: Law writs, none but
only as of Physic bills, if you like them, you may use them, if not, lay them
by, and this comes by drowning the term, Law. If the name once be lost, the
thing it self will not long stay. And after. Christian Religion was in the very
best times called Christiana Lex, the Christian Law, and the Bishops
Christianae Legis Episcopi, Bishops of the Christian Law, and all the ancient
fathers liked the term well, and took it upon them. To conclude, Gospel it how
we will, if the Gospel has not the Legalia of it, acknowledged, allowed, and
preserved to it, if once it loose the force and vigor of a Law, its a sign it
declines, it grows weak and unprofitable, and that is a sign it will not long
last, we must go look our salvation by some other way, etc. Thus we see how he
contradiets the popular errors of these times about Law, and Gospel, and
therefore it cannot be conceived that his discourse here tends to the
nourishing of such dangerous and novel opinions as our solifidians do now cry
up.

If we have the sum of these two we may assure our selves, that we have as
much as is needful for our salvation: and the sum of them both are necessary
principles. The Evangelist has them both in one verse. The Law was given by
Moses, John 1. 17.
but Grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. Seeing then that these are the two
parts, we are to consider in the first place, which of them is first to be
handled. We say we must speak first of the Law.

1. First because the Law and the Gospel are nothing else, but two Covenants
which God made with mankind, and in that respect are called the Old and New
Testaments, considering them not as they are in the Books (for so in the old
Testament; there is the Gospel also, the Law being as S. Aug. says, Evangelium
absconditum, and the Gospel Lex revelata the Law revealed: the Gospel the new
law, and the Law the old Gospel) but as they be Covenants. Now taking them as
Legacies in a will, there are in a Testament two parties necessarily required.
1. The Testator or Legator. 2. The Legatee, or the party to whom the Legacy is
bequeathed. So in each Covenant, both of Law and Gospel, there were two
parties. The first between God and Adam; the Covenant on Gods part, was to give
to Adam, paradise, felicity: and on Adams part to return to God perfect
obedience.

This did Adam receive power and strength to perform, but he abusing this
power, and opposing it against God, justly incurred the forfeiture of his
felicity, and the penalty of morte morieris, death and misery, opposite to
Paradise, from which the strength given to him by God might have preserved him.
Now this Covenant being broken and made void, it pleased God in his mercy (not
regarding this forfeiture) to make a new Covenant, the Covenant of faith in
which there were two bonds: one between God and Christ, and another betwixt
Christ and us: on Gods side felicity, on Christ's part satisfaction to God for
us, on our side faith unfeigned, with new obedience, but this not by our own
strength, but by the power of Christ, and his Spirit. For as man fell, and by
his fall lost all that he had, so, if he would recover that which was lost, he
must make satisfaction for it: but this he could not now do, and therefore
Christ undertook it for him, suffered for him, and removed the penalty,
satisfied the forfeiture, and thereby restored to man all that he had lost.

Now Christ had a double title to heaven, one of inheritance, and the other of
purchase; the right of inheritance he had by nature, in that he was the Son of
God, which he claims to himself, the other he gives to them that lay hold on
him side viva, non ficta, by a lively and unfeigned faith; and therefore this
is called the Covenant of faith, which we have not by our own strength, but in
Christo, by the power of Christ.

And the reason of this second covenant was, that now Adam having lost his own
strength by breach of the first, all power and strength should be now from God
in Christ, and all the glory be given to him. For if Adam had stood by his own
strength in the fist, howsoever God should have had most glory, yet Adam should
have had some part thereof for using his strength well, and not abusing it when
he might; but kept his standing: but that God might have all the glory, he
suffered the first Covenant to be broken, and permitted man to fall, for which
fall he was to make satisfaction, which he could not do but by Christ, nor
perform new obedience, but by the grace of God preventing us, and making us of
unwilling, willing, and of unable, able, to do things in that measure, that God
will require at our hands.

So that the first Covenant (the Law) was weak and imperfect, standing upon a
promise in figure, and a curse without figure; a curse indeed: but the promise
being performed in Christ, and the curse abrogated by his death, then came
those perfect things, and imperfecta abiere, the things which were imperfect
were done away, 1. Cor. 13. 10.
as the A postle speaks.

The first covenant (...) is said to be given by Moses, yet was it not received
by us, we had not the hearts to take it, till the coming of Christ: but in the
Gospel it was not only (...) given, but (...) brought to pass and fulfilled
per Christum by Christ.

And we must observe withal, that the moral Law it self is not changed, but
the ceremonies only taken away by Christ's truth, and the curse thereof by
Grace: so that the bond of the keeping the Law, is not cancelled by Christ's
coming, but (...). 5. 17.
remains in force still, and is to be performed as he himself testifies.
Think not that 28. 20.
I am come to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it. Christ came not to repeal his
fathers statutes, when he spoke his last words to the Disciples, Teaching them
to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded. Now these things standing
thus, and the Law being first in time and order (for we begin with the
imperfect) that is first to be taught.

(...). Another argument of this Order is, That humiliation is first by the
Law, and the course of teaching, is first by humbling men by the Law, in
letting them see what they are, which has been the order used from the
beginning of the world. It was the course of Gods own proceeding upon the
violation of the first Covenant, for after Adam had transgressed, and remained
till evening in expectance and fear Genesis 3. 9.
of punishment for breach of the Law, and therefore had hid himself; then first
began the Law to pass upon him, by way of judicial proceeding. First he is
called forth. Vbies where art thou? and then examined, Edisti have thou eaten?
and upon Jgitur, Because thou vbies? and that is the Law, and after came Semen
(...) Abraham, Ambula coram me and (...) integer, Genesis 17. 1.
walk before me, and be thou perfect, which is the only end and scope of the
Law, so that the Law was first given to him, an(...) then was he instructed in
the Gospel, 22. 18.
In semine tuo benedicentur omnes netiones terra, In thy seed shall all the
nations of the earth be blessed.

And this was the way that Moses taught the people. Take the Book of
Deuteronomy, which is the iteration of the Law, after the three first chapters,
in the fourth Deuteronomy. 18. 15.
he begins to teach the Sum of the Law, Therefore shall thou keep etc. till the
18. Chapter, and there he tells them the Gospel, That God would raise up a
Prophet Act. 7. 37.
from the midst of them, like unto him, etc. Which Saint Stephen applied to
Christ. This was also the Course of the Prophets. Esaias in his first 40
Chapters, (though Esa. 40.
in gross there be some promises of the Gospel intermingled) yet the scope and
beginning of it is to teach the whole sum of the Law, and the rest is the sum
of the Gospel. But more plainly in his first Chapter, from the beginning to the
18. verse, there is a bitter invective, and denunciation of the Curse of the Law;
but from C. 1.
thence to the end of the Chapter is the promise of the Gospel. Come then etc.
If your sins were as red as scarlet etc. And the first psalm is nothing but a
recapitulation of John the Baptist Mat. 3. 7.
begins with the Law, and tells them of the axe laid to the root of the tree,
and in Ego baptzio vos, I baptize you.

And its Christ's own order too (who was the great prophet of the New (...),
Mat. 23. 12.
and whose method ought to be our Jnstruction) He that humbles himself shall
be exalted, first Humiliation, and then exaltation; now there is no humbling but
by the Law, and therefore it is called Humiliator, the humbler.

It was also the practice of Saint Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, (which is
held to contain the sum of Christian Religion) after his proemium, in the 17
first verses from the 18 of the first Chapter to the 21 verse of the 3.
Chapter, he speaks all of the Law, all under sin, Jews and Gentiles, and
unregenerate and regenerate, and at last includes himself in the number: but
after, he delivers the sum of the Gospel, showing in what Covenant we must
look to be saved. And this Epistle the learned will have to be our warrant for
this practice.

And such was the form of instructing in the primitive Church taking pattern
from Saint Paul. First Repentance from dead works, which includes the Law, and
then Heb. 6. 1.
faith in Christ, which shows the Gospel. So that this must be our Order, The
Law first, and then the Gospel. So much for the Order.

Now the Law contains three things.

1. Praeceptum, that which is required of us; fac hoc and vives do this and
thou Genesis 42. 18.
shall live. Psa. 19. 12.
2. Transgressionem praecepti and delictum, which shows us how far we are
from the duty that is required of us by the precept; Delicta quis intelligit?
3. Paenam (...), the punishment we must look for and expect for the Genesis 2. 17.
breach of the precept by our sins, Morte morieris, thou shall die.
And the Gospel also teaches three things.

1. Liberationem, how we are delivered from the Curse of the Law, (...) agnus
Dei John. 1. 29.
Behold the lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world. 2.
Certitudinem, how we may be assured that this deliverance pertains to us, to 2
Pet. (...).
make our calling sure by good works. 3 (...). according to King David's, Quid
retribuam? what shall I render to the Lord? what we are to perform, new, and
true obedience, not that secundum (...) summum, jus, but secundum (...) that
which is accepted of in Christ, the neglect or none performance whereof makes a
forfeiture of what God has given or promised. So that our new obedience is not
only to look back as an act of gratitude for benefits received, but also (and
that chiefly) forward, as a condition to which is annexed by Gods free grace in
the Gospel, the promise of eternal life. Matthew. 5. 20. and 7. 21. To. 8. 13.
Gal. 5. 21. 2 Pet. 2. 20. 21. 2 John 8.
CHAP XV.
In the law four things frist, the work to be done. The (...), the Pandects of
moral laws. The laws moral known before Moses, written in men's hearts, proved
in particular. In every law there is evil to be avoided, and good to be done,
both must concur. S. Paul's Three rules, of pie, just, sobrie. Saint Aug. his
three rules, (...) contrary to three rules of corrupt nature, secondly the
mahner of doing, requires first, Totos, secondly, totum, thirdly, toto tempore.
Thirdly, the reward Fourthly the punishment.

The Law.
WE learned in the general Preface, that we are to depend only upon Gods
provid(...), and so we are to conceive of him as a mighty prince and king, for
so he is styled in the Apocalypse. Rev. 19. 16. Who as he has a Reward for us,
so he has his (...) his work house, his place of probation and (...) for us,
which house is the world and that being in his workhouse we have our agenda,
work to be done. And the Law, as the Rabbis call it, is Therash magnashoth,
Doctrina agendorum, the things we must do are contained in it. And as there be
four things in all good Laws in the world; so are there in this, which is Lex
Creatoris Mundi the Law of the worlds Creator.

1. Opus. The work prescribed to be done. This ye shall do. 2. Modus. The
manner how it must be done. Thus ye shall do it. 3. Praemium The Reward for it
being done. In palatio, in Heaven. 4. Poena the punishment for it being not
done. In Carcere, in hell. The action.

1 Opus. The action or work. The Decalogue is as it were the Pandects, a Book
of all the Offices, works and duties which God requires at man's hand, and the
Lawyers Pandects are nothing else but Comments upon these: these are the true
Ethica Christiana, Christian moral duties, transcending all other whatsoever.
And in this respect are they of the Church of Rome to be commended, who though
they teach their youth other Arts, yet teach them no other Ethics then these:
Logique and Physiques and Metaphysiques they learn them, but for Ethics they
refer them especially, as the reformed Churches have done, to these of the
Decalogue, which indeed is the true Regula morum, the just square of all our
actions, for they ought not to be shorter nor longer then this.

But because the Law is said to be given by Moses, there may arise a doubt from
(...)
hence, that seeing the Law was not given till above 2000 years after the
Creation, and that the world was so long without a Law, why may not we live
without a Law now, as well they did before Moses.

Our answer is. That they lived not before Moses, without the Law. They had
Resp.
many parts of the Law, some of the Ceremonial Law, by special Revelation from
God, and all the moral Law written in their hearts, they had the knowledge of
beasts clean and unclean, of sacrificing, of praying or calling upon God: of
the younger Childrens subjection to the elder. Abraham had the Law of
Circumcision: he and (...) paid Tithes; and many other Laws they had before
Moses wrote them. And as Saint Paul says, The Gentiles (both before and after)
doing by nature the things contained in the Law, these having not the Law,
were a Law unto themselves: Romans 2. 14, 15
what to do? not what they listed, but the work of the Law, written in their
hearts, instead of Tables of stone.

That is, the effect of the Law, which is equivalent to the Law it self, which
he proves thus, because their conscience bare witness, and their thoughts
reflected on their actions, accused or excused themselves in what they did. De
Trin. l. 14. c. 15.


And therefore S. Augustine says, that every man had this law in his heart,
which is to be understood after the fall, for before that, all was perfectum,
perfect. Mali multa recte laudant, multa recte reprehendunt, quibus autem
regulis faciunt hoc? ubi eas vident? unde illud habent? quod homines sic vivere
debeant, cum ipsi non sic vivant, sunt regulae justae, mentes eorum injustae,
regulae immutabiles, mentes eorum mutabiles, vel hoc argumento, etc. Evil men
commend many things truly, and reprove many things as justly: but by what rules
do they so? whence have they it, that men ought to live so, seeing they live
not so themselves? why, these rules are right and good, though their minds be
not so, the rules are unchangeable, though their minds be mutable, John 1. 5.
etc. Yea, he concludes, that they find them in libro lucis, in the book of
light and truth, howsoever they are blind, (and as S. John, the light shone in
darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not) which truth being in God, as
a seal, makes the same impression in the mind of man, yet keeps it self whole,
and where this print or impression is fet, it can never be wiped out. And thus
we see, that all men ever had, and have the effect of the Law in them.

And this we will prove from the performing the duties required in the law
before it was given, this may appear before the written law in all the ten
Commandments.

1. For the first Commandment. Though it be not very plain, that Terah with
Genesis 11. 31.
Abraham, Lot and Sarah departed out of Vr of the Chaldees into Canaan, because
of the idolatry of the inhabitants, yet soon after there is a very plain place
for it. Jacob 35. 2.
commanded his household to put away their strange gods. 2. For the second.
Jacob buried the idols under an Oak, and in that Rachel hid the 35. 4.
images under the Camels litter in a godly zeal, as some think. 31. 34.
3. For the third. Abraham caused his Steward to put his hand under his thigh,
24. 3.
and swear by the Lord of Heaven and Earth, that he should not take a wife for
his son 31. 53.
of the daughters of the Canaanites. And we may see a solemn oath taken between
Jacob and Laban. 2. 3.
4. For the fourth. We may see the observation of it plainer before the giving
of Exodus 16. 23.
the Law, in Exodus, in speech about gathering a double portion of Manna of the
Sabbaths Eve. 5. For the fifth. we may find in one place, how Esau cried for
his fathers Genesis 27. 38.
blessing: and in another, how he stood in awe of his father, though he were 41.
otherwise profane, for he would not kill his brother Jacob, while his father
was alive. 6. For the sixth. we see a plain precept. Whosoever sheddeth man's
blood, by 9. 6.
(...) shall his blood be shed. 7. For the seventh. Judah would have burned
Thamar for playing the whore. 38. 24.
and Shechem was slain for ravishing Dinah, and the whole city spoiled by her
brethren. 34. 31.
For their answer to their father Jacob was, should he deal with our sister as
with a harlot? 8. For the eighth. The putting of Joseph's cup into the mouth of
the sack was 44. 7.
enough (though among the Egyptians) to clap his brethren in prison, and God
forbid ((...) they) we should do this: that is, steal. 9. For the ninth.
Because Judah had promised to send a kid, he performed it, though 38. 17.
(as he thought) to a harlot. 20.
10. For the tenth. There was no act, nor purpose of heart in Abimelech against
Sara, as appears, yet the sin of concupiscence was punished in him, by God:
Behold Genesis 20. 3.
thou art buta dead man, because of the woman which thou have taken.
Notwithstanding Abimilech had not yet come near her. So Pharaoh was plagued for
her, 12. 17.
in the same case.
By this we see, that there was a Law before the written Law.

The sum of the Law is this: Ambula mecum, walk with me, or before me, and
Genesis 17. 1.
the means to do this, is Love. Can two walk together (says the Prophet) and
not be agreed? if they love they will not part. So that love must be the
ground, and to Amos. 3. 3.
love Christ is to keep his Commandments. Now there is no Love but between
John. 14. 15.
likes, so that we must be integrl perfect,, both in body and soul, not
outwardly alone, but inwardly too.

The Law consists in two Duties. 1 In avoiding or not doing Evil. 2 Jn doing
that which is good. Both put together by the Prophet. Cease to do evil, learn
Esa. 1. 16.
to do good. And by the Psalmist. Eschew evil, and do good. 17.


The sin against the first of these, is called Peecatum Commissionis, sin
of commission, Psa. 34. 14.
and the sin against the second is called Peccatum Omissionis, sin of
omission. In regard of the first, we are called (...) Dei, Gods soldiers
against his enemies, Sine and Satan, and therefore are we said to be the Church
Militant. In respect of the second, we are styled Operarii Dei, Gods laborers.
In regard of the first, we are called innocents, guiltless, And of the
latter, Boni et justi, good and (...), or viri bororum Operum, men of good
works.

But in any good work, these two (...) go together. For the Jews were very
observant Jer. 5. 8.
in offering Sacrifices to God: but because they burned in Lust, and every one
neighed after his neighbors wife, their sacrifices were not accepted: and it
was Esa. 1. 11.
in this respect that God to'd them, he was full of their Libamina, their
sacrifices. On the other side, be we never so innocent, yet if we do not to
our power pascere and vestire, feed, and cloth, do good works, we sin et
(...) bonum sit non secisse malum, tamen malum est (...) fecisse bonum, as it
is good not to do evil, so is it evil not to do good. For in keeping of the Law
facere and abstinere must concur. Yet if we could keep the second, we should
not so greatly offend in the first.

Saint Paul in his directions to Titus gives these rules, that as we must deny
ungodliness Tit. 2. 12.
(there is the abstinere) so we must facere too, live soberly, justly and Godly;
that is, 1. Pie, Godly, toward God. 2. just, justly, toward our neighbors.
3. Sobrie, soberly toward our selves. And for these three Saint Augustine has
three rules, or natural principles.

1. Deterius subiiciendum prestantiori, quod commune habes cum Angelis, subde
Deo: Let man subject himself to God: and his Angel-like reason to God his best
director. This is pie. 2 Quod commune habes cum brutis, hoc subde rationi, Let
men's faculties common to them and brute beasts, submit to reason. And this is
to live sobrie. 3. Fac quod vis pati let every man do, as he would be done by.
And this is just.
And the corruption of these is by three contrary rules.

1. The first; as the Satan said to Eve. Dii eritis ye shall be as Gods. Be not
Genesis 3. 5.
6. 2
subject. 2. The second, as the Tempter said to the sons of men. videte and
nubite, quod libet licet, voluntas lex esto, see and marry, do what likes you,
Let your will stand for a Law. 3. The third. Machiavels principle. Quod potes
fac, bonum prestantioris, bonum communitatis. Do what you can, (...), (...)
quod potes: that you can do is lawful. So much of the first thing in the Law.
The Action or work.
2. The second thing required in every law, and so in this, is the manner, how
it The manner.
must be done, which by learned men is much dilated. We will reduce them all to
three things. We are to do it, 1. Toti. 2. Totum. 3. Toto tempore, or Semper.

1. Toti. as Jacob said to Rachel, you know that with all my power I have
served Genesis 31. 6.
your father: and no doubt but he would yield as much service to God as he did
to Man. (...). 5. 18.
2. Totum. with our whole souls and bodies we must endeavor to keep the whole
Gen 6. 22.
Law, not as Naaman did, keep it by halfes: but as Noah, who did all that the
Lord 7. 5.
commanded him about the Ark. 3. Toto tempore, not for a time only, but all
the days of our life. Noah was (...) Genesis 6. 9.
tempore justus, righteous all his life: and Abraham was juvenis and senex
idem, the same man in his age that he was in his youth.
Now for the Reward or Punishment (which are the two other things required in 3.
Reward.
a law) it stands thus. That if a man break one part of the law, the commanding
part, 4.
it is impossible that he should escape the other part, the sanction, which
binds over Punishment.
to punishment. Therefore God has taken order, that though men can overreach
the law in one part (that is, in contemning it) yet on the other part,
punishment shall overreach them. So says S. Augustine, Aut faciendum, aut
patiendum quod debemus, we must either do what we should, or suffer what is
due. And this was known, before the giving of the law. That God was righteous
and the people wicked. It was the confession of a wicked Egyptian King. And
both reward and punishment were Exodus 9 27.
set before Cain. If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? And if thou
do not Genesis 4. 7.
well, sin lies at the door. Like a savage Bear, or Mastiffe-dog, or a
Blood-hound. So long as thou keep within doors, that is (as the Fathers
expound it) as long as thou live, thou may happily escape punishment for
thy sin, but whenever thou go out of the doors, out of this life, then vae
tibi, he will fly upon thee, then this Blood-hound will never lose the sent,
till he have brought thee to perdition and destruction

More directly: for the Reward, its to them that do well. 1. For temporal
Reward to the well (...) Genesis 39. 3.
benefits in this life: Because Joseph feared God, the Lord made all things
prosper under his hand. 2. And secondly, for eternal benefits, felicity after
this life. Enoch was 5. 24.
(...) to everlasting life, because he walked with God.

For punishment, it is to them that do evil. First, temporal punishment in this
life, as we see in the case of Adam, Eve, Cain, and Joseph's brethren: but
especially in Exodus 9. 27.
Pharaoh, which made him cry out as we heard before, Justus est Dominus, etc.
The Lord is righteous, and I and my people are wicked. It was his sin drew
those temporal plagues upon him. 2. And secondly, eternal punishment in the
life to come. So we read of the Spirits in prison for being disobedient in the
days 1 Pet. 3. 19.
of Noah, who preached repentance to them: so that they were condemned for
transgressing the law of God preached by Noah.

CHAP. XVI.
That the moral Law of God written by Moses, was known to the Heathen. 1. The
act or work was known to them, as it is proved in every precept of the (...),
yet their light more dim in the 1. 2. 4. 10. S. Paul's three rules of Pie,
sobrie, just, known to them. 2. They knew the manner of performance, Toti,
Totum, Semper. 3. They knew the rewards and punishments.

AND thus we see, that Gods written Law, which is Natures Law, has all those
conditions that any Law should have. For this Law, which was before Moses, was
nothing else but Moses's Law in the hearts of men: as if a man would get a
thing by heart that is not written. For what Laws then they had from GOD they
kept in their hearts by tradition.

But now peradventure they will say, that these Laws and the four Rules, appear
only in the Scripture, and were observed by the Jews and those mentioned in
the Scripture only, but other Heathen took no notice of them, nor used them by
the light of Nature, and therefore think themselves not bound to them, but are
at liberty to use, or not use them.

To this we say, that by the writings of the Heathen themselves it appears that
they had these rules written in their hearts, and received many of them, the
son from the fathers ascending even to Noah's sons, Sem, Ham, and Japhet, though
in some of the Commandments it may not seem so plain as in the rest, for in
every Commandment they introduced some corruptions of their own heads, and
declined diversely from Gods Law.

First, for six of the Commandments it is manifest, as the 3. 5. 6. 7. 8 9.
the more 1 The action.
obscure are the 1. 2. 4. 10.

3. For the third Commandment. It was a law among the Egyptians, Perjuri poena
capitali plectentur, let the perjured be punished with death, as Diodorus
Siculus reports. And it was the law of Rome in the 12 Tables (...), swear not
Soph. in Stob.
rashly. And Sophocles says, that when an oath is taken (...), the soul Sermon.
27.
will be more cautions to sin against God and to injure man.

5. For the fifth, Homer says of one that had a misfortune, that it came quia
parents non honoravit, because he honored not his parents, (...) (...); he
would not render the duty of a child to his father, therefore his days were
not prolonged: and another says, (...), live well and nourish thy parents in
their age. And Menander says, that he which honored his parents, shall (...),
live long and happily. And for superiors, Charondas (said in his laws) (...),
the neglect of our aged parents is extremity of wrong.

6. For the sixth, there is no question, every Nation held it as a Canon of
their Law, Homicida quod fecit, expectet, Let a murderer expect loss of life,
as he deprived another of it: and therefore they all punished murderers with
loss of life.

7. For the seventh, it was the saying of Licurgus, Fuge nomen Moechi, si
mortem fugies, Avoid adultery, so shall thou avoid untimely death: and
Stephanus out of Nicostratus (...), He that will live in this city and not dye,
let him abhor adultery. And Menander censureth adultery as a rob. sermon. 6.
sin disgraceful, (...), because the price of it is death.

8. For the eighth, Demosthenes against Timocrates alleges plainly the
Lacedemonian law, in the very words of this Law, Thou shall not steal. And He
siods precent enjoyneth men, not to possess (...), stolen goods, but (...)
given by Gods providence.

9. For the ninth, it was one of the Laws of the twelve Tables at Rome, Qui
falsum testimonium dixerit, Tarpeio Saxo dejiciatur, He that shall bear false
witness, let him be cast down from the Tarpeian Rock. And Phocylides
counsels not to utter lies, but to speak the truth in all things.

Now in the other four they had a dimmer light, for they were not so manifest
to them.

1. For the first, though we find most of them speaking of gods in the plural
number, yet it was well known to the Philosophers, that there was but one God,
and especially to Pythagoras, who could say, Si quis se deum dixerit paepter
unum qui omnia fecerit, novum faciat mundum, If any one shall say that he is a
god, but he that made all things, let him prove it, by making a new World. And
so Sophocles, (...), unus in veritate unus Deus, There is one in truth, there
is one God, and so said Orpheus and Varro: and this they maintained in their
Schools.

2. For the second, they agreed, that every god should be worshipped according
to the manner that himself should think best. So Socrates in Plato's
Respublica, (...) every god should be worshipped as he liked. And this is the
very foundation of the second Commandment. But for the thing it self, S.
Augustine De Civ. l. 4.
out of Varro says, That Varro did much approve of the Jews religion, because
31.
it excluded Images, holding it the best way to keep Religion undefiled by
excluding them; and that if all people else had taken that course, it had been
a means to take away much trifling.

4. For the fourth, very little is to be found, and yet they had this Canon
among them, that numerus septenarius, the number of seven was numerus quietis,
a number of rest, and that it was Deo gratissimus, a number pleasing to God.
From which, and from the report they heard of the Jews observing the seventh
(...) rest, they might have gathered a conclusion, that God would have rest
upon that day. And it was their practice in their funerals to have their (...),
the seventh day aster a man's death, and seven days together they would mourn
and they gave their children names the seventh day after their birth, and all
this because they held it Saturns number.

10. For the tenth, Menander has this saying, (...), do not concupiscere, or
desire, so much as another man's pin or button. And indeed, though in their
Laws they never touched this, yet the scope of them all did tend and drive to
this end, (...) non concupiscere, they were against concupiscence. And hence we
may conclude with Saint Paul, Romans 2. 15. That the Gentiles, having the Law
written in their hearts, were inexcusable.

Now to show that the Heathen had also the rules and grounds before mentioned,
we may thus prove.

1. There was written upon the door of the Temple of their god, Apollo at
Delphos, in the upper part of it the letters (...), that is, Thou art: showing
thereby that God alone has a being of himself, and that we depend on him; and
that if any did ask (...) at the Oracle, they should do what the god commanded,
and that was subdere deo quod commune habes cum angelis, to subject their
Angel-like reason to God. 2. Secondly, upon one leaf of the door was written,
(...), Nosce reipsum, know thy self; that man should take notice how much
better he was then beasts, and his mind then his body: and knowing his soul to
be better then theirs, he should not abase it with vile things; and that was
subdere rationi, quod commune habet cum brutis, to subdue to reason those
faculties which were common with beasts. 3. Thirdly, upon the other leaf was
written (...), a rule of sober living, against covetousness and profutenesse,
fac quod vis pati, do as thou would have done unto thee, to avoid injustice.
Besides this, they had legem (...), a law of retaliation, like for like, and
nemo facit injuriam, qui velit idem sibi fieri, no man commits an injury or
does wrong, that would be willing to have the like done to himself. And
therefore when the Emperor Alexander Severus heard this sentence, Quod tibi
fieri non vis, alteri ne feceris, do not that to another which thou would
not have done to thy self, he ever after used it to malefactors, and caused it
to be graven in his plate. And thus we see the Heathen had rules for their
actions, and for the whole substance of their obedience. So much then for the
Action.
Secondly, for the manner. Toti, Totum, Semper or Toto tempore.

1. For Toti, they had this rule among them, (...). We must do it with all 2.
our mind, strength, heart, and affection, else not at all. 2. For Totum, the
whole duty. It Is Plutarchs comparison, if we eat not up the whole fish (...), it
will do us no good, but harm, but if we eat it all, it will be wholesome and
medicinable both, (...). So they found fault with Caesar for using this
sentence, (...), Si violandum est jus, regnandi causa violandum, in (...) rebus
pietatem colas? If justice be to be broken, it would be for a kingdom, in other
things live godly. And this is the case of every sinner: so the unclean person
says. If ever chastity be to be violated, it is for Bathsheba, in others it
shall be kept. So Plautus, Solis amatoriis perjuriis dii dabunt veniam, the
gods will pardon perjuries in lovers only. But justice must be totally kept and
not broken for any respect, nor any other virtue, if we so do, we omit part of
the whole and entire duty required of us, this the Heathen knew. 3. For Semper
or toto tempore, all the days of our life. They held, that a good man should
continue so to his end: they resembled him to a tetragonism, all sides alike,
like to a Dye, they would have him to be homo quadratus, ever like himself,
never like to a Camelion often changing his color, inconstant, sometimes good,
sometime bad, now in, now out, but he must continue ever one and the same.
1. For the reward we see that they held, that their god Jupiter had (...) a
sheet 3. and 4.
of Parchmine made of the skin of that Goat that nourished him, wherein he
wrote Reward and Punishment.
all men's deeds, and for those that had done well, he had his three graces to
reward them in this life, and his Elisian fields in the world to come,
answerable to Paradise in Scripture.

2. And for punishment they likewise held, that he had his three Erinnyes or
Furies in this life: and Tartarus, Styx, and Cacytus in the life to come,
according to Tophet and Gehenna in Scripture.

And thus we see that the (...) are inexcusable, having all the parts of the
Law (...). 1. 10.
within them written in their hearts, to accuse or excuse them.

CHAP. XVII.
Questions about the Law. 1. Why it was written by Moses, seeing it was written
before in men's hearts. How the light of Nature became Divine, three causes of
it: it was deserved in three respects. Why the Law was given at this time. Why
only to the Jews. All the four parts of a Law are in the Law written. 1. The
Act. 2. The Manner. 3. The Rewards. 4. Punishments. 2. Whether any can keep the
Law. How God is just in requiring that which we cannot perform. An addition
about power of keeping the Law Evangelical. Adam lost his ability, not
efficienter, but meritorie. God always gives, or is ready to give power to do
what he requires, if we be not wanting to our selves. How Christ has fulfilled
the Law, how we keep it by faith. 3. Why God promises life to the keeping of
the Law, if we cannot keep it.

NOw here a question may be made. If the law of Moses were thus written in
(...).
their hearts before, to what end was it given them, or what needed God
afterward to have written it in Tables of stone?

We answer, the reason was, because the former law, though it were whole in
Answ.
Paradise, yet afterward by Adams fall, it was broken into shards and
fragments, all to pieces, and afterward every piece was broken smaller and
smaller, so as the light of Nature thereby grew dimmer and dimmer. And
therefore lest it should be clean put out, because the writing in the heart
would not be sufficient, but daily decayed, it was necessary that it should be
written in tables of stone, and set before the eyes of all, that by daily
viewing it, it might be brought again into their hearts.

If it be questioned again, how it came to pass, that these laws of Nature
were blotted out, and how the light thereof came to be dimmer and dimmer, we
answer, that the reasons are three.

1. Because men did what they could, to blot it out themselves. (...)
intelligere, men would not understand: and the reason why they would be so
ignorant was, because when they had done ill and communed with their own
hearts, they found presently an accuser in them; so that not daring to look
into themselves, when they had done ill, they would not be checked, and as S.
Augustine says, facti sunt fugitivi a cordibus suis, they became fugitives
from their own hearts. Therefore to cure this evil, it was expedient, when they
had put it out of their hearts, that the law should be written, to be ever in
their sight, that thereby it might be brought back again into their hearts,
unde fu^gerunt, from whence they had driven it. 2. Because as Christ said,
there came a Super seminator, another Sower, the Devil, Matthew. 13. 25.
who sowed tares (false principles) in their hearts, as Eritis dii cognoscentes
(...) (...). 3. 5.
and malum, ye shall be as gods knowing good and evil, and (...) Bonum est quod
prodest, that is to be counted good that does us good, and the like Now
thesetares overgrowing and overmastering the good wheat, it was fit that the
good seed should be sown again: and that it might not be corrupted again, it
was necessary that the Law should be delivered in Tables of stone, to remain
ever to be looked upon, and not forgotten. 3. Thirdly, God inflicted the
punishment of blindness upon them, as S. Augustine says, Lege infatigabili
spargit (...) paenales caecitates super illicitas cupiditates, when men went
after their own lusts, and neglected the light of nature which God had written
in their hearts, and would not cherish it, it pleased God to send upon them the
spirit of slumber and giddiness.
And thus having spoken of their knowledge, let us now see their practice. And
by this, they deserved the loss of the light of Nature three ways.

1. In respect of God. Because, whatsoever things or Arts they invented, or
whatsoever Hab. 1. 16.
else they understood, they attributed not to God, but to their own industry,
sacrificing to their own nets, as the Prophet. And as S. Paul, professing
themselves (...). 1. 22.
to be wise, and therefore (as he says) they became fools, and had the reward
of their folly, God gave them up. 2. Again, whereas the goodness of every
action should be for the end, all their actions were either for a wrong end, or
none at all. As the Epicures end was for pleasure. The Platonists ob praxim
politicam, for policy. The Stoics for the action it (...), Officium propter
(...) or propter virtutem, doing their duty for their duties, (...) virtues
own sake, none for the glory of God. But we know, that Officium est propter
quiddam altius officio, for something more excellent then then the duty it Esa.
42. 8.
self, that is for the glory of God. For he says, My glory will I not give to
another. But they robbed God of this glory. 3. Lastly, whereas God is no (...)
offended, yea more for the breach of the (...) Table, then of the second; and
in the second Table more with Adultery then Theft: they go another way, and set
down great punishments for Thefts, and such things as are committed against
themselves, or concern them; but when they come to blasphemy and other sins
that are injurious and derogatory to Gods honor, they regard not them, nor set
any (or at least little) punishment upon them, as if they concerned not them at
all.
In respect of Men. Take the second Table, in which is contained the duty of 2.
Reg. 23. 10.
Mark. 7. 11.
and releeved them not, yet they had their Corban for it: a child might neglect
his duty toward his Parents if he vowed to bestow a gift on the Temple. For
stealth and robbery that was accounted no sin, their Law bare them out: as in
Sparta it was but, Tu quoque fac simile, do thou the like, And for Adultery
they allowed their nagas libidines, extravagant lusts, their abominable feasts
to Venus, and their Stews to maintain them.

In respect of themselves. They practiced and delighted in Gluttony and
Drunkenness, Augustine says of them, they did mensuras bibere sine mensura,
drink measures without measure: and it was accounted a commendable thing among
them. No marveil then if in these respects, all those things considered, that
God plagued them with blindness and darkness, for such intolerable abuse of
that light they had.

Thus man's heart being an ill Custos or keeper of the Law, and ignorantia
ignorance being made poena ignorantiae the punishment of ignorance, and so the
Law being almost blotted out, it was necessary it should be written, so as it
might abide for ever. When God had made an end of communing with Moses upon
mount Sinai, he gave him two Tables of Testimony, Tables of Stone written with
his Exo. 31. 18.
own finger, which had a sign and resemblance, and indeed contained summarily
the Law of nature. But after they were broken in pieces by Moses moved to wrath
against the Israelites for their idolatry to the Molten Calf, then were two
Tables 32. 19.
made again by Moses, but the Law was written in them by God, this Law was 34.
1.
called Moses Law, because it was delivered to the Israelites by his ministry:
ever since it has been delivered to succeeding ages by the ministry of Man.

Now it was necessary that this Law should be given at this time in these
respects.

1. Because now, not only the Gentiles walked in the vanity of their own
hearts, but the Israelites the seed of Abraham (to whom God had bound himself
Ezech. 20. 7.
by promise) were addicted to the Idol-worship of Egypt, and having lived long
in Egypt, had almost lost the knowledge of sacrificing to, and true ly
worshipping of of God. So that had not God at this time taken his people apart
from other Nations into the wilderness, and there as it were schooled them
apart, and taught them his Law, and given it to them written, to be preserved
for posterity, the whole world (in probability) would have been (if dim before)
stark blind at length, and wholly ignorant of Gods Law.

2. Nor did God give his Law to all the world at once, nor write it in the
manifold and different tongues of the Nations, but first imparted it to Moses
and Aaron, and the Elders of the Jews, that by them it might be communicated to
the whole body of that people, in the ancient tongue kept ever since Adams time
by the Patriarchs, as is commonly thought. And then did God make this his
people so famous in regard of the wonderful miracles wrought amongst them, his
admirable dealings with them, his temple and worship granted to them: that the
world before Christ's coming could not plead ignorance. Besides whereas the
Gentiles had departed from God, yet such was his mercy, that he left the way
open for the Israelites to call them again to the truth, and for their
reentrance into the true Church, and becoming Pr selytes.

Now then come we to show, that in this written Law of Moses are all the four
properties which are in all Laws. 1. Preceptum, a rule for our actions. 2.
Modus the manner how to observe that Rule. 3. 4. Praemium and poena, The reward
for keeping, and the punishment for breaking it.

1. First, that it is a Rule and precept for our Actions. The Psalmist says.
The Law Psa. 19. 7.
of the Lord is a perfect Law, etc. Every Law else is unperfect.

2 For the Manner. It requires that Toti, we be whole observers of the Law, 82
it commands, that we do it with our whole soul and body. For we consist but of
1 Toti.
those two parts. And the soul likewise has two parts, the Mind and the
Heart. Now God must be perfectus mentis scopus, the mark at which the mind
must wholly aim, the end of all our actions, there must be plena intentio
(...) Deum, look wholly to God in them. And the heart which is the will, must
be tota inflammata wholly inflamed. As for the Body, every Member of it must be
used, and all the strength of it, to perform the Law, and be instruments of
Righteousness; toto cord, totis viribns all our heart, and all our strength
must be employed therein. Deuteronomy. 6. 5.


For (...) all the Law. Its Gods own wish concerning the people. O that there 2
Totum.
were such a heart in them, that they would keep all my commandments always:
5. 29.
and it were very absurd to except any. For whereas God is perfectly wise, if
some of his precepts were needless, then might he be taxed with folly, in not
leaving out them which were superfluous. And as none of Gods Laws must be left
unkept, so none but his or what is grounded upon them, or not repugnant to
them, and imposed by lawful authority derived from him, must be kept; for then
his wisdom would be likewise impeached, if any thing thing besides his Law or
without subordination to his, were to be kept; and the Law it self would be
imperfect, but it is neither defective, nor has any thing superfluous in it:
and therefore God says. Whatsoever thing I command you, observe to do it, thou
shall not add thereto, or 12. 32.
diminish from it. Nothing must be commanded in Gods name, as immediately from
him, but what he has prescribed.

For the Continuance. Tota in vita est (...), It is to be kept always, all the
3 Semper.
days of our life. The place before quoted shows, by the word [alwayes] that
to 5. 29.
continue all our lives in his obedience, is a part of the Law. And the same in
effect, he commands elsewhere, Thou shall Love the Lord thy God, and keep his
charge, 11. 1
and his statutes, and his judgments and his commandments always. And in all
places too, for though the place includes not the time, yet the time includes
the place, and therefore the house of Rimmon is not, nor can be excepted. 2
Kin. 5. 18.


Thirdly for reward. If the Law be kept, there is promise of reward. This Saint
3 Reward.
Paul confirms. Godliness (says he) is profitable to all things, having
promise of the 1 Timothy 4. 8.
life that now is, and of that which is to come. And our Savior says, that
they that have done good shall come forth of the grave to the resurrection of
life. Saint John 5. 29.
Paul testifies before Agrippa, that the twelve Tribes do rest in hope of a
Resurrection. Act. 26. 7.
And the opinion of the Sadduces that held the contrary was ever odious to the
best Jews.

Fourthly for punishment. If the Law be not kept after this manner, first
wholly, 4 Punishment.
but in a double heart, then comes the Curse, which the prophet denounces,
Cursed is Jer. 48. 10.
he that does the work of the Lord negligently. And for the Totum. He that
keeps not the whole Law is accursed. Cursed is he that confirms not all the
words Deuteronomy. 27. 6.
of the law to do them, and all the people shall say Amen. which very words
Saint Gal. 3. 10.
Paul recites to the Galatians, (...) he has in stead of [confirmeth not,]
continues not, and that is for the Semper or Toto tempore, the keeping them
always, all our life. And these being Gods Curses, they are sure: for as when
he said fiat lux, let there be light, and it was so; so if he say Cursed, it
will be so too. And as there is a fullness of blessing to them that can keep
this Law, so there is a fullness of his wrath to them that break it: a Curse
without a blessing for the one, and a blessing Deuteronomy. 28. 15.
without a Curse for the other. Curses for these in this life, Si non obedietis
etc. If ye will not harken to do all these commandments, all these Curses shall
come (...). 66. 10.
(...). 9. 44.
upon thee. As they follow there. And for the life to come. Their worm shall
not die, neither shall their fire be quenched, as the prophet speaks, which
words our Savior quoteth also. So that the Law of Moses for the moral part of
it agrees with the Law of Nature, and what God commanded Moses to write for
the instruction of the Israelites was in great part written in the hearts of
the Heathen, and in some measure practiced by the better sort of them.

Now if the question be asked, which of us, nay does the best of us fulfill the
Commandments, or who has so clean a heart that never lutted, or indeed that
lusts not daily? We answer confidently, None. And to prove this Saint (...)
shall tell you (in the first seven chapters to the Romans) that both Jew and
Gentile were defective, and came short herein. Saint James says, In mult is
offendimus omnes, in James 3. 2.
many things we all offend. The prophet David by way of question says, Delicta
Psalm. 19. 12.
quis intelligit? who is there that understands how (...) he offends. So
that Septies in die cadit justus, The best of us falls seven times a day, which
diverse take as meant of Pro. 24. 16.
falling into sin, though others, very learned, take it, of falling into
afflictions. And holy Job confessed, that he could not answer one for a
thousand. Lastly (to omit many) Job 9. 2.
K. David speaks positively in regard of fulfilling the Law, that, In Gods
sight shall no Psalm. 140. 2.
man living be justified, that is, if God should proceed according to strict
justice.

If then the case of the best be so, another question arises, Whether God be
just in (...) things to be kept, and promising that whereof no man can be
capable, because no man can keep the Law.

We answer that God is most just, and there is no injustice in his proceedings.
Though the matter be never so crooked, yet the rule ought to be straight, not
like a (...) rule. For God being perfectly just, his Law must needs be
perfectly just (...): for else if he had left out any part of the Law, he might
have seemed to (...) sin.

And if it be demanded, why we were not made able to fulfill and perform it.
Some answer thus, That Adam was at first made fit and able, and received
strength to keep it, in that perfection which was required: but he lost it. For
Adam was like an evil (...), that receiving money of his Master to do his
business spent it riotously, (...) became drunk by the way, and so was not able
to perform that work which his Master expected: yet the Master might lawfully
exact it of him, because he had before enabled him unto it: So God gave us
ability at the first, to do what he commanded, but we having lost that ability
vainly, God may lawfully exact of us, what he let us to do.

But against this some object, that seeing man lost this ability, not
efficienter, but Addition 5.
(...), by Gods penal act depriving him of it, it can no more stand with Gods
justice Of man's power to keep the Law of Christ.
and wisdom still to require the same obedience without new abilities, then for
a Magistrate, having cut off a man's feet for some offense, yet to require him
to go to such a place, and then to punish him for not going: and therefore it
may be said, that God never requires any thing of us, but he either gives or is
ready to give ability to do it, if we be not wanting to our selves. And
therefore as God requires obedience under the gospel, so he enables us by his
grace, or is ready to enable, if we seek to him to do what he requires: as to
avoid every known and wilful sin, and to perform the substance of every good
duty, though we are still subject to sins of Infirmity, which we must labor
against, and though we come short of perfection in some degree, yet we must aim
at it, and not rest in a perfection of parts. Thus every Christian may and
ought to keep the law of God, as it is qualified and moderated in the Gospel,
so as to be free from all reigning sin, and to perform every act commanded in
sincerity, and as this is possible by the grace of the gospel, so it is
necessary to salvation in all after their conversion, and Repentance. As for
that absolute perfection or freedom from all sin, it is commanded too, but not
as actually necessary to salvation: but only in our true and constant
endeavor, as that which we must aim at, and come as near to as we can, though
we do not attain it in this life. And thus it may be truly said, that the Law,
though it cannot be kept in that absolute and exact manner, which is required
in the Covenant of works, that is without the least omission, or intermission,
in which sense God does not now require it of us to salvation, yet as it is
required in the second Covenant according to the equity and moderation of the
gospel, it may by the grace of Christ be kept, and must be kept by every true
Christian, so far as God requires it of us now: and this is (...) Christian
perfection which the Scripture often (...) to, and the Catholic Church of
Christ ever acknowledged. God having made a second Covenant, wherein there is a
Law to be kept as well as promises to be believed, requires obedience now not
by virtue of the first covenant which is void, but according to the second
which is still in force, whereby he is always ready by such means and various
dispensations as are agreeable to his wisdom and justice to enable us to do what
in this covenant is required.

But an answer to the first question, and that more fully, you shall have in
the words of the Apostle Romans 8. 3. What the Law could not do, in that it was
weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful
flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh. That the righteousness of the
Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the
spirit. In which words are two things principally to be observed.

1. That the Law cannot now, nor ever could justify men: yet he lays not the
fault on the Laws weakness (it being most perfect) but on our corrupt flesh.
It is the flesh that cannot do that which the Law requires. 2. The second
arises out of the former: that is, seeing that neither the Law could justify
us, nor we perform what the Law required, God, (rich in mercy and goodness)
sent his Son into the world, that being incarnate here should die for us, and
by that means take away the guilt and dominion of sin in us, and enable us to
keep his Laws by faith and love, which is the perfection and fulfilling of the
Law.
To show more plainly how Christ did this, and that was two ways.
1. By fulfilling whatsoever was promised and prefigured, in the Law and the
Prophets, As semen mulieris, the seed of the woman shall bruise the head of the
Genesis 3. 15.
serpent: and, In thy seed shall all the nations of the world be blessed: with
diverse 22. 18.
other of the like nature. He also fulfilled the ceremonialls of the Law, while
he being Priest offered himself as a sacrifice. Besides, he spiritually
circumciseth believers, by substituting Baptism instead of Circumcision. He is
our Passover, and appointed the Eucharist instead of the Paschal Lamb: and
indeed, he is the full complement and perfection of the Law and the Prophets.
2. Christ fulfilled the Law by satisfying in most absolute manner the will of
God; being the holy of holies, without spot or sin at all, for in him is the
love of God most perfect, and righteousness most absolute. And this in regard
of the merit and satisfaction thereof, he communicates gratis freely to us most
imperfect, to us, I say, if we believe. God was in Christ (says Saint Paul)
reconciling the world to him, 2. Cer. 5. 19.
not imputing their trespasses to them: for he has made him to be sin for us,
who 21.
knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. So
Abraham Romans 4. 3.
believed and it was imputed to him for righteousness. For by faith we rely
upon Christ, whom we believe to have made satisfaction most fully to God for
us, and that God is so pleased with us in Christ, that he accepts us, as now
become the Sons of God. 3. But this faith, by which we believe in Christ is not
by our nature or merits, but is wrought in us by Gods grace, through the Spirit
given into our hearts. And this, abiding there, enflames them with love of Gods
Law, and desire to express the same by good works: which though we do not
perform as we ought by reason of the infirmity of our flesh, yet God allows
our endeavors in Christ. Nor did ever any of the Saints (though he strove and
resolved to keep the Law as far as he could) trust or rely upon his own merits
but upon Christ. Saint Paul did not, for he complained, Who shall deliver me
out of this body of death: and presently adds, Romans 7. 24, 25
I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord, that is, I thank him that he has
redeemed me from death by Jesus Christ. And it follows, There Is now no
condemnation 8. 1.
to them which are in Christ Jesus, etc. So that a faithful man moved by Gods
Spirit to do that which is good, as far as he is able, and as the second
covenant requires, and that out of love of God, and not only for fear of the
Curies threatened in the Law, may be said to fulfill the Law in such manner,
that God in Christ accepts of him. So much in answer to the first question.
To the second, why God would promise life to them that should keep the Law, 2.
seeing no man can keep it in a legal and exact manner, we answer.

1. First, besides that, it may be doubted, whether God does offer or promise
life now otherwise then upon the conditions of the Gospel, which may be kept,
some do further answer, that God shows hereby, that he abides the same, and
the Law still the same, though we be changed from what he made us. 2. Secondly,
Hereby man sees his own weakness, and is driven out of himself to seek
Christ. For (as the Apostle says) if there had been a Law given, which could
have given life, verily righteousness should have been by the Law, But the
Scripture has concluded all men Gal. 3. 21, 22
under sin, that the promise by faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them
that believe. 3. Because Christ took on him our nature, and dying for us, has
purchased the promised inheritance, to be communicated to us, by faith and new
obedience or sanctification. 4. Lastly, Though man cannot keep the Law exactly,
yet upon his faith in Christ, and his resolution and endeavor to keep the Law,
and actual keeping of it, by the assistance of Gods grace, so as is above
declared, God accepts of him in Christ, and takes the will for the deed, in
some things, and accounts him righteous, and makes good the promise unto him.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the preparation before the giving of the Law. 1. To make them willing, by
consideration of 1. his benefits; 2. Gods right, as Lord; 3. Their relation as
Creatures, (...). 4. that they are his people. His benefits past and promised.
Three (...) to love. 1. Beauty. 2. Neernesse. 3. Benefits: all in God. 2 To
make them able, by sanctifying and cleansing themselves. That ceremonial
washing signified our spiritual cleansing. How we came to be polluted. How we
must be cleansed. Why they were not to come at their wives. Of the danger and
abuse of things lawful. 3. That they might not run too far, bounds were set. Of
curiosity about things unnecessary.

Now concerning the Preparation to the hearing of the Law.
THough in the Preface something has been said concerning the preparation of
the Catechumeni upon the words venite and auscultate, yet before we come to the
particular explication of the Law, we shall further add some thing in this
place about our preparation to the hearing of it. For we can receive no benefit
at Gods hands, if we be not prepared for it.

God himself commanded the people to prepare themselves before the hearing of
Exodus 19. 10.
the Law, and so of the Gospel also. Prepare ye the way of the Lord, says the
Baptist. Matthew. 3. 3.
And to these add, that the primitive Church appointed Vesperas diei Dominici,
Vespers of the Lords day, and so they had for other holy days, and solemn
feasts, and to the solemnest Sunday, Easter day, they prepared forty days
before. And forasmuch as the Sacrament is an appendix of the word, and the seal
of it, surely we cannot be excused, if we prepare our selves for the one, and
not for the other. The Eccl. 5. 1.
Preacher gives this advise; Keep thy foot (look to thy self) when thou go
into the house of the Lord. And again we ought to know that preparation is as
necessarily required of the Hearer, as of the Speaker.

Now this preparation consists of three things or means.

The first means to preparation, is to make the people willing to hear the Law,
(...)
and that is grounded upon the speech of God to the Israelites in Exodus. Ye
have Exodus 19. 4.
seen (says he) what I have done unto the Egyptians, and how I bare you on
Eagles wings. And a little after, Go to the people and sanctify them to day
and to morrow, and let them wash their clothes. And let them be ready against
the third

1. The will in every action is to precede, the people were to be made willing
to hear and receive the message that was to be delivered. And therefore to make
them willing God (in the first place) gives them a catalogue of his Benefits
and goodness. So that one way to stir us, and our will to embrace Gods Law is
the meditation and consideration of the benefits, which either We, or our
Country, Parents, Friends, or kindred have received at his hands, for the
remembrance of them will stir up a love in us, and love will make us do our
duties with delight.

2. Another way to prepare us, is by taking notice of the right and interest
God has in us, as he is our Creator, and so has power to command us
absolutely. We are as Pots in his hands, either to be made or broken as he
pleases: we are his servants or born subjects, and he may command us to do
what he pleases, for which he needed not to reward us, if e had not tied
himself by promise to reward us as the Subjects of Nebuchodonozor, who if they
performed his will, had no reward, Dan. 3.
if not, the furnace was heated seven times hotter. We are Dei Vernae, Gods
bondmen, and as the Poet says, Quae premiae Vernae, what rewards may bondmen
expect? we are bought with a price. There Is nothing that takes so deep an
impression in us, 1. Cor. 6. 20.
as the consideration of Gods benefits to us, and interests in us, and dominion
over us.

3. If we consider our selves, as we are his Creatures. The Dragons, the snow,
Psalm. 148.
wind, storm, hail, are (as it is in the psalm) to praise him; so that if it
had pleased God, to have made us but wind or snow, yet being his Creatures we
were bound to praise him; how much more then, for that he has given us a
living soul, and secondly the use of natural faculties in every member, the
value or estimate whereof may be made, by the want of an eye, or an arm, for
the supply whereof, how much would we think our selves beholding to any that
should restore us the use of them: and therefore seeing God gave us all our
Limbs, how much more ought we to be thankful to him for the use of all. But
thirdly, when we shall enter into consideration, that God has given us a
reasonable soul, it should procure a third degree of thankfulness. The value
of which is such, that as Saint Augustine says, that every man had rather
(...) cum ratione Lamentari to Lament ever with understanding, then ridere sine
ratione, to laugh without reason.

4. But the fourth transcends all the rest. If we consider the goodness of God
in choosing and preferring us above all other people to be his Church, and to
pertain to him in the New Covenant, and the death of his Son, all other
benefits will seem as miseries without this. And this benefit we shall the
better value. If we consider the Saints of God (who were wiser then the sons of
men) how they have Labored to be of the number of this Church, Gods elect
people, enduring infinite calamities, Heb. 11. 25.
and rejecting the preferment of this world, and (with Moses) rather enduring
to suffer affliction, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. Again,
we may divide Gods benefits, as God divides them himself in the verses before
mentioned. Into them that are past, and them that are promised; 1. Deliverance.
2. Eagles wings.

1. Them that are past. Deliverance. For this we need no other argument, then
that which God himself (...). Ye have seen what I did to the Egyptians. In
which as in a Type we have seen how God has delivered us from the spritual
Egypt, the kingdom of sin and Satan, and this deliverance from the shadow of
death, ignorance, blindness, and Gods judgments, does incomparably pass,
that from (...) and his servants. And though the Hunter has set a snare: yet
the Lord has Psalm. 91. 3.
delivered us from it, and all his snares, as from the noisome pestilence, a
terrore nocturno 5.
and sagitta diurna, from terror by night, and the arrow that flies by day,
multi undique ceciderunt, nos autem stamus, many have fallen round about us,
but we stand. 7.
A thousand fall beside us, and ten thousand at our right hand, and yet the
danger comes not near us. 2. I have not only delivered you from the Egyptians,
but I have carried you on Eagles wings, says God. In the Revelation, says he,
to the woman (that is to the Exodus 19. 4.
Church) that he gave her two wings of a great Eagle: which, according to the
interpretation of the learned, are,
1. His providence 2. His especial grace. Dei providentia in (...) seculo, ala
una gratia dei specialis ala ecclesiae altera, his providence in this life, and
special grace, which brings us to a better life, are the two wings whereby God
protects his Church.

1. His providence is thus proved. That he being infinite and eternal, yet
condiscendeth to care and provide for every particular thing we need. He is
said to make our bed. And in the Gospel to number our hairs. He has allotted
to us Psalm. 41. 3.
poor worms, being but ashes (as Job speaks) the most excellent guard of
Angels, Matthew 10. 30.
commanding them to wait upon us. Lastly, he has created this goodly Theater
of Job. 30. 19.
the world, and all creatures therein for our use, and has made us Lords
thereof. Heb. 1. 14.
And this providence of his, is (...) bonitatis, a fountain that can never be
drawn dry. 2 For his especial grace, preventing, and following appears 1. In
vouchsafing his only Son for the worlds redemption, and remission of sins. 2.
In giving us a measure of Sanctification, and virtue in some degree to live
well. 3. In giving us the ministry of his Word and Sacraments, as seals of his
promises, which the Prophets, Apostles, and Saints esteem so highly. 4. In
giving us pulsationes spiritus, Apoc. 3. 20.
standing at the doors of our hearts, and knocking, inspiring into us good
motions to do well, So that if we would in particular weigh these good gifts
of nature and grace, which God has bestowed upon us, we could not but think,
that he who does thus for us, must needs love us, and that if he love us, he
will command us nothing, but that which shall be acceptable to him, and
profitable for us.
But to make his providence appear full, add to these the benefits promised,
which are yet to come. We have them in the fifth and sixth verses. If ye will
hear my voice, ye shall be etc. and as they had their promises under the Law,
so have we under the Gospel better promises for the life to come. In respect of
which all the rest are as nothing: When we have the kingdom of heaven, and the
bliss thereof, no more can be added to us. These cannot be valued by the Eye,
nor by the ear, nor by the heart. The Prophet tells us. The eye has not seen,
nor the ear Esaias 64. 4.
has not heard, nor can the heart under stand, the joys that are provided for
them that seek God. Now we know, that the eye may see much, for our Savior saw
Matthew. 4. 8.
all the kingdoms of the world at once; and the Ear may hear many things; but
the heart may conceive infinite things in comparison of the senses for
apprehension, yet not all them so much as this: therefore the joys of the
world to come must needs be infinite: we usually call that which we cannot
value or reckon a Nemo (...). This is that name, which S. John speaks of in the
Revelation, that no man knows, but he Apoc. 2. 17.
that receives it.

And whereas the heaven and earth are too good for us, yet he promises to
create a Esaias 65. 17.
new heaven for us, as if this present were not pay good enough for our
service. Now the consideration and remembrance of all this, is to this end, to
stir up a love in us; for love will make us to do our duties, with ease,
diligence, delight, and perseverance, all these will follow love.

There are but three things that are motives to love. 1. Beauty. 2. Neernesse
of nature, or kindred. And 3. Benefits: and these three do even make the brute
and savage Beasts to love. Now these three are in God eminently.

1. For his excellency of Beauty, it appears most gloriously in those things,
which he has made, the world, and the inhabitants, and creatures therein,
which being so beautiful in themselves argue a far greater in him. The Prophet
Zachary admiring it, Zach. 9. 17.
breaks out into these words, O how great is his beauty. 2. For neernesse in
Nature, what nearer Relation can there be, then that of the Creator, and the
Creature? Parents are but instruments of our Creation, yet we account them the
nearest: but God is our Father indeed, not only by Creation, but Gal. 4. 5.
by a second bond of Adoption, we are his adopted sons. You know that David
Ephesians. 1. 5.
made it a great matter to be son in law to a King; but we are nearer: sons
indeed. 1. Sam. 18. 18
3. For benefits: if those which God has bestowed upon us, and are mentioned
before, be not sufficient, take one more. Such was his love to mankind, and
delight to do us good that he spared not his only son, but made him come down
from heaven, to dye for us. So that if these benefits make us not willing to do
his will, well may the saying of the Prophet (...) be taken up. Obstupescat
Jer. 2. 12.
coelum, be astonished O ye heavens. And so much for the first means of
preparation, willingness.
The second means of preparation begins at the tenth verse. God said to Moses,
2.
Go to the people and sanctify them to day and to morrrow, and let them wash
their clothes, and let them be ready against the third day, for then will I
come down, etc.

1. As the first was to make us willing, so the second is to make us able, fit,
apt, and capable of his law, In the primitive Church they began their Liturgy
with Sancta sanctis, munda mundis, so here none are capable of holy and clean
things, but holy and clean persons: therefore we must sanctify our selves, or
else we are not fit to receive the Law of God. The reason is, because if we put
an unclean thing to a clean, not only the unclean is no whit the cleaner,
but the clean thing is made unclean by it. It is the Prophet Haggai's allusion.
And our Savior makes it plain in the case of new Agg. 2. 12, 13.
Matthew. 9. 17.
wine and old bottles. If you keep not a proportion between the wine and the
bottles, Luke 5. 37.
both will perish, as is said before: so if there be not a proportion between
the word and the hearer, he is not fit to receive so holy a thing, and it will
turn to the condemnation of the hearer, and the frustration of the word heard.

2. The time of preparation or sanctifying prescribed by God here, is two
days, to day and to morrow, etc. to show that a convenient time must be
allowed for preparation, not like Saul's preparation, who being to encounter his
enemies called for 1. Sam. 14. 18.
the Ark and the Ephod, and would needs fall to prayer first, before the battle
began: but hearing of the approach of his enemies, and fearing to loose time by
prayer, lays all aside, and sets his people in array, and so his preparation
was all in vain: for he did unadvisedly herein. God would have us to continue
in our preparation, and therefore he wishes, O that my people would do thus
always: for the time Deuteronomy. 5. 29.
that is bestowed and spent in prayer is not lost, nay it is the best time that
can be bestowed of any.

3. The sanctification here, was at that time but a Ceremony, a washing, which
being a figure to them of Israel, they are examples to us. And as the Apostle
speaks, 1. Cor. 10. 11
are recorded for our admonition: for every Ceremony has its equity, to which
we are all bound. And though we be not commanded to put our Clothes in the
water, yet we must be careful to wash our souls.

The garments of the old Law, were Tunica, and stola, the inward and the
outward garment, which Saint John seems to allude unto: which have washed their
Apoc. 7. 14.
robes white, etc. And Saint Paul. Cleanse your selves from all filthiness of
the 2. Cor. 7. 1.
flesh. We must be cleansed both in flesh and spirit. Now the best way to make
our selves clean, is, to see how we became foul, that when we be once washed we
may keep our selves clean. Now there is a twofold pollution whereby we became
foul, as in a garment. 1. Pollutio externa, outward pollution and aspersion, as
spots, or 2. interna, grown within, as by Moths.

1. If a man (in the Law) did touch a dead corpse, or one that had an issue, by
that Lev. 15.
very touch he is made unclean; and by this is allegorized the pollution we
receive of the World, by ill examples, ill company, or the like: there is
uncleanness that will defile us with the touch. And secondly, if a man have an
issue in his own flesh, he is unclean, that is, the inward corruption which is
within us, the concupiscence of our unruly affections, arising from the
blindness of our minds, and resistance of our will: and all these had need of
washing, and separation. Therefore as the Apostle (upon the first place in
Leviticus) speaks, we must come out from among them, and be separate, and
touch not the unclean thing: and it was the same Counsel 2. Cor. 6. 17.
which the Prophet Esaias gave long before. For the second (within our selves)
Esa. 52. 11.
Saint Paul says, that we are Templa spiritus sancti, temples of the holy
Ghost: 2. Cor. 6. 16.
upon which S. Augustine says, Quisque Christianus templum habet in templo,
templum in domo, templum foris, ubique and semper templum ambulans, every
Christian has a temple in his temple, a temple in his house, a temple every
where abroad, and ever a walking temple. And because there must be no pollution
in a temple, none in Gods Apoc. 21. 27.
temple. Nihil inquinatum ingredietur in illud, there shall in no wise enter
into it, any thing that defiles: we had need to be careful to wash us so, that
all things may be clean unto us, and then all shall be munda mundis clean to
the clean.

But if we be once cleansed, we must take heed that we be not defiled or
polluted again. He that washes himself after he has touched a dead body, and
touches it Ecclus. 34. 25
again, is defiled, says Sirach. We must not therefore be like the Dog that
returns to his vomit: nor like the Sow that walloweth again in the mire. How
then may 2. Pet. 2. 22.
we be cleansed? Saint Augustine tells us, that there is balneum erectum a
Christo, balneum sanguinis ejus, by the bath of Christ's blood. And this is it,
wherein both our aspersions and fluxes may be cleansed away. Of which bath, the
water of Baptism is a representation. Baptismus abluit omnia peccata, says the
same Father, Baptism washes away all sins. Et Aqua illa non solum sordes
corporis mundat, sed animam a peccatis liberat, that water does not only
cleanse the spots of the body, but frees the soul from sin. And not only by
that, per Baptismum fluminis, but flaminis too, Lib. de (...) c. 1.
the Baptism of fire goes with it to purge us, even the Spirit of God, which
remains with us to the worlds end, and wherewith we are daily baptized, for
as fire scoureth and cleanses metal from dross, so does the Spirit of God
the filth of our souls. S. Augustine says, Spiritus sanctiopus est, and
diligentes sanctificare, and sanctos costodire, to keepus, as well as to make
us holy. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19.


But because the Spirit and fire may be quenched, there is another matter added
to John 15. 3.
feed it, The cooperation of the word, ye are clean through the word, says our
Savior: Jer. 2. 22.
the hearing of the word is a cleanser too, it cleanses like niter or fullers
earth. Mal. 3. 2.
The daily applying of the word checketh that which is amiss in us, and
cleanses our corruption. By this the Spirit purges us both within and
without: for outwardly Mat. 23. 25.
we must be clean too, or else we come short of a Scribe or Pharisee, for he
makes clean the outside. 15. 19.


But the inward cleansing, washing of the heart and spirit is specially for
Christians, Exodus 19. (...).
because out of the heart comes all uncleanness; and if no concupiscence
were, there would be no issue at all: so that he that can scour the foul, shall
have no issue.

In this Chapter of preparation it is said, be ready against the third day:
come not at your wives, which seems to be an addition to Gods commandment, and
a counsel given by Moses: not that this was unlawful, or did pollute, but
because it was inconvenient at that time, and might perhaps have endangered
them, from being so clean as they should be.

The Jews report, that beside the Law of God, the most ancient saying among
them, (that is, of such as they called Dicta sapientum, the sayings of wise
men) was facite (...) legi, make a limitation to the Law. As when God commanded
the Israelites not to enter league or covenant with the Gentiles, they (because
Deuteronomy. 7. 2.
they would be sure not to offend against that precept) would not so much as
keep company with them, nor drink with them. And Job, (whereas the Commandment
Job 31. 1.
was, not to covet another man's wife) made a covenant with his eyes, and not so
much as thought upon a maid. So S. Paul in the Chapter which is called the 1
Cor. 7.
Chapter of expedience, confesses, that it is lawful to marry, yet it was
better to forbear in that time of persecution; he made a hedge about the Law,
abridging the use of a lawful thing, that they might not fall into unlawful.

Now God forbids none of these in any place of Scripture: It was not
unlawful to drink with unbelievers, nor to look upon a maid, nor to marry. Yet
we see their counsel and Moses, here, come not at your wives. This teaches us
a good point of wisdom, not to go too near the edge of the bank, lest we fall
into the ditch, not to come too near the pit, lest (...) in.

And the ground of the equity of this command brings in a third reason, to
show, that we have need of inward cleansing. A clean thing may be defiled, not
only by an unclean thing, but by a thing that is not of as high a nature and
degree, as it self, that is, not as good as it, though it be clean. As a holy
thing being touched with that which not as good as it self, is unhallowed. If
one hear holy flesh (its the Prophets Haggi 2. 12.
question) in the skirt of his garment, and with his skirt do touch bread, or
pottage, or wine, or oil, or any meat, shall it be holy? and the Priests
answered, No. And Isay 1. 22.
the Prophet Esaias tells us of two things to the same purpose. 1. That their
silver became dross, and their wine was mixed with water. Now the dross
defiles the silver, because it is naught, but water defiles wine, because it
is not of so good a nature as it self. So is brass with gold. So we, if we set
our souls upon inferior things, and earthly, make a mixture; and though they
be not unclean, nay, though they be lawful, yet there will be a pollution. And
in what respect it comes to defile, the Heb. 12. 1.
Author to the Hebrews shows, and makes a distinction; telling us, that we
must not only forbear sin, that besets us, but also lay aside every weight
that hinders us in our Christian race. This weight is not properly sin, but an
impediment, and because 1 Cor. 6. 12.
it hinders, it must be laid aside. He argues thus. All things are lawful, but
all things are not expedient: Lawful things, when they hinder, must not be
used; if lawful things begin once to be unexpedient, a Christian is not to use,
but eschew them. By the use of indifferent things we are sometimes brought
under their power, they become predominant over us: And therefore we are so to
use them, as that we come not under the power of them, that we may forbear them
when we will, and use them when we will. Though the use of marriage be lawful,
yet because as S. Paul says, it may be a hinderance to fasting and prayer, it
is not to be used at such times as those duties are required. For the Devil
insinuates into us, and deceives us, not only by evil things, but also by
those which are good in their own nature; by Gods Psalm. 69. 23.
good creatures, by his gifts, and we are no less to take heed of him in
indifferent 109. 7.
things, then in evil. Our tables may be a snare unto us: And the thing which
should Matthew. 6. 5.
be unto us for our welfare may be an occasion of falling. So Prayer (one of
the most 2.
excellent duties of a Christian) may be turned into sin. The like may be said
of Alms. These things are spoken to this purpose, that as Moses's counsel was,
Come not at your wives, which is a thing lawful: yet if by circumstance of time
or place, or the like, these lawful things make a man slow in the service of
God, we ought to refrain them, and to follow the counsel of Moses.

The third and last point in preparation is set down in the 12 and 21 Verses,
which 3.
was to set bounds and marks about the mountain, which the Israelites were not
to pass. And the repeating of it, must needs cause us to conceive that there
is some weighty thing in it of which we are to take notice. For the Scripture
has nothing vain or needless: but as Joseph said of Pharaohs dreams, that the
doubling of them did show the certainty, so the doubling here shows the danger
if this command be not kept. And the command is to keep the Israelites within
their bounds: for as the first part was to make them willing, and the second to
make them able; so because a man may be overwilling, or rather curious, and may
run too far, here he is abridged, this third means to preparation sets limits
and bounds to our curiosity, that we pass not the marks which God has set in
knowledge of him and his will, but content our selves with the knowledge of
such things as are needful for us, and revealed to us.

And here we may take notice of a foolish affection that we naturally have, in
hazarding necessary things, by our curiosity in those that are needless: and
not only in adventuring things necessary for those which are unnecessary, but
with too greedy (...). 3.
a desire of them, to break Gods Commandments. So we see in the beginning Gods
prohibition gave the Devil occasion, to tempt Eve to be overcurious to know
that she should not. And afterward, a little before the Law given, Moses
commanded, Exodus 16. 19.
that none should reserve Manna till the morning, and yet some of them itched
to try 25.
conclusions, and saved it; so it stank. And they were charged not to go forth
on the Sabbath day to gather it, for they should find none, yet some would
needs go out, but they were deceived. The men of Bethshemesh would needs be
prying into the 1 Samuel o. 19.
Ark of the Lord, but they paid for it: for fifty thousand and threescore and
ten of them died for their foolish curiosity. And therefore in this place God
commanded, that on pain of death, nor man nor beast should pass their bounds.

God prohibited the people because they had murmured, not to go into Canaan,
Number. 14 44.
yet they would needs go up to the hill too, and were discomfited. It was no
necessary 45.
thing to go up, yet go they would: and here they were not it seems so hasty to
hear and to know, as to gaze: it was not the Law they desired to know, but the
place and the Mount, and to be idly occupied: and therefore God gave the
charge three times: for curiosity is an odious thing to God.

And we see that this very affection of curiosity reigned afterward in the
sons of Acts 17. 21.
Adam in moving curious questions, concerning Heaven and Hell, how and where 1.
6.
they be, omitting many needful things in the mean time; like the Athenians,
that gave themselves to nothing but to tell or hear new things. The Apostles
must needs be asking our Savior, Lord, will thou at this time restore the
kingdom? and tell us, when shall these things be? and what shall be the sign
of thy coming, and of the end Mat. 24. 3.
of the world? But as Christ answered them, It is not for you to know the times
and seasons, which the Father has put in his own power. So here Moses, Non est
vestrum ascendere montem, It is not for you to come near the Mount, or to see
what is done there, it belongs not to you.

This then must be our wisdom, to be content with the knowledge of that which
God has revealed to us: and not to be too curious in prying after those things
which he has reserved to himself. Secreta Deo, aperta and revelata, nobis and
filiis nostris, as Moses said, secret things belong to God our Lord; but those
things which (...). 29. 29.
are revealed, belong to us and to our children. And this is the same which the
Apostle counsels us to do, to keep within the limits which the Holy Ghost
has set us: Not to think of our selves more highly then we ought to think, but
to think soberly, to be wise to sobriety. This curious enquiring and searching
after needless matters, has been the decay of learning. And the Apostle
says, that such curious inquisitors, 1 Timothy 6. 4. 2 3. 7.
shall languish, and be sick with foolish questions, ever learning, and never
able to come to the knowledge of the truth. Qui inventa veritate (says S.
Augustine) aliud quaerit, (...) invenerit, He that finding the truth, seeks
further, shall find a lie. We have a fearful example of it in Solomon: I gave
my heart (says he) to know Eccl. 1. 17.
wisdom, and to know madness, and folly: his too great curiosity made him
stray too far, and by degrees to connive at most gross idolatry. Qui scrutator
est divinae majestatis opprimetur a gloria, they which are too inquisitive in
seeking out things too high for them, shall perish in their folly. Therefore it
is best for us to know our bars, and keep our distance. And thus much for the
several means of Preparation.

CHAP. XIX.
The manner of delivering the Law. 1. With thick clouds. 2. With thunder and
lightning. 3. With sound of a trumpet. The terrible delivering of the Law,
compared with the terror of the last judgment, when we must give account for
the keeping of it. The comparison in all the particulars. The use of this.

THere is added also by the learned another point, not a point of Preparation,
but a The manner of delivering the Law.
necessary observation in the delivery of the Law, fit for meditation, and it
is gathered from the manner of the delivery of it, in the before mentioned
Chapter of Exodus, Exodus 19.
upon which the Apostle seems to Comment. For whatsoever might seem Heb. 12. 18.
terrible to man, God made it to concur with the delivery of the Law. The
particulars are these.

1. The Lord told Moses, he would come in a thick cloud. Verse. 9.


2. With thundering, with lightning, with the sound of a trumpet. 16.


Now all these as they are fearful sights and objects, so was it done purposely
by God, that his Law might be received with the more reverence. And we see it
took Exo. 20. 18.
effect and wrought upon them: For upon the quaking of the Mount, and those
terrible sights, the people removed and stood afar off, and said to Moses,
Speak thou 19.
with us, and we will hear, but let not God speak withus, lest we dye. Nay, the
sight of these things was so terrible, that it wrought upon Moses himself, for
there we read that Moses said, I exceedingly quake and fear. Heb. 12. 21.


These sights and sounds affect us not, because they are past: but yet the
Apostles argument may affect us. If the delivery of the Law was so terrible,
how dreadful 25.
shall the account be how it is kept? And if the Law being delivered by the
ministry of Angels (as S. Stephen said) were thus terrible, how dreadful shall
it be when God Acts 7. 53.
Heb. 2. 2.
in the power of his Majesty shall come to require account of it? Now this will
appear more plainly, by comparing the circumstances in the delivery of the Law,
with the day of judgment.

1. That which is first mentioned, is a thick and dark cloud. And the Prophet
speaking of the day of judgment, says, The day of the Lord is darkness, and
no Amos 5. 18.
19.
light. S. Jude calls it, the blackness of darkness. And the Prophet Joel
gives the Jude 13.
reason: because the Sun and Moon shall be darkened, and the stars shall
withdraw their Joel 3. 15.
light.

2. The second, there were thunderclaps. And S. Peter says, that when the day
2 Pet. 3. 10.
of the Lord shall come, the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and
the elements shall melt with servent heat, and the Earth shall be burnt up. And
no man doubts but these things are more terrible to the eye and the ear, then
the noise of a thunderclap.

3. The third is lightning or fire, which then was but upon the mount of Sinai
only: but at the last day, it shall be all over the Earth. This fire was but as
that in the Bush, Heb. 12. 10.
which was not consumed by it, nor Sinai by this. But our God is a consuming
fire, Apoc. 19. 3.
and such a fire as will torment for ever. S. John says, the smoke of it shall
ascend for Mark 9. 43.
ever, and the fire shall never be quenched.

4. The fourth is the sound of a trumpet, that pierced the ears of the living
only: but there shall be a more shrill trumpet, that shall be heard, not by
the living only, but by the dead in their graves. The trumpet shall sound, and
the dead shall be raised, says S. Paul. 1 Cor. 15. 52.


5. Another thing (which was an effect of the former) was the shaking of the
Earth, there but one mountain quaked; but at the last day it is said, Yet once
more Heb. 12. 26.
I shake not the Earth, but also Heaven. This removed not the mountain, but
that Luke 21. 11.
shall remove both Heaven and Earth.

Thus we see the circumstances of both conferred; now let us compare the
effects of them. The giving of the Law made only Moses to shake and tremble,
but at requiring of an account of it, there shall be like trembling of all, the
very just shall Nahum 2. 10.
tremble too: but the wicked, they shall smite their knees together. They shall
go Esaias 2. 19.
into the holes of the rocks, and into the caves of the earth for fear of the
Lord, and Hos. 10. 8.
Luke 23. 30.
for the glory of his Majesty, when he arises to shake terribly the earth. And
as our Apoc. 6. 16.
Savior (quoting the words of the Prophet) speaks, They shall say to the
mountains, coverus, and to the hills fall on us, and that to hide them from the
wrath of the angry Judge. So that we see, by these comparisons, that the
delivery did in some sort prefigure the requiring of it; but the terriblenesse
of that day cannot be expressed. This sound may awake us now; and therefore let
us say, as the people said here to Moses, let us hear it by the ministry of
man: and as the Apostle says, let us have grace to Heb. 12. 28.
serve God with reverence and fear. For no doubt when Christ shall come from
Heaven, he will bring with him a fiery Law, even fire and brimstone, like to
the Deuteronomy. 33. 2.
Law mentioned and foretold by Moses. So much for the circumstances and effects
in the manner of delivering the Law.

CHAP XX.
The end of the Law as given by Moses. 1. It brings none to perfection, and
that by reason of man's corruption, as appears, 1. by the place, a barren
wilderness, a mountain, which none might touch, 2. By the mediator Moses. 3.
By the breaking of the tables, etc. 2. It brings us to Christ, because given by
Angels in the hand of a Mediator: It was to be put into the ark: Given fifty
days after the Passover: Moses had a veyl: The fiery Serpent: Our use of the
Law, to know our debts as by a book of accounts, then to drive us to seek a
surety to pay the debt, viz. Christ, and to be thankful and take heed of
running further into debt.

THere is yet one thing to be considered, namely, the use and end of the Law,
The end of the Law.
which we will collect from the words of the Author to the Hebrews. It brings
no man to perfection. The Law (that is the Mosaical Law, or the Covenant of
Heb. 7. 19.
works, but not the moral Law considered as it is a part of the Covenant of
grace) made nothing perfect; but it was the bringing in of a better thing. So
that 1. It brings no man to perfection. 2. It brings us to a better thing, that
is (as it is in another place,) the Law was our Schoolmaster to bring us to
Christ; but the principal end of the Law, Gal. 3. 24.
as it is delivered by Christ, and become a part of the Gospel, is to be a rule
to direct us, and the way to lead us by walking therein to life and salvation,
Mat. 5. and 6. and 7.

1. For the first end. Though it be a Law which carries with it the character
of the Lawgiver, as those of Solon did, (which was mildenesle) and of Draco,
which was cruelty. So this of God, holiness, justice, goodness, etc. And
though it be mandatum sanctum, an holy Law, in respect of the duties to God;
and justum, (...), in respect Romans 7. 12.
of the duties to men, and bonum, good, in respect of our selves: yet by
occasion of our corruption and transgression, it brings no perfection with
it, which appears by seven circumstances.

1. The first is of the place where it was given. That was a vast and barren
Wilderness yielding no fruit: to signify, that the Law should be so barren of
fruits, that it should not yield one soul unto God. 2. The second is of the
Mountain, which was Sinai. And this S. Paul acknowledges Gal. 4. 24. 25.
to have relation by way of allegory to Agar. It is a mountain in Arabia, and
therefore holds of Ishmael the son of Agar the bondwoman, and therefore to be
cast out with her children, and not to receive the inheritance with Isaac. So
they which think to bring forth fruit by their own righteousness, are like
Ishmael who was born by nature, not by promise, as Isaac was, whose birth was
supernatural: therefore the children of the Law are to be cast out with their
mother, because they cannot be perfected by it. 3. Thirdly, none might go up to
this mountain, none might touch it. And so concerning the Law, none has gone
up to it, none could so much as ever touch it, as he should. But the condition
of grace, the Gospel, is otherwise. We must Heb. 4. 16.
ascend to Sion, the hill of grace, and that with boldness. And many have gone
up to it. The Prophet speaking of the Gospel of grace, says: Many people Esaias
2. 3.
shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, etc.
4. The fourth is of the person that was minister of it, Moses. And if any man
should have received perfection by the Law, no doubt but he that gave it,
might. But we find that he was a transgressour of the Law, before he received
it, and Numb. 20. 12.
therefore was never partaker of the promise of the Law, that is, to enter into
the land of Canaan. Again, his miracles often were destructive, as to drown
(...), and to bring plagues, to show Gods wrath and justice, and not to save.
Whereas the Ministers of grace raised the dead, healed the sick, cast out
Devils, etc. So we see it is the Covenant of Grace that must perfect and save.

Lastly, when Moses came down from the Mount, his face did so shine, that Exodus
34. 33.
no man was able to behold him, unless a veil were put over his face: which 2
Cor. 3. 13.
shows, that the cleanness and perfection of that Law is rather to dazzle the
eyes, then to enl ghten them: but Christ came into the world with so mild an
aspect and countenance, as needed no veil.

5. The next is of the Law it self. The Tables were broken before they could be
delivered, which the Fathers expound to signify, how that covenant should be
made void, and another come instead of it. 6. Of the Time. In that very time
that the people should have received the Law, they were in the greatest
transgression of it that could be, namely, in idolatry and worshipping the
golden Calf, and in that respect, very unfit to receive a Law, and so it was
broken before it was given. 7. Lastly, of the Manner. It was delivered by the
terrible blast of a trumpet, to terrify the people; showing thereby, that it
was a Law of terror, and would require terrible things at their hands. But the
delivery of the Gospel was clean contrary; for that was delivered in a
comfortable song, by a Quire of Angels, praising and giving glory to GOD: a
song of peace and joy: whereas the trumpet serves rather to denounce war.
For the second end. It was to be (...) ad Christum, a Schoolmaster to bring 2.
us to Christ; which will be shown by these five circumstances of the Law.

1. It was delivered by the ministry of Angels. It was ordained by Angels in
the Gal. 3. 19.
hand of a Mediator, says the Apostle. Now we know that a Mediator has
power to end matters as he pleases, either to establish or abrogate a Law. So
Christ our Mediator, because for our salvation it could not be otherwise, took
upon him in his own person to satisfy God, and abrogate the old Covenant, to
establish a new. So the Law brings us to this Mediator. 2. There was a charge
given to Moses, that the two Tables should be put into the Deuteronomy. 10. 2.
Ark of the Testimony, which was but a sign of Gods presence with them: which
8.
sign was perfected in Christ, in whom God is present with us, for he is our
Emanuel, God with us indeed. 3. Moses must have a veil, which was but a
Ceremony, to show the mitigation of 2 Cor. 3. 14.
the rigor of the Law by Christ; for by him the veil is removed. The veil also
signified the ceremonies of the Law, which referred to Christ, and by him are
done away. 4. The time when the Law was delivered, was fifty days after the
celebration of the Passover, the time of first fruits. And at that very time,
the same day, fifty days after, at Pentecost came the Holy Ghost in the
Gospel. And though we cannot perform all we should, yet because those fifty
days are the time of first fruits, we may offer up our first fruits, and
inchoatam obedientiam inchoate obedience accepted by Christ. And this inchoate
obedience we shall have, when we shall have new hearts, not of stone, but of
flesh. A new heart will I give you, etc. as the Prophet speaks, Ezekiel. 36. 26.
which as the Apostle expounds it in the New Testament, written, not in tables
of stone, but in the fleshly tables of our heart, whereby we shall be made able
to offer up 2 Cor. 3. 3.
our first fruits 5. Lastly. By the protestation which the people made against
God and Moses Numb. 21. 5.
that they would not hear them, we see a plain dissolution of the Law. (...)
sunt (...) and Mosen, they spoke against God and Moses. Presently upon their
murmuring came a type of Hell. The Lord sent fiery Serpents among them, and in
(...), we have sinned: and the John 3. 14.
Moses lifted up the Serpent in the wilderness, so must the Son of Man be
lifted up. Besides, the (...), had their types of the Sacraments in the Gospel,
as the 1 Cor. 10.
passing through the Red sea foreshewed Baptism, their Manna, and the water out
of the Rock, the Lords Supper, And thus we see that the Law was (...) ad (...),
a Schoolmaster to lead us to Christ.
To make this more plain. Christ's wisdom in the Gospel must be ours: for he
says, a man must call himself to account, how he has used his talent; for God
is one that Mat. 25. 19.
will take account of his servants how they have employed the talents which he
has delivered them, and we must expect to be called ad calculum, to account
for our talent, and not hide them in the ground with the foolish servant.

This is the first use of the Law, that it is tabula supputationum, our book of
Debtor and Creditor; the tables that we must make our account by, and lets us
see, how we stand in case of profit and loss; and in that respect it is
remedium ignorantia, a remedy for ignorance. Now because it shows us, that
our debt is 1 Cor. 15. 56.
greater then we are able to pay, and so becomes our sting to death, showing
Apoc. 2. 5.
us our miserable condition, with a memento unde excideris, a putting us in
mind whence we are fallen, from the image of God: As also the horror of Hell,
into which we shall fall: the first of which will procure grief, and the other
terror within (...). And when it has brought us to this, that we may be
condemned in the whole sum, when God and we have reckoned: then has he Call.
3. 23.
his (...), the Conscience to (...) the debt, which brings in another use of
the Law; that it will be our humiliator, humbler, shutting us up in prison,
then it is remedium (...), a cure of our pride.

Then comes in another use of the Law. That seeing our condemnation to be most
just, and that we are never able to discharge so great a debt: there can be no
other way for us, but to seek out a surety to discharge it for us, and that
leads us as it did the Israelites to the brazen Serpent, that is, to Christ.
So that the one will keep in our remembrance, our debt, and deliverance; and
the other will teach us to say with the Psalmist, Quid retribuam, etc. and so
be converted to his testimonies, and work a care in us, that we lay no more
debt upon Christ, then we needs must, by reason of our infirmity.

So much for the Preparation.
THE EXPOSITION OF THE First Commandment.
CHAP. I.
Of the Preface to the Decalogue. Two things required in a Lawgiver. 1. Wisdom.
2. Authority. Both appear here. Gods authority declared. 1. By his name
Jehovah; which implies, 1. that being himself, and that all other things come
from him. 2. His absolute dominion over all the creatures. From which flow two
attributes. 1. His Eternity. 2. His veracity or truth. 2. By his jurisdiction:
thy God, by creation and by covenant. 3. By a late benefit. Their deliverance
out of Egypt. How all this belongs to us.

THe Lord spoke, etc. From the second to the eighteenth verse of Exodus 20. 1.
this Chapter, the words which inded are the body of the Law, contain in them
two things.

1. The Style. I am the Lord thy God which have brought thee verse. 2.
out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. 2. The Charge. Thou
(...) have no other gods before me, etc. 3.

To the perfect enabling of every Lawgiver to make Laws is (...); (...).
required. 1. Wisdom. 2. Authority.

1. For the wisdom of God, it appears in the Laws themselves. Moses justifies
Deuteronomy 4. 8.
it, and challenges all the Nations of the earth to match them. What Nation
(says he) is there so great, that has statutes and judgments so righteous,
as all this Law? And the wisdom of a Law is best seen in the equity of it. But
a little before (to show more plainly his wisdom) he tells them, that it was
their wisdom to keep them, for the Nations which should see that they were
kept, would presently conclude and say, Surely this Nation is a wise and
understanding people, which they would never do, if they had not conceived
wisdom in the framing of them. So that certainly we must Esaias 28. 29.
needs confess with the Prophet, that it came from the Lord, who is wonderful
in counsel. 2. For his Authority, (which is rerum agendarum telum,) it is
plainly demonstrated by God himself in the second verse; and manifested by the
deliverance of the Israelites out of Egypt, by strong hand. In every Edict and
Law proclaimed, the beginning is with the style of the Prince, intimating
thereby his Prerogative Royal, to make Laws, and to publish and see them
obeyed. And therefore his authority is annexed, as to the Law in general, so to
those particular Laws which have a reason annexed. As to the second. For I the
Lord thy God am a jealous God, etc. To the third. For the Lord will not hold
him guiltless, etc. To the fourth. For in six days the Lord made Heaven and
Earth, etc. and it is the Sabbath of the Lord. Now, if it be true that men
expect no reason to persuade them to lay hold of a benefit, then there needs
none to make them observe the Law, because it is a benefit; for the Psalmist
Psalm. 107. 20.
so accounts it. He has not dealt so with any Nation, neither have the Heathen
knowledge of his Laws. Yet it pleased God to add his reason from his own
person, though indeed profit be a sufficient Orator. And thus does God in
diverse places, as Levit. 21. 8. 12. 15. 23. As also S. Paul mentions it for
the New Testament. As I live, says Romans 14. 11.
the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall confess to God,
which Esaias 45. 23.
words are taken out of the Prophet.
In this style or authority are three points according to the titles.

1. Of name, Jehovah. Thy God. which brought thee, etc. the last benefit they
had received, out of Egypt. 2. Of jurisdiction, Jehovah. Thy God. which brought
thee, etc. the last benefit they had received, out of Egypt. 3. Of benefit.
Jehovah. Thy God. which brought thee, etc. the last benefit they had received,
out of Egypt.

And such Prefaces do earthly Princes use in their writings.

1. Of Name, as Caius Caesar. 2. Of jurisdiction, Imperator. 3. Of the last
benefit, Caesar Germanicus, for conquering Germany, the last triumph obscuring
the former.
1. For the title of his Name, it is I Jehovah, not I am Jehovah: which
argues, 1. His Nature. 2. His Power. 1. That it is the name of his Nature, it
cannot be denied. They shall know (says Psalm. 83. 18. (...)
the Psalmist) that thou (whose name is Jehovah) art only the most highest
over all the Earth.

Concerning the word Jehovah, (which is Tetragrammaton, consisting of four
letters,) much has been written, and many speculations have been gathered from
it. As namely, that there are three distinct letters according to the number of
persons in the Trinity; and of these three, the first signifies power, the
proper adjunct of the Father; the second wisdom and knowledge proper to the
Son: and the third love, the proper adjunct of the Holy Ghost. And that the
second letter is doubled, to denote the two natures of the second Person. But
this may be sufficient for us, that it is a name from being, or a name of
existence, and that he is of himself, and from none (...), (...). 11. 36.
but that all things are through and from him. Omnia beneficio illius, ipse
beneficio nullius. Bern.

And as it (...) his being of himself, so his absolute dominion and power over
Mal. 1. 14.
all; and therefore we translate it (Lord) following the Septuagint, who render
it 2 Timothy 6. 15.
(...) Jude ult.


2. And as there is no exception in his title, as to be commanded of or by any
other. All earthly Princes derive their power from him, as his Delegates by
commission. As our Prince has in his title Dei gratia Angliae, By the grace of
God King of England, etc. and is ab aliq. from another, viz. from God. Only
God rules without commission from any, but is within and of himself a supreme
head, commands simply and absolutely, has no dependence upon any other,
either of being or power; but all things depend on him, as their essence
powers, or faculties, and operations.

This the Prophet shows forcibly, that streams proceed from him to every
creature, psalm. 104. 29.
which being stopped they perish. When thou hidest thy face (says he) they are
troubled, when thou take away their breath, they dye, and are turned again to
their dust. And in the next verse he says, that he is the only breath of the
world, 30.
his breath gives life. When thou let thy breath go forth they shall be
made. Now if we did conceive that any man in the world had our life at such an
advantage, that with his very countenance he could make or destroy us,
certainly we would be marvellously cautelous to offend him, and very obsequious
to please and observe him. Yet such is our dependence upon God.

The word Jehovah, as it has these two significations, so has it two
consectaries that follow thereupon in Scripture. 1. The eternity of God. 2. The
truth of God, in giving a being to his promises, by his performance of them.

1. For his Eternity, he calls himself, I am. Say, I am Ero, has sent thee
unto Exodus 3. 14.
them: and howsoever there is (...) of time in respect of us, yet in regard of
Psalm. 90. 2. 4.
Gods enduring for ever, there is (...) him: he is without all time, he is
always Esaias 57. 1. 5.
Ero. The eternity of his essence S. John describes. I am Alpha and Omega, the
beginning Apoc. 1. 18.
and the ending, says the Lord, which is, and which was, and which is to come;
the same yesterday, today, and the same for ever. And this takes away the Heb.
13. 8.
hope of escaping his vengeance, if we do amiss, and not obey his commands.
For in that case a man may hope to avoid the justice of Princes, by departing
their kingdom, or by outliving them: But he lives for ever, and his Angels
pitch their tents about us: He compasses us in a circle, first, that we escape
not: Secondly, though we could Psalm. 72. 8.
escape out of one place, yet can we not so far as out of his Dominions, for
his Dominion Zech. 9. 10.
is from one sea to the other, and from the flood to the worlds end. He can
fetch us from any place. So the Prophet Amos, Though they dig to hell, etc. And
he lives Amos 9. 2.
for ever to punish those that transgress his laws, we cannot outlive him, his
name is still Ero to all eternity. 2. For his truth, in effecting that which he
promised, God said to Moses, that he appeared to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, by
the Name of God Almighty, but by my Name of Jehovah appeared I not to them: as
if he had said, by one that is as good as his word. So in the Psalm, He is
mindful of his promise: and yet it is plain, that Abraham Psalm. 105. (...).
believed in the Lord, in Jehovah, and it was counted unto him for
righteousness, Genesis 15. 6.
and God himself in the next verse says, I am the Lord ( Jehovah) that brought
thee 7.
out of Ur of the Chaldees, and yet God says, that the Patriarchs knew him not
by the Name of Jehovah, but by the Name Almighty. To reconcile these two
places, we must understand, that by Jehovah is meant here, the bringing to
effect this general promise of bringing his people into the land of Canaan. So
long as he makes a promise he is Schaddaj, or God: but when he has brought it
to pass, he is Jehovah. So the (...) knew him by the Name Jehovah in some
particular promise, as Abraham in the birth of Isaac: Noah in the delivery from
the deluge: Lot in his delivery from Sodom: but they never knew him by the
Name of Jehovah, in bringing to pass that great and general promise of Canaan.
And in this sense it is said, that when God has brought his judgment upon the
people, they shall know that Ezekiel. 5. (...).
I Jehovah have done it.

The Title of jurisdiction, Deus (...), Thy God. To this title he has claim in
a 1. In general he has title of jurisdiction in respect of his being Creator,
and therefore, Psalm. 108. 5, 6.
as the Psalmist says, He spoke the word, and they were made, etc. He has
given them a law which shall not be broken, that as all things are his
Creatures, he has jurisdiction to govern them by such laws as he pleases. All
the Creatures have their rule from him. And therefore the Lord complains
against them for breach Esaias 1. 2.
of it. Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O earth, for the Lord has spoken, I
have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled against me, that
is, they have broken my laws. And in Moses Song, Give ear, O ye heavens, and I
will speak, and hear, O earth, the words of my mouth. The Creatures are called
to bear witness Deuteronomy. 32. 1.
against Israel, that they were breakers of Gods law. 2. In particular. The Law
or his jurisdiction being infringed in general, it gave occasion to the second,
that is the particular, which is by covenant, and that conditional. God is our
Jehovah by Covenant. Hear, O Israel, the statutes and judgments which I speak
in your ears this day, that ye may learn them, and keep and do them. Audis? 5.
1.
Deus sum: Non audis? non sum Deus, says one, do thou hear? then am I thy
God: hear thou not? then am I not thy God. This shall be the Covenant, faith
God. I will put my law in their inward parts, etc. and I will be their God, and
they shall be my people. (...) and tuus are relatives, He is ours and we are
his, so long as we keep Jer. 31. 33.
his commandments. Moses tells Israel a strange thing, Behold the heaven and
the heaven of heavens is the Lords thy God, the earth also with all that
therein is: yet Deuteronomy. 10. 14.
has he separated thee (as a handful) above all people to make a covenant with
thee. And this mercy of God is wonderful, that in describing himself, he
rejects all his other titles of glory, drawn from other creatures, as the God
of heaven and earth, and entitles not himself by them, but only claims the
Jurisdiction of us being so vile by nature, and wicked by our works. And is not
ashamed (as the scripture Heb. 11. 16.
speaks) to be called our God. And, as one says well, conjunxit (...) tuam cum
gloria sua, nay he might have said, conjunxit gloriam suam cum gloria tua,
insomuch as true are the words of the Psalmist. Happy are the people that be in
such a case: psalm. 144. 10.
yea blessed are the people that have the Lord for their God.
Lastly, His Title by Benefits. And this he raises from the last act he did
for 1. Of the miserable estate and condition of the Israelites in thraldom and
bondage. 2. Of their mighty and wonderful deliverance from it.
1, Their estate was miserable in Egypt. For they were servants in the most
Exodus 5. 5.
servile work that could be, being put to the furnace to make bricks etc. They
were in servitude under their most cruel enemies, and that so hard, as that
they were daily punished, never rewarded. They were forced to work, and yet no
materials given them to work withal. To gather straw, and yet nothing abated of
the tale of bricks which they made when straw was provided to their hands. And
lastly, they had their children daily drowned before their eyes. 2. Their great
delivery from this servitude appears, in that it was done with a mighty hand,
and an outstretched (...), by showing his power in the plagues of Deuteronomy. 4. 34.
Egypt, and drowning Pharaob and his host in the red sea. The two former titles
have ever stood the same, but this last, in respect of this act, and upon
diverse acts of his has bin altered. As, 1. After the Creation he was styled
God, the Creator of heaven and earth. 2. In the days of Abraham. I am the
Lord, that brought thee out of Ur of the (...). 15. 7.
Caldees, 3. in Moses time. The God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Exo. 3 6.
fourthly. And here, I am the Lord that brought thee out of Egypt etc. fifthly,
when God should deliver them from the Captivity of the North, it is said. The
days come, says the Lord, that it shall be no more said, the Lord lives that
brought up the children out of the land of Egypt. But the Lord lives that
brought up the children of Israel from Jer. 16. 14, 15
the land of the North. And this title lasted to the time of Christ. sixthly.
The last is prophesied by Jer. Jehovah justitia nostra, the Lord our
Righteousness, and so by the Jer. 23. 6.
Apostle Christus justitia nostra, Christ our righteousness, and God the
father of 1. Cor. 1. 30.
our Lord Jesus Christ. Gal. 1. 8.


Now this great benefit being not fully six weeks before the Law delivered, it
must needs stick close to their memory, and being in the wilderness, where
they were wholly to depend upon God and his protection, so that as well in
regard of the remembrance of the late benefits, and the hope of future
assistance, as of the place where they could not depend at all upon themselves,
it was both a fit time and place to give them a Law, and then they were more
fit to receive it, in as much as it could not well be given in Egypt, for
thence they were unwilling to go, nor in Canaan, for there they murmured
against God, it was most fit it should be given here: for their delivery was
not that they should be Masters, but Servants.

And all these pertain to us: for though it be true, Non obligamur Legi propter
Sinai, sed propter paradisum, when it was first given to all the sons of Adam:
and Romans 11. 11.
though God gave this Law to one Nation, to stir up others to emulation, as the
Gentiles were taken into Covenant afterward to provoke the Jews to jealousy:
yet this is also true, that there are none of those his titles, but much more
appertain to us, who have means of better performance, as having received
greater Heb. 8. 6.
benefits, and our faith grounded upon better promises.


1. Jehovah The excellency of this Name to us, is in respect of the ordination
of Genesis 22. 18.
a new Covenant (the Gospel) which (as the Scripture speaks) is the better
Covenant, Deuteronomy. 1. 8.
because it was established upon better promises: for, Insemine tuo
benedicentur 2. Tim. 1. 10.
omnes nationes terrae, in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be
blessed, is a better promise then, Semini tuo dabo terram Canaan, to thy seed
will I give the land of Canaan. We have clearer promises of eternal life, and a
greater measure of sanctification of the spirit then they had. 2. Deus tuus,
thy God. As we are included with them in the first, so in the second title, we
have part and interest in them both; for he is our God by Covenant as well as
theirs, by a Covenant of mercy and grace. 3. Qui eduxi etc. which brought thee,
etc. For this third, how far greater dangers are we delivered from then they?
From the sting of Conscience, fom sin, from death: how much do the Devil and
his Angels pass the power and malice of Pharaoh, and his taskmasters? Hell
and Gehenna the Lime-kills? the torments of Hell without number, the bricks
with number? and as much as these everlasting pains pass those temporal, so
much does our deliverance exceed theirs. The Apostle says, that God has
delivered us from the power of darkness, and from the wrath to come. And in
another place, that he Col. 1. 13.
has abolished death. In this world he has freed us from errors, which the
most 2. Tim. 1. 10.
part of the world fall into. 1. These. 1. 10.


He has delivered us 1. from the justice of God, 2. from the terror of the
Law, 3. from the sting of Conscience, 4. from sin, 5. from death, 6. from Hell,
7. from the Devil and his Angels. 8. from the Spiritual Egypt, 9. from the
Egypt of this world, etc.



Now as God has titles, so have we. He Jehovah, we vile Creatures: He our God,
we his servants: He, which has delivered us, we which have been delivered by
him from sin, etc. from a thousand dangers. Audi Israel, hear, O Is ael, says
he, Speak Lord, for thy servants hear, must we say, and not only be his
Auditors, but his servants, least we be made servants to sin, Satan, and the
world and so be made to know the difference between his service, and the
service of other Masters.

CHAP. II.
The division of the Decalogue. How divided by the Jews. (...) Christians.
Addition 6. That the four fundamental articles of all Religion are employed in
the four first precepts. Of rules for expounding the Decalogue. Six rules of
extent. 1. The affirmative implies the negative, and e contra. 2When any thing
is commanded or forbidden, all of the same nature are included. 3 The inward
act of the soul is forbidden or commanded by the outward. 4. The means
conducing are included in every precept. 5. The consequents and signs. 6 We
must not only observe the precept our selves, but cause it to be kept by
others, least we partake of other men's sins, which is 1. Jubendo, by
commanding. 2 Permittendo, by tolleration. 3. (...), by provocation. 4
Suadendo, by persuasion. 5 (...), by consenting. 6. Defendendo, by maintaining.
7. Scandalum praebendo, by giving scandal.

WE divided the Law into a style and a Charge; the first has been handled.
The charge remains, whereof we will now speak. And this is contained in Exodus
34. 28.
the ten words which we commonly call the ten commandments. So does Moses,
Deuteronomy. 10. 4.
as well to deter men from presuming to add any more, (in which respect, God
wrote Exodus 32. 15.
both sides of the Tables full to prevent the adding to them) as also to take
from man, the excuse of being so many that his memory could not bear them. They
being but few, whereas those of the heathen are infinite.

These ten for better order and memory sake, receive a division from the
subject, 37:
and are divided according to the two Tables. which our Savior in his answer
to Matthew. 22. 40:
the Lawyer, divides according to the objects, God, and Man. And this is not
his Mark. 12. 30:
own division only, we find it in the time of the Law. Our duty toward God
is Deuteronomy. 6. 5.
set down in Deuteronomy. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy hea t,
Lev; 19. 18.
and with all thy soul, and with all thy might. Our duty toward man in
Leviticus. Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. From both which places
this division of of our Savior has its ground.

Now because love is so often repeated, S. Paul makes the end of the Law to be
1. Tim. 1. 5.
love. And in another place, after he has recapitulated the Law, he reduces
it to this. Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self; for our love proceeding
and Romans 13. 9.
ascending up to God, when we descend and come to our Neighbor, it is but a
reverberation of the love we have to God, and every reverberation or reflection
presupposes a direct beam, so that every man that loves his Neighbor, has
God first in his direct motion, as the immediate and direct object of his love,
and then his Neighbor in and for God.

And as these ten precepts are divided into the two Tables by God, so in the
sorting 105.
of the precepts to each Table arises some doubts. 1. Between Jews and
Christians, and 2. between Christians themselves. 1. The Jews make an even
division of them, five in one Table, and five in the other; and they take their
warrant from the Psalmist, I have said ye are Gods, and ye all are Children of
the most Highest: Psalm 82. 6.
therefore they infer that the fifth Commandment must be referred to the first
Table, which immediately concerns God. But seeing in that precept inferiors
also are included, and they are no Gods, we must exclude out of the first Table
the fifth Commandment, as not pertaining directly to God, but man. And the
Apostle Ephesians. 6. 2. (...) this in express words, making this Commandment the
first with promise, that is, the first of the second Table, for otherwise it is
not the first with promise.

2. The Church of Rome, and some Protestants, as the Lutherans, make the two
first Commandments but one, and the last they divide into two, against the
consent of most of the Fathers, whom they pretend in other things to follow,
thus they make the coveting of Neighbors house or goods the ninth, and the
coveting or lusting after his wife, the lusts of the flesh the tenth. That it
cannot be thus, (besides the reasons against it in the tenth Commandment, as
you shall hear hereafter) the whole current of the Church has consented to the
division of four and (...), only S. Augustine excepted, and Origin hom. 8. in
Exodus with some others, and disallow this division of theirs. As among the
Jews, Josephus lib. 3. of the Commandments. Philo Judeus in Decalog. Aben Ezra.
Rabbi Solomon upon the 20. of Exodus. Among the Christians, Clemens 6. Stromat.
Chrysostom in Matthew. Athanasius de sacris script. Ambrose, Jerome, and
Nazianzen: only S. Augustine (de december preceptis) (...) of theirs. Yet himself
in his questions veteris and novi testament. q. 7. divides them plainly as we,
and the reason that moved him to the contrary was but weak, upon a bare
conjecture that there should be three in the first, because there are but three
persons in the Trinity, but by the same reason we may add the fourth, because
of the Unity in the Trinity. Canisius has an argument of great force with
them, that the reason of the Law must be be annexed to the Commandment: but in
our division the reason is in the second [for I the Lord thy God am a jealous
God] therefore all before is to be referred to the first commandment. But we
say that the general reason went before the Charge, viz. in the Preface, and
was not to be annexed to any of the Commandments; and that this is a special
reason added to the second Commandment, as some other precepts have their
special reasons annexed. But howsoever they be divided, if the whole Law be
delivered, and we be careful to keep it, the matter is not much, otherwise it
will be to little purpose, si been numeres, male vero Custodias, as Musculus
says, and therefore we come to the precepts themselves.

1. The first is the table of Holiness or Religion, and this immediately
respects God. 2. The second is the table of justice, and that immediately
respects Man.
1. This holiness consists in holy duties to be practiced which are either
1. Continual, or to be done at all times, and that inwardly in heart and
mind. Commandment 1. outwardly in gesture. Commandment 2. speech. Commandment
3. 2. Temporary at some special times in the Congregation on set days.
Commandment 4.

2. The Table of Justice concerns either or
1. The Act, and that either particularly between Inferiors and Superiors,
Commandment 5. generally toward all. Commandment 5. and this concerns our
Neighbor either 1. In his person, Commandment 6. 2. Or in his flesh, his Wife.
Commandment 7. 3. In his temporal estate or goods. Com. 8. 4. In his good Name.
Commandment 9. 2. The inward desires restraining the very motion of the heart
though they never come to Act. Commandment 10.

True Religion generally considered and abstracted from the modifications of
Jewish Addition 6.
and Christian, rested always principally upon four Articles or propositions.
1 That concerning the 4 principles of religlon employed in the 4 first
commandments.
there is but one God. 2. That none of these visible things we see are God: but
that he is of a higher invisible nature. 3. That his providence extends to
humane affairs, and (...) it self in rewards and punishments. 4 That he is the
Author and maker of all things besides himself, and herein his infinite
goodness, power, and wisdom appears. These four principles are included in the
four first Commandments. In the 1. The Unity of God is openly declared. 2. In
the second his spiritual invisible nature, which is not to represented by an
image. Deuteronomy. 4. 12. Therefore Tacitus says, Judi sola mente (...) numen
intelligunt, profanos qui Deorum imagines mortalibus materiis in speciem homnum
effingunt, the Jews conceive one only God in the mind, and account them
profane who represent him by material images, and Plutarch gives this reason
why Numa would suffer no images in Temples, (...) because God cannot be
conceived, but only in the mind. 3 The third supposes Gods knowledge of
humane actions, even of thoughts, for this is the ground of an oath 4. In the
fourth God is acknowledged the Author of the visible frame of heaven and earth,
in remembrance of which the sabbath was instituted, and that with greater
strictness then other rites, for here the punishment was capital, if any
offended; in others arbitrary: for the wilful violation of this precept did
imply a denial, that God created the world. And from these contemplative
notions, arise those practical virtues, of loving, fearing, honoring God,
invocation, obedience, etc. The consideration hereof shows the wisdom of God
in the excellent order and perfection of the first table, the like may be
showed in the second table, when it comes to be handled. Vide Hug. Grotium. De
jure belli and pacis. lib. 2. cap. 20. n. 45.

The Law of the Lord, says the Prophet David is a perfect Law, and therefore
commands all things that we are to do, and forbids all things that are not
to be done: which if it be interpreted only according to the letter, we shall
omit the hundredth part of those things which are commanded or prohibited
implicitly in them, therefore there must be an interpretation of them.

This we must hold for an infallible conclusion, that every Law stands upon a
Synechdoche. The reason is, because the Law being to take order for actions,
and the actions of man being infinite, both in variety and number (because the
circumstances, objects, and degrees, are infinite,) it follows that the rules
also should be infinite, and so exceed the memory of man. Therefore has God
only set down general things, and so does man after his example. And these
generals are to receive Interpretation, and to be applied to perticulars.

Now if it be demanded, where, and whence this interpretation is to be had?
Deuteronomy. 17. 8, 9
The resolution of this we have from Moses. If there arise a matter too hard,
etc Thou shall come to the Priests and Levites, etc. and they shall show thee,
etc. And Mal. 2. 7.
the Prophet Malachi tells us, The Priests lips preserve knowledge, and they
must seek the Law at his mouth: and the reason he gives, for he is the
messenger of the Lord of hosts. The Lord Treasurer to Candace Queen of
Ethiopia, could not go forward without Philips instruction. How can I
understand without Acts 8. 31.
a Guide?

But this may beget a second doubt, which is, Whether every thing they deliver
be good, or the interpretation they make of every thing be true, and
infallible? To this we answer, That there are rules to be observed in their
interpretation. And unless their interpretation be according to those rules,
it is neither good nor true: and if it manifestly swerve from them ought not to
be received.

Our Savior Christ reprehended the Lawyers, for not interpreting according to
the rules: the condition of a Law standing upon a more particular respect,
Matthew. 20.
there must be more particular rules then the bare letter or sentence
affords; the interpretation must be to show the compass of the Law, how far
it extends, and how far it restrains: so that to know the true meaning of
every precept, these two things are to be considered to which the rules of
interpretation do refer. And they are but two.

1. Amplificatio, the extent. 2. Limitatio, the exception or restraint.
The first rule is general, viz. Intentio ad scopum, because the Law depends
not merely upon the letter, but upon the meaning, Certum est quod is committit
in Legem, qui Legis verba observans contra voluntatem Legislatoris facit, it is
without question that he offends against the Law that by observing the words of
the Law, goes against the will of the Law maker. Now the purpose of the Law is
best known by the intent of the Lawgiver: Intentio Legislatoris voluntas Legis,
the intent of the Lawmakers is the will of the Law, for as the Law is regula
mentis, the rule to square the mind by, so men's Legislatoris est regula Legis,
the mind of the Lawmaker is the rule of the Law.

The intent of the Lawgiver is known by his end, for as bonitas Ethica, so
bonitas Theologica pendet a fine, Divine as well as moral goodness depends
upon the end, therefore in our interpretation we must consider Gods end and,
make that ours. The supreme end of the Law is Gods glory, as it is in the
Prophet. My glory Esaias 42. 8.
will I not give to another, and the subordinate end is, vult omnes salvari, he
will 1. Tim. 2. 4.
have all men saved, as the Apostle testifies. But (as is said before) the best
way to take our direction more particularly to know the meaning of a law, is to
consider these two, the extent, and restraint or limitation. And first let us
take a view of some rules concerning the first.

Of Extent.

And for direction in this, the Jews have set down thirteen rules which may be
praeceptum faciens and non faciens, if the commandment be affirmative it
implies also the negative, and e contra, according to the rules of Logique, si
(...) est faciendum, ejus contrarium fugiendum, if this be to be done the
contrary is to be avoided. And to this purpose, Eschew evil and do good, (says
the Psalmist,) there is Psalm. 34. 14.
the Rule. The affirmatives of the Decalogue are but two, which are the fourth
and fifth. The Rabbis find in the books of Moses two hundred forty eight
affirmative commandments, according to the number of the joints in a man's body,
and the negatives in the five books of Moses, three hundred sixty five
according to the number of days in the year: both which added, make six
hundred and thirteen, according to the Hebrew letters in the ten commandments.

The second Rule is, That wheresoever a thing is commanded or prohibited,
homogenea (or of the same kind) to it are forbidden or enjoined. The same may
be seen in man's Laws. A Law is extended either Specifice, or by Equipollens.
1, Specifice is, when a thing is done that is of the same kind, but by
circumstance is diverse. 2. By Equipollens, the Rabbis call those by two
names: first, when the balance hangs equal, the Logicians call it a pari,
Exodus 22. 6.
as in the commandment against theft, to set a man's house on fire is as evil as
to steal. Secondly, when one is lighter or heavier then the other, from Esaias.
7. 13.
the less to the greater, a majori (as they call it.) If one be bound to
honor his Parents, much more to honor God.

The third Rule is peculiar to the Law of God, which is spiritual. The last
commandment Romans 7. 14.
all the rest. When you have extended them specifice, and per equipollens, then
they must be extended to the Spirit: Lex humana ligat manum, lingua divina
comprimit animam, Man's Law binds only the hands, but Gods the soul. The true
worship of God is in Spirit; and the reason is good, for the heart is the
fountain John 4. 23.
of all evil. Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, says our Savior. This
appeared Matthew. 15. 19
by the dream of Polydorus in Plutarch de sera numinis vindicta, that dreamed
in the night, that his heart came to him and said, ego tibi omnium horum
malorum sum author, I am the cause of all these evils which have befallen thee.
The heart therefore is first to be cleansed, by truly planting the fear and
knowledge of God in it.

Plutarch says, that the Heathen would have restrained the heart if they
could, but because they could not, they forbear it. The Law of man fails two
ways, First for want of knowledge of the offender, because they knew not the
heart. Secondly, for want of power. As when the number of offenders is so
great, or their power of such force, as there is no resisting them, tolleration
must be. Frst, But though with men faults may be so closely carried as that it
cannot be found where the fault is, or how it may be remedied: yet with God and
his Laws it cannot be so. For the heart is deceitful (as the Prophet truly
says) above all things, and desperately wicked, Jer. 17. 9.
quis cognoscit idem, who knows it? but in the next verse, he answers
himself, that there is a quis, a who he is that knows it: I the Lord search
the heart, I try the 10.
reins. There is no defect of knowledge in God. Secondly, neither can there be
so many Offenders, but God is able to destroy them. It is his power by which he
rules, says the Prophet. Did not he in his last act of benefit bring the
handful of Israelites from the power of Pharaoh? and indeed who is able or
has resisted his power.

Concerning the first, the omniscience of God. S. Augustine says, If the
candle burn he sees thee, if the candle be out he sees thee, he sees all
thoughts, both present and past, and thy thoughts to come; therefore it is
justly said, that the Law is spiritual.

Now for the thought, we may observe therein these several steps and degrees.

1. Cogitatio ascendens, the suggestion arising from some former voluntary act
or neglect. 2. Inclinatio voluntatis, the entertainment of the suggestion. 3.
Mora, the delay in the thought. A desire to stay upon it longer. 4. Voluptas ex
cogitatione, a good liking of this guest. 5. Cupido actionis, a longing to
taste the conceived pleasure in outward act. 6. Consensus cordis, purpose to
practice, and put it in execution. 7. Deliberatio perficiendi, the choice of
some means to bring it to pass.
And though man's law cannot take hold of all these, yet Gods Law does.

4. The fourth Rule of extension is that, which man's Law has prescribed. Cum
quid prohibetur, prohibentur omnia per quae pervenitur ad illud, and e contra,
when any thing is prohibited, all things likewise are forbidden, that are the
means to it, and so on the contrary. The Jews say, Ambulandum est in praeceptis
per viam regiam, we must walk in the commandments, not by a by-path, but in the
rode, in the Kings high way. The reason is, The goodness of a way or motion
depends on the end: so that if these or these means bring to an evil end,
they are evil, and consequently not to be used in good things, neither are we
to seek God by them. We must not so much as stand in the way of sinners. So if
a thing be good, the omission as also Psalm 1. 1.
the means be evil, Bonae legis est, non solum tollere vitia, sed et occasiones
vitiorum, it is the property of a good law not only to take away sin it self,
but the occasions also of sin,

5. The fifth Rule is, Cum quid prohibetur vel jubetur, prohibentur vel
jubentur omnia, quae consequuntur ex illo, when any thing is prohibited or
commanded, the consequents that follow thereupon, and the symptoms of them are
also forbidden or enjoined. As in the case of Pride, the holy Ghost condemns
the symptoms of it, a proud look, and a high stomach. And the prophet
condemns walking with Psalm 101. 7.
stretched forth necks, and mincing gates. And the Apostles S. Paul, and S.
Peter 131. 1.
Esaias 3. 16.
frizling and platting of the hair, and vain apparel. And God himself threatens
to 1 Timothy 2. 9.
punish such as should be clothed with strange apparel, because all these are
not the 1 Pet. 3. 3.
signs of modesty and decency, but Consequents of pride. God will have the
sign Zeph. 1. 8.
go with the thing signified.

6. The sixth Rule is, That we must not be accessory to the sins of others, but
seek to hinder sin in others, and to draw others to the observing of the
commandment, as well as to keep it our selves. S. Paul speaks of some, and
reproves them that Romans 1. 10.
consent with them that do things worthy of death. For accessorium sequitur
naturam principalis, and agentes etconsentientes pari poena plectantur, both
principal and accessory were to be punished alike, and the reason is, because
the law is not only to be observed, but preserved; we must not only be
observers of it, but take care too that it be kept by others. Sic luceat lux
vestra, says our Savior, let your light so shine before men, that they seeing
your good works may glorify your Father Matthew. 5. 16.
which is in Heaven. God will have glory from us, not for us, from others by
us. We must have a care that God may be glorified both in our selves and
others; so that we must not be accessory to any thing whereby God may be
dishonored, and we be made guilty of other men's sins, and so they become ours.

Now there are seven waves whereby we become accessory and partakers of other
men's sins. The first two concern Magistrates, and all other Superiors: the
other five all men alike.

The first is in Magistrates and Superiors. Jubendo by commanding, if (as the
Esaias 10. 1.
by way of law. As Nebuchadnez. that enacted a law for Idolatry, that the
people Dan. 3. 4, 5. 6.
at the sound of a Trumpet should fall down and worship his Golden Image. This
lies (...) upon the Magistrate for commanding it, and he is accessory to
Idolatry 1. Sam. 22. 18
if the people commit it. So Saul was guilty of killing the Priests, hough Doeg
slew them becau se it was his command. So, though Ananias rose not out of his
seat to strike S. Paul, yet because he was stricken at his commandment, the
Acts 23. 2, 3.
blow reached unto him, and S. Paul called him a painted wall for it, and
denounces Gods judgment against him for it. David did not in person put Vriah
in the forefront of the battle, but Joab; yet because he wrote to Joab so to
do, the murder 2. Sam. 11. 15
of Vriah was laid to David by the Prophet Nathan. Jezebel was far off when
Naboth 12. 9.
was stoned, but because she wrote to the Elders of Israel to proclaim a fast
and 1. Reg. 21. 8.
to set Naboth on high among the people, and to set wicked men to witness
salfly 9.
10.
against him, and to put him to death, she was made guilty of his death.

The second is, Permitten to by toleration, and is the other way whereof the
Lev. 20. 4.
when he gives his seed unto Molech, and kill him not. Then will I set my face
5.
against that man, and against his family, and will cut him off That is, if the
people in whom it lay to execute punishment for it neglected, and suffered the
Malefactor to live, the fault should be theirs as well as his.

S. Augustine says that the Magistrate has the Sword committed into his
hands, Vt mali, si non dimittant voluntatem, amittant facultatem peccandi, that
wick d men should be disabled of their power, if not of their will to sin. S.
Paul describing a Civil Magistrate, says, that he bears not the Sword in vain,
and tells the Romans 13. 4.
end wherefore he bears it, as a Revenger to execute the wrath of God upon him
that does evil. And the same Apostle (to set down a rule for the
Ecclesiastical Magistrate) inveigheth against those of Corinth, for not
excuting an Ecclesiastical Censure upon an open Offender, but suffered him to
continue in the Church. And 1. Cor. 5.
this rule extends also to Domestique government, as that of fathers concerning
their Children. Because the sons of Eli made themselves vile, and he restrained
(...) not, God said that the iniquity of his house should not be purged with
sacrifice nor offering 1. Sa. 3. 13, 14
for ever, that i, he would judge his house for ever. Ahab for suffering (...)
(an Idolater) to escape contrary to Gods command; his life went for Benhadads.
1. Reg. 20. 42.
So then, he that suffers an offender to escape unpunished, the state of the
party permitting shall be as the state of the party permitted. For a perpetual
opprobry John. 19. 16
to Pilate, it is recorded, that he delivered Christ to the Jews to be
crucified. What a fair show made he? What washing of his hands, with much other
pretexts, as publishing his Innocence (before all the people) concerning
Christ's death? yet because he was chief of the Province, and had authority to
have kept the Jews from putting Christ to death, he was guilty of the death of
our Savior. (...) 1. Reg. 1. 6.
wantonness and riot came upon this occasion. His Father had not displeased
him at any time, in saying, Why have thou done so? And it pleased the Holy
Ghost throughout the whole course of the history of the Kings of Israel and
Juda, to leave this as a blot upon wicked Kings quia non sustulerat excelsa,
because they permitted high places to stand. And therefore S. Augustine says
very well to all in authority. Tu imple officium tuum, alioquin Deus and de te
and de ille implebit suum, be sure thou do thy part, and perform that which thy
place requires, else God will perform his, both upon thee and the offender. And
it is better sentire lenitatem patris quam seueritatem judicis, to feel the
lenity of a father, then the severity of a Judge.

The third is Provocando, by provocation. The two former were subsequent to
Vrgendo, Alliciendo, by urging or alluring.

1. By urging as, Jobs wife, do thou still retain thine integrity? Curse God
and die. Or when men by provocation, urge men to blasphemy or Job. 2. 9.
anger etc. 2. By alluring, as Samsons wife to discover his riddle, and Ahabs
false prophets Judge. 14. 15.
to go to war. 2 Chronicles. 18.

Now God is so far from allowance of any provocations, that he takes it clean
away, Ephesians. 6. 4.
ev n from superious to their (...), that he commands even fathers not to
provoke their children. And it is the Apostles counsel not to provoke one
another. Gal. 5. 25.


The next is Suadendo, by persuading. A man may be accessory by giving evil
counsel Jacob lying on his deathbed and blessing his sons, said to Psalm, 1 1.
(...) and Levi, In secretum eorum non veniat anima (...). And holy Job, The
counsel Genesis 49. 6.
Job, 21. 16.
of the wicked is far from me. In Ezra, evil Counselors were hired to hinder
Esr. 4. 5.
the building of the Temple. Absalom committed incest with his fathers
Concubins, 2 Samuel 16. 21.
yet the sin is imputed to Achitophel, that put it into his head. Herod's
wives Mar. 6. 24.
daughter asked John Baptists head, but Herodias the mother counseled her to
ask it, John, 11. 50.
therefore his blood is (...) to her charge. The sin of the Jews in desiring
Christ Act. 19. 25.
to be crucified is laid to Caiphas for giving the advice. And the (...)
against Saint Paul, is laid to Demetrius the silver-smith that counseled the
rest of the handicrafts men to rise.

And these two last precede the Action.

The next is Consentiendo, by consenting to other men's sins, and this brings
us

Now we offend by consent as the Lawyers speak either.

1. Consensu directo and vero, by directly consenting. Be not partaker of other
men's 1 Timothy 5. 22.
sins. 2. Consensu interpretativo, when a man is instrument of an ill action
by his 2 Samuel 11. 15
deed, though in word he mislike it, or seem not to approve it, as (...) was
David's instrument to kill Vriah. 3. Participatione, by partaking, As in the
case of thest to partake in the gain. Psalm. 50. 18.
4. Approbatione, by allowing, Saul is said to be consenting to Saint Stephens
death, Act. 8. 1.
only by the laying down of the witnesses clothes at his feet. And Moses makes
all 7. 58.
them to be consenters to the rebellion of Corah, which departed not from their
tents. Number. 16. 26.
5. Union, by joining. When men join purses with them that do evil. Cast in
thy lot a mong us: let us have one purse. Pro. 1. 14.
6. Silentio, by not disclosing. When a man reveals not the sins of others,
he does Lev. 1. 5.
after a sort consent to them, because he is bound to it. If a soul sin, and
hear the voice of swearing, and is a witness wheither he have known of it, and
do not utter it, 19. 17.
then he shall bear his iniquity etc. Saint Augustine gives the reason, ut
malus (...) inducit in peccatum; sic malum (...) relinquit in (...), and not
only so, but if a man know that his neighbor sins, there is a flat precept
that he shall rebuke him for it.
The last is Defendendo, by maintaining. When we commend and flatter men in
their Pro. 24. 24.
art righteous, him shall the people curse. And the wise man in another place,
lactant 16. 29.
amicos suos etc. enticing his neighbor, and this lactatio peccatorum,
alluring of sinners is the way that leads to destruction. For though suck
kind of men's words seem to be softer then butter, yet there is war in their
hearts, and though they seem smoother Psalm. 55. 22.
then oil, yet are they very swords. By good words and fair speeches such men
deceive the hearts of the simple. But there is a woe pronounced by the Prophet
Romans 16. 18.
against such men. Woe unto them that call evil good. And another Prophet calls
Esa. 5. 20.
them dawbers, that say peace, and there was no peace etc. And a little after
he pronounces Ezech. 13. 10.
a woe against them that sow pillows under men's arms. Such were Ahabs 18.
false Prophets. But especially Zedekiah, which made himself horns of iron, and
said (falfly) ic dicit Dominus. Non semper corrupta men's male oper antis, at
semper corrupta 1 Kin. 22. 6.
male defendentis, the mind that does ill is not ever corrupt, but that which
defends 11,
ill, is.

Lastly, besides these, there is another way whereby a man may be guilty of
ratione scandali, by giving of scandal, or by doing some act whereby another
stumbles and falls into some sin, thus per accidens a man may partake of
another sin, and that not only in actions sinful, by giving evil example but
sometimes in things lawful, and indifferent, clothed with such circumstances,
whereby the weak, that is, the ignorant may be drawn to some unlawful act; as
when some did eat of things sacrificed to Idols, no way in it self unlawful,
others were thereby occasioned to commit Idolatary, Romans, 14. Yet here we
must consider, that if the thing we do be indifferent in it self, yet if
commanded by lawful authority we must not forbear it: potius scandalum
admittatur, quam veritas amittatur, as Saint Augustine says, rather let
offense come, then the truth be lost; I may add, rather then any act necessary
vi pracepti; be omitted, and so a sin of omission follow: for this is
scandalum acceptum, non datum, a scandal taken, and not given, and in this case
we may say as Christ of the Pharisees, if they will be offended, let them be
offended: but if the thing be not sub pracepte, but wholly in our own power,
and no way necessary, we ought to forbear till the weak brother may be informed
of the lawfulness of the action; but if he will not be informed or rectified,
it is not weakness but wilfulnes in him after sufficient means of information, and
no man need to abridge himself in his liberty for the pleasing of such persons.

Thus much for the rules of extent,
CHAP. 3.
Rules os restraint in expounding the law. False rules made by the Pharisees.
Of Custom. Addition 7. of the force of Church Customs. Three Rules of
restraint. 1. by dispensa ion 2. by the nature of the precept. 3. by Conflict
of precepts. Antinomia, wherein these rules are to be observed. 1. Ceremonial
preceps are to give place to moral. 2. The second table is to give place to the
first. 3. In the second table, the following precepts are to give place to
those before. Rules to expound in case of. 1. obscurity. 2. Ambiguity, 3.
Controversy.

THe second are the rules of Limitation or Restraint, how far the Comandments 2.
are to be restrained. The Hebrews say, that there are general precepts in the
Scriptures, which we would conceive to be particular, but are enlarged as
generals, either in the fignifications of the words, or in their derivations,
or from equity or parity of reason, etc. And this practice of enlarging and
restraint, according to the true (...) and scope of the words, has bin a token
or note of distinction between good interpreters and bad. The Pharisees rules
be narrow, though their Phylacteries be broad.

The commandment against swearing the Pharisees restrain it, either to, Thou
shall not forswear, or, Thou shall not swear by the name of Jehovab. But our
Savior Math. 5. 34.
by the second rule of extension says, Thou shall not swear at all, but your
conversation should be yea and nay; and so forbids all unnecessary oaths,
which appears from the end of an oath, which as the Author to the Hebrews,
Heb. 6. 16. says, is to be an end of all weighty controversies and not to be
used upon every light and trivial matter.

They restrain the Commandment, Thou shall not kill, that is, not the innocent,
and restrained it to the outward act, and thought it fit for a man to revenge
an injury. But Christ by the third rule of extent makes wrath and anger,
murder, because it is the seed of a greater offense, and forbids all revenge
commanding to love our enemies.

They in the Law against adultery held, they might have as many wives as they
would, by way of divorce. But Christ by the fourth rule of extension tells
them, they must avoid all occasions of adultery; we must not look upon a woman
to hust after her.

They restrained the word [neighbour] in the parable of the Samaritan, to them
Luke 10. 30
that dwelt near them: but Christ by the rule of aequipolleus extends it to
every man; so that Christ's interpretations warrant extensions. And though it be
true, which the Rabbis say, that it is necessary to extend and to restrain,
but more necessary to extend: yet rules must be set down of restraint also.

There is a Rule that Consuetude est optimus legum interpres, Custom is the
best expounder of Laws; but we must add bumanarum, of man's Laws: for
concerning the interpretation of Gods Laws it is most false. In Civil Law,
Communis error facit jus, Common error makes a Law, say the Civilians; but in
Gods Law it is no rule, but Consuetudo cedat authoritati divinae, Custom must
give place to divineauthority. Their rules have no place in the ten
commandments, there is no (...) 2 Cron, 17.
that can plead Custom, or so common that can make it a Law. If Jehosaphat walk
not after Gods Law, but after the Custom of Israel, he is blamed. Now the
reason why Custom must give place to Gods Law is this. In every positive Law of
man it is necessary to sever just positivum and nature the positive Law, and
Law of nature, ut necessario consequatur repetitio, and repetitio does
presuppose deliberationem, and often times the after wit is better then the
former. But the Law of God was so wisely set down at the first, that it need
not come again to the forge of men: man's after wit cannot better it, and
therefore howsoever it be with the Law of man yet in Gods Law, vsus authoritati
cedat, and per principia in lege Dei omnia examinanda, all actions are to be
squared according to the principles of Gods Law, and Custom must give way to
authority. Addition 7. of the observing of Chuch Customs.


This holds, where the Custom is clearly and evidently contrary to Law; but
where the Law speaks doubtfully or obscurely, there Custom and usage of the
Church is the best and safest guide to follow, even in divine Laws as well as
humane: so our learned Author on 1 Cor. 11. 16. speaking of Church Customs.
Every Society, besides their Laws in books, have their Customs in practice, and
so the Church; we de not oppose them to that which is written etc. but haec
oporret facere, et illa non omittere, P. 531. At the Nicene Council the
Churches cry was, (...), mos (...) obtineat, let old Customs prevail. And P.
521. against contentions men, reasoning will not serve, they will be sine fine
dicentes, no way so ready to stop their mouths as Custom: for Custom is matter
of fact, habemus or non habemus, may be put to twelv: men, and there is an end.
Thus this reverend Author expounds himself.

Now we may know, how many ways a Commandment holds not, by three rules of
Limitation.

1. By the Dispensation. 2. By the nature of the Precept. 3. By the Conflict or
opposition of the Precepts.
1. Every Prince challenges to himself a prerogative Royal to dispense with
his 2.
own Laws: the word comes a dispensando proper to a Steward; so are all
princes to God. This privilege, as it is allowed to earthly Princes, of great
right does God challenge it. For their dispensations commonly proceed from will
or affection, which often times is corrupt; but Gods will and his justice go
together, therefore there can be no danger in his dispensations. Their rule is,
Quod licitum est ex superveniente causa mut atur, that which is (...) may be
changed by a cause which may come unlooked for; and so in some cases, God has
sometimes restrained his Law. The warrant of this, is either by his word, as the
setting up of the brazen serpents image against the second commandment, or by
ratifying by some special sign, and blessing men extraordinarly above the
course of mankind, when any pretend exemption or special dispensation, these
dispensations are exemptions from the common Law, because they are privileges,
and are to be restrained to the persons to whom they were granted. It is a
maxim in Law, Quae exorbitant a jure communi non sunt trahenda in
consequentiam argumenti vel exempli; things which agree not with the common Law
are not to be drawn into the consequence, either of argument or example. Though
we are willing to make many restraints, yet they are but few which God allows;
as he said of the good Emperors, so may we say of them, they may all be graven
upon one side of a penny: and therefore the more restraints we make, the more
injury we do to God. It is the commendation of a Law to have the fewest
exceptions and privileges; for where the dispensations are fewest, there is
most (...): and therefore it is, that in Gods Laws there are not so many as in
others.

The slaughter of Phinees, the robbing of the Egyptians are not restraints, and
if they were, yet it is certain, that they are not for us, nor our times, nor
have we the special warrant of the voice of God for them; and it may be
sufficiently proved, that many things in the old Testament (supposed to be
restraints) were not so, but kept to the uttermost. And this is to stop the
mouths of vain persons, which cannot contain themselves within the ordinary
course, and we have but little use of this rule.

2. The second rule is from the nature of a precept, which in sundry cases
gives a restraint As in the fifth commandment to honor superiors; as to
Princes, who having no superior on earth are exempted from this, (saving the
reverence they owe to their natural parents.) And in the fourth which is an
affirmitive precept, the practice is not required at all times. The rule of an
affirmative precept is Semper (...) facere bonum, but non (...) bonum facere
semper, we are allways bound to do good, but not to do good always. The
negative holds always, but the affirmative not so. The Schoolmen say, that
affirmative precepts bind semper but not ad semper, they bind always, but
not to the actual performance at all times, but at convenient and set times:
but negatives bind semper and ad semper, we must at no time go against a
negative precept. For the nature of doing a good thing well, stands thus,
that there must be a concurrence of all due causes and circumstances together,
which belong thereto. Malum (...) quolibet defectu oritur et bonum e causa
integra, all causes and due requisits must concur in every good act, but the
want of any one, makes an act sinful. Now all causes and circumstances cannot
always concur, and consequently affirmative duties cannot always be
practiced; therefore in the affirmative part we are exempted by the nature of
it, and secondly, the ardour of affection, that is required in doing good,
shows, that it cannot be practiced perpetually, or at all times,

3. The third and last is of greatest use. And this upon sundry occasions
receives diverse judgments. The case is called Antinomia, a conflict of Laws.
The Jews have a saying, that two Commandments make each other a liar, till the
third come, and make them a gree, by restraining one of them. This therefore is
a sure rule, (...) it a inter duo peccata perplexus est quin ei pateat exitus
sine tertio, no man is so perplexed between two sins but he may get out without
committing a third. And this exitus is to be had, one of these two ways,
first, If the two precepts can be reconciled between themselves then there is no
perplexity or necessity of sinning, for he may, as the Schools say, de ponere
(...) conscientiam, by in forming and rectifyng his conscience, Herod, after
his oath to Herodias, was in such a perplexity, that he thought he must either
break his oath in not performing with her, or behead John Baptist: but he
might have freed himself by right information, that such an unlawful and rash
vow was sinful, and did not bind to any one thing but repentance, and then he
would have let John Baptists head stood still, and thereby have committed no
more sin.

If they cannot be reconciled, then Agendum est id quod est major obligatio,
that must be done, which we are most bound to do; for God has ordained things
in order 1. The first and principal end is his own glory, 2. The next is a man's
own salvation, 3. The next is the salvation of our brethren. Therefore Gods
glory must be preferred before our own salvation: if these two could stand in
competition: and our good before our brothers, we must not commit sin to
deliver him from sin; yet our own temporal good must not be preferred before
his spiritual good, we ought to (...), (...), as Saint John says, to lay down
our life for our brother, that is, for his salvation. Now Gods glory being the
end of the first Table, and the good of our selves and our brethren, the end of
the second Table, we see the order between them, and how the one ought to give
place to the other; but usually it falls out other wise; for, as Saint
Augustine says the love of temporal commodity, and the fear of temporal
displeasure so blindes the eyes of men and poisons the love of God: upon this
ground we may resolve, when there is a conflict, as it is sometimes, between the
first commandment and the fifth, obey God, and obey your rulers; when this
Antinomia falls out, it is easily reconciled. The latter Commandment concerns
(...) obedience in yelding to the commands of a superior; and common reason
tells us, that if a stronger arm holds us, then that which should raise or
remove us, then we can never rise or be removed. But Gods authority (whose
Proconsuls on earth Magistrates are) is more then his delegates power, and his
arm stronger to hold us in obedience then theirs. It is a rule, Motus (...)
fortior vis (...) motion, is restrained by a stronger power. And this is one
case wherein Superiors are not to be obeyed.

2. Another case of restraint is, that nothing is to move vltra spharam (...),
beyond its own bounds, Siquando excedunt regulam dominationis suae, when
Superiors pass the bounds of there authority their commands bind not; as if
a Captain sends his soldiers to feed sheep, it is more then he ought to do,
and they are not bound to obey his command.

3. There is a maxim in our Common Law, that Juris interpretatio non debet
laedere jus regium, and if there be not a restraint to obedite praepositis
vestris, Obey your Rulers, we shall prejudice Gods authority, and what is this,
but laedere jus regium, all Rulers are only (...) and (...), ministers or
servants and public officers to God, though they have none above them on
earth. Papinian an Heathen, yet one who for the defense of justice was content
to lose his life, (this example may beseem Christians to imitate) had a rule
whereby he interpreted all Laws. Potior semper sit ea ratio, quae pro
religione facit, that is the best reason ever which makes for religion.

Now follows the conflict of the Commandments among themselves.

1. In the first Table three Commandments are moral and perpetual, the fourth
temporary or positive and ceremonial in part. Cedat temporale (...), a temporal
Law must give way to an eternal: therefore if the fourth come in competition
with any of the other, it may be violated; the rest of the Sabbath may be
violated that Gods name may be sanctified. 2. In the second Table, the Table of
Justice hinders not the civil Magistrate from doing justice according to to the
fifth Commandment; for we know that the nature of justice is, Vt (...) detur
debitum, nulli indebitum, let every one have his due, and therefore though an
innocent person may not, yet an (...) may be put to death. A man is either to
fulfill the Law faciendo quod debet, by doing that which he is enjoined, or
patiendo quod debet, by suffering that which belongs to offenders, and the
Magistrate in Gods right is to punish him, ut, si non (...) voluntatem
peccandi, amittat potestatem. 3. If any of the second Table come in competition
with the fifth Commandment it is to give place, because that is de communi
bono, the other de privato. And it is an undeniable rule, that commune privato
praeferendum, that which concerns the common good is to be preferred before any
man's private, the general before the particular. And for the five last
Commandments, which forbid any wrong or damage to our neighbor, that excellent
order, in which God has rancked them, shows which are to give place to the
other; for damage against life is greater then against chastity; and against
chastity, greater then against his estate; and against his estate or goods,
greater then against his fame: for life is more precious then chastity,
chastity then substance, substance then fame: and again, sinful actions are
greater then words, and words then thoughts, which are last. There can be no
better order then God has set down for all; therefore the Schools resolve
well, not only charitas, but also ordo charitatis cadit sub praecepto.
4. There yet remains another case, which is, when a Commandment is doubtful,
and that may be three ways.

1. By obscurity, cum occultatur sensus. 2. By ambiguity, cum vocabulum
praecipuum duplicem ferat sensum. 3. By controversy, cum utrinque deceptatur
nec convenit.
S. Augustine says, In nullo debet opinio vacillare, our opinion must waver in
nothing. If this be to be observed, what shall become of those that in words
seem very resolute, but inwardly are very inconstant and wavering, and no man
knows this but God, and so none can restrain them. There is no other way then,
says S. August. but tene certum, dimitte incertum, hold that that is certain,
and let go that which is uncertain. This counsel is good, but how shall we
follow it? Quicquid non Romans 14.
est ex side peccatum est, whatsoever is not done with a full and settled
persuasion is sin.

1. Obscurity is, when we know not what to make of such a word or such a phrase
in a sentence, of such a place, as in those places that are mystical and
allegorical. The safest way is not to be too bold, but rather to take the less
then the more: for it is a rule, In obscuris minimum, that is, if we be not
certain how much God meant, it is best to take (...) with the least, for if he
meant the most, then sure he meant the least. We must besober and wary in
mysteries.

2. Ambiguity is, when there is a word that bears two senses; Christian
wisdom in this case will do best to take them both, if neither be against the
Analogy of faith, lest happily that which we incline to, be not the sense of
the Holy Ghost.

3. In a case of Controversy when both parties think themselves in the right,
and either part has great reasons to maintain their opinion, then the Rule is,
In (...) maximum, it is best to take it in its largest extent. As in the case
of Usury, some think it altogether unlawful, and some unlawful in some cases.
The (...) way then is, that a man put not out at all his money to usury, and
that will make his heart lightest when the sorrows of death make it most heavy.
A man is a niggard of his hand, and a prodigal of his tongue. It is Christian
wisdom to do with the most, and speak with the least. These our common
Restrainers count but small matters.

And in doing the most we are to follow the Wisemans rule, Non negligere
minima, not to neglect the least, for qui minima spernit, paulatim decidit, he
that slighteth and despises the least things, decays by little and little:
and therefore we are not to conceive it a small matter to neglect small things.
If thine eye offend thee pluck it out. Instandum in minimis, give no ground to
small, nay the Matthew. 5. 29.
least occasions of evil. The safest way is to beware of the serpents counsel,
and to command Eve and our Concupiscence, not so much as to look upon the Tree.

Thus much for obscurity, ambiguity, controversy.
CHAP IIII.
Three general observations in the Decalogue. 1. That the precepts are all in
the second person. 2. All but two are Negative. 3. All but two are in the
future tense. Observations general from the first precept. 1. Impediments are
to be removed, before true worship can be performed. 2. The worship of God is
the foundation of all obedience to the rest. 3 That spiritual worship is
chiefly commanded in the first preprecept. Addition 8. about the distinction of
inward and outward worship.

THese are three especial points to be further observed throughout the whole
course of the Commandments.

1. That the Commandments run in the second person singular, Thou shall not do
this or that. The style of Gods Laws is not like the style of the Heathen Laws,
in the third person plural, Deos adeunto cast. 2. That (except two) they all
are negative. 3. That (except the fourth and fifth) they all run in the future
tense.
For the first. We see in Deuteronomy God speaks to the people of Israel
(...). 5.
as unto one man. Audi Israel non habebis alios Deos coram me, Hear, O Israel,
thou shall have no other Gods before me. He speaks to all, and to all alike,
as well to Moses and Aaron, as to the meanest of the people. It is an argument
of equality in respect of the bond of observing the Law of God, not any one is
excepted more then another. As we see in that Commandment, Non maechaberis,
Nathan said to King David, Tu es bomo, thou art the man. And 2. Sam. 12. 7.
John Baptist to Herod though a King too, Non licet tibi, etc. it is not lawful
Matthew. 14. 4.
for thee, etc. So neither do the Commandments leave us in a generality that so
we may slip our necks from them: but they are in the second person that
whosoever hears or reads them, they shall be as strong to him, as if there
were as many Tues, as persons that hear them.

Therefore every one upon reading or hearing the Law in the second person,
ought to apply it to himself, and the speaking of it in this manner is as
forcible as if God himself did speak to every particular man.

By the using a negative or countermand, there is implicitly a confirmation of
ad plura se extendit negatio, quam affirmatio. It was Gods purpose to have his
commandments beaten out as far as the rules of extension used by Christ would
permit: and his intent is, that affirmative duties should be done after the
impediments are removed. And though ad negationem, non sequitur affirmatio
oppositi, yet the Rule of Logic holds only in bare affirmative and negative
propositions, not in affirmative or negative precepts, for in these, Qui negat
prohibens, jubet promovens. In Laws, Qui prohibet impedimentum, praecipit
adjumentum, he that forbids the obstacle commands the helps.

And this also serves to show how full of weeds our nature is, that it is not
capable of a command, but first of a countermand. We are not capable of good,
before that which is ill in us, be weeded out of us.

1. That the future tense is so much used in the Commandments, it is an
implicit facies, so there is another as ready to say faciam. Evil suggestions,
evil examples, our own corrupt natures, and Satan besides will egg us
forward; and therefore we must keep a diligent watch and abridge our selves of
things lawful; we must flee from the smoke, abstain from all appearance of evil
1 Thessalonians. 5. 22.
Romans 6. 12.
(as the Apostle speaks) that the body of sin reign not in us.

2. And in the second place, it imposes a continual keeping of the Law, so
long as we live. It is for to day, to morrow, and to our lives end, and
therefore our warfare against sin must be to blood and death, and before such
time we are not discharged from the obligation of the Law. Eccl. 8. 8.


Now for the commandments themselves.

The end of the Law is to make a man good, and here also are some things to be
noted from the order here observed.

1. Impediments are to be removed that we may keep the Law, therefore this
first Commandment runs negatively. As when the frame of a building is to be
erected, if a tree be standing in the way, it must be cut down, or if the
ground be not sure and dry it is not meet to (...) an house upon: or as in a
cure in Chyrurgery, if the whole Body be corrupt or some member be dead, and
the flesh (...), that must first be cut away before any thing be applied to the
grieved part. Ground must be fallowed before corn be sown. And so God has
provided by his Law running negatively, Jer. 4. 3
and that in the front of it, Non habebis, etc. false Gods must be renounced
that the worship of the true God may take place.

2. The second observation follows, that that be done first which is first in
Order. As in a building the foundation is first laid, and in natural generation
the heart is first: this also is done here. First, Non habebis deos alienos
coram me, thou shall have no other Gods before me. This is the foundation of
all worship, inward or outward, and therefore in the first place mentioned. We
are to observe our former rules, fines mandatorum diligenter observandi sunt,
we must therefore know what intent God had in giving this Commandment.

One end of the Law as is said is to make men good. And the ultimate end or
scope of this, and all other Commandments is the glory of God. The whole first
1. Cor. 10. 13
Table refers to Godliness, Holiness, Religion: Now Religion being an action,
it mvst needs proceed from some inward principle and so does it; which is from
the soul of man, and principally from the spirit of it, which in this regard is
compared to a Treasury, out of which good men bring good, and evil men evil
things. Our Matthew. 12. 25
worship and service of God will be according to the treasury of our hearts,
the spirit: if that be good our outward worship will be so too.

We see then, that inasmuch as the spirit is the chief and principal thing in
Gods worship, our chief and principal care too, ought to be had for this
spiritual worship. And indeed it is the scope of this first Commandment. It is
said, that according to the superior end, the Commandment is to be esteemed.
Quo prior finis, (...) prior necessitas, hence it is that the first Table is to
be preferred before the second; because spiritual worship required in the
first, is before outward worship, prescribed in the second Commandment. So man
was made the end of the Sabbath, not the Sabbath the end of man. Mark 2. 27.
therefore the breach of the external part of the Sabbath must yield to the
necessities of man.

Whereas the worship of God is commonly divided into spiritual and bodily, or
inward Addition 8.
and outward, and the one said to be commanded in the first, the other in the
second Commandment; about the distinction of inward and outward worship.
this must not be so understood, as if they were several kinds of worship: for
the same act of Religion may be both inwardly and outwardly performed; as we
see in mental and vocal prayer, but they import only the different manner of
performing, as either by the heart alone, which is only spiritual, or by the
heart and outward man, which is the same spiritual worship performed by the
body, and therefore called outward: for the outward worship of the body
proceeding from the heart or spirit may be truly called spiritual, because the
exterior act proceeds from the spirit, and God accepts such worship, though it
be outward in respect of the act, as a worship in spirit and truth, when John 4.
it is accompanied with truth and sincerity of heart: and therefore as all
worship and obedience is the same both inward and outward, so in some sense
that commandment which requires the one, requires the other; for every precept
is given to the whole man, though chiefly to the soul, and to the body as the
instrument of the soul: yet in regard that worwip may be performed either by
the heart alone, or by the whole man, therefore that distinction may be in some
sort admitted, and so it may be said that the first commandment looks chiefly
to the heart, though not excluding (...) outward man; and that the second looks
more immediately at the outward manner of performance, yet not excluding the
heart.

CHAP. V.
In the first Commandment three things are contained. 1. We must have a God. 2.
We must have the Lord for our God. 3. We must have him alone for our God. The
sin opposite to the first, is profaneness: to the second, is false religion:
to the third mixed religion. How our nature is (...) to those sins. Reasons
against them.

THis first precept is primae necessitatis, and therefore first to be regarded,
it was never dispensed withal, nor ever shall be. And according to the first
Rule of extension, Praeceptum faciens and non faciens. It being a negative
implies an affirmative. The Matthew. 4. 10.
negative is, Thou shall have no other Gods. The affirmative our Savior
quoteth to the Devil out of (...), Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him
only Deuteronomy. 6. 13.
shall thou serve. 10. 20.


There are three propositions which naturally arise out of this Commandment.

1. That a God we must have. 2. That we must have the Lord for our God. 3. That
we must have him alone for our God.
1. The meaning of the first is, that we should not be Gods our selves (which
was Genesis 3. 5.
the beginning of all mischief, Dii eritis, ye shall be Gods) in judging good
and evil at our own election: but to acknowledge a superior power from whence
we are to take our rules and directions, both in following good and abstaining
from evil, and not to be led by our own affections. And to this superior power
so instructing us, and promising to bring us to the full fruition of the
chiefest good, we should submit our selves, acknowledge him, and tie our selves
to him, which acknowledging and tying our selves to him, is the proper act of
Religion, which is therefore called (...), a religando, as S. Augustine derlves
it: this is in the first place to have a God, and a Religion, and consequently
to worship him as God.

2. The meaning of the second is to inform us, that the Gods of the Nations are
but Idols no Gods, and therefore the service and worship done to them is false
and Idolatrous. But (...) our God who has manifested himself many ways to be
the true God, is the only God, and his religion true religion, and therefore
we are to shake off, all worship and service to others, and (...) our selves
wholly to him, and his service.

3. This third teaches us, that there are no Idols nor Gods that can do as he
does, either in rewards or punishments; none can reveal or bestow eternal
happiness but he, none can join with him, or help him therein; but he alone is
both able and willing, and therefore he alone will have all the glory to
himself, he will have none to participate with him, Gloriam meam (...) non
(...), my glory will I not give to another. (...) 42. (...).


1. Now the opposite sin to the first is called Profaneness, when a man will
be carried by his own affections in every thing, and do that which seems good
in his own eyes, when he will be under no yoke or bands but break them, giving
credit to nothing but what his own God (corrupt reason) (...) him to, doing
nothing but by his own direction and what his own will stands affected to.

2. The sin contrary to the second is false worship and (...) religion. The
holy Ghost is pleased here to call it the having of other Gods, as in the
Scripture he (...) Jude, 7.
evil by the name of strange, as a strange woman (a harlot) so, strange
worship, Pro 7. 5.
Idolatry, strange Gods, false Gods. And this is forbidden in the second
proposition. Psa. 81. 9.


3. The sin against the third, is that which Elias called mixed worship;
halting between two opinions, mingling Gods religion with others, following
both God 1 Kin. 18. 21;
and Baal, Like the Samaritans, that feared the Lord, when he sent lions among
them, and yet served the Gods of the nations whence they came, they swear by
the Lord, and by Miclcom. A sin that diverse of the kings of Israel and Judah
were taxed with. 2 Kings, 13.

1 Now these are three things which the devil aymeth at. and has helps in our
nature to set forward and bring to effect his purpose. According to his own
name Belial, he is without yoke, so would he have others to be also. His
argument in the first temptation, was to have Adam cast off his yoke, and be
under no director. Taste but the apple, and thou shall be a director to thy
self, and be able of thy self without any other guide to judge of good and
evil. And this vain desire of licentiousness, whereby men (by corruption of
nature) delight dissolutly to follow their concupiscence, and in all things to
sit Judge in defining good and evil, is the high way which leads to the
greatest transgression, opening the door to profaneness and Atheism.

2. So in the second place there is a marvilous itching desire in us of change,
which the Devil also nourishes, Stolen bread, matters of secrecy, strange
flesh, etc. And where once prophanes (...) he fails not to add a curious
longing to search beyond the truth, till at last he causes them to find a lie
in stead thereof, for there was never any error broached, but it sprang from a
desire of innovation and a wandering out of the beaten path. And this he brought
Solomon to, who having the knowledge of true Religion as much as any, yet not
content, fell to enquiring after foreign Religions, mystries and conceits. and
so fell to (...).

3. In the third, there is also a great desire in us to reconcile God and
Mammon. And Math. 6. 24.
though our Savior said it was impossible to serve both, yet are we desirous
beyond measure to heap up temporal things and get eternal too, to have a
Paradise here and else where; there is a desire in us to communicate our selves
to all, and to use a like freedom to good and bad, thinking that while we are
in the world, the world will do us good. and when we come to heaven, God will
do us good too. And this the devil misliketh not, for he runs not upon soli or
(...), for when he Math. 4. 9.
tempted Christ with promise to give him all the kingdoms of the earth, it was
not upon so strict a condition to worship him only, but to join him with God
in his worship and service.

1. Now the reasons whereby these are forbidden are these. We must confess
that the nature of man has recieved a great wound, insomuch as none can be
partakers of true happiness by his own guidance or conduct as other creatures
attain in some sort: and therefore the heathen confess with us, that there is a
maime and a main defect in man's nature. But we our selves were the cause of it,
as appears by the History of the Bible, namely by dealing with the tree, in
being our own choosers. And therefore this choosing of ours, this making Laws
to our selves must be left, we must leave and submit our selves to the will and
choice of a superior nature, that knows what is best for us.

2. Of the second the reason is evident. that seeing a God we are to have, we
ought in all reason to desire a true God. No man would willingly err, even
they that bend themselves to deceive others, cannot endure to be deceived
themselves. And no man desires to think that to be which is not, nor that not
to be which is.

The reason of the third is. That there be sundry things that a man cannot
have, but he must have them alone, without partner or competitor. Of which
number a master is one. And God is our Master, he is pleased to call himself
so. And our Mal. 1. 6.
Savior says Nemo potest duobus Dominis servire, no man can serve two
masters, Mat. 6. 24.
the service to a master must be to him a lone, else not. And the prophet in
the person of God faith, I will (...) thee unto me for ever, and the Apostle, I
have (...). 2. 9.
espoused you unto one husband, that is Christ, now a husband also comes within
2 Cor. 11. 2.
the number, and is to be had alone, and the condition of having God is like to
that of a husband, one, and a lone, or not at all.

4. Another reason may be added. The joining of God with any other thing must
needs be much to his dishonor and derogation; for he (...) the most
transcendent nature in the world; (...) no inferior thing but being joined
with him, does much abase him, and he will endure no dishonor, his honor he
is very jealous of, and thereof his worship must be kept pure without
intermingling it with the worship of any other, for if any thing of a nobler
nature be joined with some thing of a viler substance, the nobler nature is
thereby adulterated and corrupted, therefore Gods worship must be pure and not
mixed or sophisticated.

CHAP. VI.
In the 1. proposition of having a God, is included, 1. Knowledge of God
wherein, 1. The excellency, 2. the necessity, 3. how it is attained. The
contrary forbidden is, 1. Ignorance, 2. light knowledge. What we are to know of
God. Impediments of knowledge to be remooved. Rules of direction to be followed.

For the 1. consideration of the proposition. S. Pavl says that an Idol is
nothing and we know it, and that there is no other God but one. And therefore it
may seem strange, 1 Cor. 8. 4.
that (in respect that Idols nor ought elie be Gods) he should command us to
have no other Gods.

We say, though a man take arms against his Prince, yet he is his Prince still
and he has no other, and this having, is only true inrespect of the
superior: yet the rebellious subject has him not for his Prince or atleast
will not have him, because he accounts him not his Prince, the like is between
God and us. He is our God and his law is lex ferrea, it will hold us and have
us, whether we will or no. Yet in regard we rebel against him and endeavor to
exempt our selves from his service and obedience, in breaking his laws, we have
him not for our God. It is the course of the holy Ghost to use this phrase.
They had Baal and Ashteroth, not that they were Gods, but that they in their
accounts had them for Gods.

2. Again (as the Philosopher) a thing is said to be had, when it is known to
be had, for if a man have (...) under his ground and knows not of it, he has
it not. Besides a man cannot be properly said to have, that, which he makes no
account of, as if he have rushes or cobwebs in his house, and caring not for
them, he cannot be said to have them. Therefore a man cannot be said to have
that which he knows not of, or knowing he has them regards them not. And so
he that will be said to have God, must both know and regard him, and this is
that which is meant by having a God.

It has been formerly said that the spritual worship and having of God was the
end and scope of this commandment. The worship of the spirit is divided as
Devt. 6. 5.
the soul. The principal parts of the soul (as God himself makes them) are two.

1. Reason or understanding called the spirit in a strict sense, and sometimes
the soul or mind. 2. Affection or will, called the heart.
Now as we know the parts of the mind so we must know that these parts have
their order, Vires annimae sunt ordinatae, the powers of the soul are set in
order, says the Philospher, and the order is, first to know, then to regard
and love that we know, for (...), and Saint Austine says Invisa (...) cupere,
ignota nequaquam, we may desire things we have not seen, but never those things
that we have never heard of. Therefore as they say well, If two things be to be
done in order whereof the second depends upon the first, if the first be taken
away the second can not be fulfilled. So if we be ignorant of God, we shall
never desire or Love him. and so we shall not have him at all. God must first
be known, then Loved.

1. Knowledge, lies in the understanding part. The mind 2. Love is in the
affection. The heart.
1. Cocerning knowledge the obect thereof is God, and he cannot be known a
priori, therefore we must seek to know him a posteriori. and that must be either
by his Attributes ascribed to him in his word, or by his effects and works.

His Attributes (...) ten, Exodus 34. 6. 7 Majesty, Truth, Unchangeableness,
Will, Justice, Mercy, Knowledge, Power, Vbiquity, Eternity, other things are
attributed to God in scripture, but they may be reduced to some of these, as
love patience etc. may be referred to mercy: anger or wrath, to Justice etc.

Of these Justice and mercy are the two principal, and concern us most, the
other eight have influance upon these two parts to make them the fitter objects
of our faith, fear, love, and hope, etc. To work upon our knowledge or faith,
apprehending 1. Gods Justice 2. his mercy and believing them both: if you add
the other attributes to his Justice, 1. that he is infinite in majesty, 2.
infallible in his truth, 3. without change etc. and they make his Justice more
perfect, and consequently more fearful. In the second place add the same also
to his mercy, that he which loves us, is 1. A King of eternal majesty and
life, 2. Infallible, 3. Unchangable, and the, rest; it makes his mercy more,
and consequently far more to be beloved.

1. Out of this faith or knowledge apprehending his Justice arises fear, and
out of fear, humility. 2. Out of knowledge and faith of his Mercy with the
other eight attributes arise.
2. Duties more. 1. Hope, 2. Love.

1. The fruit of hope is 1. Invocation and prayer, for what we want, 2.
thanksgiving, in acknowledging whence we have received it. 2. Love has its
fruit or effect in obedience in conforming our selves and our wills to God will
both in doing what he requirs, and in bearing willingly whatsoever it pleases
him to lay upon us, and this last is called patience, Obedientia crucis And in
these does the having of God wholly consist.
We are further to understand, that the Holy Ghost in the scripture is pleased
by the figure Synechdoche for shortness of speech often times to name one of
these, and in that one to comprehend the whole worship of God, as in Saint
John, all the John. 17. 3.
worship of God is attributed to knowledge. This is life eternal to know thee
the only true God, And in a another place all to fear, fear God and keep his
commandments Eccl. 12. 13.
for this is the whole duty of man. In a another place to hope, Saint Paul Romans
8. 24.
says we are saved by hope. And so of the rest, under the name of one duty
Synechdochically are comprehended all the other and this without injury to the
rest of the duties, for they all have good dependence one of another.

Now to these we are to add the duties of the second proposition. [That we
must have the Lord for our God] that is true religion. And of the third [to
have him only for our God] that is pure religion, against joining of it with
other worship. And besides these out of the word [shalt] it must be perpetual,
till, non erit, swallow up our, erit, which implies the virtue perseverance
throw all the Commandments. And little facie mea before me includes sincerity
of heart, against hypocrisy, and these make up the manner of Gods worship.

In the resolution of this first commandment, the first thing is knowledge of 1.
God which in regard of the excellency of it Saint John says (as before) This
is life eternal to know thee the only true God. John, 17. 3.


In the handling of which we must follow this method.

1. To show the excellency of the knowledge of God. 2. The necessity of it. 3.
How it is to be attained.
1. The first thing concerning knowledge is the excellency of it, for other
knowledge without this, is but a puff, a tumor that swells naturally in them
that possess it. The Apostle says as much, knowledge (...) up. That therefore
our knowledge 1 Cor. 8. 1.
may be right we must pluck from us our peacockes feathers, the gifts of
nature, as strength, wisdom, riches, birth, etc. And not be proud or rejoice in
them, but Jer. 9. 24.
as God by the prophet speaks. Let him that glories, glory in this, that he
understands and knows me, (...) totae scientia hominis magna est (says S.
Augustine) (...), quia nihil ipse est per se, and quoniam quicquid est, ex Deo
est and (...) Deum, psalm. 70.
(...) is the chief knowledge of man to know that of himself he is nothing,
and that whatsoever he is it is of and for God. And this is the use we must
make of our Knowledge.

2. The second is the Necessity of this knowledge. It is not the excellency of
this knowledge that altogether works upon the desires of all men, and the
hearts of many are so dull and heavy that they desire not to be excellent, a
mean degree of perfection contents them in it. But when we come to perceive
that necessitas incumbit, there lies a necessity upon us to get it, a ferrea
ratio that strong and forcible persuasion; and stricketh to the heart, for the
Law is Doctrina agendorum and no action can be without moving, no motion
without the will, no will without desire, and no desire without knowledge of
that we desire. So that take away knowledge, and take away all, and then
nothing shall be done.

It cannot be denied but that evil men are in action, they are practical
enough, but their knowledge being deprived of the true end and obejct, we must
also confess, that they must needs err and fall upon false ends and ways,
wandering in by paths and never attain to the right end; butthey walk in
darkness, and so they miss of the end for which they came into the world.

The Apostle says that without hearing there can be no knowledge, for hearing
is Romans 10. 14.
called the sense of discipline, and without knowledge there is no belief,
without faith there can be no love and without love there is no obedience. And
therefore in as much as faith, love, and obedience are necessary, it follows
that it is necessary to have knowledge, as the ground of all virtues whatsoever.

There is in all these virtues inchoation in this life, and a consummacion in
the life to come. The schoolmen call them a first and second perfection or
(...) partixm and graduum, and therefore the knowledge we attain to in this
life, is but a (...), (...) taste of that blessed knowledge we shall have in the
other. And as the Apostle makes Rev. 20. 5. 6.
two Resurrections, the first and the second, and says that Blessed is he that
has his part in the first, for he shall have it also in the last. So there are
two degrees of knowledge, the first is fides, faith, the second visio dei or
vita aeterna the beatificall vision, and blessed is he that has his part in
the first, for he shall have his part in the second, the beatificall vision of
God. And as in the second Resurrection none shall have part, but they which
have part in the first, so none can have their portion in the second knowledge
but they that had in the first.

A witness without exception of this, is our Savior. Martha troubled her self
Luck, 10. 42,
about many things (and no doubt necessary to the honorable entertaining of
(...)) yet we know that Christ said vnum necessarium, there was one thing
necessary, and Mary had chosen it, to sit down at Christ's feet and learn his
will. So that if this be only necessary, and without it there is no getting to
the end, then have we done with the first part, wherein we see the use and
necessity of this knowledge.

3. If the knowledge be so necessary, by what means shall we attain to it? In
knowledge there is a teacher and a learner, we must either find it of our
selves or learn it from others. For our own abilities the Propher has told us
long since what they Jer. 10. 14.
are. Every man is brutish (or a beast) in his knowledge, if he have none to
direct him but his own natural parts he shall attain no more knowledge then the
brute beasts. The wiseman says that we are all vain by nature. We are vain in
our imaginations says the Apostle. And according to holy Job, we utter but
vain knowledge, Eccl. 9. 9
therefore having no hope to learn the true knowledge of our selves, and being
as Romans 1. 21.
far from learning it from other natural men (...) our selves, we must look
after another Job. 15.
teacher, that has deeper knowledge then we have. And who that is we shall
find 1 Samuel 2. 3.
in the book of Samuel, Deus scientiarum Dominus, The Lord is a God of
knowledge, it is he only that can teach us; and as he is able so is he willing
too. Our Savior Joel, 6. 45.
tells us that it is written in the Prophets, and they shall be all taught of
God, for so says the Prophet Esaias, And thy Children shall be taught of the
Lord. And the Esaias. 54. 13.
kingly Prophet David gives the reason, Because that with him is the well of
life, Jer. 31. 34.
and in his light we shall see light. Though we be naturally blind, and have
no light, psalm. 36. 9.
neither in, nor of our selves, yet in his light we shall see light. And
therefore he it is that must be our teacher, and as he must be our teacher, so
we may be sure that this teacher is willing to instruct us. Gods loving
practice tells us that he is. He began it with Adam, and preserved it in the
Patriarchs, and then it beginning to decay, he continued it by tradition. After
that, people being corrupted, and knowledge decaying, more and more, he wrote
the Law, which being broken, he took Deuteronomy. 5. 7.
order for a new writing, and enjoined them to hear it, and appointed Priests
and Neh. 8. 8.
Levites; who by interpreting it, caused the people to understand it: for (as
the Mal. 2. 7.
text says) they read the Law of God distinctly, and gave the sense, and
caused them to understand the reading. When they failed and false interpreters
came, he raised up prophets to give the true sense of the Law, and when this
was not sufficient, he sent his only Son, the last and most perfect teacher or
doctor of the Church, (...). 1. 2.
and (he ascending to the glory of his Father) gave gifts to men, as, Apostles,
Ephesians. 4. 11.
Prophets, Evangelists; Pastors and Teachers, whom he promised to send, and
enable 1 Cor. 12. (...)
with gifts, for the instruction and edification of his Church, and to continue
a Matthew. 28. ult.
succession of them to the end of the world.

Now as God is the Author of this knowledge, so he provides what is necessary
for us to attain it. viz. the outward ministry of man, and the inward work of
his Spirit.

1. For the first, we have the Eunuch sitting in his Chariot, and reading a
place Acts 8. 28.
in Esaias, and being desirous to know the meaning of the place, God provides him
a Minister, Philip, to expound it to him. And so, when Cornelius was continuing
10. 30.
in fasting, from the fourth hour to the ninth, and falling to prayer, God sent
Peter to him.

2. For the second, Our Savior has promised on Gods behalf, that God shall
Luke 11. 13.
give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him. So that the outward means being
diligently performed on our part, we may rest assured that God will perform his
part. Christ in the Gospel persuades the Pharisees, and us in them to search
John 5. 39.
the Scriptures, to come to the true knowledge of him, and so to life. That
which 1 John 2. 20. 27
remains God will supply by the unction of his Spirit, there will be no
defect on his part, provided that we look to ours. But the fear is on our part,
and it appears by the commandment here laid upon us, that we are not willing;
for a good man is a Law to himself: but we have a commandment to stir us up to
knowledge.

Now further in this, as in all the other Commandments, we are to consider two
things.

1. That which is commanded, Knowledge: of which we have now spoken. 2. That
which is forbidden, Ignorance: of which in the next place.
The affirmative, and the negative part. In the affirmative is commanded. 1.
Knowledge. Col 3. 16.
2. A rich measure of it, according as our vocation will permit, non solum
scire, sed etiam been scire.

And in this negative two things are forbidden. 1. Ignorance. 2. Light
superficial knowledge, for the rule in Divinity is, Peccatum non tantum est
appetitus malorum, sed etiam desertio meliorum. Where fullness is commanded,
not only emptiness, but scarcity is forbidden also. So not only ignorance,
but a light, fleeting and superficial knowledge is forbidden.

Ignorance, The Church of Rome is taxed to justify it, though it cannot 1.
be found that they are Patrones of it, but only faulty in allowing small
superficial knowledge in the people, yet if any man conceive, that Ignorance
of God is justifiable, let this persuade him to the contrary.

1. A sin it must needs be, else what needed a sacrifice for it? 2. If it had
been a light offense, David had been uncharitable to pray to God to power out
his indignation on them that knew not his Name. 3. It is not only sin, but
first the cause of it, and secondly the cause of punishment.
1. It is the cause of sin, for the Prophet says, The Lord has a controversy
with Hof. 4. 1.
the inhabitants of the land, for that there was no mercy, and the reason of
that was, because there was no true dealing, and the reason of both was,
because there was no knowledge of God, and presently after he tells them of
their destruction for it. So the Apostle, after he had reckoned up the offenses
of the Heathen he concludes 3.
it was because of their ignorance of God. Romans 3. 17.


2. Ignorance is the cause of punishment. (...) Prophet faith, That the
captivity Esaias. 5. 13.
of Babylon was, because the people wanted the knowledge of God. And it is not
the cause of punishment, but as it is the cause of sin. The Wise man asks
this question, Do they not err that imagine evil? there is no sin without
error, therefore Pro. 14. 22.
the planting of knowledge would be the rooting out of evil. Non erratur, says
S. Augustine, nisi ignorantia, men err not, but for want of knowledge.
Therefore to both these points S. Augustine has a pertinent place. Quia and
ipsa ignorantia in eis qui intelligere noluerunt (...) dubitatione peccatumest,
in eis autem qui non ad Six. ep. 105
potuerunt poena peccati, ergo in utrisque non est (...) excusatio, sed justa
damnatio, because ignorance it self was a sin without doubt in them that would
not understand, and a punishment of sin in them that could not, therefore in
both are condemned, neither justified.

Some there be that argue out of the Acts, and excuse ignorance, alleging that
Acts 17. 30.
place, That God winked at the times of ignorance, and so make it no sin, when
it is as they call it invincible.

Ignorance excusable is fourfold.

1. In children before they come to years of reason and discretion. 2. In fools
those that naturally want the use of reason. 3. In those that by sickness or
disease are bereft of the use of reason. 4. Where the means cannot be had to
take it away. But this is not simply and altogether invincible, for the law of
nature may teach them. He that has the Law of God in his heart (as every one
is some measure has) if he set himself to seek God, he shall surely find him;
for God has made his mind known to them that are careful to observe the rules
of Nature, habenti dabitur, to those that use the general light well, God will
not be wanting in means of further knowledge.
These may be excused, but the last, a tanto, from so much; but not a toto from
all. They are not absolutely without sin. But there two other (...) of
ignorance utterly inexcusable.

1. Affectata ignorantia, affected ignorance, when it comes to that height,
Noluerunt intelligere, ut been agerent, they would not understand to do well,
and it is in them that know they are ignorant, and are unwilling to come out of
it, but nectunt sibi argumenta, devise arguments to defend their ignorance.
They will not know that they are workers of iniquity; this is, cum. libenter
ignorent, (...) liberius peccent, when men are wilfully ignorant, that they
may sin the more freely, without Psalm 14. 8.
check or remorse, when men shut their eyes against the light, and reject means
of knowledge, saying as they in Job, depart from us, for we desire not the
knowledge of thy ways. S. Augustine says, ubi non est dolus in inquisitione,
ibi non est peccatum in inventione, where there is no deceit in enquiry, there
is no sin in finding out: but many would ask his opinion, and he would answer,
dolose quaesisti, dolose invenisti, thou soughtest fraudulently, and foundest
accordingly, This it is in effect, when a thing is made plain to us, we will
not have it plain, and so we continue in this kind of ignorance.

2. Supina ignorantia is the second, and that is a careless and wretchlesse
ignorance, and this is the fault of these times: When a man has ex quo discat,
sed non vult discere, may learn if he will take the pains: but will not. And it
is chiefly in them that either propter (...) sciendi, or (...) discendi,
carelessenesse to know and slothfulness to learn, or ob verecundiam querendi,
modesty in seeking after knowledge, will be ignorant still. Of one of which the
whole land is for the most part guilty.

The second thing forbidden, is a light knowledge, contrary to the Apostles
rule, 2.
according as God has dealt to every man the measure of faith: so that not
only Romans 12. 3.
the whole want of faith, but the want of the measure of faith is condemned.
When a thing is commended to us in measure, not only the not having it at all,
but the not having the measure of it is a fault: and not only that, but it is
also required Col. 3. 16.
that according to our years and gifts our knowledge should increase. We must
1 Cor. 14. 20.
(according to the Apostles rule) be men in understanding and children in
malice. Esaias 28. 9.
The Prophet goes lower, Whom shall he teach knowledge, and whom shall he make
to understand doctrine? them that are weaned from the milk, and drawn from the
breasts. This is as low as may be. Therefore as we grow in years, we must grow
in knowledge, and not be ever taught and never learning. To have precept upon
10.
precept (as he speaks in the next verse) line upon a line, here a little and
there a little, not too much at once. Ever learning (as the Apostle) and never
coming to 2. Tim. 3. 7.
the knowledge of the truth. And it is that which is inveighed against in
another place, Heb. 5. 12.
that the Hebrew Christians after much time spent in learning profited no
better, but still needed to be catechized in the principles of religion.

It was prophesied before Christ's time, that the succeeding ages should have
Dan. 12. 3.
great knowledge, as by Daniel. They that be wise shall shine as the brightn
(...) of the firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness as the stars
for ever, and by Joel, I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh. And by Esaias,
All thy children Joel 2. 28.
shall be taught of God, and great shall be the peace of thy Children. And this
was Esaias 54. 13.
foretold of the primitive Church by the same Prophet. The people that sat in
9. 2.
11. 9.
darkness have seen a great light, etc. And the earth shall be full of the
knowledge of the Lord.

S. Paul was so confident of their knowledge in his time, that he asks a
question, not by way of doubt, but of full persuasion of it, and that not in
small matters, but high mysteries; Know ye not (says he) that the Saints shall
judge the 1 Cor. 6. 2, 3.
world? And in in the next verse, Know ye not that we shall judge the Angels? 1
Cor. 14. 34.
And we may see that the Corinthians were so forward in Religion, that the
women thought themselves able to dispute and teach the weightiest points in it;
so that the Apostle is forced to make a prohibition to them, not to speak in
the Church, Acts 18. 3.
which argues much knowledge, though too great boldness in them. In the Acts
of the Apostles, we see Aquila was but a Tent-maker, yet he afterward attained
to such knowledge that he became a pillar of the Church. The Ecclesiastical
story makes mention of Severus, that he was at first but of mean condition;
yet, afterward for his knowledge was chosen Bishop of a great Evagr.
See (Antioch.) Now if we consider these, and see how careful they were to
exceed in knowledge we shall think it an odious thing to be of the number of
the ignorant. And if, that which the prophet speaks of, prevail not with us, (I
have written to them the great things of my Law, but they were counted Hos. 8.
12.
as a vain thing:) because we may pretend the profundity as an impediment. Yet
let the tax upon the Hebrews work shame in us, that whereas we Heb. 5. 12.
should be past the principles, we have not that measure of knowledge in us.

The extent of our knowledge must reach, as to a discerning quid verum, what is
true, so to a giving of reason, quare verum, why it is true. To prove that we
say 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21
or know, as the Apostle; and as our Savior speaks, to know our own Shepherd
and John 10. 5.
his voice; or at least with S. Peter, to give a reason of that we hope. Yet is
it not 1. Pet. 3. 15.
fit with our Sciols, for the people to enter into dispute of controversies, of
discussing great and hard questions: this is not required of them, but of
Timothy, and others to whose office and place it wholly belongs; for in such
things, sancta simplicitas est virtus Laicorum, holy simplicity is a virtue in
Laymen: yet as it is not required or expedient they should jangle about every
quiddity, so must they not be like them, that know not, nor will understand,
but walk in darkness: nor such as will take upon Psalm 82. 5.
them to check or control their teachers, for herein they show their own
ignorance: for if the foundations be out of course, that is, the teachers, how
can the building stand, and as Chrysostom, If darkness be upon the tops of
the mountains, there must needs be mist in the valleys.

Before we leave this virtue of knowledge, it will be needful to add a little
concerning, 1. The Object of this knowledge, and 2. Such Rules as are to be
observed in the use of means to attain it.

1. The Object is God, and his Son Christ Jesus. Of God the Father we read,
That no man has ever seen him, and Moses could see but his back parts, and
when John 17. 3.
he did see them he hid his face, and was afraid. It is sufficient then for us
to know 1. Tim. 6. 16.
him, as he is revealed to us in his word, and in his works; and because our
knowledge Exodus 33. 23.
3. 6.
is to be referred to his worship and obedience, therefore so much is necessary
for us, as that without which we cannot worship and obey him: more particularly
we are to know him in the unity of his Essence, and Trinity of person, as also
what he is to us by creation, providence, redemption, and what he requires of
us to be done. Therefore it is said, They shall know that I am the Lord their
God, which Exodus 29. 46.
brought them forth of the land of Egypt, that I may dwell amongst them. And in
another place God proclaims himself by his Attributes. The Lord God, merciful,
and 34. 6.
gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy
for thousands, etc. Besides which knowledge of God, in his nature, and
attributes, 7.
actions, and relations to us, we are to know what we are to do for him,
namely, we must have the knowledge of his will, both in regard of the general
duties, what all are to do, and in respect of every one of us in a particular
calling, what every one of us is to do in our several rancks and callings.

2. Now concerning the rules to be observed, if we would come to this
knowledge, it is well said of the Heathen, Ponenti (...), ponenda sunt media,
means are to be appointed to him, that has pitched upon his end.

In the use of which means the order stands thus,
1. Impediments must be removed. 2. The rules of direction must be observed.
1. The Impediments to be removed. The first is according to the Wise man's
rule, Prove. 1. 16.
To (...) from evil company, and to keep our feet from the paths of those,
whose (...). 27.
feet run to evil, such as do lactare homines, entice men to evil, and
therefore as he speaks in another place, Cease to hear their instruction,
that cause to err from the words of knowledge. And the Instructions that cause
us to err, or the impediments in that kind that are to be removed are two
fold. 1. In our selves. 2. Without us.

1. Within us, besides diverse others, is our own reason which must be
rectified, else it will much hinder us, we must not do according to that which
is set down in Deuteronomy. 12. 8.
Ephesians. 4. 17.
Deuteronomie, The doing of every man that is right in his own eyes; and as the
2. Cor. 10. 5.
Apostle, Walking in the vanity of our own minds. And in this case we must
cast 1. Cor. 3. 18.
down our imaginations, all our strong holds, and high mountains of carnal and
corrupt Matthew. 11. 25.
reason, and bring them into captivity and obedience, as in the mystery of the
Romans 1. 22.
Trinity, and the other high mysteries of faith. 2. The impediments without us
are, 1. Taking religion from our fathers only 1. Pet. 1. 18.
by tradition, by inheritance as left to us by our Elders. Such things as our
fathers taught us, we will do. Our rule in this must be, Scrutamini Scripturas,
search the Scriptures, and receive nothing by tradition where we find it
contrary to this rule. 2. It is said of Jehoshaphat, that he sought the Lord of
his fathers, and walked 2. Chro. 17. 4.
in his commandments, and not after the trade or doings of Israel. The custom
or fashion of the place or times is an impediment without us which must be
removed, Amos. 5. 13.
except it agree with our rule: for there are evil times, as the Prophet
speaks, and 12.
what fashions the people then used he shows the verse before. You shall not go
haughtily, faith another, for the times are evil. And there are perilous times,
as the Mic. 2. 3.
Apostle calls them, where evil examples and fashions by many are followed: but
2. Tim. 3. 1.
these we must leave.
The rules of direction in the use of means follow next in order, of which
(because unum necessarium which our Savior tells Martha of. Luke 10. 42.


2. That (as Christ also said) first seek the kingdom of God, and the
righteousness thereof, and all other things shall be added: so this knowledge
is to be sought after Matthew. 6. 33.
in the first place, for we have no warrant that our other studies shall be
sanctified, or other knowledge prosper without this: but if we look after this
first, sanctification of the other will follow.

Vacate (according to Saint Jeromes translation) et videte quoniam ego sum
Deus, psalm. 46. 10.
find a time, and that time must be our first, it may be at other times this
knowledge will not be found. Saint Paul gives counsel to man and wife not to
come together 1 Cor. 7. 5.
for a time, that they may give themselves to fasting and prayer, If then we
must abstain for a time from indifferent things, then a majore, from things not
indifferent but evil, when we spend our time not only aliud agendo, but male
agendo, as (...) says, not only in things impertinent but evil. The Athenians
what other business Act. 17. 21.
soever thy had, yet they spent some time to tell or hear novelties. And it
were a shame to us if we should not do more then they in a thing so necessary.

Diligence in attaining it is also to be used, that we loose not this time.
Saint Augustine Satis reputatur quis facere, cum tantum facit pro Deo, quantum
facit pro mundo, If a man spend, but as much pains for God, as he does for the
world, it is sufficient. And I wish we would do that, bestow but as much
diligence in Gods Laws as on the poenall Laws of a prince. For all the statuts
of Omri are kept says the Prophet, and all Mic. 6. 16.
the works of the house of Ahab, and ye walk in their counsels, we might attain
Jer. 4. 22.
to some knowledge, if we would take that pains to study Gods Law, which we
take to do evil.

If any of you want wisdom (says the Apostle) let him ask of God. And Solomon
Ja 1. 5.
the wisest among the sons of men, says that it is a point of wisdom to Sap.
8. 21.
know whose gift it was, how to attain to it. and therefore in the next chapter
10.
he makes his prayer to God for it. This prayer is also set down in the book of
the 1 Kings, 3. 7.
kings, and (which is more) the text says, that the speech (...) the Lord,
that 10.
Solomon had asked this thing.

When we have attained to knowledge we must as is required in Deuteronomy. 1. bring
Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7, 8, 9,
it into our heart (that is past the brain) 2. we must whet or Catechize our
children, for Catechizing in the principles must be diligently observed, 3. We
must talk of Gods statutes, that is, use conference, 4. We must write them,
which includes also reading, both fruitful. 5. We must bind them before our
eyes, which implies meditation, 6. We must bind it about our hands (a thing
unusual in these days) but yet as in physic it is a rule per brachiam fit
judicium de cord, The pulse comes from the heart to the hands, so in Divinity,
by the arm, practice and exercise is meant, and this is to bind it on our
arms.

It is a good way to make a conscience to practice what we know. Saint Bernard
says, Quod datur (...), quod aperitur (...), id exerce, practice what we have
attained by prayer and industry: for the contrary, not practicing what we know,
brings coecitates poenales for illicitas cupiditates, The heathen man says,
that he that has an habit of Justice, shall be able to say more of it then he
that has a perfect speculation of all the Ethics. So the meanest man that
has practiced his knowledge, shall be able to say more of God and Religion,
then the most learned that has not practiced. It is in divinity as in other
things Exercitium signum est (...) and so signum scientiae, practice is the
sign of power, and so of knowledge.

It is a true saying, that the best rule to judge of the Consequence is by the
Augustines prayer was, Domine noverim te, noverim me, and adds that no man
knows God, that knows not himself. And vera scientia non facit (...)
exultantem, sed lamentantem, True knowledge puffs not up, but dejects a man,
and the Heathen man could say Inter sapientes sapientior qui (...), he is the
wisest among the wise that is humblest, and he that has a conceit of himself
can never come to kowledge.

Aristotle in his Metaphysiks says, Scientis est ordinare, he is wise that can
order his doings, prefer every thing according to order; as in divinity
knowledge of God which brings life eternal, should be prefered before other
knowledge which brings only temporal profit. But we do contrary, for it is a
common order with us, as to prefer private profit before public, so to place
temporal things before eternal, and the knowledge of the one before the
knowledge of the other, which is a sign that our knowledge is not rightly
ordered.

The Apostle says, we must not be children in knowledge, that is, carried away
1 Cor. 14. 20.
with every false wind of doctrine, but must be rooted and grounded, that we
Jude, 12.
may be steadfast in the truth; not clouds without water, carried away with
every wind, as Saint Jude has it, and like waves of the sea, that is, carried
with the tide, here with the ebb, and there with the flood, as it is in our
times.

The last rule is, we must not hinder knowledge in others, either by authority,
commandment, permission or counsel, but provoke others to it, and increase it
in them as much can be. Our knowledge must be to help others, and that three
ways.

1. In teaching them that are ignorant. 2. In satisfying them that doubt, and
strengthening them that waver. 3. In comforting the distressed and afflicted
conscience.
And thus much for knowledge, the first duty of the mind.

CHAP. VII.
The second Inward virtue Commanded in the first precept, is faith. Reasons for
the necessity of faith. Addition 8. Concerning the evidence of faith, and
Freedom of assent. The certainty of faith. Of unbeleif, Addition 9. Concerning
the nature of faith. means of believing. Of Trust in God for things temporal.
The trial of our trust. six signs of faith.

THe next inward virtue of the mind, is faith. This supposes a knowledge of
Faith
the object or things to be believed, which being propounded sufficiently, as
credible, our assent thereto is called faith, which rests upon divine
authority, though it see not the proper reasons to enforce assent; for seeing
we cannot by mere natural reason attain sufficient knowledge of supernatural
truths, but that divine revelation is needful, therefore besides natural
knowledge, faith is necessary, which reecives them for this authority of the
speaker. To explain this. There is in every proposition an affirmation or a
denial. 1. Sometimes a man holds neither part, because he sees that equal
reasons may be brought on both sides; and that is called doubting, 2. If we
incline to one part, yet so as we fear the reasons of the other part Luke, 12.
29.
may be true; then it is called Opinion. As Agrippa was almost persuaded to
Act. 26. 28.
be a Christian, 3. If we consent to one part, that is called kowledge, which
goes beyond both the other, and arises from evidence and assurance of the truth.

Knowledge is threesold.

1. By sense. 2. By discourse of reason. 3. By relation of other men: and this
is properly faith.
1. Knowledge by sense is such as was that of Joseph's brethren, that had seen
him before they sold him into Egypt, and therefore knew him.

2. Knowledge by discourse. Such as Jacobs was, when he saw the chariots Genesis
45. 27.
come out of Egypt, he conceived straightway that his son was alive.

3. That by relation of others; as Jacob knew that his son yet lived, when his
sons told him so.

1. For the first, when a thing cannot be present to the sense, then must we
rely upon the third [Relation.] The Queen of Sheba did first hear of Solomon's
wisdom 1 King. 10. 1.
in her own land, before she came and heard him her self.

2. For point of reason, there is nothing absent from that, but that which is
supernatural and above our understanding; when a thing exceeds the capacity
of mere natural reason without divine illumination, as we see in Nicodemus, a
great Rabbi in John, 3. 9.
Israel. For concerning mysteries in religion, the Apostle says out of the
prophet, eye 1 Cor 2. 9.
has not seen, or ear heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man: that
is, they Esa. 64. 4. (...)
exceed both the capacity of the sense and reason, and therefore we must come
to the third way, which is by faith; for as Job speaks. God is great, and we
know Job. 36. 26.
him not, neither (...) the number of his years be (...): therefore it must
necessarily Esa. 7. 9.
follow, Nisi credider it is non stabiliemini, as the Prophet assures us, if ye
will not believe, ye shall not be established. And yet this restrains us not so
far, but that after we have believed, we may search after a reason, that we may
be able and ready (as the Apostle bids us) always to give an answer to every
man that asks a reason 1 pet. 3. 15.
of the hope that is in us. For grace does not annihilate and make nature void;
faith is above, and not contrary to right reason, it is as a greater light to
the less, yea religio est summa ratio, it is the quintessence of reason, or
reason exalted or elevated. But we are to use reason, as the handmaid to
faith, (for faith must bring the understanding of man into captivity to the
obedience of Christ, as Saint Paul 2 Cor. 10. 5.
says) and we must expect from the holy Ghost the teaching of these things,
which Act. 4. 31.
our nature neither can nor is able to conceive.

Now faith differs from science thus. In science there is first an enquiry
after the reasons and causes, and then the assent follows. But in faith there
is first the assent, and then the understanding of that to which we have
assented Auditu (...), by the psalm. 18. 44.
hearing follows. As Soon as they hear of me they shall obey me, says God. It
is conceptus cum assensu, because the object of our faith is not propounded
with such evidence to the understanding, as to constrain us to believe, but the
will holds the understanding prisoner, and keeps it captive.

Thus faith becoms a free act, an act of obedience; whereas if things were
propounded with that Addition 9.
evidence that we could not distrust, there could be (...) place for freedom of
obedience in believing: concerning the evidence of faith, and freedom of assent.
God has so ordered it, that matters of faith are propounded, as sum
credibilia, highly credible, such that in prudence we may safely assent unto,
yet not with that evidence which necessitates assent; for then there could be
no trial of obedience in believing, nor any pretense left for reward to
believers, or punishment to unbeleevers. See the Schoolmen generally, and
master Hookers (...). Of the certainty of says, added to his Eccles-politic.

With the heart man believes, faith the Apostle, belief being an act of the
understanding, it should come first a mente, but he says there, we must cord
(...), for Romans 10. (...).
the will has an especial act in it.

Now the reason why it pleased God thus to order the matter in production of
faith is, because if reason of it self could have attained to the things
pertaining to God, little or no glory at all had come to God by it. Again,
seeing matters of faith cannot be attained by reason, this shows the vanity of
the wisdom of the flesh, and we may see how God does confound and abase it. For
in Religion, the ground is contrary to that in Philosophy; (...), not to
believe, is the way of Philosophy, and (...), to believe, of divinity, at which
Lucian scoffed.

For the warrant of believing or assenting before we know, something has been
said before: we will add a little more in this place. Saint Cyrill in his fifth
(...). Cyprian, Chrysostom, and other of the ancient fathers prove against
Philosophers, that Quic quid fit, fide fit, whatsoever is done, is done by
faith. This appears in all civil affairs wherein men go upon a civil faith,
without certain knowledge of the things, and therefore much more in matters of
religion, which are supernatural, may we live by faith. Thus we see the
husbandman, who though he sees the weather unkindly etc. yet fits himself to
till and sow his ground, and bestows his cost, though he have no demonstrative
knowledge, whether he shall reap any profit or no. And so the Merchants,
though their goods and ships are subject to storms, pirates etc. yet they run
the hazard, and adventure upon this Civil faith, So in marriage, though some
may be barren, yet they marry in hope to have children, and so in warfare,
though the victory be uncertain, yet the soldier goes one to battle etc. The
Schoolmen after the fathers go a subtiller way to work, and hold, that (...),
fide scitur, that we believe even those things we know: for by our senses and
understanding we know many things, and herein they are our witnesses, which we
believe, yet all confess, that these witnesses are very doubtful in many
things.

For the eye, which is the most certain and chief of all the outward senses,
because it apprehends more differences, and apprehends its object after a
more special and spiritual manner: yet they which are skilful in the Optiques,
reckon up 20 ways 1 Cor. 13. (...).
how it may be deceived, and what greatimperfections are in it. And for our
reason or understanding, we see how uncertain it is in our younger years, and
how we correct former errors, as we grow in years, when we are children we
speak as children, 1 Cor. 13. 12.
reason as children, and conceive as they do, but when we are men we put away
childish things. Ploughmen cannot reason of the formal causes of things,
because they cannot see them, but tell them of labor, that they can conceive,
and so in respect of a more sublime understanding they come far short. And
therefore we also may be deceived in things that are above us. and therefore the
third way of knowledge that is by relation is necessary.

The certainty of faith is grounded upon the condition and quality of the
relaters, and has only two exceptions.

1. Either against the authors, that they want skill, and are ignorant of the
things they relate. 2. Or else that they are such upon whose fidelity we cannot
rely.
Now in either of these cases if the party relating want skill and cannot
relate the truth, or is not honest, and will not, his testimony is not to be
taken. So then there is no more certain way then this, that whereas the
knowledge of faith, and grounds of Religion are to be built upon such
witnesses, as want neither skill nor fidelity, but for their skill can, and for
their faithfulness will deliver the truth, we are to embrace what they deliver
as certain truths.

The Apostle says not, I believe whom I know, but scio cuicredo, I know whom 2 Timothy 1. 12.
I believe. We know that whom we believe is Amen, just and true. That cannot
lie, A poc. 15. 3.
Tit. 1. 2.
a faithful witness, it is a thing impossible for him so to do. Heb. 6. 18.


And for the manner of giving his testimony. The terms in Scripture are 1.
Dictum Jehovaeh, and Dixit (...), the word of the Lord, and thus says the
Lord. And because man's stipulation and promise is more certain then his bare
affirmation, Romans 1. 2.
therefore God has made promises to us, and his promises are precious, as the
Heb. 6. 13.
Apostle says. 3. And for our greater comfort and assurance has confirmed his
promise 2 pet. 1. 4.
with an oath. 4. Again, because if we have a man's handwriting, we give greater
Heb. 6. 17.
credit to that then toan oath, we have his own handwriting, written with his
Exo. 31. 18.
own finger. 5. And for confirmation of that he has put to his feal. 6. And
lastly, Romans 4. 11
(beyond which no man goes, nor any man desires more to strengthen a promise)
2 Cor. 1. 22
he has given an carnest penny, a true Gods penny as we call it.

1. Now that which may be objected against this is, that the immediate voice of
God is not now amongst us, and that which we hear is from Moses, Esaias, Saint
Matthew Saint Paul etc. Yet this we must know, that though we hear it from
them, being but men, yet did they not speak of themselves, not of their own
brains, but as they were inspired by the holy Ghost. And this Saint Peter
tells us, 2 pet. 1. 21.
the Prophecy (says he) came not in old time by the will of man: but holy men
of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost. For a Prince usually
speaks not to the people immediately from his own mouth, but by Edicts and
proclamations published by others in his name. And as the Scepter or mace which
is delivered to them that publish those Edicts is a sign and token that they
come from and for the Prince, so the Scepter of Gods extraordinary power was
committed to his Prophets, Apostles etc. The Jews required no more then a sign
of our Savior, which with them was the Scepter. And our Savionr desired no
more of them then that, if John, 2. 18.
they would not believe him for his words, yet they should for his works. And
10. 38.
15. 24.
that if he had not done among them, the works which no other man did, (those
were his miracles,) they mighe have been excused for their unbeleefe. Upon
which Saint Augustine says, that either we must grant that they were done, or
else, that without miracles all the world was converted, and became Christians,
which is a greater miracle then all the rest which he did, and so we must grant
miracles whether we will or no. And this is our warrant that these men, the
Prophets and Apostles came from God, and that God has spoken to us by them.

2. The next quere is, whether he is able to perform those things which he
has promised by them. To that we say with the Angel, that with God nothing
Luc. 1. 37.
shall be unpossible. The Prophet says, His hands are not shortened, it is able
to reach all Esa. 59. 1.
things. When Moses mistrusted Gods providence to feed 600000 men, saying shall
Number. 11. 23.
all the flocks and the herds be slain, or all the fish of the sea be gathered
together to suffice them? God answered, is the Lords hand waxed short? Thou
shall see whether my word shall come to pass or not.

3. Lastly, for his Will, take a place of a Father for all, Scio pcsse, scio
scire, cupere, (...). 3. 25.
velle, for, The Lord is good to them that trust in him, to the soul that
seeks him.

That faith is necessary, may be thus proved, it is called the substance of
things hoped for, and the evidence, ground, or demonstration of things not
seen; both Heb. 11. 1.
which argue the necessity of it; for in totis ordinatis, (as Religion has its
order) the first part is substantia reliquorum, as the substance of a house is
in the foundation, of a ship in the Stern, of a tree in the root. The Apostle
compares it to a foundation, and to a root, and he says there is naufragium
fidei, a shipwreck of faith, and Col. 1. 23.
so consequently it is compared to the stern of a ship. If faith then be
necessary, as 2. 7.
the root and foundation of all religion, then without it nothing can be done
by a Christian, which is accepted of God, ad salutem, to salvation. If we
stand, it is by 2 Cor. 1. 24.
5. 7.
faith. If we walk, we walk by faith, whatsoever we do, if we do it not by
faith, it is Romans 14. 23.
not pleasing to God, ad salutem. And it is in this respect that faith is
called, Matter obedientiae, the mother of obedience, because all duties arise
out of it.

Luther has a saying, (which is true if it be taken in a good sense) that in
faith all the Law is fulfilled, before we have fulfilled any part of it in act,
because it is the root from whence all Christian obedience arises, and wherein
it is vertually contained; and therefore in regard of the necessity of it, it
pleased God to reject all the high titles of the learned wise men of the world,
as Philosophers, etc. and to entitle his flock only by the name of believers.
And Eusebius. Emisenus gives a good reason 1. Cor. 1. 21.
for it: for the first word of a Christian is credo, and that which makes him
a 1 Cor. 10. 13.
Heb. 12. 2.
Christian; if we be not faithful, then are we no Christians. God gives
Christians 1 Timothy 1. 15.
no other name then he gives to himself. Fidelis est Deus, God is faithful. And
his Romans 10. 8.
Son is called the author and finisher of our faith, and his word is called,
sermo fidelis, Gal. 6. 10.
the word of faith, and his family, the household of says, and prayer is called
by James 5. 15.
Romans 4. 11.
Saint James, the prayer of faith. And Saint Paul calls the Sacraments, the
seals of faith.

So we see that faith leads us through all duties: and not only this, but
that which has bin said of knowledge, may be said of faith; that it is the
beginning of our blessedness. Our Savior says to S. Thomas, Blessed are they
that have not seen, John 20. 29.
and yet have believed. There is an apt similitude in the Prophet to express
this, I will betroth thee to me in faithfulness, and thou shall know the Lord.
The inchoation Hosea 2. 20.
of marriage is in sponsalibus, when hands are given, so are our sponsalia in
fide in this life, the marriage is consummate in heaven.

It is said, Qui non crediderit condemnabitur, he that believes not, shall be
Mark 16. 16.
damned, nay further, (as S. John has it) his sentence is not deferred, but it
is gone John 3. 18.
already upon him, he is condemned already. Therefore for the necessity of it
we Heb. 11. 6.
may conclude with the Apostle. Without faith it is impossible to please God.
And the reason is, because there is no man but thinks it a disparagement not to
be credited, and the greater the person, the more desirous he is to be
believed. A private man would be believed upon his honesty; and a man of
greater state upon his honor; the Prince upon his own word, he writes, test
meipso, to argue the sufficiency of his word, and a disgrace he accounts it
to break it, and if any of these persons should not be credited on these terms,
they would think that a great discourtesy were offered to them.

If then there be a God, he must needs expect more then a Prince, and
consequently he may of greater right say, test meipso, because he is above all
Princes. Job says, Is it fit to say to a King, Thou art wicked, or to Princes,
Ye are ungodly? Job 34. 18.
though they be so; much less to a good Prince, and least of all to God. Now
he that believes has set to his seal that God is true. And on the contrary,
He John 3. 33.
that believes not, makes God a Liar: and there can be no greater disgrace to
God, then to say, he is a Liar. therefore S. Bernard upon that place,
Impossible est sine 1. John 5. 10.
fide placere Deo, it is impossible to please God without faith, says, Quomodo
potest placere Deo, cui non placet Deus? how can that man please God, who is
not pleased with God: and such is every one that believes him not. And thus
much for the necessity of faith. Now we come to our Rules.

1. As we have seen the affirmative, and what is commanded, so we must see the
1.
negative, and what is forbidden: that is unbelief. It is a note of the
reprobate, to be children of unbelief, whether it be by the lifting up of a
man's soul, as the Ephesians. 5. 6.
Prophet calls it, by a proud imagination and conceit of our own reason, or
by Abak. 2. 4.
contempt, or any other kind of wretchedness, or carelessenesse, when we come
to hold Machiavels position, Non curandum quid boni credat, sed quid faciat.
And in this case they must be punished with that the Apostle tells us, God
shall send them strong delusions that they should believe a lie, for rejecting
the truth. Quia 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11.
Christum non crediderunt in nomine Patris venientem, veniet alius nomine suo,
and praevalebit, eique credent, because they believed not Christ coming in the
Fathers Name, there shall another come in his own name, and prevail, him they
shall believe: so shall it happen to those that will not cleave to the truth,
they shall be given over to the untruths of this world, and in the world to
come, that punishment shall befall them, as it did to the Lord, on whose hand
the King leaned, that would not believe Elisba that prophesied plenty. Videbis,
and non gustabis, thou shall see it with thine eyes, but shall not eat thereof;
for when he had seen that come to pass which 2. Keg. 7. 2.
the Prophet foretold, he was trodden to death, before he could eat or taste of
that 17.
plenty. So shall they that are incredulous see the glory of others, but not
communicate of it in the life to come. S. Ambrose compares such men to a coal
covered with ashes, Infidelitas non potest claram narrationem habere, nam sicut
carbo cinere suo coopertus obcaecatur: It a and hi erroris tenebris circundati
luce carebunt, unbelief In 1 Cor. c. 16
cannot have a glorious narration, for as a coal covered with ashes is obscure,
so the unbelievers shall want light being covered with the darkness of their
error.

2. And as unbelief is forbidden, so is also resting in a small measure of
faith. The Apostle mentions a full measure of faith, and if we want that, or
labor not to Romans 12. 3.
attain it at least, we are not of the number of the faithful, which our
Savior speaks Matthew. 8. 10.
of; I have not sound such faith, no not in Israel; and in another place, O
woman, great is thy faith. There is a great faith. And that of S. Peter's was a
little faith, 15. 28.
when for want of it he began to sink, a faith mingled with many doubts.
Therefore 14. 31.
we are to pray with him in the Gospel, Domine credo, adjuva (...) Mark 9. 24.
meam, Lord I believe, help thou mine unbelief; and secondly, when it is
settled, that Luke 17. 5.
it may be brought to a good measure, we are to pray with the Apostles, Lord,
increase Romans 14. 5.
our faith. Our faith must be in a full measure, we must endeavor for full
assurance. Interpreters think, that it is a metaphor taken from a ship under
full sails.

The holy Ghost resembles man in this life to a Champion, and therefore for his
better defense advising him what weapons to furnish himself withal, puts faith
instead of all weapons. As Scutum fidei, the shield of faith, a special
safeguard against the Ephesians. 6. 16.
Devil and his fiery darts. And against the world, he says, This is the
victory that John 5. 4.
overcomes the world, even your faith. Lastly, against the flesh, he wills
us to be 1 Thessalonians. 5. 8.
sober and put on the breastplate of faith. And no marvel, for the Author to
the Hebrews Heb. 11. 33.
attributes all the great achievements of the Saints to faith. Besides we see
that Matthew. 14. 31.
S. Peter's faith made his body so light, that he walked on the sea, and sunk
not: and on the other side, our Saviors hands were restrained, so that he
could work no more Mark 6. 5, 5.
miracles among the Jews, because of their unbelief.

So that it appears by this, that by Gods own ordinance, he will have helps of
our faith, or else he will do nothing among us: not but that he can work
miracles without it, but that he has so ordered and disposed it. And this
proves the necessity of the concurrence of our faith, with the mercy of God.
If thou (...) believe, all things Mark 9. 23.
are possible to him that believes. The want of faith hindered the working of
the Apostles; for whereas Christ had given them power to cast out Devils, yet
they could not dispossess the man's son, and asking the reason of our Savior,
he tells them it was because of their unbelief. Matthew. 17. 19.


And this is more strange, seeing that in the case of the woman with the issue
of blood, we do not find that Christ spoke a word, but her faith cured her, as
if it had been against his will, she conceiving, that if she could but touch
the hem of his garment she should presently be cured, and Christ not aware of
it, her faith, as Origin says, Vim (...) Christo, got her cure by force from
him. And the same Father compares faith to the Loadstone, that by a hidden
quality and virtue attracteth iron to it. Neither is this to be marvelled at,
for it prevails also even with God himself; for the Angel, when he perceived
that Jacobs faith was so prevalent that he would not let him go, nor he could
prevail against him, told him that his name should be no more Jacob, but
Israel, because he had power with Genesis 32. 28.
God, and men. Now if we be Jacobs and prevail with God thus, we shall also
prevail with men. We see that the woman of Syrophoen. gave our Savior the
foyl, and Matthew. 15. 28.
he was forced to say, O woman great is thy faith, be it unto thee even as thou will; for indeed faith is so wonderful a thing that it became wonderful to him
to whom 8. 10
nothing else is wonderful, Christ himself wondered at the Centurions faith.

To avoid error we are to know, that Divines make three kinds or degrees
rather of faith. 1. General. 2. Legal. 3. Evangelical. And all these are
necessary in their place and order.

1. The general stands in believing that God is, etc. He that comes to God
must Hebt. 11. 6.
1. believe that God is, and 2. that he is a rewarder of them that seek him,
and that he will find means to bring them to felicity. And this was the faith
of Adam in paradise, and is supposed in the other two as the foundation of all
Religion. 2. The Legal stands upon the Law, and the belief of the promises and
(...) contained in it, with the punishments and the rewards thereof; Christ
tells the John 5. 46.
Jews of a faith in the Law; If ye had believed Moses, ye would have believed
me. This was peculiar to the Jews before Christ came, and is not proper for us.
3. The Evangelical is the third, which is the belief of the Gospel, whereby we
trust Addition 10.
and rely upon Christ for (...) of sins and eternal life, in the way by him
prescribed concerning the nature of faith.
in the Gospel, which is by repentance and new obedience: which way they that
walk in, are said to believe in Christ, or to believe the Gospel; whereas to
apply the promises Matthew. 5. 20.
absolutely, not performing the conditions is a mere fancy, and not faith in
Christ, or the 7. 22.
Gospel: because Christ has no where promised pardon or life, but to such as
repent and Acts 3. 26.
lead a new life; and therefore those that resolve not seriously so to do, and,
as occasion is John 14. 15.
offered, do not put their purposes in execution, do nothing less then believe
in Christ, but turn the gospel into a doctrine of liberty. Therefore says, S.
Cyprian, Quomodo se credere in Christum dicit, qui non facit quae Christus
facere praecipit, how can any say he believes in Christ, who does not what
Christ commands him. And S. Augustine de (...) and operib. c. 23. says, not
only that a good life is inseparable from faith, but also ipsam esse bonam
vitam, that faith and good life are all one. And Irenaeus before them both,
Credere in Christo, est voluntatem ejus facere to believe in Christ is to do
his will.
The object of all faith is the word of God, which, as it is said, profited not
the Hebr. 4. 2.
Jews because it was not mingled with faith, when it is was preached to them.
So that there must be a mixture of faith with the word, for the word and faith
continue the Spirit of God in us. Our Savior tells his Disciples, that his
coming upon earth was, fovere ignem, to cherish and keep fresh the Spirit,
which is there compared to a Luke 12. 49.
fire. S. John the Baptist calls him the Baptizer with fire, and the Holy
Ghost; and Matthew. 3. 11.
therefore it is, that S. Paul advises, not to quench the Spirit: and that
which nourishes 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19.
it is in the next verse, Despise not prophecy, which is lampas fidei, the oil
20.
of faith. The word is the matter of this fire. If it come into a man, it is
but as a lamp without oil, which flameth for a time, it is but a blaze in the
Hearers, when it is not mingled with faith, it bideth but a while if this
nutriment be wanting. And it is wanting in the wicked, Non quia dicitur, sed
quia creditur, sicut credis ita sit S. Augustine
tibi. Non est semen immortale, nisi credas esse a Deo, qui est solus
immortalis. And this is the necessary use of faith. Thus much for the first
Rule.

The second and third rules are of little use in this Commandment.

The fourth rule is concerning the means to believe: about which we need not
much to labor, because it is certain, that the first way whereby we come to
believe, is the relation of others. The Q. of Sheba believed Solomon's wisdom
upon report. And 1. Reg. 10. 6.
the reports of Saints who reposed their whole confidence in God, may be able
to persuade us, else (which cannot be) we must think that all the Patriarchs
and Prophets were either unwise or dishonest, and their faith in vain: but they
according to their own experience, left that which they found to posterity.
Thus the testimony of the Church is the first motive and inducement to belief,
though not the sole or the the principal, for this is divine authority, viz.
the word of God derived and conveyed unto us by the Church of God, into which
our faith must be finally resolved, and ultimately terminated, upon which when
our faith is grounded we may say as the Samaritans to the woman that had
related to them the passages between her John 4. 42.
and Christ at Jacobs well, Now we believe not because of thy saying, for we
have heard him our selves, and know that this is indeed the Christ, the Savior
of the world. And so we may say, we find by experience the truth of what we
have Romans 10. 17.
heard: therefore the proper and especial ground of faith is the word of God.
Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, as the Apostle says.
And after it is preached, we must take the same course that we held in
knowledge, or meditation and conference etc, to acquaint our selves with it,
after we hear or read it, as it is in Deuteronomy 6.

But because he cannot be faithful in much, that is not so in a little; and as
Christ says, If we believe him not in earthly things, we shall come far short
in the belief Luke 16. 10.
of heavenly; therefore the learned have distinguished faith into fidem
Coelestium John 3. 12.
and Terrestrium, by faith of heavenly and earthly. And the latter of these is
a means or way to the former. Therefore it being a way or preparation to faith,
somewhat is to be said of it as a special and most effectual part of faith, and
is rather to be called fiducia or confidentia then fides, confidence or trust
then faith.

It pleased God to prepare and make way to faith by the last of the two, that a
man may repose himself, and rely wholly upon God: and he that can be brought to
this etiam vacuo penu, when there is no hope of good, being unfurnished of all
earthly means and help, will be able also to put his confidence in him for
heavenly things. But when the storehouse of faith in earthly things is empty,
we cannot be furnished with faith in heavenly.

1. Now this faith or rather confidence in God is considered two ways. 1.
Either he that has it has the means also; 2. or he that has it is utterly
without the means. Both here are enjoined. If we have them we are to use them,
because it has pleased God to ordain them as ordinary means to work with; as
Jacobs care Genesis 30. 30.
was to provide for his family. And Isaac said to his father, here is wood and
fire, 22. 7. 8
but where is the sacrifice? Abraham's answer was, Deus providebit, God will
provide Matthew. 4. 5.
the rest. If we do our parts, God will do the rest. We must not do as the
Tempter would have Christ do, cast himself from the pinnacle, when there was an
ordinary way to come down from it, for this were to neglect the ordinary, and
seek out for extraordinary means which is not warrantable.

2. And as we are commanded to use them, and not presume without them, so on
the other side we are forbidden to trust in them, and rest upon them, whether
it be in the private art we practice to sacrifice to our own nets, that is, to
ascribe all to our Abak. 1. 16.
own skill, or in our wealth, which Job accounted as a great fault. If I have
made Job. 31. 24, 25
gold my hope, or have said to the fine gold, Thou art my confidence. If I
rejoiced because my wealth was great, or because my hand had gotten much. Or if
our trust be in great men, as the Prophet, who denounces a curse against him
that trusts Jer. 17. 5.
in man or makes flesh his arm. And not only in great personages, but in
Psalm 146. 3.
Commonwealths, and the strength of them, and their chariots and horses. Or in
20. 7.
wisdom. Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom. Or in outward privileges.
Jer. 9. 23.
7. 4.
Trust not in lying words, says the Prophet, saying the Temple of the Lord,
etc. Or Ezekiel. 33. 30.
as Ezekiel in ordinary coming to sermons, (as the people did to his) and so to
rest, doing no good works, and reaping no fruit by them. But to use these
things well, not trusting in them, which may be done. 1. By a right judgment
of them. 2. By a right use of them.

1. For the first, Moses says, It is not bread that man lives by only, but
by the word of God, his will and decree. In nature bread should nourish, but it
is withal, Deuteronomy. 8. 3.
if God give the staff of bread with it. His blessing gives a nutritive virtue
to bread, and this is the staff. The Psalmist looked upon his bow and his
sword, and yet could Ezekiel. 4. 16.
not be confident in them. I will not trust in my bow, says he, it is not my
sword that shall help me. And, except the Lord build with us, and watch with
us, our building Psalm 44. 7.
and watching will be to no purpose. It is the Lord that must give the staff of
building, 127. 1.
watching, nourishing, etc. else all our means will be used in vain, nothing
can prosper without his blessing. Every thing depends upon God, both in esse
and in operari, as the Schools say, and no second cause can work without the
influence of the first cause; and this must be our judgment concerning the
means. 2. The right use, is the second, and this because the means are of no
force without a blessing annexed, we are to seek for some thing further that
may add vigor and strength to them, which, as the Apostle says, is
thanksgiving and prayer to sanctify the means. And this thanksgiving and
prayer are not to be formal. It was that 1 Timothy 4. 4. 5.
which Job feared in his sons: for he knew by his good education of them that
they omitted not thanksgiving nor prayer every day, but feared that they
performed not those duties as they ought, and therefore every morning he
offered burnt offerings Job. 1. 5.
according to the number of them.
And in doing thus we shall make the right use of the means, and be in the
number of the Saints, whose practice we shall find in scriptures to be the
same. Jacob Genesis 32. 9.
in reconciling himself to his brother, used all the means that could be, as in
sending messengers before he met him, thereby to feel his affection toward
him, not forgetting presents to make his way the better, and withal instructing
his servants to separate his wives and children and droves in several stations,
that if his brother should set upon one, the other might escape, yet for all
this we see, that in the first place he gives himself to prayer, thinking that
all the means he used could be of little force, except God blessed the means,
So in Exodus we find, Exo. 17.
that in the war with the Amalekites, all things were provided, Joshua made
Captain, and the battle set in order, but knowing that all this was not
available without Gods blessing Moses went up to the top of the mount with
Aaron and Hur to pray, and we see, that no longer then Moses listed up his
hands, no longer did the Isralites prevail. We find in the fathers two several
ways whereby a man may know and certify himself whether his trust be more in
the means then in God the author and giver.

1. Quid primum in mente venit cogitandum, what first comes into a man's
thoughts. 2. Quid postremum, what last.
1. For the first, say they, when thou go about any thing, comes thy wealth
first into thy mind? or thy money? or thy chariot? or thy horse? or thy arm of
flesh? or comes he that has the prerogative of all these? the first that
first offers it self to thy mind, tries it and tieth it to it self, and all
other are but secondary means. If there be first a calling to mind of God, it
is probable that he is the ground of thy confidence.

2. And secondly, what we set down in our minds as our last refuge, and this is
too commonly seen to be the means. The wiseman says. The rich man's wealth is
his Pro. 10. 15.
strong city, which the fathers expound thus, when the Justice and goodness of
his cause, when God and good men, and all else forsake him, then will that
stick to him (as he conceives) and help him at a pinch, and he is persuaded
that argento respondent omnia, pecuniae omnia obediunt, when we are like to
them (against whom the Prophet denounces a woe,) that devise iniquity, and
work evil upon their beds, and when the morning is light they practice it,
because it is in the power of their Mic. 2. 1.
hand. And indeed our nature is such; that as long as means prevail, so long we
trust in them. But when a man in the plenty of his means can say, I will do
nothing against 2 Cor. 13. 8.
the truth, but for the truth, notwithstanding all my means, wisdom, friends,
etc. I will do nothing against a good cause, if the event conduce not to the
Glory of God, non est faciendum, I will not go about it, when a rich man shall
be poor to do evil, and so a wise man foolish and ignorant in evil, then he
has a good warrant that flesh is not his arm, and that his trust is not in
his means, (...) God, though his means be many.

Nay when we can trust in God, though means be wanting. The Greeks have a
proverb, (...)
while the pot seetheth their love seetheth, and so we can be content to hold
out so long as our means hold out and no longer. And this is the cause that
provokes God in his just judgment to give the means without the blessing, as
also to bring many things to pass without means. For as, where the blessing of
God is, there it falls out, that men's bellies are filled with Gods hidden
treasure, psalm. 17. 14.
there is thriving and growing, no man can tell by what means. So where he
(...) the means, it fares with them, as with those in the Prophet, ye have
sown much and bring in little, ye eat but ye have not enough, ye drink but ye
are not filled with drink: ye cloth you, but ye are not warm, and he that
earneth wages, Agg. 1. 6
earneth wages to put it into a bag with holes, whatsoever means they use, it
prospers not. And the experience of this we see in king Asa, albeit Physic be
the ordinary means to recover health, yet because he sought to the Physicians
before 2 Chr. 16. 12.
he sought to God for help, his physic was accursed and he pined away.

Achitophel the Oracle of wisdom and policy, gave wise counsel, but because he
looked not up to God, God did not determine to bless it, but (as the text
says) 2 Samuel 17. 1.
defeated it, and made the Counsel of Hushai to be taken and his rejected, and
we 14.
see what became of him afterward, he seeing his counsel was not followed,
sadled 23.
his ass, went and set his house in order and hanged himself. And so the
wisdom of the Egyptian Counselors became foolish, infatuavit cos God besotted
them, the Lord Esa. 19. 11.
made them give foolish counsel. Some put their trust in chariots, and some in
horses, Psalm. 20. 7. 8.
but we will remember the Name of the Lord our God, they have stumbled and
fallen, but we are risen and stand upright.

Now as these ordinary means of clothing, food, Physic, and wisdom are many
times accursed, so God to show how little he depends on secondary means, does
effect his purpose, sometimes without means, and sometimes contrary to means. As
in the fall of the walls of Jericho upon the blast of Rams horns. So Gideon
Jos. 6. 20.
encouraged by the exposition of a dream of a barley loofe, with threehundred
men with trumpets and empty pitchers in their hands and lamps within them put
all the Midianits to flight, and to run upon themselves. As also the great host
of the Syrians were put to flight, none pursuing them, but a panick terror
came Jud. 7. 13.
suddenly upon them, and a certain imagination that they heard the noise of
Chariots, horses, and a great army of the Hittites and Egyptians that came to
aid the Isralites.

1. Seeing then that God gives the means when he will, and blesses them when
he will, it is our parts to trust in him, whether we have the means or no, and
to be affected as King David was, though he were in the midst of ten thousand
men armed psalm. 3. 6.
and compassed round with them on every side, yet he would not be afraid, but
as 4. 9.
it is in the end of the next Psalm would lay him down and sleep trusting in
Gods protection, and as Moses counseled the children of Israel, when the
Egyptians pursued them with their chariots, though their enemies were behind
them, and the red sea before them, and no way seen whereby to escape, yet to
stand still and put their trust in the Lord, and they should see the power of
the Lord, which they accordingly Exo. 14. 13.
found.

So the Apostle describing a true pattern of faith, sets before us that of
Abraham, Romans 4. 18. etc
who had neither means in himself or his wife whereby to believe Gods promise
of a Son, she being barren by nature, and having a dead womb, and he a hundred
years old past child getting by course of nature, yet he staggered not, but was
strong in faith, being fully persuaded, that he which had promised was able to
perform, and therefore received the blessing in the birth of Isaac.

2. And as we are thus to trust in God, though we see no means, so must we be
far from the course of the wicked, who if God once fail them, do not only
despair of his help, but cast him off, and betake themselves to his enemy, and
to unlawful means, and such are they, that despairing of Gods assistance in
their health, leave him and the lawful means, and flee to Sorcerers, a thing
utterly condemned by the Esa. 8. 19.
Prophet. We see that Saul lost both the favor of God and his kingdom for
conversing 1 Chr. 10. 13.
with a familiar spirit.

3. Besides, there is a woe denounced against another sort of people, that Esa.
29. 15.
(as the prophet speaks,) seek deep to hide their counsel from the Lord, that
think by their policy and deep wisdom, they can deceive God as they do men.

4. There are others that take advantage of other men's weakness, and think that
that which they get by over reaching others in bargains is their own, but the
Apostle tells such, that God is an avenger of them. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 6.


5. Another unlawful means is, when we see other means failus, and that a good
man stands in our way, then we do as those against Jeremy, let us have devises
against him, and percutiamus cum lingua nostra, let us smite him with our
tongue (...). (...). 18.
that is, let us raise slanders against him, that none may credit his words, In
this case, God will give ear to the prayer that Jeremy in the subsequent
verses made against such men.

6. There is yet another sort of people that are not in the right way, and that
is of those which are married. In respect of themselves these men are
confident, but when (...) comes to, semen nosturm our seed, there their
confidence falls off, and it is to be feared, that many that might have been
saved in the estate of single life, have fallen from God, and hazarded their
own salvation, by mistrusting that God will not provide for their children,
whereas God says, Ero deus tuns et seminis tui, I will be a Genesis 17. 7.
God to thee, and to thy seed after thee. In this point Saint Ambrose says,
Plausibilis excusatio est liberis, sed dic mihi (...) homo, an unquam a Deo
(...) ut pater fieres, an etiam id petiisti, da liberos ut deum amittam, da
liberos ut peccem propterliberos, it is a fair excuse for children, but tell me
o man did thou ever pray to God thou might be a father, or did thou make
thy petition thus, give me children that I may lose God, give children that I
may sin for them. I am sure, says he, that you never said so, and yet this
is the common practice. Gehazi said not to Naaman that his (...) needed the 2
Kin. 5. 22.
Talent, and two changes of raiment, but that there were two children of the
Prophets etc. and they needed them. And Abraham himself has, his blemish in
this kind, Genesis 17. 18.
in that he was so careful for Ismael. Oh that Ismael might live in thy sight.
Therefore as we are to trust in God and his means for our selves, so are we to
rely upon his providence for our children also.

5. The fifth rule of our exposition, directs to speak of the signs of faith,
it is not enough that a man can say, Credo in deum, I believe in God, we must
have more particular signs of it. For as the Apostle says, all men have not
faith; 2 These. 3. 2.
therefore that of Saint Peter must be added, the trial of faith is much more
precious then gold. 1 pet. 1. 7.


1. The first sign therefore of faith, is according to Saint Chrysostom, when
a man is not ingeniosus ad causas, ready to pick quarrels, and to make excuses
for not believing. Chr. To. 4. 19.
How many causes might Abraham have found out not to believe? and that it was
impossible for him to have had a son? yet we see that true faith overcame all
difficulties, so that he neither excepted against the promise in respect of
Saras barrenness, or his own weakness, but Credidit he believed. But among
all the rest there was one exception which might have tried one that had been
very faithful, and that was the long time he had been without a child before
and in his younger days, and therefore there was little hope for him in his
old age. And therefore he might have concluded with them in the Prophet. It is
in vain to serve God, what profit Mal 3. 14.
is it to trust in him? I will believe no longer. But this is against that rule
of Esaias, Qui crediderit ne festinet, have and impatiency are no fit companions
of faith, he that will Esa. 28. 16.
see the event in have, his faith is in vain. Therefore our faith must not
waver, if we Genesis 32. 26.
see not the fruit of it speedily, but we must wrestle, as Jacob did with the
Angel, and not let God go till we get a blessing from him, as was said before.
We see that Mat. 15. 23.
the woman af Canaan weak by sex and an alien from the promise, though she
received 24.
three repulses from our Savior, yet by not making have she confirmed 26.
her faith to be true, and received the reward of a true faith, by obtaining
what she desired. 2. The second sign is our freedom from worldly cares and
thoughts, the ground of this is taken out of the great Scripture of faith, when
we run not a madding after Heb. 11. 1.
worldly preferment, the scraping together of wealth, and seeking to have a
portion in this life is an argument, that we are born citizens of this world,
not as the Saints and Godly men that showed themselves pilgrims in this world
and that they sought another country, a heavenly country, and so God was not
ashamed to be called their God.

But a more particular and special example is that there of Moses, who being in
great Verse. 24.
possibility to be a Prince (for he should have been the only son to Pharaohs
daughter) yet we see his coldness to the world, and to the preferment thereof
was such, that he waved it, and chose rather to suffer affliction with his
brethren, the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a time,
for so he accounted the preferment of the world.

3. The third sign is taken out of the 11. to the Hebrews, from the definition
of Heb. 12.
faith which is there called Hypostasis or a substance, (and thereupon the
faithful are called Hypostatici) now we know that a thing which has substance
is able to receive a great weight without shrinking or crushing. And such are
the Saints of God. David psalm. 46. 2.
was hypostaticus, he would not fear though the earth be moved, and the hills
carried into 3.
the midst of the sea, though the waters thereof rage and swell, and though the
11.
mountains shake at the tempest of the same, yet the Lord of hosts is with us,
the Psalm 112. 6. 7. 8.
God of Jacob is our refuge, as he concludes that psalm. And in another psalm
he shows the true (...) of a true believer, he shall never be moved, he will
not be afraid, and his heart is stablished. But the condition of him that
wants faith is otherwise. If there come but a gale of wind, Saint Peter
sinks, when holy Job on the other Mat. 14. 30.
side in the fulness of this substance of faith can say, Etiamsi occiderit
tamen sperabo in Job, 13. 15.
illum, Though he kill me yet I will put my trust in him. Though God should
punish him in his wrath, yet he would not leave his hold. 4. The fourth sign
of a true faith is to establish the Law, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 3. 31.
and it is a plain sign and demonstration of an ill faith to make void the
Law, it must (...). 2. 26.
be a working faith, if not, it is but like putridum (...), a body without the
spirit, Rom 10. 10.
dead, for as Saint Paul says, with the heart a man believes unto
righteousness. The heart must kindle it, from the heart, says the wiseman,
come the issues and springs of pro. 4. 23.
life, and all the actions and operations of a man, and if no action, there can
be no true faith.
If the heart be once possessed with this belief, then, as the Apostle
speaks, I believed, therefore have I spoken, then it will come into the
tongue, and not only 2 Cor. 4. 13.
so, but, as the Psalmist, All our bones will speak, every member will make
profession psalm. 35. 10.
of it, for as it is said before, according to the Physicians rule, Judicium a
cord fit per brachium, the heart makes the pulse beat, and that not by little
and little, or in a long Mat. 17 18
time, but presently, and so is faith when it is in the heart, it has its
effects presently, eadem hora sanatus, he that believed was healed the same
hour.

The prophet says, who has heard such a thing? who has seen such things?
shall Esa. 66. 8.
the earth be made to bring forth in a day or shall a nation be born at once?
for as soon as Zion traveled she brought forth her children. The Prophet
wonders at it, yet it is a sign of true faith. Therefore what is their faith,
that is not seen till they die? (...) then they must trust in God whether they
will or no, all their life they will not, at their death there is no remedy. But
it is not said, that the just shall die, but live by his Abak. 2. 4.
faith. And I shall not pray with Balaam, let my soul die the death of the
righteous, Number. 23. 10.
but let my soul live the life of the righteous.

6. The sixth rule for exposition teaches us; that we (...) seek to strengthen
the faith of others. Saint Paul, though strong in faith, yet desires to be
strengthened and Romans 1. 12.
(...) by the faith of the Romans. And the contrary (which is seducing others)
is not only forbidden, but a punishment is also laid upon seducers. As we may
see Deu. 13. 6. etc.
in Deuteronomy. where we are commanded not to consent to such, and not only so, but
to be the first actors in his punishment. And thus if we labor to grow in
faith our selves and to confirm others, then, as Saint Peter says, we shall
receive the end of our faith, 1 pet. 1. 9.
Mat. 8. 13.
even the salvation of our souls, and have this answer, Vade and secundum fidem
tibi erit, as thou have believed, so be it done unto thee. This will be Gods
answer to us, and merces fidei est visio dei, the reward of faith is the vision
of God, for in in rebus supra naturam idem est habere and videre, in
supernatural things its all one to have and to see. We shall enjoy it Credendo
quod non vidimus, videbimus quod credimus, by believing that we have not seen,
we shall see that we have believed. And thus much for the duties of the mind.
Now for the duties of the heart.

CHAP. VIII.
The third inward virtue is fear of God. Addition 11. of the seat of faith.
Reasons why God should be feared. Of (...) and servile fear. how fear and love
may stand 'together. The sins (...) 1. want of fear. 2. worldly fear. motives
to fear taken from Gods judgments. The signs of fear.

WE have seen out of the Apostle that says must be in the heart, and the
heart must believe, else there can be no righteousness, there must be a mutual
affection of the mind and heart; for if the heart love not, the mind will not
long believe; and if the mind believe not, the heart will not love long.

Faith in regard of the actus elicitus (assent) is an act of the mind: but in
respect Addition 11 of the seat of faith.
of the actus imperati (as the Schools speak) which flow from assent, and
belief, as love, fear, obedience, etc. So it is in the heart, and whole man, so
that the duty of a Christian may be called the work of faith, because it is
commanded and produced by faith, though belief be the formal and only proper
immediate act of it.

Now the heart is the seat of the affections, and the affections are about such
objects as are partly agreeable to our nature, and such as we wish for and
embrace, and partly such as we desire not, but turn from. Of the former sort
are love, hope, joy, and of the other are fear, grief, hate. And God has (...)
both of them to a double use, as those of the second sort to restrain us from
evil, or after we have committed evil to torment and punish us. So of the
former, either they are provocations to good, or after we have done well to
cherish and comfort us for so doing.

It is the work and office of faith to stir up these (...) in us, the first of
which is fear toward God; and the reason is, because the word of God being the
object of faith, whether we take it in whole, or in gross, the five books of
Moses, or the four Gospels, in all we find punishments (...) to such as should
transgress, which threatenings being (...) by faith, must needs work fear to
(...), and so they restrain from sin, or fear of the punishment in those that
have offended, and so they stir up to repentance: for in the very beginning we
see, faith had a word of threatening to apprehend. In what day soever Adam
should eat of the fruit of the tree he Genesis 2. 17.
should die, and this was before the promise, that The seed of the woman should
bruise the serpent head. Now faith apprehended Gods justice, which with his 3.
15.
other attributes made it seem more fearful, and the conscience telling that an
offense was committed by eating, fear must needs arise out of the consideration
of it.

And this is it which was remembered before in our Saviors speech to the Jews.
John 5. 56.
If ye had believed Moses, ye would also have believed me. First Moses was to
be believed, then Christ, first the Law, then the Gospel.

The first is a faith in Gods justice. There is a manifest example of this in
the Ninevites, Jonah 3. 5.
Crediderunt Deo, and timuerunt, they believed God and feared; which is Moses
fear, a faith in Gods justice.

Among many motives to fear given by writers, the chief is (...) legis, the
knowledge of the Law, and this works contritionem, a grinding to powder by fear
of that which the Law brings into their hearts. And of this the Psalmist
speaks, telling us psalm. 119. 120
what is the true object of fear, My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am
afraid of thy judgments. This is the effect of faith upon the knowledge of
Gods Justice.

The reason why it pleased God to set justice and fear in the first place is,
because before any thing can be effected, the impediment, and that which
hinders must be taken away. We cannot possess God, and the reason is,
because as the Prophet tells Esaias 59. 2.
us, there is a separation between him and us, our sins do separate between God
and Ephesians. 2. 14.
us: a partition wall, as the Apostle calls it. Now seeing there is a necessity
to have God, and that this partition wall keeps us asunder, in the first place
we must not build this wall higher, but we must cease to build sin upon sin,
and look for Christ to beat down that which is already built. That which
causes us to cease from sin is the fear of God, Expulsor peccati timor Domini,
says the Wise man, we must not say, shall prove. 8. 13.
we continue in sin that grace may abound? God forbid, says the Apostle. And
Romans (...). 1.
this is the reason why God commands fear, because it makes us to leave sin.

Besides fear there are two other affections which cause men to live well,
though it pleased God here to make choice of fear: as 1. Shame. 2. Pain and
grief. Make psalm 83. 16.
Esaias 28. 19.
their faces ashamed, O Lord (says the Psalmist) that they may seek thy Name:
and for the other, Vexatio dat intellectum, affliction brings understanding. If
a man smart for any thing, experience will give him understanding. But we see
that in the multitude of offenders there is no place for shame, and for pain we
have terrenas consolatiunculas, poor worldly comforts, at least if not to drive
it away, yet to season it, and therefore God foresaw that neither of these
would strike so deep as fear. But fear (which it pleases God to set before us,
and to require at our hands) is that affection which touches us nearest, and
when other fail, fails not. Examples we have of it in offenders. Genesis 3. 10.
Adam being naked, and clothed only with fig leaves, might have been ashamed,
yet he walked up and down Paradise confidently, and his humbling came not till
Acts 24. 25.
he heard the voice of the Lord, and then he was afraid. Felix was a corrupt
governor, and made no conscience of it, yet hearing Saint Paul discourse of
Justice, and Temperance, and especially of Gods Judgments, he fell into a
trembling.

And this affection is not only in men, but predominant in beasts also, and in
those Number. 22. 23. etc.
beasts which are most stupid and brutish. (...) ass fearing the angel of the
Lord, notwithstanding all his Masters beating fell down flat, and would not
stir a foot to James 2. 19.
run into danger. Nay, further the Devils which fear nothing else, yet in
respect of God, S. James tells us, Demones credunt etcontremiscunt, the Devils
believe and tremble. And therefore this must needs be a prevalent means; and
that man is far gone, and in a fearful case that fears not.

But it may be objected. That since God speaks so much of love, why should we
not be brought to obedience by love rather then by fear?

It cannot be denied, but that were a more acceptable way, but our case is so,
that love will not prevail with us, for he that loves a good thing must have
knowledge of it, and that comes by a taste of it. Now if his (...) be corrupt,
as theirs is that are feavorish, nothing can please him, but that which pleases
the corrupt taste, wholesome things are distasteful to him, yet (though they
love not those things that are good for their disease) this reason will prevail
against their liking, that if they take it not, their fit will be sharper, or
their life shorter: so fear in them works more then love. And so is it with
men, whose first taste in spiritualibus is corrupted. If love could cause us to
taste spiritual joys, fear were super fluous. But vain delights in earthly
pleasures, ease and evil company have so cloyed and corrupted our tastes, that
we are not able to desire that which is truly to be desired, and that which is
hurtful to us we desire. And therefore there is nothing can alter our taste,
but that if we continue in taking those earthly pleasures, and not take that
which is spiritual, our fits will be sharper, and our life shorter: this fear
is necessary to be set before us.

To this may be added; that to this love we are brought by fear, for Odium
peccandi, the hate of sin comes from fear, for fear causes us to abstain from
sin, this abstinence brings a good life, and that, a good conscience, being
possessed with that, we shall be without fear, and have peace of conscience,
which breeds love to God and godliness. A timore bona vita, a bona vita bona
conscientia, a bona conscientia amor. And love and fear in this respect are
compared by Saint Augustine to a needle and thread, the needle tarrieth not,
but brings the thread after it; first we must fear, and that will bring love
after it. Discat timere, qui non vult timere; discat ad tempus esse solicitus,
qui vult esse semper securus, let him learn to fear that would not fear; let
him be solicitous for a time, that will be secure for ever. So we see that the
use of fear is to restrain us from evil, and to procure love in us.

The Common definition of fear is, Expectatio mati, the expectation of evil,
upon which may arise a doubt to them that are not well versed in Divinity. How
a man may be said to fear God, seeing there is no evil in him, for he being
wholly goodness it self, and the fountain of all goodness, therefore should
not be said to be feared. But it is soon resolved. For God is not to be feared
as he is God and goodness, and no evil in him, but ab effectis in respect of
his Judgments, the effects of his Justice, they are first to be feared, and
God secondarily.

The (...) why the effects of his justice are to be feared, are because in Gods
judgments concur all the causes and motives that can by any means move fear,
his judgment is, (...), malum formidabile, an object altogether fearful.

And it is in a three fold respect, for it is,

1. Futurum, to come. 2. Propinquum, near. 3. Vires excedens, exceeding our
strength.
1. An evil past is not the object of fear, but an evil to come, and the
greater it is' Matthew. 24. 6.
the greater the fear is, and therefore after our Savior had reckoned up to
his Disciples, many calamities that should happen, he adds, but the end is
not yet, the greatest is behind, though we suffer many things in this world,
yet there shall somewhat befall us after, worse then those. 2. It is
propinquum, because the armies of God are ever round about us, wheresoever we
are, God is present, and in the midst of his host, and all things are naked and
open unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do. And therefore if we do Heb.
4. 13.
ill, he is ready and (...) to see it, and his armies ready to execute
vengeance upon them that do evil. Psalm 149. 7.
3. It is vires excedens. It must be a great matter of difficulty that must
exceed our power and strength, but this does; and such a thing takes a deep
impression, it terrifies us, when we can make no resistance. And this the
Psalmist by a question makes to appear plainly. If thou, O Lord, should be
extreme to mark what is done Psalm 130. 3.
amiss, who may abide it? that is, none can. And therefore S. Paul says, Do
we 1 Gor. 10. 22.
provoke the Lord to jealousy, are we stronger then he? No; our strength to
him Job 13. 25.
is but as stubble, not as the strength of stones, nor is our flesh of brass,
as Job speaks. 6. 12.
This makes it malum arduum, hard and difficult, which is aggravated by these
four degrees.
1. First, it is a punishment malum poenae, and there is a bar erected, and an
indictment framed. We must all appear (as the Apostle tells us) before the
judgment (...) 2 Cor. 5. 20.
of (...), etc.

2. This punishment will be fearful and strange, insolitum, without example;
fiery Heb. 10. 27.
indignation, Horrendum est incidere in manus Dei viventis, it is a fearful
thing to fall 31.
into the hands of the living God.

3. It will be malum subitum and repentinum, sudden and unexpected, sudden
destruction, as travail upon a woman with child, especially upon such as
harden themselves. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3.
He that being often reproved hardens his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed,
prove. 29. 1.
and that without remedy; which is the last. No redemption till the utmost
farthing Matthew. 5. 26.
be paid, that is never after this life; for as God shows the uttermost of his
(...) in providing rewards for his (...); so he will show his infinite power in
punishments for those that will not fear. Besides all this we say in
Philosophy, Timetur is qui malum potest infligere, he is to be feared that can
bring evil upon us. Now that God is able, appears by three things considerable
in a party to be feared.

1. The first is authority. Though a child be a King, or a woman bear rule
over (...), Mal. 1. 6.
who in respect of themselves are but weak, yet in regard of their authority,
they become Zach. 14. 9.
terrible to us. And the Lord is king over all the earth, let all the earth
therefore psalm 23. 8.
prove. 16. 14.
fear him, says the (...). And why? An earthly kings wrath is as (...) 19. 12.
of death, and as the roaring of a lion, then what is the wrath of the King of
kings? And besides, by best right he may challenge this fear, for being King of
kings his authority is highest and above all others. And he is not only a
king, but such a king, as to whom all the celestial powers and principalities
lay down their crowns, and fall on their faces before him. And therefore it was
the song of them that overcame Rev. 15. 4.
the beast, Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy Name? 2 The
second is power. A man if he have a mighty adversary, though he have no
authority, yet he is to be feared. Might is to be feared; and therefore we are
counseled to be at peace and have good correspondence, and in no case to
strive with a mighty Ecclus. 8. 1.
man. If the mighty men upon earth are to be feared, how much more the mighty
God, whose power as it exceeds all other powers, so it has compelled them
that were mighty on earth to fear him. Nebuchadnezzar when he perceived the
power of Dan. 3. 24.
God working beyond the course of nature, that three men should walk in a fiery
furnace without hurt either to their bodies or garments, was so terrified and
astonished, that he repealed his former decree and published another, and that a
sharp one against them that should (...) Gods Name. The like did Darius upon
the supernatural Dan. 6.
and powerful preservation of Daniel in the Lions den. And so we read that the
people were astonished at the mighty works of our Savior. Power breeds terror
then. 3. The last is his omniscience. No sin that we commit but he takes notice
of them. psalm 69. 5.
My sins (says king David) are not hid from thee. When Moses saw no man by,
Exodus 2. 12.
he was bold to kill the Egyptian. But when he perceived that some were privy
to it, he feared and said, surely this thing is known. There is no creature but
is manifest in 14.
his sight; for all things are naked, and open before him. In respect therefore
that he Heb. 4. 13.
knows our transgressions, our fear is to be fixed on him. And this puts a
difference between the fear of God and the fear of man, which they call malum
diuturnitatis custodem, an ill keeper of continuance, for the fear of God is
bonus diuturnitatis custos, a good keeper of it.
And now according to the first rule for exposition of the Decalogue, we are to
1.
see in this what is commanded, and what forbidden. 1. Here are commanded both
the fears, servile and filial.

1. The first the Schoolmen call timorem servorum, servile fear, such fear as
servants show to Masters, a fear of punishment, and this is a good fear though
it be ignorantly condemned by some. True it is, that the Apostle says, that
the sons of God have not received the spirit of bondage to fear; but the spirit
of adoption Romans 8. 15.
whereby they cry, Abba Father: the spirit of bondage is inferior to the
spirit of adoption; yet that spirit is better then the spirit of Belial, or
that of slumber, of Esaias. 29. 10.
which the Prophet speaks, whereby men's eyes are closed.

It is a maxim, that actio perfecta non recipitur, nisi imperfecte primo,
there is no perfect action, but at first it is imperfect, and is perfected by
degrees. It is a good thing to be a son; yet it is better to be a servant, a
doorkeeper in the house of God, Psalm 84. 11.
then to dwell in the tents of ungodliness; better to be a hired servant then
a prodigal son. It is good to be in Canaan in the land of promise, but (in the
mean time) Luke 15. 19.
it is better, to be in the wilderness then in Egypt. So fear and spare not,
fac (says S. Augustine) si nondum potes amore justitiae, at timore poenae, do
it, if not for love of goodness, yet for fear of punishment; and his ground is
out of a place in Deuteronomie cap. 5. Nothing brought the Jews to the love of
God, but the terror Dent. 5. 29.
they conceived out of the strange sights before them, yet God wishes that
they might have such a heart in them always, that they would fear him: yet
this was but a servile fear, procured by the strange sights at the deliverie of
the Law.

2. The second they call timorem filiorum, filial fear. This they illustrate by
an example from the son of a poor man, that has a reverend fear not to offend
his father, though he be assured that he can do him neither good nor hurt. And
these two fears are distinct and different. The first arises from the fear of
punishment, and this from love, and may be called reverence. This is the fear,
which the Psalmist calls clean, and endures for ever, and thus we perfect,
or work out our salvation with Psalm 19. 9.
Phil. 2. 12.
fear and trembling.

The reason why, though we may and ought to obey God out of love, yet it has
pleased him to command fear, is threefold.

1. To overthrow the vain sp culation of some erroneous people, that dream of
an absolute perfection in this life. The Wise man says, Beatus qui semper
pavit, happy Prove. 28. 14.
is the man that fears always. And either there is no perfection in this life,
or else fear is superfluous, he that cannot fall, need not fear. But because in
this life there be degrees of perfection, and though we have obtained
perfection of parts, that is, all virtues and graces required in a Christian;
yet there are several degrees of perfection, wherein we must still be growing;
for a child, though it have all the parts of a perfect man, yet it has them
not in that degree of perfection, which one of years has attained to;
therefore this fear is always necessary. None stands so fast, but he may fall,
and therefore must always fear.

2. Inasmuch as the children of God often feel in themselves a feebleness in
faith, a doubt in hope, coldness in prayers, slownesse in repentance, and a
debility in all other pious duties, in some more, in others less, according to
the measure of the Spirit communicated to them, as it was in King David;
therefore fear is necessary to recover themselves, and he that loses it not,
his heart shall never be hardened, nor fall into mischief, as the Wise man
intimates, in the place before cited. Fear is a good preservative for the
heart; though all other duties fail, yet if fear continue, we shall never need
to despair.

Saint Bernard says, I know it for a truth, that for the keeping, continuing,
and (...) of the virtues and duties, which God has commanded, there is nothing
more profitable and available then fear; when the grace of God is with us, and
when it is departed, so that there is nothing left but fear; yet this fear will
never leave us, or let us rest, till we have made our selves fit to receive it
again, si deficit timor, deficis et tu, if fear decay, thou decayest with it
etc. when we have recovered the grace that was lost, fear will preserve it; for
fear of a relapse will make us more circumspect. Saint Jerome calls it Custodem
omnium virtutum.

3. Because the excellent duty of love, the effect of fear, might not fail and
grow. carles, In the Canticles the Spouse fell asleep with her beloved in her
arms, and when she awoke her beloved was gone, in her bed she sought him, but
found him not, so that if there be not a mixture of fear with love it will grow
secure, and fall a sleep, and lose her beloved. Therefore that we may be sure
to keep our love awake, when we think we have Christ in our arms, there must
be a mixture of fear with it. So for these three reasons fear is necessary even
for them that think themselves in a perfect estate. And withal Solomon tells
us, the fear of the Lord is the beginning of Cant. 3. 1.
wisdom, so did his father before him And the same Solomon concludes his book
of pro. 1. 7.
the preacher, with fear God and keep his Commandments, for this is the end of
all, psalm. 111. 10.
Eccles. 12. 13.
and the whole duty of man, And in another place he says, it is fons vitae,
The fear pro. 14. 27.
of the Lord is the fountain of life, to avoid the snares of death. As faith is
the beginning of Christian religion, as the first principles are in every
science in ordine credendorum, so is fear the first work or first beginning, in
ordine agendorum, of things to be done: and as timor servilis, servile fear is
the first work, so timor castus, a reverend and filial fear is the last work
and conclusion of all things.

Now we have seen what is Commanded, we are to see what is forbidden.

That is first want of fear, the effect whereof is hardness of heart; which is
of

1. The first arises from the prosperity or present impunity of the wicked,
which draws with it an erroneous persuasion of our own freedom from danger.
Because Eccles. 8. 11.
sentence (says the Preacher) against an evil work is not executed speedily,
psalm. 36. 1.
Genesis 20. 11.
therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil. They
harden psalm. 50. 21.
their hearts; because wicked men escape punishment, and conclude with him in
the Romans 2. 4.
Psalmist, that God is like themselves, and thus the want of fear opens a way
to all pro. 29. 1.
wickedness, whereas they ought to have reasoned, as the Apostle does, that
God deferreth his punishment, that we should not defer our repentance, and that
he that hardens his neck being rebuked, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that
without remedy, as the Wise man says.

2. The second is the absolute want of fear. There ought to be ever a
proportion, between the object and the power apprehending. The Psalmist says,
who regards psalm. 90. 11.
death the power of thy wrath, for thereafter as a man fears, so is thy
displeasure. Our fear should be proportionable to Gods wrath. But though we
cannot fear in that proportion, etiamsi conteremur ad palverem, though we
should grind our selves to powder, though we should tremble till one bone fall
from another; yet some measure of fear ought to be in us, at least our fear
ought to go beyond the precepts of men; not be like those whose fear toward
God was taught merely by the precepts of men, Esaias. 29 13. Math. 15. 2. if we
fear only when man's law punishes, our fear comes short; the trial is, if we
make the like conscience of those things to which man's law reaches not, as of
those which are forbidden both by the laws of God and man, other wise we are
void of fear.

Now as the want of fear is forbidden, so on the other side to fear that we
should S. John says, that the fearful, psalm. 53. 6.
(that for fear have transgressed) shall have their part in the lake which
burns with Apoc. 21. 8.
fire and brimstone. And our savior bids us not to fear them that can only
Luc 12. 4.
Exodus 1. 7
kill the body. Pharaoh was afraid the Isralites should grow into a greater
number 22.
then the Egyptians, and therefore made Edicts to kill the male children of the
Isralites. So Jeroboam fearing that the hearts of the people would return to
Rehoboam 1 Kin. 12. 27.
their true Lord, if they should go up to Jerusalem to offer sacrifice, and
therefore set up two Golden calves, and brought the people to Idolatry. Herod
was afraid that he should loose his kingdom, and therefore commanded to kill
all the male children Mat. 2. 10.
in Bethlehem and the coasts round about, from two years old and under. And the
Jews were afraid, that if they suffered Christ to proceed in his doctine and
miracles, all would believe on him, and the Romans would come and take away
John 11. 47.
their kingdom, and therefore they conspired to put him to death. The Wise man
says, Quod timet impius id accidet ei, that which the wicked fears shall
pro. 10. 24.
come upon him. And so it happened in the four examples mentioned. The Romans
dispossessed the Jews of their kingdom. Herod missed of his purpose, and lost his
kingdom. Jeroboams issue was rejected in the next generation. And the
Israelites increased and prevailed against Pharaoh and the Egyptians.

Seeing then that this duty of fear is so necessary, and that the Prophet in
the Esa. 66. 2.
person of God tells us, that to him will he look that trembles at his words,
it stands us upon to keep this fear ever in our hearts. And the best motives to
induce us, is to take to us the consideration of Gods judgments, and to
consider with the Apostle, How fearful a thing it is to fall into the hands of
the living God, for if he shall be Heb. 10. 31
extreme to mark what is done amiss, no man shall abide his wrath. psalm. 130.
3.


1. And the first is the consideration of the examples of the judgments of God
in former ages, left upon record in holy Scriptures. Of which the Apostle says
That al these 1 Cor. 10. 11.
things (meaning the judgments spoken of him in the former verses of the
chapter) happened unto them, for ensamples, and are written for our admonition.
They should be our monitors, Quot habebis jndicis Dei historias in (...), tot
habes conciones, The histories of God judgments in the scared Scripture, are
as so many sermons to us, to move us to the fear of God. As when we see his
justice upon his Angels, upon man in Paradise, upon his whole posterity in the
deluge, upon the five Cities, upon the Egyptians, upon his chosen people the
Jews, upon his own Church Jerusalem, and last of all upon his own, and dearly
beloved Son, in proceeding against him, in the fulness of bitterness at his
passion: insomuch as one of the fathers says upon it, O magna amaritudo
peccati qui tantam amaritudinem peperit, Oh the great bitterness of sin that
brought forth so great bitterness. Can we read and hear these things and not
fear and tremble.

2. And as the judgments of former ages are to be considered, so those which
are more near ourselves, especially these three.

1. Mala inherentia, those crosses that it pleases God to let us feel in some
measure, as sickness, poverty, afflictions by bad children, and the like. 2.
Mala impendentia, those crosses which we do not feel at the present, but hang
over, our heads, and which we have cause to fear may daily fall upon us, as
pestilence sword etc. 3. Malum excubans prae foribus, as they call it the
horror of a guilty conscience, which is always ready to accuse and terrify
us, in which regard God told Cain, that sin Genesis 4.
lies at the door, though conscience seem to sleep, yet it lies like a mastive
at the door which when the conscience shallbe awakened will be ready to fly in
our faces.
3. Besides these, we should consider those tria novissima, as they are called,
those three last things, death, judgment, and hell torments, first the terror
of death which is (...) as the Philosopher called it the terrible of terribles,
this would make us to number our days, and lavbor to spend our time well,
therefore Moses prayed, that God would teach men to number their days, that
they might apply their hearts to wisdom. psalm. 90. 12.


2. Terror Judicii, the terror of Gods jndgement after death, and what account
we are able to give, when as the Apostle speak, We shall appear before the
judgment seat of God, which judgment seat cannot but be terrible. 2 Cor. 5.
10.


1. If we consider the Authority of the Judge from whose sentence there lies no
appeal, it is sententia definitiva, a definitive sentence. 2. In regard of his
wisdom and knowledge of all our offenses. Omnia nuda, all Heb. 4 13.
things are naked in his sight, neither will he leave any of our acts
indiscussed. Am. 8. 12.
I know your manifold transgressions, says God. And he judges not as 1 Samuel
16. 7.
1 Chr. 28. 9.
man, for man looks on the outward appearance, but God looks on the heart.
He searches all hearts, and understands all the immaginations of the
thoughs. 3. In respect of his omnipotency. He is God of all power and might,
power belongs to him, says the Psalmist. If he whet his glittering sword and
his hand take psalm. 62. 11.
Deuteronomy. 32. 41.
hold on judgment, he will render vengeance to his enemies. At his reproof
all the Job. 26. 13.
pillars of the earth tremble says Job. 4. In regard of his justice. He hates
all workers of iniquity, there is no corrupting psalm. 5. 5.
of this judge. Riches profit not in the day of wrath, but he will do that
which pro. 11. 4.
is just, he will reward every man according to his works. Mat. 16. 27.
5. In consideration of the fearful signs which will go before this
judgment, Joel 2. 1.
which will be so strange and terrible, that as the Prophet speaks, All the
inhabitants Mar. 13.
of the world shall tremble, when the day of the Lord shall come. Our Savior
describes Luke 21.
them in the Gospel. And Saint Gregory says vltima tribulatio multis
tribulationibus pervenitur, et per crebra mala quae perveniunt, judicantur mala
perpeta quae sequantur, there are many tribulations which precede the last, and
by those foregoing we may conceive of them which are to come. 6. Lastly. in
regard of the accsers, God himself and Christ will be both Judge Jer. 29. 23.
and witness, I will be a swift witness says God. The Angels, Devils, our own
Mat. 3. 5.
Consciences, our works, for they will follow us. The Creatures which we have
Apoc. 14. 13.
abused, and the wounds of Christ, caused by our sins.
3. The third Consideration is Terror poenarum, the terror of punishments,
which Poena sensus and Poena Damni, the pain of sense and loss, The pain and
grief we have in that we feel or in that we forgo.

1. In that we feel, Christ's fan is in his hand and he will thoroughly purrge his
Mat. 3. 12.
floor and gather his wheat into his garner, but will burn up the chaff with
unquenchable fire.

The grievousnesse of these pains we shall find, if we consider particularly
what they are.

1. The sharpnes of them, there shall be fire. And as in this particular, so in
the rest we may truly say, that the least of hell pains are greater then all
the pains of this world put together, this fire shall far exceed that in the
furnace heated seven times at the command of Nebuchadnezzar. It is a lake
burning with fire and brimstone. Dan. 3. 19.
Ap. 21. 18.
2. There shall be darkness worse then that of Egypt. Job calls it a land of
Job. 10. 21.
darkness, were the light is as darkness. Saint Gregory says Ignis
infernalis concremationem 22.
habet, lumen non habet, flanima illa comburit sed tenebras non expellit, The
L. 9. Moral.
fire of hell has burning, but no light, the flame of it burns, but expells no
darkness. 3. There shall be noisome stench. And so much the materials of this
fire may intimate to us, which is brimstone, as bad a smell as may be, besides
as the bodies of the Godly shall be a sweet smelling Savor, so shall the
bodies of the wicked yield and send forth a noisome stench. 4 There shall be
hunger and thirst never to be satisfied. For the first our Savior Luke 6. 25.
16. 24.
denounces this judgment upon the wicked, woe unto you that are full, for ye
shall hunger, for the other, the rich man (mentioned by our Savior) found the
want of as much water as would lie upon the tip of Lazarus finger. And for them
both the Prophet says. My servants shall eat, but ye shall be hungry, and my
servants shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty. Esaias 65. 13.
5. If you add the company which the wicked shall enjoy (notwithstanding there
shall be many other miseries) it will make the Paena sensus full enough to
cause fear in us. And they be the Divills which torment them, and the wicked
tormented, whose the cruelty and ghastly looks of the first sort, and the
howlinglamentations and gnashings of teeth of the other, will make disconsolate
enough their sense of hearing.
For Paena damni, this instead of much may be said. That as it is the chiefest
2.
good of man, and the height of his felicity to enjoy the infinite goodness of
God and his beatificall vision, so is it his greatest misery to be deprived of
it. And though the wicked and reprobate love not God, nor desire to be united
to him in respect to do him honor; yet desire they to be in heaven, in regard
it would be to their profit to enjoy eternal happiness.

The last consideration of the pains of hell, which is not the least, and has
reference both to poena sensus and Damni is the eternity of their misery, for
as they shall never enjoy the comfortable presence of Allmighty God, so shall
they never be freed from their miserable torments. And that this shall be
eternal, we may see by the Esa. 66. 24.
words of our Savior taken out of Esaias. where their worm dies not and the
fire is not quenched. And no doubt our Savior repeated it not five several
Mar. 43.
times in one Chapter, but to confirm the truth of it against all that should
gainsay it. 44. 45.
46. 48.


The signs of fear are these.

1. The first sign of fear is. If we give credit to that which is taught by
them that have authority and knowledge for timor est credulus, as the heathen
man said, fear is credulous or easy of belief, and if we be not desirous to
busy our selves in questions and frivolous distinctions for this questioning
of what we hear is a sign we fear it not, but do as they did, and said to
Moses. Go thou near and hear all Deuteronomy. 5. 27.
that the Lord our God shall say, and speak thou unto us all that the Lord our
God shall speak to thee, and we will do it and hear it. 2. The next is
diligence, negligence is an ill sign, Qui timent Dominum nihil negligunt, fear
is very diligent. Jacob being in fear of his brother, could not rest all Gen 32.
night, but was either praying to God, or sending messengers to his brother or
ordering his family. 3. Another is humility. Jacob fell seven times to the
ground before he came to his brother. The Philosopher says, Timor contrahit
non intendit, fear shrinks up the heart it maks it not to swell. The wiseman
has a good medicine against Pride. Be not wise in thine own eyes but fear the
Lord. 4. The surest sign of fear is, the fear of sin, which is all one with
the fear of God. psalm 34. 11.
Come ye children (says King David) and hearken unto me and I will teach you
the fear of the Lord. And both these fears are joined by holy Job, of whom it
Job 1. 1.
was said. Job was an upright man and one that feared God and eschewed evil,
and as it was his practice, so was it his opinion, The fear of the Lord is
wisdom and to depart from evil is understanding, Timor est fugitivns fear bids
us not resist but fly, and he that fears cannot be armed sufficiently though he
put never so much harness on his back. A thief being pursued, fear will make
him demittere furtuns drop that which he has stolen, or at least not have it
about him. So if we fear God, we will be sure not to have sin found about us,
we will be afraid of that, lest it condemn us. And this is a sure sign.
6. The last is given us by Moses. And now Israel what does the Lord thy God
Deuteronomy. 10. 12.
require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, and to walk in all his ways,
to love him and to serve him with all thy heart, and with all thy soul. And as
we are to have this sign of fear in our selves, so are we to wish with the
Prophet, that all the earth may have this fear. Let all the earth fear the Lord
psalm. 33. 8.
stand in awe of him all ye that dwell in the world, and it is a fault where
this desire is wanting. The want of this desire argues the contrary affection,
that is turning others from the fear of God, which God condemns by the prophet
and calls it strengthening the hands of the Ezech. 13. 22.
wicked.

Thus then we see that fear is the end of the Law.

CHAP. IX.
The fourth inward virtue, is humility. The nature of it. The properties of it.
Of Pride. The nature and degrees of it signs of pride. The punishments of
pride. Of forced humility. Of Counterfeit humility. The means of humility. The
signs of humility.

IT is the property of him that fears, to shrink. Humility arises out of
fear. Saint Peter has, a place which fits this well. Humble your selves under
the mighty hand of God, upon which one of the fathers says Tanquam sub securi
vehementi 1 Pet. 5. 6.
loquitur, the Apostle speaks as if Gods hand were lifted up with his Axe ready
to strike us, and we shrink down for fear. And so should a man do, cast himself
down, and be content with whatsoever it shall please God to lay upon him, and
such a dejection of our selves is the effect of fear. And this as it humbles
us toward God. My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy
judgments; so the like effect it produced toward men, even from good men,
when they pfal. 119. 120.
were in fear of men. Jacob bowed himself seven times before he came to his
brother. Genesis 33. 3.


The like we read of the wicked. Benhadad King of Syria, and his nobles, being
stricken with the fear of Ahab, girded sackcloth on their loins, and put ropes
1 Reg. 20. 32.
upon their heads, and came to him, and said, Thy servant Benhadad says, I
pray thee, let thy servant live. And if the fear of man's wrath work so upon us,
much more ought the terror of Gods justice, that by it we should be presently
cast down until we can say with Prophet, Adhesit anima mea pavimento and
pulveri, my soul Psalm 119. 24
cleaves to the ground, yea to the dust. We see also that the Patriarchs and
Prophets have showed this humiliation by putting on sackcloth, as judging
themselves not worthy to be better clothed, and in throwing dust and ashes upon
their heads, thereby professing themselves fitter and worthier to be cast under
the earth, then to tread on the ground any longer. We must have that in truth,
which they signified Psalm 7. 5.
by those types and emblemes; we must be even with the ground, and as the
Psalmist speaks, lay all our honor in the dust.

When we are thus humbled, and have given all glory to God, and none to our
selves, then follows our exaltation; for when God has brought us to the
nethermost pit, and as it were to deaths and hels door, when we are at the very
bottom of humility, and can go no lower, then are we fit to begin a foundation
to build upon. We must first set our selves in the lowest room, and the Master
of the feast will bid us sit up higher. And this should be the true Myrrour of
every Christian, Euke 14. 10.
the true (...), or self knowledge which is to be commended, not in the sense
the Heathen took it, to know and see the excellency of himself, and so be
puffed up, but to see the imperfections of our souls, and know our wants.

Pride never gets footing of us, but either for want of knowledge, or upon a
false knowledge. And therefore the Heathen considering the excellency and
nobility of man, and having a false apprehension of Gods Justice, it was that
which made them fall into that proud conceit, that the preaching of Christ was
foolishness, and 1 Cor. 1. 18.
for the same reason it became offense also to the Jews, insomuch as when
Christ came to exalt and heal them, they were high and sound enough already.
And therefore S. Augustine says, Superbis Phariseis viluit Christus, Christ
seems vile to the proud Pharisees. Their pride made them have a base esteem of
him. Not that we deny, but that the nature of man is most excellent, yet withal
remembering, that the more excellent a thing is, the worse it is if it
degenerates.

And therefore seeing our estate is so vile, and that it has pleased God to
vouchsafe us Christians a better way, we are to follow it. And this is by the
true knowledge of a man himself, wherein there must be. 1. Humilitas mentis,
humility in the mind or understanding, which is when the mind apprehends the
infinite excellency of God, and our own baseness; and this belief of the mind
will raise a suitable disposition in the heart, for from hence follows the
second. 2. Humilitas cordis, voluntatis, and affectuum, the humbling of the
heart and will, etc. whereby a man thinks himself not worthy of food, apparel,
or any comforts of this life, but is abased in his own sight. This restrains
the appetite of pride, which is to be measured by that pfalm 131. 1.
which is in every man, and makes him not to exalt himself, seeing there is no
excellency in him, and to say with the Psalmist, O Lord, I am not high minded,
I have no proud looks, etc.

We see then that the end and use of humility is to bring a man out of conceit
with himself, and to cause him to resign all his acts to the glory of God, and
upon this the foundation of the building is to be laid. For as the Heathen man
said well, Superbus miser est and indignus misericordia, a proud wretch
deserves no pity. And in Ezekiel. 17. 24.
the Prophet God says, I have brought down the high tree and exalted the low,
I have dried up the green tree, and have made the dry tree to flourish. And for
this cause it is Matthew. 18. 3.
that our Savior says, Except men be humble and have no more pride in them
then babes, there will be no entrance for them into heaven. Though God can
afford other things to men, yet gloriam meam alteri non dabo, he will not give
his glory to any, Esaias 42. 8.
we must be altogether emptied, before his grace can fill us. And thus much for
the nature of Humility. Now for the command and prohibition: and first for the
command, the affirmative part.

The thing here commanded is the making our selves low in our own eyes, and it
is defined to be an opinion or conceit of a man proceeding out of true
knowledge of himself, whereby a man is vile in his own judgment.

And to be made thus low it has this privilege, that we cannot fall lower,
Qui jacet in terris non habet unde cadat. Rise it may, but lower it cannot
fall, for theirs nothing under it. A man that stands may fall, Qui stat videat
ne cadat; he that stands let him take heed lest he fall, but he that thus
humbles himself is out of this rule. The 1 Cor. 10. 12.
usual phrases of the Holy Ghost against the high minded are casting down,
hewing down, cutting down, but the humble that has cast himself down already,
fears not Gods casting him down, for he has done it already, and his next
hope is of exaltation: and this is a further privilege this humiliation has,
that God has made a promise of exaltation to this virtue. He that humbles
himself shall be exalted. As God in the beginning made all things of nothing,
so he keeps that course still; to make high the things that are low, and
humility the way to exaltation. Luke 14. 11.


In this Humiliation there are three things included.

1. It must not be only a bare base conceit of our selves and our nature,
which goes no further then the brain, the object whereof is the Majesty of God,
but there must be also humilitas cordis, the humbling of the heart; we must be
Christ's disciples in this, meek and lowly in heart, we must assume nothing to
our selves, nor desire any glory, but that God may have all: and say with the
prodigal son, that we Matthew. 11. 29.
are not worthy to be called sons, the degree of a hired servant will be
sufficient for us. Luke 15. 19.
2. Secondly, our appetite must be subdued and restrained, and be
proportionable to the gifts which God has endowed us withal. And this is
against the common practice of the world, where men aspire and account
themselves worthy of higher degrees then they deserve: and as S, Bernard says,
quod adepti sunt nummis, meritis attribuere, what preferment they buy for
money, they ascribe to their deserts. King David is a pattern for us in this
point. Domine, non est exaltatum cor meum, etc. Lord, my heart is not haughty,
nor mine eyes losty, nor do I exercise my self in great matters, Psalm. 131. 1.
or in things too high for me. But this is more proper to another place. 3. The
third is, to think better of other men's abilities then our own, and not vilify
that which we see in others, and extol that which we think we have in our
selves, which is far from humility. But we are to follow the Apostles counsel;
In lowliness of mind let all esteem of others better then themselves. And
this point also will fit another place better. phil. 2. 3.

1. Concerning the first of these which is proper to this commandment, as our
humility must be hearty not superficial, so it must be of continuance; as fear
is the beginning and end of the commandments; so there must be humility in the
beginning, and humility to perfect all. For the first, God used never to work
any excellent thing by any, but did first prepare him by humility. As Joseph
was first sold to the Ishmaelites and then to Potiphar, before he came to his
place of honor. And Moses was forty years in Egypt, and forty years after
that in (...), before those excellent things and wonders were wrought by him.
The like we read of David and others. And this is a part ante, this goes
before exaltation and deliverance, both in this life, and that to come, to make
us more sensible of our future condition, and endear the mercy of God therein
to us.

2. The other is a part post. Our humility must continue to the end, as fear
is continual, so must humility be: else it will befall us, as it did Noah, who
was by his fear preserved in the midst of a wicked generation from the general
deluge; but the flood ceasing, and he growing careless and destitute of his
former humility and fear, fell so grossly, that he was a scorn to his own son.
So Lot, as long as he was in Sodom, and hambled by danger, he kept himself in
the fear of the Lord; but being high in mind in the mountain, where he thought
himself safe from danger, he committed incest with both his daughters. The like
may be said of King David, who being humbled by Saul's persecution, kept himself
in the fear of God; but coming to the kingdom, and living in his palace, fell
in a short time into two grievous sins, Adultery and Murder. And therefore S.
Gregory says, Perit omne quod acquiritur, Lib. 8. Moral.
si non humilitate custodiatur, all the goodness a man gets is lost again, if
it be not kept with humility. And our Savior Christ well knowing this, after
he had taught to pray for remission of sins, the next petition he adds is, not
to be led into temptation; showing thereby, that in the greatest peace and
safety lies most danger: and therefore when our sins are forgiven, we must be
most careful not to fall into sin again. Much more might have been said
concerning this virtue of humility, but this may suffice to have been spoken,
because of the affinity between these two kinds of humility, and the two
kinds of fear formerly handled. And now we come to that which is forbidden,
the negative part.

As humility is commanded, so pride the opposite to it is forbidden. Pride and
humility are thus considered; let the offense be what it will which a man
commits, yet humility overweigheth it and obtains pardon for it. On the other
side, let a man do never so many good works, and yet pride weighs them down,
and choaketh them, and makes them all of no value. It is one and the chiefest
of the four impediments to Gods service, three of which are formerly spoken of.
1. Ignorance. 2. Infidelity. 3. Security. 4. Pride. And this last takes deeper
root then all the Luke 3. 5.
other. It is the highest mountain that stood in Christ's way, and except John
Baptist take the pains to remove it, he can never come to us.

This vice by the Fathers is called, Morbus Satanicus, the Devils disease, from
its first original, as Morbus Gallicus is so called from the persons from whom
first it sprang. It is highly descended, and takes hold of them that are
highly born; for it was first born in heaven. Ero similis altissimo, I will be
like the most High. It was Lucifers vaunt, he would have part of Gods glory,
and be above his degree; Esa. 14. 12, 14.
and that made him fall. The Devil has knowledge and fear, but wants humility.
And Adam took this infection from Satan, and we as his heirs. The Devil, as he
said of himself, Ero, I will be; so he told Eve, Eritis sicut Dli, ye shall be
as Gods. Genesis 3. 5.
He would not suffer them to be content with that honorable estate, in which
God had placed them, but persuaded them ambitiously to seek an higher. The
Apostles came joyful and proud in a bragging manner to Christ, and told him
that the Luke 10. 17. 20.
Devils were subject to them, they gave not glory to God. But that which Christ
said to them may be an instruction to us; Rejoice not that they are subject to
you, etc. for I saw Satan falling from heaven like lightning, etc.

Pride consists especially in two things. Either 1. a nobis, or 2. (...): to
our selves, or for our selves, our own glory. And both these are comprehended
in the speech of Nebuchadnezzar, Is not this great Babylon, which I have built
Dan. 4. 30.
for the house of the kingdom, by the might of my power, (there is the first)
and for the honor of my Majesty, (there is the second.) If we assume any thing
either as our own act, or for our ownglory, that is pride. Of which there are
diverse degrees.

1. If we conceive that we have greater abilities then we have, (which commonly
is when we have none at all) as the Church of Laodicea, that said she was rich,
and had need of nothing, and knew not that she was wretched, miserable, Revei.
3. 17.
blind and naked. None are so subject to this as (...), novices, that are
green and shallow, and therefore apt to be lifted up with pride, and fall into
the comdemnation 1 Timothy 3. 6.
of the Devil.

This is one degree. Of this S. Chrysostom says, That it is no commendations
for a servant to be humble, but if a man either for place or parts have
wherewithal to be proud, and yet is humble, this deserves commendations.

2. The second degree is, when we esteem that little we have more then it is
worth, when we conceive we are better then indeed we are: when (as the Prophet
Ezekiel. 8. 12.
speaks) we seal up great sums, and think that we are full of wisdom, and
perfect 2 Cor. 10. 14.
in beauty. Stretching our selves (as the Apostle) without measure. This the
Devil makes use of, and either shows us our selves by a false light, or makes
us look upon our selves through a mist, whereby we seem greater then we are,
making us drunk with self love, causes us to see gemina objecta, and geminos
soles, every thing seems double to us, as to a drunken man.

3. The third degree of pride is, when we conceive that we are the causes of
that good which is in us; for it is a more excellent thing for a man to have a
thing of himself, then from another: if we have it of our selves, we conceive
the glory is the more. But the Apostle nips this conceit, and abateth the edge
of this degree of Pride, by saying, What have thou that thou have not received?
1. Cor. 4. 7.


4. The fourth degree of pride is, when a man conceives, that though he have
it not, yet he deserves it, and ought not to stand to the courtefie of
another. And this is Genesis 32. 10.
also laid flat on the ground by Jacob, who was as well deserving as any. O
Lord, I am not worthy of the least of thy mercies. All we have is of Gods
mercy, not of our own merit.

The Church of Rome is charged with the two kinds of pride mentioned in
Nebuchadnezzar, and for our selves we profess, that we are so far from
thinking that we James 1. 17.
have any good of our selves, that we say, we have received all from the Father
of lights. But how true it is that we so think will be tried by these two
things.

1. If we take it into due consideration, that whatsoever we have, we are not
Proprietaries, but Dispensators and Stewards, that we must not account of it as
our own, but that there is a Lord over us, that does commit them to our good
and orderly usage of them; and herein we fail, by mispending our means and
misimploying our gifts, as if we were owners and not stewards; and if we be
reproved, we are ready to say, It is my own, I may do what I will with it. 2.
And secondly, if we know that we have no other propriety in them, but that they
are only committed to our trust, then if we consider, that when the Owner
calls for it we are willingly to restore it. And this consideration comes not
seriously into the minds of many; for let but God withdraw any of his gifts,
there is such murmuring and grudging, that it shows plainly they are not
willing to restore them freely, and it is a hard task to persuade them, that
they were but Feoffees in trust, only to dispose of them as it best pleased
the owner.
5. Another thing there is which makes us guilty of this sin of pride. If our
gifts be but equal with other men's, yet if we employ them better then others
do, we conceive a greater excellency in us then others. And this was the fault
of the Pharisee, who boasted of the use of those gifts which God had given him;
as, abstinence, justice, chastity, and withal acknowledged from whom he had
them; for, O God (says he) I thank thee, this gratitude was good: but then, I
am not as other men, as this Publicane, this spoiled the rest of his actions,
he reputed himself more excellent then others, and in ascribing the use of
these gifts to himself, he fell into contempt of his brethren. And this
singularity hindered his prayer from being accepted: it is a sin not only
odious in it self, but a special impediment of Gods grace.

The common place of humility is very strange in these times, and why? Because
the Papists use it: but it were to be wished, that we would make use of
whatsoever good thing they use; for the forbearance and disuse of it, has
brought our religion to that pass it is come to. Whether we consider those
that live among us without any sense of God, or those that have eminent parts
yet want humility; we condemn that opinion of the Church of Rome, that any one
man cannot err; they ascribe to man what is proper to God, and yet in our
practice nothing is more common, then to ascribe infallibility to our selves,
and others, whom we admire: and thus that pride which we tax in them, we
practice our selves.

So likewise it is usual among great men, They will speak in Gods phrase, and
as God says, I will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and will show
mercy on whom I will show mercy. So they will prefer whom they will prefer; and
whereas Exodus 33. 19.
God has appointed to prefer whom he will without gifts, they will prefer
without gifts: and lastly, whereas there are no merits with God, but all is ex
gratia, out of favor, they will have no merits, but all favor, and so in all
things they behave themselves not as men, but Gods: and that comes because our
hearts are lifted up, as (...). 28. 2.
the Prophet there speaks.

Come we to the common sort, and in them we shall find S. Bernards seven notes
Inserm. de resurrectione.
or signs of pride, two whereof are in the soul. 1. Pursuing our own counsel.
2. Following our own will and pleasure. Two in the mouth. 1. Grudging against
our betters. 2. Disdaining and vilifying our inferiors. And three in outward
things. 1. Superbia habitus, pride of apparel. 2. Superbia habitus, pride in
our table. and 3. Superbia supellectilis, pride in our furniture.

In the means of grace which God gives us to beget in us humility and other
graces, we show much pride, as when we take a pride in praying, hearing, etc.
and do herein affect the praise and applause of men; but an higher degree is,
when men reject those means of grace, especially when they resist the good
motions wrought in them, and quench those sparkles which are kindled by the
word, when it comes home to their hearts, as if they could have the motions of
Gods spirit when they please; whereas they know not whether God will ever offer
them the like again, and so this may be the last offer of grace.

Nay not only in the means of grace, but even in the graces themselves will
pride appear, and whereas the objects of other sins are base and vile, even
the best things and most excellent graces are made the object or matter of
pride, Cineres (...) peccatorum, fomes superbia, when other (...) are consumed
to ashes, even out of those ashes will pride spring up, yea we are apt to be
proud even of our humility. There is a pride in the cross, when we are humbled
under Gods hand, we may be proud in that we are not proud, or not so proud as
other men, or as we have been before. Thus the greater our gifts are, the more
secure we grow, and the less jealous and suspicious of our selves, and so are
overtaken, as (...), David, (...), and others. Therefore where the greatest
gifts are, there is greatest danger, and therefore the greater watch ought to
be kept, and where the richest prize is, there the devil will use his greatest
power and subtilty to rob us of it. Therefore the more any man has received,
the more ought he to humble himself, and watch that he be not overtaken with
pride.

1. We will add a little to that we have said, and that shall be concerning
the punishment of this sin. Gods glory (as one well says) is fiscus regalis,
his chief treasure and exchequer into which the proud man breaks, robbing God
by extenuating his glory, and taking it as much as he can to himself. But (as
the wise man speaks) the Lord will destroy the house of the proud, as he did
Pharaoh, Haman, Herod, and many others, who were taken away even when they
magnified themselves most of all.

2. Or else God punishes him by depriving him of the guist, which was the
cause of his pride. His tongue shall cleave to the roof of his mouth, or his
right hand shall forget her cunning.

3. Or when he thinks he has gotten strength enough, that he is able to lean
upon his own staff, God suffers him to fall under every small temptation,
because he seeks not to God for supply of his spirit, whereas by humility he
might have withstood the greatest assaults. Thus some of great parts, when they
will be singular, as unicorns, that will have no match, they break the net of
humility, which should bring men unto God, by pride, and so God leaving them to
themselves, they become the authors of heresies and errors.

4. Or though it pleases God to let the gift remain, whereof they are proud,
yet he gives not a blessing to it, but leaves it fruitless. Some have been
endued with excellent graces, but without fruit, they have made no return to
God of his Talents, not a soul gained unto him by them, whereas a man of mean
endowments joined with humility has gained more then the golden tongue of an
eloquent Tertullus.

5. Or Lastly, (which is the greatest punishment) there is in the mind, (as
ost times in the body, as toward the end of a man's days, a Palsy or an
Appoplexy) a certain stupidity or numnesse, so that neither threats can
terrify them, nor persuasions allure them to repentance, but pass out of this
world without the fear of God, or sense of his judgments, so that they die and
perish like beasts. And God punishes their pride with this dullness, lest they
should feel, as Saint Paul did, a thorn in the flesh, which, as the best
interpreters expound, it was a wrestling against pride.

1. Another thing forbidden is forced humility, coacta humilitas, And such was
that Pharaoh. So long as Gods hand was upon him and his people, and that he was
Exodus 9. 28.
sensible of the plagues sent by him, so long he humbled himself, and promised
to let the people go: but when he perceived that the plagues ceased, he and his
servants hardened their hearts, and grew to that height, that he said, who is
the Lord, that he should let his people go? Saint Bernard describes these kind
of humble men thus; vidimus multos humiliates, sed non humiles, we see many
humbled, few humble.

2. Counterfeit or bastard humility, spuria humilitas, for in every virtue
besides the two extremes, there is that which has the likelihood of virtue,
which they call spuriam virtutem, wherewith many are deceived. Thus some are
naturally of a low servile disposition, which some take for humility, though it
be nor, neither is it true humility to give in Gods cause, and not to be stout
in maintaining it; for detrimentum veritatis non est ornamentum humilitatis,
that which brings detriment to the truth, can be no ornament of humility. So to
deny the gifts or graces of God in our selves is not true humility; Saint Paul
would have the Ephesians. understand his knowledge in the mystery of Chist, Ephesians.
3. 4. 5. and preferres the Jews, of which himself was one, before the Gentiles,
Gal. 2. 15. and all this without pride. In every one there is somewhat of God,
somewhat of nature, somewhat of sin; now its true, every man may see more
sin and corruption in himself then in another, and so may say with Saint
Paul, I am the greatest sinner, 1 Timothy 1. 15. and may see that gift in another,
which is not in himself, which he is bound to honor in him: but to prefer the
gifts of nature in another before the gifts of grace in our selves; is not true
but counterfeit humility. So likewise is that Hypocritical humility which some
pretend for worldly ends, as that of Absalom, who though he were the kings son,
yetbowed himself to every one, and kissed him etc. whereby he stole away the
hearts of the people, and rebelled against his father. 2 Samuel 15. 5.

Now the means to humility are these, among many other.

1. The first is the considertion of the vileness of the composition of our
bodies. Saint Basile says, that man's life is a schoolehouse of humility, and
his ground In Hexameron
is upon that of the psalm, where the Prophet comparing his body to the
celestial bodies, falls into admiration, why God did rather choose to put a
reasonable soul into psalm. 8. 3. 4.
his body rather then into them. What is in man (Lord) that thou art so mindful
of him etc. And out of that place in Genesis, where Abraham acknowledges
himself to be but dust and ashes. Our nature is but a heap of dust, mingled
with ashes. And the Genesis 18. 27.
Philosopher says, that we are but a pot of Choler and phlegm. And Saint
Augustine says, that it would be a prealvent motive to humility, if we would
but take notice what manner of stuff passes through our nose, ears, and other
parts of our bodies nunquam tam turpe sterquilinium reperites, we should see
there is no such dunghill as our selves. 2. Another means is, the consideration
of the estate of our souls. The humble Publican took notice of it, when he
said, God be merciful to me a sinner. A father Luc. 18. 13.
seems to correct the translation of those words well, by mihi peccato to me
which am nothing but sin. For it is many of our cases. We are such sinners,
as that Romans 7. 14. 18.
the Apostle says we are sold as slaves under sin and in us, that is, in our
flesh there dwells no good thing, insomuch that of our selves we are not able
to think 2 Cor. 3. 5.
a good thought. And not only so, but if we consider that we have so
multiplied our transgressions, as that they are more in number then the hairs
of our head, insomuch psalm. 40. 15. 38. 4.
as the burden of them is so intolerable that they are too heavy for us to
bear. The consideration of these things will so humble us, that though the
devil carry us into our own mountain and show us any good thing in our selves,
to tempt us with, Genesis 32. 10.
we shall be able to say with Jacob, we are not worthy of the least of Gods
mercyes, Luc. 17. 10.
and that if we use the gifts we have never so well, yet to say, we are
unprofitable servants, and that there is no gain to be expected from us to him,
and with the Prophet O Lord righteousness belongs to thee, but unto us
confusion of faces, and Dan. 9. 7.
lastly with King David. Not unto us Lord not unto us, but unto thy name give
the psalm. 115. 1.
praise, for thy loving mercy and truths sake. 3. A third is, the consideration
of the crosses and afflictions which God either has or may lay upon us: and
this is a sufficient motive to humble even the wicked. This wrought upon king
Ahab (of whom it is said that he had sold himself to work 1 Kin. 21. 20. 29.
evil) a blaze of humility, which was not unrewarded. And certainly this is no
small means to work this duty, and so we are to think of it. King David said,
it is good for me that I have been afflicted. because thereby he learnt Gods
statutes; this drives psalm. 119. 71.
us to God by prayer, and to the word for comfort, it maks us to enter into the
house of mourning, and to exercise discipline over our selves, with other the
like effects which it works. 4. Lastly, the best and chief motive should be the
example of our Savior (of whom though there were many things worthy our
learning and imitation in him) yet he would have us chiefly learn this duty of
humility. Learn of me (says he) Mat. 11. 29.
for I am (...) and lowly in heart. And so all his acts upon earth did testify
of him; John 8. 50. 8. 4.
his preaching was humble. he sought not his own glory, hismiracles without
pride, see thou tell no man (said he) to the cured Leper, he begins his first
sermon with, Blessed are the poor in spirit his behavior was humble, of which
he left an example in washing his disciples feet, exemplum dedi vobis, he was
humble in his birth, humble John 13. 15.
in his life: but his death was a true pattern of humility beyond all
presidents; He humbled himself to death, even the death of the Cross. phil. 2.
8.

Saint Augustine upon our Saviors speech before mentioned, Mat. 11. 29. says,
discite De Verb. Dom
a me, non mundum fabricare non cuncta visibilia and invisibilia fabricare, non
in ipso mundo miracula sacere et mortuos suscitare etc. sed quod mitis sum et
humilis cord, Cogitas magnam constituere fabricam celsitudinis, de fundamento
prius cogita humilitatis; Learn of me, not to create the world, or all visible
or invisible things, not to work miracles in the world, as to raise the dead
etc. but to be meek and lowly in heart as I am. Thou conceivest to erect a
great fabric of honor, first bethink thy self of laying the foundation of
humility.

And another Father upon our Saviors first sermon [Blessed are the poor in
Mat. 5. 3.
spirit] Ne contemnerent hominis humilitatem, placuit Deo plura largiri in
humilitate sua, quam in (...): qui igitur verentur humiliari se, (...) ea
facere quae secit Deus, Lest men should despise humility, it pleased God to
bestow more in the time of his humility, then in his Majesty, They therefore
that are afraid to humble themselves, fear that which God himself did. And so
we come to the signs of true humility.

1. The first sign of true humility appears in our tongue, by ruling that and
forbearing to talk of matters above us. Speak not proud things. And not only
so, but psalm. 131. 1. 12. 3
not to have them in our thoughts, but to be content to deport our selves
according to that condition, in which God has placed us. We must know how to
be abased and how to abound, else God will mislike us, as he did Baruch, who
did quarere phil. 4. 12.
grandia, seek after great things. And therefore Saint Augustine says, this is
a true sign of humility; when a man despises those things as well which he
might De Catech. nud.
have, as them he would have.

The second is, when we set before us for our object bona aliena et mala nostra
illa ut aemulentur hac ut corrigentur, other men's good parts and our own evil,
to follow their's and correct our own. When a man does with the Prophet,
acknowledge psalm. 51. 3.
his own sin, and his own transgressions are ever before him: and not busy
himself with other men's faults; whereas the proud man's thoughts are bona sua,
mala aliena the evil in others, and the good that is in himself.

3. Another sign is, when a man is able to suffer the slander, backbiting and
reproaches of ill tongues, and not regard them, as King David did. As for me
(says he) I was like a deaf man and heard not, and as one that is dumb and
opens not his psalm. 38. 13. 14.
mouth: and in the next verse, I became even as a man that hears not, and in
whose mouth is no reproof. Thus he showed his humil ty, when he bare patiently
the railing of Shimei: Christ being reviled, reviled not.

4. The fourth, not to do any thing that may be against Gods glory, though it
be to a man's own reproach and suffering in this world; when he is willing to
suffer any thing himself, rather then any dishonor should red ound to God or
his Church, by opening the mouths of the wicked Psalm. 69. 6. Let not them that
trust in thee be ashamed, O Lord God of hosts, for my cause, let not those that
seek thee be confounded through me. etc.

5. The last is not to rob God of his glory, or to give it to another. How can
ye believe, says Christ, that seek glory one of another. The humble man, as
the John. 5. 44.
Psalmist says sets not by himself, but is lowly in his own eyes, Psalm. 15.
4. this is evidentissimum signum appropinguantis gloriae, for before honor
goes humility, as a proud look before a fall, Pro. 33..

CHAP. X.
Of the fifth inward virtue, Hope. Hope and fear come both from faith. The
several uses of hope. The nature and exercise of hope. Of presumption and
despair. Reasons against both. Means to strengthen hope. Signs of true hope.

Spes Hope.

AS the knowledge and belief of Gods justice works in us fear and humility,
of which we have spoken, so from the knowledge and apprehension of his mercy
arises hope and love. After humility, we come to the valley of Achor for a
door of hope, as the Prophet speaks. When we have been brought to the valley
of mourning, Hos. g. 8. 15.
and have bin in fear and despair, then will God open to us a door of hope; so
that in stead of the first spirit, the spirit of bondage unto fear we shall
receive the Romans 8. 15.
spirit of adoption unto hope.

Now by conferring our strength and performances with the strict rule of Gods
justice, we find it impossible, that we should hope for salvation, but by
faith apprehending Gods mercy it may be possible, it may be considered as
attainable two ways 1. either by our selves, 2. or by some other.

1. Now concerning the former, if we look upon our selves, the effect of faith
is fear, inasmuch as the object of it is Gods justce, and so we can have little
comfort in our selves, for this shows that it is impossible to us as of our
selves, but as it is in the Apostle, every mouth must be stopped, and all the
world must Romans 3. 19.
become guilty before God; there is little hope that way. 2. But we are not left
altogether to despair: for though it be impossible to us of our selves, yet if
it be possible by another, if another way may be found, there is some hope
Faith reasons as the Psalmist does. Has God made all men for naught or in
psalm. 89. 47.
vain? If he has, then why falls not his wrath at once? And searching
further for the cause why we are not consumed, we find, that his mercy is the
cause. It is of the Lords mercy (says the Prophet) that we are not consumed,
for his compassions fail not, and that the work of his creation is not in vain.
Then consequently Lam. 322.
a remnant there shall be, and God will have a tenth always preserved to
himself, Esa. 6. 13.
and the holy seed shall be the substance thereof, and as it is in the Gospel,
there shall be a little flock, and we may hope that of that little flock Luc
12. 32.
we are.

If the Lord were sparing of his mercy, that might be a great impediment to our
Esa. 30. 18.
hope, but when we read that the Lord waits to be gracious to us it sets
our hope in a better forwardness. Now because that out of the gate of mercy
all our hope comes we are to consider upon whom God vouchsafes to bestow this
mercy, how they must be qualified.

The prophet says, he will thrust his face into the dust (that is he will
humble himself) Lam. 3. 29.
if peradventure he may have hope. And hope is given to them that fear, and are
of a contrite spirit, and that tremble at Gods word, Spes timentibus Deum, hope
Esa. 66. 2.
is a reward to them that fear God. And as fear is requisite, so faith much
more. God shows this kindness to them that put their trust in him, and all
they that put psalm. 17. 7. 34. 21. 90. 14.
their trust in him shall not be destitute or forsaken. And when we hear God
himself say, liberabo eum qui sperat in me, when the act of hope shall have
such a reward, there is good encouragement, and we may surely expect it. Now to
hope is to trust psalm. 13. 5.
in Gods mercy, and so the psalmist says. My trust is in thy mercy, for that
is Porta spei the gate of hope there is no entrance unto God but by this gate,
and no issue of good to us but by it, for faith apprehending mercy hops, and
the rather because there is such plenty of mercy promised to them that hope in
God, that it will compass them round. Who so puts his trust in the Lord,
mercy imbraceth him 32. 11.
on every side.

But it may be demanded how faith can beget both fear and hope, two contraries,
or how two contraries can stand in one subject. To this may be answered, first
we should not question it, in respect that the holy Ghost has put them
together so often. The Psalmist says, The Lords delight is in them that fear
him, and put their trust in psalm. 147. 11.
his mercy. Again, faith breeds fear in us, in respect of our weakness, and
it breeds hope in respect of the mercies of God: so that they being contraries,
non secundum idem, they may well stand together in the soul of a just man.

For distinction sake. Fides credit promissis, faith believes the promise, and
spes expectat credita, hope looks for the things we believe. Again, a thing
may be believed and yet not hoped for; as no true Christian, though he hopes
not for hell, yet he believes there is such a place. So the general truth of
God, being the object of our faith, and containing many threatenings brings
forth fear, and the mercy of God in his promises, being likewise an object of
our faith, produces hope. And so we see they are distinguished ab objecto, the
one having Gods justice, and the other his goodness for its object.

S. Bernard distinguishes the three virtues, of Faith, Hope, and Charity, by
presenting (...) 10. in psalm 91.
to us three speeches, from each of them one.

1. Faith says, Repositasunt bona, good things that pass the conceit of man
are laid up for the faithful. 2. Hope says, Mihi illa servantur, they are laid
up for me. 3. Charity says, Curro ad illa, and I so run to them that I may
attain them.
And thus out of the faith of the Gospel hope arises, as fear does from the
faith of the Law. And therefore hope is called by the Fathers, the Isaac of
faith.

This virtue of hope has two uses.

The first is, that it is our Anchor: for our life is as a sea, and our faith
the ship. Heb. 6. 19.
Now when a man sailing in the sea of this life, feels his ship tossed with the
waves of a conscience terrified with the justice of God, and is in the Apostles
case, when Acts 27. 29.
tackling and masts were spent, then fearing to be cast upon the rock of
despair, he casts out this Anchor. And it is called by some of the Fathers our
Interim, that which stays us in the mean time, till God performs that which
he has promised to us.

2. The second use is, not only to stay and support us, but also to stay and
retain Christ with us, and accordingly the precept is, Custodispem, custodem
Christi. So the Apostle counsels us to take fast hold of it, and as when we
are in danger of drowning, Heb. 10. 23.
or falling into a pit, we cast from us whatsoever we hold in our hands, and
take fast hold of whatsoever comes first to hand to stay us, such an use has
hope.

3. And under this use may be another, that by hope thus holding and keeping
Christ here, we have a kind of possession of heaven in this life, as a man may
be presens absens, so a thing absent is present by hope; and as it was said of
fear, that it wrought humility, by removing all impediments, so it may be said
of hope, that it fills the soul by making things absent and future to become
present, and in a manner enjoyed here.

And this is one thing which the Philosophers never knew, that these which they
called affections, Hope and Love; are become virtutes theologicae to Gods
children, and the excellentest virtues in Divinity: the reason is, because they
make them good that possess them. For our nature not being able to be a rule
to it self, but directed by an higher and more excellent nature, whatsoever
that is, which applies that rule to us, must needs bring some part of
goodness to us: which hope partly does in respect of the promises, and
therefore is a virtue to us. This the Heathen man expresses by Pandoras Box,
at the opening whereof all flew out, and only Hope remained under the lidde.
Therefore Philo Judaeus calls it, (...), an inbred Comforter, which forsakes
us not when all other things have left us; dum spiro Romans 5. 3.
spero, hope never makes ashamed.

And in the regenerate hope has the same use, as the Prophet affirms; I
should psalm 27. 15.
utterly have fainted, but that I trust verily to see the goodness of the Lord
in the land of the living; and in another place be says, that his flesh
rests in 16. 10.
hope. And this spes vitae immortalis hope of immortal life, as S. Augustine
calls it, is vita vitae mortalis, the life of this mortal life, and if we were
without it: we (...) Psalm 3.
should want breath. As the body lives spirando, so the soul sperando, and it
is very true in the spiritual life, Qui desperavit, expiravit, he that
despaireth, is dead.

Now to conclude this first affirmative rule, we may say with the Psalmist, O
Lord God of hosts, Blessed is the man that puts his trust in thee: which
blessing in this life is, the certainty that we shall enter in with the
Bridegroom to the psalm (...). 13.
fruition of it in the life to come. And thus we have seen the nature,
necessity, and end of hope.

Now for the first rule, concerning what is commanded and forbidden. Our rule 2.
for faith and hope is not unlike to that of humility.

1. As Nebuchadouozor Daniel 4. 27. ascribed the building of great Babel to his
own power, and made his own glory the end of it; so on the contrary (as we
showed of humility) we also say of hope, it makes God the Author of all the
good it looks for, and makes his glory the end of all. For first it makes us go
out of our selves and trust only in God, and wholly rely upon him, as the sole
efficient cause of good, to us, we must wholly depart out of our selves, we
must not conceive that there is any sufficiency in our selves, but that all our
sufficiency is of God, not so much as to think a good thought, therefore much
less to have a will to do it; but that it is God that works the velle, and
consequently the perficere, both the will and the deed in us. 2 Cor. 3. 5.
We must not ascribe any part or help to our selves; for our Savior says,
Sine me phil. 2. 13.
nihil potestis facere, without me ye can do nothing. Upon which place S.
Augustine notes, it is not nihil magni, but nihil omnino, not any great thing,
but nothing at all, John 15. 5.
and not nihil perficere, that we can perfect nothing, but nihil facere do
nothing at all. And as it makes God the cause and first beginning, so the last
end too, by giving the glory of his graces in us to him; and the reason is
plain in the Apostle, That no flesh should glory in his presence, but, as it
follows, That he that glories should 1 Cor. 1. 29. 31
glory in him.

In the exercise of hope two things are commonly seen. 1. Grief. 2. Joy. Joy
because we hope for that which is good, and grief because the good we hope for
is delayed. Or rather (...), 1. joy, and then grief. If hope be true, it never
suffers us to be secure, but we shall be in a continual war. The Apostle
intimates to us, that we are warriors, when he advises us to put on the
helmet of hope. And in 1 Thessalonians. 5. 8.
the Psalms King David is sometime beaten down, and sometime raised again;
sometime prove. 13. 12.
hope and joy are victors, sometime fear and grief. And seeing delatio boni,
must have rationem mali, and that hope deferred affligit animam, afflicts the
soul, it must needs be a great affliction to the soul, that when a man shall
see that which was promised not only deferred, but sometimes to happen clean
contrary as when he looks for peace, then terror and anguish to follow; he
shall find not only wicked men psalm 115. 2.
and enemies upbraiding him and saying, as they to David, ubi spes vestra,
where is your hope? but even his own reason shall make a problem with his
spirit within him, and tell him it is in vain to hope any longer. Surely this
must work upon men, for it works even in dumb creatures, though they shall
not be partakers of the resurrection Romans 8. 22.
with us, yet because the deliverance of man is not accomplished, they are said
to groan, and desire to be delivered.

Now the only remedy for this is the consideration expressed by S. Augustine,
in Psalm 36.
Sustine illum, sustinuit te, si sustinuit te dum mutares vitam malam, sustine
tu illum dum coronat vitam bonam, bear with him that has born with thee; if he
have forborne thee whilst thou alterest thy ill life, forbear him whiles he
crowns a good life. This has great reason for it, which shall be afterward
showed when we come to treat of patience.

S. Basil compares the Gospel to a net, and fear to the lead which makes it
sink, and keeps it fast, and hope to the cork, which keeps it always above,
without the lead of fear it would be carried hither and thither, and without
the cork of hope it would sink down under water: and the Apostle shows a joy
in hope, and therefore wills us to hold fast the profession of our faith,
without wavering; Romans 12. 12.
and he gives a sufficient reason, for he is faithful that has promised. And
so Heb. 10. 13.
all these are necessarily to be observed in this command of hope. Another
thing commanded is hope for earthly things. For as our Savior says of faith,
he that is faithful in that which is least, is faithful also in much. God
exercises our Luke 16. 10.
faith in heavenly things by a faith in earthly things; so it may be said of
hope, If a man can hope for heavenly things, can he not hope for earthly? And
he that will not hope in God for the less, will not hope for the more. Our
Savior argues from the greater to the less. God having given us a soul,
providing food to preserve life, Matthew. 6. 25.
how much more will he provide food and raiment for our bodies; and if he cause
his sun to shine, and the rain to fall upon the wicked and ungodly, will he not
provide for his servants? Qui pascit contemnents, non pascet colentes? He that
feeds them that despise him, will he not feed them that love him? And our
Savior prosecuteth his argument, that if God provide for the fowls of the air,
and the lilies 30.
of the field, shall he not do it much more for man, for whose use all things
are made psalm 40. 4.
and preserved? Therefore must we cast our selves upon God, and not trust to
the Esaias 28. 15.
proud, and such as go about with lies.

The care for temporal things is lawful, so it be restrained within its limits,
that is, within the lawful means and ways which God allows. For terrena been
curantur, nil male agendo contra illa: so been contemnuntur, nil male agendo
propter illa; we are careful enough for the things of this life, if we do not
waste them, and careless enough of them, if we use no ill means to get them.

We come now to that which is forbidden. The object of hope is bonum, and not
every bonum neither, but that good which we see not, as the Apostle speaks, it
must be futurum. Spes quae videtur non est spes, as it is in faith; and
besides, that it is futurum, Romans 8. 25.
it must also be possibile, and arduum, possible to be had, yet not with ease,
but with some difficulty, to make us the better to esteem of it; for if we
could obtain it presently, we need not hope for it. And out of these two arise
two extremes of hope, which are here forbidden. 1. Presumption. 2. Despair.

Whereas eternal life is propounded as a thing possible, arduum tamen, not to
be attained without difficulty, there arises in our mind an affection, called
Presumption, whereby we apprehend it as possible and easy, and so neglect to
labor for it, as a thing of difficulty, and thus presumption hops without
hope. But to avoid this we must know, that the Lords delight is in them that
fear him, and hope in his mercy. psalm 147. 11
This hope must be mixed with fear, in regard of the hardness: of attaining, ne
2 Cor. 12. 12
forte reprobi fiamus; as S. Paul, though he had been taken up into the third
heaven, yet feared afterward, lest he should become a cast away.

So then, as there ought to be hope in regard of the possibility, so in respect
of the difficulty we must not presume, we are not to presume of our selves, or
of others.

1. Not of our selves. For we are to know that of our selves we can do nothing,
unless there be, Gratia praeveniens, and subsequens, preventing and following
grace, which is divinum auxilium, the divine aid: if these be wanting, our hope
is mere presumption and folly. Sine me nihil potest is facere, without me ye
can do nothing, is sufficient to correct this humor: and S. Bernard says of
the first, Quaerere In Cant. sermon. 8
Deum non potest anima, nisi praeveniatur ut quaerat. The soul cannot seek God
without this preventing grace. And for the last, the Psalmist says, Thy loving
kindness psalm. 23. 6.
and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life. So that whatsoever we do,
all must be attributed to Gods grace. Gratiae divinae ascribitur omne quod
prospere a Greg. in Reg.
nobis geritur, says S. Gregory, whatsoever is well done of us is all and
wholly ascribed to Gods grace.

2. We are not to presume upon the help of others, our hope and trust must not
be put in man. Put not your trust in Princes (says the Psalmist) nor in any
child of man, and why? Because there is no help in them. Not in Abraham or
Israel, for they psalm 146. 3.
Esaias 63. 16.
know not; nor in Saints or Angels: for they are not clean in his sight. And
therefore Job 15. 15.
S. Augustine says, Solus siduciam praestat homini apud Deum, Deus homo, it is
only God the man that gives man confidence with God; for he is only Clypeus
sperantium in eum, a buckler to all them that trust in him. God has his ax in
his hand psalm. (...). 30.
ready to strike us, no creature is able to ward off the blow, it is only this
Deus homo, Christ Jesus God and man, that is able to bear it off from us.

3. As a man may not presume of himself nor others, so neither may he presume
upon God further then his word gives warrant. The word of God begets faith,
and faith hope, so that there can be no hope without faith, nor faith without a
promise in the word whereupon to build. David went no further, Remember the
word unto thy servant, upon which thou have caused me to hope. And therefore
psalm 119. 49.
it were a point of high presumption for a man to continue in sin, in hope of
Gods mercies, without repentance and amendment of life, whereas there is no
promise of God, that unrepentant sinners should find mercy.

The other extreme is Desperation, which is opposite and flat contrary to
Presumption, 2.
and hope too; for whereas true hope conceives a thing possible, though it be
hard, and presumption takes it to be possible, but not hard; Despair thinks
it to be so hard, that it is impossible. Despair is of two sorts.

1. The first is the Epicurean despair. And it was the Israelites fault. He
smote (said they) the stony rock, that the waters gushed out, and the streams
overflowed, psalm 78. 20.
can he give bread also? can he provide flesh for his people? S. Gregory gives
us a note. Because the Israelites ex luxuria were not fed with Quails, as their
Lib. 3 Moral.
lust came upon them, presently desperaverunt, they despired of Gods
omnipotency, or of his care in protecting them and providing for them. And when
a man conceives, that either the thing promised will be always futurum, to
come, or if it has no taste at all with him, or that it is a thing not much to
be esteemed, he gives himself to sensuality, as S. Augustine said, Quia non
possum habere quae spero, because I cannot have what I hope for, (at my own
will) I will have those things which are contra spem, that is, those things
which I can have in this life, which being present cannot be the object of
hope, according to the Epicures rule, Ede, bibe, lude, post mortem nulla
voluptas; eat, drink, play, for there is no pleasure after death to be hoped
for. 2. (...) second is more to be pitied, but no less dangerous then the
other, which is despair in Gods mercy. The Apostle was afraid lest the
incestuous person should 2 Cor. 2. 7.
have been swallowed with this. This error arises upon an imagination that
there may proceed such evil from the Creature, as God cannot master; whereas it
is most certain, that Gods mercies exceed all sin. And this was Cains case and
(...). My iniquity is greater then can be forgiven. S. Ambrose writing upon
that place, says, Genesis 4. 14.
Mentiris Cain, Cain thou lie; for if it were possible or lawful to think,
that any one attribute of (...) had larger dimensions then another, it must
needs be mercy, that would be most transcendent, because it is an attribute
which reaches unto the heavens, whereas his righteousness stands like the
strong mountains, and his judgments psalm 36. 5.
like the great deep. Therefore the Schoolmen disputing the case of Judas,
whether his betraying of Christ, or despair of Gods mercy was the greater sin,
they resolve that his despair was the greater, because it rejected the medicine
of Gods mercy and Christ's merits, by which the other sin might have been cured,
and so it was simply incureable. Despair not therefore, nor let the Devil
persuade thee, that (...) is poor in mercy, and only can forgive small sins;
for his mercy is over all his works.
The means to attain and preserve hope are these. First to consider the end of
our prove. 11. 7.
hope, which extends it self beyond this life. The Wise man says, when a
wicked man dies, his expectation shall perish, and the hope of unjust men
perishes, but the just has hope in (...). The consideration of our end
raises our hope higher 23. 18.
then this life. And in another place he tells us, that surely there will be an
end, and our hope shall not be cut off; it ends not with our life; and
therefore S. Peter (quoting psalm 16. 9.
a place in the Psalms) says, Our heart shall be glad, and our flesh shall
rest in Act. 2. 26.
hope. So that death does not put an end to our hope.

2. To consider the examples of others. That the Patriarchs and Fathers lost
not the fruit of their hope. Our Fathers (says the Psalmist) hoped in thee,
they trusted psalm 22. 4, 5.
in thee, and thou did deliver them. They called upon thee and were helped,
they put their trust in thee, and were not confounded. And by these examples we
should be quickened in our hope. For it is the Devils policy to lay despair as
an engine to entrap us; persuading us, that there were never such sinners as we
are, and therefore never were any in the like case with us, But if we look back
into the Scriptures, we shall find him to be but a seducer in this.

3. A third is our own experience of Gods strengthening us against former
temptations, and of our own former deliverances from sin and danger, which may
make us say with David, The Lord that delivered me out of the paw of the 1 Samuel
17. 37
lion, and out of the paw of the bear, he will deliver me out of the hand of
this Philistine; this is drawn from our experience, then which nothing uses to
be more prevalent with us.

4. But the chief means is that, which is formerly alleged, the consideration
of Heb. 10. 23.
the promise of God, and withal that the promise is sure, because he is
faithful that has promised. And whatsoever is written concerning these
promises aforetime were written for our instruction, that through patience and
comfort of the Scriptures Romans 15. 4.
we might have hope. And this has been the especial aim of the holy Ghost, to
strengthen our hope, in mentioning it so often in Scripture. And it is only
God whose (...) is factum est, whose word and work go together, therefore his
promise is so sure, that he speaks of things to come in the preter tense, as if
they were already done, de futuris in preterito. Therefore Nathan said to King
David, transtulit non transfert, 2 Samuel 12. 13.
God has taken away or put away thy sin, not God will put it away. So Saint
Paul, that he has (already) raised us and made us sit in heavenly places in
Christ Ephesians. 2. 6.
Jesus; because though it be not yet (...), yet is it as certain in respect of
the promise, as if it were already come.

Now seeing God is good and faithful, we may safely hope in him. There is one
thing remarkable and true in the blasphemous speech of (...). Thou trustest in
Egypt upon the staff of a bruised reed, on which if a man lean it will go into
his hand: 2 Kin 18. 21.
so fares it with men that trust in other things besides God. The wise man
says, prove. 25. 19.
confidence in an (...) man in time of trouble is like a broken tooth and a
foot out of joint: in either of which there is little help, a waking dream, as
the heathen said. Our hope therefore is called (...) viva, a lively hope; for
the worldlings hope is 1 pet. 1. 3.
mortua dead, has no life in it; or at least spes mortalis, a mortal hope; if
we trust to it, it will fail us and either wound us, or make us ashamed, as
they in Job, Job 6. 20. whereas true hope never makes ashamed, Romans 5. 3 And
then we may boldly say with the Prophet, why art thou so vexed, O my soul, and
why art thou so disquieted psalm. 42. 14.
within me? O put thy trust in God, for he is the health of my countenance and
my God.

There are certain signs whereby we may know, whether our hope be right, for
there is fleeting hope, when a man thinks he hopes, but does not, as a man may
think he believes, but does not.

1. The first is the sign which appeared in Ezechias; in his sickness says he,
I beseech 2 Kin. 20. 3.
thee, O Lord remember now, how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a
perfect heart. To have been mindful of God in prosperity, is a good ground for
hope in adversity.

2. The second is Saint John's. Every man that has this hope in him purifieth
himself, 1 John 3. 3.
keeps a pure conscience, does not (as they which presume) make their
conscience a receptacle of corruption upon hope. For, as the fathers say,
Conscientia bona custos spei if it be kept clean our hope is true and right.

3. The third is David's. Hope in the Lord, and be doing good, it must be psalm.
37. 3.
active and doing good. The heathen call labor the husband of hope. There is
hope the harlot, and hope the married woman; now hope the wife may be known
from the harlot by this, that she is always with her husband, accompanied with
labor. Sacrificate sacrificium justitiae, et sperate in Domino, offer to God
the sacrifice of psalm. 4. 5.
righteousness, and put your trust in the Lord. There must be travail and
strife to do good in a true hope.

4. The last is Saint Paul's, who makes good hope to hold (...) in tribulation.
It Romans 5. 3. 4.
is that which tries whether it will hold the touch or not, In silentio et
(...) erit sortitudo vestra, in quietness and confidence shall be your strength,
says the prophet, Esa. 31. 15. If we faint in adversity it cannot be true. The
heathen call hope the blossom or bud of tribulation, (...) if the bud be nipt,
nofruit can be expected, it will be but (...) bastard hope: but if it blossom
in tribulation, it will bring forth fruit in due season.

The last of our rules is, that we should not only have this hope in our
selves, psalm. 40. 4. 62. 8. 115. 9. 10 11. 51. 13. 75. 5.
but provoke it in others also, It was David's desire, many shall see it, and
fear, and trust in the Lord. That all the people may trust in him. That the
house of Israel. The house (...). That all that fear the Lord might trust in
him. To the furtherance whereof he promises to teach the wicked, and tells the
fools that they deal madly in setting up their horn, that is, in trusting to
themselves.

And thus much for hope.

CHAP. II.
The sixth duty is prayer. The end of prayer, Gods glory. The necessity of it.
The power of prayer. The parts of prayer. 1. Deprecation. 2. Petition. why God
denies somethings we ask. 3. Intercession. 4. Thanksgiving, which consists of
1. (...). 2 Complacency. 3. promulgation. 4 Provocation of others. The
excellency of praising God. The properties of true prayer. The helps to prayer.
Signs of faithful prayer. Of causing others to pray.

Now concerning prayer.

Unto every affection there is an operation suitable; and so every grace has
its proper (...) and operations: besides which one grace usually depends so
upon another, that one may be called the fruit and effect of another Thus the
fruit of faith is hope, and the fruit of hope is prayer, Speioperatio, oration,
hope works by prayer. And so the property of hope is to (...) us up to prayer,
and the property of prayer is to be interpres spei, that is, to express the
desires of our hope. In which respect, as the Articles of our faith are summa
credendorum, the sum of things to be believed, and the Law summa agendorum,
the sum of things to be done, so the Lords prayer is summa sperandorum, the
sum of things to be hoped. For the soul of man by considering and believing
the judgments of God, being brought down, dejected, and humbled to the dust,
and as it were struck dead, has some life put into it again, by conceiving
hope in his mercy: for which we must repair to God by prayer, and nothing
better beseems a suitor for it then prayer and supplication. in Psalm. 66.
Saint Augustine says, Precibus non (...) ad Deum, The way to God is by prayer
not paces. Therefore that hope may be partaker of its object mercy, we are to
know, that mercy is only to be expected and obtained from God by prayer. And
therefore Saint Augustine says, ut descendat miseratio, ascendat oration, let
prayer ascend that mercy may descend; and so there shall be a blessed
intercourse between his mercy and our prayer.

while we speak of prayer (lest we mistake) we are to conceive, that prayer
consists not only in that which we outwardly make in the congregation, which
the Prophet calls vitulum (...), the calves or sacrifice of our lips, but
inwardly also, in lifting up the heart, as the Apostle speaks, Orabo (...),
orabo mente, I will pray Hos. 14. 3.
with the spirit, I will pray with the understanding, which is when the spirit
ascends 1 Cor. 14. 15.
to God, which howsoever it be not heard by men, how vehement it is yet we
Exodus 14. 15.
know it is powerful with God. We see the experience of it in Moses. The Lord
says to him, why criest thou to me? though there be no mention of any word he
(...). and this is principally and truly prayer, for without it the prayer of
the lips prevails not. Our Savior seems to tax the Scribes with resting
in outward (...). Esa. 29. 13.
when he quoteth a speech out of the prophet, This people draws near unto
Math. 15. 8. 7. 21.
me with their mouth, and honors me with their lips, but their heart is far
from me. And he tells his disciples in the sermon upon the mount, that it is
not the ingemination of Lord, Lord that will gain the kingdom of heaven. And
therefore Saint Augustine says, Hoe negotium plus gemitibus constat quam
sermonibus, This work (...) more in groans then words; the spirit makes
intercession for us with groanings Rom 8. 26.
unvtterable.

1. Now the main end and scope of prayer is Gods honor and glory. It pleases
psalm. 123. 2.
God by the prophet to account this as an especial honor done to him, that
even as the eyes of servants look to the hands of their masters, and the eyes
of an handmaid unto hand of her mistress, so our eyes wait on the Lord, until
he have mercy upon us, or, as Saint Augustine Magna est gloria Dei ut nos simus
mendici ejus, It is Gods great Sermon. 5. de. verb. Domin.
honor, that we are his beggars; though it be of persons without the Church,
as in Cornelius, whose prayer was accepted, Act. 10. 2. or of persons within
the Church, yet out of Gods favor by their sins, who call to God de
prosundis, out of the depth of misery, Psalm. 130. 1. though the person be an
heathen, yet his prayer inregard of the act it self is in some degree
acceptable to God. And this he accounts as an addition to his glory, when we
ackowledge, that what we have, we have not from ourselves, but from him.
Besides, he takes it as a further honor to him, as an homage we render him,
when we thank and glorify him, either for benefits, or deliverances, and to
encourage us to this duty, he adds a promise. Call upon me (says he) in the
day of trouble, and I will deliver thee (but upon what condition?) psalm 50. 15.
and thou shall glorify me. But this we may see set down most excellently by
the Prophet, where he particularly exacts the duty from five several sorts of
men in one Psalm, that are there mentioned, as more especially bound to God.
psalm. 107.


1. They that wander in the wilderness and are harborlesse and in distress
and want, and are relieved. verse. 4. 10. 23. 2. 6. 8. 15. 21. 31.
2. They that are at the point of death, and are restored to life and health.
3. They that are in prison and are delivered. 4. They that are delivered from
shipwreck. 5. They that are preserved from the hands of their enemies.
These several sorts of men, as he there speaks, when they cry unto the Lord,
he delivers them out of their distress; and therefore he often reiterates
this and says, Oh that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness,
and declare the wonders that he does for the children of men.

And this deliverance by prayer has three effects, whereby God is glorified.

1. When an humble minded man upon his prayer finds this deliverance, he is
psalm. 34. 2. 15. 13. 107. 42.
thankful and glad. 2. By this sinners (seeing Gods goodness in hearing the
prayers of his servants) shall be converted. 3 The mouth of all wickedness shall
be stopped.
By all these ways prayer brings glory to God.

If then prayer bring such glory to God, and that without it God is like to be
defrauded of a great part of his honor,

2. It concerns us necessarily to practice it: and that not only in respect of
God, but of our selves too. Our Savior shows this by the parable of the
widow, and the unjust judge where her importunity prevailing with a wicked
judge, shows a Luc. 18. 1.
majori, how powerful prayer is with God, a father of tender mercies, and that
we ought to pray always, and not faint. And therefore having a care that we
should know how to pray, he himself who never did any superfluous act, and who
is our advocate and daily intercessor with God. set down a form to our hands,
to instruct how to pray daily. 11. 2.


In the use whereof, that comes to mind, which Chrysostom observes in his
first book de orando Deum, out of Dan. 6. 10. where bodily death being set
before Daniel, if he prayed during thirty days, on the other side, tanquam si,
as if the forbearance for that time would be the death of his soul, he chose
rather to hazard his life, then to neglect his daily custom.

In the Law besides the observation of the Sabbath there was a morning and an
evening sacrifice. Which was a type, and is explained by the Psalmist to be
prayer, (...). 141. 2.
Prayer as incense in the morning, and lifting up of hands (which is nothing
else but prayer) for the evening sacrifice. The fathers have for the most part
written largely Numb. 28. 3. 8
upon the necessity of this duty, and call it Clavem diei, et seram noctis, the
key to open the day and the bar to shut in the night. Saint Chrysostom calls it
signaculum diei, the seal of the day, out of the Apostle, who says, that the
creatures are good being sanctified by prayer; else not, and so it is a seal to
confirm a blessing of the Creatures in Tim. 4. 5.
for the day following. And in this respect it is said, that our Savior
blessed the loaves, by looking up to heaven, that is, by praying as also the
meat at supper by Mat. 14. 19. 26. 26. 30.
blessing it be fore and singing an hymn of thanksgiving after.

And this is no new thing, but a custom as ancient as Abraham, as the Jews
record, who continue it still: the chief of the family first takes bread, and
blesses it by prayer, and then breaks it, and the last thing is to take the
cup, and then to give a second blessing; this being so holy a practice, the
whole Church of the Jews to our Saviors time observed it as a thing most
necessary: from which custom Christ translated the use of it to his own
supper. The Apostle fits all the rest of the spiritual Ephesians. 6. 13.
armor to some special part, as to the head, the breast, the feet, but
specifies no part for prayer, because it is to cover all over, and to make all
the other armor useful. Therefore the fathers upon that place of Epes. 6. 13.
call it Armaturam (...) the armor of all other most necessary; as if all the
other were of no more strength, then if we were naked, if we put not on this.
And they style it also flagellum demonum, the Devils scourg, Athanasius is
confident that the bare, but faithful recital of this ejaculation, Exurgat
(...), Let God arise, and let his enemies be scattered, will make psalm. 68. 1.
all the devils in hell to quake. And Maximus another father affirms, that he
ever found this verse [hast thee, O God, to deliver me, make have to help me, O
Lord] 70. 1.
effectual to deliver him from any temptation. And Saint James prescribes no
other remedy for afflictions then this, Is any among you afflict d? Let him
pray, even when Jac. 5. 13.
humane hope fails, yet (...), for that which is impossible by our selves, is
possibile per alium, possible by God, to whom we pray. And indeed it has been
ever of such power that it has wrought miracles.

1. In the air. By it Elias the Prophet shut up the middle region, that no
rain 17.
could come down for three years and six months, and he prayed again, and the
heavens 18.
gave rain etc. 2. If we desire to see the like in other elements, we may in
Fire, by 2 Kin. 1. 10.
the same Prophet, for he by prayer brought down fire, which consumed the
captain and his fifty men. 3. In the Earth At the prayer of Moses the earth
opened and swallowed up Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, with their company. psalm.
106. 17.
4. In the water. At the prayer of Moses the red sea divided it self, and the
waters Exodus 14. 16. 22. 28.
were a wall to the children of Israel, and returned and covered the host of
the Egyptians. 5. And this efficacy it has wrought not only in the elements,
but Josh 10. 12.
in heaven also. At the prayer of Josuah the Sun and Moon stood still. 6. In
putting to flight earthly powers also. At the prayer of Moses, when he lift up
his hands Israel prevailed. David stayed the plague. By it Hannah of a barren
Exodus 17. 11.
womb became fruitful, The Ninevits escaped the severe judgments of God;
examples 2 Samuel 24.
1 Samuel 1. 9.
are infinite, but these seem less, because it has power over spiritual
powers, Jon. 3.
death, and hell and satan. 7. It has power over death. Ezechias having
received a message of death, by prayer 2 King. 20. 6.
obtained fifteen years addition to his life; I have heard thy prayer and seen
thy tears etc. 8. Over hell and the devil. Our Savior tells his Apostles,
that by prayer and Mat. 17. 21.
fasting the devils were to be cast out. 9. And lastly, which is the most
remarkable, it overcomes God himself. we read that Moses used no other means
but only Prayer, yet God says, Let me alone Exodus 32. 10.
that my wrath may wax hot; as though while Moses prayed God himself could do
nothing against the Isrealites, or as if Moses by prayer had offered violence
to God, and held his hands, Quis tenet te Domine, says one, Lord, who holds
thee, that thou say let me alone? Moses his prayer did in a manner bind the
hands of God. There is an almighty power in prayer, because it overcomes him
that is almighty.
But it may be objected, that how dare miserable men, dust and ashes, presume
to speak to God, being so excellent and omnipotent; and as Jacob confessed now,
being Genesis 18. 27.
less then the least of his blessings. 30. 10.


This is answered thus by one, non presumptione tua, sed promissione et
permissione sua, God not only permits it, but adds a promise to them that
use it, and commands us to call upon him. In the Psalm before alleged, call
upon me in the time of trouble, and I will hear thee. And Saint Peter and Saint
Paul both confirm psalm. 50. 15.
the truth of this, when they quote this of the Prophet Joel, whosoever shall
call Joel. 2. 32.
upon the name of the Lord shall be saved. And the joining of two places in the
Act. 2. 21.
Romans 10. 13.
Gospels will make us call on God with great confidence. Every one that asks
(says Saint Matthew) receives; and that in Saint John, whatsoever ye shall
ask the Mat. 7. 8.
Father in my name he will give it you. There can be no more said then that
John. 16. 23.
every one that asks shall have, and whatsoever you ask you shall have: Jer.
10. 25.
whereas on the contrary, Gods sury will be powered upon them, that call not
upon his name.

And as God is ready to promise, so is he also to perform; yea so ready is he
on Esaias 65. 24.
his part, that he says, before they call I will hear. To testify this, he
erected Exodus 30. 6.
a mercy seat in the Tabernacle: and when the temple was built, he gives it a
name Esaias 56. 7.
from this duty of prayer, The House of prayer, to show how ready he would be
to hear the prayers there put up; and that not only by his own people, but
even by strangers too; for whom Solomon prayed at the consecration of the
Temple: 1 King. 8. 41.
Ezra 7. 23.
and this was acknowledged by the Persian King, who calls it, the house of the
God of Heaven. Herein was the mercy seat placed, and the first part of the
service was psalm 141. 2.
incense, which as we showed before, is often interpreted to signify prayer:
and Luke 1. 10.
so it is intimated in the Gospel, when we read that the people were without
praying, while the Priest was within at the typical worship, burning of
incense. And as God had a seat of mercy then on earth, so has he now erected a
throne of grace in Heaven, from whence, si ascendat (...), descendet gratia, if
prayer ascend, grace descends. And because that we cannot have access by our
selves, by reason of our sins, therefore order is taken, that we may have
access per alium, by another, Romans 5. 2.
even by Christ, who to assure us the more of the efficacy of our prayers, not
Heb. 5. 7.
only in his flesh offered up prayers and supplications with strong crying and
tears; but still makes intercession for us; and therefore in the Revelation, he
is figured Romans 8. 34.
by an Angel that receives the prayers of the Saints in golden censures,
mingles Rev. 1. 6.
them with incense, to make them acceptable, and so offers them up to his
Father. So that as he prays for us himself, so he makes our prayers
acceptable, and therefore Zach. 12. 10.
Gal. 4. 6.
he makes us Priests to God, to offer this spiritual sacrifice of prayer, and
praises; and, as it was promised, to pour upon us the spirit of grace and
supplication, so it is performed by Gods sending the spirit of his Son into our
hearts, whereby we cry, Abba Father; which spirit helps our infirmities, and
when we know not how to pray, makes intercession for us with sighs and groans
that cannot be expressed. So that we have no reason to doubt of the (...) of
our prayers with God, but to rest assured, that God is highly pleased with
them, and is ready and willing to hear us, and to grant what we ask according
to his will. Thus we see, all is performed on Gods part. Now for the duty it
self.

This duty of Invocation here commanded contains in it two things.

1. A lifting up of our soul, a fixing of the mind upon God, as the Author
and psalm 25. 1. 62. 8.
giver of all good. 2. A pouring out of our soul, a full declaration of our
desires, and meditations, or 142. 2.
what it is we require of God.
Invocation or prayer is divided into
1. Petition, and that either for ourselves, which also is subdivided into
Deprecation (...), for the removal of some evil. Precation, for the obtaining
of some good, (...). or for others which we call Intercession, (...). 2.
Thanksgiving, (...).

1. The first part of Petition is Deprecation, that evil felt or feared may be
removed; and this is most properly and usually the matter of our prayer. Is any
man afflicted Jac. 5. 13.
(says S. James) let him pray; and though hope apprehends nothing but good,
yet the removal of evil has rationem boni, and so may be the object of hope,
and the subject of prayer. And this consists in three points.

1. Vt malum avertatur, that evil may be turned away before it come, I beseech
Dan. 9. 16.
thee, O Lord, (says the Prophet) let thine anger and fury be turned away.
That Gods wrath may be turned away, before it come upon us. 2. Vt malum
anferatur, that evil may be taken away after it has seized upon us. psalm 25.
21.
Deliver Israel, O Lord, out of all his troubles. (...) being in trouble we may
be delivered out of it: and this is called (...), deliverance. 3. Vt malum
minuatur, that evil may be (...). Let thine anger cease from us 85. 4.
(says the Psalmist) mitiga iram tuam; when we pray for a diminution, that so
we may 3.
be able to bear it.
But as a necessary preparative to this, the Saints have ever used Confession
and acknowledgment of sins. The Prophet in sundry Psalms runs first over all
his sins, sins of omission and commission, of thought, word, and deed, against
God, his brethren or himself, by instigation of others, or of his own accord.
For Prove. 28. 13. He that covers his sins shall not prosper; that is a
dangerous saying: and in Psalm. 32. 3, 4. (...) dangerous example; till he had
(...) his sins, his bones consumed, and his moisture was turned into the
drought of summer. So likewise did Daniel make confession before he comes to
petition.

1. The chief thing to be prayed against, maxim deprecandum, is to be kept
from falling into sin by temptation. That we may not be winnowed by Satan. Not
to wish Luke 22. 32.
as commonly we do, I would I were out of the world, but as our Saviors prayer
for his Disciples, I pray not that thou should take them out of the world,
but that thou John 17. 15.
should keep them from the evil. And we desiring but thus, certainly Gods
promise will not be unperformed, for he is faithful who will not suffer us to
be tempted above 1 Cor. 10. 13.
that we are able. And either our strength shall increase with the strength of
our cross, or, as our strength, so our cross shall diminish. The enemy shall
not be able to do us Psalm 89. 23.
violence.

2. We are to deprecate temporal dangers, as Jehosbaphat did. We know not what
to do, hoc solum restat, ut ad te oculos dirigamus Domine, Our eyes are upon
thee, O 2 Chro. 20. 12
God. And then in our trouble and distress Nomen Domini shall be turris
fortissime, Prove. 18. 10.
The Name of the Lord will be a strong tower to us. But yet concerning temporal
evil, we must stand affected as the three children were, who answered K.
Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 3. 17. 18.
our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace;
but if not (because the promise and covenant is conditional) we will not serve
thy God etc. Matthew. 26. 39.


And thus far and no farther went our Savior when he used deprecation, Father
if it be possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless not my will, but
Luke 22. 42.
thine be done.

The second branch of Invocation is (...), Precation, which is the desiring of
2.
some thing that is good. There is no one thing more common in the Psalms then
this; as, 1. Give me understanding. So 2. Establish the thing that thou have
Psalm. 119. 73. 125.
wrought in us, etc. As the first prayer is to give what we want; so the second
is, establish and confirm it in us when we have it. 3. The third is that of the
Apostles, 68. 28.
to our Savior, Lord increase our faith in us. We must not keep at a stand in
Luke 17. 5.
grace, but desire an increment, that we may grow in grace, as the Apostle
counsels 2 (...). 3. 18.
us.

Concerning this part of prayer, petition of the good we want, It is true, our
desires are not always granted; for as Christ answered the sons of Zebedee, ye
ask Matthew. 20. 22.
ye know not what; so it may be said to us, we often desire (...) that which is
agreeable to our own humors then to Gods will; as Chrysostom reports of a
Thief, who purposing to continue in his sin, orabat Deum ut non caperetur, and
eo citius capiebatur, he prayed that he might not be taken, and was taken so
much the sooner, because he so prayed.

Therefore the rule we must follow, and whereon we must ground our prayer is
that promise, Quicquid secundum (...), whatsoever we ask according 1. John 5.
14.
to his will, he will grant us: such are the graces of his spirit, and
whatsoever is necessary to salvation, as the Word, Sacraments, public
Worship, etc. These are that unum (...), which the (...) so earnestly begged,
unum petii a Jehovah, One thing have I desired of the Lord. He desired psalm
27. 4.
many things, but one thing especially, (...), to dwell in the (...) of God all
the days of his life, to continue in the Church of God all his life, where he
might glorify God, and work out his own salvation. Whatsoever is absolutely
necessary to these ends, we may safely ask, and be sure God will grant, and
therefore our Savior tells us, that God grants his Spirit to those that ask
him, this is one thing which he will not deny us.

Now with these, or after these, we may pray for temporal things, that is, we
may pray, first, for a competency, not for superfluity. The (...) Jacob Genesis
28. 20.
prayed only for food and raiment, and Agur the son of (...) prays, Give me
neither poverty nor riches, but sufficientiam victus, a sufficiency only,
whereupon prove. 30. 8.
S. Augustine faith, non indecenter petit, quia hoc petit, and non amplius, it
is no unbeseeming prayer, because he asks only so much, and no more. 2. We
must desire them with condition, if God see it expedient, submitting to his
will; as Christ, If it be possible, and if it be thy will: so did David praying
for restitution to his kingdom. 2 Samuel 15. 25
If I have found favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again, etc.
if not, here I am, let him do what seems good to him. He resignes all to Gods
will, and there is no more compendious way to obtain what we need, then to
resign all to Gods pleasure, whatsoever means we use, or however we struggle,
nothing will avail without this.

Now that which was mentioned before, concerning omnis and omnia, falls in best
to be expounded here. It seems strange that every one that asks shall have, and
that whatsoever he asks he shall have, seeing it is certain that many ask and
have not.

1. We must remember that of S. Augustine, that our duty is to pray however;
for as he says, Jubet ut petas, and si non petis displicet, and non negabit
quod petis, and si non petes? does God command thee to pray, and is he
displeased if thou prayest not, and will he not deny thee what thou prayest
for, and yet do thou not pray?

2. We must know that the cause why we receive not, is not in his promise, but
in Jac. 4. 3.
our asking. Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss, says S. James. For
it is not a demonstrative sign of Gods favor to us, to have all we desire
granted; for we see psalm. 78. 18. 27. 30. 31.
that the Israelites desired flesh, and flesh God sent them, but is was with
displeasure: for while the meat was yet in their mouths, the wrath of God came
upon them, and flew the mightiest of them, and smote down the chosen men of
Israel. And upon the 1 Samuel 8. 22.
peoples violent desire to have a king, God gave them one, but in displeasure.
Nay it Job 1. and 2.
is so far from a favor, that God sometimes grants the Devils (whom he favors
not) Mark 5. 13.
their requests; as in the case of Job and the Swyne.

3. And as this is not an absolute sign of favor, so Gods denying of our
requests, is not always a sign of his displeasure. This we may see in S.
Paul, who obtained not 2 Cor. 12. 8.
that he desired concerning the prick in the flesh. 1. One reason S. Isidore
and S. Aug. give; Saepc multos Deus non exaudit ad voluntatem, ut exaudiat ad
salutem, God ofttimes De (...) bono lib. 3. cap. 1.
hears not many as they desire, that he may hear them to their good. 2, Another
reason is given by S. Aug, God denies not, but only defers to grant, that we
might by his deferring them, ask and esteem of them more highly. Desideria
delatione crescunt, etcito data vilescunt, desire increases by delay, and
things soon given are of light esteem: and therefore he adds, Servat tibi Deus
quod non vult cito dare, ut and tu De verb. (...). cap. 1.
discas magna magis desiderare, God keeps for thee, that he will not give thee
quickly, that thou may learn with more affection to desire great things. 3.
A third reason is, that we might the more earnestly ask for them; which our
Savior intimates in two parables to us; one of the unjust judge, and the
importunate widow: and the other of Luke 18. 2.
Luke 11. 8.
the friend that called up his neighbor at midnight; by both telling us, how
much importunity prevails with God. 4. A fourth is; God, though he gives not
quod petimus, what we ask, yet he will give quod novit utilius, what he knows
to be more profitable 2. Cor. 12. 8.
for us: as in the case of S. Paul, My grace shall be sufficient for thee. 5.
Some things we pray for may be hurtful to us, (as knives for children) so as
that non accipiendo accepimus, In Johan. 14.
we are better by wanting then possessing them. Chrysostom calls prayers for
such things, childish and aguish prayers; as S. Aug. male usurus eo quod vnlt
accipere, Deo potius miserante non accepit, God in compassion lets not him
receive, that which he meant to use ill. And therefore sometime to miss that
which we conceive to be a In lib. sent.
benefit, is a blessing. And therefore we will conclude this point with a saying
of S. Aug. Prosperi.
fideliter supplicans Deo pro necessitatibus hujus vitae, and (...) auditur,
and misecorditer non auditur: quid enim infirmo sit utilius, magis (...)
medicus quam aegrotus, God in mercy hears, and in mercy hears not a faithful
suppliant for the necestities of this life; for the Physician knows what is
profitable for the sick man better then himself. These reasons are from the
matter of our prayers, others taken from the manner of our asking may be
mentioned hereafter.

The third part of Invocation is Interpellation or Intercession, which is
prayer either S. Aug. cites S. Ambrose. Frater mi, si pro te rogas tantum, pro
te unus Hexam. lib. 1.
orabit, si autem pro omnibus rogas, omnes pro te rogabunt, My brother, if thou
only pray for thy self, one shall pray alone for thy self, but if thou pray for
all men, all men will In Moral.
pray for thee. And S. Gregory says, Quisquis pro aliis intercedere nititur,
sibi potius ex charitate suffragat, and pro semet ipso tanto citius audiri
meretur, quanto magis devote pro aliis intercedit, whosoever prays for others,
does the rather pray for himself, and by so much the sooner deserves to be
heard for himself, by how much the more devoutly he intercedes for others. S.
Chrysostom has an excellent speech to this purpose. Pro se orare necessitas
cogit, pro aliis charitas fraternitatis In Matthew.
hortatur: dulcior autem ante Deum est oration, non quam necessitas transmittit,
sed quam charitas fraternitatis commendat: it is mere necessity that compels a
man to pray for himself, but it is a brotherly affection that draws a man to
pray for others: and that prayer is more acceptable to God, which is caused by
love then necessity.

This part of invocation has diverse branches. As we are to pray for all men.
1. For 1 John 5. 16.
sinners, that have not sinned unto death, and there is a promise that prayer
shall be James 5. 15.
heard. In which respect there is a prayer in our Liturgy, first for them that
are without the Church, for their conversion, as Heathens, Jews, Turks,
Heretics, Schismatics: then for those that are in the Church; which are with
us, and yet not of us, but are still in blindness and ignorance, or know but
practice not. 2. We are to pray for them, that not only are oppressed with
outward afflictions, but inward temptations, and the (...) of their sins. 3.
For those that stand, that they fall not, but persevere. 4. For them that are
our enemies and persecute us. And for this we Matthew. 5. 44.
have not only our Saviors percept, but the practice of holy men. Saint
Gregory Hum. 27. in Evang. upon that place in Jeremiah 15. 1. where God says,
though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet my heart could not be toward this
people, etc. asks the question, why Moses and Samuel are especially named; and
gives this reason, Because the prayers of such are most powerful with God, who
having received an injury, can presently pray for those that wronged them. Now
such are Moses and Samuel. For Moses when the people were ready to stone him,
presently Exodus 17. 4.
prays for them. Samuel though the people desired to cast off his government,
1 Samuel 12. 23
yet says, God forbid that I should cease to pray for you. And of these
prayers it is said, that they shall return into our own bosom. They are very
effectual, psalm 35. 13.
for in these cases, Qui pro aliis orat, prose laborat, he that prays for
others, labors for himself. 5. For Kings and Magistrates, as the Apostle
advises. 6. Lastly, but 1 Timothy 2. 2.
most especially for the peace and good of the Church. O pray for the peace of
Jerusalem, psalm 122. 6. 137. 6.
says the Psalmist, who also wished, that his tongue might cleave to the roof
of his mouth, if he forgate to pray for it.

The fourth branch of Invocation is Thanksgiving. Invocation is for that we
Esaias. 65. 24.
or whether it be given us when we ask, in both cases we have cause to enter
Matthew. 7. 7.
into this consideration, Quid retribuam Domino, what shall I render unto the
Lord psalm 116. 12
for all his benefits. And indeed the chief end of all should be the glory of
God. For, for his glory all things that are made were created: the seventh day
when he had Genesis 2. 3.
finished his work of creation was instituted for his praise and glory. And for
this purpose man was placed in Paradise to praise him, and after his fall
mankind had perished, and all things had been again reduced to nothing, but
that God might have Esa. 24. 13. etc
some to glorify him. Now it is plain that God takes and accepts of thanks as
a great part of his glory. And therefore were the thank-offerings among other
sacrifices 2 Chro. 29. 31 33. 16.
for Gods service and glory instituted of old; and he that offers me thanks
psalm 50. 23.
(says God by the Prophet) gives me glory: and the Apostle, All things are
for 2 Cor. 4. 15.
your sakes, that the abundant grace might, through the thanksgiving of many,
redound to the glory of God.

That which the Heathen said is true, Gratus animus est meta benignitatis,
gratitude is the end of bounty. And it is the condition of our obligation to
God, and of Gods psalm 50. 15.
to us. Call upon me in i am of trouble, and I will hear you, there is Gods, and
thou shall glorify me, there is ours.

The Hebrews make Thanksgiving to consist of four parts, according to the four
words used by thankful persons in Scripture.

1. Confession or acknowledgement, Confitebor, I will confess, that we have
nothing 1 Cor. 4. 7.
but that we have received from God. That our help comes from the hills from
psalm 121. 1.
no inferior creature, from above (...), from the Father of lights. Nor must
we conceal James 1. 17.
what we have received. Saint Augustine says, that as he Qui putat se habere
quod non habet temerarius est, he is rash that thinks he has that he has not,
so he qui non (...) quod habet ingratus est, that confesses not what he has
is unthankful. And therefore we must acknowledge them, as data not innata, as
of Gods gift, not of our own acquiring. 2. The second is contentment and
complacency in Gods gifts by a grateful acceptance of what it pleases God to
bestow upon us, complacui, I am well pleased. King David may be a pattern to us
in this point. The Lot is fallen to me in a fair ground, yea psalm. 16. 6.
I have a goodly heritage, it liked him well, he desired no more. For as Saint
Bernard says Spiritui gratiae contumeliam facit, qui beneficium dantis grata
mente non suscipit, The undervaluing of gods blessings by not being content
with what he sends In Ephesians.
us is a reproach to the spirit of grace. And it was the disease of the
Israelites forty In Johan.
years together. Of which Saint Augustine says, De nulla re magis Deum
offendisse philip. 4 11
ille populus Judaicus dicitur, quam contra Deum murmurando, The Jews offended
Heb. 13. 5.
God in nothing more then in murmuring against him. Saint Paul learned better
that is, to be content in whatsoever estate he was. And his counsel was, be
content psalm. 66. 14. 111. 1. 40. 9. 35. 14. 57. 10. (...). 16. 40. 9.
with that ye have. 3. The next is Promulgation or publishing to others the
benefits we receive Anuntiabo, I will declare. I will tell you (says the
Psalmist) what God has done to my soul; and in another place he says, he will
not only tell it in private, but publicly in the congregation, and in magna
congregatione, in the great congregation: and (that being not enough) to all
the people and among all nations. And yet higher, to his seed and posterity,
and beyond that, to all generations to come. Which he has done, we see it. For
as Saint Chrysostom says well, Optima beneficiorum custos est ipsa Hom. 25. in
Math.
memoria beneficiorum, et perpetua confessio gratiarum, The best preserver of
benefits is the memory of them, and perpetual thankfulness for them. 4. The
fourth and last is Incitatio, a stirring up or provocation of others to do the
psalm. 95. 1. 147. 12. 148. 1
like. Venite, O come let us sing unto the Lord etc. Says the Psalmist. And
praise the Lord O Jerusalem, praise thy God O Sion. And again praise ye the
Lord, Sing unto the. Lord a new song, and his praise in the congregation of
Saints. And his last Psalm is all incitation, not only to men, but to the
creatures, to perform this duty.
Now as there is Deprecation, or intercession, for others so this duty of
thanksgiving is to be performed not only for our selves, but also for others;
in which the first example we have in Scripture is Abraham's servant, after he
had found a wife for his masters son, Genesis 2. 27. So did Daniel for the secret
revealed, Dan. 2. 20. Moses composed a song for the deliverance out of Egypt,
Exodus 15. 1 Deborab and Barak for the victory over Sisera, Judge. 5. and so Saint
Paul usually begins his Epistles with thanksgiving for others, as Romans 1. 8. 1
Cor. 1. 4. and 2 Cor. 1. Ephesians. 1. 3.

To stir us up to this duty of praise, King David has the commendation above
all other of the Patriarchs for his exact performance of it, in all the parts
above 1 Samuel 13 14.
mentioned and in this respect was called a man after Gods own heart, as Samuel
told Saul. S. Chrysostom examining why he was so styled rather then Abraham and
Moses and the rest, says, he could find no other reason for it but this,
because (God desires that his name should be exalted and praised above all) he
labored more plenteously in this point then any other, and in that respect
deserved that title better then any other. In the 55. Psalm he professes that
he will keep his hours for prayer. In psalm. 55. 17.
the Evening and morning and at noon day will I pray. But for praises in the
119 psalm. 119. 164. 175.
Psalm, Thrice a day shall not serve, but seven times a day do I praise thee.
Yea he would praise God at midnight, Psalm 119 62. Psalm. 6. 7. and Psalm 118.
17. and Psalm. 39. 15. And the desire he had to have his life prolonged was, to
praise God, O let me live (says he, and wherefore) and I shall praise thee,
and this the rather, because he knew that it was not only the end of man's
creation, but of Angels also Luc. 2. 14.
whom he desired to imitate, who continualy praise God. It was and is their
song, Glory be to God on high: and in the Revelation, Blessing, glory, and
wisdom, and thanksgiving, Apoc. 7. 12.
psalm. 108. 1
and honor, and power, be unto our God for ever and ever. And in this respect
it was that David accounted his tongue the best member he had and called it his
glory because he employed it to the glory and praise of God: which was the end
why God created both it and all the other members.

And as it was the cause why God created man, so was it also of all the
creatures; psalm. 19. 9.
and they (as the Psalmist says) perform their duty herein. The Heavens (says
he) declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handy work etc.
Insomuch as we see that he calls upon the very worms to perform this duty;
upon which Saint Chrysostoms note is, that they were in worse estate then worms
that neglect it.

But for the Church there it is the most natural duty that can be performed; In
thy Temple every man speaks of thy praise: what is preaching: predicare, but
to psalm. 29. 9.
declare to all the world, his benefits of creation, redemption by Christ, and
other benefits we have by him, in publishing whereof we praise and honor God,
and therefore the conclusion of all sermons is with a Doxology, To whom with
the Father etc. be all honor etc. As was usual with the Fathers. For the
Sacraments, that great mystery which is the complement and perfection of all
our service on earth, is called (...) a thanksgiving; for what is it but a
solemn commemoration of that grand mercy and benefit of our redemption by
Christ's sacrifice upon the cross, and therefore it ends with a gloria, Glory
be to God on high etc. and for prayer, we pray, that we may have matter of
praise, yea praise for benefits received must be joined and go along with our
prayers, else they are not acceptable, so that we in all our church exercises
tend to this.

The Psalmist says of unity, that it is good and pleasant. The Fathers observe
psalm. 133. 1.
from hence. the excellency of unity; for that some things are good, but not
pleasant, others pleasant, but not good, but this is both. The same may be said
of praises, the Psalmist tells us, that it is both good and pleasant, and adds
a third thing, for whereas psalm. 147. 1.
some thing may be both good and pleasant, but not comely, he therefore says,
that it is both good and pleasant, and a comely thing to praise the Lord, and
to be thankful.

Besides this, lets consider, that this is a profitable and an excellent
service, profit is a great mover, and all excellency without this is contemned.
Here is excellency Act. 20. 35.
and honor for beatius est dare quam accipere, It is more blessed to give then
to receive. Now here we give some thing to God, and there is nothing else we can
give or return to him for his benefits, quid retribuam, says David, I will
take the cup of salvation etc. that is, offer the sacrifice of praise. that is
all I can return. God esteems it an addition to his honor, and therefore it is
called magnifying, glorifying and sanctifying of his name, as if we made him
hereby more great and glorious and holy then he is. And as the duty is thus
excellent, so it is profitable; for we never give praise and thanks, but we
receive some thing: Deus vult nos gratos esse ut capaces simus majorum
benificiorum, by gratitude for benefits received, we are fitted for greater
benefits. Ten lepers were cleansed, and only one returns back to give thanks,
who hereby became capable of a greater mercy; Christ tells him, his faith had
saved him. Our gratitude is never done gratis, but gets a reward; as there is
first ascensus orationis, the ascent of prayer, and then descensus gratiae, a
descending of grace.

So as Bernard says, when there is recursus gratiarum, a sending back of
thanks, then there is a new decursus gratiae, a descending of benefits, and si
(...) recursus gratiarum, cessat decursus gratiae, if thanks be not returned,
there will be noe more return of grace and other benefits: that grace we have
received, if it stand still, and be not in recursu, in perpetual succession by
returns, then like water (to which its often compared) it stands still, and
putrifies: and rots all the gifts and graces bestowed formerly. The same Father
on Act. 7. makes a question, why those excellent and rare examples of grace and
virtue, which were so common in the primitive times, are not now seen; we have
the same beginnings they had, and we admire those that continue, as thy begun
in grace, but they not only continued, but increased, and went forward, and
had their gifts increased, which is, as he says, because Gods hand is not
shortened, or his good will altered, but our thanksgivings are scant and thinn
sown, and therefore our harvest must be scanty and thinn too, and therefore he
says vae (...) nostrae propter ingratitudinem, woe to our age for
unthankfulness; this is the reason why there is not the same progress of
grace in us as was in them. For as Prosper says, Gratiae nullum certius est
signum quam gratiae, there is no surer sign of grace then thanksgiving. Nay we
see that we are tied to it, though we should be prohibited from it. it must
needs be an excellent duty which must not be omitted, though forbidden by God.
Our Savior when he had healed the leper, inhibited him from telling any body
what he had done unto him: yet we see he (...) it, and it is recorded to us for
his great Luc. 5. 14.
Mar. 5. 20.
praise, and this was a godly disobedience, for it was only a commandment of
trial, as some think.

Now there are five rules to direct us that our invocation may be rightly
grounded.

1. It must be (...), it must have life in it. Saint Bernard says, upon that
Psalm. 40. 15.
of the psalm [ Cor meum dereliquit me,] nihil in mundo fugacius cord, there is
nothing more fleeting then the heart. Our extravagant thoughts come so thick
upon us in our prayers, that they hinder our prayers from ascending unto God.
And it is a common fault, our prayers are exanimes without life. And therefore
the Psalmist begins and ends a Psalm, praise the Lord, O my soul, and praise
the Lord O my psalm. 108. 103. 1. 42. 4. 62. 8.
soul, and all that is within me praise his holy name: we must not only have a
tongue but a soul to praise him. I power out my heart by my self says he; and
so he wills others, power out your hearts before him. And the Apostle, I will
pray with 1 (...). 14. 15.
the spirit and will pray with understanding also. And indeed ordinary civility
should teach us thus much, to do no less to God, then to men, to mind that
which we speak to him. But the neglect of this is much augmented by an humor
of men in our age that are much delighted with long prayers in private, praying
beyond the measure of their abi ities. Saint Augustine speaking of the Monks of
Egypt and their worship, Epst. ad probam.
says dicuntur fratres Egypto crebras orationes babere sed eas brevissimas, et
raptim quodammodo (...), the brethren in (...) are said to pray often, but
their prayers were very short, and ejaculations etc. and his reason was, ne per
productiores moras evanescat atque hebotet intentio, lest by long continuance
their good intentions should vanish and grow dull. These ejaculations were a
remedy against dulling of our good intentions, and therefore his advise is,
intentio non est obtundendae si (...) non (...), our intention is not to be
blunted if it cannot hold out; and si perduraverit non cito (...), if it can
hold out, it is not to be broken of: for indeed we have need of all helps to
our devotion, which is easily interrupted. Cupio (...) fieri (says he) sed non
(...) cogitationes vanae, I desire to be saved, but my extravagant thoughts
hinder me Domine vim (...) a cogitationibus meis responde pro me, Lord I suffer
violence, answer thou for me. The 119. Psalm is full of these ejaculations, and
every one of them is a prayer. The Lord will not take notice of those ascending
thoughts, but of our prayers, if they displease us, and if in our drawing near
to God we cannot drive away those fouls from our sacrifices, yet if we have a
care to prepare our hearts, short ejaculations will be effectual though we be
not cleansed according to the purification of the sanctuary, as Hezekiah speaks
2 Chronicles. 30. 18. 19. 2. Our prayers must be constantes. For he that wavereth in
his prayers (says Ja. 1. 6.
Saint James) is like a wave of the sea driven and tossed with every wind,
prayer is Interpres spei as the Fathers term it, and hope is the Anchor of
prayer and if psalm. 145. 18.
this anchor fail, we shall flote up and down, nay we shall receive nothing of
the Lord, Tertullian calls prayer breviarium fidei the abridgement of our
faith. Jac. 1. 7.
Whatsoever we pray for according to Gods promise, we must believe that we
shall receive it. for as one says non frustrain Deo positae sunt spes et
precs, quae Mar. 11. 24.
cum recte fiunt inefficaces esse non possunt, Our hope and prayers are not
placed upon God in vain, which cannot be uneffectual when they are in either
aright. 3. They must be (...). They must be made in the spirit of humility, else
are they no prayers; the Hebrews call such prayers and no prayers. We see the
humble supplication of the Publican was accepted, when the vaunting prayer of
the Pharisee was rejected. God turns himself to the prayer of the poor
destitute. Luc. 18.
Saint Bernard says concerning this and the last qualification, Quando fidelis
et humilis psalm. 102. 17
Dan. 9. 18.
et (...), (...) sine (...) penetrabit, unde certum est, quod (...) Born.
(...), whenever our prayers are faithful, humble, and fervent, we may be
assured they will pierce the heavens, (...) will not return empty. 4. Our
prayer must not be absurd, oration sine ratione, prayer without reason. As
accedere Deum pro pace sine pace: pro remissione peccatorum cum retentione, as
Tertullian says, to come to God for peace without peace, to pray for
forgivennsse, and be far from forgiving ourselves. Our Savior sets us a rule
to pray, forgive us, as we forgive others; how can we say to God forgive me,
and to our brother pay me? who so stops his ears at the cry of the poor, he
shall also cry himself, and shall not be pro. 21. 13.
heard, as the wise man speaks. If there be a receiving there must be a giving.
When you pray (says our Savior) forgive, if ye have ought against Mar. 11. 25.
any, that your father also which is in heaven may forgive you your trespasses.
And thus our prayers shallbe reasonable, otherwise prayer withour charity, is
as they call it, the prayer of Cain, who offered sacrifice to God and murdered
his brother. Judith 7. 30.
5. It must not be the Bethulians prayer. Help must come within five days, or
else farewell prayer. This is contrary to our Saviors rule, who taught men to
Luc. 18. 1.
pray, and not to saint; and to the Apostles, Pray without ceasing. Yet it is
not 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17.
meant, that we should ever be praying, and doing nothing else, as the Euchita
dreamed, ad Probam
or that God is pleased with many words, or battology for non in sermon Epist.
121.
multo sed diuturno offectu, not in many words but with long affection, as
Saint Augustine. Luc. 11.
Nor is it our Saviors meaning in the parable of him that went to his friend
for loaves, that he knocked at the door continually but interpolatim ever and
anon till he was heard; non continua interpellatione, sed interpolatione, our
prayer must be renewed often. for in this frequency and continuance in prayer
there are two extremes to be avoided. Aug. haer. 57.

1. First that which Saint Augustine tells us was in the Euchites, as before,
who never ad quodl. vult deum.
left or discontinued prayer, but neglected all other duties of religion; which
was condemned by the Church as an heresy. 2. The other is that which Isidore
mentions of some, that hold, that men L. I. C. 22.
were only to pray in the night, and to spend the day in other affairs. These
are like our noctna owls that never cry but in the night. The practice of many
among us is like theirs, that pray not but when they are in their beds, if
then; both these must be avoided, and we must walk in the middle way.
There may be a defect also in the manner of praying, when it is not qualified
so as we have above specified. Also our thanks may be in this two ways
defective Numb. 11. 6.


1. when a man has benefits and slighteth them; now our soul is dried away,
we can see nothing but this Manna. It was the Jews fault to murmur
unthankfully. 2 Kin. (...). (...)
2. Or our thanks may be formal cold, and careless, vsu magis quam sensu, of
course, and not from a true sense and feeling: such sacrifice to their own net.
Hab. 1. 16. Naaman received a benefit, and he would be thankful, for when one
talent was asked he would give two.
Now because prayer is the means to obtain all other graces, it cannot properly
be said to have means to obtain it. Yet are there diverse helps to it.

1. There is no greater help or spur to prayer, then the consideration of our
own wants, and imperfections. by taking a view of our souls, and frequent
examining our own hearts, whereby we come to see the evils we are most
inclinable to, and the good things we want. This knowledge and sense of his
own wants made David thirst after God, and power out his soul before him,
Psalm 42. 1. 2. 4. 5. 2. Another help is the remembrance of Gods benefits to
us. King David was so well versed in this duty that there is not a benefit he
received, or that we may, but that there is a Psalm for it psalm. 40. 3. He had
still canticum novum for beneficium novum, when he wants any singular benefit,
then he reckons up the lesser, which Saint Augustine calls, colligere
fragmenta, the gathering up the fragments, and these he made great account of,
and as the woman of Canaan was thankful for the crumbs, Mat. 15. 27. so was he
for the least mercies: when he had no new benefits then he takes up old
benefits and makes of them a new song, as Psalm. 38. and 70 and rather then
faith remembers to God and gives thanks for his wonderful forming in his
mothers womb Psalm. 139. and sometimes enlarges himself to those benefits that
are common to all the world, as psalm. 8. 19. 104. yea to the very wild asses
quenching their thirst in the wilderness 3. Another is fasting and alms, which
the Fathers call the wings of prayer. S. Augustine says, Jejunium orationis
robur, oration vis jejunii, fasting is the strength Ep. 121.
of prayer, and prayer the like of fasting. And jejunia and elemosynae
orationem juvant, 1 Cor. 7. 5.
fasting and alms are assistants to prayer. These both are the wings that
prayer mounts Dan. 4. 24.
up by. Illud hanc corroborat, haec illud sanctificat, as fasting strengthens
our prayers, and prayer sanctifies our fast, so alms. 4. If our own prayers be
weak, then are we to desire the prayers of the Church, according to S. James's
direction. Si oration tua fulmen sit (says one) ascendat ad coelum James 5. 15
sola per se: otherwise esto gutta in nube grandinis, if thy prayer be fervent,
or as a thunderbolt, it may ascend to heaven by it self, but if it be as a drop
in a cloud, it will need the help of others. 5. If none of all these help, yet
there is oration fidei, as well as oration sensus, though I cannot have the
prayer of feeling, yet I may have the prayer of hope. For spiritual duties are
likened to seed, of which harvest comes not presently, but lie in the (...) of
the earth till the time that the Lord fructify.
The signs of praying aright, or that our prayers are rightly qualified, and
like to prevail, are diverse.

1. Earnestness of the soul, when that sends out sighs and groans
unutterable, Romans 8. 26.
gemitibus non sermonibus, constat hoc negotium, this business consists not in
words but groans. 2. The second sign is, if a man have a taste of Gods mercy
in the remission of his sins. The Prophet David being before cast down,
presently says, Verily God has psalm 66. 19.
heard me, he has attended to the voice of my prayer. S. Augustine asks how
David knew this, and answers himself, habuit gustum aliquem divinorum, he had
some taste that God had forgiven him his sins. 3. The third is, when a man
continues in a patient waiting of Gods leisure, as King David did. (...) till
God came to him he would walk in a perfect heart, and take no wicked thing in
hand, O when will thou come unto me, says he, I will walk psalm. 101. 2, 3.
within my house with a perfect heart.
1. The signs of true thankfulness likewise are diverse. The first is, when a
man feels himself filled with marrow and fatness, as rapt with consideration
of Gods 63. 6.
favors and benefits. 2. When a man is jealous of his own ingratitude, that
after his cleansing he wallow no more in sin, and lest he make himself
incapable of Gods hearing his prayer for any more mercies. 66. 16.
3. When beneficia become veneficia, when his benefits charm us, and make us
58. 5.
withstand strong temptations; as Joseph did: though his Mistress tempted him
very Genesis 3. 9.
strongly, yet he answered her, My Master has done this and this for me, how
can I then do this great wickedness, and sin against God? This is a great
sign, that a man is truly thankful unto God, that when God has bestowed his
benefits upon him, he is the more careful thereby not to break his law. 4. The
last sign is, when we defer not our thanks. A type of this was in the law. The
Levit. 7. 15.
sacrifice of thanksgiving was to be eaten the same day, not kept longer. No
procrastination of thanks. Nihil citius senescit gratia, nothing grows old
sooner then thanks.
Now concerning the sixth rule, as in the former, we are to procure this duty
to be Rule 6.
performed by others.

1. Saul, when he should have betaken himself to prayer, thought the enemies 1 Samuel 14. 19
came too fast, and not only laid away the ephod himself, but willed the
Priest to withdraw his hand; it is noted by the holy Ghost to Saul's infamy.
Therefore as we are to avoid all impediments to our selves, so are we not to
discourage others with them in Job. Who is the Almighty that we should serve
him, and what profit should we have Job 21. 15.
if we pray to him? One of the Fathers makes this answer, Beneficium
projicitur ingrato, collocatur grato, a good turn is cast away upon an
unthankful man, but bestowed Luke 7. 35.
upon a thankful person. He is kind unto the unthankful and evil. 2. And as we
must not hinder others, so for the affirmative part, the invitation, we have
David's, and it is in the beginning of our Liturgy, O come let us sing psalm
95. 1. 34. 3.
unto the Lord. O come let us worship and fall down. And, O praise the Lord
with me, and let us magnify his name together. But especially in the hundred
148.
forty eighth Psalm, he is not contented only to the company of men in this
duty, but dragons, snow, fire, and all creatures, not that they could praise
the Lord, but that there is not the basest creature of them all that had not
cause enough to praise the Lord if they could. And thus much for prayer.
CHAP. XII.
The seventh virtue required is, Love of God. That God is to be loved. Of
mercenary and free Love. The excellency of Love. The measure of Love. The
opposites to the Love of God. 1. Love of the world. 2 Self-love. 3 Stupidity.
4. Loathing of God. All the motives of Love are eminently in God. 1. Beauty. 2.
Propinquity. 3. Benefits bestowed. Six signs of Love. Of drawing others to
Love God.

THe next duty is Love. The same which the Apostle says of the Law to have
been occupare amorem, to have love in us drowneth all other affections. For we
have fear first, and being delivered from that we feared, we love, and being
heard in what we hope and pray for, we love God, and say with the Prophet,
dilexi quia audivit, etc. I love the Lord, because he has heard my voice.
psalm 116. 1.
There is a coherence between love and prayer. We have formerly said that to
enjoy and have a thing, we are first to know it, and the knowledge of it breeds
in us a true estimate of it, and the estimate of a thing makes us love it, so
habere Deum, est scire to possess God is to know him, and this knowledge
breeds a true estimate of God, whereupon we love him; for according to our
estimation our love is more or less to that we have.

These affections of fear and hope are for this end, that when God has
bestowed on us the things we either fear to lose or hope to enjoy, we may the
better esteem of them. For as cito data vilescunt, we slight those things
which are easily got, when we can but ask and have; so the things we have felt
the want of so long, and for which we have been humbled, when they come, we
will the better regard them, and love him the better for them.

The object of love is bonum, in which the very natural reason of man has
found two properties: viz. that it is 1. Communicative. 2. Attractive.

1. Every good is desirous to communicate it self to as many as are willing and
meet to partake of it. As we see in the Sun and other celestial bodies in the
natural elements; so there is in God a quality of desiring to communicate his
goodness: and indeed it was the cause why he created all things, to have a
church, and to show his glory and mercy on it. So that the mind of man seeing
this nature in God, consequently has a desire to it, and that desire goes so
far, till it come to a conjunction, and that to an union, ita conjungi (...)
uniantur; because by the union of two good things there will come good to the
desirer, which he had not before, and whereby he is made better. 2. Secondly,
it has vim attractivam. It has been said, that if inferior things be coupled
and united with things of more excellent nature, they are thereby made more
noble. As a potsheard being covered with gold. As on the other side, things
which are excellent being joined with viler, are made more abject: as the mind
of man with inferior creatures. And there can be nothing which can make the
mind more transcendent, then the conjunction of it with that which in it self
is all good, and contains all good things, and that for ever, and from hence
arises this attractive property and force: for in every good there is that
force, which allureth. And therefore to show us this good, it is nececessary
that faith and knowledge precede. Bonum non amatur (as the Schoolmen say) quod
non cognoscitur, the good that is not known, cannot be loved. For if it were
known (it being the natural desire of all to be better) we should love it, to
be the better by it. It is therefore well said, That good things have no
greater enemy then ignorance. Knowledge and faith then (as is said) showing us
this good, love will be stirred up in us, and then follows unio affectus the
union of the affection, all that we can have here; and in the life to come,
instead of this fruition by faith, fruition by clear vision.
There are two sorts of love. 1. Amor mercenarius, a mercenary love. 2. Amor
gratuitus, a free love.

They are distinguished thus: when a man loves his meat and drink, and when he
loves his friend or brother; it is certain these loves are not all one: in the
one there is a desire to have the thing loved, that he may make use of it for
his own benefit, for the present, not caring what becomes of it after; but his
love to his friend, is to do him good, for himself, or for his own sake; and it
includes in it been velle, and been facere, to wish him good, and to do him
good: in the former a man looks at himself, and his own good only, in the
other at his good whom he loves; the first is, amor concupiscentiae, the other
amor amicitiae. The Philosopher distinguishes them by Vnde, and Quo, whence and
whither. In the first love the question is made by Quo, in the other by Vnde.
In the first we ask, what good comes to us by it: in the other, what good it
has in it self, though it be no benefit to us. The one has an eye that looks
inward on our selves, the other outward upon others. Yet these two though they
may be distinguished, yet are not always divided: for the one oft-times is the
beginning of the other, both in our loves to God and man; for those that have
been beneficial to us, though we love them at first for the benefits we receive
by them, yet afterward we come to love them for themselves.

1. The first arises from hope. Because a man being cast down by fear,
conceives hope upon Gods promises, then sending forth prayer receives fruit,
and says, psalm 28. (...). 21.
Praised be the Lord, for he has heard the voice of my humble petition. And
thou have given me my hearts desire: which fruit stirs up the first love,
and this amor concupiscentiae, the love of concupiscence, which goes before
(...) gratuitum, free love; for as the Apostle says, that is not first which
is spiritual, but that which is natural, or carnal; and then that which is
spiritual: so free love of God for himself is not first, but first we love him
for his benefits, and then for himself, and this is true love. Therefore it is
said that (...) virtues, of clemency, affability, liberality, etc. were greater
then Cato's, of justice and fidelity in his dealings; because the former looked
at the good of others, these reflected upon himself, and his own good. That
which is natural will be first, (...) before amicitia, or benevolentia, and
this is the inchoation of the other. Perfect love is not attained at first; for
nemo repent fit summus; now S. Chrysostom wondreth how men can slip
themselves out of this love: for if they will love any for his benefits, none
bids fairer for this amor mercenarius then God; for he offers for it the
kingdom of heaven. The Fathers compare fear to the wilderness, and these two
degrees of love to the land of promise; this mercenary love to that part of it,
which lay beyond Jordan, and the other to that part upon which Sion and
Jerusalem stood. For amor gratuitus which looks not at reward, Saint Bernard
says, that Deus nunquam sine praemio diligitur, our love to God is never
unrewarded, though sine intuitu praemii diligendus est, he ought to be loved
without looking at the reward. The Apostle respected his own commodity so
little, that he wished himself accursed, that the glory of God might shine in
the salvation Romans 9. 3.
of Israel. It is lawful to love God for his benefits, for God uses them as
motives to stir us up to love him, and the best of Gods servants have so
practiced: Moses looked at the recompense. Hebrews 11. but we must not rest
there, nor love him only or chiefly for them, but for himself; otherwise we
love not him but our selves: ratio diligendi est Deus ipse, modus sine modo,
the cause of our love must be God himself, and the measure without measure,
says S. Bernard.

Some divide love into Quoniam, and Tametsi, Because, and Although.

1. The first is that which is called mercenarius. I love the Lord, says the
Psalmist, and why? He is my defense. Psalm 18. 1. And in another place, Because
he heard my voice: yet seeing David did not love God only or chiefly for his
benefits, his love was not properly mercenary, but true, though not perfect.

To show the excellency of love, S. Paul has a whole chapter, wherein he
prefers 1 Cor. 13.
it above all other virtues: and says in effect. If a man for his knowledge
and elocution might be compared with Angels, and by his faith were able to
remove mountains, and by his liberality had relieved the poor with all his
estate, and for his constancy had suffered martyrdom, yet were all these
virtues little worth, except they were joined with the love of God. And in the
end of the Chapter after Ver. 13.
this general commendation of love, he prefers it in particular above Faith and
Hope.

1. If we take the dimension of it, it is greatest both in breadth and length
of all other. For whereas Faith and Hope, are restrained within the bounds of
men's persons and to singulars, this dilateth it self and extends both to God
and man in Lib. confess.
general, to our selves, our friends, yea to our enemies. S. Augustine says,
Beatus qui amat te, and amicum in te, and inimicum propter te, blessed is he
that loves thee, and his friend in thee, and his enemy for thee. And this is
the latitude.

2. In longitude also. For whereas the other are but in us in the nature of a
lease, but for term of life, the gift of love shall be as a free hold, and
continue for ever Matthew. 22. 40.
in heaven. Our Savior makes both the Law and Prophets to consist of one
Commandment, namely Love. And the Apostle reduces all to one head, and if
there were any other Commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this of love.
And it is our Saviors mandatum novum; admit that all the old Commandments were
cancelcelled, Romans 13. 9.
yet this new commandment ties us to the duties of all. And indeed S. John John
13. 34.
says, (commending this duty,) Brethren I write no new commandment unto you,
but an old Commandment; for both the old and new are all one. There is both in
the 1 John. 2. 7.
old and the new a Diliges, thou shall love.

But that which is beyond all these, and imposes a necessity upon us to
observe it is, that whereasnone of the other virtues are mutual or reciprocal,
nor indeed are properly said to be in God at all, as faith, hope, etc. this is:
here is (...): if he reprove us, we must not reprove him; if he promise and
threaten, we cannot promise or threaten again; but if God love us, we must love
him again. S. Gregory says, Magnum est vinculum charitatis, quo and ipse Deus
se ligari voluit, the bond of love is great, with which even God himself was
content to be bound. And S. Bernard says of it, that solus triumphat de Deo,
it only triumphs over God; and adds, Nescis quid majus dici debeat in laudem
tuam, O charitas, deduxit Deum de Coelo, hominem invexit in Coelum, hominem Deo
reconciliasti, and Deum homini placasti, thou know not, O love, what may be
more said in thy praise; it brought God from heaven, and carried man thither;
thou did reconcile man to God, and pacifiedst God with man. And therefore as
on the one side we are to consider how willing God is that his affection should
grow in us, so are we to weigh what God on his part has done to stir us up to
it. The heathen could say, magnes amoris amor, the Loadstone of love is love;
nothing is more effectual to attract love then love. And in that God has not
failed on his part. S. Bernard expresses to Lib. de dilig. Deum.
the full, in these six points. Quod prior dilexit nos, tantus, tantillos,
tales, tantum, gratis; that he loved us first, being so great, we so little,
such kind of creatures, so much, and without any respect to himself.

1. Prior. S. John proves this point. Herein is love, not that we loved him,
but that 1 John 4. 10.
he loved us. It was not our love first to him that caused him to send his Son
to be a propitiation for our sins, but his first to us. S. Augustine says,
Nulla major est ad amorem (...), quam praevenire amando, and nimis durus est
animus, qui se (...) De (...).
nolebat impendere, nolit rependere, there is no greater alluring to love, then
to anticipate by loving, and that heart is too hard which will not requite,
though not love first. 2. Tantus. Of Gods tantus we may rest our selves upon S.
Augustine, and go no further. Tantus ut non liceat conari exprimere quantus, so
great that it is not lawful to endeavor to express his greatness: it
transcends all the learning and wit of man to express his greatness; and yet
he condiscends so low as to love us. 3. Tantillos. Worms and no men. This we
see in Job, and in the Prophet David; Job. 25. 6.
and being but worms he loved us: Nay further, as the Apostle speaks, cum
nondum psalm 22. 6.
essemus, being not yet born; we cannot be less then not to be at all, and
yet, even then Romans 9. 11.
he loved us, when we were not. 4. Tales. when we had estranged cur selves from
him and served his enemies Romans 5. 10.
then he loved us; nay when we were our selves his enemies. 5. Tantum. Saint
Chrysostame upon that of Saint John, [God so loved the world] John 3. 16.
In comparison of Gods love with others, all adverbs may be left out, no sicut
to this Ephesians. 2. 4.
sic, The Apostle may well call it great love. He spared not his own Son but
delivered Romans 8. 32.
him up for us all. This for Gods tantum.
2. God the Son has his tantum too. For our sakes he left heaven, the Society
of God the Father, Angels and Saints, and endured upon earth. 1. Infamy. 2.
Poverty, 3. Sickness. 4. Enmity. 5. death. The Philosophers (...) five fearful
things.

1. He had ignominy and reproach; and that not only while he lived, as the Mat.
12. 24. 27. 63.
Pharisees slandered him to deal in sorcery, to cast out Devils in the Devils
name, but when he was dead too. The same Pharisees told Pilate Esa. 53. 3.
that he was an impostor and deceiver: He was despised, says the Prophet. 2.
For the want of necessaries you may take his own word, that he was in worse
case then souls and beasts. Foxes have holes, and birds of the air have nests;
but the Luc. 9. 58.
Son of man has not where to lay his head. 3. For his infirmities. The Prophet
Esaias describes them at large long before his suffering them. He was wounded for
us, and by his stripes we are healed, etc. 4. He was hated above all others, as
we may read in the whole story of Esa. 53. 4. 5.
his life. Though he did much good and many miracles among them, yet John 5. 18.
they so persecuted him, that ost times they were ready to stone him, and never
left him till they brought him to the last part of the five, which he suffered
upon earth. 5. And that was death. This also he suffered for love of us. And
greater love 15. 13.
then this has no man, then to lay down his life for his friend; yet Christ
suffered a shameful death for us, that hated him, and were his enemies; and as
the Apostle says, hereby (if all other signs of his love move us not)
perceive we 1 John 3. 16.
his love, because he laid down his life for us. And in this particular is that
in the Canticles confirmed, love is as strong as death: such love is perfect
Cant. 8. 6.
love.
3. The holy Ghost is not without his Tantum. For after the Passion of our
Savior, when Christ was ascended, he vouchsafed to come and dwell among us,
and among other his graces to shed his love abroad in our hearts, and to make
his Romans 5. 5.
residence with us to the worlds end.

And here we may judge between God and our selves, God may refer it to us,
whether he has left any thing undone, that he might have done, to testify his
love Esa. 5. 3. 4.
to us.

6. Gratis, he loved us without expectancy of any reward from us; we have
nothing that can better him, nothing at all. Our goods (or ought else) are
nothing to him. The Prophet demands, what reward shall I give unto the Lord?
nothing psalm. 16. 1.
but love for love. Saint Bernard upon that Psalm is of the same opinion, non
est melius 116. 11.
nec decentius, quam per dilectionem rependere quodper dilectionem datum est,
there is no better or more decent thing then to repay that which is given
lovingly, by love. For as S. Augustine says, Quid est home, quod amaxi vis ab
(...), et si non amet te, minavis ingentem poenam? Annon panasatis magna est
non amare te, what is man, that thou desire to be loved by him, and that thou
should threaten to punish' him for not loving thee? Is it not punishment
enough not to love thee. There needs no punishment to sorce us to love our meat
and drink, and other natural things, and yet we see that to bring us to the
love of that which is supernatural we need threats and rewards; so resractory
is our nature.

And now we come to that which is commanded (by the first rule) which is love;
whether it be 1., amore naturali, the natural affection, which is from God, and
consequently is by nature due to God: for to love him a quo potentiam habemus
amandi, is but equitable. Whether it be 2. amore delectus, with a love of
election; for when we have summed up all the objects in the world together, we
shall find nothing to be beloved so much as God. Or whether it be 3. amore
infuso, he it is that has shed this love into our hearts, and it is fit, that
he which Romans 5. 5.
has scattered, should gather that which he has scattered. The wicked servant
can Math. 25. 24.
tell us so much.

Now this love and the measure thereof, as it proceeds freely, is branched
into, 1. Desiderium, 2. Gaudium 3. Zelus, desire, and joy, and Zeal. 1. A
desire of God, while we feel not the assurance of his spirit in us; and then we
complain with the Prophet, like as the heart desires the waterbrooks, so
longs my soul etc. 2. psalm. 42. 1.
The other of joy remains, when this desire is fulfilled; cum (...)
desiderium, posuit gaudium, this desire wrought in our hearts by the holy Ghost
produces those fruits mentioned Galat. 5. 22. Joy, peace etc. And when our
desire is hindered that it cannot be obtained, then comes 3. Zeal. Jra est
vindex laesi (...), anger is the revenger of desire not satisfied: and this is
called sacra (...), an holy boiling of grief and anger incensed against all
impediments: and it is one of the signs of love, for quinon Zelat, non amat,
he that is not zealous loves not. He that can discern the impediments to Gods
glory, and not be desirous and earnest to remove them, has no love in him.

The measure of this love must extend to this height, as to be ready to hate
parents, those that depend upon us, yea our own souls, if they could come in
competition with it, as Saint Luke has it; but Saint Matthew in more gentle
Luc. 14. 29.
terms, he that loves father or mother, son or daughter more then God is not
Mat. 10. 37.
worthy of him, that is, when their commands contradict Gods, they must reject
them.

The law says, that we must love the Lord with all our heart, with all our
mind, Deuteronomy. 11. 13.
with all our strength, and with all our soul. As the heart is said improperly
to believe, so is the mind said no less improperly to love; yet here love is
ascribed to all parts and faculties, which must all concur to the love of God,
either directly or by consequence, either per actum olicitum or imperatum, as
the Schools speak. Saint Bernard has this meditation Quia fecisti me, ideo me
tibi debeo, (...) cum renovasti, quantum? Dicto me fecisti, sed renovasti me
multis dictis, factis, passis. The remaking cost more then the making; and with
this second making came the gift of God himself. Nisi dedisset se (says the
same father) non reddidisset te. Si me solum mihi reddidisset, potui me illi
denuo: at cumse mihi, quid illi reddam? If he had given me to my self, I could
have given my self to him again, but giving himself to me, if I would give my
self to him a thousand times, it were not sufficient recompense for such a
gift. Yet this is to our comfort which he adds. Etiam si non possum amare
ultra quod possum, si possim velim: et si minus reddo, quia minor sum, quia
tamen tota anima diligit, (...) deest ubi totum est, Although I could not love
beyond my ability, yet if I could I would: and if I render less because I am
less, yet because I love with all my soul, I want nothing, which is all that
God requires, and we must labor to attain to.

Now for the negative part.

1. The first thing forbiden is Dilectie inordinata (...) as Saint Basil
calls it, a disordered love. whereas God should stand highest in our love,
and ought to have the first place, and nothing should be loved extra Deum, and
yet we love phil. 3. 19.
other things more then God, or not with subordination to God, then our love is
out of order. It has been said, that not only the committing of evil, but
desertio meliorum, the leaving of that which is best, is sin; so is it in the
love of God, if we leave the better, and make choice of the worse, it is sin,
whether it be to make our belly our god, or earthly things, or to bestow the
honor due to God upon our selves; primatum gerere, to usurp a primacie above
God: in these cases our love is out of order. For pro deo colitur quicquid
praecaeteris (...), (...) amor meus Deus meus, whatsoever is loved above other
things is worshipped as God; for what we love best, that is our God. Every man
has something that he preferres before all other, and that is indeed his Idol
rather then his God.

This exorbitant and irregular love is of two sorts. Amor mundi, or Amor sui,
love of the world, and love of a man's self.

1. For the love of the world. S. Augustine says Si possimus homines excitare,
et cum (...) pariter excitari, ut possemus esse amatores vitae permanentis,
quales quotidie videmus vitae fugientis, his wish is, that we were as forward
to love the world to come, as we are to affect this present transitory world.
The Philosophers say, that the soul of man is placed in loco medio inter Deume
(...) creatur as, has a middle place between God and the creatures. And that
which stands in the midst of two things cannot move to both but motibus
contrariis by contrary motions. Certainly this is the case of the soul, it
stands so in regard of God and the world, and cannot move to both but by
contrary motions. Now because through the corruption of original sin the soul
is a based, it apprehends worldly things best because they are near et illis
nos ingurgitamiss. we fill our selves so with them, that we have no taste of
heavenly things; according to that of the wiseman Anima saturata calcabit
(...), the full fed despises the honey comb. And therefore to correct this
humor, prove. 27. 7,
we must jejunare fast, and weane our selves from the world: for if we glut and
cram our souls with worldly pleasures, we can have no taste of God and so come
to despise or neglect him. 2. Besides this there is amor sui, self love; and
this is harder to repress then the other; and it is that wherewith men are
wilfully infected, and till a great measure of the spirit poslesse their hearts
they will not be able to rid themselves of it. and therefore it is that Prosper
says, Amantes donantur sibi, these men that over love themselves are given up
to themselves, so that thy loosethe love of God. And this humor has two
degrees 1. when we think better of our selves then we are, and so love our
selves better then we should. 2. when we prefer our selves in our love before
God. The first is a degree to the second; for when man have tasted worldly
things, though base, then nothing will have any relish with them but those and
so many come to say of God with him in Plautus, Malo me ista mulier plus amet
quam (...), so brutish are many in their hearts, and in their doings proclaim
it, that they had rather have the favor of this man or woman. then of God.
Saint (...) defines this to be inordinatum (...) motum quo aliquis excellentiam
propriam admiratur, This is a disordered motion of the mind, whereby a man
admires his own excellency.
2. The second thing here forbidden, is that which is apposed to zeal,
commonly called stupor, stupidity, when we account of all things alike, as if
there were no difference between good and ill, God and Baal, and we can be
content to tolerate both Saint Augustine says that this stupor is pejus
omnibus vitiis, the worst of all sin: this God punishes with other grievous
sins; for it is an especial prejudice to the love of God.

3. The third is that which the Fathers call nauseam spiritus, which we may
call a loathing of God, when the thought of God is a burden to them. The case
of such men is desperate, and it is the very extremity of evil, to which men
may come in this life, and though it be more rare, yet it is found in some.

Now all these negatives and affirmatives may be thus examined and known, by
the contempt or approbation of Gods laws; not of God himsely, for every man
will say, he loves God with all his heart, but of his laws. For the case is
alike as between an earthly Prince and us, so between God and us. (...) diligit
Regem, diligit legem, he that loves the King, loves his law: and so Qui diligit
Deum, diligit verbum, He that loves God loves his word. And this was King
David's touchstone. O how do I love thy Law, says David, and I have therefore
loved thy commandments, psalm. 119. (...).
for they are the very joy of my heart:

We will add something concerning the means, and they are three. 1. Pulcbrum.
2. (...). 3. vtile, beauty, neernesse, and profit or benefit. Men are moved to
love by these or some of these inducements, and all these are eminently in God.

1. Beauty. There is (...). a visible, and 2. an invisible beauty. The visible
is that which attracteth our eyes: one of the Heathen calls it radium (...) the
beam of divine essence; and another florem divini seminis, the flower of the
divine seed.

This beauty is not that which ought to move us much; it quickly fades: one of
the Heathen said Da mihi solemn (...), the summers sun will parch it; Da mihi
ventum vernum, the march wind will spoil it; or Duc unguem trausversum (...)
but with thy nail, and it is marred. But the beauty of God (if a man had a
glorified ye to see it) passes all these. The prophet says, that he saw the
likeness of God psalm. 16. 11.
put in a vision, and it filled him.

2. The invisible Beauty Saint Augustine tells us how to find. It may be
(says he) that thou love a man because he is thy friend, may it not be also
that he is an old man? And what love thou then in him? His head is white, his
body crooked, and his face wrinkled: but thou will say, fidelis homo est, he is
a faithful man; well, says he, quibus oculis videtur? fidei. iisdem videtur
Deus: with what eyes is that seen? of faith. Why with the same God is seen. God
is seen with the eyes of faith by nothing more. And in God we have perfect
rest; but set thine eye or heart upon any other countenance, or on any earthly
pleasure, thou shall find no rest in it; but quicquid est quo (...)
occurritur, whatsoever meets with wearines, the same thing in s tigationem
vertitur, turns to weariness; it wearieth us, if we fix our eyes but a while
upon it.

2. Fropinquity or neern sse. Name any name of neernes (not that of Dominus and
servus excepted) and there this love is: and that is a great privilege of
ours, Rev. 19. 10.
that the Angels are not our Lords, but fellow servants.

2. But the name of friend is of greater propinquity. Our Savior says, I call
you John. 15. 15.
not servants but friends; and such a friend as (notwithstanding his glorious
estate) made him not think scorn to be our friend, and in the pinch of our
adversity did most of all show his love to us. (...). The name of brother is
yet nearer: yet we see he vouchsafed to call us so. Go tell my brethren etc.
And whereas naturally John 20. 17.
if there be many brethren, it qualifieth the affection of Parents, as Jacob
loved Joseph more then all his children; here it is otherwise. Besides,
brethren according Genesis 37. 3.
to the flesh are a means, that the inheritance continues not whole. But this
brother is so far from withholding any of the inheritance from us as that
having two rights, he was content to part with one to entitle us with the same.
3. Besides this he is our father, Deuteronomy. 32. 6. and not as a father after the
flesh, that begets Luc. 12. 13
them harly to a benefit, it may be to a curse. 4. He is an husband, married to
us. Cant. a jealous God. 5. But yet further, there is one propinquity more; he
was not near enough, when the Apostle said, It behoved him in all things to be
like us; but Heb. 12. 17. 16.
he took upon him our nature, the seed of Abraham: and that is to be like us
indeed in all things, sin only excepted, which made us unlike to him; that
there might be perfectus a mor, ubi perfect a similitudo, a perfect love where
there is a perfect likeness.

3. The last motive is benefit. Set up a Crib and put provender in it, and the
Ox Esa. 1. 31.
and the Ass will know you for it; so it is in the case of benefit between man
and man: they that have more given or forgiven them are apt to love more. Love
increases and decreaseth according to benefits received. And this the Heathen
man could confess to be but justice, Hoc certe justitiae convenit, suam cuique
reddere benificio gratiam, certainly this is consonant to justice, to render
thanks for every ones benefit. Now what benefits does God confer, that we are
facti et refecti made and renewed, is from his goodness; our own tables will
instruct us how bountiful Luc. 7. 47.
he is in serving up the creatures for our use; so promotion; riches honor,
they come not from men, but from God: Ipse est qui inclinavit corda eorum,
whatsoever benefit we receive from men, we are accountable to God for all. If
then we are to love for every benefit, then are we not tied to love him, that
dedit filium, gave his Son for a price, et spiritum, and his spirit for a
pledge, et servat se tantum in praemium, and reserved himself only for a crown
or reward of the love we shall afford him. If we know not his crio, let the Ox
and the Ass reach us.

Now the proper signs of love are patience and obedience, which are also the
proper effects of love, of which we shall speak afterward. Others handle them
more particularly, and distinguish them by six several signs.

1. The first is, if the heart be well affected toward God by often thinking
of him for our Savior tells us where our treasure is (or that which we love)
there will be our hearts also. By our hearts our love will be known; and by the
thoughts of our heart Mat. 6. 21.
we may know what we love, what we think of most. We have an example of this in
Saint Mark. Our Savior taught his disciples to beware of the leaven of the
Pharisees; now because their thoughts ran upon bread which they had forgotten
Mar 8. 14.
to take into the ship, they conceived that Christ warned them from bread: for
if a man's mind be set upon any thing above other, he thinks that is meant,
when ought is spoken that may be taken that way. So then it is a sign of our
love to God, when we think upon him.

Thoughts are of three sorts: 1. A deep thought. 2. A long thought. 3. A
thought often repeated. Cogitatio profunda, continuata, crebra.

1. Profunda cogitatio. This deep thought was especially in those saints of
God, when it was so deep, that in recounting the mercies of God, (the matter of
their love) they seemed to be in an ecstasy. 2. Continuata cogitatio. As in
secular matters, old age is continually thinking upon Ezekiel. 33. 31.
wealth, youth upon pastime, and the like: so if our thoughts be continued upon
God, though they be not deep, yet they are a good sign of love. 3. When a man
has neither long nor deep thoughts, yet if his thoughts be crebrae, often
though they be not extaticall nor continual, but with some intermission; they
signify that the love of God has taken root in us.
2. A second sign is, if we esteem well of the pledges of that party to whom
we seem to bear affection, if we account of those earnests which he has left
us, as King David; I love thy Law. When a man loves the very pledges that he
leaves; psalm 119. 97
as the Word, Sacraments, and prayer: as it is on the contrary an ill token to
neglect them. It was accounted a great pledge of Gods favor to have
primo-genituram; and Heb. 12. 16.
Esau is called by the Apostle a profane person, or one that loved not God, for
setting Genesis 25. 30.
his love so upon his brothers pottage, to love his belly so much as to neglect
the pledge of birthright and sell it.

3. When we earnestly desire the presence of him we love; for, as the Heathen
said, ubi amor, ibi oculus, where the heart is, there will the eye be, and if
we cannot see the party, yet if we have his picture, our eye will not be of it.
Now because we walk here by faith, and not by sight, it is a sign of our love
to God to desire his presence, and to behold him in his Ordinances, the Word
and Sacraments, to behold his picture, as in all the creatures so especially in
his servants, in whom his image is renewed. David's delight was in those that
excelled in virtue.

4. Where there is love, we will readily forgo what is dear to us, to enjoy
what we desire. Thus Esau did part with his right of primogeniture, the best
thing he had, the pledge of Gods favor, for Jacobs pottage, Genesis 25. 30. so
well did he love his belly. If we then can accept of any condition be it never
so hard, which may set or keep us in Gods favor, it is a good sign we love
him.

5. The fifth sign (as the former) falls into desiderium, which is a grief for
Gods absence from us: for the desire of that we love not being accomplished
turns to grief, and makes us break out into passion with the Prophet, When
shall I come to psalm 42. 2.
appear before the presence of God? Saint Gregory says, it is inauditus amor,
a love unheard of, for a man to love one, and not to desire his company. So
that he which desires to live here and not to be dissolved (with the Apostle)
has phil. 2. 23.
no love. These are signs of that part of love which is called desiderium,
desire, now follow the signs of that part of love which is, gaudium, joy.

1. The first is alacritas cheerfulness, in doing or suffering for the party
we love, an especial sign of love; when a man has gladness in his heart, no
less joy for Gal. 5. 22.
increase of spiritual things, then the worldly man has of a good harvest.
psalm 4. 8.
When Jacob had served Laban seven years for Rachel, they seemed but a few
days, Genesis 29. (...)
for the love he had to her. If we can do thus in the service of God, it is a
sign we love him. But if a man count Gods service a burden, and be weary of
it, thinking one hour three which is spent in it, surely he has no joy nor
delight in God, and by consequence no love.

2. When the affection of love is truly settled; the Philosopher says, Quod
cupis habere, times perdere, cuicunque cupis conjungi, ab eo times separari,
thou art afraid to lose that thou desire to have, and art afraid to be
severed from him that thou desire to be joined with.

Now if a man's heart bear him witness, that he is fearful of sin as that which
may separate him from God, it is a good sign of love. On the other side, when
with Pilate we have a good mind to save Christ, but fearing the disfavour of
Caesar for so doing, he did it not, it is a sign of his want of true love to
Christ. Timor occupat omnes affectiones, fear runs through all the affections;
Pilates fear of offendig Caesar, showed he loved his favor before Christ's; for
all the affections Acts 19. 27.
discover love. Demetrius the Silver-smith was afraid, that the craft he loved,
for the benefit he reaped by it, should be put down, he raised a sedition, and
so preferred his gain before the safety of the state, thereby discovering what
he loved best.

3. It is much you would think that grief should be another sign of joy; but
so it is in the case of Gods love, as fear of loosing his favor, so grief when
we have lost the sense of it. If we be grieved when we perceive sensibly a
defect of our former comfort and vigor of spirit in the love of God, it is a
sign that we loved him. The young man in the Gospel, Luke 18. 23. was grieved
to part with his possessions for Christ, which showed that he loved them before
Christ, though he professed to love Christ.

4 The next sign is a care and anxiety to recover it when we have lost it; not
to give sleep to our eyes, nor slumber to our eyelids, nor the temples of our
heads to Psalm 132. 4.
take any rest, until we be in statu quo: so did the spouse in the Canticles;
the like care is in worldly men to obtain what they love, as in Balaam, Numbers
23. who loved the wages of unrighteousness, though God bid him not go, and
himself said, verse 19. that God is not as man that he should repent, yet he
would go and try again, whether God would let him curse Israel; so careful was
he to get a reward.

5. Again, when a man resolves, though all the world forsake God, yet he will
Psalm. 119. 126, 127.
adhere to him, his liking is constant, goes not with other men's. The Psalmist
says, and complains that men forsake Gods law, (but what follows)
Therefore I love thy commandments above gold and silver; whatsoever other men
esteemed of it, yet his love was constant and firm.

6. If we can love him cum cruce. If our love be true, water cannot quench it.
True Cant. 8. 7.
love will abide trial, the fire cannot consume it. It is not like false love,
of which the Heathen man said, Falsus amor inde fugit, unde probatur, false
love flies from 1 Cor. 13. 4.
trial. But the other will endure the loss of all. Love suffers long, says
the Apostle, even to death. And as our Savior says, Greater love then this
John 15. 13.
has no man.

And now a little for the sixth rule, as in the former. As we must love God our
selves, so must we also be desirous to draw others to this love; and in this
there is a difference between amor mercenarius and gratuitus: for in the first
a man is loath that another should love that he loves, lest he be restrained in
his liberty of enjoying; and hence proceeds jealousy; but in the other, we
wish not our own good only, but the good of him we love. In the one, quo quis
vult bonum suum, whereby a man seeks his own good, the fewer that partake, the
better he thinks it is; but in the other, quo quis vult bonum alterius, whereby
he seeks the good of another, the more that partake, the better it is: for Deus
omnibus communis, cuique totus, God, who is common to all, is wholly possessed
of every one. Therefore the Prophet was psalm 31. 23. 139. 21. 94. 16.
of this mind, and was desirous to draw all to the love of God: and on the
other side, his zeal was so great, that he hated all them that hated God, and
that with a perfect hatred: and in another place, who will rise with me against
the wicked, or who will take my part against the evil doers? This argued the
perfection of his love to God, as he would rise against them himself, so he
labored that others would join with him.

CHAP. XIII.
The proper effects of love. 1. Obedience. 2. Patience. How obedience arises
from the love of God. It brings glory to God two ways. Is better then
sacrifice in four respects. Reasons why we should obaudire Deo. There be three
speakers. 1. God, who speaks, 1. by his word, 2. by his works. 2. The world. 3.
Our selves. These do obloqui gainsay what God says. The measure and quality of
Obedience. Of Disobedience, that it is a great sin. The degrees of it. 1.
Neglect. 2. Contempt. Motives to obedience. Signs of obedience.

Of Obedience.
THe two principal signs and proper effects of love, are (as we said before)
Obedience, and Patience.

There is a saying of S. Gregory, Probatio dilectionis, exhibitio operis, we
show our elicere motum, produce some action. As if a man be given to love wine,
his love kindles a desire in him to have it, and desire does elicere motum,
that he may work and earn so much money as will obtain it. So is it in love.
Our Savior says, if you love me keep my commandments. And S. John says, that
John 14. 15.
if a man obey not, he is so far from the love, that he has not the knowledge
of God, 1 John 2. 2. 4.
if S. Peter love, Christ he must feed his sheep.

We must know, that where the parties are equal between whom love and mutual
affection is, there love is called amicitia: but where one party is superior,
then they are not properly called friends, but this love in the inferior is
called observantia, the natural act whereof is obedience; for though a Prince
will in speech or writing vouchsafe to call his inferiors, friends; yet are
they but subjects. And so though John 15. 15.
our Savior was pleased to style his Disciples and Apostles friends, yea and
by nearest Matthew. 12. 49.
names of consanguinity, brethren, etc. yet S. Paul and the other Apostles
presumed Romans 1. 1.
2 pet. 1. 1.
not upon these titles, but acknowledged this observantia, and in the beginning
of Jude 1.
their epistles and writings styled themselves servants of Jesus Christ. And S.
Paul Revel. 1. 1.
showing that this is infallible, says, Know ye not to whom ye yield your
selves servants Romans 6. 16.
to obey, his servants ye are whom ye obey?

In the first petition of the Lords prayer we desire that Gods name may be
glorified. God being a King and bearing rule over us, how can this kingdom and
rule be established better then by fulfulfilling his commands, and obeying him
as the Angels do in heaven? For in regard of the glory which God has by our
obedience, Gods name is hallowed or glorified. And therefore from the beginning
in Paradise God commanded obedience to Adam in that estate, that he Genesis 2. 17.
should not eat of the tree of knowledge; that in obedience to that precept his
glory might be showed.

Now by our obedience we bring glory to God two ways. 1. Directly by our
selves, as Psalm 50. 15. Call upon me in the time of trouble, I will deliver
thee, and thou shall glorify me. 2. When we give occasion to stir up others to
glorify him; therefore God is not content with the former, but says further,
Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in heaven. Matthew 5. 16. Thus God is glorified
by our says, whereupon follows our first justification before God, but then
there must be a second justification also, viz. before men and the world, by
our good works, whereby God is glorified by others; and so God will have glory
of us, both immediately by our selves, and mediately by others. Saint Augustine
says, that nothing makes men good or evil, but good or evil love, and that
Amor male inslammans, and timor male humilians, that love which inflames, but
not aright; and that fear which humbles but not aright, are the causes of all
evil in the world. And our love is never true, but inter similes, among men of
like conditions: therefore there must be between God and us recipocally, idem
velle, and idem nolle, to will and nill the same. And this is true obedience,
when our will is moved by his, and when we yield to his will, as the principal
mover; for where there are two wills the inferior must be proportioned to the
superior, or both to a third: now there is no reason that Gods will should be
proportioned to ours, or to any others (he having none above him) and a
straight line must not be subjected to a crooked piece of timber; now our wills
are crooked, but Gods is straight.

Now the excellency and necessity of obedience is seen by this. That whereas
God had ordained sacrifice as an especial part of religion, yet he prefers
obedience before it. To obey is better then sacrifice, says Samuel to Saul,
and that in these respects. 1 Samuel 15. 22


1. He that desires to offer an acceptable thing, must offer that which is his
own rather then another, because it is dearer to him. And in obedience we
offer propriam voluntatem, our own will, and in sacrifice carnem alienam, the
flesh of beasts, nothing of our own.

2. Again, the better the thing is which is offered, the better it is accepted;
but that which is offered in obedience, is better then that in sacrifice,
because in the first a living thing is offered, and the beast cannot be offered
till it be dead; besides in sacrifice it is but a brute beast which is offered,
but in obedience a reasonable soul, and therefore 1 pet. 2. 1. 2.
the more acceptable.

3. The more we offer the more acceptable is the offering, and nothing can be
added to the offering of obedience. In sacrifice part of our fruit is offered,
but by obedience we offer both fruit and tree and all, we give our selves. One
well says, Obedientia non potest plus dare quam dedit: dedit enim se,
obedience can give no more then it has given, for it has given a man's self.

4. Lastly, the longer of continuance that which is offered is, the better it
is; but a sacrifice is but an hours work, while the fire is kindled, and the
beast consumed to ashes; now when by obedience we offer our selves unto God, it
is a continual sacrifice, a perpetual mortifying of our will, our reason, and
all our members. Obedientia est juge sacrificium, obedience is a continual
sacrifice. Therefore it is plain, that obedience is better then sacrifice, not
that sacrifice should be neglected or contemned, for contemned it is not when a
better is preferred. God says to the Prophet, I spoke not to your Fathers, nor
commanded them in the day that I brought them out of Egypt concerning
burnt-offerings or sacrifices. But this thing I commanded them, saying, Obey my
voice. That is, I denied not the one, but preferred the other, because Jer. 7.
22, 23.
it was better.

The excellency of obedience appears further in this: that whereas things in
themselves may be neither good nor bad, yet obedience has power to make evil
good, and good evil, either by observation or contempt. For had not God
forbidden Adam to eat the fruit, the eating of it in it self had been neither
good nor bad: but we see his disobedience made it evil. Another example we have
in Scripture. A Prophet comes to his neighbor in the word of the Lord, and
said, Smite me, and 1 Kin. 20. 35, 36.
the man refused to smite him, knowing it was unlawsul. Then said the Prophet
to him, Because thou have not obeyed the voice of the Lord, Behold, as soon as
thou art departed from me, a lion shall slay thee; and as soon as he was
departed from him, a lion found him and slew him for his disobedience.

The great necessity of obedience is in the example of our Savior, in his
dilemma, O my Father, if it be possible [let me not obey] but let this cup
pass from me, [if it Matthew. 26. 39.
be not possible] nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will. And one of
these must needs be done, either mori, or non obedire, to die or not to obey,
and elegit potius mori quam non obedire, he chose rather to die then not to
obey, whereby he intimated, that obedience is more necessary then life it
self: and this his obedience recovered the world from eternal destruction, as
the obedience of the saints preserves it from temporal; for it is the small
number of obedient persons that are column mundi, the pillars of the world,
which otherwise would not stand.

And here then by the second rule, obedience is commanded in general, not as it
is the execution of every particular command, but as it respects the intent of
the Commander: all the commandments are the materiale, or matter of our
obedience, but intuitus voluntatis divinae, the looking up to Gods will as the
motive, is the formale, or form of this virtue, which distinguishes it from
other virtues and duties commanded, when a man has an earnest endeavor and
will to satisfy and fulfill whatsoever is prescribed. And it is 1. unperfect
inchoata: or 2. perfect, perfecta. The first arises from fear of punishment
only, as in Saul, 1 Samuel 15. 24. the other from filial fear, as in Abraham's,
Genesis 22. 12.

1. Obedience is a compound of ob, and audio, and imports to hear and obey, and
that before all others; and in compositis et copulativis oportet vtrumque
fiere, non sufficit alterum, in compounds one will not serve, we must have
both. We will take the simple first, audire, to hear, and then the compound,
obaudire. First, audire for audire and sequi to hear and follow, are Gods
words for obedience. The Fathers in the Greek Church call it (...) the Latins
obaudire, both imply hearing and following.

1. For hearing it is good reason to hear God, if it be but in this respect
only, Quia nos audit, because he hears us, when we cry de prosundis; but
there is another reason, and that is, because we can have no better guide to
follow or counselor to hear. It is safe to follow Lot out of Sodom, and Noah
into the Ark. If we follow not them that can can lead and direct us we shall be
punished with false guides and counselors; there was never any heretic but
had some followers. Qui xoluns regi a pastore incidunt in lupos. They that will
not follow the shepherd to the pasture, either are a prey to the wolf, or
shall be led by the butcher to the shambles.

Many are loath to hear, because they would not follow, they will devise and
invent new ways, and be leaders themselves, that they may be heard and
followed; but malus assecla ratio pejor voluntas, our own reason is an ill
lacquey, our will a worse; our reason is blind, and our will a tyrant, before
it be subdued by grace; therefore we must be content to be led, and to receive
rules from God.

2. And as we must hear with the ear, so with the heart too. Auditus est
sensus disciplinae: we are perhaps content to hear, but that is not all that
is required. Quod cor non facit, non fit. The ears without the heart are but
like Idol ears, that hear nothing, aures aequivocae. There is praeputium, and
this foreskin must be taken away, else we have but uncircumcised ears, Jer. 6.
10.

We use to say, that such an one will not hear good counsel, that is, will not
follow it: for though he will not stop his ears, yet if his heart be not bent
to follow it, his hearing is to no purpose; for as the heathen man said, men's
videt non oculus, it is not the eye, but the mind that sees; so its not the
ear, but the heart that hears. To show the truth of this, lest men should
think obedience consists only in hearing, God used to put an et, a copulative
after it, as audiant, et custolient, et ambulent, et faciant etc. they shall
hear and keep, hear and walk, hear and do etc. There is an apt similitude of a
fishhook, cum capit capitur, et tum capitur, cum attrahitur, when it takes, it
is taken, and it is taken, when it is drawn to us; and it is a sign that our
hearing stick to us, when we hear to obey.

2. As we must audire, so also obandire, hear and follow him before and
against all others, this is employed in the preposition [ob.] As there is a
saying, loqui, and obloqui a gainsaying; so there is an hearing, and a hearing
against, audire and obedire. There is never a hearing of God, but even when he
speaks there will be an obloquutor, one that speaks against what he speaks.

There are three speakers
Deus. Homo. Mundus.
1. Deus. God is a speaker, by his word, and his works. 1. By his word. O that
God would speak, says Zophar to Job. And speak Lord, for thy servant hears,
says Samuel. Hear O my people (says God himself) and I will speak. They Job.
11. 5.
1 Samuel 3. 9.
that will not hear him (to obey) when he speaks in mercy, shall hear him
psalm. 50. 7. 2. 5.
speak in his wrath. And he continually speaks to us now by the Church and her
pastors, as he did in former ages by his Prophets and Apostles.

2. By his works every man may see and behold them; And therefore Elihu Job.
36. 24. 37. 14.
bids Job stand still, and consider the wondrous works of God. There Is none of
them but are as so many speakers to us. The Heavens declare the glory of God,
psalm. 19. 1. 2. 3.
and the firmament shows his handy work. One day tells another, and one
night certifieth another. There is neither speech nor language but their voices
are heard among them. No nation but may understand that God speaks to them by
these works.

2. The other two speakers which gainsay what God speaks, are the world, and
our selves; here we must obaudire to what God says, contrary to what the world
says to us, and to what we speak to our selves. 1. For the world it hated John
15. 18.
Christ, and so it is like to speak no good of him, or his ways: now as Genesis
5. 22.
Enoch walked with God, so must we; for God and the world cannot walk together.

Can two go together, says the Prophet, unless they be agreed? The world
cannot Amos 3. 3.
walk with Christ, because it hates him: Enoch therefore forsook the company
of the world, and chose to walk with God alone, and so was translated, so must
we, whatsoever evil counsel we hear, whether from profane men, or others, if
they be gainsayers, if they do obloqui, we must obaudire, hear God against
them. The King had a Michaiah to speak the truth to him from God, so had 1 King
22. 12.
he a Zedekiah, who spoke against it: so when we preach the truth, there are
others which preach placentia, that will tell men id quod volunt sanctum est,
that whatsoever they like is the best, that will loose, let others bind as
fast as they can; these we must take heed of hearkening to, we must not frame
ourselves to the world, Jer. 44. 17.
whether to the old world, as they that would burn incense to the Queen of
heaven, because they and their fathers had done so before; or to this present
world, as the people who would needs have a king, before Gods time, because
they would be 1 Samuel 8. 20.
like other nations.

2. The other speaker, that does obloqui, speak against what God says, is our
selves, for we are at as great odds with God as the world is. The wisdom of
Romans 8. 7.
the flesh is enmity with God; there is in us a desire to follow our own spirit
and, Ezech. 13. 3
as the wise man says, every way of a man is right in his own eyes: and this
way prove. 21. 2.
we are not to follow, but God speaks clean contrary to this, Revertatur quis
que a Jer. 18. 11.
via sua; return ye every man from his own way, for that's a wrong way: we have
Genesis 6. 5.
Gods own testimony, that man's thoughts are naught, and exceeding naught, and
therefore we are like to find little good by this oblocutor. These thoughts
and lusts do militari (...) war against the soul; and above all, it is a great
punishment from 1 pet. 2. 11.
God to give men up to follow their own lusts. The Isralites lusted for quails
which God gave them, but withal his wrath fell upon them, and when they refused
to hear psalm. 78. 9.
his voice, in his anger he gave them up to their own desires. This is the
punishment psalm. 81. 12.
for the greatest offenders. The Heathen Idolaters were punished by being given
up to follow their own lusts. It is a great punishment to be delivered over to
Satan, yet this may be for ones good, that the soul may be saved, as 1 Cor. 5.
5. Romans 1. 24
but to be deli ered up to the desires of our own hearts is far greater, 2 Cor.
2. 8. Therefore Moses when God appointed him an office very plausible and
desirable by men, to be a Magistrate, he being suspicious of himself, left his
heart, which did not obloqui, should beguile him, denied it four times. and
would not take it upon him, till God was very angry; for true obedience has
nothing de suo, of its own, but totum de alieno, all from another, it is a
continual gainsayer of it self.

3. Some will join these two together; they will hear God and then call a
conference, and hear what flesh and blood can say, and they will sit judges
between both. This was not Saint Paul's practice, when God called him to
preach, he consulted Gal. 1. 16.
not with flesh and blood. Our affections are like lyme, hottest when they
should be coldest, as in water, and e contra, we are suspicious and wary, when
we come to hear God, though we ought to be then most secure, as if he were
persona mala fidei, one not to be trusted; we fear most, when we need not fear,
we are afraid in hearing the minister of God, and mavelous careful in
examining all circumstances, when they exhort to any thing that agrees not with
our worldly interests, lest happily we should be seduced: but in hearing the
world, and our own hearts, where most peril is, we are most secure and
careless. Hence it is that we yield partial obedience to God, only in what we
like, or in what crosses not our carnal ends and desires, which Bernard calls
deliratam obedientiam, a nice obedience. To sit an hour and hear a sermon, and
receive the sacrament, and such outward performances, we see no harm in them,
but in those things which the world or our own hearts do obloqui speak against,
we are ready to yield and hearken to them, and to say with Cushai, though he
had been David servant and subject before, yet now whomsoever this people shall
choose, his will I be, and him will I serve; we will hearken to God for a time,
but so as we will follow the world and our desires, when they contradict what
God requires; this we must specially take heed of, we must so obey God, as to
gainsay his gainsayers; our obedience must be sincere without mixture, we
cannot serve God and Mammon.

The last thing commanded is the measure and quality of this obedience. It must
be ready and willing, a, Saint Bernard says, though contra voluntatem, yet ex
voluntate, cheerfully. Saint Paul commends the Romans, that they obeyed from
Romans 6. 17.
the heart: and therefore Saint Gregory says, Obedientia non servili metu sed
charitatis Mor. 12.
affecta servanda est non timore poenae, sed amore dei, obedience is to be
performed not with servile fear, but the affection of love, not for fear of
punishment, but for the love of God: for there is Obedientia coacta, a
constrained obedience. Jer. 23. 33. etc.
The people were content to be obedient, yet grumbled at the Burden of the
Lord. But what says God? For this obedience he would forsake them, he would
punish them, and the Burden of the Lord should be no more in their mouths: for
Amor erubescit nomine difficultatis, love blushes at the name of difficulty.
And Saint Bernard says in Gods case, non attendit verus obediens quale sit
quod praecipieur De Praecepto et Dispensatione.
hoe solo contentus quia praecipitur, A true obedient man regards not what
kind of thing is commanded, being content with this only, that it is
commanded. The disciples upon Christ's preaching upon the Sacrament said, Durus
est hic sermo, this John. 6. 60.
is a hard saying. There is an obedience in the Devils, they came out of the
possessed, Math. 8. 29.
but with great reluctance and grudging. So they that obey not cheerfully,
show what that kind of obedience is like. That which is durus sermo to others,
and a burden, the Psalmist counted sweeter then the honey comb, Psalm 119. Now
Gods aim and scope in this point is, that we perform our obedience to his
commands, though they be hard, it must not be like that of Saul's, we must not
spare it in the great, and perform it in the least; if we do, our sacrifice 1 Samuel 15. 21.
will not be accepted: for he spared the best and fattest of the cattle, and
offered the worst in sacrifice.

The thing forbidden, as opposite to obedience, is disobedience; the nature of
which sin we may conceive, if we consider what it is compared to, and behold
it in the effects which it produces.

1. It is compared to the sin of witchcraft, or the sin of divination, as
it is in the Hebrew; and to the abomination of the Teraphim, as it is in the
Hebrew; or iniquity and idolatry, as we read it. 1. To witchcraft or the sin
of divination, because as men forsake God, when they seek to witches and
diviners, so men renounce God by disobedience, and hearken to Satan's
instruments, the world, and their own corrupt hearts: and likewise as witches
do not always give true and certain answers, but often deceive those that
trust to them; so disobedience to God deceives men in their hopes of worldly
things, which they think to gain by not hearkening to God, as in this example
of Saul, he disobeyed God out of fear of the people, lest they should have
deprived him of his kingdom, which he thought to establish by pleasing the
people, when as his disobedience like a witch deceived him, for thereby he lost
his kingdom: because thou have cast away the word of the Lord, therefore the
Lord has cast off thee from being king, says Samuel.

2. To the abomination of the Teraphim, which were images or idols, like the
dii Penates, the household Gods of the Romans. These they set up in the secret
Genesis 31. 30.
corners of their houses, and worshipped in private, though in the temple they
pretended to worship none but God; so men prosesse Obedience to God in the
Church in the sight of men, but in their domestic and worldly affairs, they
obey mammon, and follow their own hearts, disobeying God.

2. Consider it in the effects, which are all the curses of God denounced
against the disobedient. His curse whose maledicere is malefacere, as his
benedicere is benefacere (for his curse and his blessing are effectual and
operative) is due especially to the sin of disobedience: for it is a thing
most reprochful to God, for any to account his commandments hard and unjust, as
all disobedient persons do, as the Mat. 25. 24.
evil servant, that said of his Master. I knew thou wast a hard man, reaping
where thou sowest not. A sign of Gods curse is the Rainbow, which not only
minds us of the covenant, but also of the general deluge, whereby God punished
the disobedience Romans 5. 19.
of the old world; but especially death, that passes upon all, is properly
ascribed by the Apostle to this sin of disobedience. And as Saint Bernard
observes our daily experience tells us as much, for Quotidie experimur,
quotidie enim morimur, we find it true every day, because we die daily.
Besides, as God observes a proportion in his punishments, so here in this
sin; by that wherein we sin, by that Romans 8. 20. 7. 23.
we are punished: for as we withdraw our obedience from God so the creatures
withdraw their obedience from us; neither are we punished only by disobedience
without us for this sin, but also by disobedience with in us: the two Laws of
the members, and of the mind, are opposite, our affections will not be subject
to reason, because we disobey our Creator. Thus we see the nature of
disobedience in general.

Now for the kinds in particular, we know, that disobedience is compared to a
psalm. 119. 32.
path in which we are to walk, not turning to the right hand, or to the left,
so that Deuteronomy. 5. 32.
there is a right hand way, and a way to the left hand. The heart of a wiseman
is Eccles. 10. 2.
on his right hand, but the heart of a fool is on his left hand. From which
places the Fathers make two kinds of disobedience, by turning to the right
hand and to the left, which they expound thus.

1. There is Probabilis inobedientia, a disobedience not without some probable
pretense, as was Saul's sin at Gilgal, his answer seemed reasonable, but that
we must not make our own reason but Gods revealed will the rule of our
obedience.

This is turning to the right, and to this kind belong those opposites, of
which we spoke, when we hearken to the voice of our own hearts, or of the
world, or would mix them and join them with God, All these lead ad dextram to
the right hand.

2. There is a lest hand way, whereto they turn, that have no probability of
reason, or color for their sin, such as the Apostle calls (...), wicked and
absurd 2 Thessalonians. 3. 2.
and unreasonable men, whose course of life is without any excuse, who sin
wilfully and presumptuously against the clear will of God, and dictate of
their consciences. And as disobedience is here forbidden, so when men obey, but
not readily, not without murmurings and disputings. Murmuring was always the
fault of the phil. 2. 14.
Israelits, they would make dialogues with God and and ask the reason of every
thing why this rather then that, and why now rather then at another time; such
men Luther calls the sect of the Queristae, they will go with a why in
insinitum.

This also must be avoided; to which we may add the fault of those that excuse
their disobedience, Luc. 14. 18. The Angels yield no reasons why they should
not Mat. 22. 5.
obey, do not murmur, or excuse but obey readily.

Now for the degrees of Disobedience.

Disobedience has two degrees. 1. Neglect. 2 Contempt.

1. Neglect is defined to be animae torpor, quo quis minus diligens est in
exequendo Hugo
quod exequi debet, a dulnes of the mind, which makes a man less diligent in
doing that he should; and this was the fault of him that came without his
wedding garment. Mat. 22. 12.
2. Contempt is the extremity of disobedience. And this God threatens with a
severe punishment. If you shall despise my statutes, or if your soul abhor my
judgments, Levit. 26. 15. 16.
etc. I will appoint over you terror, consumption, etc. and I will set my face
against you, says God. S. Augustine says of both these, Neglectus ubique
culpabilis, contemptus ubique damnabilis, neglect is blameable, but contempt
damnable.
The means to compass this virtue, or rather the motives to stir us up to
obedience are diverse. Heb. 11. 24.


1. The first is, the obedience that has been exhibited to God from time to
time Genesis 39.
by his Saints. As Moses had fair proffers and liklyhoods of preferment, yet
rather chose to suffer affliction, then to disobey God. Joseph in the eye of
the world might be thought to have risen to great preferment by obeying his
Mistress voice, but you see what rocks he was willing to cast himself upon,
rather then to disobey his God, Luke 2. 51.
or hearken to the oblocutor. Our Savior though he were the Son of God, yet
was subject to his parents, and not only so, but became obedient to God even
to death. Phll. 2. 8.
S. Bernard asks the question, Who were they that the Son of God should be
subject to them? Faber and foemina, a Carpenter and a woman; and he though God,
or rather as Christ, God and man, was subject. I hough he were the Son of God,
yet he learned obedience by his sufferings, Heb. 5. 8. and indeed by the
obedience of the cross, he recovered the world. And if any shall except and
say, they cannot imitate the Son of God or the Saints, let him consider in the
next place.

2. The example of all the creatures, in whom there would be no disorder, were
it Matthew. 8. 27.
not for man. The winds and sea obeyed Christ: the sun standing still at the
prayer of Josh. 10. 1.
Joshua: the fire not consuming the three children: and the lions not devouring
Daniel; Dan. 6.
all go against their natures, to yield obedience to God. So that they are not
only audientes, attentive, but obedientes verbo divino, obedient to Gods word:
which is true and perfect obedience, to obey even contrary to our own nature.

3 Another motive, is if we consider how obedient our nature is to the
contraries of what God commands, and follow that: natural reason says, where
there is one duty there are two extremes at the least. And therefore the
obedience we show to sin is multiplicior then that we exhibit to God. It is
truly said of the Heathen, that negligentia plus laborat quam diligentia,
idleness is more toilsome then employment. And so we may say of the adulterer,
he labors more then the chaste, and the covetous more then the contented man.

4. Lastly, the reward may be a means to stir us up to obedience. We know
nothing is more prevalent then it. Its true there is such equity in Gods
commands, that we should obey them without reward; yet there is such reward
annexed to our obedience, that if there were less equity and more difficulty
in them, yet they ought to Cass.
be kept in regard of the reward. One says, nutriunt praemiorum exempla
virtutes, examples of rewards cherish virtue. If a thing commanded were not
equal, yet we stick not at that, so a reward be proposed. And we see that
Abraham's obedience had a great reward; I am, says God, thy exceeding great
reward: Merces magna nimis, Genesis 19. 1.
as some Fathers say; so great is the reward of obedience, that one of the
Fathers says, that the Saints seeing how great it is repent, that they had
performed no greater obedience on earth, and wish themselves on earth again,
that they might perform more exact obedience.

The signs of well hearing and obeying are these.

1. In audire. The joy we have in profiting, and the grief of not benefitting
at our hearing; as also our care to resort where we should hear, and to apply
what we hear to our selves in particular, are signs of our good or ill
disposition to this duty.

2. In obedire. If we not only obey that part of Gods law, to the observance
whereof 1. we are tied by the Princes law, but those also which the Princes law
takes no hold of, though we observe them not: where there is only vis
directiva, not correctiva, a directive, but no coercive power: or when Gods
laws and man's concur not, if we obey as well as when they concur, then is our
obedience free and voluntary out of conscience, not by constraint. This is a
good sign of obedience.

2. And secondly, when Gods commands and the desires of our own nature stand in
competition, as when God commands Abraham to offer his son, and nature forbade
him. As also in the world, when it and the fashion take one side, and Gods
commandments another. If in these cases God have the victory, and the world and
the flesh go down, it is another good sign, that we are in a true way of
obedience. The trial is best found upon the parting, as when two walk together,
you cannot know whose the spaniel is till they part, but when they part, we
know who was his Master, and whom he followed before they parted.

The sixth rule for procuring obedience in others is, done per edificationem,
as the Romans 14. 19. 13.
Apostle speaks, by edifying one another, and by avoiding that which they call
scandalum, let no man put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in his
brothers way.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of patience. How it arises from Love of God. The necessity and excellency of
patience. Afflictions are either corrections, or trials. Reasons of patience in
both. Of counterfeit patience in Heretics and others. Stupidity no true
patience. Cause thereof. Of fainting under the cross. Means of patience.
Signs of patience. Of working patience in others.

THe second principal sign or property of Love is Patience, and it might be
comprehended under obedience; for they use to call it, obedientiam crucis. It
is a fruit 1 Cor. 13. 4.
of Love, charitas patiens est, says the Apostle: for if it be active, it
produces obedience, if passive patience. The Heathen man has a strange speech
to this purpose: Non amo quenquam, nisi offendat, I love no man, but he that
offends me; the reason is, because bearing and sorbearing is an argument of
love, he that loves will bear much, if not, he loves not. Qui desinit
sustinere desinit amare, says S. Augustine, leave of to forbear, and leave of
to love: and S. Gregory, Patientia vera ipsum amat, quem portat, In Ezekiel hom. 7
true patience loves him who is a burden to him.

In respect of our selves being natural, nothing can be trulier said, then
durum pati, It goes against flesh and blood to suffer; and the object of
patience is evil. But the spiritual man glories in tribulation, knowing that
tribulation works patience; and why? because patience works experience, and
that hope. So that patience never Romans 5. 3, 4, 5.
bears evil propter se, sed propter mag is bonum, for it self, but for a
greater good. The evil we suffer by it will be recompensed with the greater
good. Labor is durum, a hard thing, and ease good, but if a better thing (as
learning) may be attained by the privation of that good, we will take pains and
endure labor. So the suffering of want, trouble, and the like, conducing to a
greater good, puts a will into us to endure them. Ardor desideriorum, says S.
Gregory, facit tolerantiam laborum, the earnestness of our desires causes us
to endure labor. This greater good is the glory of God; and that as we said of
obedience, both directly by our selves, when we glorify him, by our
sufferings, and also by others, who take occasion by our patience in suffering
to glorify God. Though the Devil afflicted Job with sundry crosses, yet he
continued firm and endured them patiently, and by his servants patience was God
glorified even over the Devil: God triumphs over the Devil by the patience of
Job. (...) thou not, says Job 2.
God, my servant Job, that there is none like him in the earth, etc. Beatus Job
quot voces patientiae in laudem Dei percussus reddidit, quasi tot in adversarii
pectore jacula intorsit, et acriora multa quam sustinuit, inflixit, blessed Job
by his often expressions of patience to the honor of God in his afflictions,
castas it were so many darts into the bosom of his adversary, and inflicted
much more upon him, then he endured himself.

The Author to the Hebrews tells us, that we need this virtue, and our Savior
Heb. 10. 36.
gives us the reason. We cannot possess our souls without it. How? Thus; if
any cross befall us, either it is too great for us to bear, and so we fall
into exceeding great worldly sorrow, which works death, as it happened with
Achitophel, a wise man: or else 2 Cor. 7. 10.
without this gift of patience we set our selves against that party in
passion, that we 2 Samuel 17. 23.
conceive did offer us the injury, and so fall to hatred, and then to injurious
dealing, or if it be from Gods hand, to murmuring and impatient reoining, and
so loose your souls. But if with patience we bear the afflictions of this life,
and thereby overcome the last enemy which is death, 1 Corinthians 15. 26. then
we are sure to save our souls. In consideration whereof, as we said, that in
the Christian structure faith was fundamentum the foundation of all virtues, so
patience is tectum the roof or covering of all virtues to keep and defend them
from the storms of afflictions; without which storms would beat, and rain would
descend into the building and rot it.

And this may well be warranted by that of our Savior in the Gospel, where he
says (describing the spiritual harvest) that they brought forth fruit with
Luke 8 15.
patience. The fruit is after the bud and blossom, the fruit must come through
both. But more plainly in the Apostle; that therefore patience must have her
Jac. 1. 4.
perfect work, that we may be perfect and want nothing, and the building be
consummate. And S. Paul joins faith the foundation, and patience the roof
together. phil. 1. 29.
To you it is given not only to believe, but also to suffer; and in another
Heb. 6. 12.
place, in side and patientia, by faith and patience we inherit the promise,
the first and last, the beginning and the ending. So that when we have this
virtue, and the roof be covered, we may have good cause to rejoice, as S. Paul
did. He rejoiced in patience, 2 Cor. 12. 10.
in suffering infirmities, reproaches, necessities, persecutions, distresses,
for Christ's sake. And patience working experience, he then had spem solidiorem
more Romans 5. 4.
solid hope, and thence grew so valiant, as to throw down gantlet, and challenge
any 8. 35.
thing that could separate him from the love of God, and begins with the
least 38.
first, as tribulations, ascending to the most potent, as death, Angels,
principalities, etc.

Patience is distinguished according to the object, which is affliction, and
that is of two sorts: for it is either for punishment, called (...), or for
trial called (...); there must be patience in both: and the reason is, for that
in every Law there is a directive and a corrective force, if one miss, the
other will take hold. Aut faciendum quod oportet, aut patiendum quod oportet,
either we must do, or suffer what we should; we must be either active or
passive.

1. We submit our selves to the corrective force in respect of our deserts,
knowing 1. pet. 4. 19.
the Law to be just, for two reasons, both which are mentioned by S. Peter, It
is the will of God; of his secret will we cannot enquire the cause, but when he
has revealed the reasons, we may be bold to take notice of them for
confirmation of our faith. 1. The first is, He will have all the world know,
that sin shall not be unpunished. This is plain. The waters of Meribah cost
Moses his life, his wavering, because the waters came not at the first, was his
forfeiture of entering into the land of promise, Numbers 20. 12. Many more
instances might be brought, but they are all obscured by Christ's punishment for
our sins, which may inform us how highly sin displeases God. And although the
main punishment fell on the Son of God, and this Passio Christi, this suffering
of Christ was the greatest sign of the love of God to us, yet he loves us not
so as to exempt us from all punishment, there must be a visitation for his
Church. It is a great part of that league and covenant made long since, that
though his mercy shall not be withdrawn from us, yet if we forsake his Law, he
will visit our trespasses with the rod, etc. this is a sign of his love too,
as well as his punishing the Son for us; therefore we must still be subject to
his fatherly correction, though his children and servants. Judgment must begin
at the house of God, says S. Peter. But he will punish the 1. pet. 4. 17.
wicked more grievously; for as our Savior speaks, If this be done in me that
Luke 23. 31.
am a green tree, what shall become of the dry? If I bring evil upon mine own
Jer. 25. 29.
city, where my Name is called upon, (says God) shall you go unpunished? And
Heb. 12. 6.
it is certain, that the Lord chasteneth and scourges every Son whom he
receives, and as many as he loves he rebukes and chasteneth. S. Augustine
says, Si huc non tibi magis malum videtur exhaeredari, quam non castigari, hoc
elige, If to be disinherited seem not to thee to be a greater evil then not to
be chastised, choose that.

2. As the first was a reason of the declaration of Gods justice, so this
second is Esaias 28. 19.
for our own benefit. Vexatio dat intellectum, trouble brings understanding. It
was good for David that he had been afflicted, many men cannot be without it.
S. Aug. says, that when he followed this world by pleasures with a full
stream, a pain in his psalm. 119. 71.
breast, pectoris dolor, was the first means of his recalling. S. Paul's
unhorsing and Acts 9.
smiting blind was his initiation to God. Sepiam vias tuas, says God, I will
hedge Hos. 2. 6.
up thy ways with thorns; If thou will go out of the way the thorns shall
prick thee, and keep thee in. Nazianzen reports of S. Basil, that being
subject to infirmities and sickness, he petitioned God for recovery of his
health, and when he had obtained it, he remembered that he had left out a
condition, that lest he should grow proud, God would by afflictions put him in
mind by sickness again, which he did as the same Father reports. Thus in
these two respects its necessary we bear correction with patience.

(...). The trial is of two sorts. 1. There is either, Delatio boni a deferring
of good, touched before in hope, which ever has rationem mali, a show of
evil. Hope deferred makes the heart sick; the bearing of it is called, prove.
13. 12.
(...), longanimity; though it tarry, wait for it, because it will surely come,
says the Prophet. Wait patiently for the Lord will come, says the Psalmist.
This is the Hab. 2. 3.
only patience which is in God, who waits ut misereatur nostri, that he may
have Psalm 37. 7.
mercy on us; for as S. Augustine says, Dominus patitur neglectus, patitur
contemptus, patitur negatus; the Lord, though we neglect, despise, deny him,
yet still bears with us; with what patience then should we wait upon him, and
not to make this conclusion by infidelity, Because that we wait for is long in
coming, therefore it will never come: or to say with them in Saint Peter, Where
is the promise of his 2 pet. 3. 4.
coming?

2. The second trial indeed is the bearing of some real affliction, not for
sin, as in (...), but for righteousness sake. To whom more is given, of him
more shall be required. The Devil shall have a larger liberty to tempt him. The
Philosopher says Luke 12. 48.
very well, Deus non habet amorem maternum erga filios, sed paternum, that is,
he will not dandle his children in his lap, and rock them as a mother, but put
them to trial as a father. And he tryes them by this, if they will rather pati
malum, quam facere, suffer evil then do evil; or as S. Augustine says, utrum
velint malum non patiendo facere, or non faciendo pati, whether they will
rather do evil without suffering, or suffer evil without doing any. And this is
as S. Peter says, That the trial of 1 pet. 1. 7.
our faith may be more precious in the sight of God then gold. And the reasons
are four.

1. Because we commonly see, that res prosperae are mare mortuum, the dead sea,
Pet. Chrysol.
or the lake Asphaltites in Judea, where Sodom and Gomorrah stood, that
corrupts Epist. 85.
all that is put into it. Noverca virtutis prosperitas, prosperity is the
stepmother of virtue, says one. And Seneca, Ipsa foelicitas nisi temperetur
premit, felicity it self, if it be not qualified, is a pressure. We settle upon
our lees, if we be not poured out from vessel to vessel; standing water
putrifies; armor not used contracts rust; a full body ill humors; unfallowed
ground brings forth weeds; but by exercise our graces grow bright, the stirring
them up makes them burn, which else would die in us. 2. The second is, that as
the Apostle says, there may be a conformity between Christ and us, Romans 8.
29. Christ has his inheritance in heaven by two rights; one as he is the first
begotten son of God, and the other by his obedience. Ye see he says of
himself, Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and so to have Luke
24. 26.
entered into heaven? Now in respect of the first we can have no conformity with
Acts 14. 28.
him, but the right we must claim by is the other, which is suffering; and if
we claim the inheritance by Christ, we must have it by his title, viz. by
suffering. In man's Law it is a principle, that inheritance which descends from
one to another, must be held by no other title, then by that, which he that was
formerly possessed of it, held it by. And therefore the Apostle pleads, that
through much tribulat on we must enter into 2 Timothy 3. 12.
the kingdom of God. This is the tenure, and lest any should think himself
exempted, he tells us, All that will live Godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer
persecution; none excepted. And for this cause, whereas the Church militant
has six resemblances. 1. To a Camp, 2. to a ship, 3. to a building, 4. to com,
5. to wine, 6. to a flock. The nature of all these imports patience. 1. A
soldiers life is nothing else but agere sub dio, abroad in the open air; much
2 Timothy 2. 4.
patience is required in them that follow the camp. 2. A ship we see is subject
to wind and storms, to be tossed with the waves Matthew. 8. 24.
of the sea. 3. 4. The resemblance to these two One well describes. Forsitan
te temporaliter punit, ut aeternae mortis ardores poena redimat temporalis. In
edificatione enim temporali omnes lapides prius malleis tundebantur, in horreo
Domini non reponitur granum, donec flagellis aut triturantium pedibus sit
excussum, in buildings axes and hammers must be used, and no corn comes to the
table before it pass through the frail and millstone. 5. The grape must be
trodden and pass the winepresse before it be fit to drink. Esaias 5. 2.
6. The flock is shorn and carried to the shambles.
3. The third reason of trial is, to separate the good from the bad. Therefore
God suffers the Devil to sift his servants, trial is, Sathanae ventilabrum, the
Devils seive, Luke 3. 17.
Luke 22. 31, which separates the good corn from the chaff, and for this cause
God suffers good men to be afflicted by wicked, because it is not fit he should
use good men as scourges for the good; for there must be a fan to make a
separation of the corn and chaff, which is the cross. There is a red sea to
pass, if thou be a true Israelite, thou shall get through, if an Egyptian no
passage for thee, thou shall be drowned in the midst of it. vituli triturantes
quotidie ligantur ad stabulum, vituli mactandi quotidie in paescuis libere
relinquuntur, the oxen, that are for use, are kept tied up, when those that are
fatted for the shambles, are let loose into the pasture to feed at peasu re. 4.
The last is for the Devils confusion, to confound him when he says, Does Job
Job. 2.
serve God for naught. God sends trials to stop the Devils mouth, who slanders
all for mercenaries, therefore ost times he sends no reward visible at all, and
sometimes gives malam mercedem, an ill reward in appearance, that it may appear
that we serve him gratuito freely.
Now for the manner of suffering; There were in the Primitive Church a sort of
heretics called Circumcilliones, who (hearing patience so much commended)
conceived of it, as the stoickes, to bean (...) a want of passions, and
therefore whipped themselves, and acquainted themselves so much with hardship,
that they could bear any thing. But we are to understand, that as Christian
religion is far from Epicurisme, so it allows not the doctrine of the stoics:
Saint Paul disputed against both Epicures and Stoickes. Christian patience is
no stoicall (...) for Job, David, Christ, they were patient, yet had some
notable signs of passions, that they felt what they suffered. Nor is patience
a Monothelite, to have a will only to be punished. Our Savior had a will to
be rid of the cup, as well as a submission Luc. 22. 42.
to Gods will. It was a suffering according to the will of God, as the Apostle
1 pet. 4, 19.
speaks, to which he conformed himself. Saint Augustine shows the difference
c. 7. de patientia
between the Heathens, and heretics patience, and that which is true patience.
The first was not in a good cause, or for a right end, but possibly they used
themselves to suffer, and felt it not: but in true patience, a man feels the
cross, and would be rid of it, yet submits to the good pleasure of God. And
therefore he says, it was stupor morbi (being accustomed to ill) potius quam
robur sanitatis, A stupefying disease, rather then the strength of health, and
admiranda duritia, quae magna est sed neganda patientia, que nulla est, their
hardness was to be admired, for it was great, but their patitence to be denied,
for they had none. Heb. 12. 5.


That which is forbidden the Apostle comprizeth in one verse 1. A small regard,
or despising the chastisment of the Lord. 2. and a fainting under his
correction (...) and (...) the two extremes of true patience.

1. Saint Chrysostom notes upon Exodus 9. 28. that in the wicked there is but
momentanea cura, not no regard at all, but a momentary regard of Gods
afflictions: as it was in Pharaoh concerning the plagues of Egypt; and it was
no other in Jeroboam, 1 King. 13. 6.
there was in him a humiliation for the present, till his hand was restored
only. That effect which judgment works upon the wicked, is only pannicus
timor, a panick fear for the present, till the danger be over, and therefore
such patience is called Pannica patientia, a pannick patience: like to that in
bears and wolves at the sound of the drum, they are afraid while that is beaten
and no longer. Or as they which not being used to the sea are sick, while the
ship is tossed, but as soon as they set footing on the land are well again. And
by this men came to that which the Ancients call Stupor morbi, non robur
sanitatis, a numnesse and hardness of soul, not proceeding from strength of
health: and thy call it animi (...) a palsy of the soul. It is one thing to
thrust a needle into quick, and another into dead flesh. And this stupor or
numnesse of the soul is of two sorts. Contractus et immssus.

1. The wiseman speaking of a person given to excess of meat and drink, says,
They prove. 23. 35.
have stricken me (shall thou say) and I was not sick, they have beaten me and
I felt it not. He shows that some by custom in sin, contract a
senselessenesse in sin. Their life is like to them that sleep in the top mast,
whose sleep is broken and yet continues, and so they come to a kind of
drunkenness. Ebrii sunt, non vino, as Esa. 51. 21.
the Prophet speaks, they are drunk, but not with wine; and so it falls out in
other vices, when a man is bewitched with a sin, he is smitten but feels not,
because he is drunk with it. 2. The other is such as we read Baals Prophets
were: who, when their God 1 King. 18. 28
would not hear them, cut themselves with knives and lancers, and thereby might
seem patient; and this is not stupor contractus, but emissus a stupidity
infused by Satan, whether he possess men spiritually only in their souls, or
corporally too. The Devil taught a man to break his chains and cut his flesh
with stones; and such Mar. 5. 5.
was that of the Circumeelliones, Manichees and Donatists etc. it was but pati
malum, ut facerent malum, as Saint Augustine speaks, they suffered evil, that
they might do the more evil.
This stupor contractus comes two ways. 1. Ex ignorantia causae, not
considering the cause whence afflictions come. or 2. Ex ignorantia finis, not
considering the end whereto they tend.

1. When the afflicted consider not the cause from whence their affliction
comeeth, Jer. 5. 3.
Thou have stricken them O Lord, and they are not grieved (says the Prophet)
thou have consumed them, but they have refused to receive correction, they have
made their faces harder then a rock etc. And God himself by the same Prophet,
2. 30.
In vain have I smitten your children, they received no correction. And the
Prophet Esaias, why should ye be stricken any more? ye will revolt more and more
etc. Esa. 1. 5.
No doubt but there are some such among us, whom God calls before him, and
arresteth with these his Serieants, but are no whit amended. Such are usually
compared to Simon the Cyrenian, who was violently laid hold on, and forced to
carry Luc. 23. 26.
the crosle, but are not crucified on it themselves, a cross they bear, but
profit not. And the reason is, because they ascribe it to other causes, besides
God inflicting, and their sins deserving. Divines call this coecum termentum,
or coecum dolorem, a blind grief, a grief they have on the sudden, but are not
able to say, for this or this cause is it come upon me: they ascribe it humori
naturae not rori gratiae, and like purblinde men they cannot look up to the
hand that strikes them; and so consequently they get them terrenas
consolatiunculas earthly petty comforts; (as Saint Bernard) pleasure and
friends, and so drive it away: and if it comes from without then many times
they do insurgere in instrumentum et omittere percussorem, rise against the
weapon, and leave the striker, which comes by not observing the two
concurrents, viz. God and his instrument, and that the affliction is just with
God, though unjust in the instrument, as the calamities of Job, were just in
God, cui nil nisi justum placet, who delights in nothing but what is just; and
our Savior says, Math 5. 11. we shall be blessed by God when we are injured
by men, the 1 Samuel 22.
not distinguishing of these two breeds desire of revenge. King David could
distinguish psalm. 7. 3.
better. In the case of Savl and Doeg, the instruments; O Lord my God, if 2 Samuel 16.
I have done any such thing etc. He ascribed it to God, and yet knew he was
wronged by them: and in the case of Shimei, he conceived that he was but Gods
instrument to afflict and punish him.

2. When we look not high enough, that is the first, the second is, when we
conceive not aright of the end: for tribulation is of tribulus a bramble; and
Saint Augustine says, Ideo mittitur, aut ut detineat, aut ut revocet, it is
sent therefore, either to restrain, or to call back. And Intelligat bomo Deum
esse medicum, et tribulationem medicamentum esse ad salutem, non poenam ad
damnationem, Man should know, that God is a physician, and tribulation a
medicine for health, not a punishment to condemn. And Saint Gregory.
Adversitas quae bonis viris obiicitur, probatio virtutis est, non indicium
reprobationis, Tribulation that comes upon good men is a trial of their
goodness, not a token of reprobation. When men then mistake Gods aim, in the
end they fall into a numnes of soul.

2. The second extreme of Patience is the fainting under Gods correction. The
cause most commonly comes, when men cannot distinguish between (...) and (...)
between being shaken, and cast down; but imagine, that God afflicts them 2 Cor.
4. 8.
in wrath, and aims at their destruction: whereas the Apostle could say, we
are troubl d on every side, yet not distressed, we are perplexed, but not in
despair. And when a man cannot distinguish between these, then a heavines
seizes on him that begets death. The Psalmist makes a dialogue between his
soul and himself. psalm. 42. 6.
Why art thou so cast down O my soul? but then comes in the other part, put thy
trust in God for the help of his countenance. When men begin to be perplexed,
then either they feel their courage die, the spirit is cast down, and A wounded
spirit cannot be born: the spirit of a man will bear other infirmities and
crosses, Prove. 18. 14.
and so the heathen have showed great patience, but when the spirit or
conscience it self is wounded, who can bear it? Or else they fall a murmuring
against Gods Genesis 4. 13.
justice, and say with Cain, Their punishment is greater then they can bear, or
have deserved; and so mistaking Gods Justice fall away by despair, and not
considering 1 Samuel 28. 8.
Gods mercy, they come to be of Saul's mind, If God will neither answer him by
Prophets, dreams, nor voice, he will go to the witch: and if this succeeds
not, then he takes another course, and so falls into the other extreme, and
lies flat on the ground with a brutish kind of patience. And all this is by
misconstruing Gods justice or mercy, that because he corrects as a father, he
will condemn us as a Judge.

The general means to get Patience are these. Meahs of Fatience.


1. It is truly said by Saint Jerome, that quot sunt causae, as many causes as
God has ad (...) to punish, there are so many for us ad patiendum to suffer
with patience. There are many examples of patience among the Heathen as of
Scaevola, Rutilius, Regulus, etc. these had a show of patience, and their
reason was, Sis asinus, quemcnnque asinum sors prospera fecit. But there ought
to be in Christians a more heroique courage, seeing they know the causes from
whence affliction comes, and whereto it tends, as was showed before.

2. They say that it is Tenuis patientia, quicquid corrigere est nefas, a small
patience, when a man cannot help it then to bear: since we cannot help it,
were bestt o make a virtue of necessity. It is hard to kick against the pricks.
Act. 9. 5.
A necessity being laid upon us, let us do it willingly, and so it will become
a commendable virtue, and let us not be like them that have no hope.

3. The third is that which the heathen man confessed, Quantum mercator pro
lucro, quantum venator pro ludo, tantum ego non passus sum provirtute, I have
not suffered so much for virtue, as the merchant for gain, or the hunter for
sport: this he spoke out of ambition, that he had not suffered so much for his
honor. But let us add, Quantum ethnicus pro ambitione, tantum ego non passus
sum pro Christo meo, I have not endured so much for my Christ, as the Heathen
for his ambition. On the other side considering as we are Christians, and
afflicted either ad correctionem or ad probationem, for our amendment or trial,
these should be to make us patient: of which two let us spoke more particularly.

1. In respect that afflictions come upon us justly for our sins. The less
dishonest thief could blame his fellow for murmuring, and his reason was, Lue.
23. 41.
seeing we suffer justly; all we suffer is justly deserved, yea less then we
deserve. 2. The Psalmist says, that God in faithfulness had afflicted him.
That as the psalm. 119. 75.
punishment is just in the first place, so if we are afflicted, we should
ascribe it to God of very faithfulness. Though he visit our offenses with
rods, or our sins 89. 32 33.
with scourges, yet his mercy shall not utterly be taken from us, nor his truth
fail. This affliction being sent in mercy, either to retain us, or to recall
us, either for prevention or for cure, and we apprehending it so, is a special
means to procure patience in us. For being strengthened by his promise, we
shall make use of his punishment, and know that all things work together for
good to them that love Romans 8. 28.
God. And to this we may apply the speech of the Heathen man, Patior ne patiar
I suffer now, that I may not suffer hereafter. That Abraham make not that
argument against us which he did to the rich man; Son remember that thou in thy
life time Luc. 16. 25.
receivedst thy good things, therefore now thou suffer pains; but Lazarus,
who suffered pain, shall for his patience have his reward. That this conclusion
may not be, here we must suffer those pains that may be ended, mitigated,
endured with patience; and have hope of an end, that we may not hereafter
suffer those pains, in which there is no patience in bearing, no hope to be
delivered no mitigation to be expected, but the end will be without end. And
indeed this continuus psalm. 73. 5.
cursus temporalium, to have no misfortune or trouble, nor to be plagued as
other men, is a dangerous sign of Gods disfavour to us. And these for the
corrective part.
The motives for patience in that affliction which is explorativa or probativa
are.

1. To consider before hand what troubles and crosses are incident to a
Christian life. Our Savior upon this has two comparisons, of a builder, and a
king going to war, both whom it behooves to cast their accounts before hand
what charge they may be at. For the want of forecast of them that intend to
live a Godly life, what troubles, what temptations they must go through, makes
them unprepared and unresolved when the cross comes, and so they give over.

2. The Apostle (though it may be equally applied to other virtues) tells us,
that whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our learning,
that we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might have hope: that
is, in Romans 15. 4.
this point of patience we may see in scriptures what the Saints of God have
endured, and by considering their afflictions and sufferings, what it cost
them, and what they suffered we may see what it will cost us, and what we must
endure, and so we may be the better armed against the like; and especially if
we consider our Heb. 12. 10.
Captain, as the Apostle calls him, and what he suffered. Recogitate illum,
consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners against himself, lest
ye be wearied 12. 3.
and faint in your minds, This is a good preparative to patience. Si paessio
Christi, (says Saint Gregory) in memoriam revocetur, nihil tam arduum quod non
aequo animo In Epist.
toleretur. if we would but call Christ's passion to remembrance, there is nothing
so difficult, but we would willingly endure it. He suffered so much in all
parts of soul and body, that its impossible for us to endure the like.

3. Martyrs (...) flamma esse possumus, si in anima patientiam retineamus, we
may be martyrs without fire, if we endure Gods cross with patience. And to
endure them we shall be enabled by Gods own promise, in the words of the
Apostle; God is faithful who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye
are able, but 1 Cor. 10. 13.
with the temptation will also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to
bear it. He will not try us above our patience, but either give us sufficient
strength to suffer great afflictions, or lesson our trials, as our patience
shall decrease. And the consideration of this is also a great motive to
continue in this virtue.

4. Lastly, The hope of the reward laid up for those that suffer in this world,
is a principal means to stir us to this duty. Saint Paul says, I reckon not
the Romans 8. 18.
sufferings of this present time worthy to be compared with the glory which 2
Cor. 4. 17.
shall be revealed in us. And he gives the reason in another place. For our
light affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory.

Here is a gradation of so many steps, that a man cannot reach to the top of it.

The glory great, the affliction light, the glory exceeding, the affliction for
a moment, nay the glory far more exceeding with an eternal weight added to it.
Here is Hyperbole upon Hyperbole, and yet no Hyperbole can fully express it,
The Apostle could not express it. and we cannot conceive it.

So much of the means.

The signs of patience are these. Signs of Patience.


1. Tolerantia Crucis. When a man finds upon examination, that he is able and
willing according to the Greek word (...) to abide under the cross, it is a
good sign. When a man is so affected to the Cross, that if it please God to
take away his sin, (the cause of punishment) he is willing to bear the
punishment. Let me only be assured of forgiveness and let the Cross lie on
me still. 2. The second is when we can Tolerare et amare, bear and love too.
When our suffering turns not to murmuring or disobedience, but so affects us,
that (notwithstanding our chastisment) we can love God with his chastisment,
and for it say with Job, Blessed be the name of the Lord. When it is Benedictus
Dominus in Job 1. 21.
donis suis, blessed be God in his gifts, Jobs wife can say grace as well as he;
but when it comes in ablationibus suis, blessed be God, who takes away, a true
note arises of difference between true and counterfeit patience. It is in this
as in the affections, when they arise from contrary objects, they are true and
not counterfeit; as when justice, which properly stirs up fear, works love in
us, and when we can fear him for his mercy which properly stirs up love. Wicked
men may fear God for his justice, and love him for his mercy; but the true note
of difference is, if we love him for his justice, and can say with David, There
is mercy with thee that thou may be feared. So that when a man can love God,
as we count it, post injuriam, this is true love, and is a sign of true
patience. The Heathen man said, that's true love, cum amare possis post
injuriam, when one can love him that has injured him. 3. The third is, when we
find our selves humble in our sufferings, which is a distinction between true
Christian patience and heretical. The Fathers in the primitive Church had much
to do to make the people observe the difference of patience between a true
Christian and a Donatist; and were forced to use these two notes of
distinction.
1. That in the suffering of a Donatist (which is to be observed in our days)
they should find a spirit of pride and vanity, whereas true patience is
humble. And this humility appeared in the Martyrs sufferings, which was without
disputation with God about the cause, or murmuring at the torments: tolerabunt
and non gemuerunt; or else respondent pro Deo, they either bear them, and mourn
in silence, or if they reply, it is on Gods behalf, like Job, of whom the Holy
Ghost says, In all this Job 1. 22. 2. 10.
Job sinned not, nor charged God foolishly. And, In all this did not Job sin
with his lips. He did nothing to bewray impatience. True patience is humble,
and says with David, Tacui Domine, quia tu fecisti, I kept silence, O Lord,
because it is thy doing. 2. The other note is Alacrity. It was observed by the
Fathers, that the Circumcelliones in their sufferings had no alacrity, but
(...), without passion, it is true, they were not moved, but they suffered not
cheerfully. They bore them, but they rejoiced not; they did (...), overcome, as
those that in some diseases, cure without pain, or using Narcotick medicines do
overcome the pain, but Christian patience does more, In all these, says the
Apostle, Romans, 8. 37. (...), we do more then overcome. It does (...),
overcome, and more then so, for it rejoices too. So the Apostles after they
had been scourged, departed, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer
for the Name of Christ; whereas the suffering of Acts 5. 41.
Heretics, though it discovered no fear or grief, yet it wanted this
rejoicing, it had no alacrity in it.
Now concerning the sixth Rule (as is in the former.) It is not enough for a
man to say to his own soul, Why art thou so impatient? but we must say to
others, Psalm 27. 14.
Sustine Dominum (as the Psalmist) wait (and that patiently) on the Lord. We do
what we can by our comforts and exhortations to make them patient. On the other
side, if there be any provocation to impatiency in others, as Jobs wife, we
must answer them with him. And this is the knowledge that every one should
have, and it is folly in them that have it not. For Doctrina viri per
patientiam noscitur, the discretion of a man deferreth anger, says Solomon,
Proverbs 19. 11. and as S. Gregory adds, Tanto minus quisque ostenditur
doctus, quanto convincitur minus patiens: nec enim potest veraciter bona
docendo impendere, si vivendo aequanimiter nesciat mala tolerare, every man
shows himself the less learned, by how much the less patient: nor can he well
teach to do well, if he know not how to bear evil.

And thus much concerning the first Proposition, Thou shall have a God.
CHAP. XV.
The second thing required in the first Commandment, To have the true God for
our God. Reasons hereof. Of true Religion. This is the true pearl to be sought.
Three rules in seeking. The extremes of Religion. 1. Idolatry, 2. superstition,
3. Profaneness, 4. novelty, of which three degrees. 1. Schism. 2. Heresy. 3.
Apostasy. The means of true Religion. The signs of procuring it in others.

The second Proposition.
THere remain two propositions more in this Commandment.

1. Thou shall have me the true God, for thy God; and this includes the virtue
of religion, viz. true religion, which is the having the true God for our God.
All other religions are the extremes forbidden. 2. The second is, Thou shall
have no other Gods but me, that is, thou shall have one God alone, and thou
shall have me alone, and this includes the virtue of sincerity, which is
opposite to all mixtures of true religion with any other.
Besides these propositions drawn out of the whole precept, there are two other
virtues included in the first and last words of this Commandment. 1. Upon the
last words (...) coram facie mea, before my face, is grounded, the virtue of
integrity or uprightness, opposed to hypocrisy; and upon the first words, Non
erunt tibi, [thou shall not] the virtue of perseverance. For the words are in
the future tense, and extend to the whole course of our life. and these are the
particulars that remain to be handled in this commandment.

The second proposition then, is, Thou shall have me for thy God. For it is not
2.
enough to have a God, unless he be the true God. And this is true religion.
Naturally our affections are bent, and chiefly bestowed on some one thing above
the rest, and to this all our actions refer, and this whatsoever it be is our
God. As some upon an Idol, or false god, which, as the Apostle speaks, is
nothing. Or some upon the god of this 1 Cor. 8. 4.
world (that is, the Devil.) Some have their belly for their god, that is, the
flesh. 2 Cor. 4. 4.
Phil. 3. 19.
Some idolize their money and wealth, the love where of is idolatry, as the
same Apostle. Ephesians. 5. 5.
Thus as S. Augustine says, unusquisque comeditur ab aliquo zelo, every man is
zealous for some thing or other. And concerning all such the Prophet makes his
complaint, that there is a generation of men that turn the glory of the true
God into dishonor, that are not careful to render God his true honor, and
their religion is, Psalm. 4. 2.
as the Apostle says of knowledge, scientia falsi nominis, religion falsely so
called. For 1 Timothy 6. 20.
they follow vanity and lies, and therefore eat the fruit of lies, as the
Prophet speaks, Hos. 10. 13.
that is, grief of mind, smart of body, and confusion of soul. That which
Plato says of this is true, (...), etc. Every soul if it has not the truth,
it is not because it wants desire of the truth, and if it find it not out, it
is against the will of it, unless it degenerate from its nature. When Abraham
had told Abimelech that Genesis 20. 9.
Sarah was his sister, not his wife, he (though a Heathen) could tell Abraham
that he Job. 8. 44.
had done that he ought not to have done. And that which is more strange, the
Devil, Genesis 3. 2.
(though the father of lies) could say to the woman, Yea is it true indeed?
Has God said ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden? He was desirous
that Eve should give him a true answer. So we see the force of truth, that
howsoever it is not practiced, yet in judgment, not only the good but the
wicked, even the Heathen, and the Devil himself would not willingly be beguiled
with falsehood.

One reason why God, though he commands only true religion, yet permits the 1
pet. 1. 7.
false, is, in respect of that which was named before, the trial of our faith,
which is more precious with God then all the riches of the world. This trial
has been the cause, why God has permitted and does permit so many errors,
heresies, and false worships, we may allude to it by comparison: that albeit
God has abundance of all things to make all men rich, and so could have done;
yet for trial of a liberal Deuteronomy. 15. 11.
and compassionate mind in the rich, he says, The poor shall never cease out
of the land: So it may be said in the case of truth, It had been an easy
matter for God to have taken order, that every man should enjoy the true
profession but on ly for this trial. Ideo oportet haereses esse inter vos,
therefore there 1 Cor. 11. 19.
must be heresies among you, and why? because they which are approved may be
Genesis 1. 3.
made manifest among you. He that said, Fiat lux, let there be light and it was
made, could have as easily said, Sit veritas, let there be truth, let there be
plenty of truth, and it should have been so, but he has given the reason why
he suffers error, that they may be tried, that seek after the truth.

Another reason of this is, that forasmuch as God has magnified his word, and
truth above all things, and that it is the chiefest thing, and that he makes
most Psalm. 138. 2.
account of, he would therefore have it diligently to be sought by us, that we
should show our conformity to him in the estimation of it, and magnify it
above all things.

For the necessity of it much need not be spoken, it has been partly handled
already; but because truth and true religion is a way, as S. Peter calls it,
and that way 2 pet. 2. 2.
must bring us to the right end, then it follows, that of necessity we are to
find it. John 16. 13.
The spirit of truth is to guide us, and therefore it is requisite we find
him. If we find it not, we cannot come to our end. Eunti in via aliquis trit
terminus, but error immensus est, if a man keep the way he shall at length come
to an end of his journey, but error has no end; therefore the way must be
found.

The thing commanded is Religion, and true Religion, very nominis Religio,
which Matthew. 13. 45.
our Savior under the name of the kingdom of heaven compares to a pearl, and
him that sought after it, to Merchant, that seeking after many, found one pearl
of inestimable price and value, and when he had found it, sold all that he had,
and bought it. In which we may consider his desire which is branched out into
three acts. 1. Quaesivit. 2. Invenit. 3. Emit. He sought, found, and bought.

1. In regard of the manifold errors and falsehoods in the world, Investigation
is most necessary; that is, an earnest study and applying of the mind, to
find out truth among many errors, contrary to the custom of this age, where
no man desires to seek, but in that Religion wherein a man is born, in that he
will grow up, and in that he will dye, and imagine that he has found the pearl
without seeking, and so when our studies ripen, we only stick to some men's
institutions. Moses seems to Deuteronomy. 4. 32.
be of another mind, and not only exhorts, but commands the Israelites to
enquire into all antiquities, and in all parts and ends of the world, whether
there were any Religion so true as theirs. No man then ought to suppose he has
found the truth, before he has sought it; and a promise there is of finding if
we seek. The Matthew. 7. 7.
promise of the calling of the Gentiles, that God would be found of them that
sought him not, is no rule for us in this case: but as we must enquire, so we
must examine all truths. There are many counterfeit pearls; a man must be able
to distinguish, before he sell all to buy a pearl.

Hereditary Religion, Religion upon offense taken, Religion upon a sudden,
these three at this time possess the most of mankind.

1. Either because they will be of the mind of Auxentius, In hac fide natus
sum, in hac item moriar, and in this case Religion finds us, and not we it.
2. Or, because I have received some indignity in one Religion, I will be of
another: or because we have sustained some loss, or had some cross by our
Religion, therefore we will go over seas, and there we will seck and find the
pearl, and are able to defend it to be so. 3. There is religio repentina a
sudden religion. This is a stumbling upon Religion Esaias 65. 1.
without study, by some that seek to revelations, and prefer fancies before
ordinary 1 These. 5. 21.
means: whereas God has given ordinary means, we must have time, and study,
and means to find it; for in other cases and without these there is no promise
nor warrant from God, that we shall light upon it.
But if any shall say we have found it before we sought it, as God says of a
people, I was found of them that sought me not, we must add, with the Apostle,
Omnia probate, there is an examination answerable to seeking: they that have it
must either seek it or examine it, and not make examination of the truth in
Religion a matter of death, as the Turks do.

Seek therefore we must, and in seeking the Fathers give many rules, but
especially two rules must be observed.

1. The first our Savior gives, quaerite primu^. It must be sought before all
other things, Matthew. 6. 33.
and in the first place, because the seeking of it will it all things else Seek
the Lord (says the Prophet) while he may be found, and call upon him while
Esaias 55. 6.
he is near. S. Paul says, All seek their own, not the things which are Jesus
Christ's. phil. 2. 21.
But if we give primum to our own, and not when we seek for Christ's God will
not be near, but leaves us. 2. The second is given by Moses. If thou seek the
Lord thy God with all thy Deuteronomy. 4. 29.
heart, and with all thy soul, thou shall find him. God says by the Prophet,
Ye shall Jerem. 29. 13.
seek me and find me, when ye shall search for me with all your heart. We must
seek with tears, as Mary did the body of Christ, John 20. 15. we must seek for
the truth, as Solomon says men must do for wisdom, how is that? as men seek
for silver or prove. 2. 4.
hid treasures; and, as the Prophet, if ye will enquire, enquire; that is,
enquire indeed. Jerem. 45. 5.
But if either we primum quaerere grandia, if we first seek great things for
(...) selves, and religion after; or seek, and not seek, by seeking coldly;
(...) seeking his fathers asses, and the woman seeking her groat will prove to
be with more care then ours for religion: such seekers will never find. 3. The
third is. As we must seek for the truth, if we have it not, and when we 1. Tim.
6. 3.
have it examine it, so when we have it, we must acquiescere we must rest in
it. The Ephesians. 6. 14.
use of religion serves us instead of a girdle to (...) our loins, that is,
truth must be applied as close to our souls, as a girdle to our reins.
For the negative part, what is here forbidden, may be reduced to these two
heads.

1. One extreme opposite to true religion, is (...), the excess, when we give
honor, either cui non oportet, to whom it is not due, or quantum non oportet,
or more then is due: the first is commonly called Idolatry, the other
superstition. 2. Another extreme is parum, the defect, when we do not give
honor cui oportet, to whom it is due, or not quantum oportet, not so much as
is due. The first is called profaneness, which usually ends in Atheism, the
other is non-acquiescence, or not resting in religion, when men seek out
novelties, and receive the truth (...) in part: and this divides it self into
two branches. 1. Schism. 2. Heresse: which ends in Apostasy.
1. The cui non oportet, is Idolatry, whether it be by giving divine honor and
worship, or ascribing any part of Gods office to any creature, as S. Augustine
speaks: within which comes dealing and covenanting with the Devil, or trusting
to his instruments, Sorcerers, Charmers, Dreamers, and other Inchanters. So if
a man yield any of the former affections and virtues, as love, fear, etc. to
the Devil, if he fear the stars, or attribute any thing to dreams,
enchantments, ligatures, lots, characters, etc. it is comprehended within this.
God tells us by the Prophet, that none can foreshew Deu. 18. 10, 11
things to come, but himself, (not meaning things known by natural causes) but
where there is causa libera a free cause. Therefore if divine honor be
attribute: to any of these, a part of Gods peculiar offices, is taken from him,
and the most of them are reckoned up by Moses, and God threatens to punish
them. In the (...) Jerem. 10. 2.
Jeremy there is a plain commandment against the ascribing any thing to stars.
So (...) Esaias 8. 19.
Ezekiel 21. 21.
against Wizards and divination. Saul enquired of the Witch of Endor, and 1 Samuel 28. 16
you see Gods anger toward him for it. And Ahaziah using the like means to
recover 1 Chro. 10. 13
his sickness, was reproved by Elijah, Is it not because there is no God in
Israel, that ye 2 Kings 1. 3.
go to inquire of Baalzebub the God of Ekron? Though the Witch at Endor
foretold Saul's death, and spoke truth, yet Saul's act is condemned. 1.
Chronicles 10. 13. And though the Pythonist in the Acts confessed, that the
Apostles were servants of Act. 16. 17. 18
the living God, yet S. Paul rebuked the spirit that was in her, and made him
come forth. Yea though a Prophet foretell a truth, and yet says, let us go
after other Deuteronomy. 2. 1. 2. 5
gods, he shall be put to death.

2. The other, quantum non oportet, to give too much honor, is commonly
referred to superstition. The second Council at Nice erected images, and their
principal reason was, because God could not be remembered too much: but that
was no good argument, for then there could be no superstition. Tully shows how
the word superstition came first up. There were certain old Romans, that did
nothing but pray, day and night, that their children might outlive them, and be
superstites: whereupon they were called superstitious. In this respect we also
condemn the Euchytes.

It is true, as the Fathers say, that for quantitas absoluta, the absolute
quantity, if we were as the Angels, there were no (...); but for as much as in
man there is but quantitas ad analogiam; or ad propartionem, and thereby he
has no absolutenes, but ex condition, we must do that whereby we may
continue, and go forward to the glorifying of God. and because of his weakness,
for a man to spend himself in one day makes a nimium in religione, and
consequently, superstitition.

2. For the other extreme, Parum, when we give too little, and that either 1.
cui non oportet, or non quantum, the fi st is commonly called Prophanent (...),
which was a punishment from the beginning, that a man should be such a one,
that he should not come intra sanum, within the Church, but to stand extra
which many now a days count no punishment; nay it is to be feared that it has
a reward, and that such people are the better thought of. Too many of this fort
are in these times that value religion and Gods worship no more then (...) did
his birthright.

2. The second part of this extreme is, when we give not quantum oportet, so
much to God as we ought, when we will not rest or acquiesce in what God has by
his Church prescribed, and delivered to us, but affect novelties, and desire
new and strange things (...), and therefore that God might make novelties the
more odious to us, he has made it a name for those things he most Levit. 10. 1.
hates. Nadab and Abihu are said to have offered strange fire to the Lord, and
the prove. 2. 16.
Genesis 35. 2.
wiseman calls an harlot a strange woman; Jacob commands his family to put
away strange gods. It is called in Deuteronomy. for (...) post deos alienos. This
being bewitched with the desire of novelties, and new devises, has changed the
pure doctrine of the Primitive religion, and marred this religion where it is
predominant. Thus the Galatians were bewitched, Galat. 3. 1. and none but the
Attica ingenia, which is spoken of in the acts, are given to it, Academick
doubting spirits, Scepticks in Act. 17.
Religion.

There are three degrees in novelty. 1. Schism. 2. Heresy. 3. Apostasy. In
which one makes way for another.

1. Schism is the high way to superstition, as also to profaneness. And it
is so called properly, when a man upon unjust dislike, either of government or
worship or doctrine professed, or for some indifferent rites, withdraws from
the communion of the Church in public duties, and refuses to submit to his
spiritual governors, the Bishops and Pastors of the Church, and so will make a
rent in, and from the 1. Cor. 1. 10.
whole body: whereas the Apostles counsel is, that all would speak one thing,
and that there be no dissentions, but be knit in one mind and in one
judgment; and in another place, not to forsake the fellowship we have among
our selves. 2. Heresy is (as S. Augustine defines it) Dum scripturae bonae
intelliguntur non been, Heb. 10. 25.
and quod in (...) non been intelligitur etiam temere and audaciter asseritur,
when good Scripture is not well understood, and that they affirm that rashly
and boldly that they 1 Cor. 11. 19
understand not well. S. Jerome goes further, Quicunque alias scripturam
intelligit, Tract. 18. in John.
quam sensus spirious S. flagitat, quo conscripta est, licet, de ecclesia non
recesserit, tamen haereticus appellari potest, he that makes another
interpretation of Scripture, then according to the sense of the holy Ghost,
although he depart not from the Church, yet may be called an Heretic. This
must not be understood of every error, but of sundamental errors, and such as
are wilfully held, when there are sufficient means to convince one of the
truth. Acts 5. 17. 3. Apostasy is a general defection or falling from all
points of religion.
The means to find out true religion are, besides the public and general
means, Hearkening to the voice of the Church, to whom Christ has entrusted the
truth, and which is therefore called by S. Paul, the ground and pillar of
truth. Act. 8. 28.


1. The Eunuchs means, reading the Scripture, He read the Prophet Esaias.

2. Cornelius means prayers, alms, and fasting, and that (which is strange
being Act. 10. 2.
a Heathen, before he was called) he was said to be a man that feared God: But
the Fathers resolve it well, why he was said to be so; quia non detinuit
veritatem in injustitia, he withheld not the truth in unrightousnesse, as the
Apostle speaks, and did Romans 1. 18.
not abuse his natural light and therefore God bestowed a further light upon
him. So that if men use Cornelius means, and not suppress the light they have,
God will give them his grace and further light to lead them into all necessary
truths.

3. The third is Apollos means, to have paratum cor, to be ready and willing to
Act. 18. 24.
increase the knowledge we have already. These are the principal means: other
26.
means were mentioned before, when we spoke of knowledge.

The signs of true religion were four: of which formerly we have spoken, and
therefore will but name them. 1. The Antiquity. 2. The purging of the soul. 3.
The beginning and growth of it. And 4. Lastly the examples of excellent virtues
in the professors. All these Saint Augustine accounts the especial De Civ.
Dei.
signs.

The sixth rule for purging it in others. King David desired that he might not
die yet, because the dust could not declare Gods truth. And our Savior says,
that he psalm. 30. 10.
was borne and came into the world to bear witness unto the truth. And on the
contrary we are commanded to mark and avoid those which cause division and
offenses John 18. 37
contrary to true doctrine.

CHAP. XVI.
The third thing required in the 1. Commandment is, to have only the true
God, which includes Sincerity Reasons hereof. The Contraries to sincerity.
Means of sincerity. Signs of sincerity. Of procuring it in others.

Thus much for the second general proposition, and the virtue therein required
viz, religion. Now for the third. Habebis me solum Deum. We must have him only
for our God, and this includes Sincerity.

It is not enough to have him for our God, but we must have him alone for our
God: none but me, as the Chaldee, and Septuagint read. Our Savior, says thou
shall worship the Lord thy God and him only shall thou serve: which is (...)
Mat. 4. 10.
one with Deuteronomy. 6. 13. and 10. 20. only there is not (...) him only, but it
is supplied by our Savior, and all comes from the same spirit. The reasons
were touched before, yet we will mention some of them again.

1. The first is, because it trencheth upon Gods honor and glory to have a
partner, and that men should worship other gods. The Apostles end their (...),
with Soli Deo (...) et gloria. Romans 2. Peter. and Saint Jude. And the reason
the Prophet gives, My glory says God, will I not give to another, his glory is
indivisible, Esa. 42. 8.
if any will add a partner see the conditions, 1 Samuel 7. 3. God promises,
(...) Judge. 10. 14.
the people will leave serving of other gods, he will be their deliverer but if
they serve any other gods, he will deliver them no more, but bids them go to
them, and let them save them.

2. Another is taken from the titles given to God: as a father, a king, a (...)
Malach. 1. 6.
O hearken to the voice of my calling, My king. A husband. I will marry thee
(...) psalm. 5. 2.
me, says God by the Prophet. A Master. If I be a Master, where is my fear?
And Hos. 2. 20.
Math. 6. 24.
of all these we can have but one: but one father, one husband, one king. one
master. We cannot serve God and Mammon. And therefore we can have but one God.

3. The third was touched before, To join any with him, who is below him (and
whosoever he is, he must be below him) is to abase him: if we could join any
that were equal or his match, it were otherwise. If we join worse with better,
it disgraces it. wine with water is the weaker. If you go to Bethel, and erect
an altar to Jehovah, you must put a way other strange gods. No halting with the
Israelites Esa. 1. 22.
Genesis 35. 2.
between God and Baal. No swaering by Jehovah and Malcom with one breath. No 1
Kin. 18. 21
keeping the feast with leaven; no mixture in religion, but our passover must
Zeph. 1. 5.
be kept with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth, says the Apostle.
And therefore all mixture was forbiden under the Law, both in figure Deuteronomy. 22.
9 1 Cor. 5. 8.
and by express precept, Deuteronomy. 4. 10. there must be (...), as the Apostle
speaks, 2. Cor. 1. 22. a judging of mixed and counterfeit wares, by bringing
them to the sun: God will search with lanthorns: sincerity is sine cera, pure
honey, without wax, such must our religion be.

The thing forbidden and opposite to sincerity is.

1. Mixture in religion, and that both in respect of the matter of it, and of
our affections toward it.

1. For the matter. Our Savior says. No man puts new and old cloth
together Luc. 5. 36.
in a garment, or new wine into old vessels. This mixture of religion
corrupts it: as that of the Turks is a religion compounded of all: and the
Pagans worship diverse gods. The whore of Babylon is said to have a mixed cup,
Rev. 18. 6.

2 For the mixture of affections. As our religion ought to be sincere, so our
affections. A mixture of hot and cold maks lukewarm, which temper is loathsome
to Rev. 3. 16.
Christ. The religion of such is for their ends, not for Gods glory: as they
which sought Christ for the loaves. They are duplici cord, as Saint James
calls them. John. 6. 26.
There is no worse fault then to be lukewarm; therefore we must be resolved to
be either Jam. 1. 8.
hot or cold.

2. The other extreme forbidden, is the defect, as that of mixture in excess,
that is, when men will so reform and purify religion, that they destroy it.
Pro. (...). 23. The wringing of the nose brings forth blood qui mungit
nimium, sanguinem elicit, he that will make his nose too clear, makes it
bleed; so when men will cleanse the church too much, instead of purifying it
from mixtures in composition, they give it a bloody nose, as sectaries and
heretics usually do, who always pretend reformation, when they rend the
church, and make it bleed, sometimes to death.

The means of sincerity in religion.

1. There is no better, then that which is implied in that wish of Christ, I
would thou were cold or hot: we must avoid lukewarmnes, which causes wavering
in religion, and come to a resolution; we must resolve to be what we profess,
and to stick to the truth: then we shall be mel sincerum, pure honey sine cera,
purified from all mixture.

2. When we are resolved to adhere to the truth, then we must come to the
price, and value aright. It is true, that Job says. Man knows not the price
of it. Job 28. 13.
Though we would give our selves and all we have for it, yet we cannot give a
full price for it, and therefore must not for any price part with it. Merchants
use to set a mark upon their clothes or other wares of the lowest price they
will sell them at: now the truth is of such a value, that we cannot set any
price whereupon to part with it. How high soever our price be, if we part with
it, God may say to us, as the Prophet does in the person of Christ, when they
weighed for his Zach. 11. 12.
price thirty pieces of silver, a goodly price it is that I was valued at by
them; a price more fit to buy potsheards, and therefore he casts it to the
potter. Surely God sets no such price on us, or valued us at so small a rate,
however we value Christ or his truth 1 Cor. 6. 20.
Empti estis pretio, says Saint Paul, we are bought with a price, more then
thirty pices of filver not with corruptable things, as gold and silver, but
with the blood of Christ, as of a lamb withour spot: a lesser price would not
serve to redeem us, for if it would, all should have gone rather then he;
therefore as he prized us, so must we prize him, and his truth, above all
corruptible things in the world.

The signs of sincere or true religion have been handled before: we shall
touch only a few.

1. True religion ascribes all good to God alone, and gives no part of his
honor to any creature. 2. It favors not man in his corrupt desires, its no
doctrine of liberty, but restraines all carnal liberty; it teaches us to
despise father and mother, friends, yea a man's self and all for God. 3. It is
free from those mixtures which have been the decay of religion, which were 1.
mingling it with errors of vain Philosophy, which Saint Augustine calls
Coloss. 2. 8.
rations philosophorum, obtusae, acutae the acute and yet obtuse or blunt
reasons of Philosophers. Thus Clemenes Alex. and Origan by Platos (...) and
Aristotle's (...) vshered diverse errors into the Church.
2. With Jewish fables, which the Apostle bids Titus beware of, Jewish rites
and ceremonies abrogated by Christ, which he calls egena et infirma elementa,
weak and beggarly rudiments. Tit. 1. 14.


3. It does penetrare cor, it pierces into the soul, circumcises the heart,
mortifies all carnal lusts and desires, false religion reaches chiefly to the
outward man. True religion enflames the heart and affections with love of God,
and makes us prize him above all worldly things, that we can say with David,
whom have I in heaven but thee etc. And makes us able to answer Christ's
question to S. Peter, diligis me plus etc. Love thou me more then these? that
we can say, we love him more then these, all these things on earth: and where
this is not, there is not sincere religion rooted in the heart.

The sixth rule is, for procuring sincerity in others; especially we must
exhort others, as the Apostle does Timothy, and all those that succeed him in
the like office of a Bishop in the church, to keep the commandment, that is,
the doctrine and religion left etcommanded by Christ, (...), without spot,
unrebukeable: and when Gala. 2. 11.
Saint Peter seemed to Judaize, he reproved him to his face; so ought we in our
places and stations to oppose the corruptions and novelties brought into
religion, contrary to the primitive and Catholic truth.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the last words in the first Commandment, Coram me, in which is implied
Integrity. Reasons for it. Of Hypocrisy, and reasons against it. Signs of a
sound heart. An observation from the first words. Non habebis. They are in the
Future tense, and imply perseverance. Reasons for it. The extremes. 1.
Constancy in evil. 2. Inconstancy in good. Four reasons against Backsliding.
signs of perseverance. Of procuring it in others.

Coram me, Before me.
This is the last part of this Commandment. And this Coram me, says saint
Augustine 3.
has a great Emphasis in it, even so much as makes a distinction between this
and the three other Commandments of the first Table: and it is to be taken
according to the third rule of Extent before specified, viz. that is spiritual
and extends to the heart. Coram me, Not in my sight. That is, thou shall not
have any other God not so much as in the secret corner of thy heart: for God is
scrutator cordis, Romans 8. 27.
a searcher of the heart. This implies the virtue of integrity. The law is
spiritual, 7. 14.
says the Apostle, and therefore the duties here commanded, are to be, not
only coram facie humana et coram luce, in the sight of men and in the light,
which reach only to the exterior act of Gods worship, but this coram tenebris
et coram facie Dei, in Esa. 45. 7.
the darkness, and in Gods sight, reaches to the thoughts, the inward parts of
the psalm. 139. 11. 93. 9.
soul, which belong properly to the sight of God. It is God that formed the
light, and created the darkness. And therefore, as the Psalmist says, the
darkness and light are both to him alike. And he that made the eye shall he not
see? He sees not only what the eve sees, but also because he forms the
spirit of man, Zach. 12. 1. He sees what the eye sees not, but only the
spirit of a man beholds, and that, as Saint Augustine says, whether the Candle
burn, or is put out; and which is more 1 John. 3. 20.
then all this, he sees further then the spirit of man can see; for though our
heart condemns us not, yet he can, for he is greater then our heart, and knows
more then our heart or spirit.

Again this [ Coram me] distinguishes true obedience from a bare appearance:
for bonum apparens, good in show, may be Coram homine before man; but bonum
verum is only Coram me, before God. For Coram homine before man, or any other
Coram, argues nothing to be other then in appearance: but Coram Deo makes it
indeed. Saint Paul Ephesians. 3. 16. Divides every man into an inward, and an
outward man and the same words are use bid Plato before him, whence some gather
he had read Plato; there is (...), and (...), an inward and an outward man, and
which of these two pleases God best, himself shows in Eliab, and David.
Samuel had a 1 Samuel 16. 7.
liking to Eliabs countenance, but God said, look not on it, for I have refused
him psalm. 51. 6.
God saw more into him then Samuel could. God looks into the heart, and Luke
17. 11.
therefore requires truth in the inward parts. For there God rules especially.
The kingdom of God is within you, as our Savior said to the Pharisees. There
it must begin, and there he delights to be most, if our heart he right, from
thence he expects his worship. For in the heart is the principal seat of
Christ's scepter, there be rules, subduing our wills to God. There is in all men
a corrupt desire of appearing outwardly to men, (...), we affect to seem
something, as Saul, when he spoke to Samuel, who had told him that God had
rejected him, yet says 1 Samuel 15. 30
he, Honor me, I pray thee, before the elders of my people, and before Israel:
such is our nature to appear outwardly to men; but this appearance commends us
not to God, for he delights most in the truth and sincerity of the heart, for,
as the common saying is, every man is chiefly delighted with that, wherein he
is singular and exceeds others; and because that God alone can search the
heart, therefore he delights in it, and requires our obedience to be coram
facie mea, as in his sight. Therefore it is that the Wise man counsels a man
to keep his heart with all Prove. 4. 23.
diligence. He gives a double reason, for it is the principal member, and
therefore gives God the chief glory; and further it is the fountain of all our
actions by none of which is God honored, if they come from a corrupt fountain;
nay they are so far from being accepted that they are abominable, and therefore
according to the disposition of the heart, life or death proceeds: if we
worship God with a right heart, then we shall reap life; if that be unsound,
death eternal follows. And therefore necessitas incumbit, we had need to keep
that member right. For all those glorious duties before spoken of, if they want
integrity, or a good heart, they are so far from Gods acceptance, that they
become abomination. For if we believe, Romans 10. 10.
our faith must come from the heart; if we love it must be not in word, but 1
John 3. 18.
in truth, which comes from the heart. Our obedience also must proceed from the
Romans 6. 17.
Col. 3. 23.
heart. To conclude this, whatsoever we do, we must do it heartily, as to the
Lord, and not to men.

That which is here commanded is called, virtus integritatis by the Fathers,
inward soundness against hollownesse, and sincerity against mixture. And they
ground it upon Gods charge to Abraham, when he made the covenant of
Circumcision, Genesis 17. 1.
Ambula coram me, what that is, God explained in the next words, and esto
integer, walk before me, and be upright or perfect without hypocrisy. It is
commonly joined in Scripture with another word, Job was an upright and just
man, the words Job. 1. 1. 8. 6.
signify properly, straight and sound, upright and pure in another place; and
an honest Luke 8. 15.
and good heart in another. The nature of the word integer is taken from
timber, it must be straight without, and sound within; straight that it be not
crooked, coram facie humana, and sound that it be not hollow coram facie
divina, before God. Therefore Exodus 25. 11. 37. 2.
the Ark was overlaid with gold, without and within, and in this respect it was
that the Psalmist distinguished the Church (the Kings daughter) from other
Kings psalm 45. 14.
daughters, her outward beauty might be parraleld, but she was all glorious
within. It is the inward beauty which is required chiefly.

That which is forbidden is hypocrisy. Our Savior taxed it in the Pharisees,
by telling them they had a care to make clean the outside of the cup and
platter, but had Matthew. 23. 25.
no regard to that which was intus, within. This is the sin of seven woes, more
then we read that any other sin had. Of which S. Chrysostom says,
Pharisaeorum justitia erat in ostentatione operis, non in rectitudine
intentionis, the righteousness of the Pharisees consisted in ostentation of
their works, not in the uprightness of their Hos. 7. 11.
intents. The other extreme is that the Prophet taxes in Ephraim, whom he called
a Matthew. 10. 16.
silly dove without heart: this is simplicity without wisdom, when there is as
our Savior intimates, Columba sine serpente, the dove without the serpent. Of
such speaks Solomon, when he says, that a fool utters all his mind, he
poures out his spirit without any manner of wisdom and discretion, before every
man: our integrity therefore must be preserved with wisdom.

1. The way to keep our selves in this integrity. First, Seneca's council to
Lucillus The means.
(who desired this virtue) was, when he took any thing in hand, to imagine that
Cato, Scipio, or some other of the ancient Romans, renowned for virtue, stood
before him. But it is a better way for us to do as the Psalmist did, to set God
always psalm 16. 9.
before our eyes, conceiving, (and that truly) that whatsoever we do is in his
presence. If that will not work with us, then to set God not absolutely, but as
he will sit, when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed, at the day of
judgment. The day Romans 2. 16.
(as the Apostle speaks) when God shall judge the secrets of all men: for (as
the Preacher Eccles. 12. 14.
says) God shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing.

2. Another motive, and that a forceable one, to persuade us will be, that God
requires an exact and sincere service of us to himself, because he commands
Ephesians. 6. 5.
singleness of heart from servants to their Masters even with fear and
trembling. If this; (...), eye-service will not be allowed by God, as current
toward men, much less will he allow it to himself.

3. Lastly, if we consider the integrity of Christ's heart to us, of whom we
read, that it was pierced, and that he spent his very heart blood for us: if we
consider that, it will stir us up to have a reciprocal heart to him, and say
with S. Bernard, just cor nostrum vindicat, qui cor suum pro nostro dedit, he
may justly challenge our hearts, that gave his for ours. When he had offered
his hands, feet, and other members for us, yet thought it not sufficient, but
gave his heart for us also. It is not our tongue, hands, or feet, that can
requite it; our hearts will be too little, if we give them also up to him.

1. And we shall know whether our hearts be upright or no, first, by the
Heathen Signs of uprightness.
man's rule, Nil conscire sibi, nulla pallescere culpa
-- hic murns (...) us (...).


A sound heart is like a wall of brass, and is so full of courage that it can
say, with the Apostle, (...) perminimum est, ut a vobis judicer, it is a very
small thing that I should be judged by you. It is the soundness of the heart
that will make it bold, if 1 Cor. 4. 3.
we be not (...) mali to our selves, that we know no evil in our selves. This
made John Baptists heart to be above King Herodes power; the want of it made
Peter afraid Mark 6. 8. 14. 66. 69.
at a silly Damsels speech, charging him to be of Christ's company.

2. Another mark like to this, is, if we be firm and upright under the cross.
If afflictions alter us not: for troubles and crosses will dishonor the
integrity of our hearts. Look how we stand affected in them, if firm, then no
doubt but we are right. If we can say with King Hezekiah, Remember, O Lord, how
I have walked before thee in 2 King. 20. 3.
truth, and with a perfect heart: this upheld him when he was sick even unto
death; but e contra, if the heart be not sound, then in any cross, it melts
within us like wax, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm 22. 14.

3. If we derest sin in our selves, and punish it no less in our selves then
others. Judah Gen 38. 24.
at the first in the case of Thamar, cried, Bring her away, let her be burnt;
but upon 26.
further consideration, when it came to be his own case, there was a sudden
alteration, she was more righteous then I. This is much like that the Heathen
man said of (...) and his fellow, that they did odisse tyrannum, but not
tyrannidem, they hated the tyrant, but not the tyranny: whereas a sound heart
hates sin most of all in it self, even the least sin as we see in the Apostle
when he cried out, O wretched man that I Romans 7. 24.
am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?

4. The last is somewhat hard. If we can with confidence say those two last
verses of the pialmist, Search me, O Lord, and know my heart, try me, and know
my psalm. 139. 23, 24.
thoughts, and see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead mein the way
everlasting. If any dare take this upon him, and can speak it truly not
deceiving himself, his heart is upright in him: but a gentler trial then this
is, if a man can say in four particular cases, as he in another place, if there
be any wickedness in my hands, etc. let the enemy persecute my soul, etc. And
when we with communing with our own hearts privately, can say, as my heart has
been upright with thee, 7. 3.
so I desire in my last gasp to be comforted by thee, O Lord, and to be helped
in my 5.
greatest need. In these cases a man may perceive whether his heart be sound,
4. 4.
or not.

And this according to the sixth rule stays not in our selves, but desires to
have it in others also, with S. Paul, who prayed for the Philippians, that they
might be sincere. Phil. 1. 10.
And so did the friends of Job, though they took a wrong course in their
comforts, yet they were right in this, that they had a desire to make Jobs
heart upright. Thus far of integrity.

One point more rests to be handled within the last general Proposition, and
Perseverance.
that is, Non habebis, Thou shall not have. The observation is, that it is set
down in the future tense, which implies perseverance; and this is the knitting
up of all. It stands first in the text, non habebis, and non erunt, thou
shall not have, and there shall not be, but in order of handling it has the
last place, because it is the shutting up of all.

The words, Non habebis must not be answered with non habeo, or non habui, but
with non habebo, I will have no other gods; and this is perseverance. This is a
greater matter then many do imagine: fui, sum, and ero are distinctions of the
three times.

1. For fui; it is certain, that whosoever shall consider what he has been,
will be brought into a melancholic and sad passion. S. Bernard says,
Recordare praeterita, and erubesce, it will confound a man to remember what he
has done. 2. For sum. Peradventure there my be some comfort, inregard that we
endeavor and strive to obtain. 3. But howsoever it stands with us for the
present, our comfort depends chiefly upon ero, what we shall be; and if we
persevere not in good, ero must needs be terrible: for a man to consider in
what case he may be hereafter, and considerare novissima, to think upon his
end: whether God may not forsake him, if he be not careful to persevere on his
part, as he has done others, that have been for the present in as good and
peradventure better case then he is, but were not careful to endeavor, and to
use the means required on their part, to persevere, and therefore were left of
God, and returned with the dog to their vomit: therefore non habebis is a sharp
and strict command, and to be looked to.
In the common conveyances at Law, there is, Habendum and tenendum to have and
to hold; we have formerly seen Quid habendum, what we were to have, now we are
to see Quid tenendum, what we must hold and keep. It falls naturally into the
last place by due order. 1. First because (as the Heathen say) (...), wisdom or
knowledge is the beginning of virtue: but constancy and In Epist.
perseverance, is virtutis apex, the pitch and perfection of virtue, and as S.
Bernard, Perseverantia est unica filia summi Reg is, finis virtutum, earumque
consummatio, perseverance is the only daughter of the great King, the end and
consummation of all virtues.

2. Secondly, because all other virtues are preserved by this, or (to use the
Apostles Col. 4. 6.
phrase) seasoned with this salt. As God set David over Israel by a covenant of
salt, that is, by an everlasting covenant, and no sacrifice was under the Law
without salt, to show, that as the covenant is perpetual on Gods part, so ought
the condition to be on ours, by perseverance, and thereby is known the truth of
our obedience, without which an hypocrite may go for a true Christian. S.
Bernard calls it, totius boni repositorium and virtus, the place where all
good is preserved and kept; and the strength and virtue of all other.

3. Because as there is in every virtue a resemblance or conformity in us to
some attribute of God, as in our knowledge to his wisdom, in our belief to his
truth, in our fear to his justice, in our love to his mercy, in our integrity
to his ubiquity, so in this of perseverance to his eternity.

4. Because God is Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, which is his
book of perseverance. So must we persevere according to our quandiu, that is,
till we die, usque ad mortem, and not only to natural but even to violent
death. The Apostle has another usque, usque ad sanguinem, unto blood, and so
his own resolution was, (not only usque advincula) not to be bound only, but
usque ad mortem, to die for the Name Acts 21. 13.
of the Lord Jesus. This must be our Omega. Wheresoever our Alpha is placed,
this must be our Omega, our eternity. Otherwise as S. Bern. says, Quid
levitate cum aeternitate? there is no fellowship between God and man, without
perseverance. Inconstancy has no congruity with eternity.

On the other side backsliding is condemned. Our nature is so corrupt, that, as
in the last affection we spoke of [Sincerity] we have a desire to seem rather
then to be, because it is easier, and we naturally love ease: so here we have a
desire of falling away, or starting back like a bow, like a deceitful bow, to
which the Prophet resembles Psalm 78. 57.
the Israelites. We are naturally like a bow, which being almost bent, and let
go never so little, starts back. Or, as the Apostle no less excellently, we
are apt Gal. 6. 9.
(...), segnescere, or to feel a grudging in our bones all the while we are
doing good, and are soon weary of welldoing.

1. How necessary this virtue is, is plain by diverse reasons. First all the
good we have formerly done is lost without it, Incassum bonum agitur (says S.
Gregory) si ante vitae terminum deseratur, quia frustra velociter currit, qui
priusquam ad met as venerit, deficit; all the good we do is in vain, if we
leave doing good before the Lib. 1. (...)
end of our life: because he runs swiftly to no purpose, that gives over before
he comes to the goal. It is God by the Prophet that says, when a righteous man
Ezekiel. 18. 24.
turns from his righteousness, etc. all the righteousness that he has done
shall not be mentioned.

2. In regard of the benefit that comes by it. He that continues to the end
shall be Matthew. 24. 13.
saved, says our Savior. Upon which S. Bernard, Non qui inceperit, sed qui
perseveveravit Epist. 129.
usque ad finem, hic salvus erit, not he that begins, but he that
persevereth to the end, this is the man that shall be saved.

3. Again, as it is with faith, our first covenant is, nisi credideritis non
stabiliemini, if ye will not believe, ye shall not be established: so in this,
if thou continue not, Esaias 7. 9.
thou shall be cut off. Upon this persevering or discontinuing stands the
getting Romans 11. 22.
or forfeiture of all: behold the goodness of God to thee, if thou continue,
otherwise thou shall be cut off.

4. In the reason and laws of man it is a point in all contracts, that nihil
praesupponitur esse actum, donec aliquid restat agendum, nothing is said to be
done, while any thing remains to be done. As in a building, a house is not said
to be finished, until the last stone be laid and the building covered.

That which is here commanded is perseverance, set down in Matthew 24. 13. and
Matthew. 24. 42. 25. 5. 25. 43.
in many other places: metaphorically it is called watching till the Bridegroom
come, and so the contrary, viz. falling away, or defection, is called sleeping
in the parable of the Virgins, (...), they all slumbered and slept: and in the
next Chapter it is reproved without a parable in the Disciples, that they could
not watch with Christ one hour, they could not persevere, the heaviness of
their eyes showed the heaviness of their souls, and made them unfit in the
duties then required.

Perseverance is distinguished from patience thus: the object of patience being
tristitia crucis, the sorrow of the cross, and of the other taedium
diurnitatis, the weariness of continuance. It is called perseverance in regard
of the length of time, and the tediousness which accompanies it, which must
be overcome. And therefore in regard of the necessity of it, we are to take the
Apostles caveat, Take heed Heb. 3. 12, 13
lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief in departing from the
living God. But exhort one another daily, while it is called to day. And this
hodie S. Jerome calls quotidie, when we have done this day, it is not blotted
out, but when the morrow comes, there is hodie still, and so every day is
hodie, as long as we live, usque ad mortem.

1. That which is forbidden is in the first rule of extent [excesse] To
continue wilfully Esaias 5. 11.
in an evil course. There are some that can rise up early in the morning that
they prove. 23. 29, 30.
may follow strong drink, and continue till night, till the wine inflame them.
And as the Wise man says, Tarry long at the wine, till they have red eyes, yea
and red faces too. And as it is in the drunkard, so in the glutton, who
continues til his skin is ready to break; and the Adulterer as long as his
loins last; the contentious man as long as his pursc lasts S. Angustine says
upon that place [ Judas festinavit] Petrus dormis tu, and non dormit Judas, sed
festinavit? do thou sleep Peter, and does Judas make haste? And S. Jerome
says, Infoelix populus Dei, qui tantam perseverantiam non habet in (...),
quantam improbi in malo; O unhappy people of God, which have not as great
perseverance in good, as the wicked in evil.

2. The second is in defect, and it is an extreme, more rife and usual now a
days; Inconstancy in good. The Romans were so glorious professors, as that
S. Paul said of them, I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you all, that
your faith is published Romans 1. 8.
through all the world. Yet, when he was at Rome, at his appearing before Nero,
he complained, No man stood with me, but all men forsook me. And this is the 2 Timothy 4. 6.
custom of those that want perseverance; for a while they are hot and zealous,
but afterward they forsake Saint Paul, and may justly be resembled to
Nebuchadnezzars Dan. 2. 32.
image, whose head was gold, but the feet were clay, they begin in gold, but
end in dirt.

Certainly there is none so bad in the world, but has his beginning in some
good; for God is the light that lightens every one that comes into the world:
there is not the worst of men, but is enlightened in part; sometimes he seems
good and then falls back; and these revolters are of two sorts.

1. For they do first, as Demas did. He at the first was reputed so in the
church, (...). (...).
that Saint Paul joins him with Saint Luke. But afterward S. Paul says,
Demas has 2 Timothy 4. 10.
forsaken me, having followed this present world.

And these are of two sorts; for either they fall quite away at once, without
any sign of returning; or else in the second place they are such as may be
compared Exodus 6 etc.
to Pharaoh, from the 7. of Exodus to the 11. of whom we read, that he had many
beginnings, and many interruptions: come a shower of rain or hail, or any new
plague, he cries, the Lord is righteous, and I and my people are sinners, and
then pray for me, that this plague may be taken from the land, and I will let
you go. So there are some, that have many beginnings. every day a beginning,
and never go forward. It is fitly called Religio lateritia, a religion of
bricks, or that comes by fits, and continues not, Such are like that beast in
the Revelation, that had 7. heads many Revel. 12. 3.
beginnings, but never go on to bring any thing to perfection.

2. The second sort are such as set themselves out of malice to oppose the
truth which they formerly professed, with a resolution never to return again
which is high Apostasy.

1. Forasmuch as patience is joined with perseverance; one of the best means to
Means of perseverance.
attain this duty is, to cast before hand, to foresee what troubles may and
will befall us, that we may be armed against them, and how long the time may
be. It may be the Lord may come in the first watch, it may be not till the
second, nay, not till the third: though sooner, or later, yet we must not be
found a sleep, whenever Luke 12. 38.
he comes. God commanded joshua, and reiterates it often, to provide and Josh.
1. 6, 7, 8, 9,
strengthen himself against all crosses which should happen to him before he
came to the land of promise. Esto fortis, be strong, faint not. And it is the
Apostles counsel, be strong in the Lord. So that this fore-arming our selves
against the assaults of Ephe. 6. 10,
our enemies is a very good means to make us hold out in times dangerous or
difficult.

2. If we consider with our selves, what our own judgment is, when it is not
our own case, what account we make of things that continue not. A Christian is
compared to a tree, that brings fruit in season, whose leaf does not wither
etc. Now what account do we make of fruit that's nipt or bitten in the blossom,
or that's wind shaken, or that is rotten or wormeaten, that cannot last till the
gathering, or keep if it be gathered. What account does the husbandman make of
a morning cloud, that vanishes, and promises no showers, or of the seed that
falls among stones, which may grow up for a time, but when the sun arises, is
parched, and withers, and never comes to perfection, the reaper fills not
his hand, nor the mower his bosom. Such fruit is all our obedience, if we
persevere not, like a morning cloud Hos. 6. 4. Or like seed sown upon stony
ground. In all other things we prefer that which is permenant: vessels of wood
or pewter, before glasses or earthen ware, because they are (...), though they
make never so fair a show: a poor crossed or a small close, especially if we
have the freehold, we esteem before a goodly house for which we pay rent,
because of the continuance. So that by our own practice we condemn our selves,
if we be not careful to persevere and hold out.

3. Unless we persevere, all that Christ did for us, and all that we do for
him, or our selves is in vain: now no man desires to do any thing in vain, to
beat the wind. This vanity of all may be seen in two respects.

1. In respect of Christ, we make all that he did in vain. How intolerable is
it, that so great a person as the Son of God should come down from heaven, be
born and live amongst us, and die so base and ignominious a death, and al in
vain: yet we frustrate al, if we continue not in grace to the end. He
persevered to the end, went through all the work required for our salvation:
The cup was not suffered to pass from him, but he drank it up clear, even to
the dregs of it. This was the price of his labors, our perseverance in that
estate he obtained for us; wherein if we continue not, this is more grief to
him, then it was to suffer; Labor irritus supra omnem laborem, to labor in
vain is more to him, then all the torments he suffered, though they wrought so
upon him, that he cried out, Eli, Eli, etc. My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me. This should move us to persevere. 2. In respect of our selves: all
we have done or suffered will be in vain, if we persevere not if after we have
escaped the pollution of the world, we be entangled again, we are like to the
dog that returns to his vomit and to the sow that was washed, to her wallowing
in the mire, our former washing was in vain. Under the law, if any 2 pet. 2.
20. 22.
Nazarites did separate themselves by a vow, and devote themselves more
specially Numb 6. 6.
to Gods service, if they did touch any dead body, though it were upon the last
day of their separation, they were to begin all their days anew; for all that
was done before was counted as nothing. This was a figure, the truth whereof we
read in Ezekiel. If the righteous man forsake his righteousness, and commit the
abominations of the wicked etc. Look whenever he gives over his
righteousness then, even then at that hour, all he has done formerly, shall
be forgotten, it shall be, as if he had not done a righteous deed. Therefore if
we will not lose the fruit of our former labors, we must look to our
perseverance. Nay further, not only Christ and we shall lose our pains, but a
worse thing will happen to us; for when the evil spirit is cast out, if he come
again, and find the house swept and garnished, but empty, he will not only
enter again, but he will bring with him seven spirits more worse then himself,
and then the end of that man will be worse then the beginning, hisestate is
much worse, even in a manner without hope of recovery.
4. The last, and which may be made use of by the children of grace, is
intuitus mercedis. The reward which God purposes to bestow on us, shall not be
a reward for days or years, but it shall be an endless reward for ever and
ever: and surely (as the Philosopher says) our labor ought to be
proportionable to the price of our labor, seeing God rewards us not as
hirelings, but bestows the inheritance upon us for ever which is the reward of
sons, we should not labor as (...), for a year or a certain time, but quandiu
vivimus, as long as we live; our obedience must endure quandiu nos as long as
we are, as the reward will be quandiu ille, as long as he shall be; we must
serve him in (...) nostro, in our eternity, seeing he rewards us, aeterno suo,
with his eternity.

The signs of Perseverance.
The sign of other graces is perseverance, of which we connot be certain a
priori perseverance it self is a sign a posteriori of our happy estate, and
therefore the Heathen could say, (...) nemo supremaque funera faelix esse
potest, no man can be happy before his death, nor can we pronounce of any man
what he is, till it appear whether he persevere or no. Perseverance it self is
a special note of a true christian, it is (...). 10.
the note which Christ gives, which infallibly distinguishes the true professor
from an (...). Those gratiae gratis datae, (which the schools distinguish from
saving grace, called gratia gratum faciens) may shine in an hypocrite, as well
as a true christian; he may have as good natural parts, make as glorious a
profession, use as much diligence (it may be more) in Gods (...), as the best;
but as Christ says, when the wolf comes, then there is a difference seen,
between the true shepherd and the hireling: the one lays down his life for
the sheep, while the other betakes himself to slight, so (...) persecution or
trial comes then the hypocrite (...) away, whiles the true (...) perseveres,
and holds out. This perseverance shows whether a man be begotten with mortal or
(...) seed; the mortal seed may move a hearer for the present, but the immortal
seed continues with him, and works perseverance in him. Thus a man may judge
whether he fear God, or only the judgment, when he is humbled under a
judgment, if he fear God for himself, the fear will continue, if it be only
for the judgment, it will vanish when the judgment is over, as we see in
Pharaoh.

But though we have no certain notes of perseverance, yet there are some
probable marks and signs, whereby we may judge of the likelihood of our
continuance.

1. The first is, if we feel a desire in our selves with the Apostle, to press
toward the mark not looking back but going forward; if we consider not how long
we phil. 3. 14.
have already continued, nor slatter our selves of our lives past, but bend our
whole study and endeavor how we may go on, and hold out; for as Saint
Augustine says, (...), sufficit, defecisti, if we once say, we have done
enough, we are then fallen back. Saint Gregory observes upon that of Jacobs
ladder, that the Angels ascended In Genesis 28. 12
and descended, but none stood still; which he applies to the life of a
christian, who mustnever stand still, and gives this reason. Quando desinis
esse melior, incipis esse deterior. when we leave being better, we begin to be
worse. For our nature is like a bow, which if you bend it not forward till the
string take hold, it will start back of its own accord.

2. A second and a better, is, if we find our selves more fruitful in good
works, when more years have taken hold of us. It was the mark of the Chuch of
Thyatira, Apoc. 2. 19.
that her last works were more then her first. When we abound more and moer as
Phil. 1. 9.
the Apostle speaks, The Psalmist says, they that be planted in the house of
the Lord Psalm. 92. 13. 14. 84. 7.
shall still bring forth fruit in their age, and go from strength to strength.

3. The last is, if we persevere in time of trouble and (...), if we fly not
when the wolf comes, if with Eliiah we be not afraid of the fiery horses, nor
of the fiery charet. If persecutions and crosses make us not waver, then we may
persuade 2 king 2. 11.
our selves, that our case is like to Jobs, of whom God said to Satan, he
holds fast his integrity though thou movedst me against him without a cause
to destroy him; and that God will say the same of us.

The last or sixth rule is, to procure it in others. And herein we must follow
the Job. 2. 3.
Apostles counsel, strengthen those that are weak. Lift up the hands which
hang down Heb. 12. 12.
and the feeble knees. It is set down from an act of piety in Barnabas, that he
exhorted Act. 11. 23. 13. 43.. 14. 22.
the people, that with purpose of heart they would cleave unto the Lord; and of
Saint Paul and Barnabas, who persuaded the religious Jews, to continue in the
Ezech. 34. 4.
grace of God; and in another place, they confirmed the disciples, and exhorted
9. 4.
them to continue in the faith etc. As on the other side it is set down by the
holy Ghost, as a mark of an evil shepherd, and of bad sheep, not to strengthen
the weak nor to bind up that which was broken, nor to reduce those that
stray. As the receiving of vinegar was Christ's consummatum est, so is
perseverance the consummatum est (...) a christian. It is like the mark in the
Prophet, the last letter in the Alphabet, the letter (...) tau, which is called
the letter of perfection, of enduring and continuing, which whosoever has
shall not be slain, but shall enter into the heavenly Jerusalem, but they which
have it not, shall be slain without pity.

So much for the first commandment.
THE EXPOSITION OF THE Second Commandment.
CHAP. I.
The general parts of this Commandment. 1. The precept. 2 The sanction. The
precept is negative, forbids Idolatry, and implies the affirmative. 1. That God
must be worshipped as he requires. 2. That reverence must be showed in the
performance. Reasons why this and the fourth Commandment are larger then the
rest. Reasons for the affirmative and negative part. Addition 13. That the
making of images was absolutely forbidden the Jews, and in that respect the
precept was positive and reached only unto them. Addition 14. Whether all
voluntary or free worship be forbidden under the name of will worship.

Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image etc.
THe Commandments of the first Table concern the worship of God Inward, and
outward; of which, the first commandment contains the inward duties, and the
three last the outward. The outward are either continual, or to be performed on
a set or certain time or day: or are either private or public. That which is
for a set day, and public is required in the fourth Commandment. The other
which are continual and private, concern either the outward gesture in honor,
(for, reverentia exhibetur per gestus, the gesture dicovereth our reverence)
contained in this second Commandment: or in Laud, in praise, which is
exhibited by the tongue or speech, in the Third. Or else they concern either
the manner of worship, in this second: or the end of it in the Third.

This Commandment which concerns the manner of our outward worship, and how we
are to behave our selves in it conteines, 1. A precept, set down by way of a
prohibition. 2, A Sanction or Penalty annexed. Or (if you will) a Charge, and a
Penalty.

1. The Prohibition, in these words Non facies tibi sculptile, not to make
images, to worship them.

2. The sanction, which is brought in by way of reason, in these, Ego enim Deus
tuus sum zelotypus, for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God. It is in this, as
in the laws of Princes, after they have signified their command, what they
would have done, or not done, there is added. Quisecus faxit punietur, he that
shall transgresseagainst this law, shall be punished. So here he that breaks
this commandment, God will visit etc. which is the penalty, or sanctio
precepti, that part of the precept, that contains the corrective, showing how
they shall be corrected, that will not be directed by this law.

This Commandment, as it prohibiteth Idolatry directly, so implicitly it
enjoyneth 1.
the true worship of God, prescribing the manner how that worship is to be
performed. May we not worship or serve false Gods? then there is a true God to
be served and worshipped, we are not masterlesse men, we are under the authority
of another (as this Centurion) we have a master, there is a God (certainly) to
be Mat. 8. 8.
served.

Concerning the performance of this worship, two things are commanded. first,
God will have modum a se praescriptum, our service must be done in that manner
himself prescribes. 2. And secondly, Reverentiam exhibitam. He requires at our
hands, a reverend behavior in the performance of it.

If we mark the other eight Commandments well, we shall find them far short in
words of this and the fourth. So that these two may fitly be called Precepta
copiosa, Commandments fully expressed. Statutes at large. And this was not
without cause, there was good reason they should be so. For unless it were
these two of the first Table, and the last of the second concerning
Concupiscence, there was none of the Commandments unknown to the Heathen. The
outward worship of God, and the day set apart for his worship, they had
corrupted most of all, these Laws were most obliterated among them. They took
some order for the inward worship of God, as Solon. Ad Deos cast adeunto, let
men come to God with pure minds. And the keeping of Oaths was severely exacted
among them. Of these two Laws they took notice. So in this point of the inward
worship of God we agree in many things with Turks and Pagans; but the outward
service of God is it, which makes the difference between us, and will ever
distinguish the true Church from the faise, Christ's Church from Satan's
Synagogue. And thus we see the Reason, why God did so enlarge these two
Commandments, because they were in most danger to be neglected. We will now
come to the opening of the Commandment.

It is said before, that the Commandments make use of Synechdoche, that is,
under one fault include many, that are homogenea of the same kind. So that in
each Commandment the principal or general sin is named, and the rest implied;
for if every particular sin should be mentioned which were within the compass
of the prohibition, the Commandment would be infinite. Now that which is
forbidden principally in this, is not merely the making of Images; for Images,
or pictures are not absolutely prohibited, either here, or in any other place
of Scripture: for painting and graving are warrantable and profitable Arts, and
the gifts of God. We see Bezaleel Exodus 31. 2.
commended by God himself for his wisdom and understanding in them: 35. 30, 31.
and the reason is, because these Arts conduce to the preservation of the
memory of things past, as also for the delight of the mind. Non Simulacrum,
non Imago damnatur, In Amos 5. 23.
sed non facies tibi, says S. Jerome. An image or the likeness of a thing is
not condemned, but the Emphasis or Energie of the Commandment is in, Non facies
tibi by, thou shall not make to thy self (...), Invented and will worship,
devised by Col. 2. 23.
man, not agreeable to the general rules prescribed by God, but contrary to
what is by God prescribed. Like to that of Saul, when he was commanded to
destroy the Amalekites 1 Samuel 15. 21.
and spared the king, etc. his excuse was, The people took of the spoil to
sacrifice to the Lord. They would have a worship of their own with a direct
breach of Gods command. Whereas God had formerly told them, Whatsoever thing I
command you, observe to do it, thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish from
it, and in that Deuteronomy. 12. 10.
particular had commanded them to spare nothing of Amalek, but to destroy all.

Notwithstanding the judgment of this learned Author, whith whom many
expositors Addition 11.
agree, it is the opinion of diverse learned men, both Protestants and others,
that the very Of forbidding the making of Images.
making or having of any graven image of any living creature was forbidden the
Jews in this Commandment, and that therefore this precept as well as the
fourth, is partly positive obliging only the Jews, and not wholly moral or
perpetual. The prohibition is general, not only for worshipping, but for
making any. Deuteronomy. 4. 16. for the general opinion of the Heathen was, that some
divine power was included in their images, after they were consecrated by some
magical superstitious rites, as appears in Tertul. de idolatria, Minutius
Faelix, Cyprian de Idolorum vanitate, and others, as also by the Jewish
writers, Aben-Esra, Maimonides, Kimchi, etc. and hence are those strange
relations of what was done by those images mentioned in Heathen writers, as
that diverse of them did speak, as Memnons statue in Egypt, the Images of Juno,
Moreta, Fortuna, Silvanus, etc. mentioned by Valerius Maximus, and others by
Trismeg. in Dialogo, and to this that place of Zach, 10. 2. may infer. God
therefore, that his people might not come near the corrupt customs of the
Heathen, and to prevent the danger of Idolatry the more, as also that they
might the better conceive the invisible and spiritual nature of God, forbade,
not only the worshipping, but even the making of such images of living
creatures, as also of the stars (because they also have their motion) as most
dangerous to induce men to Idolatry in those times, and so the custom (which
is the best expositor of laws) among the Jews was against all use of such
representations, as appears in Josephus, in Decal. explic. and Hist. Antiq.
lib. 17. Maimonides, Tacitus, Leo, Modena, and others: yet though this were
prohibited the people, God might make exceptions in this, as he did in other
precepts which were positive, as in erecting the brazen serpent, and in placing
the cherubims upon the ark, and in the Holy of Holies, before which it was
lawful to worship God, without Gods special appointment had not been
warrantable: and that Solomon had the like warrant for the lions and oxen that
upheld the brazen Laver is probable, or else that this was a step to those sins
which he fell into afterward, as Josephus and other Jewish writers think. As
for pictures, or such representations by painting, (they being not so apt to
nourish the opinion of an inherent diety in them, as in statues, or imagines
extantes were) the making or using them (if no divine honor were given them)
was not absolutely prohibited, and therefore we find them used among the Jews,
as appears by their banners and ensigns, wherein were the representations of
diverse creatures; yet in other places, (though not here) they seem to be
forbidden, if they were used by Idolaters about their false worship. Levit. 26.
1. and Numb. 33. 25. See Scal. in posthumis ex Cosmogr. Arab. and Grot. in
explic. Decal. p. 33, 34 etc.

And as God forbade the Jews the making of Images, and commanded them to break
them in pieces, if any were made, Exodus 34. 13. Numb. 33. 52. Deuter. 7. 5. so
if they came into any strange country, where they had no power to demolish
them, he forbids not only their religious worship, which is intrinsecally
evil, but even all reverentiall gesture of the body before an image, by
bowing, kneeling, etc. though it were with no intent to honor the image; for
(to bow to them and worship them) is all one, with (to bow or worship before
them) as the Jewish Doctors expound, and may appear by collation of Matthew. 4.
9. with Luke 4. 7. in the Greek, and Jer. 22. 9. with 2. Chronicles 25. 14. and
Leviticus 26. 1. in the Hebrew; not that it is simply evil to bow or kneel
before them, when it is with no relation to them, but because God would prevent
all occasions and shows of complying with the Heathen, and therefore forbade
his people many things, not evil in themselves, because they were practiced by
the Heathen. So much then of this precept as forbids things morally evil, or
forbidden by any law of Christ, obliges us as well as the Jews: but what was
purely positive, and not continued by Christ, obliged them only.

This invented or will worship, Cultus arbitrarius, has two specious things in
it, as the Apostle says. Col. 2. 23.


1. The first is a kind of wisdom, and carries with it a trim show thereof:
when a man shall be thought so wise, as that he is able to devise and invent a
worship for God, especially when men consider not what God has already
prescribed, whereby their rites prove contrary to what he has appointed, and
so they will be wiser then God. 2. The second is, a show of humility: when a
man will be so humble, as not only to prostrate himself before God, but to bow
down to an Image, Saint, Angel, or the like. But these howsoever they carry a
show of wisdom, and humility, yet are they no ways for us to use: if we entend
to be exempt from the penalty, of this Commandment.
Although, all will worship, (...), be taken in an evil sense by many, upon the
Addition 14.
vulgar exposition of that place in Colos. 2. 23. yet that there may be some
voluntary Of voluntary worship.
or free worship acceptable to God, though not specially commanded, provided,
it be not corruptive of, or contrary to any right or worship commanded by him,
but subservient or agreeable thereto, is the judgment of learned Divines; for
under the law they had their voluntary and free-will-offerings, besides those
commanded by God, and though things were more particularly prescribed, in the
Levitical worship, then now under the Gospel, the Church being then in its
childehood, and confined to one Nation, and the spirit not then so plentifully
given, as now since the ascension of Christ, (...) King 8. 64.
yet even then the Church prescribed diverse things in Gods worship not
specially commanded, Est. 9. 22.
as in fasts, and festival days, as that of the dedication of the Temple, 1 Samuel 30.
approved by Christ's own observance, John 10. and sundry other things, all
which were never taxed as unlawful, unless the worship appointed by God
himself were thereby corrupted, or neglected, and so the continual practice of
the Christian Church has been to prescribe and order several things in Gods
Worship, which no peaceable and holy men ever found fault with, provided, that
they were agreeable to those general rules of moral worship required by God,
and no ways repugnant to those rites by him appointed, but rather subservient
to them, and contained nothing either impious and forbidden, or vain and
ridiculous; nor the observance of them preferred before the commandments of
God, or made equal to them; but a difference observed between things of
immediate divine institution, and those of Ecclesiastical institution: to add
to Gods institution any thing as from God is forbidden, Deuteronomy 12. 10. but
to add something for the more decent and orderly performance of what God has
appointed, and to observe the same as an ecclesiastical institution, is no where
forbidden, but rather commanded in all those texts, that require us to hear the
Church, and to give obedience to her; and to observe this is also to obey God,
who has given his Church power to ordain such things: and that that place in
Colos. 2. 23. condemns not all voluntary or free worship, no more then it does
humility, and chastening or keeping under the body which are joined therewith,
but rather that it makes for it, has been lately proved by juditious and
learned Divines; and by one in a full tract upon this subject of willworship;
for the Apostle there condemning certain Jewish and Pythagorean observances
about touching, tasting, etc. says ver. 23. that they had a show of wisdom, if
due cautions were observed, viz if they were freely and voluntarily undertaken,
not as necessary to salvation, and without rejecting what God had made, and if
they were used in humility or modesty not condemning others which used them
not, and if they sought thereby only to keep under the flesh. The contrary to
all which those Pythagoreans and Jews practiced. By which exposition, which I
take to be the most true, it is plain, that the Apostle is so far from
condemning all voluntary or will worship, that he rather approves and commends
it, and condemns their forbearance of meats, and other things, because it was
not freely or voluntarily undertaken, but as a thing necessary to salvation,
etc, See Grotius in Colos. 2. 23. Et votum pro pace. p. 100. 101. 102. 103. Et
Apol. Rivet. discuss. p. 101, 110, etc. Dr Hammon of will worship. See also our
Reverend Author in: his sermon on Matthew 6. 16. p. 124, etc. and on 1. Corinthians. 11. 16.

The affirmative part of this Commandment included in the prohibition, S.
Stephen Acts 7. 44.
in the Acts, and the Author to the Hebrews after him cites out of the Law;
Heb. 8. 5.
where Moses receiving order how to build the Tabernacle, was admonished by
Exodus 25 40.
God, to make it according to the pattern precisely, as it was showed him in
the Mount.

1. Because God (after the delivery of the moral law) declared to him the
particulars Verse. 40.
concerning the outward worship.

2. And secondly he gave him charge at his departure to square and order it,
accordding to the form by him prescribed. And it is probable, that if he had
such a care in the Type, he will also not be worshipped in the substance
otherwise, then himself has prescribed.

The negative part is, that we mingle none of our will worship with his
precept; that is, in such things as God has particularly prescribed, not to
vary from Deuteronomy. 12. 32.
his command, but hoc tantum facere quod Deus (...), do that only, which God
Matthew. 15. 9.
has commanded, (and these words may be taken for the inward worship also, but
they especially concern the outward worship of God.) I here follows in the
(...) 13.
before cited (to make Gods meaning herein more plain) Thou shall not add nor
diminish. If we do either, or both of them, that will follow which our Savior
Esaias 1. 12.
tells the Scribes and Pharisees, that if it be man's doctrine that is preferred
before the Plato lib. 7 de legibus.
commandments of God, or made equal therewith, (...) colitis (...), worship him
we may, but all in vain: and as the Prophet speaks, (...) ista (...) e (...)
Socrates
vestris? who has required these things at your (...).

Now the reason both of Negative and Affirmative is, Because that seeing honor
is to be given to God, it is most reasonable that it should be given after that
manner which he best likes, and not contrary to his will. The Question being
propounded, Whether God should be honored, as he, or we thought (...) Socrates
could answer, that every God will be worshipped, (...), in that manner that
best likes him. And so Saint (...), (...) ratur, is maxim eo honor (...),
quem ipse (...), non (...); Hom. 5. in Matthew.
if a man be to be honored, his delight is in that, which himself fancieth,
and not in what we, without looking to the rules in Gods word, think most
convenient; and therefore as we ought in all acts of worship to see first what
is prescribed by God; so if the the Church prescribe any thing, she ought to
look to those general rules given by God, that it may be the more acceptable to
him, when there is nothing in particular determined in the Word. Therefore when
we come to do any man honor, we enquire what kind of honor pleases his
humor best; and shall we allow that to man, which we will deny unto God?
Surely if we follow not his will and pleasure in his worship, he will have none
of it; for S. Chrysostom concludes there, Non est honor sed (...), si vel
contra, vel (...) mandatum fiat, it is rather a disgrace then an honor, to
worship God either against or besides his own Rule. Nay S. Ambrose goes
further, Si quid addas vel detrahas, prevaricatio videtur esse mandati, De
(...). (...). 12.
add, or detract any thing from it, and you break the Commandment; that is,
where God has particularly prescribed any thing, we must keep close to it, but
where he has (...) a latitude, it is his will that we hear the Church, and
obey those that are set over us.

CHAP. II.
That God will not be worshipped by Images: the several words whereby
Image Worship is forbidden: why God appointed the making of Cherubims, and the
brazen serpent: reasons against worshipping of images: the original of images:
four occasions of the use of images; some in times of persecution, some in
times of peace.

That God is not to be worshipped by Images.
THe general being thus premised. The first question is, concerning the choice
which God has made, whether he will have us worship him by images, or not. In
which there is a mere (...) scopi, as the Logicians term it; between us, and
the Church of Rome; for whereas God has delivered his will, in these two
terms, (...) and (...) (...), (...), (...), and exemplar, the greatest stir
they keep is about, (...) and (...), (...) or (...), and Idolum, an Image, and
an Idol, two words that are not in the (...) so that whosoever contends with
them about these words, (...) needs fall into a (...), and fight about a shadow.

This is then that which is required, whether (when God names (...) Sculptile,
graven, and after (...) a word very general, and large; and that so general, as
that neither in the Latin, nor the Greek, there can be any word found to
answer it, containing both (...), and exemplar, and not only that, but
extractam (...), and (...) in (...), even the (...) notions, whether in our
brain, or brought into matter) we must not so much as fancy any of them in Gods
worship, seeing that God rises from the species to the genus of all. And this
will set the question right between us, and the (...); for whereas Gods word is
here (...), any likeness whatsoever, which the seventy (...) (...) (...)
likeness, though (...) does not so fully (...) it; their (...) is (as before
is said) about (...) and (...): but here is a flat precept against both, the
Hebrew word can admit of no distinction, and therefore for that which (...) by
the Censurers of Colein, that God in no place has generally prohibited the use
of Images, let (...), and Pagnine be their Judges in the word (...).

It is true, that Peter (...) (...). There are thirteen Hebrew words to (...)
what is here forbidden, to which more might be added, but to avoid
tediousness, they may be reduced to these four. 1. (...), a graven or (...)
image. 2. Fusile, any thing that may be melted. 3. (...), that which may be
hammered out. (...). (...), a thing composed of the (...) of (...) and he says
(...), that soulptile was more common among the Jesws then the rest, and was
usually taken by Moses to comprehend the rest, But seeing it pleased God, to
set it down by the word (...) which the Septuagint interpret (as before) (...)
a likeness; let any man judge, whether in forbidding all likeness or
similitude there be not a full and plain precept, containing both Idola and
(...), in the (...). These two have a plain distinction, but so cannot (...) or
(...), in regard of (...), and abuse.

After the holy Chost, has thus set down the general, to make all sure, you
may see what he does further. Because we should have no pattern, to frame to
our selves, he makes an enumeration, of heavenly and earthly things, and
consequently, leaves nothing to resemble God by, either in heaven or in earth,
and this is comprehended, under these 3. heads.

1. Things in heaven above. 2. In the earth beneath. 3. In the waters under the
earth.

1. For the first. The Papists as diverse of their late writers affirm, do
utterly disclaim with us, the drawing of the deity; and are weary of defending
the lawfulness of representing it. and that upon this text of the Prophet To
whom well ye liken Esa. 40. 18.
God, or what liknesse will ye compare unto him?

For other things in heaven, it was high time for God to give this charge;
because men had robbed him of his honor, in ascribing that to his Creatures,
which was only due to himself, we see, that Laban had his Teraphim, angelos
genios, good Genesis 31. 19.
Angels, as they call them.

The Greek renders it (...) And there were few of the Philosophers afterward,
but knew and worshipped them by the title of intelligentiarum intelligences, or
spirits: for the souls of men it was no less necessary, the opinion was that
they were (...) minorum gentium received up into heaven, and an usual thing it
was to deify them and give them divine honor.

And for the stars we see, that the Sunn came also to be worshipped, for we
read, that good king (...), in reforming the service, and worship of God; among
2 Kin. 23. 11.
other his acts of reformation, one was, that he burnt the Chariots of the
Ezec. 8. 14.
Sun. And Jer. 44. 17. 18. The people say that they will sacrifice to the Queen
of Jer. 44. 17.
Heaven. The Sun was so called, because in the Hebrew (...) the sun is of the
feminine gender. It was the God of the Persians. The Jews also worshipped the
Moon: 2 Kings 23. 5.

Again Saint Stephen tells the Jews, out of the Prophet Amos, that the people
Amos 5. 25.
worshipped the host of heaven that is the stars: one was Moloch (which was the
star Act. 7. 42. 43,
of Saturn) and the star of the God (...). And Baal (by the learned) was the
star Jupiter, and (...), Mars.

2. In the earth; after the things in heaven he comes down to the earth, and
1. first, for men. Males, no similitude must be made of them. It was the fault
of the Israelites, after (...) death, they went a whoring (says the text)
after Baalim Deuteronomy. 4. 16.
and made Baal-Berith their God: as they had done (...) to Baal-(...). We Judge.
8. 33.
Number. 25. 3.
read, that Ahaziah sent to enquire of Baal-zebub the God of Ekron. So were
there 2 Kin. 1. 2.
Hercules, Jupiters, Mars, and many others, worshipped among the Heathen. Jud.
2. 13.
2. There were females too, that had their worship as Ashtaroth mentioned in
the Romans 1. 23.
book of the Judges and (...) Venus etc. 3. Fowls, Saint Paul tells us, that
they changed the glory of the uncorruptible God into an image like corruptible
man, and to birds, and four footed beasts, and creeping things of birds, as the
Ibis among the Egyptians the golden calf among the Israelites, the Owl among
the wise Graecians, and the Eagle with the Romans, and Belus in the shape of a
Dragon with the Babylonians, and worms with the Trogloditi. 4. Plants as the
Dodonean Grove, to Jupiter. Nay they descended even to garlike. 5. They
worshipped also things made by art, as a Piece of Red cloth, as Strabo relates
of Nations in the North East.

3. In the waters. They worshipped Sirens and Dagon as it is in the first of 1 Samuel 5. 2.
Samuel, who was resembled by a water snake: and dragons, and Crocodiles,
fishes as Bell. 23.
the Dolphin: as also (...), whom they adored as God of Physic, in the Deuteronomy.
4. 12. (...)
shape of a water Serpent. So that God seeing, what had bin done to his
dishonor and foreseeing what would be done, and that men had, and would abuse
all his creatures in this kind, interdicebat (...), gave a straight injunction
against them all, allowing neither similitude, nor pattern, God would be
resembled by none of them. And therefore (...), (making as it were a comment
upon this Commandment, and letting them know, that they must not account of
Gods worship, as a ceremonial thing) puts them in mind that when God spoke to
them out of the midst of the fire they heard a voice, but saw no similitude,
but only a voice, and therefore a voice say the Rabbis because a voice cannot
be drawn into any shape and so was not likely to deprive God of any part of his
honor and he bids them therefore take heed that they attempted not to make any
likeness of any thing as you may read there at large, for if God had bin
willing they should have made any, certailny he would have represented himself
to them in some form or shape, when he came unto the mount. Let us take heed
therefore, that we take not upon us, to frame to our selves any representation
of God, and to make Images to his dishonor. It is the nature of faith, to
believe things not visible; and therefore to make invisible things become
visible in religion is the next way to dishonor God, and to overthrow faith,
and consequently religion it self. Our Savior tells Heb. 11. 1.
the woman of Samaria, that the time was coming, when the true worshippers John
4. 21.
should worship God in spirit, and truth, and in Images there is no truth, but
(...) veritatis, a resemblance of truth: the very Temple of Jerusalem as a type
should not be accepted.

It is objected, if all similitudes be condemned, how came it to pass Exodus
25. 18.
that God himself prescribed the making of Cherubins; and they were
resemblances? Heb. 9. 5.


There was no such resemblance in them, as their definition of an Image
imports, Resp.
which is (as they say) quod habet exemplar in rerum natura, that is like some
natural thing, but Cherubins were not so: for they were made like boys without
arms, instead thereof were two great wings which we cannot parallel in nature.
But it is plain, that God caused them not to be made, to the intent to be
worshipped, for Exo. 25. 22.
then he would not have put them into the darkest places, in the sanctum
sanctorum, whither (...) came but the high priest, and he but once a year. And
indeed God shows wherefore he made them, that the Priest might know from
whence to receive his answer, and to signify the readiness of the angels to
execute the will of God. Ei de Idol.
And Tertullian answers this fully, God says not, that an Image should not
be (...). 2. pa. 447.
made, but non facies tibi, thou shall not make it to thy self. God commanded
these to be made by Moses. God might dispense with his own precept, so far as
it was positive, as the prohibition of making any Image is, but to worship or
give any divine honor to it, which is malum inse, simply evil, though it were
not forbidden, this God never allowed or dispen'ed with; the other is only
malum quia prohibitum, this is prohibitum quia malum.

It is said also, why then did God command the image of the fiery serpent to be
Obj.
made? Number. 21. 8.


This was not ut coleretur. sed ut mederetur, not that it should be worshipped,
Resp.
but that it should be as a means to heal the people that had bin plagued for
their murmuring. And indeed Tertullian has the same objection, and answers
it thus Quod idemDeus, vetuit lege similitudinem fieri, (...) prescripto aeneum
serpentem (...) fecit, si tu eandem legem (...) legem habes, eam observa si
(...) preceptum factum, (...) feceris, and tu imitare Mosen, idest, ne sacias
tibi simulachrum, nisi Deus te (...), that the same God did both forbid by his
law the making of images, and yet by an extraordinary command, caused the
brazen serpent to be made if thou observe the same law, thou have a law, keep
it, if thou be afterward commanded to make an image, imitate Moses, that is,
make none except God command thee.

Concerning this point, we have showed, what moved God to make this restraint,
on his own part. Now it follows to show why he did it on our part, in regard
of our corruption.

1. Tertullian says (in the book before quoted) that before the flood, even
in the days of Seth, the worship of God was corrupted with images, and that
Enochs instauration was nothing, but the restoring of pure religion again, and
that therefore he is said to have walked with God. Again we see, that after the
flood, Jacob Genesis 5. 21. 31. 19. 6. 3.
by being in (...) house. had learnt to take Teraphim, Images of gods and to
mingle them in Gods worship. Now the reason of this, God himself gives. Man is
but flesh. Though he consists of two parts flesh and spirit yet the grossnesse
of the flesh, overgrows the pureness of the spirit, and corrupt it, turning
that other part of man (the spirit) into flesh insomuch as the Apostles many
times, in their writings call the soul and mind, by the name of flesh, and
Saint Paul gives us warning, to take heed of the flesh of the soul (...).

And hence it is that we have an affection in us, which they call (...) desire
to feel or see. This was the disease of Saint Thomas, that would not believe,
except John 20. 25. 11. 21. 32.
he might feel Christ's wounds, and see him himself, (...) of Mary Magdalen and
Martha about their dead brother, both told Christ. Lord if thou had bin here,
my brother had not died, and not theirs alone, but of all the Apostles, they
were desirous that Christ might stay, and be with them always, to erect an
earthly kingdom, 16. 7
insomuch that he was fain to tell them, that if he went not away, the
Comforter would not come unto them.

And such a thing there is in religion. Moses had bin in the mount but three
days, and the Israelites cry out to Aaron, fac nobis Deos visibiles, make us
gods which shall Exo. 32. 1.
go before us. Upon which place, Lactantius says, verentur ne nulla sit
religio, si nibil habe ant quod adoreat, they were afraid, there could be no
religion at all, unless l. 2. de orig erroris.
they might see what to worship. This was the conceit of Rabshakeh, touching
Hezekiah, and the people of Judah that they had no God at all, because Hezekiah
had taken away his high places, and altars, and there was no God to Esa. 36. 7.
be seen.

2. As the great sin against the first Commandment was to set that up for
God, which was no God: therein was their excess. So in the second Commandment
they would not ke pa mean: but though they could never have monitors and means
sufficient, to stir them up to Gods worship, whereas God has allowed and
ordained these four.

1. Verbum scriptum, The scriptures or written word. 2. Verbum predicatum, That
word preached. 3. Verbum visibile, The visible word. The Sacraments. 4. Verbum
libri magni Creaturarum, the word of the great book of the creatures, of which
the psalmist, their sound is gone out into all lands, and their psalm. 19. 4.
words into the ends ofthe world.
And though these be canori monitores, loud and shrill Remembrancers: yet all
these could not content them, but they would have images, falling into this
error, that there could be no nimium in Religione et cultu divino, no
superfluity in religion, and the worship of God, and consequently no
superstition: ascribing the honor due to God unto the creatures, and (as the
Apostle speaks) changing the glory of the uncorruptible Romans 123.
God, into an image, made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and to four
footed beasts, and creeping things. And this is very certain, that if there had
been such force and virtue in images, to move men to the duty of Gods worship,
God who had such care of his people would never have protested against them and
prohibited them, nay it had bin a special injury, they being so good teachers
and monitors.

The writer of the book of wisdom, sets down the reasons of the growth of
sap. c. 14.
Idolatry, before the coming of Christ, one of them was (...) a desire and love
of sense: insomuch, as there was nothing excellent to see to, but it was
corrupted. Rabbi Solomon (upon that place of Genesis where mention is made of
Labans. Genesis 31. 19.
Teraphim says, that they signified nothing (as the Syriacke translation of it
is) but a mathematical instrument.

So the Symbola of the Egyptians, were nothing but Emblems, and Hieroglyphics
for distinction of the several provincesthere, and to show the natures of them,
as Isis a clod of grass, or turfe, to show that that part of the country was
fertile, and fit for feeding; and Anubis a dog was set up in another province,
to signify that it was a woody country, and the like. There were also images
set upon the tombs and monuments of famous dead men as the statue dedicated to
(...), and Minos, and this because they were too much addicted to their senses:
and partly to please their Princes, and to keep their remembrance, as of Belus
for his virtue, of Minos for his justice: and to this observance they were
afterward necessarily enforced, by edicts of Princes. And thus much for their
original before Christ.

Now since the time of Christ they begin to differ, and a special thing in the
controversy, wherewith they think to lash us, is this, show us (say they) when
images came up first, that we may know their original, and when there was any
edict against them.

There Is nothing more easy then to show their original for Jreneus (wholived not
long after the Apostles times in the second century) makes mention of the
(...) of the Gnostics and Epiphanius (among other of the Heresies he wrote of)
speaks l. 1. CC. 24. 27.
of the same error and says, that Carpocras (an Alexandrian) was the first
brocher of it, one of whose errors was, that they had the images of Christ,
Saint Paul l. 3. Here Is. 27.
and Saint Peter etc. Which they said and pretended to be made by Pilate. l. 1.
contra valentinian.


So (...) shows that the Collyridians. valentinians, and others erected
images in honor of the Virgin Mary, and speaks against them, that used to
offer to her l. 3. Here Is. 79.
such outward reverence in their gestures, as was due only to God. By which we
may conclude, that Heretics were the first introducers of religious worship of
images in the church.

The occasions of their use of images for religious worship, were four, whereof
two began to take root in the times of persecution. The other two when the
church was in peace.

1. The first, as Saint Augustine says, was by the policy of the 2. former
heretics, cont. Adimant. c. 13.
as also of the Manichees, ut concilient (...) Paganorum, to ingratiate
themselves with the Pagans, and therefore Aequiores sunt simulachris ut
misereantar, the heretics show themselves (says he) better friends to images
then we, to make the Heathen Idolaters in their persecutions more savorable to
them then to us. So the first was their policy. 2. The second was, in memoriam
defunctorum to preserve the memory of their deceased friends. It seems by a
prohibition in the law, that men of old for the love Levit. 19. 28.
they bare to their dead friends, and in expression of their grief for the
loss of them, and lastly to preserve their memory) used to cut their flesh,
and print marks with hot irons upon some parts of their bodies, which might
continue there and put them in mind of such friends, for whose sakes they made
those marks as long as they lived, whereupon God prohibited such unlawlull acts
there; and the Apostle also in the new Testament gives charge that men should
not sorrow in that extremity, the 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13.
Heathen did, that had no hope of the resurrection. This extremity of passion
in them, made them also make use of another way to preserve the memory of their
friends deceased, which was by setting up of their images.
Saint Chrysostom reports of one Melesius a Bishop of Constantinople a very
godly and learned man, that he was so well beloved of the Citizens, and Clergy,
as that after his death, every man got his Picture (to preserve his memory) in
their rings and afterward into their parlours. And thus by degrees (as may be
seen in Epiphanius) Images were removed, into their Pretoria judgment places,
and thence into Epist. ad Chorepiscop.
market places, from thence (as appears by the fifth counsel of Carthage)
into high ways afterward into churchyards (as it is in the second coun. of
Nice) from whence Can. 14.
they came to the church walls and so atlast by the figure (...) up to the
altar. Here Tom. 5.
was magnum ex (...); sed ex malis principiis. These were the first two
occasions 1. A (...) to have the good will of the heathen. 2. Extraordinary
sorrow for the dead.

Now after, in the pacee of the church, there fell out two other causes

1. First wealth. When the Christians, after the persecution, began to grow
rich, they were desirous that their churches should be as rich as themselves.
To this purpose, Sect. 4.
there is extant an Epistle in the second counsel of Nice. of a noble man of
Syria to one Nilus. This great man had built a Church for the Christians, and
not content, that it should remain only with white walls, determined to have
all Gods creatures painted upon them, and acquainting Nilus with his intent,
was persuaded by him to content himself with the simpleness of the Christian
Churches in other places: but if he would needs have it painted, I think (says
he) it were best to paint the story of the Bible, for that will be more seemly,
and better then the pictures of birds and beasts, etc. So that one occasion
was, that in those times, by reason of their wealth they desired to please
their eyes. 2. The other cause may be, the idleness, absence, or ignorance of
their Pastors, (as it is said in the same place of Paulinus Bishop of Nola in
Campania, who having occasion to travail into Syria and Egypt, and having none
to preach to his people, till his return, he thought good (because he would
have something to teach them in his absence) to paint the whole story of the
Bible on the walls of his Church; so that their preachers were none other but
painted walls. But this is no way to be commended in him, and the (...) proved
accordingly. For it fell out, that forwant of better teachers, the people
became ignorant: and because their Pastors became but dumb Images, therefore
dumb Images became their Pastors. And thus much for the four occasions of
introducing Images.
This Commandment was divided in the beginning into 1. a Charge, 2. and a
Penalty. The charge was two fold, 1. Non facies, thou shall not make. The
manner must be of Gods prescribing. 2. Non adorabis, Thou shall not worship.
That's our behavior. In the first, there is a restraint, as well of the
Exemplum, or Sampler, in these words, sculptile or Imago; as of the Exemplar,
the Pattern in these words, In things above, in the earth beneath, or in the
waters, etc.

1. The Example was of two sorts. 1. Either particular, and at that time most
usual, as Sculptile, a graven Image, and yet so, as whatsoever else is of the
same kind, whether fusile, ductile, or conflatile, there were words in the Law
to reach every one of them, which was the cause, that God so enlarged himself,
by thirteen words. 2. Or secondly, to remove all occasion of quarrelling, God
did express his meaning, by the word or common name Temunah, or Col-temunah,
all likeness, or similitude whatsoever, which condemns the Metaphysicall
notions abstracted from all matter, and in the matter, all kind of
similitudes, either Images, Idols true or fantastical, are comprehended under
the word Temunah, as Arias Montanus and Pagnine testify. And for further
exposition of this, there was added, the gloss of Moses and Christ, one out of
Deuteronomy, and the other Deuteronomy. 4. 12.
out of Saint John, concerning the general restraint of this with diverse other
John 4. 2. etc.
reasons.

2. Now for the Exemplar or pattern, we showed, that the prohibition was
necessary, because there is nothing but the brain of man had abused it, to the
dishonor of God: as appeared in diverse things, which men worshipped in
Heaven, in Earth, and in the Waters.

Thence we came to the particular question about Images, wherein we handled
three points, 1. what might be alleged out of the Scripture for them, 2.
Secondly, what reasons there were for them, 3. and lastly, by what means, and
upon what occasions, they were brought into the Church.

1. For the first. In the Rhemish Testament, they can find no one place in the
New Testament for them, but one, and that in the Hebrews; that over the Ark
Hebr. 9. 5.
were the Cherubims, and that is taken out of the Old Testament. So that they
Exodus 25. 18.
must needs confess, there be none in the New. And in the Old, this of the
Cherubims, Numb. 21. 8.
and that of the fiery Serpent, is all they can show for it. Unto both which
our answer may be as before, and especially that which Tertullian has, that
this is general, (...), thou shall not make any similitude. They are
privileges and prerogatives which belong only to God, which we may do, as
well as the Israelites, if we have the like command with them. Generi per
speciem non derogatur, the species can derogate nothing from the genus. If they
can show any prescript, or command for worshipping of Images, let them worship
them.

Again the ends of both those examples, were otherwise then theirs: for the end
of the Cherubim, was not to represent God, but only to be in a place of Exodus
25. 22.
the Tabernacle, from whence God would give all his answers. And the Brazen
Serpent, the end of it was to heal those, which were stung with fiery serpents:
therefore these two places make nothing for the worshipping of Images. Besides
we see, that when the brazen serpent began to be abused, how Hezekiah dealt
with it, He brake in pieces the brazen serpent, which Moses had 2 Kings 18. 4.
made, says the text: which shows plainly, what little affinity it had with
the Commandment. And so had the Cherubims been used, if they had been abused
by the people: but God had taken order for that, for none could come unto them
but the High Priest, and he but once a year.

2. For the Reasons, they were said to be 1. (...), the affection of sense,
Exodus 33. 18.
which was not only in the Israelites, but in the Apostles, and in Moses
himself: I beseech thee (says he to God) show me thy glory: but he obtained
nothing, but the sight of his back parts: But this carnality is condemned 1
Cor. 3. 3.
by the Apostle, not only in respect of the people of God, whom this affection
caused to draw all things to Idolatry, but even of the Heathen also. De Civ.
(...) lib. 4. cap. (...)


S. Augustine says, that Varro observed many inconveniences in religion to
arise by bringing in of Images, and his reason was, Deos facile posse in
simulachrorum stoliditate contemni; the gods might soon grow into contempt, by
the foolishness of Images.

We Likewise showed, that nimium, too much, was a broad way to superstition,
and that it was a vain assertion of theirs, that there can be no nimium in
religione, no superfluity in religion. Against which opinion, S. Augustine
opposes, and says, Inpsalm 101.
That we may as well bring a rock into the Church, as other resemblances,
because that did represent Christ too.

3. The last was, by what means and occasions, when, and by whom Images were
Lib. 1.
introduced into the Church. This we showed out of Irenaeus, the Images of
Christ, and the Apostles, by the Gnostiques: the image of the Virgin Mary (out
of Epiphanius) by the Collyridians.

The occasions were four. 1. The policy of the Heretics, to make the Heathen
more favorable and inclinable to them. 2. Extraordinary grief for friends
departed. 3. The wealth of the Church. 4. The idleness of the Ministers. These
were said to be the causes of Images. So much for the recapitulation.

CHAP. III.
What the Romanists allege out of the Fathers, ancient Liturgies and Councels
for Images. Add. 13. Of S. Chrysostomes Liturgy. Add. 14. Of the second Nicene
Council. The words mistaken in the capitular of Charles the great, and in the
Synod of Franckford and Paris. Testimonies of the Fathers against Images.

NOw, for the more full handling of this Question, let us see what can be said
further for Images, out of the ancient Fathers and Councils. Their Fathers are
either true, or counterfeit. Their true Fathers are, S. Basile and Eusebius
only. And that saying of Basile which deceived Aquinas and the Schoolmen, Basil.
is this, That the honor due to the Abstract, redoundeth to the Pattern: and
this speech Aquinas urges for honor to be done to Images. But he speaks
there of this Conclusion, that Christ is to be worshipped equally with the
Father, out of the Hebrews, where Christ is called, Character substantiae
Patris, the express Image of the Father; and such an Image we acknowledge must
be honored; and Heb. 1. 3.
if they can show us such another Image among theirs, as Christ was of the
Father, we will accept of it, and worship it.

The second that is urged, is Eusebius in his (...) to Paulinus Bishop of Tire,
and in his Epistle to Constantia the (...), set down in the second Council of
Ephesus, where he speaks of an Image Lib. 10. cap. 4.
of Christ, set up by some of the Gentiles, for the cure he wrought upon the
Syrophoenician woman, which makes little for them; for what reason is it to
say, That the Gentiles did honor Christ so, therefore Christians ought to do
the same: besides it is plain, that Eusebius was no Patron of Images, through
all his writings.

1. Their counterfeit Fathers, are (...), Damasus, and Chrysostom. Out of
Athanasius, in a certain absurd book, not his own, but one that goes under his
name, they tell of a Crucifix that wrought miracles: now it is easy to be
known, whether this book were his, or not, to any that shall read it: nay at at
the reading of one of the first periods, he will say, that it is so far from
being made by Athanasius, as that it was not written by any man of common
sense. 2. Such another is that of (...) in his Pentificale, in the life of
Silvester: There is no more to be said of this, but Noveris, oderis, know them,
and you will never like them. Read the Treatises themselves. 3. Concerning
Chrysostomes Liturgy, Jewel observes in one passage. An Emperor is prayed for
by name, that lived 600 years and more after the death of Chrysostom: for they
prayed for Alexius the Emperor and Empress (who lived anno 1180) whereas
Chrysostom died in the last year of the Emperor Arcadius, which was anno 408.
This shows that some things have been added to Chrysostomes (...) in after
times, and that therefore this, Addition 13. Of S. Chrysostom. Liturgy.
as all the other ancient Liturgies have been altered since their first
composing, but to deny the substance of it to be Chrysostomes, is contrary to
the testimony and practice of all the Greek Church, and therefore was never
intended by this learned Author, who was a great honourer of Antiquity.

They have but one Council for them: which is the second Nicene Council, the
gatherer whereof, was Irene the Empress. She was a heathen borne, daughter to
an Emperor of Tartary, nouzled up in Paganism from her birth, and afterward
matching with Leo the fourth, Father to Constantine the Emperor, she was
converted, and after the Emperor Leo's death, in the minority of her son,
ruled with him, and called this Council. Constantine at the first seemed not to
oppose her, but after, when he came to some understanding, he refused to admit
of Images, but she being too potent for him, cast him in prison, and put out
both his eyes; whereby you may see, that she was a woman without natural Romans
1. 31.
affection.

The chief men at this Council, were Tarasius Patriarch of Constantinople, and
John Legate of the East Churches. The first had bin a Lay man and a Courtier,
all his life, till a year before the Council called, and (as he confessed of
himself) never intended matter of religion till a year before: and sor John, we
need no other witness for him, but the testimony of the Patriarch of Antioch,
who sent him to the Council, which was, that he was a good devout man, but of
no great learning. The like may be said of Theodosius, and Constantine, who
ruled the Council: and it may be truly averred, that in any one Council, there
were never such a sort of simple men, in respect of their gifts, nor more evil
disposed in regard of their boldness, and attempts, presuming above their
gifts. There is not in all Durands rationale scripturae worse alleged, nor
more fabulous narrations in the Legend, then in this second Council of Nice.
There may be gathered out of it, ten absurd conclusions: and that which makes
up all, there were in it such errors, as they themselves could not defend. In
the fifth Action there is this conclusion, That Angels have bodily substances:
and in another, that Christ was born in the five thousand and first year of the
world: in another, that Honorius the Pope was a Monothelite, and therefore an
Anathema denounced against him; for which the Romanists cry out, that the
Council was corrupt in all those places. Lastly, the Council is ranker on their
side, and says more then they would. Non sunt duae adorationes, sed una and
eadem: adoratur prototypus and Idolum, the adorations of Idols and prototypes
are not two but one adoration. And a worse then this, Idem Imaginibus honor
debetur, qui and beatae Trinitati, the same honor is due to Images, as is to
the bles. sed Trinity.

It is true the words of the Council are so recited in capitulam Caroli magni,
lib. 3. Addition 14. Of the second Council of Nice.
cap. 17. and that the Synods of Frankford and Paris, thereupon condemned that
opinion, and that justly, if they had held it: but it is as true, that they
were deceived by a false translation of the Acts of the second Nicene Council
into Latin, wherein the words were so rendered, when as indeed the words are,
as appears in the Greek, Action tertia Synodi: suscipiens etcum honor
amplectans sanctas and venerabiles imagines: adorationem vero latriae, soli
superstantiali ac vivificae Trinitati defero, which words are directly contrary
to what was charged upon them by those Synods.

Now what may be said on our parts, is this.

1. First, Aelius Lampridius, a Heathen Historian, reports; that the Emperor
Adrian in his affection to the Christians, built a Temple for them, (according
to the manner of the Roman Temples) which was bare, without ornaments, having
a roof to defend them from the injury of the weather only, which
notwithstanding was afterward denied to them by the Senate, and grew into such
contempt among the Heathen, that thereof arose a proverb among them, that if
any of the Gentiles in vita Adriani
built a bare Temple, it was called Templum Adriani, Adrians Temple, because it
was inornate.

1. Concerning the Fathers, you may hear their opinions. And first, Ireneus
does utterly disallow the Images of Christ, and the Apostles, which Carpocras,
and the Gnostiques said they had from Pilate. 2. Clemens Alexandrinus, in his
Paraenesis goes further, (if not too far) Nobis lib. 1. c. 23. 24.
vetitum est fallacem hanc artem pingendi exercere. He is so far from favoring
Images, that he would have the lawful use of the art of painting utterly taken
away. For his opinion he alleges this Commandment: but does not well to
press it against the lawful use of painting. 3. Thirdly Tertullian says, Nos
adoramus, oculis in coelum sublatis, non ad imagines and picturas intentis, we
adore with our eyes fixed on heaven, not bent upon images and pictures. 4.
Origin. (...) nobis (...) quod non habemus altaria, and imagines, profitemur,
Celsus objects against us, that we have neither altars nor Images, and we (...)
we have not. 5. Fifthly Arnobius Objicis nobis imagines, quid hae, nisi
vilissima fabrorum opera? thou objectest against us images, and what are they,
but the most base work of Artificers? especially thus abused. 6. Sixthly (...).
Non est dubium, quin religio nulla sit, ubi simulacrum est. It is without
doubt, that where Images are, there is no religion. 7. Seventhly, (...) in a
Panegyrck to Paulinus, and an Epistle to Constantia the Empress, sets down in
the second Ephesine Council. That she must now require no Image of Christ, as
he is man, because now as he is man, his glory is much more then when he was in
the Mount, and yet there the Apostles were not able to behold him, much less
then, can his glory, as he is now, be expressed. And therefore, the Fathers in
the first Ephesine Council, pronounce, Anathema sit Can. 3.
qui Christum ullo modo dividit, let him be accursed that divides Christ. Now
if they give unto Christ an image as he is man, and not as he is God, they
divide him, and as S. Augustine says, omnino errare meruerunt, qui Christum
non in divinis codicibus, De morib. Eccles. cap. 34.
sed in pictis parictibus quaeri voluerunt, they deserve to err, that will
seek Christ, not in books divinely inspired, but on painted walls. 8. Eighthly
Ambrose. Nescit Ecclesia nostra inanes Ideas, and vanas (...) Ambros. de fuga
seculi cap. 3.
figuras, our Church knows no vain shapes, or figures of Images. 9. Jerome. Nos
unam tantam veneramur imaginem, Jesum nempe Christum, qui est Hieron in 1 John
5. 10.
Imago Dei Patris, we worship one only Image, Jesus Christ, who is the Image
of his Father. And hereupon it is, that Erasmus says, that till Jerome was
dead, there Eras. censura. Catech. 6. and in praefat. in Hieron. Epiphanius
Here Is. 19.
was no images received. 10. Epiphan. is an author that they cannot abide,
because in an Epistle of his to John Bishop of Jerusalem, he says, that coming
into a temple that had an Image, he rent the vail, and pulled down the Image,
affirming that it was against Scripture. 11. Augustine being told as it seems
(by the Manichees) that some Christians Augustine de morib. Eccles. cap. 36.
began to worship Images, answers, Novi in Ecclesia nostra esse adoratores
Imaginum, and sepulchrorum, sed isti professionis suae vim nesciunt, etc. I
know there are some in our Church, that worship images and sepulchers, but
these men know not the strength and force of their profession. And in another
place speaking against those that said Christ wrote certain books of Magic
when he was in Egypt, he says, Sic enim lib. 1. cap. 10. de consens. Evang.
errare meruerunt, etc. as before is mentioned.
After (when the first five hundred years were expired) there was some better
hold for them, but yet there were gainsayers; Cerenus the Bishop opposed them.
In the sixth and seventh centuries were the (...), Champions about Idols,
Combatants both for and against them, and about anno 800. they got sure
footing, but were not generally received, till the second Nicene Council; for
Clandius Bishop of Taurinum Cedr. (...).
stood against them, saying, Amplexi sunt idolatriam permutatam, that the
Christians embraced the same Idolatry with the Gentiles, but only that it was
changed somewhat in name. But in these times Constantius, Copronymus, Leo the
fourth, and Philippicus the (...), set themselves against them. So that this
Anno 787.
worshipping of images, had entrance about these times, but never got sound
footing till the second Council of Nice.

But we have diverse Councils for us. The second Ephesine, and those at
Constantinople, Ephesians. Constan Eliber.
under Leo the 1. and Constantine the 2. At Eliberis, where Osvis was
President, in which was one Canon, Placuit picturas in Ecclesia esse non
debere, ne quod colitur aut adoratur, in parietibus de pingatur, that pictures
ought not to be in the Church, nor Can. 36. 15.
any thing be painted on the walls, lest it be worshipped or adored. The like
at Carthage Carthag. 5.
the 5. at which August. was present. And lastly at Frankfurt under Charles the
great, the Emperor. So much for the controversy of Images. Now for our Rules.

CHAP. IIII.
The five Rules of extent for expounding this Commandment. Of the affirmative
part of it. In Gods outward worship are two things: 1. the substance: 2. the
ceremony. The first consists of 1. Preaching. Addition 15. How preaching is a
part of Gods worship. 2. Prayer. 3. Sacraments. Addition 16. The Eucharist
considered as a Sacrament and a Sacrifice 4. Discipline.

THe first rule is, That not only that which is here expressed is forbidden,
but all (...), things of the same nature, and kind also; as our own
inventions, neglecting In (...) 5.
what God commands, or being contrary thereto. S. Jerome says, God says well,
Quae fecerunt sibi, non quae fecit Deus, that which they themselves, and not
God made. They received them not of God, but they were forgers of them
themselves. And the rule of the Fathers is, Idola Ethnicorum exceperunt hereses
Christianorum, the heresies of Christians, which changed and innovated the
outward worship of God, succeeded or came in upon the Idols of the Pagans,
meaning the external worship of the Heretics.

2. The second rule reaches vsque ad cor, look to the fountain the heart, that
that be not infected. The fancy must be restrained, the conceits that rise in
the brain, concerning Gods substance, unreverently attributing to it, a bodily
shape, as Serapion the Monk did. Reliquorum praeceptorum concupiscentiae
sistendae in Cord, hujus vero secundi in cerebro, the lusts that break the
other Commandments, are to be stopped and suppressed in the heart, but these in the
brain.

3. The third rule is, that the means which bring in false worship are here
forbidden, and they are four, whereof we have spoken formerly.

4. The fourth rule is about the signs, for if it be true, as the Apostle has
it, Jude 23.
that we must hate even the garments that are spotted by idols, no question but
we must do the like to the pillars, whereon they stand which are defiled as
well as the Deuteronomy. 16. 22.
garment, for God commanded that there be not so much as (...) the pillar,
basis or Deuteronomy. 7. 25.
statue raised for them. And in another place God protests, that the silver
and gold, the materials whereof they are made, are abomination to him, and
therefore 16. 21.
commands them, to burn them, lest they be snared with them. Nor must any
groves be planted whereby they might have occasion to set them up, for not
only they, but even the high places, whereon they were planted, were
abominable. and therefore it is, that through the story of the kings, it is
laid as an imputation to them, that they dug not down the high places,
though they had taken away the Idols. So that these things which seem good of
themselves, are condemned, because they had some semblance or show of
symbolizing with the Heathen Idolaters. Therefore are we to have no conceits
of our own tending that way, and 2 Samuel 6. 6. 15. 21.
though there might be a good intent in saving the best sheep and oxen, yet
because it came within the compass of facis tibi, when God had expressly
forbidden it, therefore God abhorres it.

5. We are not only commanded not to use images to the dishonor of God our
selves, but to do our best to hinder others too; not to steal them as Rachel
did (for that means is not commendable) but to deprive others of them by all
lawful Genesis 31. 19.
means as Jacob did with the idols among his own household which he took and
buried under an oak. Genesis 34. 4. Had not the altar which the two Tribes and a
half erected, bin only for a Testimony and remembrance to the Lord, but for
sacrifice, Jer. 22. 26. 27.
the other Tribes would have demolished it, or else much blood would have bin
shed about it. And thus much for the Negative part of the Commandment what we
are prohibited. Now for the Affirmative part of Gods outward worship what we
are Commanded.

Of the affirmative part of this Commandment. Heb. 8. 5.


And this is in few words set down by the Apostle. All things must be done
according Number. 12. 7.
to the pattern showed in the Mount in Gods outward worship. Now as Moses had
this commendation from God himself, that he was faithful in every Heb 3. 2.
point to follow his pattern, so has Christ also the like commendation. Christ
is said Act. 3. 22. 7. 37.
to be, as faithful as Moses, and therefore his Pattern is to be as precisely
followed by us. Saint (...) in his sermon to the people, that came to see a
Cripple cured and S. Steven Deuteronomy. 18. 15. 12. 32.
in his Apology for himself. being accused of blasphemy, quot the prophecy of
Moses, concerning Christ. A prophet shall the Lord thy God raise unto thee, from
the midst Jer. 2. 11.
of thee of thy brethren like to me, unto him ye shall hearken. And therefore
whatsoever Deuteronomy. 5. 3. 2
he shall command us we must observe to do it, not alter or change any thing of
it, nor leave any part undone, that is of what he has expressly appointed, but
in such things as he has left to the liberty of his Church, being guided by
his spirit, and enabled by his authority, in such things which tend to the
better observance of his ordinances, and are no way contrary thereto or
corruptive of them, to obey his Church is to obey him. Luke 10.

In the external worship of God, we are to consider two things. 1. The
Substance, 2. The Ceremony. 1 pet. 3. 19. 20.


The substance consists of four parts. 1. Preaching. 2. Prayer. 3. Sacraments.
4. Discipline. Addition 15.


1. For preaching. It is a substantial and essential part of Gods worship.
whether preaching be properly part of Gods worship.


Preaching is a duty of perpetual necessity under the gospel, and may in a
general sense be styled a part of Gods worship, as reading the Scriptures,
catechizing, and other ways of instruction may, because by public declaring
Gods will, and setting (...) his excellent nature, with his great works and
benefits to us, as motives of obedience, some public honor redounds to God,
and therefore the Casuists refer preaching to the duty of public praising, or
lauding God, which is properly a part of Gods worship; as Reginald. prax. lib.
18. tract. 2. cap. 19. So Fileucius and others; but in a strict and proper
sense, it is not part of Gods worship, as Prayer, and Praises are, for the
immediate object of these is God, and their immediate end is Gods honor; but
the immediate object of preaching are the men to whom we preach, and their
instruction how to worship and serve God, is the immediate and proper end of
Preaching; and so these differ, as the means and the end.

Preaching is of great Antiquity. He preached to the spirits that are in
prison. 1. Before the Law. Noah was a Preacher. 2. Under the Law. Moses
enjoined the Priests Deuteronomy. 31. 13.
to gather the people together, men and women, to hear and learn, etc. And Act.
15. 12.
S. James tells us, that Moses had in every City them that preached every
Sabbathday. And the Priests office was, to teach, to burn incense, and to offer
sacrifice. Deuteronomy. 33. 10.


3. In the time of the Prophets, Esaias speaks of preaching good tidings, and
Esa. 61. 1.
the Prophet Jonah was sent to preach to Ninive. And the prophet David
professed, Jon. 3. 2.
that he had preached the righteousness of God in the great congregation. His
Son psalm. 40. 9.
Solomon also was entitled by the name Preacher.

4. This continued to the time of the second Temple. Ezra stood upon a pulpit
of Neh. 8. 4.
wood, and preached to the people. 5. In Christ's time, he not only preached
himself, Luc. 16. 20.
but gave a Commission to his disciples to preach to all the world, which they
did, every Mar. 16. 15. 20.
where, as it is in the end of Saint Marks Gospel. Saint Philip preached to the
Eunuch. and Saint Paul not only preached, as you may see in diverse places, but
Act. 8. 35. 20. 9.
makes it an ordinance of God, to save them that believe. So that this we see,
has bin a substantial part of Gods external worship in all ages.

2. For prayer, or invocation, which the Prophet calls vitulos labiorum, the
calves 1 Cor. 1. 21.
of our lips, it consists of two parts. 1. Petition. 2. Thanksgiving, and this
has Hos. 14. 2.
bin of great antiquity also. 1. Before the flood, many 100. years, there is
mention made of invocation of the name of (...), which some learned n en refer
to public forms Genesis 4. 26. 20. 17. 24. 12.
of worship or liturgies then used, as Drusius. 2. After the flood, Abraham
prayed for Abimelech, and (...) servant, for his good success. Aaron and Moses
prayed for Pharaoh. 3. When the church was gathered together, the Ark nor the
army never Exo. 8. 12.
Number. 10. 35. 6. 24. etc.
removed or stood still, without prayer. There Is a set form of blessing the
people by the priest, with invocation, set down in the same book of (...).
Solomon 1 Kin. 8. 22.
at the dedication of the Temple, used a prayer, and therefore the Church is
called Esa. 56. 7.
Mat. 21. 13.
the house of prayer, by the Prophet, which place, our Savior cited, when he
Luc. 11. 2.
drove the buyers and sellers out of the Temple. Lastly we have a set form of
prayer composed by our Savior, upon the petition of the disciples.

2. The other. Thanksgiving. We see it used also, before the flood, by Abraham's
Genesis 24. 27
Deuteronomy. 31. 19
servant, when he had finished his business successefully. And we find this
duty Exo. 15. 1.
commanded by God himself, afterward, Moses had a set form of thanksgiving
psalm. 92.
after the deliverance of the people from the Egyptians, And King David in many
2 Chr. 6. 4. 7. 3. 6.
places commends this part of prayer highly, and penned a set form of it in a
psalm Esr. 3. 10.
which he entituleth, a (...) or song for the sabbath day. Solomon his son in
the time Mat. 11. 25.
of the first Temple practiced it, and so did the people, using one of King
David's Luc. 10. 21.
psalms, the burden whereof (as we may so speak) was, for his mercy endures
Mat. 26. 30.
for ever. Ezra also used it, after the building of the second Temple, together
with Romans 7. 25.
2 Cor. 2. 14.
the priests and people. So did our Savior. I thank thee o father etc. In the
time Ephesians. 5. 19.
of the Gospel they sung a psalm. Lastly, it was not only practiced by the
Apostle, phil. 4. 6.
as you may see in many places, I thank God through Jesus Christ, and thanks be
to Heb. 13 15.
God etc. but commended by him to others, speak to your selves in psalms and
Hymns etc. as unto the Philippians: where he joins both (...) of this duty in
one verse in every thing by prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving let your
request be made known to God. And (to omit many others) in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, giving thanks i called the sacrifice of praise.

3. As the word is Gods speech to us, and Invocation ours to him, so the
sacraments Sacraments.
are the Covenants between God and us. Such are the type of circumcision,
instead whereof Baptism succeeded; and the type of the Passover, instead
whereof we have the Lords supper. And these two only we receive as sacraments
generally necessarily for all. But for our justification in thispoint S.
Augustine says upon the words of Jo. 19. 36.
Saint John, cited out of the institution of the Passover [A bone of him shall
not be Exo. 12. 46.
l. de (...) c. 4.
broken] vnus emilitibus etc. A soldier with a spear pierced his side, and
forthwith came out of it water and blood, which are the two Sacraments of the
church l. 3 de doelr.
our mother. And in another place. Quedam pauca pro multis etc. The Lord, and
Apostilical Christiana. c. 9.
doctrine, has left to us a few in stead of many, and those easy to be kept,
most excellent to the understanding, and most pious to be observed, the
Sacrament of Baptism, and the celebration of the body and blood of the Lord.

1. The first. Baptism is so necessary a Badg for a Christian, that he cannot
be John. 3. 5.
In. Ephesians. c. 25
without it. Saint Augustine says, sic accipiendum est etc. That which the
Apostle says, is thus to be understood, that by the lavacre of (...), and the
word of sanctificational former sins of the regenerate are cleansed and
healed, and not only l. 1. de (...) et concup. ad valor.
all sins are remitted in Baptism but those also which are afterward
contracted by humane ignorance and infirmity: and in another place. Dimittitur
eis regeneratione spirituli quod traxerunt (ut (...) dixi) ex adami generatione
carnali. By this spiritual regeneration (as I have often said) whatsoever they
have drawn from Adams carnal generation, is forgiven them.

And this Sacrament, is a service of faith. For though children baptized cannot
be properly said to believe of themselves, by reason of their minority: yet are
they believers, by their fidejussores, or Godfathers, and Godmothers, and
parents, who present them, and desire to have them baptized in the faith of
Christ, and received into the Church: as were the Jews children by
circumcision. Inter credentes (says de verbis Apostolical cont.
Saint Augustine) (...) populos baptizatos (...), nec judicare aliter ullo modo
audebis, si nonvis esse apertus haereticus. Thou art to repute little children,
that are (...). c. 14.
Christened, among believers, nor must thou dare to judge otherwise, if thou will not be an open heretic. And in the same place. Absit ut dicam, non
credentes infantes etc. God forbid, that I should call Infants unbeleevers, I
have disputed it before. They believed by another, and offended by another, It
is said, They believe, and it is enough to make them of the number of the
faithful, that are baptized. This has the authority of the Church and the
Canon founded upon the truth, obtained.

2. The other, the Lords supper, is a substantial part of our servicetoo. For
in it is a whole Oblation of our selves, souls, and bodies, to be a reasonable,
holy, and lively sacrifice to God, as we acknowledge in our liturgy. In it we
acknowledge, confess, bewail, and repent us of our sins, which cost our
Savior his most precious blood, to make atonement for them. And in it, we
profess, that we are in love with God and our Neighbors, which is the
fulfilling of the Law. Gal. 5. 14.


Herein is a commemoration of that sacrifice which Christ offered for us upon
the Addition 16. the Euchrist whether a Sacrifice.
Cross, in which respect it may be called a sacrifice, for as our reverend
author else where speaks, The Eucharist ever was, and by us is considered both
as a sacrament and a sacrifice. A sacrifice is only proper and appliable to
(...) worship etc. In a word we hold with Saint Augustine de Civit. lib. 17.
Chap. 20. Hujus sacrificii caro et sanguis ante adventum Christi per victimas
similitudine promittebatur, in passione Christi per ipsam veritatem reddebatur,
post adventum Christi per sacramentum memoriae celebratur. Answer to Card.
Perron p. 6. 7.

And lastly, by it we offer a most acceptable sacrifice, and service to God, of
thanksgiving psalm. 116. 17.
(this Sacrament being called Eucharistia, which signifies so much) for
bestowing so great a blessing upon u, whereby every faithful Communicant is
strengthened in the faith of Christ. Therefore, Accedens debet esse plenus
sanctitate, he that comes to it, ought to be as holy as he may, for all our
services to God are to be done in purity (which is true internal worship) and
with decency (which is external) and both these make that complete holiness,
which becomes Gods house. Plsa. 93. 5.


4. The last part of the substance in the external worship of God is Discipline
by Discipline.
which men are regulated in the fear and service of God. This we find
commanded. Mat. 18. 15. 16. etc. John 20. 22. Executed extraordinarily Act. 5.
4. By Saint Peter, ordnarily, 1 Cor. 5. 3. By S. Paul, and Rules set down for
the ordering of it, 1 Timothy 5. It is as Barnard says, the yoke to keep us
within the bounds of Order, and (as Cyprian) Custos spei, et retinaculnm fidei,
a preserver of hope and stay of faith. Saint Augustine In Cantde discipl.
affirms, that it brings delinquents to repentance, whereby they recover that,
which they had lost, by their (...). For it is sure enough, that the Church of
God has in it of all sorts. Strong and weak, good, and bad. Corn, and chafe,
Mat. 3.
vessels of gold, and silver, of wood, and earth, and therefore has need of
some 2 Timothy 2. 20.
thing to cleanse the floor, and to sever the corn from tares and to prune bad
succors from the vine. And this the Church does by Discipline, and Censure,
which all that live within the Church must either willingly submit to, or else
be forced to obedience. Quicunque Dei (...) jam sibi nota non facit, et corripi
non vult, etiam de corrept. et gra
propterea corripiendus est, quia corripi non vult. Says Augustine. He that
knows c. 3.
the will of God and does it not, nor will submit to correction, is to be
corrected even for that, because he refuses correction. But there are a sort
of people (and ever has bin) that cry out against discipline as a tyrannical
burden imposed upon the conscience: Saint Augustine tells of such as these
which were in his time. Multi sunt sermon. 238. de Tempt.
qui sanae doctrinae adversantur, justitiam (...), et disciplinam imperium esse
judicant etc. There are many that oppose sound doctrine, find fault with
justice, and account discipline, as a thing imperious, and ascribe moderate
correction, to an act of pride: whereas there can be nothing imperious, but
that which is commanded unjustly, nor can any thing be more properly termed
Pride, then the contempt of discipline.

But howsoever we esteem of it, it is neither unjust, nor new. We find it
commanded Mat. 18. 17.
by our Savior, Dic Ecclesiae. Tell it to the Church. And Saint Paul gave 1
Cor. 5. 5.
order to deliver the incestuous person to Satan, that his spirit might be
saved: which is the true end of discipline. And in diverse other places, he
gives order, for care to be 2 Cor. 10. 6.
had that discipline fall not to the ground. Be ready to revenge all
disobedience: and Corripite 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14.
inquietos. Warn or rebuke the unruly. To Timothy he prescribes many rules
concerning it, and among them, Them that sin, rebuke before all, that others
1 Timothy 5. 20.
de Civ. dei. l. 19. c. 16.
also may fear. Whereupon Saint Augustine says, sin must be punished, that
the party punished may be thereby amended, or else that others thereby may be
terrified from offending in the like manner. And upon Saint Paul's words [put
that Quaest in Deuteronomy. c. 39.
wicked person from among you] he says. Ex quo appare, ut qui aliquid tale
commisit, (...) dignus sit. Hoc enim nunc agit (...) in excommunicatione, quod
agebat in veteri Testamento interfectione. The Church does now that by
Excommunication, which the church in the old Testament did, by putting to
death. And therefore de fide et oper
to conclude this point Disciplina Ecclesiae dormire non debet, the Discipline
of the church ought not to sleep.

CHAP. V
Of Ceremonies in Gods worship. The use of them. 4. (...) to be observed about
them. The means of preserving Gods worship. The signs. Addition 17. Concerning
customs and traditions of the church. The 6. rule of causing others to keep
this Commandment.

THe second general, considerable in the external worship of God are ceremonies
(not Jewish but Christian) which how soever they are (by some that either well
weigh them not or by others, possessed with a spirit of opposition) accounted
Antichristian, and repugnant to the word of God, and therefore to be abolished
out of the church: yet in the judgment of moderate and well affected men, nay
of al men that are not sowred with the leaven of schism or (...) they are
reputed no (...) part of this external duty, for they which are versed in the
ancient story of the church cannot but confess, that in all ages before Popery
had its birth, and in all places, where christianity was professed some ceremonies
have ever bin practiced as lawful and necessary nor was there at any time any
religion ever practiced in the world without some ceremonies nay the most
seemingly reformed sectaries themselves cannot but use some ceremonies in the
practice of their religion, and therefore of their own fraternity the wisest
sort have acknowledged. That they are necessarily to be observed, as conducing
to the advancing of the true worship of God (...) (says one) (...) ad Dei
cultum, atque necesse est, et sint persokae destinatae in Ecclesia, qui
Magistri vel Ministri potius sint Ceremoniarum, and eas exerceant in Ecclesia,
secundum Domini instituta, Ceremonies belong to the worship of God, and it is
very necessary, that there should be some persons in the Church, appointed to
be Masters, or Ministers rather of Ceremonies, to use them in the Church
according to the Lords institution: and he closes with a good reason, Vt
norint cultores Dei, qualem Deo cultum exhibeant, that the worshippers of God
may know what manner of worship to exhibit to him.

For the Fathers, take the judgment of S. Augustine for the rest, Nulla
Disciplina in his est melior gravi prudentique Christiano, quam ut eo modo
agat, quo agere (...) ecclesiam ad quamcunque forte devenerit: quod enim neque
(...), neque contra Ad inq. (...) lib. 1. cap. 2.
bonos mores injungitur, indifferenter est habendum, and pro little inter quos
vivitur societate servandum: there is no better (...) in these things (viz.
ceremonies) to a sober and wise Christian, then to observe them in that manner,
which he sees the Church wherein he lives to keep them: for whatsoever is
enjoined, so it be neither against faith nor good manners, it is to be held as
a thing indifferent, and to be observed in regard of the society of those among
whom we live. And this is a good, way to follow the Apostles Counsel, to keep
the unity of the Spirit in the bond of Ephesians. 4. 3.
peace. You shall hear the same Fathers censure against them that are
refractory in this point. In (...) rebus de quibus (...) statuit divina
Scriptura, mos populi Dei, etconstituta Ad Casulan.
majorum tenenda sunt. Et sicut praevaricatores divinarum legum, (...)
contemptores Ecclesiasticarum consuetudinum coercendi sunt; In those things of
which the holy Scripture has determined nothing, the custom of Gods people,
and the Constitutions of the Ancient are to be observed: and the Contemners of
Ecclesiastical Customs are no less to be reduced to conformity, then they
which offend against Gods Laws.

And withal, there is no doubt but, these ceremonies may be changed, and varied
according to the diversity and alteration of times, and nations, and other
circumstances. Ad Marcellin. Epist. 5.
S. Aug. says in defense of this point, Non itaque verum est quod dicitur,
Semel recte factum (...) est mutandum: mutata quippe temporis causa, etc. that
is not then true, which is said: A thing once well established, may not by an
means be altered, for as time, so true reason may call for (...) alteration:
and whereas they say it cannot be well done to change it: so truth may say, it
cannot be well sometimes, if it be not altered: because both may well stand
together, and be right, if upon alteration of time, they differ. Yet in
Ceremonies there are these 4 rules or cautions to be observed.

1. That they be not over many, and that those which be enjoined, be necessary,
according to the time and place wherein we live, according to the Apostles
example, who enjoined few things to those believing Gentiles. Acts 15. 28, 29.
2. That the Ceremonies enjoined be for edification, and not destructive to that
which the substance builds, and sets up. And this is the Apostles counsel. Let
1 Cor. 14. 26.
Gal. 2. 18.
all things be done to edifying. For a destroyer (according to this rule) is a
transgressour. 1 Cor. 14. 4.
And in this respect it is, that the same Apostle prohibits prayer in an
unknown tongue. 3. That they be such, as conduce to order: to which all things
must be squared 4c.
(...) according to order, (as the same Apostle) else there will be confusion
in the 33.
Church, and God is not the Author of Confusion. 4. Lastly, (...), that they be
for decency. They must be such as make for the decent service of God. And
therefore it is, that the Apostle inveighed against covering 1 Cor. 11. 4.
of the head and face in religious exercises. It was an uncomely and undecent
thing for men to be covered, or women uncovered in the Church.
Now the means (according to our former rules) to observe these things is. 1.
according The Means.
to the Apostles direction, to keep the Depositum safe, which God himself 1 Timothy 6. 20.
tells, what it is, Retentio verbi, the keeping of the word, which is, volumen
Gal. 4. 24.
utriusque foederis, the volume of both Covenants. This book shall not depart
Jos. 1. 8.
from thee (which now among some is thrust out, and the Legend and other
things, 1 Timothy 6. 14.
obtruded in the room of it.) And this, as it must be kept safe, so sincerely
and purely, without spot, it must not be corrupted; for a little leaven sowreth
the whole 2 Cor. 2. 17.
lump, as he speaks elsewhere: and Nazianzen tells us, that a little
wormwood 1 Cor. 5. 6.
marres a whole barrel of honey. The Altar that Vriah devised, got (...) Reg.
16. 14.
so near to the Lords Altar, that in the end it got the upper hand of it.
Physicians say, that Aegros sanis immiscere initio morbi est, it is the way to
breed diseases to mingle the sick with the sound. Therefore, that form of
outward worship is to be kept, which has no repugnancy with Gods word, and
has that decency in it (which S. Paul advised before) which may express our
inward affection, and be suitable to the true and reverend worship of God.

The signs of true worship are evident, When that which is enjoined concerning
The signs.
it, is either grounded upon Dictum Jehovae, as the Prophets usually pronounced
their injunctions, The word of the Lord: or as Christ proved the resurrection
by a Syllogism, Matthew. 22. 32
or inference out of Scripture: or Quod accepi a Domino, what I have received 1
Cor. 11. 23.
of the Lord (as the Apostle,) or lastly, by authority of the Church in things
indifferent tending to decency and not repugnant to the Word.

To keep close to the constant practice of the Church is the duty of all
Christians, and Addition 17.
what she has successively delivered to us, being not repugnant to Scripture,
ought to be concerning customs and traditions of the Church.
reverently received by all true sons of the Church. S. Paul requires the
Thessalonians to obey what he had taught or delivered them by word, or by
Epistle, on which place S. Chrysostom (...), that it is manifest, the Apostle
did not deliver all (...), by writing, but some things without writing, and he
adds (...), that the one is to be believed as well as the other, (...),
therefore we esteem the tradition of the Church worthy of belief: is there a
tradition? seek no further: and of such things which have been generally
received by the Church, and of which no original can be found, and which have
the testimony of pious and prudent men of authority in the Church, that they
were delivered by the Apostles, there ought little doubt to be made, because
there can be no greater proof given, or reasonably desired in such things, for
of such we may say with S. Augustine, Quod invenerunt in Ecclesia, tenuerunt;
quod didiscerunt, docuerunt; quod a patribus acceperunt, hoc filiis
tradiderunt; what they found in the Church, they kept; what they learned, that
they taught; what they received from their fathers, that they delivered to
their sons. And though all matters doctrinall, of necessity to salvation for
all are written, yet other matters concerning government, and external rites
and forms, are mentioned only ocoasionally, nor were needful to be written,
because they were visible to every eye in the daily practice of the Church.

These are the true signs.

The sixth Rule concerns. 1. The Magistrate. They which are in authority must
enjoyne that which is true and lawful, and abolish that which is false and
ungodly Moses took the Calf, burnt it in the fire, and ground it to powder, and
(...) Exodus 32. 20
2. Reg. 18. 4.
brake the brazen serpent. 2. The private persons duty (is not to pull down)
but not Exodus 23. 24.
to worship Images: as it is in the law, and in the practice of the three
Children, Daniel 3. 18.
though we may not without authority break them down, yet we may refuse to
worship them.

CHAP. VI.
Of the manner of outward worship, no reverence, nor worship to be performed to
Images. 1. The distinction of (...) and (...) examined. 2. That evasion, that
not the Image, but God by the Image is worshipped, taken away. 3. That they are
Laymens books, examined. 4 That Images are to put us in mind of the Saints,
examined. Addition 20. About Images and pictures for memories sake.

Of the manner of the outward worship of God.
THe second part of the Precept follows, which directs us how we must stand
affected Pars secunda. Negative part.
in this outward worship of God. Non prosternes te, etc. Thou shall not bow
down to them, etc. In which words are prohibited. 1. Falling or bowing down. 2.
Worshipping them; or (as some translation) serving them. The first of these,
Prostration is bowing the knees, or bending the head or body, in reverence or
honor to any thing. And the second Worshipping, is, to offer service to a
thing in the way of Religion. Neither of these ought to be done to an Idol, to
rob God of the least part of his glory, and honor. There shall be no strange
God in thee (says the Psalmist) neither shall thou worship psalm 81. 9.
any strange God.

So that whereas some might say concerning the words, Non facies, Thou shall
not make. I am out of danger and compass of this prohibition, for I make none;
here the words reach further and tell him, he must not worship them, though
made by others; for as a father answers, Age, non facio, alius facit, ego
factum reperio, etc. well, say I make none, others make them, I find them
made: as the children of Dan, Judge. 18. 31.
that set up the graven Image that Micha had made: and Jeroboam and
Nebuchadnezzar 1 Reg. 12.
we may conceive made not those which they set up; well says he, howsoever,
Dan. 3. 18.
and by whomsoever they were made, as thou had no hand in the making, so thou
shall have as little in the worshipping of them. Non adorabis neque coals, thou
shall not worship them that others make.

Now, as before, he used the two words (...) and Temunah, 1. first that no
graven Image should be made, 2. and then no manner of likeness whatsoever, so
(...) be two words answerable to them, (...) and (...) tishtacavoh and gnabhod,
1. There must be no bowing down to them, 2. no manner of worshipping or serving
them, of purpose to exclude all distinctions. The first bowing, was the usual
manner in old time of worshipping. Abraham ran to meet the 3 men from the tent
Ger. 18. 2.
door, and bowed himself toward the ground: then from the species, Adorabis, he
rises to the general, coals, or servies, to keep out all manner of worship
whatsoever, for fear we might be apt to say, No, we will not bow down to them,
yet we may worship them though, with some kind of worship or other, if not
with latria, yet with dulia, at least: therefore both these are added here, not
only non adorabis, but non coals too: for we know that a man may colere, or
serve that, to which he will not bow down; and therefore adorabis, the chief
worship being forbidden first, he adds coals too, and forbids that also which
may be a great deal less then the other: for though the word gnoved pesel in
the psalm, be colere, to worship, or serve graven psalm. 97. 7.
images, so in another place, the word is used to serve man, as twelve years
they served Chedorlaomer; and else where to till the ground; and in Esaias,
gnoved pishtim is Genesis 14. 4. 3. 23. 2. 15.
a trimmer, or dresser of flax. And in Latin the word colo, is not only used
in respect of God and man, but colere rus, glebam, hortum, etc. to till the
ground, and thereupon Esaias 19. 9.
comes the word Agricola, an husbandman in respect of tillage.

So that the Papists hold an erroneous opinion, that think the holy Ghost
ascends from a word of (...) importance, to one of greater. The like may be
said of (...), or (...), and (...), bowing and serving. But if these two, non
incurvabis te, and non coals will not serve the turn, then we must be sent to
another place, do nothing Exodus 23. 24.
which any Idolater does to his gods. Thou shall not bow down to their gods, or
serve them, nor do after their works.

We see then that the Commandment is double, the prohibition is against making
and serving Images: and though they of the Church of Rome bring an Example for
the making, as that of the Cherubims, yet they show none for the worshipping of
them, we must have a warrant for both, or else they defend not themselves.

Now for bowing down, you shall understand, that in their defense, they are
constrained to desert the original words; for as in the former, they went from
Pesel and Temunah, to Idolum and Icon, so here, from Tishtacaveh and Tagnabod,
they betake themselves to (...), or (...), and (...), and profess the
lawfulness of the first, but not of the second; yet this cannot quit them from
the breach of this Commandment. But because they would have some evasion, they
quote a place in the Rhemish Testament, because that (...) (only) is not
joined (...). 4. 9, 10
with (...) (worship) but with (...) (serve) therefore say they, we may (...),
bow to Saints, though not (...). But if we consider the precedent verse, we
shall find, that the Devil required no more but (...),; and therefore, unless
we make that proper to God, Christ's answer will not be sufficient, nor serve;
and the Devil might have replied, that he required not (...), but only (...),
to which the word (...) was not joined.

In the next place, they tell us, that the distinction of (...) and (...) has
been long in the Schools, and that Saint Augustine has it, in his tenth book
de Civitate Dei, cap. 1. and lib. 1. de Trinitate, cap. 6. in which places he
maintains the distinction, as they do. They tell us also that Eusebius lib. 14.
cap. 4. and Hieron. Epistola 52, and 53. contra Vigilantium, hold the like, but
there is no such thing to be found in the two last. And as for S. (...) we say,
that he was an excellent and reverend man in the Church, but with reverence to
him, we say, what he confesses himself in diverse places, that the least part
of his learning lay in the tongues, and that he was very unskilful in the Greek
and Hebrew, and therefore can be no meet man to pronounce, that by (...) is
meant the service of men, and by (...) the service of God.

But if we will distinguish of these words aright, (...) is properly the
service of our own servant, and (...) the service of him that is hired; for
(...) is properly servus, a servant, and (...) an hireling: and so came in
Latro, which (as Varro says) at first signified nothing, but a hired or
stipendary soldier, of (...), merces, wages, and after by the abuse of their
calling, and by their evil behavior it came to be so odious a name, that it is
now used for a thief.

And this word is often used in the Scriptures, but not always for the service
of God, as in the Epistle to the Hebrews. The reason why the Septuagint used
the Heb. 8. 5.
word (...) for lagnabod, may be like that in the speech of Tertullian, that as
he says De Idolatria.
of the Christians, so ye may say of the Jews, because they would not have Gods
people to be hired for money, to make ornaments for, and to dress and adorn
the Images of the Heathen: for it was the use of some Christians in the
Primitive Church so to do, against which act Tertullian inveigheth, as being a
thing, utterly unlawful.

But it was the ignorance in the Hebrew tongue, that brought in all these
absurd conclusions, (for the thing it self, the nature of the word is contrary
to them, and the use also: nor has it any agreement with the Hebrew) insomuch
that Thomas Aquinas did determine, that the picture of Christ, and every part
of the cross, Part. 3. sum. q. 25.
is to be worshipped adoratione (not duliae, as their distinction was before,
but) latriae too, which they confessed was alone due to God, and not to any
Creature whatsoever. Therefore the learneder sort among them, having studied
the tongues better, seeing the absurdity of these conclusions, found out
another shift, and say, that they neither do adorare, nor colere imagines,
neither bow down to, nor worship the images themselves, but Christ, and the
Saints, by the Images.

This distinction does little avail them; the records of Antiquity can tell
them, that this was the shift of the Heathen Idolaters of old, even in the
Primitive Church. Lactantius taxes those of his time for it, Quae igitur
amentia est, etc. what Lib. 2. de orig. error. cap. 2.
madness is it, says he, to answer, that you worship not the Idol, sed Numen
aliquod, cui Idolum fabricatur? but some God to which the Idol was was made?
and Hom. 18. in Ephesians.
Chrysostom, Adoratis simulachra, non simulachra, sed Venerem and Martem per
simulachra Veneris and Martis, you adore images, and not images, but Venus and
Mars by their images: lastly S. Augustine, (...) quis disputator, etc. there
starts In psalm. 97. 7.
up I know not what disputer (and he seems to thee to be a learned man) and
says: I worship not that stone, nor that senseless Image, I know (like a
subtle Prophet) that it can neither speak nor see, but I serve that Deity
which I see not, I worship not that Image, but I adore what I see, and serve
him that I see not: And what is that? why a certain invisible Deity? To which
the Father answering says. Hoc modo reddendo rationem de Idolis, optime factum
putant, etc. by this means they think they do well by rendering a reason for
their Idols. And in another place he says of another sort, videntur sibi
purgatioris esse religionis, qui dicunt nec simulachrum, In (...). 115. 4.
nec (...) colo, sed per (...) corporalem ejus rei signum intueor, quam colere
debeo; but they seem to be (...) a more refined Religion that say, I neither
worship the Image, nor the Devil in it, but by that corporeal shape, I behold
the representation of that which I should worship. But what says he to this?
Itaque Apostoli, una sententia poenam, etc. one sentence of the Apostle
testifles their punishment and damnation, Romans 1. 25.
for such kind of acts; God gave them up, etc.

But indeed this error is as ancient as the Calf in the wilderness, and if we
examine it well, we shall find this of their's, all one with that of the Exodus
32. 1.
Israelites, for they did not think the Calfe to be a God, for these reasons.

1. For first, they desired a God to go (...) them, and their reason was
because they could not tell what was become of Moses (who formerly had bin a
visible representation to them of God, and not a God himself) therefore they
would have somewhat made, instead of him and this must hold for one reason, or
else we must say, that they took Moses for their God before. 2. The assent of
Aaron, for if he had not had somewhat in his mind besides flat Idolatry in
consenting and complying with them, he had not bin favored as he was, but
destroyed with the rest. And therefore it cannot be understood, that they
conceived the calf as a visible Representation only, but that in that calf God
might be worshipped, for Aaron said to them that they should keep a feast to
the Lord therefore they intended that the Calf should represent God in their
solemnity. Exo. 32. 5. And it is likely that it was so, because that while they
were in Egypt, they knew no other God then Apis, an Ox. And it is recorded,
that Aaron, upon these words of the people [These be thy Gods (...), that
brought thee up out of the land of Egypt] took hold of them and built an altar,
and proclaimed a fast to (...), which they must needs know, could not be
ascribed to the Calf. So that this was the Elench; that deceived him, that they
might worship God in the Calf, though Moses could not be deceived so, for he
brake it in pieces, and burnt it to ashes. 3. The third evasion of the Papists
is. That these Images are not erected, either to adore or worship them, or God
by them, but that ignorant people might have something to put them in mind of
God; and therefore Images are called by them libri laicorum, the books of
laymen. l. 10. Ep. 54

This is no new device, but used of the old Idolaters, as we may see, by the
(...) of Symmachus. There must be something to put the ignorant in mind of
God. Which Ambrose and Prudentius answer thus, Omnia Deo plena, all things have
God to 16. con. gent.
manifest him, and put us in remembrance of him. And by Arnobius. These that
stand so for Images (says he) use to say, that they made no account of the
Image, but only in respect of the ignorant sort of people, that are put in
mind of God by it. orat. cont. (...).
And (...) in an oration says, Istiusmodi (...) esse pro libris, quae dum
legunt cognitionem dei dediscunt etc. That while they read these books of
Images in stead of learning God, they loose the knowledge of him, and therefore
calls it (...) not (...) moralizing upon (...), not teaching true divinity. So
that we see, there is nothing said in this canse, that was not said before.

Now if we ask the Papists, that if the people must be put in mind of what it
must be? Not of the deity, for they themselves are weary of maintaining that
and though they were wont often, and in many places do still to represent God
and the Trinity in humane shapes, yet Hosius now confesses, that such things
came c. 66. in decal.
in Dormientibus (...) praepositis, while the governors of the Church were a
sleep.

2. Not of Christ, as he is God, for his attributes are (...), but as he is man
only and in so doing, in representing him by picture as man and not God,
seeing that person in the deity cannot be delineated, they imitate Nestorius,
who did divide the natures of Christ, and so consequently may seem to run into
the Anathema of the council of Ephesus: because in some sort they divide in
their picture the manhood from the Godhead, which they cannot express
therewith. Conc. 1. Ephesians. can. 3.


2. Not of Christ, as man, and now glorified, for against this, the saying of
ad Consta (...).
Eusebius may serve well, that the glory of Christ in heaven, is now far
greater, then it was, when he was (...) in the mount, where the disciples could
not look upon him, and therefore cannotbe pourtrayed by any pensil.

3. Nor of Christ, as he was in the flesh, for that were (as the Prophet
speaks) to teach us lies: and rather to forget, then to remember, what he
suffered for us; for in his picture (as in that upon the cross for example) we
can be put in mind and we see no more, then the piercing of his hands and
feet, a wound in his side by a spear, and the thorns on his head: this we may
remember by these things: but the especial pains and torments which inwardly
he suffered; his being sorrowful unto death, his anguish of heart for the Jews
obstinacy and rejection, the bitterness of the cup, which his not only most
perfect body was most sensible of, and his holy soul apprehended and suffered,
these are forgotten these cannot be depicted; so the greatest part of his
passion is un expressible.

4. The last evasion of theirs is, that by Images, we remember, or are put in
mind of the Angels and Saints. To this in brief may be answered, that Saints
are Apoc. 22. 9.
no better then Angels: and seeing that an Angel would not suffer John (...) to
worship him it is not to be used to them. Saint Augustine has a zealous wish,
vtinam velletis discere ab Angelis, tum enim disceretis eos non adorare, I
could wish you in psalm. 96.
would learn of Angels, for then you would learn not to worship them. And Saint
Paul's charge was. Let no man beguile you of your reward, in a voluntary
humility, Col. 2. 18.
and worshipping of Angels etc. And thus much of the controversy, betwixt the
Papists and us, as it had dependence upon the former part of this commandment
concerning Images.

These reasons show, that there are other means better and more effectual then
pictures to Addition 18. of Images.
instruct men in the knowledge of Christ, viz. The scripture and the preaching
of the gospel but they are not meant to prove it unlawful to paint or make any
pourtraiture of Christ in his humane nature, as at his passion etc. Provided,
no religious worship be given to it: that which is of (...) use, is not
therefore unlawful or of no use at all. So the author in his answer to Porron.
cap 18. p. 17. To have a story painted for memories sake we hold not unlawful,
but that it might be well enough done, if the church found it not inconvenient
for her children.

CHAP. VII.
The affirmative part of this precept, concerning the manner of outward
worship. 3. Reasons for outward bodily worship. Outward honor consists 1. in
the sign. 2. in the (...). Of the sign, by. 1. uncovering the (...). 2.
bowing the body. Of the act or deed. 1. By being at Gods command. 2. By doing
his work or service. Of the gesture of Reverence 1. in public and private
prayer. 2. At (...) the word. 3. At the administration of sacraments. 4. At
discpline. The sins against these. In public worship must be. 1. uniformity.
2. Fear. 3. The heart must be present. 4. Silence. 5. constancy, to tarry till
all be done. The (...) outward worship. The signs.

WE are now to take a view of the affirmative part of this precept that is,
how we are to behave our selves in the external worship of God. The worship
enjoined in the first Commandment (as has bin said) is internal; this in the
second, is outward or external honor or worship. Honor being a testimony
Honor signi et (...)
of excellency given by outward sign or deed, and praise by word. The honor
of the sign, is expressed by the word (...), in bowing down, and of the deed
by the word (...), in serving. For the first, as the negative was, thou shall
not bow down to them, the affirmative is, thou shall bow down to me. And for
the other as in the Negative, thou shall not worship or serve them, the
affirmative is, thou shall serve me.

1. For the outward worship first in general. Christ tells us, that a candle is
not Mat. 5. 15.
lighted to be put under a bushel: upon which, the fathers have raised this
note or Maxim, that Bono debetur manifestatio, our good must be made manifest,
and therefore, candles that have bonum lucis, the goodness of light, must not
be thrust sub (...) tenebrarum, under the evil of darkness. So then, if the
candle of light be in our souls, that is, if we inwardly worship God, we must
set it upon a candlestick: our inward religion, must apear in our outward
worship, and it must not be only in a Chamber, as our private Religion, a
close godliness that cannot be seen.

2. The next reason for this point, the Apostle gives. Ye are bought with a
price, 1 Cor. 6. 20.
therefore glorify God in your body and spirit, glory being nothing else, but
an effect of conspicucu nesse, the fair spreading and enlarging of honor and
praise: and therefore contains honor in it. Now in conjunctions copulative,
the rule is In copulativis non sufficit alterum, In things that are coupled,
one is not sufficient, but vtrumque faciendum, both are to be performed. And
the Apostles conjunction [(...) and] [in body and spirit] shows, that this
honor must be done in both. The devil knows this, that God requires both,
and therefore asked of our Savior but Mat. 4. 9.
one, a little glorifying of him, but the bowing of the body, because he knew
that if God have not the copulative, body and spirit both, he will have
neither, God will have all or none.

The third thing is, that seeing God every where almost through the Scripture,
Exo. 3. 5.
has put a distinction and difference between his house and private houses, as
being in more special manner there, then in other places, and that as the
psalmist speaks holiness becomes Gods house for ever, therefore he will not
only have a manifestation of our worship toward him, and that to be in body
as well as Spirit, but he assigns his house for the place, where he will have
this honor exhibited to him. You shall keep my sabbaths (says God) and
reverence my sanctuary. Levit. 19. 30, 26. 2
And therefore it is, that the preacher gives us this rule when thou go into
Eccles. 5. 1.
the house of God, observa pedem vtrunque. Look to thy foot. and if God have a
care how we serve him in our inferior members in that place, no question but he
has much more, how we employ our eyes, ears, and hearts there, our external
worship must be apparent, and it must not be by halves, and it must be in the
house of God, in themidst of the congregation.

1. The outward worship of God (according to the former division) consists
Honor signi.
1. In Sign 2. In deed. And this Honor signi is twofold, which the Apostle
setts down in the example of Christ 1. Exinanivit se. He emptied himself, or
made himself phil. 2. 7. 8.
of no reputation. 2. (...) se. He humbled himself.

1. The empting of ones self is that, which is called deponere magnificentiam,
to lay a side all titles ofhonour, which holy Job expounds, and calls spoliavit
me honor a stripping one of glory, it is that, which the Elders did, cast down
their crowns Job 19. 9.
before God. King David laid aside his robes, and made himself vile before the
Kev 4. 10.
Lord, in his service. The Apostle tells us, there must be Nudatio capitis, our
heads 2 Samuel 6. 22.
1 Cor. 11. 4.
must be uncovered. The wearing of a cap, pileo donari, among the Romans, was
peculiar to free men only, and an Hieroglyphick of honor, for once if a man
cepisset pileum, he was free, and when he laid aside his cap, he was said
deponere magnificentiam, to lay aside his honor and privilege, whereby he was
distinguished from a servant. So then, as servants are to be uncovered in their
masters service, so are we to be in Gods: and therefore Saint Paul (in the
place before cited) tells 1 Cor. 11. 4.
us, that it is a shame for a man to have his head covered at that time. That Is
the first sign.

2. The other sign is humiliare nosmetipsos to humble our selves, which is
nothing else, but to make a man nearer the ground, to bow himself as low as he
can: and this was it, which the devil required of Christ: and it is a posture
which God Mat. 4. 9.
expects at our hands and was used from the beginning. We may see it, by that
which God said to Elias. I have yet left me 7000. in Israel, all the knees
which have not bowed to Baal, by which he signified, that bowing was a sign of
them, that 1 Kin. 19. 18.
worshipped him aright: and it was his quarrel against them, that bowed
themselves Esa. 2. 9.
to Idols for which he would not forgive them.

2. But Honor signi is not enough, there must be Honor facti too. The first was
Honer facti.
Reverence, this is service and worship, which we call properly devotion, or
the devoutnes and readiness of the will to serve God. And this Honor exhibitus
facto, has also two parts. 1. To come and go at Gods command. 2. To do his
work.

1. Both of these we have in the Centurions servant, approved by Christ
himself. Mat. 8. 9.
1. In going and coming when he is bidden. I say go and he goes, come and he
comes. 2. In doing his Masters will or service. Do this and he does it. And
in these two respects it is that Christ will say to some Nescio vos, I know you
not. 1. Either for not coming at all to his house, so that he cannot take
notice of them for his servants. 2. or for coming unwillingly, with an ill will
to do his work, and so they do not perform service to him, and in this respect
are not known to him neither.

We see that Gods servants did both. Abraham was no sooner spoken to by God
Genesis 22. 1.
but he was presently at his call and answered, Ecce ego, behold, here I am.
The psalm. 84. 2. 40. 9.
kingly Prophet before he was called, had a longing desire to go into Gods
house prove. 1. 24.
but when he was called, he presently answered, Lo I come. It is Gods
threat-Because Esa. 65. 12.
I called and ye refused etc. I will laugh at your calamity. And in the Gospel,
Luc. 14. 24.
they which were invited to the Supper and came not, were thought unworthy;
none of them shall taste of it. And as we are to come, so in our coming two
things are required to make us welcome. 1. The first is, we must come mature
betimes they that seek me early shall find me, and secondly we must come
quotidie daily pro. 8. 17. 34.
Blessed is the man that hears me, watching daily at my gates. We must wait
and be desirous to be called.

2. The second (...) the Act. [Service,] to do his will. It is the property of
a good servant to do his masters work, and to prefer it before his own. We see
the practice Luk 17. 28.
of it, in Abraham's servant; he refused to eat before his masters work was done
and here Genesis 24. 33.
falls under this, the commandment of the great service, the service of the
altar which that we may think it no dishonor to be Gods servants we find that
he chose the Tribe of Levi, to serve him at the altar, so that this service is
the service of choice and howsoever some account but lightly of it, yet it was
the greatest honor, to Deuteronomy. 11. 5.
be chosen to perform this service.

Now to apply these things to the point in hand. There is in the 95. Psalm,
which is used as an antipsalm or Introduction (as it were) to the service of
God by our Church. psalm. 95. 6.
1. A coming, 2. A worshipping. 3. A falling down and 4. a kneeling before the
Lord, whereby we may see, that in the precept of worship, in the substantial
parts of the service of God prayer, preaching, the Sacraments, and discipline)
especially in the former) there is a due gesture and behavior required. And in
this we are to follow the rule prescribed by Saint James which is, to take the
Patriarchs and prophts for our Ja. 5. 10.
guides and directors, and it is Saint Peter's rule too for women, to follow the
steps of holy women of old. So that laying this for our ground, and withal
taking the approved 1 pet. 3. 5.
practice of the Church with it, we cannot go amiss. Now we shall find (in
this outward worship of God) that they never came together to serve the Lord
nor departed from it, without exhibiting some reverend external worship, and
behavior, both in (...) and recessu, in coming in and going out.

In accessu, in their coming together, it is plain, Solomon in the
consecration of 2 Chr. 6. 13.
his Temple, at the beginning, before his prayer kneeled upon his knees. And in
recessu, we see, that when Hezekiah and his people had ended their service,
they 29. 29.
bowed their heads and worshipped. We have seen what our gesture must be in
accessu and recessu. Let us now see, what it must be while we are present at
Gods service, in the particulars of it.

1. First for our outward gesture in prayer, which is either public or
private. And in both these, since we are to remember, that they are to proceed
partly Behavior in Prayer.
from Humility, partly from hope, our external signs must be answerable to
both these.

1. In public prayer, the signs are first, that which we called before
depositionem magnificentiae, with our heads (...). 2. The other which we called
Humiliation, 1 Cor. 11. 4.
by bowing our selves to the ground or kneeling as Abraham did, and Genesis 18. 2.
24. 26.
his servant too, bowed, and worshipped the Lord. So did the people at the
institution Exo. 12 27.
of the (...). So did king Solomon, praying upon his knees. The Prophets. 1
Kin. 8. 54.
Daniel 6. 10. After the first temple Ezra 9. 6. Our Savior himself upon the
mount Luc. 22. 41.
of Olives kneeled down and prayed: lastly. Saint Paul, and the whole Church
Act. 20. 36.
prayed kneeling Saint Peter Act. 9. 40.

Thus we see our pattern, if we look at the (...), or Prophets, at Christ or
his Apostles, or at the whole church.

True it is, because we only kneeling, but also standing before another is a
sign (...) service and reverence,, therefore we read in many places that the
gesture in prayer was standing, and that some prayed standing, as Gehezi stood
before his master Genesis 19. 27.
Elisha. So Abraham stood before the Lord, and Abraham's servant stood by the
well Genesis 24. 13.
of water when he prayed. The people rose up and worshipped every man in his
Ex. 33. 10
Numb. 23. 10.
tent door. (...) said to (...), stand by thy burnt (...) and I will go etc.
Thus psalm. 135. 2.
Samuel stood before the Lord, and the Psalmist says. Ye that stand in the
house of 2 Cro. 23. 13.
the Lord etc. The king stood by his pillar at the entering etc. And thus
standing may be a reverend gesture, when kneeling or some other gesture in
public worship is not prescribed by the church in which case we must conform
to what is (...), for that which is indifferent in it self, in the gesture, is
not indifferent to us, or in the practice of it, when it is commanded by
lawful authority.

2. In private prayer, we shall see it to be a samiliar thing sometimes to fall
down prostrate, as Moses and Aaron did. This gesture of prostration was used by
Moses, Deuteronomy. 9. 18.
as he testifies of himself. And the Evangelist reports of our Savior, that he
Matthew. 26. 39.
used it. So likewise was kneeling a custom of the holy men of God in their
private Ezra 9. 5.
prayers. Ezra fell upon his knees, and spread out his hands. And S. Paul in
Ephesians. 3. 14.
his private devotions, bowed his knees, as he says of himself. In private
devotions liberty and freedom of gesture may be used, so it be reverent and
humble, which sitting at prayer cannot be: Balaam willed Balak to stand by his
burnt-offering, Numb. 23. 15. and being set he bids him rise up.
2. The exterior signs in respect of hope, are oculi elevati, and manus
extensae, eyes lifted up, and hands stretched out. And these are to be used in
that part of prayer, which is called Petition, (for in deprecation the
Publicans posture is fittest, which is, oculis dejectis, with eyes cast down)
for the other we find King Luke 18. 13.
David lifting up his eyes. And in S. John's gospel it appears, that our Savior
did psalm 123. 1. 121. 1.
the like. For the other, the lifting up of hands, we see that in the battle
with the John 11. 41. 17. 1.
Amalekites, Moses practiced it. Ezra (in the place before cited) spread out
his hands to God. The Prophet David tells us, that he stretched out his hands
to God, Exodus 17. 11.
Let the offering up of my (...), be an evening sacrifice. And it is the
Apostles psalm 88. 9. 141. 2.
counsel to use this gesture, I will that every man pray, lifting up holy
hands. For as 1 Timothy 2. 8.
oculus elevatus expectat, the eye lifted up expects, so manus extensa petit,
the stretched out hand begs and asks.

But in this point corruption is crept into our Church. Instead of humbling our
selves by prostration and kneeling, we are pleased to sit at our ease, and that
in a proud manner: instead of the depositio magnificentiae, and nudatio
capitis, kneeling and uncovering our heads, we sit, and with our heads covered
too; this is not to enquire, at least not to imitate, the days of old. Balaam
would not suffer Balac, Numb. 23. 15 18.
though a King, to sit down, but to stand at his burnt-offering, and when he
was set, he bade him arise. This sedentary prayer, and proud fashion of
covering the head, cannot be warranted by any text in Scripture.

Secondly, the outward gesture at the word preached, or read in the old
Testamament, Ezekiel. They sit before thee, Ezekiel. 33. 31
and they hear thee, etc. says the Lord by the Prophet. And so in the new, The
Mark 3. 32.
multitude sat about our Savior, while he was preaching: and the Pharisees,
and Luke 5. 17. 10. 39.
Doctors of the Law sat by him, as he was teaching. So Mary sat at Jesus
feet, and heard his word. Eutychus also sat to hear S. Paul preach. Sometime
the word Acts 20. 9.
preached was heard standing: as when Ezra opened the book, standing in a
pulpit Nehe. 8. 4, 5.
of wood, all the people stood up. And these two gestures have ever been
indifferently permitted and used.

In the administration and receiving the Sacraments, the nature and dignity of
viz. that the gesture of kneeling and humble adoration is most fit, and that
such a gesture, as does not signify our humble reverence, as sitting, is
utterly unlawful.

In point of discipline the gesture is evident, the Judge sits, and the party
accused, or

So that the end of all this is. 1. That God may be glorified, as well by the
body, which 1 Cor. 6. 20.
is the external worship, as by the soul and spirit, which is for the internal.
2. That our outward gesture may stir up our souls to their duty, as clothes
increase the heat of the body, though they receive their heat at first from the
body. Lastly, as to stir up our selves, so to stir up others by our example,
that they seeing our reverend 14. 23. 25.
behavior, may fall down with us, and be moved to do that which they see Tit.
2. 10.
us do, and to glorify God on our behalf.

Thus as we have showed what we are to learn out of the affirmative part, The
Negative
viz. what duties to perform, so out of the Negative part, we must learn, what
sins we must avoid: and to find out this, we shall need to go no further,
then by opposing the contraries to that, which has been delivered in the
affirmative part.

1. To Humility, and depositio magnificentiae] he is opposite that carries
himself proudly in Gods service. The Wise man tells us, a proud eye is an
abomination prove. 6. 17
to the Lord, and if at all times much more at that time. It is the Prophets
Jer. 13. 15.
counsel to (...) this behavior, especially in Gods service. Hear ye, give
ear, (says he) (...) proud, for the Lord has spoken. 2. To Humiliare] He is
averse, that is stiff necked, not willing to bow, and that has knees like an
Elephant, that cannot bend, when we give him not the reverence, of knee, head,
and of our whole body. 3. To Coming] Our absenting our selves from Gods service
and worship, S. Chrysostom says, Ludus jubet and facis, vocat aurea tuba, and
venis: Cultus Dei jubet, and non facis, vocat and non venis; pleasure commands
thee, and thou obeyest; the golden trumpet calls thee, and thou come: Gods
worship commands, and thou obeyest not; it calls thee, and thou come not.
Whose servant then thou art, thou may judge by the Centurions words, even
his at whose command thou Matthew. 8. 9.
come and go. 4. Lastly, to the doing of his work; the neglect of it is
opposed, and the neglecters out of Gods (...): for neglectus praecepti, (...)
is injuria est, the neglect Hier in Epist.
of a command, is an injury to him that commands. He that knows his Masters
will, and does it (...), shall be severely punished. Luke 12. 47.

But in the manner of doing Gods work and his will, in his service and public
Liturgy, there are five things required of us: of which though something has
been formerly spoken, yet considering the great neglect and contempt of this
work by many, more is here to be said of them.

1. The first is, Unanimity and uniformity, to come together at the same time,
Vnanimitas.
and to join together in the same worship, that there be no disagreement in our
behavior in Gods service, one to do one thing, and another to do another, some
come into the Church at prayer, some not till the sermon begin. But, as the
Apostle enjoins, tarry 1 Cor. 11. 33.
one for another: that is, all praise God together. Inward unanimity, and
outward uniformity being a delight to God. It was David's joy, I was glad when
they said to me, Let us go into the house of the Lord: and soon after he
adds, Jerusalem is as psalm 122. 1. 3.
a City, that is compact together, or (as some translation) at unity in it
self. And this spiritual union, is without question, a great strengthening to
the Church, for when, either one comes after another, or if in time of Gods
service, some sing not, nor pray with the other, this must needs make a breach
in the fabric of it. In Discordia (says Augustine) nemo benedicit Dominum,
God is never truly or well In Ps. psalm 34 3.
served, where there is discord or separation. The Prophets earnest desire is,
O magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his name together: And therefore
it is, that the holy Ghost mentions so often this unanimity to be in the
infancy of the Church, as being one of the chief causes of the growth and
enlarging of it. The Acts 2. 1.
Spirit came upon them when they were all together with one accord in one
place, as if the whole Church were one person, and had but one tongue, and one
lip. And in prayer it is said, They lift up their voice with one accord. And
they heard 4. 24.
8. 6.
so too. The people with one accord gave heed to the things which Philip spoke.
So in the point of uniformity; we see, that he was punished, that was not like
the Matthew. 22. 12.
rest of the guests, that had not a wedding garment. And as the separation and
division of tongues was a curse, that the earth was no more unius labii, of one
speech or language, so it is a great part of the blessedness of the heavenly
Jerusalem, that the Elders sing with one voice unto the Lord. The Fathers beat
much upon this: Apo. 4. 10. 11.
and Saint Chrysostom extolleth it highly, and says, that it falls upon God
like a shower of hailstones: and Saint Augustine says, of singing of praises,
that it sounds in Gods ears, tanquam resonantia maris, as the voice of many
waters, which he seems to take from that place in the Revelation. 14. 2.


2. The second is fear, (...), in all fear, says S. Peter; with fear and
trembling, says S. Paul; for if the service of men (according to the rule of
S. Paul and Ephesians. 5. 6.
Saint Peter) must be so, much more the service of God. But in our exterior 1
pet. 2. 18.
service of God, there is commonly so little fear, or rather such want of fear,
that commonly we sleep in it, like the Apostles, who could not hold open their
eyes, being in horto, in the garden with their Master, they could not watch one
hour, and therefore that judgment befell them, that they all forsook Christ
and fled. And there is little fear in sleep. When Jacob was afraid of his
brother Esau, he slept not all that night. The Example of the Christians in the
Primitive Church, is left upon record for our observation, That they heard S.
Paul preaching till midnight. Upon which place Chrysostom says, Acts 20. 7.
Ad hoc commemoravit eos, qui media nocte vigilabant, ut pudeat eos, qui media
die dormiunt, the Evangelist records those that watch till midnight to this
end, that they may be ashamed, that sleep at midday.

Now because the actions of a natural man, are eating, drinking, and sleeping,
the same reason which (...) the using of the two former in the Church, must 1
(...). 11. (...)
needs be of force to condemn sleeping too. Have ye not houses to eat and drink
in, says the Apostle; thereby condemning those that used to eat and drink in
the Church. So if he could have supposed that the Corinthians would have slept
there, he would have asked the same question concerning sleeping.

And as he reasons from the place, so we may reason from the time, out of
another place of the same Apostle, Vigilate, nam qui dormiunt, nocte dormiunt,
watch, for they that sleep, sleep in the night. But with us, we may say, They
that sleep, sleep 1 Thessalonians. 5. 7.
in the day. And so, whereas the place of sleeping should be our houses, and
the time of sleeping the night; we, (because we will be cross) in the daytime
sleep at Church.

Natural reason tells us, that Actio vestita indebitis circumstantiis illicita
est, every action clothed with undue circumstances, is unlawful. The Prophet
(as his manner is) after he had denounced a curse upon a careless people,
falls to blessing the Church of God; in which he says, Non dormiet quisquam,
neque dormitabit, none Esaias 5. 26.
shall (...), nor sleep among them. And our Savior gives this caveat; Beware,
that the Lord when he comes, find you not sleeping, which though it have a
spiritual understanding, yet there follows a temporal punishment. Mark 13. 27.


In prima poena est estimatio peccati, we may consider of the sin, by the first
punishment; and so we may weigh every (...) in prima poena. God usually
punishes sin in its own kind. We see it from the beginning, Cains murder God
threatens with blood. Sodoms heat of lust punished with fire, etc. Eutychus
sleep (in this case) Acts 20. 9.
with a dead sleep. This carelessness in Gods service, is the only way to
bring us, first to (...); and then to Apostasy, and no religion at all. We
find it punished in the Church, she slept and awoke, but found not her
beloved. And this judgment followed the Apostles themselves; because they
could not watch one hour, they all Cant. 3. 1.
forsook our Savior, and Peter forsware him. Matthew. 36. 40.


But howsoever it stands in respect of Gods punishments or mercies, yet the
former reasons condemn it: and we may add, that the heart truly and rightly
affected in Gods service, is ardens cor, (as the Disciples were that talked
with our Savior going to Emaus, their heart (...)) and a Father says, that it
is impossible Luke 24 32.
to have cor ardens sub oculo gravi, a burning heart, and a heavy eye, are not
compatible.

3. There must be with these, Cordis praesentia, our heart must be present, and
watchful too: for though we watch outwardly, yet there may be such extravagant
and wandering thoughts in the heart, that we may be said to be praesentes
absentes, absent, though present. And where the heart is absent, the other
members will discover it. The note of Cor fatui, a fools heart, is to be in
domo laetitiae, it turns that way, where the sport lies, whereas cor
prudens, the heart of him Eccles. 7. 4.
prove. 15. 14.
that has understanding, quaerit scientiam, seeks to get knowledge. The
inner parts of a fool are like a broken vessel, he will hold no knowledge; so
long Eccus. 21. 14.
as he lives, it runs out as fast as it is poured in, but the wise inquire
at the mouth of the wise, in the Congregation, and ponder his words in their
heart. 17.


And these are testified by some signs. A fools eye is in all places, but the
eyes of the wise are (as theirs were that heard Christ in the Synagogue)
fastened prove. 17. 24.
on the Preacher. The fools eyes, hands, and feet, all speak, and will tell you
that Luke 4. 20.
he is not present with his heart, and when they are reproved, all is but
risus, prove. 6. 13. 14. 9.
they make but a mock at it. Therefore it is nothing to hear, except we Luke 8.
18.
take heed how we hear, and be affected with Lydia to attend to that which
Acts 16. 14.
is spoken; for it is the wise ear that gets knowledge. And as it is a curse
prove. 18. 15.
Esaias 6. 9, 10.
to speak to an (...) that hears not, so it is a blessing to speak to a
hearing prove. 25. 12.
care.

The place before named is terrible, mentioned by Esaias against foolish hearers,
Hear ye, but understand not, and it is often repeated in other places of
Scripture, as Matthew. 13. 15. Mark 4. 12. Luke 8. 10. John 12. 40. Acts 28. 26.
and Romans 11. 8. It is the extremity of Gods wrath, and a heavy curse, and so to
be accounted, to be given up to this spiritual judgment: and we are to take
heed, that by our own carelessness it be not laid upon us. If it be true which
the Heathen said, that pietas non est vultu laedenda, sive serio sive simulato,
then surely we ought to have a special care of our looks and gesture, when this
part of piety, Gods worship is performed.

4. The fourth is silentium, silence: we must not talk while we are in the
service of God. The Preachers counsel is against it, for talking is flatly
opposite to hearing the Word. Be more ready to hear (says he) then to give the
Sacrifice of fools, whose Eccles. 5. 1.
heart (as he says in another place) proclaims folly, they cannot be silent.
Job reckoned Prove. 12. 23.
it as one of the honors done unto him, while he was in prosperity, That men
gave Job 29. 21.
ear to him, and kept silence. If a man should turn from us, and talk with
another, while we are speaking to him, we would think he little regards us, or
what Hab. 2. 10.
we speak. The Prophets command was. The Lord is in his holy Temple, let all
the Zeph. 1. 7.
earth keep silence before him. And, Hold thy peace at the presence of the
Lord, that is, when the Lord speaks: and he speaks when his Messenger
speaks. Qui vos audit, me audit, says Christ, he that hears you, hears me.
In the Primitive Luke 10. 16.
Church the first word, was (...), Be still and silent ye people, which had its
original, from that place in the Acts, where S. Paul being to preach to the
Antiochians, Acts 13. 16.
beckoned with his hand for silence, and said, Men of Israel, and ye that fear
God give audience.

5. The last is, constantia in cultu divino, we must tarry while Gods service
is done, and not depart till it be ended. It was Joshuahs commendation, that he
departed not Exodus 33. 11.
out of the Tabernacle. The offending herein is that which the Prophet calls,
discedere psalm. 119. 118
a lege, which relates, to depart out of the Congregation, while the Law was
reading. For as by preaching, God speaks to us, so by Prayer we speak to God:
and it is but lex Talionis, the law is equal. As we deal with God, so will God
deal with us. If we stay to hear him, he will stay to hear us: and when we say,
Quare dereliquisti me, Domine? Lord, why have thou left me? he will answer,
Quare dereliquisti me, serve? Servant, why have thou left me? And that speech
of his at the last day, Discedite a me, depart from me, will be a just
punishment for them, that depart Matthew 25. 41.
from him here in this kingdom of grace.

In the Primitive Church, from the first words (...), let the people be silent,
to the last words (...), let the people depart, none might go out from the
Congregation upon pain of Excommunication, as appears by the fourth Council of
Canon 24.
Carthage. If we would well consider this, this fault would not be so common
among us.

Now the means to perform this outward worship are these. 1. If we follow the
The means.
Preachers counsel in taking heed to our feet, when we go into Gods house. 2.
If we Eccles. 5. 1.
consider, that it is a more fearful thing to come to the Church, then it was
to touch Heb. 12. 22. 25.
the Mount, and in respect of Gods presence, we must not refuse him that
speaks. 3. That the Angels are present among us, though we see them not, and
that the 1 pet. 1. 12.
doctrine of the new Testament is such, in quam desiderant Angeli prospicere,
which 1 Cor. 11. 10.
the Angels desire to behold, therefore if they shall see any not to esteem
that, which they make such account of, shall not they be Ministers of Gods
wrath? 4. That the end of our Creation is to glorify God; now glorification
comes from instruction, and instruction from hearing; so then as our hearing
is, our doing shall be. Vt audies it a facies, if you hear not well, you can
never do well; a careless hearing ever begets a careless doing, it cannot go
ultra speciem. 5. If we put to it, ut audies, ita audieris, as you hear, so
shall you be heard of God, and men. If we be careless of him, he will be
careless of us likewise, and more then that, our very Prayers shall be an
prove. 28. 9.
abomination to him. He that turns away his ear from hearing the law, even
his prayer shall be an abomination, says Solomon. And this may be a punishment
upon some Preachers, who have had dull ears themselves, that they shall speak
to a dull people, that will not hear.

1. That which God (...) in the Prophet, there is a very low, and as The (...).
Augustine says, an unlawful comparison, God compares himself to an earthly
King, I am a great King says the Lord of hosts etc. And with all, how he
reasons Mal. 1. 14. 3.
in that Chapter against the careless in his service. Offer this to your
governor will he be pleased with thee? As if he should say, do such service as
this to your Prince, would he take it well at your hands? and do you think that
I that am King of Kings, will not look for such observance in my service as an
earthly Prince will look for? so if we say with our selves, this service which
I offer in praying, hearing etc. would I offer no better to agreat king this is
a good sign.

If as David was to Saul, we be to God, be careful, that we be not missing from
his house, for else as Jonathan said to David, To morrow is the feast, and you
will be 1. Sam. 20. 18.
looked for, and if my father find your place empty, he will be angry. So will
God look for us, and if he find us not at his service, he will be angry too,
unless we have just cause of absence. Now there are some causes wherein a man
may be excused for absenting himself, such as these.

1. The first is sickness. Michol excused David from coming to Saul, by saying
that he was sick, and it had been barbarous in Saul to urge a sick man to 1 Samuel 19. 14.
come. 2. Secondly. Sacrificing our selves, is a sufficient cause. Jonathan
excused David 20. 29.
likewise, from coming to Saul's sacrifice, because he was gone to Bethlem, to
offer sacrifice for himself. 3. Lastly, Misericordiam volo, non Sacrificium. I
will have mercy, and not sacrifice; works of mercy, as visiting the sick, and
the like, are lawful excuses. Mat. 9. 13.

2. Thesecond sign is, if upon the meditation of Lex Talionis, as you hear you
shall Judge. 4. 7.
be heard. We can truly say, Even as I hear, so hear me O Lord. This is a good
sign.

3. The third is. If we be companions of them that fear God and love them psalm.
119. 63. 79.
that are Gods servants; because they be reverend and zealous in his service,
15. 4.
for he that loves God, loves them that worship him, with fear and reverence.
Accessory


The last thing (according to the sixth rule) is, thatwe procure this outward
worship in Number. 3. 25.
to be performed by others. (...) says (...) verus Christianus est (...)
sratris, every good Christian is a Curtein to his brother, for every curtein
must have a hook, and a catch to draw his brother. to Gods service. King David
drew the psalm. 42. 4.
multitude into the house of God. Andrew brought his brother Simon to Christ,
so John. 1. 42. 45
Philip called (...). We must tarry one for another, according to the Apostles
rule. For they that desert others, and dissuade them from this outward worship
and 1 Cor. 11. 33.
service ofGod, shall be accursed and stricken with blindenes of body and soul,
as Act. 13. 8.
Elimas the Sorcerer was for dehorting Sergius Paulus the Governor, and
seeking to turn him away from the faith.

And thus much for the first part ofthis Commandment which as we said in our
division of it, was an express Prohibition, in these words Thou shall not make
to thy self any graven image etc. And an included affirmative precept, thou
shall worship me in such manner as I do command thee.

CHAP. VIII
Of the second part of this precept. The sanction, or penalty. This is the
first Commandment with a penalty. Reasons of it. The parts of this sanction. 1.
Gods style. 2. A commination. 3. A promise. 1. Gods style by 1. his power. 2.
His Iealousy. How Iealousy is ascribedto God. Why humane affections are
ascribed to God.

Of the Sanction in this Commandment,
WE come now to the second part of the Precept, which is the reason or the
(...). 2.
sanction of the law consisting as well of a Penalty for breaking it, as a
reward for observing it. And these two may be resembled to the two Mounts,
Ebal, where the Curses were denounced. and Gerizim, where the blessings were
promised to the twelve Tribes, for unumquodque mandatum sancitur praemio et
poena, every law is confirmed Deuteronomy. 27. 12. 13.
by rewards and punishments and here are both.

Now if it shall be demanded, why it was the will ofGod, to make this the first
precept with a penalty, as Saint Paul observed of the fifth commandment, that
it Ephesians. 6. 2.
was the first, with a promise, we shall find these reasons for it.

1. Because a public sin is to be openly punished and the punishment by Gods
Dut. 25. 2.
law, is to be proportionable to the offense. Now the sin against the first
commanment is secret in our hearts, it is a bosom sin, which God alone can
see and therefore Act. 17. 30.
the punishment of it is left to God himself who is content (as Saint Paul
says) sometimes and on some reason as himself pleases to wink at it, not to
see it: but this, because it comes into the light of the sun, and is obvious to
every eye, and the rule of Justice being ut malum ubi contingit, ibi moriatur
that if the fault be open, it be publicly punished, therefore God has
appointed and decreed a visible punishment for it, for the reason and end, set
down by the Apostle, that others may fear. 2. Whereas it is the property of
punishment, cohibere impetus (...) turpia, to restrain 1 Timothy 1. 20.
men's passions from committing ill; and our impetus or inclinations being prone
to offend against this commandment by two motives, proffit, and safety 2. of
the best Orators to persuade (I speak of that corruption, which draws every
one to such platformes of Gods outward worship, as his own head shall, devise)
and that we cannot be vile in our own eyes, as David was; and also for that
sometimes 2 Samuel 6. 22.
it falls out, as God foretold, that the beast gets place, and is
received, Revel. 13. 15.
and then he that will not receive the mark of the beast in his forehead, shall
be threatened with penalty of Body and goods. And that either for proffit or
honor, or for fear of such edicts as were made by Nabuchadnezzar, Darius and
the rulers of Dan. 3. 6. 6. 8.
the Jews, which mav touch the life, any worship is likely to be embraced by
us. For Act. 4. 18.
as Satan told God skin for skin, yea all that a man has, will he give for his
life not only to save his skin, but to save the fleece also, to enjoy outward
peace Job. 2. 4.
wealth and honor, men will violate the commandments of God. Therefore to
bridle these impetus, and to meet with those edicts ofPrinces, and men in
authority, God frames his Commandment as strong as Princes do theirs and
threatens a punishment greater then they can inflict, Qui secus faxit. He that
does otherwise, shall be subject to this, and this punishment. And these are
the reasons, why this is a penallstatute.
This sanction or ratification contains two things. 1. A Commination visiting
sin to the third and fourth generation. 2. A promise, showing mercy to them
that love me etc. before both which there is a preface, I the Lord etc.

This style of God is the same, which formerly we had, but with a double
increase 1 The Lord thy God. (...). (...)
or addition. 1. fortis strong. 2. zealotes jealous, of sure performance in
what he here threateneth fortis nihil impediet, strong that nothing can hinder,
zelotes ut nihil slectat, zealous, that nothing may alter him. He has both a
posse, and a velle, a power and a will.

1. It falls out many times, that men (whose arm and strength is shortened)
though they conceivesore displeasure against others, yet there wants strength
to put it in execution. Shimei was maliciously bent against David, yet all he
could do, was 2 Samuel 16. 13.
but to cast a handful of dust against him, and because he wanted power to put
his malice in execution, he was fain to end, in a few railing words.

Fortis (...) the strong God is often times used in scripture. but especially
then when God opposes himself to weak man, as we may see in the prophet. The
Egyptians, Esa. 31. 3.
are men and not Gods etc. And this attribute of God is expressed by the
Hebrews by twowords [ Gnuz] robur, or internal strength, and [ Cayl] potentia,
or fortitudo; external might as in weapons and arms.

1. The first is called Gods weakness (by the holy Ghost,) in respect of man,
his weakness is stronger then man and is called by Pharaoh Magicians the finger
of God, 1 Cor 1. 25.
which if it do but touch the mountains, they will smoke, yea at the breath of
his Exo. 8. 19.
nostrils (hills were overturned and the foundations of them are discovere d.
And not psalm. 144. 5. 18. 15. 104. 29.
only thy positive, but privative too. For if he do but hold in his breath,
the Creaturs die, all things shall perish. It brings those effects, as the
Ecclype of the sun does in the world, all are darkened. And therefore it is,
that the Psalmist says of God, in psalm. 89. 14.
respect of this first. Thou have a mighty arm, strong is thy hand etc.

2. The second is Potentia. His external strength; his Ammnnition or weapons.
Potentia.
This word is like to a fire, and hammer, as the Prophet speaks, He has a
sword, and Jer. 23. 29.
a bow too, for as the Psalmist says, he whets the one, and bends the other.
He is psalm. 7. 13. 14.
styled, Dominus Exercituum, The Lord of hosts, in many places king David
says, that 68. 17.
his chariots and Angels are 20000. The Prophet Daniel reckons more.
Thousands Dan. 7. 10.
of thousands, and ten thousand thousands. The holy Ghost in Saint Lukes
Gospel, Luc. 2. 13.
calls them a multitude (our capacity or arithmetic not being able to conceive
them) And what God is able to do by all these we may imagine, by that which we
Es. 37. 36.
read was done by one of them, who in one night slew 185000, of the Assyrian
host. And as he has heavenly so has he earthly soldiers too, by which he
has done mighty acts even against great Princes as lice, frogs, flies,
Caterpillars Locusts Exo. 8. 9. 10.
and the like. And therefore there is no doubt to be made, but that he is
fortis, of power psalm. 105. 30.
enough and what he threatens, he can, and will bring to pass.

Secondly for his (...). And this is well added by God, for there are not many
psalm. 10. 13.
the wicked (as it is in the Psalm) say, Tush God regards not, here we see,
he regards it, and that in the highest degree, in jealousy, which is a narrow
searcher of that it suspects.

Jealousy is the excess, or extremity of love, zelotypia amor est
reduplicatus. Many Cant. 8. 7.
waters cannot quench it. It endures no Corrival, but is impatiens consortis,
it must be alone and have no companion. Nemo praeter, nemo cum. None besides,
nor none with it. And God is not only impatiens consortis, but equalitatis, of
equality too, he will not have any to be equal with him, nor to partake the
least unequal share with him in our service, but he will have totum affectum,
we see he calls for the prove. 23. 26.
whole heart. Saint Paul says, I am jealous over you, with a Godly jealousy
for I have espoused you to one husband, that I may present you as a chaste
virgin 2 Cor. 11. 2.
to Christ. And the Psalmist, zelus domus tuae devoravit me, The zeal of thine
psalm. 69. 6.
John 2. 17.
house has even devoured me, which the Disciples applied to Christ. It is such
an affection, as must take up the whole man, such a regard has God to his
outward worship.

This affection in it self is good, else God would not have taken order, that
he that Number. 5. 14.
was led by the spirit of jealousy, might make proof of his suspected wife: but
upon some occasions it many times falls out to be mingled with other
affections, as in the case, which Saint James calls zelum amarum, a bitter
zeal ex laesa concupiscentia from an offended concupiscence, which brings not
only greef, but stirs us up, ad Ja. 4. 1.
vindictam, to revenge, and this is anger, such as we find in the Prophet. God
is jealous, and the Lord revengeth: the Lord revengeth and is furious etc. and
the wiseman Nah.. 1. 2.
calls it, a raging revenge. Now, if this affection fall where there is power
pro. 6. 34.
as with God, it will not only smoke, but it will kindle, and burn like fire,
as the Deuteronomy. 29. 20
psalmist has it and that not like a spark in a stack ofstraw, which flameth,
and vanishes psalm. 79. 5.
a way but like fire in a barrel of gunpouder, bearing all before it. For pro
potentia, ira. According to a man's strength, so is his anger. The wiseman tells
us. pro. 16. 4.
The wrath of a king is death: and of the eternal king, eternal death, of body
Luc. 12. 5.
and soul.

Now to avoid the error touching (...) whether according to the manner of men,
affections fall into God, or no? We are to distinguish: for if we speak simply
and not by Metaphors, there does not. Why then says Saint Augustine (...) est
ista de deo affirmare, it is an indignity to affirm such things of God, but he
answers himself, Indignum certe, si aliquod dignum, quod de Deo diceretur,
inveniretur. It is certainly, if we could find any thing to speak, that were
worthy of him; but we cannot. For the most glorious terms of Majesty and
magnificence, which we give him, magis congruunt humanae imbecillitati, quam
divinae Majestati, they agree better with man's weakness, (...) Gods divine
majesty.

And whereas it is said in Scripture, both, that God is not as man, that he
should Number. 23. 19.
repent, and in another place, that it repented God, that he had made man Genesis
6. 6.
upon earth, these places and the like, are to be reconciled by these rules.

1. Cum negantur de Deo affectiones, humanae naturae infirmitatitribuuntur: cum
Aug.
affirmantur, divinae naturae efficaciae. When these affections are denied to
be in God, they are attributed to the infirmity of humane nature, but when they
are affirmed of him, it is to show the power of the divine nature. It
betokens, that he will work as effectually, as men do, when they have the
like affections upon them: not that he has such affections, for he is
impassibilis, not to be moved with any kind of perturbation, but that he
produces such effects, ad modum hominis (...) affecti, as they do in whom such
affections are. 2. Secondly, Augustine says, that these things though they are
affirmed of God and man, Eodem verbo, expressed in the same words, yet are they
not eodem modo, performed by the same manner. For 1. Jealousy in man,
oftentimes arises out of error, either out of a false or light cause, but in
God is no error, he does all out of judgment. 2. Man's jealousy is suddenly
provoked: but Gods comes, lent and longanimiter, slowly and after much and
long suffering. 3. Man's is immodice, and sine fine, psalm. 18. 38.
immoderate, raging, and endless, but Gods is, Sedate temperatly, it is
Tranquilla justitia, a peaceable, and quiet justice. 3. We are to conceive,
that God speaks thus for man's capacity (as the Apostle Romans 6. 19.
says) after the manner of men: or as in another case, not to us as spritual,
but as carnal 1 Cor. 3. 1.
in our own terms: as in the case of man and wife, some think they love not
their wives enough, except some jealousy be mixed, that they participate their
love with other men: and God in his service here, is as jealous, as a man for
breach of wedlock, and therefore represents himself in that manner, and under
the like affection. 4. Fourthly. Quia nos non promovemur ad nomen justitiae,
introducitur zelotypus. We are so dull of spirit, that the attribute of Gods
justice alone moves us not, and therefore he takes a term from an affection,
that falls not into him, as it is in men to the end, we may be quickened, and
made fearful to offend. 5. Lastly as Tertullian says vtitur spiritus hoc
vocabulo, ad exaggeranda ejus generis l. 2. cont. Marcion.
scelera. The Holy Ghost uses this term, to show how odious this sin of
Idolatry is to God, that if it might be, it would make God be that which he
cannot be.
The use of all is that, which the Apostle makes. God professes himself
jealous 2 Cor. 11.
here, that we our selves might be jealous of our own salvation. For if we
would redire ad corda, enter into our own hearts, and consider, first, what God
is, and then what vile creatures we are, we should wonder at the excess of
Gods love to usward, that he should be any way jealous of us, and not rather
let us take our own courses, to our own ruin, and take no further regard of
us. But chiefly, that we should rather so love him, as to be jealous of his
anger, and the loss of his love, lest he should bestow it somewhere else. And
so much of the Preface of the Sanction.

CHAP. IX
Of the Commination, wherein. 1. The censure of the sin 2. The punishment. 1.
In the censure. The sin. viz of Idolatry. Is called. 1. Hatred of God. How
God can be hated. 2. Iniquity. The punishment, Visitation upon the children.
The grievousnesse of this punishment, by. 1. The greatness. 2. The
multiplicity. 3. The continuance. Of Gods justice in punishing the sins of
the fathers upon the children. That it is not unjust, in respect of the father,
nor. 2. Of the son. The use of all.

THe next thing is the Commination. Which contains in it two things. 1. The
Censure of the offense. 2. And secondly, the punishment for it. 1. The Censure
is in two things. 1. First, that it calls it hatred of God. 2. Secondly, that
he calls it, The iniquity, (...), Perverssenes.

1. If love be a means to make us keep the Commandments, then it is hatred that
makes us break them. But is there any man that can hate God? Certainly his
Essence is good, even goodness it self, which cannot be the object of hatred.
Again, there are sundry effects of his goodness, and love, and such as the
wicked themselves cannot but love them, and him for them, as that he bestows
on all men. and so on them, their being, moving, and life, sense, etc. But
there are another sort of effects, which proceed also from his love, by which
he would have us preserved, which are his Commandments, yet because they
restrain us of our liberty, and will not suffer our inordinate affections to
bear the sway, therefore (preferring our own wills before his) we hate him; so
when a man is linkt to his own will, and possessed with zeal of himself, he
hates the Commandments of God, because they are Mal. 1. 2, 3.
contrary to his will and affections, and so men come to hate God, by too much
love of themselves.

I loved Jacob (says God by the Prophet) and hated Esau, which the Apostle
Romans 9.
shows to be nothing else, but that he chose not him, but preferred Jacob
before him; and in this respect we are said to hate God, when in a case between
his will and ours, we choose not his, but prefer our own: Hoc est odisse Deum,
non eligere, we hate God, when we choose him not. For God loving us so
exceedingly, it is his will, that we should love him alone: which love, is
vinculum conjugale, a marriage Matthew. 6. (...)
bond: and therefore our love to God should be amor conjugalis, the love of a
man to Deuteronomy. 22. 16. 24. 3.
his wife, which has no third thing in it, aut amat, aut odit, he either loves
or hates; there is no medium in it.

2 The second thing in the Censure is, that God calls this sin, (...), Gnavon,
Iniquity or perverseness, and peevishness. And this is to meet with the
opinion of men, who think it perverseness, if men will not do as they would
have them, by yielding to Dan. 3. 14.
false worship, as Nebuchadnezzar thought of the three children, It is of
purpose, O Shadrach, etc. they were called perverse and disordered fellows, for
not transgressing this commandment; and so God to meet with them shows, that
the breakers of this Commandment, are in truth the disordered and perverse
persons, therefore we must not do evil, either cum magnis, aut multis, with the
great ones, or Exodus 23. 2.
the multitude, lest we fall into this sin of perverseness.

But the vote of the world is clean contrary, and the fathers resemble it, to a
pond full of Crabs (the Hieroglyphique of frowardness) into which, if you put
fish of another kind, it will be charged to swim out of course, because it
swimmeth not backward, as the Crabs do. But Jerome gives us a good lesson
against this. Nequaquam Ad Rustic.
consideres quid alii mali faciunt, sed quid boni tu facere debeas; consider
not by any means, what evil others commit, but what good thou ought to do:
nor be thou led to evil, because of the multitude of transgressors.

Of the Punishment. And visit the sins, etc. The punishment 2.


After the Censure of the sin, comes the Punishment. And though it be true,
that if there were no other punishment to man, it were enough to be found among
the haters of God, that were sufficient, Yet Gods adds further, that he will
have a visitation. What the meaning of this word is, we may gather out of the
book of Samuel, where it is said of him, that he went yearly in circuit to such
and such places, 1 Samuel 7. 16.
and judged Israel; and it is like that which we call, the Judges Circuit: as
also out of the Acts, where the Apostles went from City to City, to visit the
brethren, which s Acts 15. 36. 41.
like to the B shops visitation, which presupposes an absence before. So God
intermitteth his judgments for a time; and though some stick not to say, that
he is long in coming, and others, that he will not come at all, that God will
never visit, He hides psalm 10. 14.
Eccl. 8. 11.
his face and will never see it; becaufe (as the Wise man speaks) sentence is
not executed 2 pet. 3. 4.
against an evil work speedily: and therefore they cry out, where is the
promise of Esaias 26. 10.
his coming? yet (as the Prophet) Behold the Lord comes to punish the
inhabitants Abak. 2. 3.
of the earth for their iniquity. And he will surely come, he will return, and
give sentence Luke 19. 44.
Rev. 22. 12.
on those that know not the time of their visitation. And let not the wicked
deceive psalm 69. 25.
themselves, for as our Judges, though they are part of the year away, yet they
Haggai 1. 6.
surely come at the time of Assizes, so much surer is God in his visiting. For
behold Levit. 26. 16.
(says he) I come quickly. And his judgments will not only be upon their
goods, but 2 Samuel 12. 14
Matthew. 21. 43
upon their bodies, and upon their children, as this is. And which is worse, he
will bereave them of spiritual blessings: lastly, (which is worst) in saying as
in another case, He that is filthy let him be filthy still; so he will say, Qui
odio me persequitur, odio me Rev. 22. 11.
persequatur adhuc, he that hates me, let him hate me still. Quando poena odii
est odium, when he punishes one sin with another, this sin of hatred with
further hatred, this is the greatest judgment and heaviest visitation of all.

The Devil played the Sooth-sayer, when he caused Peter to say to Christ, Parce
tibi, The sins of the fathers upon the children.
Domine, let none of this befall thee: he thought by this to save himself: But
here you see, that though the fathers escape themselves, yet they shall be
punished in their Children: so that God tells them, as neither they, so neither
their sons, nor their sons sons, nor their sons Nephews, shall escape. So that
the threat of this punishment extends not only to the party offending, but to
his posterity. 1. For Deuteronomy. 7. 10.
himself, He repayeth them that hate him to their face. 2. Gods jealousy is
compared by the Psalmist to a fire burning for ever; which leaves not with the
party himself, that hates God, but takes hold of his children, and burns to the
third and fourth generation. So that when men think they have best provided for
their children, by saving their estates, with the breach of this Commandment,
they shall find, they have brought a curse upon their children, and that they
have brought evil upon them by that whereby they thought to avoid it.

The measure of every punishment is known by these three signs. 1. Gravitas,
the grievonsnesse of it. 2. Multiplicitas, the variety. 3. Prolixitas, the
continuance.

1. The grievousnesse of it, is seen in this, that it is said to be, upon the
children, (though the Parents escape) who are dear to their Parents, as we see
in Jairus that fell Luke 8. 42. 9. 38.
down at our Saviors feet, and besought him for his sick daughter: so did
another, for his son that was possessed. But we may gather more fully out of S.
(...), Matthew. 15. 22.
how dear a child is to the Parent, in the story of the woman of Canaan, that
came to Christ for the cure of her daughter: she says not, Have mercy upon my
daughter, but have mercy on me, O Lord, for my daughter is grievously vexed
with a Devil, she accounted her daughter as her self. So King David, hearing of
the death of his 2 Samuel 18. 33
son Absalom (though a rebellious child) falls into a bitter passion, and
cries, Would God I had dyed for thee, O Absalom, my son, my son: he could have
been content to die for his son.

These examples show, that children are most dear and precious to Parents. We
account it a heavy loss, when ought of our substance is taken from us, Abraham
reproved Abimelech, because of a well of water taken from him by his servants.
Genesis 21. 25. 2. 23.
The loss of a wife (as being bone of our bone, and flesh of our flesh) is
more grievous: but when the loss of children comes, it strikes deeply, and the
reason is, because they are both bone of our bone, and flesh of our flesh, and
the principal part of our substance, the seed: as though a man were but chafe,
after a child borne. The Wise man says, Childrens children, are the crown of
old men; their crown prove. 17. 6.
while they live; and as the Heathen man said, (...), their image or
remembrance when they are dead.

2. The multiplicity or variety of it, may be illustrated by that in the
Gospel, as there is a distinction of few, and many stripes: and so here to have
the punishment Luke 12. 47.
extend to many generations, shows, that they will be many stripes, and
therefore aggravates it a degree further.

3. The Continuance of it. As our Savior said of the Scribes, that they
devoured widows houses, sub specie prolixae orationis, under pretense of long
Prayers: and Mark 12. 40.
therefore prolixum erit eis judicium, they shall receive the longer judgment,
or greater (...): so is the punishment here, even during the whole memory of
man for four generations.

The execution of this commination we see in Jeroboam, who for his disobedience
to this Commandment was punished in this kind. It is said, That it became sin
to the 1 Reg. 13. 34.
house of jeroboam. In David by the loss of his child. In Baasha; Zimri
destroyed 2 Samuel 12. 15.
1 Reg. 16. 12, 2 Reg. 10. 11.
all the house of Baasha. In Ahab, and in the children of Solomon, for his
idolatry. And therefore we may well conclude with the Apostle, It is a fearful
thing to fall Heb. 10. 31.
into the hands of the living God. And this the godly took notice of, choosing
rather to suffer a temporal death, martyrdom, then to transgress this
commandment. psalm. 44. 20.


But here may arise a question, concerning the justice of this visitation, how
this may stand with Gods own determination upon that Proverb, [The fathers
have eaten sower grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge] which 20.
God said should not be spoken any more, nor heard among his people. For, The
son shall not bear the iniquiry of his father. And we see, that this was
practiced by Amaziah in punishing his fathers murderers, and not their
children, quoting 2 Reg. 14. 6.
Gods own law for it. According to that which is written in the book of the law
of Deuteronomy. 24. 16.
Moses, wherein the Lord commanded saying, The fathers shall not be put to
death for the children, nor the children be put to death for the fathers. And
this seems to be the opinion of S. Paul, when he says, Every man shall bear
his own burden: and Gal. 6. 5.
at the last judgment, every one must receive according to what he has done
in his body, etc. 2 Cor. 5. 10.


To this the Schoolmen answer: as to that place in Esaias, where the Prophet
wills Hezekiah [to put his house in order, for he should die and not live] he
said not, Quid futurum esset, sed quid dispositione naturae futurum esset, not
that he should then certainly die, but that according to the course of nature
he could not live, and Esaias 28. 1.
therefore should die, if by Gods special power he were not preserved. So here,
God speaks not (say they) quid faciet, sed quid dispositione meriti nostri
faceret, not what he will do, but what he might do in respect of our desert:
but this distinction is dangerous, as tending to an encouragement, to the
breach of this commandment.

But to answer it more fully, we say, that Punishment may be inflicted three
several ways. 1. By way of satisfaction. 2. Of medicine. 3. Of Correction. And
we may safely hold, that by these, one may be justly punished, though no
offense be committed by him.

1. By way of satisfaction, as in point of suretyship. When one man is a
principal Debtor, and a friend takes the debt upon him, is it injustice in
this case, to punish the surety with the payment of the debt? God forbid we
should think so. For then, that which Christ has satisfied for us, might be
accounted unlawful, and consequently of no effect. So that voluntarily one may
fatisfie for another, and yet no violence offered to justice.

2. By way of medicine, or cure. If the eye be ill affected, or the head ache,
the arm may well bleed to cure them, otherwise the whole body may be in danger:
and in this case it is not only just, but necessary: so then, if the
punishment of another man, be propter medicinam, for cure, and the evil
inflicted be less then the evil prevented; as to wound the finger to save the
eye, and the like, this is not unjust, and so when the temporal punishment of
the son, is to cure and redeem the father from eternal, then punishment may be
inflicted by God, without any impeachment to his justice.

3. By way of correction. In which there is respect to be had in repairing
equality broken: A man should require no more then suits with the will of God,
but we see daily he does, and therefore breaks equality, and is to make
amends for it: and therefore nimis must be punished with nimis, which must be
either in the father or the child, and if equality be not broken in them,
there is no injustice.

The Fathers say, frustra requirit debitum, qui non rependit indebitum, to
require a debt, and not to pay that which is due is no justice: as God says,
Do ye thus requite Deuteronomy. 32. 6.
the Lord, O foolish people and unwise, is not he thy father that bought thee?
and Qui contristat patrem suum, just contristatur a filio, he that brings
sorrow upon his father, shall have the like brought on him by his son, and that
justly too. Again, in regard the covenant of blessing was made with Abraham and
his seed, God will Genesis 17. 7.
be the God of our seed: therefore when the father breaks the Covenant, he
may justly be punished in his seed. They knew it well, that said, His blood be
upon us, and our children. Matthew. 27. 25.


2. Thus we see it is not unjust in respect of the father, now that it is not
unjust in respect of the son, appears. 1. Children may be temporally punished,
because filius est res patris, part of the fathers possessions and substance.

Again, in regard that the son may be guilty by nature. The Church in the Cant.
finds Cant. 2. 15.
a nest of young soxes, that as yet have destroyed no vineyards, nor worried
any lambs, but if they grow up, they will do both; The question is, whether the
church may say, Take us those little foxes. And so because there is a poisonous
nature in the Scorpions Esaias 59. 5.
or Cockatrices egg, we may tread them under feet: and it stands with justice.
psalm 51. 9.
The sum of all is, God never punishes one for the sin of another, but he may
ex jure Dominii, as absolute Lord, inflict any temporal evil on the son for the
fathers sin, without any injustice, for it is only an affliction to the son,
which God can turn to his good, but a punishment it is to the Father, who is
punished in his son.

To these we may add two considerations more. 1. The first is jus meriti, for
commonly education follows propagation; Men usually bring up their children
John 4. 20.
like themselves. Children have traditions from their fathers, As our fathers
worshipped, so will we, and having kept our Religion so many years, let us keep
it still. Sin propagates like to Gehezies leprosy, if it take hold of the
father, it cleaves to his posterity commonly. And therefore, this punishment
may come upon them, ex jure meriti, and that justly, because they follow their
fathers sin. And herein God when he punishes the son, exequitur chirographo
suo, non paterno, it is for his own debt, not for his fathers.

2. The second is jus beneficii, and this is the court of mercy, God may show
mercies to whom he will, the son cannot claim any thing at Gods hands for the
fathers sake, Gods covenant is free, we can challenge nothing as due, but all
from grace. S. Augustine said well, that godly fathers have wicked children, ne
virtus videretur haereditaria, lest virtue should be thought to be hereditary.
Again, wicked men have good children, and why? ne malitia serpat in infinitum;
lest there should be no end of wickedness. But first, this is certain, there
is no punishment for the grapes that are in the fathers mouths, they remain in
his own mouth only. 2. And secondly this punishment is in respect of his
justice only: yet miseretur (...) vult Exodus 33. 19.
misereri, he will show mercy on whom he will show mercy. His mercy may exempt
whom in justice he might punish, and besides, his justice takes hold only on
those that follow their fathers sins, and so the threatening is conditional.
Gregory says, (...) imitatur, gravatur; he that follows his fathers example,
shall feel the burden of it. God says by the Prophet, At what instant I shall
speak concerning a nation to destroy it, if that nation shall turn from their
evil, I will repent of the evil I thought Jer 18. 7, 8.
to do unto them. And when a son shall turn from his fathers evil ways, he
shall (...) and not die. His threatenings are of justice, his exemptions of
mercy. Jonas Ezekiel. 18. 28.
says from God, that Nineveh shall be destroyed; but by a new decree, the
former Jonah. 3. 4. 10.
sentence was reversed. These come from several courts.

1. The use of all this is, to breed a mutual care betwixt the father and the
son; for The use.
we see Eli the father punished for the children: and in another place the
child punished 1 Samuel 4. 18.
for the father David. 2 Samuel 12. 15.
2. Secondly, to acknowledge that we are sons of sinful Parents, and to say
with him in Deuter. A Syrian ready to perish was my father, etc. and with David
peccavimus Deuteronomy. 26. 5.
cum patribus, we have sinned with our fathers: and with Daniel, to deprecate
psalm 106. 6.
the punishment due to us, for our fathers transgressions. Dan. 9. 8.
3. And lastly, with Abraham to be careful to command our children to keep the
Genesis 18. 19.
way of the Lord, there must be a mutual care of building up one another. And
so Romans 14. 19.
we go from mount Ebal, the commination, to mount Gerizim, the promise, and
reward.
CHAP. X.
The third part of the sanction, a promise of mercy. Gods rewards proceed from
mercy, which is the fountain of all our happiness. His mercy is promised to
the 1000 generation: the threatening extends only to the third and fourth. The
object of his mercy, such as love him. Our love must be manifested by keeping
his Commandments. How they must be kept, The benefit: they will keep and
preserve us.

THe Commination or Punishment we see in the Psalm, Thou have rebuked the 3.
proud that are cursed, which do err from thy Commandments. The Curse. psalm.
119. 21.
In this last part which is the Promise of Reward, the Apostle tells us, that
exceeding 2 pet. 1. 4.
great and precious promises are given to us, whereby we are partakers of the
divine nature. Under this promise of mercy, are contained all the benefits and
blessings of God; all other promises are included in this, this is the fountain
of all the rest, if we partake of his mercy, we shall want nothing that's good
for us. The commination Exodus 19. 18.
was like the smoking upon mount Sinai, terrible, and dreadful, this like the
Psalm. 133. 3.
dew descending upon mount Sion, brings blessing and everlasting life, blessed
and comfortable.

This promise is mercy, for under this name he propounds the reward. Now God
has a reward for evilas well as for good. For the first, Samuel tells Saul,
Because 1 Samuel 15. 26.
thou have rejected the word of the Lord, therefore the Lord has rejected
thee. There was his reward for evil. And for the last, a cup of cold water,
given out of Mat. 10. 10.
a pious and charitable intent, has also its reward. A reward of good.

And it is well worth the noting, under what word, and by what name this Reward
is promised, which is under the name of mercy, for without it, we were in an
(...) case, even the best of us, they that do his work best, We are
unprofitable servants, all we can do, is not worth so much as thanks, so that
he promises merely in mercy, and though his visitation be in justice, yet his
reward is gratuita, ex misericordia, Luc. 17. 7. 9.
non merito, free without any respect, but his own mercy, not our merit, merces
ex (...) non ex merito, and therefore not to be pleaded in any court of
justice. There Is nothing ascribed to our merit. Sow (says God by the Prophet)
to your selves Hos. 10. 12.
in righteousness, reap (not in justice but) in mercy. So the Apostle,
Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord
the righteous judge 2 Timothy 4. 8.
shall give me. He (...) it to be of Gods gift.

It is Gods mercy then, and in this one thing are comprehended all rewards
privative, and positive. His mercy is great toward us, in delivering our
souls from the psalm. 86. 13.
nethermost hell. And it is of his mercy, that we are not consumed. All rivers
flow Lam. 3. 22.
from this. It is fundatrix nostra, it lays our foundation of happiness, in
blessings preventing, psalm. 21. 3.
23. 6.
as also in blessings following. And it is Coronatrix nostra, for he crowns
103. 4.
us with loving kindness, and tender mercies.

He could have said in this, as in the Commination, visitans, visiting, the
Prophet David prayed for no more. Behold and visit this vine. And old Zachary
took it for psalm. 80. 14.
a great blessing, that God had visited his people. But God is so good to us,
that he Luc. 1. 68.
thinks it not enough. It is justice only, that is a visitation, an act
intermitted.

1. His mercy is a continual work, to show, that there is no intermission in his
work of mercy, but he continues every day doing good to us, which is the first
degree of it.

2. The second degree of it is, that the stripes of his justice are but 3. or
4. (which in it self is mercy) his justice is restrained to the fourth
generation; but his mercy is a thousand fold, it is extended to the thousandth
generation, so that the proportion of his mercy, exceeds that of his justice
250. times, to show, that his delight is more in exercising the works of mercy,
then of justice, his mercy rejoices or triumphs Ja. 2. 13.
over judgment. The one being Opus proprium, his own work, the other Opus
alienum a work that is strange to him. He will save Sodom, if but ten
righteous men Genesis 18. 32.
may be found in it: and Jerusalem, for one David's sake. Nay he bids them run
Esa. 37. 35.
through that City and if they can find but one just man in it, he will save
it. Jer. 5. 1.


But to whom is this mercy promised? even to them that love God, and to none
other. And this love must have some proportion with Gods love. It must be
regulated by his. Now the manner of Gods love is set forth to us under the name
of jealousy. And he makes it no little part of punishment, when he withdraws
his jealousy Ezec. 16. 42.
from a people. Therefore this mercy is promised to them, that are jealous for
him. He is jealous for us, we should be jealous for him. We should say with
Elias, (...) zelatus sum, I have been very jealous for the Lord, zelantes
potius quam amantes, Our 1 Kin. 19. 10.
zeal for him should even consume us, with the kingly Prophet. Now there is a
fained psalm. 119. 139.
and a true love, and therefore the Apostle directs us to it which is the true,
and gives 1 Jo. 3. 18.
a mark of it. Not in word, but in deed and truth, what the deed is to be, we
find by Jo. 14. 15.
our Saviors speech. If ye love me, keep my Commandments, even the same which
God speaks here. The affection of this love is seen by the effects. God lets us
see his mercy by the effects of it, which is faciens, by performing it. So must
our love be discovered by keeping his Law. Saint Ambrose says, est zelus ad
vitam, et est zelus in (...).
ad mortem, ad vitam zelus est divina praecepta servare, et amore nominis ejus
custodire mandata. There is a zeal to life, and a zeal to death, that to life
is, when we observe Gods laws, and for the love of his name keep his
Commandments. A true keeper is he, which preserves things carefully, which are
committed to his charge, God needs not our keeping, as we do need his, he is
able to keep himself, but our love must be showed in keeping 1. mandata his
Commandments 2. minimos istos his little ones, what we do to one of them he
will account it as done to himself Mat. 25. 45. And 3. we must esteem them worth
the keeping as David did Psalm. 119. 10. 72. The office of a keeper is to
preserve what is committed to him, that it be not lost, or cast away, or
broken, but kept sound, till his coming that gave it in charge. There Is a heavy
sentence in the Gospel against the breakers of them. They must not be contemned
or Math. 5. 19.
cast behind us, nor may we lose or forget them, we may see Gods judgment
against psalm. 50. 17.
119. 10.
Ahab, for the loss of them. 1 Kin. 20. 40.


Now we shall keep them the better, if we make a true estimate of them. And
King David tells us, they are worth the having. They are more to be desired
then gold (says he) yea, then much fine gold. and in keeping them there is great
reward psalm. 19. 10.
Nay he tells us, they are better then thousands of gold and silver. Therefore
we are 119. 72.
to keep them safe, and carefully, and lay them up where they cannot be taken
away. the wiseman directs us where we may bestow them, to be out of fear of
losing Prove. 4. 21.
them, keep them (says he) in the midst of the heart for he that keeps them,
keeps 16. 17.
his own soul.

In respect of others we are also to see them kept. And this is to be done by
zeal and power, that others break them not. We must not say, as in another
case Cain said, Am I my brothers keeper? Sum ego custos mandati tui, Am I to be
a keeper of Genesis 4. 9.
thy Commandments in others, Is it not enough that I keep them my self? No we
must reprove, rebuke, and exhort, use all means to make others keep them, we 2 Timothy 4. 2.
must be grieved with David when others keep them not, God has given them
psalm. 119. 158.
to us, they are not only observanda but Conservanda, we must not only
observe but preserve them, which if we do we shall find as the wise man
says, that he that pro, 16. 17.
keeps them keeps his own soul.

Domine Custodio, adjuua Negligentiam meam. Lord I keep them, help my
Negligence.
THE EXPOSITION OF THE Third Commandment.
Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain etc. Or, as the
Chaldee Paraphrast reads it, Thou shall not swear by the name of the Lord thy
God in vain, or falsely.

CHAP. I
The general scope of the third Commandment. Of glorifying the name of God by
praise. The manner how it must be done. Several motives to stir. men up to the
duty.

THis Commandment forbids and prohibits not only perjury, but all other abuses
of Gods name. Annotation. 19.


Though all vain and rash swearing, and all irreverent usage of What is meant
by taking Gods name in vain.
Gods name may be reduced to this commandment, and therefore it is enlarged by
our Savior Math. 5. 34. to the prohibiting of all volutary oaths; yet if we
look at the literal meaning of the words, to take Gods name in vain, does
strickly and properly signify nothing else,, but to swear falsely or to
forswear and therefore, the 70. as they render the Hebrew word (...) lashava by
(...), which we translate vain so they often render it by (...) falsely, as Deu.
5. 18. Ezekiel. 12. 24. and 13. 6. 7. 8. Hos. 10. 4. Jon 2. 9. Zeah. 10. 2. and
that the word (...) Shava and (...) Shakar mentiri differ little, appears in
the ninth Commandment, where for (...) Sheker mendacium used in Exodus is put
(...) in Deuteronomy. both which the 70. render by (...) false witness. Therefore
Philo in explication of this place, having said, that we must (...) not take
the name of God in vain, adds by way of explication (...) for to call God to
witness a lie, is most wicked So likewise Aben Ezra, so in Exo. 23. 1. For the
Hebe. (...) vain the Targum Hierosol reads (...) false So in Psalm 24. 4. and
Psalm 12. 3. Zachary 10. 2. and in many other places, the Hebrew (...) is
rendered falsehood or lying, and that by Hierom him self. Our Savior himself
so renders these words, Mat. 5. 33. Thou shall not (...) thy self, speaking of
the litteral sense of this law, as it was given by Moses, which he amplifies
and enlarges. (For that which some late expositors say, that he recites and
rejects only the corrupt gloss of the Jewish Doctors, is against' the current
of antiquity, and against the text, as might easily be proved,) and therefore
the Syriack translation so reads the words, non mentiris in jurejurando tuo,
thou shall not lie in swearing. This further is to be noted, that this
commandment speaks not of an (...) tory oath, or false swearing in bearing
witness, for that belongs to the ninth Commandment, but of a promissorie oath
only, as the following words of Christ import, Mat. 5. 34. (...) Thou shall
perform thy vows unto the Lord, which are taken out of Numb. 30. 2. and so
Philo expounds this precept, and Aben Ezra, who adds to show the danger of
this sin, that other sins have usully the bait of profit or pleasure which
are seldom in this, and that other sins cannot be committed at all times, as
this may.

This which is the proper sense of the words being laid as a ground, other
things of like nature may be reduced hither, according to the explication and
enlargment, which Christ our great and only Lord and Lawgiver, has left in
his Gospel, to which we are to have recourse in opening the true meaning of
this and all other precepts of the Decalogue, as the are obliging to us
Christians, and become a part of the second covenant.

In it are two things,
1. A prohibition. 2. A commination of punishment.
In the Prohibition are two things likewise considerable.
1. The object, God in general, and his name in particular. 2. The Act of which
this Commandment speaks, and that either,
1. Negatively and expressly, not to take that name in vain. 2. Positively and
implied; to use the name of God reverently, soberly, considerately, and upon
good cause.
God is the immediate object, and his glory or honor the immediate end of all
the The scop of this Commandment.
duties commanded in the first table. This honor as was showed, is either
inward, in the worship of the heart, required in the first commandment, or
outward, and that either in signo, by the outward gesture and adoration of the
body, or in verbo, in our words or speeches of him, that is required in the
second, this in the third Commandment, that consists chiefly in adoration,
this in praise. They differ in this that the honor of outward adoration, is
always given to one that's present, and to the party himself immediately; this
of the tongue by praise goes beyond it, in that it may be given to one that is
absent, for we may praise one that is absent and though God be always present,
yet when we speak of him to others, we speak not to him then as present, and
besides, praise may be given not only to his person, but to his name, or any
thing that has relation to him. Thus we are exhorted psalm. 29. 2.
to give the glory due to his name etc. And this praise is aspecial part of
Gods glory, for psalm. 50. vlt.
he that offers me praise, glorifieth me, says God. This is the end which
God propounds of all his works; for as the Prophet speaks, we are created by
him for his Esa. 43. 7.
glory and that which was before our creation, our predestination was for his
Ephesians. 1. 6. 12
glory. It was Gods end and aim, and it must be ours, That all our actions be
to 1 Cor. 10. 13.
the praise of his glory (As the Apostle) And whatsoever we do, it must be to
the glory of 2 Thessalonians. 1. 21.
God, and so to demean our selves, and order our actions and thoughts, that
the name of the Lord Jesus Christ may be glor (...) in us.

The taking of the name of God is an external act, an act of the tongue; which
we know, though it be but a little member as Saint James speaks, yet if it be
not well (...). 3. 5.
8.
looked too, it is of all the members the most unruly, and breaks out to the
dishonor 9.
of God: but if it be rightly ordered, then none more meet for his service, as
the same Apostle says, therewith we bless God the father. And indeed it (...)
the proper instrument for his praise, his praise shall ever be in my mouth,
(the mouth and tongue psalm. 34. 1.
51. 15.
being one and the same in this act) And my mouth shall show forth thy praise.
My lips 63. 4. 6.
shall praise thee, and when my mouth shall praise thee, both in one Psalm, and
in diverse 3 (...).
other places. And so of the tongue. My tongue shall talk of thy praise all the
71. 22.
day long. And my tongue shall sing of thy righteousness. 51. 14.
119. 172.


The manner how it is to be done, Moses in his song of praise tells us
Enuntiabo Deuteronomy. 33. 3.
I will publish the name of the Lord, there must be no whispering in this work,
The manner of glorifing Gods name.
but Gods praise must be sounded out. and in this work one must report the
excellency of God, and they that hear, are to give glory to him: for glory as
was touched before as the word is taken both in scripture, and in humane
writers imports more, then either honor, praise, or worship, for all these
must be directed that the party on whom they are bestowed, may be glorified, so
that glory is the end of those actions and the nature of glory has some
resemblance to claritas, the brightness of glass, or other resplendent
obects, that are seen a far off, psalm. 66. 2.
so God is glorified, when he is so praised or honored, that is name may be
seen and known afar off: and therefore the psalmist exhorting men to praise
God, adds further, make his praise glorious, so that he may be seen and known
to all the world and the several steps, or degrees of doing this, are these.
First, by filling our mouths with his praise: and then secondly by filling
other men's ears with it, O praise our God psalm. 66. 8.
71. 14. 15.
ye people, and make his praise to be (...). And thirdly, that not once, but
our 35. 28.
mouths must daily speak of it ever more and more. And fourtly to them that are
ready 66. 16.
to hear of it, which are they that fear God. The Saints. And 5. this is not in
asmal assembly 149. 1.
or meeting, but in the great congregation. And sixthly the greater the be ter
40. 10.
let them give glory unto the Lord (says the prophet) and declare his praise
in Esa. 42. 12.
the Islands; nay he wishes, that all the world may be filled with his praises
and psalm. 22. 36:
that he might be heard of all nations. Psalm. 71. 18. The sound must go out
into all 19. 4.
lands, and the words (of his praise) into the ends of the world. Seventhly and
lastly Romans 10. 18.
this celebrating of Gods praise must continue to the end of the world. His
name psalm. 72. 17.
(says the psalmist) shall endure for ever, so long as the Sun and Moon
endures. And 79. 33.
we will show forth thy praise from generation to generation, and he would have
it continue so long as the world endures.

Thus you see the scope and end of this Commandment, is Gods glory: and you
see, that it must not be restrained, but it must have a large extent, and that
as large as may be for place and perpetuity. You may see the reasons briefly,
that this is no voluntary act, but a necessary duty.

1. Man was created for this end and purpose, as you have heard: and Saint
Chrysostom Motives to praise God.
says Animalia fecit Deus propter hominem, hominem propter seipsum, God made
other creatures for man, but man for himself, that is, for his own glory. Sup
Math.
Moral. l. 8.
So says S. Gregory Homo ad contemplandum and laudandum creatorem suum
conditus est, man was made to contemplate and praise his maker. Therefore it is
observed, that the Hebrew (...) Bara, and (...) Barak, creare and benediccre,
are little differing, because the end of creation is, that God may be blessed
or praised. 2. As Soon as the world was made, God sanctified a sabbath to be
spent in his praise, being a Type of what we must do hereafter. Dies enim
septinus not ipsi erimus, De. Civ. Dei. l.
(...) ejus fuerimus benedictione and sanetificatione pleni atque referti,
says Saint 22. c. 30
Augustine. And therefore our Savior delivering us a form of prayer, though
God requires his inward worship in the first place, as in the first Commandment
because it must be first in execution or performance yet because his praise and
glory is the end, and the end is first in intetion, though last in execution,
therefore Christ puts it in the first petition, wherein we desire his name may
be hallowed or glorified. 3. If we mean to do it hereafter in patria, in heaven
our country we must do it here in via, in the way thither on, earth. It will
be our continual exercise there, and by using it here, we come to have a heaven
upon earth. 4. We being little lower then Angels must imitate them in this
duty: It is psalm. 8. 5.
an exaltation of our nature, while we are here in corruption, to be made like
the Heb. 2. 7.
Apoc. 19. 1.
Angels. They sing Hallelujahs, salvation, glory, honor, and power to God. Let
us do the like. 5. If we do it not, we shall be so much lower then the Angels,
and we shall be worse psalm. 19. 1.
and more unthankful then the Heavens and firmament, baser then the basest
creatures 148. 10.
for they do in their kind. 6. The Church militant does it. It is the work of
the Temple, and to be preferred before the works of other places. as that is
the place of all places, or chief of places; so is praise the work of all
works, the chiefest work to be done. 7. Man ought to be delighted in that,
wherein God has made him to excel all other creatures, that is, in the
distinction of voice, no creature but man having a tongue to speak, the rest
only having a sound, but no articulate voice: whence man is called (...) from
his articulate voice. 8. This gift is not only proper to man, but the parts
exercised herein, as the tongue, lips, and mouth, are honored much by being
employed in this service, it it is more then necessary for him to use it to
that end Saint James 3. 8. debaseth the tongue, which is lewdly employed; David
extolleth it, when it is well occupied. It is the highest degree of glory to be
thus employed. Awake my glory, Psalm 57. 8. 9. It is not only a good act, but
pleasant, seemly, and profitable: David says, psalm. 147. 1.
his soul was filed with marrow whilst he praised God; we shall get by it
honorificantes honorificabo; therefore necessary it is in respect of the
reward. 10. It being a more excellent thing to give, then to receive, dare quam
accipere, and to make, then to be made facere quam fieri, as in all other
things we are made and we receive, in this we are giving, we give God glory,
and become makers, we make him glorious and great, by glorifying and magnifying
of him. 11. Though Christ command the contrary, and will not have his name
glorified, as he seemed to the Leper, the blind man and others in the Gospel:
yet Math. 8. 4.
the necessity of this duty lies so hard upon us, that as they, so we must
publish Mar. 7. 36.
his fame; for in this case no precept or prohibition will lie against this 8.
62.
commandment. 12. The wise man says, A man shall be satisfied with good things
by the fruit of his prove. 12. 14.
mouth And our Savior says not, that it is the work of the hands, but the
words of the mouth that a man shall be justified, or condemned by. The well
ordering of the tongue will either produce fruit to life and salvation, or gall
and wormwood to confusion. It follows then, that a necessity lies upon us to
use the tongue well, and in what better can it be used, then in hallowing Gods
name.
We see then what is here commanded, the same which we desire in the first
petition of the Lords prayer, viz that Gods name may be hallowed. 1. Inwardly
by our intention, making it the end and scope of all our actions. 2. Outwardly
psalm. 45. 2.
Mat. 5. 16.
by making it the matter of our speech, and that herein our tongues must be the
instruments psalm. 51. 15.
of his praise, and as the psalmist speaks, like the pen of a ready writer 45.
2.
and our mouth the trumpet to sound out his praises, and not only so, but also
Mat. 5. 16.


3. by our outward actions, which must be (...) that light which must shine
before psalm. 19. 1
men to stir them up to glorify God. So that we see, necessitas incumbit,
there is a necessity that our mouth and lips show forth his praise, that they
be the pen of a ready writer, to that end, to utter the praises of the great
king, and our actions must shine, that others may glorify him too. And less
we cannot do then the heavens and firmament, that are (...) gloriae.

CHAP. II
What is meant by Gods name. The use of names. 1. To distinguish 2. To dignifie
Gods name in respect of his Essence, Attributes, and works, and how they are to
be reverenced. What it is to take his name, as glorious as necessary.
Glorifying his name, inwardly, outwardly, by confessing, desending it,
remembering it, honorable mention of it threefold, it must be (...) often (...)
well spoken of, (...) venerable. Applied to our own actions by prayer, and to
others by blessing etc. Of glorifying it it in our lives. what it is to take
gods name in vair, in respect of 1. the end. 2. agent 3. The work.

IN the Prohibition it self there are 3. things considerable:
1. What is meant by the name of the Lord thy God. 2. What is meant by Taking
it. 3. And lastly, what by taking it in vain.
The Name of God. The name being a word proper to the tongue, the duty of the
tongue is commanded in it: now a name according to the general definition is,
per quod cognoscimus, etcognoscimur, that by which we know and are known;
invented to distinguish men, and other things by.

There is a two fold use ofnames. 1. Merely for distinction that one may be
known from another, which is the most proper and first use. 2. Names are used
sometimes (...), for dignities sake, that men may not only be distinguished
from others, but reverenced above others, now God makes use of names in both
respects.

1. For distinction; so the name of God is diversely set down in Scripture, to
The use of names. What is meant by Gods name.
distinguish him from all other things; as Jehovah, the principal name of his
existence. El, of his strength, Lord of hosts. Schuddai, of his
all sufficiency, in his covenant with Abraham, and the like, as Jerome has it
in an Epistle to Marcella. But most fully in Exodies. Now his names are of
threesorts. 1. In respect of his Essence, as Jehovah. 2. Of his Attributes,
which are of two sorts, Affirmative, as merciful, gracious, etc. and Negative,
as infinite, invisible, etc. by which Dionysius Areopag. Exodus 6. 3.
proceeds in his Theologia mystica, as the best way to know God, per viam
negationis. 1 Sa. 1. 11. etc
3. in respect of his works, Creator, Redeemer, Sanctifier, etc. and to those
Genesis 17. 1.
three may be referred whatsoever we read of his name.

The very litteral names of God are to be reverently used, and of every one of
Judge. 13. 18.
them it may be said, as the Angel said to Manoah enquiring after his name,
Search not after my name, for it is fearful; yea, much more fearful is the name
of the Lord, and not to be known, as appears in Deuter. If thou will not do all
the words written Deuteronomy. 28. 58.
in this book, that thou may fear this glorious and fearful name, The Lord
thy God, the Lord will make thy plagues wonderful, etc. But that distinction of
the Pharisees (...). 5. 33.
must be avoided, That unless one did swear by the name Jehovah, and take the
very word in his mouth, he was not guilty of the breach of this Commandment,
although he swear by Heaven or earth, or Jerusalem, for such oaths they made no
account of, when as our Savior shows that to swear by them is to swear by God,
because his name and glory is seen in them.

2. For as we said in the second place, names are used to dignifie some above
others, and to show thereby that some duty or honor is due to them, which is
not due to others; so Gods name is seen in his attributes, and in his works, in
Heaven and Earth, as well as in those proper names of Jehovah, Elohim, etc.
This we use to call in English, a good name, which in private persons, is
called, credit, but in those of higher place, is called, glory, majesty,
highness, etc. which is the Dialect of Prince, whose aim is, as the Prophet
says, that they may have a name, and Jer. 13. 11.
praise, and glory. The phrase in the Hebrew is, to call one of great credit, a
man of name, that is, a man of cred it, and renown, or a famous person. Now if
Gods proper and litteral name ought to be reverenced, much more ought his other
name, his good name and fame ought to be dear to us; for the good name of any
ought to be honored according to the glory and greatness of the person, as
the Author to the Hebrews reasons, that Christ was so much above the Angels
in glory, by how much he has attained a more excellent name, then they. And
when God would exalt Heb. 1. 4.
Abraham, from being father to the children of a bond woman, Agar, by whom he
had Ismael, to be the father of Isaac, and the faithful, and thereby to
establish the Church in his house, then because he was more glorious, he gives
him a more glorious name, Thou shall no more be called Abram, but Abraham. And
the like we see in Genesis 17. 1.
Jacob, whose name was changed to Israel, a name of more dignity, when he had
Genesis 35. 10.
prevailed with God. Now if a good name or good report, be among private men so
highly valued, that as Solomon says, it is better then a precious ointment,
which Eccl. 7. 1.
was in great esteem for pleasure in those days, yea, then silver or gold, or
any precious prove. 22. 1.
treasure which was most esteemed for profit: and if it be true which the
Heathen said, interesse famae est majus omni alio interesse, that the weight
and interest of a good name goes (...) all (...): yea further, as a Father
says, Fama pari passu ambulat cum vita, it goes cheek by joul with life it
self. Of how precious and high esteem ought the name of God to be, and how
highly ought we to reverence and esteem it, seeing, as the Psalmist says, God
has magnified his name and word, above psalm 138. 2.
all things. Therefore his glory and name is the chief thing we should look
unto. Thus we see what is meant by the name of God.

The second is, what is understood by taking the Name of God. Non assumes, etc.

1. It is applied to a standard or banner, and hence comes (...), nose,
Armiger. 2. To a heavy thing, as a burden, whence comes (...), massae, pondus,
and these two kind of things we take up or remove, if a thing be glorious as a
standard, we take it and lift it up, and if a thing be necessary and useful to
us, though it be heavy and weighty, we take it up: so that the one is in rebus
gloriosis, the other in rebus necessariis, and if a thing be neither glorious
nor necessary, we let it lie, the first includes the duties of praise in all
that take Gods name upon them: the second refers to the duty of swearing, which
is a weighty thing, and under these two are comprehended all other takings of
his name.
1. It is in gloriosis, as Moses called his Altar, erected and set up,
Jehovah-nissi, that is, the Lord my banner, or standard, from (...), ness,
vexillum. Or as the plate made for Aaron, wherein was to be graven, Sanctitas
Jehovae. Holiness to the Lord was to be taken up, and placed upon Aarons
forehead, visible, as a thing glorious, as the badge of a noble man is lifted
up upon the shoulder of a servant to be seen.

This lifting or taking up of Gods name, is a thing glorious. As the taking of
a Genesis 48. 16.
name by a child from a father is honorable. It was an honor, and a
privilege to Ephraim and (...) to be called after their grandfather Jacobs
name, so is it an honor to a woman to have her husbands name. It was all the
ambition of the women (in the Prophet) that desired one husband, to be called
by his name. And we see still, that in marriage the woman takes her husbands
name, and it is such a glory to Esa. 4. 1.
her, that she is content to loose her own name for his. And it is our own
glory, that Esa. 43. 7.
from Gentiles we are called Christians. Of which Esaias in sundry places
foretold. 62. 2.
Every one shall be called by my name (says God) for I have created him for my
glory. 65. 15.
And, Thou shall be called by a new name. And again, And shall call his
servants by another name. All which was fulfilled in the primitive Church, when
the Disciples Act. 11. 26.
were first called Christians. The glory of Christ was taken up by Christians,
when they were called by his name.

Now being Gods servants, and servants taken up his banner or badg, the duty
commanded is, that we must like good servants do all to his glory, as the
Apostle speaks. 1 Cor. 10. 31.
God can receive no profit by us, but glory we may give him, and therefore all
our Genesis 11. 4.
actions must refer to it. We must not be so ambitious, as they were in the
days of Peleg, that sought by building Babels tower, to get themselves a name:
for that is Gigantomachia, which is, bellare cum Deo, to fight with God. It is
not good to contest with him in this kind. You may read the success of their
enterprise; God overthrew their plot, even by the confusion of that, which
should have gotten them their names, the tongue.

Nor must we set a face or false color upon our own evil acts, under pretense
of Gods glory: as did Absalom. If the Lord will bring me again to Jerusalem, I
will 2 Samuel 15. 8.
serve him: here was a fair pretense, when treason lay hid in heart against his
own 1. Kin. 21. 9.
father. So (...), makes religion a (...), proclaims a fast for the murder of
Naboth. These are so far from the glory of Gods name, that they are wicked
abuses of it.

Thus Gods name is to be glorified within us, now for the outward duties. 2.


1. Having taken this name upon us, we must not be ashamed of it, nor afraid
Mat. 10. 33.
to confess it. Judah of whom came the name to the Jews, was so called (the
word signifying praise) because his mother said, she would confess or praise
God: so must we wear our name of Christians, and Gods servants, to the glory of
God and Christ, and not be ashamed of it. The reason Christ himself gives,
Whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my father. And
though the Church of Philadelphia was but of small strength, and its works were
not great, yet Apoc. 3. 8.
because it had not denied his name, Christ promises to set open a door for
it, and 4. 9, 10.
other things, as you may read. But any that shall receive the name and mark of
the beast (wear any others livery) he shall drink of the wrath of God, and
shall be tormented with fire and brimstone.

2. There is another degree, beyond that of not denying his Masters name, which
every good servant is bound to, and which his master expects from him, that is,
standing for his name, when it is blasphemed, consessing and defending it to
the death, as the Martyrs have done. Because there was none that offered to
defend Esa. 59. 16, 17
Gods name, when judgment was turned backward, and justice stood afarr of,
truth was fallen in the streets, and equity could not enter, therefore he
thereatens terrible judgment, he puts on the garments of vengeance, says the
(...).

3. Lastly, we must not forget Gods name, but often make mention of it. The
Prophet David threatens a terrible punishment to such. The wicked shall be
turned into Psalm 9. 17.
hell, and all the people that forget God. Take heed, says Moses, that you
forget not the Lord. Deuteronomy. 4. 9. A man would think it were impossible, that any
should forget him, but Saint Jerome tells us, how a man may forget him, if we
behave our selves so in our speech that nothing comes from us that savoureth of
God, then we may be truly said to forget him. A man is said to forget Gods
name, when he breaks the first Commandment, as it is in Jeremy. Their fathers
have forgoten Jer. 23. 27.
my name for Baal, and so for the rest. Psalm. 1. 2.


And therefore they that truly take up this banner, meditate day and night, how
119. 97.
they may do that which shall be to their masters glory. They speak (as king
David 145. 5.
did) of his glorious honor and majesty. Solomon says, that a just man's mouth
does (...) sapientiam, speak of wisdom, he speaks something which may redound
pro. 10. 11. and 12. 18.
to the glory of Gods name, and therefore he calls the tongue of the wise man
(...), and ipsam salutem, a vein of life, and health it self, out of which
comes glory to God, and health to himself but; we may now say, Rarum est nomen
(...), pro. 15. 2.
the reverend mention of Gods name, is (...) in some men's mouths, they seldom
speak of him; unless it be to dishonor him by profane swearing and cursing,
Or else they do (like Solomon's fools) ebullire (...), belch out folly or babble
and some out vanity: The p actise of king David was, to show forth Gods
righteousness, psalm 71. (...).
16.
and make mention of it, and of it only. And in the Prophet Esays song Esa.
26. 13.
ye shall find. We will make mention only of thy Name. God would execute his
Judgments upon Pharaoh, that he might get him a name, or that his name might
Exodus 9. 16.
be declared or spoken of through all the world. How to menti on Gods name.


This mention, this honorifica mentio, is of three sorts.

1. In speaking often of it, of which has been formerly spoken. 2. In speaking
well of his Name. 3. In speaking reverently of it.
1. We must speak often of it, his name must be (...) often and much to be
talked of, this is the end of all his great wonders, to have his name famous
and spoken of in the world, as is already showed.

2. His name must be (...), blessed or well spoken of. The speaking well, or
blessing of Gods name, we have a pattern from the (...), and Saints of God.
psalm. 70. 4. and 72. vlt.
It was their Epiphonema or close after mercies and judgments. They shall say
Exa. 18. 10.
always, says the Psalmist, The Lord be praised, as himself says elsewhere,
psalm. 124. 5.
Blessed be his glorious name for ever. (...) for the deliverance of Moses and
Ruth. 4. 14.
the Israelites from (...); Blessed be the Lord who has delivered you, etc.
psalm. 28. 6.
And of King David, Blessed be the Lord that has not given us over for a 41.
13.
Neh. 9. 5.
prey. So for Gods favor, as the women to Naomi. Blessed be the Lord which 1 Samuel 25. 32.
has not left thee this day without a kinsman. So was David's thankfulness.
Job. 1. 21.
Blessed be the Lord, because he has heard the voice of my supplications, and
blessed be the Lord from everlasting. And Nehemiah and the people. Blessed be
thy glorious name which is exalted above all blessing and praise. As also for
his preservation from sinning, as David being prevented by Abigail, from
shedding Nabals blood. psalm. 70. 4.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel. And lastly, for Gods chastisements and
crosses, as Job, The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the
name of the Lord. This speaking well of God, and converting his blessings and
judgments into an honorable mention of his name is commanded.

Contrary to this it is, when a man receiving some mercy, thinks it not great
enough, and therefore grudges, and is unthankful; or being under some
affliction or judgment, Lev. 22. 32.
thinks it too great, and so murmurs and complains, and converts all to the
dispraise of God.

3. His name must be (...), reverend and venerable. We must speak reverently of
Gods name, not make it common, as if we did account of it no better then a Col.
3. 17.
stone in the street, and of his service, as that of a common person. Ye shall
not psalm. 124.
profane my holy name, says God, that is, not use it commonly; for to the
sanctifying of his name is opposite the profaning of it, or making it common.
Thus when men speak of Gods nature, of his decrees and judgments, and of the
great mysteries of Religion, without fear and rerevence, as if they were
discoursing of ordinary matters, they do not reverence his name: much less
when it is abused and profaned, as Witches do in sorcery and evil arts: or as
blasphemers, that use it irreverently or by way of execration, when men ascribe
to God what is contrary to his nature, as to make him unjust, cruel, the author
of sin, etc. Besides these, there is another way of applying Gods name to our
actions, and that both to our own and other men's. 1. To our own, for this we
have a precept. Whatsoever ye do, says (...). 10. 8.
the Apostle, in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord: and how is that?
by calling upon his name for a blessing; when we say with the Psalmist, our
help stands in the name of the Lord. 2. To others, thus God commanded the
Levites to put his name upon the people, and bless them. How that is, the
Psalmist shows, by wishing them good luck in the name of the Lord.

The contrary to this is to curse; when with the same tongue, as S. James
says, we bless God the Father, and curse men. This is a terrible abuse, to
use the name of God as a curse to our selves or others, which is given for a
blessing only, (as when men wish that God would confound them) and so as S.
Augustine says, faciunt Deum carnificem suum, they make God their own
executioner, whereas God has given his name for a strong tower of defense.
James 3. 9.


Thus much for sanctifying his name in our words, now for our actions. We must
Ephesians. 4. 3.
make his name glorious in our actions, which is, 1. when our actions are such,
that Mat. 5. 16.
2 Timothy 2. 19.
men seeing our good works, may glorify our father which is in heaven.
Therefore the Apostles precept is, Let every one that calls upon the name of
the Lord, depart from iniquity. Gods name is polluted and profaned by the
wickedness of them that profess it. The wickedness of the child pollutes
the father. The Law says, If the daughter of a Priest commit fornication, she
polluteth her father. Now God is our Father when we take his name upon us; and
if we do not glorify him in our actions, nor depart from iniquity, we do what
we can to make him polluted. Therefore God threatens those that take his law
into their mouths, and yet hate to be reformed, Levi. 21. 9.
psalm. 50.
that he will set their sins in order before them, such do wound the name of
Romans 2. 24.
God by their evil coversation, and cause others to sin.

2. We make his name glorious by free and voluntary vows, made and performed;
so the Psalmist, Accept I beseech thee, the free-offerings of my mouth, and
psalm. 119. 108.
teach me thy judgments: and what he practiced himself, he exhorts others to
perform, psalm. 76. 11.
Vow and pay unto the Lord. Seeing God does freely bestow so many things psalm
78. 34.
upon us, we should glorify him not only in the duties commanded, but in
vowing, and making frec-will offerings of something in our power. The contrary
to this, when men will give nothing to God, but what necessity of law, or
eminent danger sorces from them. Like those in the psalm, that when God slew
them they sought Jon. 1. 5.
him: and like the mariners in Jonas, they prayed and made vows, but it was
not till they were in a storm.

The third thing in the prohibition is what it is to take Gods name in vain.

In every action three things are considerable. The end. The Agent. The work.

These three duly weighed, we shall soon see, what it is to take Gods name in
vain.

1. That which has no end proposed, or is done to no end, may truly be said to
be done in vain As the sowing of seed without reaping the fruit, the planting a
vineyard without a vintage, or feeding a flock without eating the milk of it,

These are labors in vain. So he that takes the name of God to no end.
neither to Gods glory, nor the private or public good, takes it in vain. Cui
bono? is a good question in all undertakings. If to no good, as good and better
not undertaken at all, it is to no end, it is in vain. If a man have well
fashioned legs, and they be lame, frustra pulchras (...) tibias claudus, the
lame man has them in vain. The chief end therefore of taking this name must be
1. the glory of God, otherwise we open our mouths in vain, as it is in Job.

God is willing to impart all his blessings to us and requires nothing of us
again, but Glory; which if we return not, he may say, as David did of Nabal.
for whom he had done many good turns, in securing his shepherds and slocks etc.
And when he desired nothing but a (...) meat for the young men, he denied it,
All that I have done for this fellow is in vain, in vain have I kept all he
has. So God having done so much for us, and expecting nothing but the glory of
his name, if we be defective herein, he may well say, all that he has done for
us is in vain.

2. Next to Gods glory, is the good of our selves and others, and so to take
God name without reference to this end, if we neither promote our own good, nor
the good of others it is in vain, ex privatione finis, because it wants a right
end; therefore Saint Paul rejoiced, having by his preaching labored the saving
of souls, I rejoice says he, that I have not run in vain, nor labored in
vain.
2. In the Agent, the heart and soul is to be considered, which in the person
acting is the chief mover. If the soul be (...) Rachah, vain and light, as when
we take Eccle. 5. 1.
psalm. 75. 7.
Gods name without due advise and reverence, though we propound a right end,
yet we take his name in vain: therefore the Wise man advises, not to be rash
with our mouth; and the Psalmist professes, that his heart was fixed when he
praised God: the heart ought to be fixed and stablisht, by a due consideration
of Gods greatness, when we speak of him. This is opposed to rashness,
inconstancy, and lightness, such as are in chasse and smoke, which are apt to
be carried away with every blast, and such as are so qualified, do take Gods
name in vain.

3. In the work it self may be a two fold vanity, which must be avoided.

1. Falsehood. 2. Injustice.

1. If it be false, then is it also vain, as theirs in Esaias, We have made
falsehood our refuge, Esaias 28 15.
and under vanity are we hid. And this is that actio erroris, work of error, of
which Jeremy speaks. Vanitas opponitur veritati, vanity is opposed to verity
and truth; therefore a thing is said to be vain, when it is false or erroneous.
They are vanity, the Jer. 10. 15.
work of errors, says the Prophet: and as there is truth in natural things,
so is there a truth in moral things, which if it be wanting, our speech is
vain. 2. If unjust, it is vain too. If I be wicked, why then labor I in vain,
says holy Job: and, the very hope of unjust men perish, says the Wise man:
and, they walk (...) vain shadow, and disquiet themselves in vain. If justice
be (...) in our actions, (...) truth in our assertions and promises, they are
vain; and to use Gods name in either, is to take his name in vain.
So that if either we take the name of God to no end, but make it common and
take it up as a (...) till it come to a habit, not for any good end; or if our
hearts be not stable and fixed, but light and inconstant, when we take it; or
if we take (...) color, or bolster out any fashood, or any unjust act we take
it in vain, and break this Commandment.

CHAP. III.
Of taking Gods name by an oath. The causes and grounds of an oath. The parts
of it, Contention, Execration. How God is glorified by an oath. What is here
commanded. 1. To swear. In what cases. For Gods glory. Man's necessity. For the
public good. The oath ex officio whether lawful or no. Of private and
voluntary oaths. 2. To swear by God, not by Idols or creatures,. 3. Not to take
his name in vain, but to swear in 1. Truth, in oaths assertory, promissory. 2.
Judgment. 3. Justice. Against voluntary oaths, whether lawful. Of swearing
from the heart. The means to be used against vain swearing. The signs of
keeping this Commandment. Of drawing others to keep it.

Of the taking Gods name by an Oath.
WE said before, that the word which we translate, taking the name of God,
signified in the original, to take up, and that in a double use. 1. In
gloriosis, as a banner, with which we have now done. The other use is, in
necessariis, as a burden: of which now.

If there be any thing which we stand in need of for the use, though it be
heavy, Jacob the great stone before the well, when upon the coming together of
the flock, necessity urged him to it. Now as the first use in gloriosis, was
solely to the glory and praise of God, by taking up his name, as a standard or
banner by praise; so this in necessariis, the taking his name up, as onus a
burden, by lawful swearing or taking an oath, looks also at man's benefit to end
controversies; for an oath for confirmation to men is an end of all strife.
Heb. 6. 16.
And although God be not so much glorified in this, as in the other, yet in
regard of our necessary use of an oath, this has in a manner taken up the
whole Commandment, there being little mention of the other.

Concerning which we must show, first the nature of the duty, and then proceed
according to the former rules given, for expounding the several commandments.

Concerning the nature of an oath, this will appear, if we consider,

1. The necessity, or the causes and grounds of an oath. 2. The parts of it. 3.
How it tends to Gods glory.
1. For the first. It is expedient and necessary, that all strises and
controversies The necessity of an oath.
should have an end, and not be continued; which cannot be, unless the one
part of Heb. 6. 16.
the matter in controversy be confirmed above the other. And therefore we
find, that before God would proceed to judgment against Sodom, he would go
down Genesis 18. 21.
first, ut certo cognoscat, that he may know the certainty, and proceed upon a
(...) ground. Now the best way of proceeding to find out the truth, is by
arguments and reasons, where they may be had; which course Joseph took to know
42. 20.
the truth, whether his brethren were spies or no, by bringing with them their
brother Benjamin, when they returned, for thereby it would certainly appear,
that they were no spies. But when Arguments or reasons are wanting, then are we
to come to the second cause, which is by witnesses: a way approved by God
himself, who appointed, that in the mouths of two or three witnesses every
truth should be established. Deuteronomy. 19. 15.
And because that many times not only proof by arguments, but by witnesses
also is wanting: there is a necessity of calling God to witness, which is by
an oath. So God appointed that in case of jealousy or suspicion of a woman's
honesty by her husband, though she were not taken in the deed, nor the act
could be proved, Number. 5. 13. 19
yet she should clear her self by oath, and swear she had not defiled her self.

Now this necessity of appealing to God by an oath, as it is sometimes in
regard of the action which is hid from others, so likewise it is needful in two
other cases; as when assurance or certainty is to be had, De occultis cordium,
of the secret thoughts and purposes of the heart, which cannot be known by
external proof; for who knows the heart, says the Prophet, save God alone, who
is (...) the searcher (...). 17. 9.
of the heart: and secondly, when it is to be concerning things to come; for,
as the Wise man says, who knows what shall be? No man is omniscient, he
cannot know the heart, nor foresee future contingents. In these cases
therefore, when the fact is hidden, or not evident, or when the intention of
the heart must be made appear, or a thing future must be ascertained, there can
be no (...), no confirmation but by oath, other proofs do here fail and come
short.

And here, if the matter of the oath be de fact, or relate to what is past, it
is called Juramentum assertorium, an oath of Assertion: if it be de futuro, of
something to come, it is called Juramentum promissorium, an oath promissory or
of promise. And in both these, when other arguments or testimonies fail, there
is no other way but to fly to God, to make him a witness, and not only a
witness, but a judge and an avenger also, if we call him to witness an untruth;
for an oath is nothing else, but a calling of God to witness the truth of what
we say, and to be avenged on us, if we speak an untruth, or perform not what we
say.

And here in the next place comes to be considered the two parts of an oath,
according The parts of an Oath.
and 2. he is called forth as an avenger, if the thing be false.

1. The first is sub Deo test, a contestation or taking God to witness, used by
Number. 14. 21.
God himself, As I live, says the Lord, and by the fathers and holy men in the
Judge. 8. 10.
old testament, who used to say, vivit Dominus, As the Lord lives, I will do
this or that etc.

2. The second is, sub Deo vindice, which is called execration, that is, the
calling of a curse upon themselves, if it be not true which they speak. And
what these curses are we may read in Levit 26. and Deuteronomy. 28. Where there are
whole catalogues of threatenings of revenge. The (...) therefore was in the old
testament, Sic faciat mihi dominus et addat, God do so to me and more also, if
this be not truth etc. Let God add to the first plague the second also. This
form was used by Eli to Samuel, God do so to thee and more, if thou hide any
thing from me. 1 Samuel 3. 17.


Now when one is brought to this, that he has called God to witness the truth
of what he speaks, and to be an avenger, if he have called him to witness an
untruth then according to to the Greek word (...) an oath, which properly
signifies a hedge or enclosure, he has hedged in and enclosed himself with
Gods truth and justice to perform it, and so he that swears is holden and
bound persistere in dicto, and (...) pollicito, to persist in his saying, and
to perform his promise.

And as an cath is an hedge to him that swears, so to him to whom the oath is
made or given, it is a satisfying or satisfaction: according to the Hebrew word
(...) Shebugnah, juramentum, or (...) Shibegnah, saturitas, which comes of
(...) Shabagn, saturari, to be filled or satisfied, because the party to whom
one swears, ought to be satisfied herewith; to which agrees the Latin
translation of Saint Hierome, pro jure habere, that is, now that I have put him
to an oath, I have bound my self, as it were by a law to rest therein. And thus
an oath coms to be (...) an end of controversy.

And thus we see the causes which make an oath necessary in respect of men: but
How an oath brings glory to God.
have glory by it; therefore we must know in the next place, that an oath duly
made, brings much glory to God.

1. For first, it is a rule in reason, that nihil confirmatur nisi per certius
a thing cannot be confirmed. but by what is more certain: this then brings
great honor to God, that when all other purposes and demonstrations fail, his
name is acknowledged to be Turris Fortissima a most strong tower, that his
testimony is more certain then all reasons, and testimonies of men. When we
hereby account of it, prove. 18. 10.
as the wiseman saying, The name of the Lord is a strong tower of defense, the
righteous run to it, and are exalted. The very Heathen could say, (...) of all
things men set most by their faith: much more then is Gods faith and fidelity
to be (...) wherein we take sanctuary, when all other people fail.

2. An oath proceeds from faith, it argues a great faith in God, which is the
ground of all honor given to any, for in the former part of an oath, which is
contestation, a calling God to witness, we profess with our tongues, that God
is every where present, that we believe he is omniscient, that he sees even
the secrets of the heart, and will lighten all things that are done in secret;
and in regard of the second part, calling God to avenge, we profess, that we
believe that he is a just avenger, that he will not suffer sin to go
unpunished, that he may say. mihi vindicta and ego retribuam, vengeance is
mine, and I will repay. Thus we believe that he has power to punish, and to
execute vengeance, which is a part of his glory: and thus we see that an oath
brings glory to God, in which regard God is content to lend us his name to
swear by, thereby to make an end of all our controversies.

Thus we see the nature of an oath, with the meaning, the parts and end
thereof. Now according to former method, we are to see what is commanded, and
what is forbidden, which is the first rule of of extention formerly mentioned
and withal the Homogenea of the same, according to the second rule.

The Affirmative part is, that we take up his name to end our quarrels and
controversies, his name must be a sanctuary to fly to, by which we must be
acquitted, The Affirmative part.
or condemned, that whereby we do enclose and hedge in our selves, and satisfy
the adverse party.

1. Herein the first thing commanded is, (...), to swear, this is flatly
commanded. It is set close to that, which was the affirmative part of the
second Commandment, Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and searve him, and swear
Deuteronomy. 6. 13.
by his name. But more effectully and vehemently it is required in Esaias, I live
and Esa. 45. 23.
have sworn by my self, that every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue
shall swear by me. therefore God has not only taken order, that an oath
should pass between parties at variance, and that upon the oath of the party
accused, he shall be acquit, as Exodus 22 11. which some call (...) a voluntary
oath; but also if the party be not willing there shall be (...) an oath of
imposition, an (...) shall be laid upon him, he shall be made (...), to swear
punctually and precisely to what is required of him 2 Chronicles. 6. 22. And if a
man hear an oath between parties whereby truth might appear to Gods glory, and
do not utter it, but conceal it, Lev. 5. 1.
it shall be accounted to him for a sin: so that we see here Gods will, and
what he commands, that in respect of these great ends of his own glory and man's
necessity, an oath is a thing subprecepto, expressly Commanded in these cases.

For example, the Psalmist says, (...) omnes et laetabuntur, every one that
psalm. 63. 12.
swears by him, shall be praised, and shall rejoice, And therefore all the
Saints of God have part of this commendation in using it. Besides men we have
the example of God, and his holy Angels. God himself swears, I have sworn by my
self, Genesis 22. 16.
that because thou have done this, I will surely bless thee. And after God the
heavenly spirits: for the Angel lifted up his hand, and swore by him that
lives for Rev. 10. 6.
evermore.

In these two cases already mentioned, of Gods glory, and man's necessity, we
have diverse examples.

1. First for Gods glory. There was a famous oath taken by K. Asa and the
people, 2 Chro. 15. 14
they swear with a loud voice, and with shouting, and with trumpets, and with
cornets, to seek the God of their fathers. The like we read of Nehemiah and the
Nehe. 10. 29.
people, to keep the Law of God. Si quis ea (says Origin) quae vidit in
proximi sui In what cases we may swear. In Levit.
delicto, vel non jndicat, vel in testimonium vocatus, non quae vera sunt
dixerit, peccaium quod commisit ille qui celat ipse suscipiet, and poena
remissi revertitur ad conscium; if any man does not either reveal of himself,
or being called as a witness, shall not speak the truth of that he knows
concerning his neighbors offense; he which concealeth it takes it upon
himself, and the punishment for the offense committed turns upon him that knows
it.

As for Gods glory, so for man's benefit and necessity; as

1. For the public good. As first in the case of a league and confederacies,
as that The use of an oath in respect of men.
between Abraham and Abimelech. 2. In a public conspiracy. The men of Israel
swear saying, None of us shall give his daughter to the Benjamites to wife. 3.
For Genesis 21. 24.
receiving or (...) nation to nation, as in that of (...), the Princes, and
people of Josh. 9. 29.
Israel with the Gibeonites: the breach of which (though it were surreptiously
gotten, 2 Samuel 21. 2.
yet) was severely punished, because it was confirmed by an oath.

2. Or for reciprocal duties between Prince and people.

Of the Prince to the people, that of (...) in the behalf of the young King 2
King. 11. 17 4.
(...) to the people.

And in the same Chapter, of the people for their obedience to (...).

Of the Subject to the King; that of David to King Saul. And of the people for
1 King. 4. 22.
preservation of King David's life. And of the people in confirmation of
Solomon's 2 Samuel 21. 17.
succession to the Crown. 1 King. 1. 39.


3. Or lastly, for the safety and benefit of our neighbor, as in case of
preservation of life and goods, as was that of the Spies with Rahab the Harlot.
And for just and Josh. 2. 12.
Genesis 24. 3.
true dealing in matter of trust, as was that of Abraham's servant to his Master.
And in deciding controversies between man and man; for Meum and Tuum, The very
word (...) for an oath, being derived from Law or right; for indeed in case of
Exo. 22. 8. 11.
controversy, where each party for his own advantage to maintain that he has
gotten, will conceal the truth from the Judge: then by the mouths of two or
three Deuteronomy. 19. 15.
witnesses shall the matter be established, and confirmed more sure; it cannot
be then by the oaths of such witnesses. But though in these cases an oath be
allowed by most, yet diverse make doubt, whether a man may be lawfully enforced
to answer upon oath, in matters that concern himself, which we commonly call
the oath ex officio, which we called before, (...), an (...) of imposition,
such as that

2. Chronicles 6. 22.

The lawfulness and necessity of it we shall see the better, if we consider
the Sea a learned determination of this question by the Author in the public
Schools at Cambridge anno 1591. inter (...). The oath ex (...).
reason whereupon it is grounded, namely, the removing of evil, which ought to
be the scope and end of all Courts of justice. Interest Rei-publicae (says the
Heathen man) ut (...) tollantur, the Commonwealth should take care to cut off
Malefactors. It being as most necessary to purge the Civil Body from evil
persons, as the Natural from evil and peccant humors. God himself held this
course in his Commonwealth. It is often repeated by him in the Old Law, Sic
tolletis malum de medio Israelis, so shall ye take away evil in Israel. And S.
Paul's rule also to the Corinthians in the case of Incest was, Vos autem
auferetis malume Deuteronomy. 17. 12. 22. 21. 24.
vobis, therefore put away that evil person from among you.

If the evil must be removed, it must be known. Physicians cure not the disease
1 Cor. 5. 13.
they know not. And if it must be known before it be cured, surely the guilty
will not by their good wills be the parties that shall discover it; hide it as
much as they can they will. We see it plainly in the first offenders. They were
more careful by far how to conceal, then how to avoid committing their
fault. And the like course take all Offenders ever since. Besides we know that
some transgressions especially are opera tenebrarum, works of darkness: few or
none come to the knowledge of them.

If then sin be to be removed, and that cannot be done if not known, and not to
be discovered, but from the Delinquents, in respect of the secrecy, and they
not willing to discover them: and that, though some may take notice of them,
yet they will be loath to accuse, because it is accounted to be an odious
office, to be accusator Deuteronomy. 13. and 17 and 19.
fratrum, an accuser of the brethren; what course then remains to find out
evil, that it may be removed, but the Magistrates power, who are Gods Delegates
to enquire.

Now God himself has set them a pattern how this enquiry should be made; who
Jer. 23. 24.
though nothing be hid from his all-seeing eyes, and that he knows all things
without any set form of Inquisition, yet to prescribe us a form, has taken
this course.

In the case of Adam, upon suspicion, because of his fleeing into a Thicket.
And Genesis 3. 8. 12.
of Eve, who upon Adams examination was found to be particeps criminis,
accessory by way of detection, without accusation, God thought fit to enquire
of both. In the case of Abels murder, which was evident, enquiry was made by
God upon 4. 6.
presumption, because Cain had borne malice to Abel, and being examined, his 10.
countenance bewrayed him.

In that of the Sodomites upon a fame. Clamor est multus, the cry is great,
God 18. 20, 21
will go down and enquire.

And this is warranted by God, not only by his own example and practice, but
by his command too: in two places of the Law. If thou shall hear, and, If Deuteronomy.
13. 13,
it shall be told thee of such and such a fault, then thou shall enquire, and
make 14.
17. 4.
search, and ask diligently, etc. the proceedings must be perscrutando and
interrogando, by interrogatories ministered to the party upon whom the fame went.

Under the Gospel also in the case of incest. The Apostle lays for his
ground, It is reported commonly among you. So that if there be no accuser, yet
the Judge by Gods 1 Cor. 5. 1.
example and commandment, and the practice of the Church, is ex officio of
duty, to search out offenses, upon some or any of these grounds mentioned.

The next question is, how shall the Judge interrogate, whether upon the bare
word of the party, or whether may he lawfully minister an oath, to find out
evil, that it may be taken away.

In a sin against the seventh Commandment, in the case of a woman suspected to
Number. 5. 14. 19
deal falsely with her husband, and that upon no other ground but her husbands
jealousy, the Judge was authorized to examine her upon oath, and to make her
abjure it by execration.

In a case against the eighth commandment, between man and man. If the one were
Exodus 22. 11
persuaded that the other had falsified his trust, he might convent him before
the Judge, who (at the Plantiffs instance) was to put the Defendant to his
oath. And Lev. 6. 3.
so it seems to hold in the case of things found belonging to another man. And
1 Reg. 8. 31.
Ezra 10. 5.
in an action of trespass the like. As also in a case of Matrimony and usury
upon promise Nehem. 5. 12.
of restoring part to the brethren who were in need and want.

Before the Law, the first oath we find given, was that of Abraham to his
Servant; Genesis 24. 3. 47. 29. 25. 33.
for his true dealing in a marriage for his son. I will make thee swear, says
the text. The same form in administering an oath did (...) use to (...)
concerning his burial. Another oath we see given by (...) to Esau concerning
his birthright.

If then this course of proceeding between man and man be allowed, then much
more a fortiori from a stronger ground, in cases tending to the public good.

Before the Law of Moses, in the Patriarchs time. In a matter of state, (...)
Genesis 42. and 43
charged his ten brethren as spies, and, without an accuser, put them to their
trial. So after it, In the case of Elias, who was suspected to be the cause of
the long and great drought. The King caused a search to be made for him all the
land over, so apprehend him, and no man's denial of him would serve, but he put
them to 1 Reg. 18. 10.
their oaths.

But in cases that concern the life of the party suspected, the tendering an
oath would Josh. 7. 19.
seem hard. For we see in the case of Achan, where the thing concerned his
life, (...) said not to him, Swear to me, but tell me what thou have done. And
in that of (...), 1 Samuel 14. 43
unwittingly transgressing his fathers rash adjuration, Saul said, tell me what
thou have done, not swear to me. And so K. Zedekiah to (...), I will ask of
thee a Jer. 38. 14.
thing hide nothing from me. All these by interrogatories only without the tie
of Job. 2. 4.
an oath. For as the Devil in Jobs case answered God. Skin for skin yea all
that a man has will he give for his life. And therefore to avoid perjury, an
oath in these cases would be spared.

Besides public oaths judicially taken, there are oaths private and
voluntary which may lawfully be used. And this is warranted by the example and
practice of private and voluntary oaths.
the Saints of God as Saint Paul. God is my witness, whom I serve in truth etc.
and lines, by whom this kind and manner of invocation or calling God to witness
has ever bin accounted to have been equivalent to an oath. Philo says it
among oothers Romans 1. 9.
Jusjurandum est tectificatio dei de re controversa, it is no other but an
attestation of God to what we aver. And of this sort of oaths you have many in
scripture. As in the Covenant between Laban and Jacob, and of that between the
Elders of Gillead Genesis 32. 48.
and Jopthah. The Lord be witness between us. An d of Saint Paul I say the truth
Jud. 11. 10.
in or by Christ. And I call God to witness, or for a record upon my soul, that
to spare Romans 9. 1.
you etc. And God is my record how greatly I long after you all. So also, the
Angels 2 Cor. 1. 23.
and God himself, as was touched before. And the Angel, (says Saint John)
phil. 1. 8.
swear by him that lives for ever and ever. And God himself in his promise of
Apoc. 10. 6.
blessing to Abraham, by my self I have sworn says the Lord. And in Esaias, I
have sworn by my self. And in his denuntiation of vengeance upon Eli and his
house. Genesis 26. 12.
I have sworn unto the house of Eli etc. And in his promise to David, I have
sworn Esa. 45. 23.
to David my servant. And I have sworn once by my holiness, that I will not fail
1 Samuel 3. 14.
David, with diverse other. psalm. 89. 3 34.


And all these make against the vain conceit of the Anabaptists and if there be
any other of that fond opinion that hold it unlawful to swear at all, upon
that speech of our Savior swear not at all. When as his meaning in that place
was not to abrogate the Law (for he testified that he came not to take it a
way, but to fulfill Mat. 5. 34. 17.
it) but to give them the true interpretation and meaning of it, and to reduce
them to the true and sound sense of it. If his meaning had been, to forbid
swearing upon any occasion, he would have said, Non assumes nomen ei (...),
Thou shall not take the Sea August. Hom. 27. et ser 30. de verb. Apost. Hieron
in Math. 5. and in Galat. 6.
name of the Lord at al: but as he forbids all rash, vain, and unnecessary and
voluntary oaths, so he confutes the doctrine of the Scribes and Pharifees, who
thought that if one swear by any thing but the name of God, as by heaven and
earth etc. That such oaths did not bind, nor were to be regarded, when our
Savior teaches, that to swear by any of the creatures of God, is to swear by
God himself.

The first thing then commanded is to swear, and the contrary practice of
Anabaptists is here forbidden.

2. The second thing commanded, in the affirmative part. may be gathered from
the next word. ( nomen (...) Dei tui) the name of the Lord thy God, which
implies Of swearing by God only.
that we ought to swear by the name of God, and by no other name, I have sworn
(says God) that every tongue shall swear by me. It is his prerogative royal,
one of his privileges, and it is therefore often called Jusjurandum Jehovae.
An oath of (...). 45. 23.
Exo. 22. 11.
the Lord shall be between them. And the oath of the Lord thy God, and the
Deuteronomy. 26. 12.
preacher, I advise the to keep the kings commandment, and that in regard of
the Eccl. 8. 2.
oath of God. Therefore (...) vouchsafe this honor to others, or to transfer
this prerogative to others, is prohibited, and this is done two ways

1. When men leave out the name of God in their oaths, and swear by other
things for a woeful vengeance is threatened to such by the Prophet. They that
swear Amos 8. 14.
by the sin of (...) and forget God, etc. even they shall fall and never rise
up again.

2. When we join any other thing or name with it. For God threatens to Zeph.
1. 5.
cut off them, that shall swear by the Lord and by Malcham. And Joseph is
discommended Genesis 45.
by many for swearing by the life of Pharaoh, this joining others with God,
whether it be a false god, or any creature, both are forbidden.

1. We must not swear by them that are no gods. Idols. it was Josuahs charge
Jos. 23. 7.
to the people upon his deathbed, that when they should come among other
nations, they should not so much as mention the names of their gods, nor cause
any to swear by them, king David observed this rule. He would not mention their
names psalm. 16. 5.
Exodus 23. 13.
within his lips. It was Gods express command, ye shall make no mention of
their gods, neither shall it be heard out of thy mouth. And for the breach of
this, God thought himself so disparaged by Judah, that he knew not how to let
them go unpunished. How says he, should I spare thee for this? Thy children
have forsaken me, and sworn by them that are no Gods. The Psalmist says, that
they which run after other gods shall have great trouble, and that he would not
offer their drink offerings (...). 5. 7.
psalm 10. 4.
and sacrifices, nor make mention of their names within his lips: and God
(...). 2. 17.
threatens, that he would take the name of Baalim out of their mouth, that they
Zach 13. 2.
should forget him.

2. And for the second, to swear by any creature (though such oaths being made
do bind, because of the relation to God) yet they ought not to be; for if any
swear by that which is not God, it is an abomination.

The reason why we should not join any other thing in an oath with Gods name,
is in respect of a threefold injury that will arise by it.

1. To God himself, who requires this honor to be exhibited to him alone, and
psalm 138. 2.
being his prerogative, is not to be communicated to others. He has magnified
his name above all things.

2. To our selves; for he that swears, swears by him that is greater then
Heb. 6. 16.
himself. Now he that swears by the Creature, prefers it before himself.

3. To the Creature that is content with that place, that honor which God has
Hab. 2. 11, 12.
placed it in, and if it could would be avenged of us, for giving to it the
honor due to its Creator.

3. The third thing commanded, may be gathered from the next words, (In vain) Of
swearing in a right manner.
viz. that we ought to swear in a right manner; otherwise we take Gods name in
vain, though we swear only by the name of God. And this duty of swearing
aright, with due qualifications in an oath, is gathered by S. Jerome out of
Jeremy 4. 2. and after him by other expositors, where the Prophet says, of a
people that should swear aright, They should swear, in veritate, judicio, and
justitia, in truth in judgment, In Jerem. c. 4. (...)
and in righteousness. Animadvertendum (says he) quod jusjurandum hos habet
comites, veritatem, judicium, atque justitiam: si ista defuerint, nequaquam
erit juramentum, sed perjurium; we are to observe that an oath has these
Concomitants, Truth, Judgment, and Righteousness: if these be wanting, we
cannot any way call it an oath, but perjury.

1. Against transgressing the first, you may see Gods absolute Prohibition. Ye
In Truth, Lev. 19. 12.
shall not swear by my name falsely: and S. Augustine says, that he that
swears falsely, seems to be a man, but indeed is no better then a beast;
yea, detestanda (...), a beast to be detested. Diodor. Siculus, (the Heathen
Historian) says Perjuri poena capitis plectuntur? does he swear falsely? let
him loose his head. And the Ecclus. 23. 11
Wise man says, If a man swear in vain [falsly] he shall not be innocent, but
his house shall be full of plagues. And God himself commanding, that he that
swears, Esaias 65. 16.
should swear by the God of truth, seems to intimate, that we are not to
swear, but in truth.

1. A man may swear falsely, either in juramento assertorio, or promissorio. 1.
In assertion, when either in re cognita, upon our certain knowledge we testify
a falsehood; or in re dubia, when we doubt the matter will fall out otherwise
then we swear, yet De verbis Jac. Apost. Nolite (...) sermon. 24
we will affirm it upon oath, for we may think that to be true which is false,
and then we swear rashly and in vain. Or we may know or think that to be false,
which is so, and swear it for true, and swear wickedly in vain. And these two
perjuries (...). For in the first case, though it be perjury, yet it is not
wiful. As if I sell a horse, and swear (as I think) he is sound, yet proves
lame. In the other, it is flat perjury. As if I sell a jewel for true and
right, and swear it to be so, though I know it to be a counterfeit stone. Such
was juramentum Petri, S. Peter's oath, swearing that he knew not Christ; a
fearful thing, it cost many tears, before he recovered himself. And there is a
third perjury, when we swear that to be true, which we think false, yet proves
true. As, I ask a man, whether a third person were at such a place, at such a
time: he (though he thinks he were not, yet for some end) swears he was, and
that proves true which he swears; yet is he perjured. For in the like case, S.
Augustine gives the reason, Interest quemadmodum verbum procedat ex animo: ream
(...) non facit, nisi men's rea; regard must be had to the heart, whence words
proceed: the tongue sins not but where the mind sins with it.

Nor is it safe to swear with a mental reservation. That has not sworn
deceitfully, says the Psalmist. It is not he that shall dwell in Gods
Tabernacle, but he that (...) (...). (...). (...). 2, 3.
the truth from his heart, and that has used no deceit in his tongue. The
Poets juravi lingua, mentem injuratam gero, will not serve the turn. But the
oath of the mouth (...). 6. 7.
must agree with the meaning of the heart. God will not be mocked. Deus sic
accipit ut ille qui dat. He will make a litteral interpretation of it. For as
Isidore says, Quacunque de (...) bonc. l. 1.
art verborum quis juret, Deus tamen, qui (...) test is est, it a hoc accipit,
sicut ille cui juratur, intelligit; with what cunning soever of words one
swears, God, who knows man's heart, takes the oath, as he to whom the oath is
made does understand it.

2. And as in the oath of assertion, so in that of promise a man may swear
falsely too. Either when we promise and bind that by oath, which we mean not to
perform. As, I borrow money, and bind my self by oath to repay such a day, and
fail, because I never meant or intended it. Or when we do the like by oath, and
fail simply. As, I borrow money, and see as well a possibility how I may repay
it, as a purpose in my self to perform: and thereupon swear to repay at a set
time: in the interim, before the day comes, such losses befall me, that I
cannot do that I promised and intended. The first of these is, perjurium
simplex and absolutum. The other per accidens, and not so bad as the former.
But if one have power to perform his oaths, and for self respects, upon the
change of times, and circumstances refuse to perform it, as Saul did to the
Gibeonites, violating the oath which Joshua and the people of Israel had made
to them; this is wicked and odious to God, as we see in the punishment of Saul's
posterity, though the text says, he did it out of zeal for the house of
Israel. Nay to swear absolutely to do that which is not in our power, is
unlawful; it is a sin to take such an oath, it is a rash oath and if it be
taken, it binds to no more then is in James. 4. 13. 14. 15.
our power, all such o aths ought to be with an express or tacit condition,
si Deus voluerit, if God will, and if we live and be able, we will do this or
that, as S. James speaks of bare purposes, which ought much more to be in oaths.

Therefore our care must be to swear truly. Ne eloquaris mihi nisi veritatem in
nomine Domini, says king Abab to Michaiah. Tell me nothing but that which is
true in the name of the Lord. And we must imitate Saint Paul in the place
before 1 Kin. 22. 16.
quoted, I speak the truth in Christ, my conscience bearing me witness in the
holy Ghost, we must swear sine dolo malo, and not seek to delude an oath by any
sinister Romans 9. 1.
practice. And this for the truth.

In judgment, in discretion says S. (...); that is, deliberatly (as
interpreters distinguish) In judgment
not rashly: take time, advise before thou swearest. Not lightly but upon great
necessity. Be not rash with thy mouth, says the preacher consider that it is a
holy thing thou go about, and that an oath is not bonum per se but Eccles.
5. 1.
bonum, quia (...), and (...) necessarium extra terminos necessitatis, is
neither necessary nor good; as a physical potion, which is to be taken only
when a man needs it, and not otherwise. We cannot say of swearing, the oftener a
man performs it, the better it is, as we may say of a good act, but (...)
defectum, when credit fails on the one part, and the knowledge of a man's heart
on the other 1 Samuel 21. 6 25. 22.
part, we must not come to swear, but as David did to eat the shewbread, in
case of necessity. Therefore neither David's oath to kill Nabal, nor Herod's to
take John Mar. 6. 23.
Baptists head, were good, because there was no necessity in either; they were
both rash, besides the unlawfulnes in the matter. This swearing only in case
of necessity, is to (...) in judgment, and is opposite to swearing in vain;
for it excludes (...) finis, when no end, viz. Gods glory, nor man's benefit do
require it, as also vanitatem cordis, when the heart is light and unconstant,
not fixed and settled.

2. Not rashly but reverently. Holy and reverend is his name. It was Gods
charge psalm. 119. 9.
not to pollute his name, to wit, by rash or common use thereof without fear:
for holy Jer. 22. 32.
is opposed to common or profane; and therefore when men swear out of anger
Act. 10. 15.
or grief, or other heady affection, Gods name is polluted and profaned. And
in case of necessity a truth is not to be sworn rashly, but in fear and
reverence. (...). 5. 1.
The reason the preacher gives in the verse before named, for God is in heaven,
and thou art on earth, therefore be not rash with thy mouth. And therefore good
order is taken in the public taking of an oath before a magistrate, that
neither the rules of judgment nor discretion be transgressed, in not admitting
any under age, or any perjured person to swear; and that men swear not but
uncovered, and the book of God, the holy Bible to be touched or laid before
them, with an admonition included in the form, because of Gods more solemn
presence at an oath taking, and to stir up an awful deliberation and judgment
in what men are to swear.

In righteousness or Justice. And this consists for the most part in the
promissory In righteousness.


1. First, it must be in (...): for if it be impossible, we are not to swear to
it at all. And therefore Abraham's servant put a good caution into his oath;
what if the woman will not come with me? And the tenor of the Heathens Genesis 24.
5.
oath was thus, de quibus sciam poteroque, what I shall know, and be able to do.

2. It must be in honestis and elicitis too. For that which is unhonest is
unjust, and therefore not to be sworn to. And in this case the Jews in Ezra put
in a caution in Era. 10. 3.
their covenant, let it be done according to law. When Saul sought to the witch
at Endor, he swore by the Lord that she should not be punished, which was
dishonest, 1 Samuel 28. 10.
and therefore unlawful. And therefore the Jews took an unjust oath against
Saint Paul, that they would neither eat nor drink, till they had killed him. If
a thing be possible, but not honest, to swear to do it, is not jus, if it be
not possible it is not jurandum,, and so jusjurandum an oath cannot be taken in
these cases. But here we must know, that a thing may be unlawful or impossible,
either 1. a principio, at the first taking an oath; or 2. There may be emergens
illicitum, or imposibile, the unlawfulnes or impossibility may arise after it
is taken, in the first ease, it is unlawful to take an oath, in the second it
is unlawful to perform or keep it though there were no sin at the first
taking of it. Saint Augustine (upon Herod's Mar. 6. 23.
oath) says, that of it self it was lawful and not simply evil to promise half
of his kingdom, but upon Herodias asking S. John Baptists head there was
emergens illicitum; for there is no (...), but it does (...), draw out, or
suppose these two, conditions, possibile and licitum. How can I do this? says
Joseph to his Mistress; Genesis 39. 9.
that is, do it honestly or lawfully. Therefore in malis promissis. we must
(...) fidem; unlawful oaths are better broken then kept; they bind to nothing
but (...). The reason is, because otherwise there is not exitus sine (...), no
winding our selves out, but a falling into a third sin, for when an oath is
past, beside the sin past, which cannot be recalled, though it may be
repented of, one falls into two other sins, as in the case already mentioned;
1. Murder. 2. Superstition Into superstition, when he thinks it is not to be
broken, and into murder, if he keep it. And according to these three
limitations must every oath be regulated, else it is not a lawful oath, but a
taking of Gods name in vain.

Now concerning voluntary oaths (not judicially taken) there is no order taken
by Of voluntary Oaths.
men, but rashly, upon every vain perturbation, an oath flies out, wherein men
are so 1 Samuel 23. 33.
rash and frequent, that Gods name is made a Parenthesis in their speech. David
being moved with anger and grief for Nabals unkindnesse, makes a rash oath
against Nabal; but when he considered better of it, he blessed God for sending
Abigail to keep him from executing what he had rashly sworn, on the other side,
Saul, touched with a greater desire of victory, then with reverence to the name
of God swears, that if any did eat or drink before the Sun went down, he should
die, and we (...) what the success was, how the life of his son (...) was
endangred thereby. Thus Gods name is commonly used in every foolish speech, and
we may speak it with grief, men herein do that to God, which they would be loath
to do to any ordinary person. In every half hour or oftener, they call him from
heaven to confirm their quarrels, and so by the common usage of Gods name, as
one says, his name which should be asylum, a sanctuary, is turned into a
brothel house. This made Saint (...) touched with a holy grief, to break out
into these words, (...) lib. l. confess. cap. 16.
flumen moris humani, cursed be the streams of the customs of men, quis
resistet tibi quando non siccavaris? quovsque evolves (...) filios in mare
magnum and formidolosum, quod vix transcendunt etc. When will this dry up? it
carries men even as a strong stream into that fearful lake, that they which
are in the ship can hardly escape it. Per te aguntur flagitia, and non (...),
by this customary swearing (...) sins are committed which are not thought to be
sins. And in another place he says, it is because of the slipperinesse of the
member, because in udo posita est lingua, it is in a most slippery place; and
therefore S. James gives a more special Vide August.
charge of it, then either of the hand or foot. James 3. Wherefore his counsel
is, Tom. 10. ser. 10 de verbo Apost. paulo post medium.
Quanto citius illa movetur, and facilius, tanto tu adversus illam fixius ito;
domabis, si vigilabis, vigilabis autem, si timebis; timebis, si te Christianum
esse recorderis, and nomen Chrsti esse: si cras factum non fuerit, non fiat
juramentum hodie, pignus fiet cras, cras non omnino: and triduo moritur pestis
illa a die qua laboramus, sicut vigilabis, sic vinces: by how much the tongue
is quickly and easily moved, by so much the more be thou fixed, etc. thou shall
tame it by watching it, and thou shall be watchful, if thou fear; and thou
shall fear, if thou remember thy self to be a Christian, etc. And concerning
himself, he says, Juravimus and nos passim, cadimus in istam deterrimam
consuetudinem; sed ex quo Deo servire incepimus, timuimus vehementer, and
veternosam consuetudinem timore excussimus. I have been a swearer my self, etc.
but after I began to serve God, etc. to see the greatness of the sin, I feared
greatly, and so shook off that evil custom, etc.

Then for these last voluntary oaths privately taken up, and not imposed upon
us, it may be questioned, whether they be lawful in some cases; which doubt the
same Father resolves thus. Quantum ad me attinet, non juro, sed quantum mihi
videtur magna necessitate compulsus, cum videam nisi sic faciam, mihi non
credi, and ei qui crederet magnum, and ei qui non crederet incommodum, etc. and
then he adds, hac perpensa ratione, etconsideratione librata, cum magno timore
and reverentia coram Deo dico, and novit Christus quod hoc est in animo meo;
for my own part I swear not, except compelled by necessity, as when I see, that
I shall not otherwise be believed, and that it will be profitable to him that
believes me, and prejudicial if I be not believed, upon this reason and
consideration duly weighed, with great fear and reverence, I use this form, I
speak before God, or Christ knows that I speak from my heart. And after he
says, quod meum est, est, est, quod amplius est, praeter est, non est
jurantis, sed non credentis, for my own part I would never say, but yea, yea;
nay nay; whatever is more, is not from me, but from the incredulity of him to
whom I swear.

The third rule for exposition of the Law. viz. that it is spiritual, takes
place in an non juratus est dolose proximo suo, (...) has psalm 24. 4.
not sworn deceitfully to his neighbor. We must not say with him, Juravi
lingua, mentem injuratam gero, I swear with my tongue, but my heart never meant
it; Gods name must not be used in guile, but we must speak the truth from the
heart: psalm 15. 2.
the Heathen saw that this law was spiritual, and that the heart must go along
with the tongue: for as Isidore says truly, God will take and understand the
oath, not according to the deceitful intentions of him that swears, but
according to his mind to whom he swears; non ut ille qui juraverit, sed ut is
cui juratus est; this will be Gods rule in expounding our oaths, whatsoever
other rules we follow.

The fourth rule, is concerning the means to keep us from unlawful swearing.

1. We must obstare principiis, beware of the first degrees of this sin; for ex
facilitate The means against vain swearing.
nascitur consuetudo, and ex consuetudine perjurium, ex perjurio blasphemia;
out of this facility and easiness to swear, a custom is bred, out of custom
perjury, out of perjury blasphemy: when men make no scruple of lying, or
speaking untruths, Lib. contr. mendacium.
they come by degrees to perjury by swearing untruths, and after that to
blasphemy, a sin so horrible that in heaven it wants a name, and therefore the
Scripture expresses it (...) Berech, blessing, as in Job 2. where Jobs wife
says, Bless God and die, that is, blaspheme; or as we render it, Curse God
and die. And if any can go higher, they come to that fearful sin, the sin
against the Holy Ghost, therefore we must take heed to the first beginnings of
this sin. These are the chains and links of an oath, In Matthew.
and S. Chrysostom says, non est qui frequenter jurat, quin aliquando non
perjurat, there is none that swears often, but is perjured sometimes: and with
him agrees Philo, ex frequenti jurejurando perjurium nascitur.

2. Again, as he there says, we must beware of such asseverations, which,
though they be not perfect oaths, yet are the way to oaths, as to say, per
fidem meam, per salutem meam, by my faith, or by my salvation, or the like: for
he that swears by either of these, binds either to that he swears to; and this
amounts to an execration, which is a part of an oath, as was showed before; for
as S. Augustine says, when a De verb. Apost.
man says, per fidem meam, by my faith, obligat se per fidem suam Deo, and cum
dicit quisque per meam salutem, salutem suam Deo obligat; he that says, by my
faith, or salvation binds or pawns his faith or salvation unto God. If that be
not true he swears to, he desires to be deprived of his faith or salvation, and
God if he please (in the very article of time he makes this execration) may
confirm it. Our Savior taught us, that in our ordinary converse, we should use
yea and nay: and therefore we are to go no further.

3. In the next place, we must dispossess our souls of impatience and anger,
as also of vain glory. Anger is a principal passion which makes men subject and
prone to swearing. The same Father says, the first sin is anger, and the
second swearing, if a man be of an angry spirit, he is seldom free from vain
swearing, for in an angry man's mouth nothing is so ready as an oath. Nay, it is
(as one says) incentivum ad blasphemandum: when a man is in fury (as anger is
a short madness) he spares Hieron ad Demetriad.
none, not so much as God himself; dum irascitur insanire creditur, says S.
Jerome. Therefore fo low the Apostles counsel, Be angry but sin not; that is,
watch over Ephesians. 4. 26.
(...) passion, that it break not out into swearing. And S. James, Be (...) to
wrath, James 1. 19.
for it will cause thee to offend this precept.

4. Vain glory is another disordered passion of the mind, as S. Jerome calls
it. By it a man is violently carried away with a vain desire, to have every
word he speaks believed as the word of God, received as an Oracle, to be as
true as the Gospel; and therefore to establish their credit, they confirm their
words by oaths: for, as one says, There is nothing that men desire so much, as
that they make so light of, to wit, their faith and credit; for they make
shipwreck of it at every blow, by frequent oaths. They swear that their credit
may not be lightly accounted of, when as by this means it comes to be lightly
accounted of; Ideo leviter aestimant, ne leviter aestimentur, and leviter
aestimando, leviter aestimantur.

5. And because an ill habit in any thing is hard to be left, and Custom being
a second nature, and that as S. Augustine says, Peccata quamvis magna and
horrenda, cum in consuetudinem venerint, aut parva esse, aut nulla creduntur;
sins though great and fearful (as this sin of swearing is) when they grow into
custom, are reputed little or none at all. We must strive to nip them in the
bud, not only in our selves, but in our children: for it is with them as with
a vessel, Quo semel est imbuta recens (...) odorem -- testa diu, as the Poet
says; and as Cassidore, Indigne transacta In Ep.
adolescentia (...) efficit senectutem.

6. We should have ever in our remembrance, and set before our eyes the great
punishments and judgments (which are so many visible sermons from God himself,
none so many and remarkable for the breach of any other precept) which have
been 1 Samuel 19. 6.
inflicted in all ages, for the breach of this one Commandment: as Saul for
attempting to kill David contrary to his oath, was slain himself. Zedekiah for
breaking his 2 Chro. 36. 15.
oath of fealty to the King of Babel, had his eyes pulled out, lost his kingdom,
and Zach. 5. 4.
was made a captive. The Prophet tells us, that the flying roll twenty cubits
long, and ten cubits broad, written full of curses, shall enter into the house
of the swearer, etc. and shall consume it, etc.

The fifth rule is concerning the signs of keeping this Commandment. And these
may be taken from the consideration of the Hebrew word (...) massah, here used
to take up as a burden or heavy thing. If the name of God be to us as a burden
or a heavy thing, and so taken up, it is a sign we are careful to keep this
Commander. As,

1. Every man will add no more to a burden then he can bear, he will make it
no Acts 15. 28.
heavier then needs must, nor take more burden upon him then necessity
requires; so if we take up the name of God as a burden, we will use it no
oftener then we must of necessity, we will come unwillingly to it as to a burden.

2. When one takes up a burden, he goes to it with all his strength, ut been
feratur 2 Chro. 15. 15
(...), that he may the better bear it, so in an oath they swear with all their
heart, and all their soul, etc. all the parts and faculties of the soul are
occupied and taken up; the understanding with a due estimation of the greatness
of him by whom we swear; the heart and affections with a due fear and reverence
of his Majesty, etc. thus the whole man is employed and taken up.

3. Those that are laden with a burden, desire to be eased and to be unladen,
to be rid of the burden as soon as they can; Christ calls all that are heavy
laden to come Matthew. 11. 28.
to him, and he will ease them: so if we desire to be eased of this burden, as
soon as may be, that is, when we have taken an oath, if we be careful to
perform it, it is a sign we make conscience of an oath. David says, I have
sworn, and will psalm. 119. 106 15. 5.
perform it, and the good man changes not, though he have sworn to his own
hinderance.

6. The sixth rule is, concerning the drawing of others to keep this
Commandment. Of drawing others to keep this law.
As we must not take the name of God in vain ourselves, so we must not draw
others to it. As 1. Irritando, by provoking others to swear. The Psalmist
speaks of some that do irritare nomen Dei, as the vulgar Latin reads it,
provoke the name of God, that is provoke others to blaspheme it. When we know
persons vain glorious, or heady and impatient, and apt to swear, if we provoke
and stir them up, we do irritare nomen Dei, we seem to consent to their sin. 2.
By persuading others not to keep their oaths when they are taken, by giving
false and fraudulent interpretations, as they did, who after an oath and
covenant with Nebuchadnezzar, would have rebelled against him, and sent for
help from Egypt; who are threatened for violating their oath, though it were
unjustly imposed and extorted Ezekiel. 17. 12. 17.
by an usurper: shall he escape? says the Prophet, etc. Thus much for an Oath.

CHAP. IIII.
What a vow is. Whether a bare purpose without a promise. Whether a thing
commanded may be the matter of a vow. The necessity and use of vows, in respect
of God, of our selves. What things a man may vow; se, suos, sua. Vows in the
times of the Gospel. Of performing vows. Qualifications in a vow, for the
person, the matter. The time of vowing. Of paying our vows.

Of Vows.
NExt to an oath, comes to be considered a vow, which in regard of the affinity
with an oath, aptly follows after it: for a vow is somewhat like to juramentum
promissorium, a promissory oath: for the same conditions are annexed to the
one, as to the other; the differences being, that an oath is necessarium, not
to be used but in case of necessity, as you have seen; and a vow is spontaneum,
voluntarily made of our own accord. And an oath is between man and man, and a
vow between God and man. An oath is chiefly for the benefit of man, and a vow
looks chiefly at Gods honor, being a deliberate and voluntary promise made to
God of something acceptable to him. And that when upon good ground and
particular consideration of our gifts and abilities from God, we do not only
purpose, but also by promise, either inwardly conceived in the heart, or
outwardly expressed, bind our selves to some particular act pleasing or
acceptable to God.

A vow is nothing else but a deliberate promise made to God, of something
acceptable to him. So Cajetan in Thom. agreeable to what the other Schoolmen
Annot. 20.
and Casuists teach, in Thom. secunda secundae, q. 88. and in Sent. Col. 3.
Did. 38. Concerning the nature of a vow.
and the Summists. verb. votum, and the Casuists in praecept. 2. Among others
this argument is learnedly handled by Navar. Enchir. cap. 12. Soto in toto lib.
7. de just. and jure. Moral. lib. 11. cap. 12. etc. but most fully by Suarez.
de Relig. tract. 6. lib. 6.

A bare purpose without a promise is not enough to make a vow, though some of
the ancient Canonists have so affirmed, the contrary is the general tenet both
of Modern Divines and Canonists, as apears in Azor. Institut. Mor. part. 1.
lib. 11. cap. 12. quaest. 5. Suarez, etc. As also in Covarr. ad cap. quamvis
pactum. 1. Part. Sect. 3. Number. 12. Panormit. ad cap. literaturam, de voto and
voti redemptione; the reason is, because a bare purpose cannot induce an
obligation without a promise either mental, or verbal, as may be gathered
from Deuteronomie 23 21, 22.

Though the principal matter of a vow be, something not expressly commanded,
but left to our liberty, yet even things commanded may be the matter of a vow,
a man may vow to avoid such and such a sin; or to perform some duty, wherein he
finds himself remiss, thereby to quicken his own diligence by a double
obligation. So Suarez proves at large. Tract. de voto. lib. 2. cap. 6. (...).
2. 2. q. 88. art. 2. cum Cajet. ibid. for as a man may bind himself by an
oath, to what he was formerly tied ratione justitiae, so he may bind himself
by a vow to God, to what he was already tied, ratione mandati, so that here is
a new obligation superadded, whereby he that breaks his vow or oath becomes
guilty of a double sin.

This binding our selves by a vow may be performed many ways, they may be
reduced to these two.

1. By limitation of some general Commandment to some particulars: as, To give
The use of vows
alms being a general precept, to restrain it to this or that person, or to
give this or that quantity of my goods to good uses yearly, or weekly. This we
know falls not under any Commandment specially, and therefore these
particular restraints fall under a vow.

2. By restraining our selves in the use of some lawful or indiffent thing,
which Christian liberty allows to all, (...) we fall into something unlawful:
this we formerly mentioned, and called it sepes mandati, the enclosure or fence
of the Precept. Or by forbearing or abstaining from some lawful and indifferent
thing, by the use whereof we find our selves less able, and fit for Gods
service, and the sanctification of his name, and therefore in this regard we
enter into a vow to abstain from such Jer. 35. 6.
and such things. And such seemed to be the vow of the Rechabites, and of the
Numb. 6.
Nazarites.

1. The necessity and use of vows is. 1. In respect of God: thereby we honor
The necessity of vows.
him, and testify our thankfulness to him for benefits received; for though
it be true, that King David says to God, when the people had paid their vows
in their offerings 1 Chro. 29. 14
to the temple, What we have received of thine own hand, that have we given
thee. It was a true confession and acknowledgement, that they had given nothing
to him, but that which they had received from him before. Upon which a Father
says, Dedit sua Dominus, ut reciperet sua, and recipiendo sua daret se, the
Lord gave his own, that he might receive his own again, and by receiving his
own, might give himself, and with himself all that he has; a greater gift then
we can possess in this life, yet God accounts it an honor, when we freely vow
and give unto him what he has first given us. Therefore he requires as a part
of our thankfulness to God, vovete and redd ite, vow and pay, or perform your
vows to the Lord. It is some sign psalm. 76. 11.
of thankfulness, to vow to God, though the bare promise be but a blastof wind
out of a golden pair of bellows: but the great thankfulness is by performance:
therefore both these must be joined, vovete and reddite, vow and pay; promise
and perform: for as we by our vows bind our selves to God, so God by our
performance is bound to us.

2. In respect of our selves, vows are necessary: because man's heart, as it is
(...) Dei, so it is cera Diaboli, the Daevils wax, fit for any impression of
the Devil, and apter to receive any stamp of evil from him, then of good from
God: and as our will is apt to turn from good to evil, so in perseverance in
evil, mala voluntas is plus quam voluntas, more then a will: and in doing good,
bona voluntas is minus quam voluntas, less then a will, it deserves not to be
called a will; it is a volo, nolo, I will, and I will not, therefore it is
expedient, yea necessary to make vows thereby to settle and stablish our wills
from starting back, to strengthen our hearts in good, and to confirm them
against evil. Saint Augustine confutes those that think a man ought to do any
thing upon a vow, because a thing vowed becomes necessary, whereby the person
vowing is bound to perform, and so the thing deserves less thanks; but he
answers it well. It is true indeed, if it were an outward necessity imposed by
others, and not assumed by our selves, it were something they said, but
concerning such a necessity as this, he says, foelix necessitas, quae
compellit Ep. ad (...).
ad meliora, it is a happy necessity which compells a man to the best things:
and this necessity we impose upon our selves, either voto simplici, by a bare
and solemn vow, between God and our selves, or voto solenni, by a solemn vow
before others, as the resolution and stiffenesse of the sinner in evil, makes
his sin greater; so our resolution in good, binding our selves by vows not to
go back, makes our good deeds the better.

3. As vows do strengthen and establish us in good, so they make our deeds the
more acceptable to God; for what we do by a vow is become a sacrifice, in
pledging it to God; and not only so, but besides the vow it self, which is
acceptable to God, and the act or thing we vow, which though it be of common or
of civil use in it self, yet by vowing it becomes sacred to God: besides this,
there is a sacrifice made to God of our freedom and liberty too; yea, of our
very power, which rests not any more in a man's self, so as to do those acts
which he pleases; for he has made over his liberty and power to God, binding
himself by his vow. It is certain, that before a man vows, he has freedom and
liberty, as appears in Deuteronomy 23. 22. so that if he do not vow he sins
not, but after he has vowed, he has bound himself, so that he sins, if he
perform it not. And this is the property of good natures, to limit themselves,
for pauciora licent illis, quam ullis, quibus licent omnia; their liberty is
less then any other men's, that have liberty to do as they list: therefore the
servants of God, where they are let loose or at liberty, therein they restrain
themselves; and this, being in Gods service, and for their own good, is judged
perfect liberty. And this is done in vows which are not to be imposed on us by
others, for that were contrary to the nature of a vow, but to be freely assumed
by our selves. And therefore, if any think, that because it is a matter of
liberty to be free from vows, that therefore Christians are now exempted from
them, he is clearly confuted by these placcs, in Esaias 19. 21. and Nahum 1. 15.
where it is foretold, that the people Esaias 19. 21.
of God shall perform their vows unto the Lord; which places are applied by the
Nahum 1. 15.
Apostle to the times of the Gospel. Romans 10. 15. We find likewise that in
the Romans 10. 15.
Apostles times, the consecrating of their possessions to common uses, and
laying the money in common at the Apostles feet, which was nothing but the
performing of a common vow. Thus far for the necessity of vows.

Having seen the use of a vow, let us likewise see what things God best accepts
in a vow. And here we find by the examples of Gods servants recorded in
Scripture, that a man may vow, 1. se, himself, 2. suos, his children, 3. sua,
his substance, or things in his power. And first the servants of God did vow
themselves to God in two cases.

1. For humiliation after sin committed, we make a vow and a binding oath to
Numb. 30 13.
afflict the soul. It is called humbling of the soul, by vowing some temporal
affliction or penance for sin committed. I humbled my soul with fasting, and I
chastened Psalm 35. 13. 69. 10. 6. 6. 102. 9.
my soul with fasting, says David, and so for weeping. Every night (says he)
wash I my bed, and water my couch with tears, and I mingled my drink with
weeping.

2. For preparation, and fitting the soul for Gods service; or to enter upon a
special calling or business, as the Nazarites did keep themselves to a more
strict rule Numb. 6.
of life, before they devoted themselves to Gods service, whence diverse
fathers conclude, that it grew to be afterward a holy and a solemn thing for
any one, before he gave himself to study, and to enter into the Schools of the
Prophets to separate himself by the vow of a Nazarite.

2. We find a man may vow, not only se, but suos, not himselself only, as in
the former instances, but his children to God also, as Hannah vowed Samuel to 1 Samuel 1. 28.
God; of such special vows for persons to the Lord, we read what Laws were made
Levit. 27. 2.
Levit. 27. 2. These are personal vows.

3. There is votum reale, when a man vows sua, his goods or estate, or what is
his; so we may vow things real, which are either 1. Fractus labiorum the fruit
of the lips, as David did, when he sung praises to the name of God, that he
might daily perform his vows. He says the vows of God were upon him, that is,
he had enjoined psalm 61. 8.
himself a task concerning prayer and thanksgiving, which he was daily to
perform by virtue of his vow. Or 2. Substantialia, things out of our substance:
as King David psalm 132. 2.
made a vow to build a Temple to God out of his means. Jacob (that made the
first Genesis 28. 22.
vow we read of) vowed tithes to God of his goods. We may vow houses, lands,
Levit. 27. 14. 16.
and offerings, either for the erecting or maintenance of Colleges, or
Hospitals; Exodus 36. 3.
for Seminaries of religion. So we read of offerings, and free-gifts, Exodus 36.
3. And as we may vow our substance, so a part of our time, so many hours or
days to Gods service: so the Jews, besides their sabbaths commanded, they had
also diesvotivos, days consecrated to the service of God. These are the chief
heads, unto Levit. 3. 38.
some of which all or most vows may be referred.

Thus we see what it is to vow; but now as we vow, so we must reddere, perform
our vows. Nothing is more easy then to vow, but its not so easy to perform;
Of performing our vows.
if a man be not master of his tongue. yet he will be of his purse, as the
proverb is; and therefore though men vow readily, yet they perform at leisure.
Saint Augustine tells his hearers quia audivisti, reddite, non vis vovere, modo
voluisti vovere, all the while we talked of promising, you would vow, but now
we speak of performing, you will not vow. But as it is no sin not to vow, but
only diminutio perfectionis, alesse degree of perfection; so on the other
side, if one vow and performs it not, he sins grievously: and therefore the
wiseman says, it were better never to vow, then to vow and not to perform. It
is a gross deluding and scoffing at the divine Majesty, not to keep promise
with him. Therefore he tells Eccles. 5. 4.
us, that to devour holy things, is destruction, and after vows to make
inquiry. Solomon speaks of those courtiers about him, who would have had him
to convert to other uses those great treasurs which David had vowed and laid up
for the building of the Temple. Therefore for a man to vow any thing to God,
and not to perform his promise, but to convert to other uses what was vo wed to
God will prove a snare to him, to choke and strangle his soul.

To our vows then must be added performances, and because the purpose of
performance The conditions required in a vow.
is but one of the conditions required in a vow, therefore we will add the
rest, which are these.

1. For the person that vows, he must be sui juris, a person free in that he
vows from the authority of another, one that has power in himself to make and
perform a vow. A child under the power of a father, a servant under the power
of a master, Gal. 4. 2.
1 Timothy 6. 1.
the woman under the power of the husband, are not capable of making a vow 1
Cor. 7. 4.
without the consent of them under whom they are: and therefore under the Law,
the father might make void the vow of his daughter, and the husband of the
wife, Numb. 30. 5. 8
made without their consent, either express or implicit. Nor have the man or
woman in some cases power to make a vow without mutual consent. Continen (...)
et alia (says Saint Augustine) vovenda non sunt a conjugatis nisi ex consensu
and voluntate communi. Et si praepropere factum fuerit, magis est corrigenda
temeritas, quam (...) promissio. And Periculose promittitur (says Saint Jerome)
quod adhuc in alterius potestate est. Continency and such like things are not
to be vowed by married persons but by common consent of both; and if any thing
be over hastily done in this kind, Ad Arment. Ep. 45.
the rashness must be corrected, rather then the promise fulfilled. It is
dangerous to promise that which is in another man's power.

2. The vow it self must be possibile, possible to be performed. As was said
before of a promissory oath, so in regard of the affinity we may say of a vow,
for the matter of it, it must be possibilie and licitum, 1. possible for us,
and within our power. Now what is possibile, and what impossible, may make a
hard matter to define. And hence some disallow the vows made in former ages, as
not possible to be kept, as to vow single life, of which we may say, that to
say all may do it, is dangerous; so to say that none may do it, is no less
dangerous. We must therefore take heed, that the Heathen man rise not up in
judgment against us, who said, that Nolle in causa est, cum non posse
pretenditur, the true cause is, we will not, when we pretend we cannot; we say,
we have not the gift, when as indeed we want another gift, the gift of
abstinence in meats and drinks, which they had in former ages, and thence came
a general possibility for them to vow. But now in our days Tertullians saying
may be verified, that multivorantia and multinubentia must go together: because
there are many feastings and drinkings there must be many marriages. The
Heathen man said, that libido est spuma ingluviei, lust is the froth of
gluttony. Therefore men must learn to abstain, and then they cannot say they
are unable to make this vow.

3. Again, the thing we vow must be licitum, an unlawful thing is not to be
Judges 17. 3.
vowed. such as was the vow of Michas mother, of 1100. pieces of silver, for a
1 Sami. 5. 7.
graven and molten image. And Absoloms vow at Hebron, to color his treason
against his father. And that of the Jews, not to eat or drink, till they had
killed Saint Act. 23. 12.
Paul: for voverinon debet quod Deo (...), we must not vow that which is
displeasing to God; for if God will not have it paid, he would not have it
vowed. Therefore Saint Isidore says to such votaries, In malis promissis
rescinde fidem, in turpi voto muta (...); and Saint Jerome, in vovendo suit
stultus; qui discretionem non 2 (...). in hist. Iepht.
adhibuit, and in reddendo impius. And Quod incaute vovisti, ne facias; that
is, if the thing be sinful; if it be only against thy profit, thou have tied
thy self to perform it. And Saint Augustine Injusta vincula rumpit justitia,
for it is impia promissio quae scelere impletur, its a wicked vow, that ends
and is performed in wickedness.

4. It must also be Deo dignum, a thing worthy of Gods acceptance. It must be
no frivolous thing that we vow, but such as may tend to his honor, and our own
good. We must promise rem gratam, a thing acceptable to God, else he will not
vouchsafe to look upon it, no such frivolous thing, as he that vowed the Amos
5. 22.
shaving of his head, or he that eat the kernels and vowed to offer the shells
to Jupiter.

5. For the time of vowing, it may be either in trouble or affliction, or in
tranquillo, before deliverance, or after; before deliverance, thereby the
better to obtain it, after, to show our thankfulness for what we have received;
examples we have of both, approved by God; of the first in David, I will pay my
vows, which I psalm. 66. 12.
spoke when I was in trouble. And of the Israelites in their distress. And
this kind Numb. 21. 2.
of vow we see is allowable: for God delivered David out of all his trouble;
and it is said in the text concerning the Israelites, that the Lord heard the
voice of Israel, allowed of their vow. Of the other, a vow of thankfullnes, we
have in the Mariners, who after the storm was over, offered sacrifices, and
vowed vows: so that in a storm, and in a calm both in prosperity and adversity,
vows may be made the one is a kind of prayer, obtaining help, the other a part
of thankfullnes for help obtained.

6. As before we showed, the vow must be performed, so it must be performed
presently without delay. The vouendum must be with a reddendum and solvendum:
for as we vow, so we must be careful to perform with God what we vow. Saint
Bernard says Just exigitur ad solvendum, qui non cogitur ad vovendum. Vovete,
In Ep.
says the Prophet David; but what then, is that all? to vow with hope to be
relieved only? no, (...) too, be as willing to perform what thou have vowed.
Pay psalm. 76. 11. 50. 14.
thy vows (says he in another place) it is a due debt, and by as strong a tie
and bond as thou can enter into. Hoc exigitur hoc (...), says Saint
Augustine. It is De vera Innoc. c. 15.
and will be exacted, for it is due debt. And pay it at the day. When thou have
vowed Levit. 7. 16.
a vow unto the Lord, defer not to pay it, says the Preacher. The flesh of the
Eccles. 5. 3.
peace offering must be eaten the same day that it is offered, nothing must be
left till the morrow: and in the Nazarites vow, if any were defiled during the
time of his separation, the priest must offer a sin offering and a peace
offering, and he must hallow his head the same day. It is better thou should
not vow, then that thou should vow and not pay it. The reason he gives is,
for God delights not in the sacrifice of fools, pay therefore that thou have
vowed. You see still, it is a payment, not a gift; and it is such a folly not
to pay, as a mounts to a gross abuse of Gods name, and a scoffing at his most
blessed and sacred majesty. Saint Augustine shall end this point. Sunt quaedam,
quae etiam non voventes debemus: qnaedam etiam, quae nisi voverimus non debemus
de bono conjugali.
sed postquam ea Domino promisimus, (...) reddere constringimur.

I will only add one thing; we must not come short in our payment. God Levit.
27. 10.
will take no composition in this kind: we must not so much as vary in our
payment, not alter nor change a good for a bad: we must rather add then
detract, if we mean to have our bond, our vow cancelled. So much for vows.

CHAP. V.
Of glorifying Gods name from the heart. The means of glorifying it. The
signs. Of causing others to glorify it. The second part of this precept, the
Commination. Reasons why such a threatening is here denounced. Gods punishing
the breach of this Commandment by visible judgments. God is jealous of his
name.

WE come now from the things commanded and forbidden in this precept, and the
Homogeneall duties, which are included in the first and second rule of
expounding the Law, (...) the other rules, which here also take place.

For the third rule, that the Law is spiritually to be understood, so this Law
of hallowing Gods name must be expounded, we must do all from the heart. Though
the name be the object of speech, yet all our using of Gods name, by swearing,
vowing, praising, or speaking of it, must come from the heart; otherwise we are
all in the number of those that draw near to God with their lips, but their
hearts are far off; by this means perverting the order in Gods worship. where
the heart must come first, and the lips attend it. Saint Augustine in his
confessions says Flete mecum fratres, and flete pro me, weep with me,
brethren, and weep for me. Now what was it for which he desires them to weep?
in the same place he declares, that in singing Psalms in the Church, Animus
magis erat ad cantum, quam adid quod (...), his mind was more upon the tune,
then upon the matter; which he confesleth to be a great sin. For holy
exercises performed to God with the mouth, and without the heart, when there is
nothing but a noise, are but as the crackling of thorns under a pot, which make
a noise; but heat little: nevertheless he approved not this infirmity in
himself; for as he says further, it a saepe facio non sentiens, sed postquam
feci sentio, I do so often, and perceive it not, but after I have done it, I
perceive and feel it. And it were to be wished, that we could have the like
feeling and sense of our failings in this kind; this would be a good step to
amendment,

According to the fourth rule, the means are to be considered of glorifying The
means of glorifying Gods name.
the name of God, whether by praying God, swearing by him, or vowing to him.
The means or motives to make us glorify his name, are 1. To consider how God
has magnified our names, by registring them in the book of life; and not only
this to make our names glorious in the life to come, but even in this world, we
are called by his name, and he by ours, we are his, and he is ours. He is not a
shamed to be called Deus noster, our God, to take our name upon him, that we
should not be ashamed of his name: thus he exalts and honors our name,
therefore we should exalt and honor his.

2. A second means is to keep a catalogue of the famous acts of God, both of
judgments and mercies whereby we may be stirred up to glorify his name. Those
that were done before our times, we either doubt of them, or think they belong
not to us, or that God had glory and praise enough in those days, and that
they are of little use to us. Therefore the counsel of devout men has been,
that is, the men of God of old, Nathan, Gad, and other children of the
Prophets, every one had their (...) verba dierum, their Chronicles or Annals,
or Diaries from the beginning of their times, wherein for their own
remembrance, they kept catalogues of the visible judgments of God upon his
enemies, and of his mercies toward his children; that so they might the
morereverence him: so should we keep memorials of the remarkable passages of
his providence to our selves and others, of his judgments and mercies, thereby
to stir us up to glorify his name the better; and that by comparing one with
another, one shall not be an impediment to another, neither those that were
before us shall seem incredible, when we see the like done in our days; nor
those in our days seem strange, because the like was done before.

3. A third is, to use thatart and dexterity which was in Christ and his
servants, whereby they invred themselves to take occasion from every action or
creature they saw, to raise matter of glory to God; that nothing could be done,
or spoken; or heard of but they would make use of it, thereby to return glory
to God: a Christ, upon occasion of the brightness of the Sun, when he was early
in the Temple, took occasion to fall into a discourse of the spiritual light of
the world, viz. himself, and the natural darkness of man; and upon inquiry of
his followers, how John 8. 12.
he came to the other side of the sea and upon his answer, that they sought him
rather for his loaves, for another dinner, then for the miracle they saw; and
upon John 6. 26.
mentioning of Manna, he takes occasion to enter into that large and excellent
sermon of the Eucharist, and the bread of life. But most notably in the
fourteenth of S. Luke, where at one dinner, he takes occasion, 1. from the
striving of the guests for the upper places. 2. From their inviting rich men
rather then the poor. 3. From one at the table that said, blessed is he that
eats bread in the kingdom of God; he takes occasion, I say, to enter into
three very (...) exhortations and admonitions tending much to the glory of God.
So the Prophet Esaias going down to the vineyards, Jeremie going into the potters
shop, Saint Paul from the altar at Athens set up to the unknown God; they take
occasion, the Prophets to convince the Jews, and Saint Paul to convert the
Gentiles. Thus when we shall study to atain to this art, by daily practice we
may come to that aptnes, that nothing can be offered, but some wholesome
meditation may be drawn from it, whereby God may be daily glorified.

4. A fourth means to glorify his name, is a reverend usage not only of his
name, but of his word, which he has given us as a means to glorify his name,
for therefore is his word called his name, as when Saint Paul is said to carry
the name of Christ before the Gentiles, that is, in the judgment of the best
expositors, Act. 9. 15.
his word, and the Prophet says, They shall walk up and down in the name Zach.
10. 12.
of the Lord, that is, in his word. His word is the special means to magnify
his name his name is in a special manner printed upon it. Therefore that
abominable and cursed practice of sundry ungracious persons, of applying sundry
sentences of his holy word to profane libells and jests, is condemned and
anathematized by all the sacred counsels in former times, yea, even by the
council of Trent it self. What shall we say says Saint Augustine, but that
these men put themselves in a way, by disesteeming Gods word, to have a slight
esteem of his name, and by abasing and profaning his word, to come to abuse
and blaspheme his name.

According to the fifth rule, the signs of glorifying Gods name, come in the
next The fifth rule.
place; which may be taken from the consideration of what it is compared to.
The signs.
We showed before, that to take his name was used in a double sense, either as
a burden, or as a standard or a glorious thing: to take it as a burden in
necessariis; in case of necessity, by an oath, but when our necessity is not
urged but Gods glory, then we take it up as a Banner or standard; and so by the
behavior of men toward that, we may know, whether we stand rightly affected
toward Gods name.

1. In the Host, they followed the standard, they stood still when it stood,
and moved when it moved: so here, if we make Gods name and glory our standard,
we stand affected, in our actions, meditations, and enterprises, to go so far
as Gods glory calls, and no further; to be lead by it, to go when it goes, and
to stand when it stands; and this when flesh and blood, and worldly powers and
reasons would allure us to the contrary. If his glory commands all our actions,
its a good sign we aim at the glory of his name, whereas many, when Gods
glory bids stand, they go and when that calls back, go further; and when it
calls on them to go, they sit still.

2. It was a part of the Roman and Grecian discipline among the soldiers,
when they entered into the camp, they swear, Pugnabo and solus, et cum aliis,
they would fight for their banner alone, and with company: now this applied
shows, that the greatest part of the world does not seek his glory, for it is
cum aliis, that gets God the glory, a solis he shall have little. If the rest
shrink away, there are few that will keep that part of the oath to stand soil
by the standard, when the Realm shall run to Apostacy.

3. Thirdly whosoever belonged to our standard, and had once professed himself
of that band, it was present death, if he had either in his mouth hostile
symbolum, or about him hostilem (...), if he had either the enemies watchword
or the enemies badg, it was death. Now if we apply this, we may see there are
many among us, that in their outwad carriage profess to fight under Christ's
banner, yet their actions, their apparel etc. are T(...), badges of the enemy,
and their speeches are the right watchword of the Devil, worldly speeches, and
worldly signs, which we daily wear, do prove, that we do carni et sanguini
militari, fight for flesh and blood, and not for Gods glory.

4. The fourth sign is the perishing of a righteous man in his righteousness to
die for the name of God. It was the manner of the Lacedaemonians at the delivery
of the standard to say, (...) either bring this home, or be brought home upon
it. So when Gods gives us his name, we must fight for it, and either bring it
home, or be brought home upon it; we must confess the name of Christ, and
either bring this shield of faith sound to God, or die for it, rather then lose
it, as Saint Paul was resolved, who said, he was ready not only to be bound at
Jerusalem, but to die for the name of Jesus.

The sixth rule requires, that not only we gloryfie his name our selves, but
that we procure others to do it, our speech must be such, as may minister grace
to the hearers, such for which they may glorify God, and not our speech only,
but our works too as our Savior exhorts, that when men see our good works,
they may glorify our father which is in heaven, otherwise if our lives be
unreformed, we cause the name of God to be evil spoken of and blasphemed, we
open the mouths of wicked men, and make them say, the words we profess has
no power, our religion is a doctrine of licentiousnes, in which the power of
Godliness does not appear. And thus much for the first part of this commandment,
The Prohibition.

The second part of this precept is the Commination, or penalty threatened, God
will not hold him guiltless etc.

And here in the last place comes the penalty, or commination, for breach of
this For the Lord will not hold (...) etc.
Comma ndment. In the first place it is worth the observing, that God uses the
Idiome or style of a court of Assise in this commination, and well may he do
it, for he ever keeps an assise, and delinquents of all sorts are arraigned
continually, and amongst them, those that take his name in vain: and that
before him (the judge) their consciences, and the devil accusing them at the
bar of his justice; where the evidence will be so clear against them, as he
cannot but pronounce them guilty.

As in the second commandment God adds a threatening to the children as well
as to the parents, to the third and fourth generation, to meet with that
argument which some men might have for falling down before an Idol, when it is
commanded by authority, they will rather change their religion, then run a
hazard of undoing themselves and their children, and bringing them to beggary,
God meets with them, and tells them, neither they nor their children shall save
any thing that way, but fare the worse, for I will visit says he, this sin
upon the third and fourth generation: so here inthis commandment he annexes a
penalty to meet with the sin, because some men may think they may get some
great gain, or profit sometimes by swearing falsely, therefore God sets a great
penalty upon this sin, to let them know, they shall gain nothing by the
bargain. Here is a Frustra quod non erit frustra, a taking of Gods name in
vain, which will not prove in vain, for he will come in judgment against them,
when men think to save themselves from some danger by taking Gods name in vain,
they shall find, that that shall be their destruction, which they thought
would preserve them.

2. Again vbi lapsus est in proclivi, where one is apt to fall, as here because
the tongue, as Saint Augustine says, (...) est in vdo, is placed in a glib or
slippery place, therefore God sets a lock upon our lips, to keep the door of
our mouth, psalm 141. 3.
which lock is this threatening, Thou shall not be held guiltless, If we take
his name in vain, that is, If we take upon us the name of Christians, and have
only a bare profession, we frustrate Gods name, for every one that calls upon
the name of Christ, must depart from iniquity; otherwise it may be said to us,
as the Psalmist speaks I said unto the fools deal not so madly, and to the
ungodly set not up your horns on high.

If you take upon you any other name; if you defend not his word, or defend any
thing opposite to it; if in disputations you maintain false doctrine; if in
your speech you bury the name of God, not making mention of it; or if you talk
of it foolishly and vainly without fear and reverence; if in your talk you
forget God, or speak evil of his name, by murmuring at his judgments on your
selves, or envying his mercies upon others; if when you should bless his name,
you take it and apply it to witchcraft and sorceries, or to profane jesting
and scoffing; if when you should bless others, you make use of it to curse
them by it; if in swearing you take it in vain; if you vow to him and perform
not; if by any of these ways you pollute his name; Consider what follows, God
will not hold you guiltless.

3. And it is he or none that must punish this sin, God will not hold you
guiltless, for the world will hold you guiltless, little or no punishment is
inflicted by men for taking Gods name. If any impair another man's name, he may
have better remedy for it, then if the name of God be blasphemed; therefore
because Gods name is not so much regarded by man's Law, God himself providing
for it, you shall not go scot-free, if you abuse my name. The Lord will take
the matter into his own hands, because men regard it so little.

Not to be held guiltless is the threatening. But who is he there that shall
not fall into intolerable and endless trouble, if God hold him not
guiltless, for every man is guilty before God: but whereas for sins of
infirmity and ignorance, though a man be guilty, and contract a guilt upon him,
yet God holds him not guilty, but pardons it upon a general repentance; for
this sin of taking Gods name in vain, he will not remit the guilt, but he will
hold him guilty; for other sins the guilt is more easily taken away: hic est
totus fructus, ut auferatur peccatum, this is all the fruit, the taking away of
sin; as the Prophet speaks, else we were of all men most miserable; but by this
sin there is a special guilt contracted which is not easily taken off.

God will not hold him guiltless, he will punish him both in this life, and in
the Judgments for the breach of this Commandment.
life to come: for Gods threatenings extend to both, and there is no precept
given by God, for breach whereof so many threatenings are denounced, and so many
fearful judgments executed in all ages.

The Blasphemer was to be stoned by Gods appointment under the Law. Levit. 24.
11.


And in another place, a curse was laid upon the perjured woman, which would
make Numb. 5. 25.
her thigh to rot, and her belly to swell.

In the Prophet, there is a flying book against false swearers, and their
houses to consume, Zach. 5. 4.
the posts, timber, stones and all.

Neither has God punished only private persons, but whole nations for this
sin. 1 Samuel 21. 1.
He sent a famine in Israel, for breaking the oath with the Gibeonites.

Saul for not calling on the name of God, but consulting with witches, was
suffered 1 Samuel 34. 4.
to kill himself, having first seen his people overcome, and his children (...).

Sennacherib for blaspheming the name of the living God, after his army was 2
King. 19. 37
overcome, was slain by his own sons. God sent destruction and captivity upon a
Jerem. 21. 7.
whole land for this sin.

Ahab, Jezabel, Baals Prophets (blasphemers under pretense of Religion) slain 2
King. 9 and 10
by Jehu.

When Zedekiah brake his oath, by rebelling against Nebuchadnezzar, though a
Ezekiel. 17. 16.
Tyrant, an Usurper, a Heathen, yet God threatens him; Shall he escape? shall
he prosper that does these things? shall he break the Covenant and be
delivered? Acts 4 and 5.
Ananias for lying to the Holy Ghost, and profaning the name of God came to an
untimely end. Whole Volumes have been written of the manifest judgments of God
upon particular persons, and whole nations for this sin. Thou shall destroy
them Psalm 5. 6.
that speak lies, much more those that swear falsely. And indeed a man's own
mouth that lies, slays his soul: and that is the worst punishment, the
punishment Wisd. 1. 11.
eternal. The temporal has a time to end, but the punishment of the life to
come shall be eternal.

And the reason that God is so severe an Avenger of the breach of this
Commandment, is the jealousy of his name. For if a private man be careful to
preserve his good name and reputation, God is much more, because his name is a
more glorious name, then any man's can be. We use to say, what is a man but his
good name? Crudelis est sibi homo qui famam negligit, vel inultam sinit, He is
cruel to himself, that is negligent of his good name, or will not vindicate it.
Solius laesae famae duellum est permittendum, quia pari passu ambulat cum
vitae, duels may be permitted (say some Casuists) for the vindication of ones
name, because when a man's reputation is lost, he is as good as dead. If it be
so with men, and that they will defend their good name to the death; yea, the
name of a friend, or any that we receive benefit by; God is not then to be
accused, if he punish those that abuse his name.

So then to conclude, if Gods name be, (as most certainly it is) most glorious
in it self; How glorious is thy name in all the world? And as it is glorious,
so is it holy psalm 8. 1.
and reverend too; Holy and reverend is his name, says the Psalmist: Then it
must be Exodus 14. 4. 15. 1.
so in every one of us, it bebooves every one to use it (...) and reverently,
and to glorify it to their power. If we do it not willingly it shall be
glorified upon us, nolentes, volentes, whether we will or not; as it was upon
Pharaoh, I will harden (...) heart, and I will get me honor upon Pharaoh, and
all his host. Exodus 14. 4. God says of Israel, Thou art a holy people to the
Lord. Deuteronomy. 14. 2. We must be as Israel, or as Pharaoh; If we glorify him not
with Israel, he will glorify it upon us with Pharaoh: for the Lord will not
hold him guiltless, that takes his name in vain.

THE EXPOSITION OF THE Fourth Commandment. The Fourth Commandment. Remember
the Sabbath Day to keep it Holy, etc.
CHAP. I.
The excellent order of the Commandments. Why God himself appointed a set time
for public worship. Why this Commandment is larger then the rest. Six special
things to be observed in this Commandment, which are not in the rest. The
general parts of it. 1. The precept. 2. The reasons. In the precept. 1. The
affirmative part what is meant by Sabbath: what by sanctifying? How things
sanctified differ from other things. God sanctified it not for himself, but for
us. We must sanctify it. 1. In our estimation of it. 2. In our use of it.

AS Gods order in all his works is most excellent (for he is the God of The
order of the Commandments.
order) so in the placing of these Commandments, it is most admirable. For, in
the First, he commands us to believe in a God, setleth Religion in us, and
shows that he, and no other is that God, and how he is to be worshipped, Intus,
within. 2. In the Second he prescribes, how we are to behave our selves
toward him in our exterior worship, and how to express and manifest our
inward affections toward him by our outward gesture. 3. In the Third, how his
glorious name ought to be magnified, by our outward expression in our words,
when we converse with others. These three first Commandments contain our
general and perpetual duties toward God.

Now in this fourth Precept (because men should not be left at liberty, when or
at what time to perform these duties) God has taken order for a set and
certain Lev. 23. 3.
time to that purpose, appointing a day, whereon to do it, and that more
solemnly Exodus 5. 3.
in a general, or public meeting, or Assembly, which he elsewhere calls an
Holy Assembly; or Holy Convocation: that all men together may set forth, and
make public professions of their worship of him in fear, and give him honor,
praise and glory. As also to learn and be instructed in what has past in
former times, and how to behave themselves for the time to come, by laying the
foundations of Religion: and lastly, to acknowledge as well the great goodness
of God, and his benefits to us, as our duty and service to him.

It is true which we usually say, and which the Heathen man did well see, that
Publicorum cura minor, the care of public matters is the least of all other:
for commonly, that which ought to be regarded by all, is regarded by few or
none. And so no doubt men would have dealt with God for public worship, had he
not provided a particular day for himself, and settled it by a special
Commandment; as we see in those that talk of a perpetual Sabbath, who come at
length to keep no day at all. And therefore (God knowing our innate negligence
in his service, which of right ought to be every ones care) did (by enacting
this law) provide for a particular, and set time for it.

This Commandment being of as large, or larger extent, and more copcious in
words then the second, should work in us no less regard, and consideration of
this, Why this Commandment is so large.
then of that. Nor is it in vain that God has so enlarged it. We see that
four duties of the second Table are ended in a word as it were. Non occides,
Thou shall not kill. Non moechaberis, Thou shall not commit adultery. Non
furaberis, Thou shall not steal. Non falsum testimonium feres, Thou shall not
bear false witness. And the reason is, because civil honesty, and the writings
of Heathen Philosophers, (who were chiefly guided by the light of Nature) and
civil Laws urge the observing of them: and our Bars, and judgment seats
condemn sins therein forbidden: but the fifth Commandment (because God foresaw
our stiffenecked humors, that we would not willingly, or easily be brought
under subjection) God thought it necessary to fence it with a reason. So
likewise in the tenth there is great particularity used, because men are apt to
conceive that their thoughts are free, and that they shall not come to
judgment for using their liberty in them.

In the first Table, every Commandment has its particular reason; but this
fourth Precept has more then any. It has six particular respects, not to be
found in any Six special things to be observed in this Commandment.
of the other.

1. Whereas the rest run either barely in the affirmative, as the fifth, or
barely in the negative, as the other: in this both parts are expressed. The
affirmative in these words, Remember thou keep holy, etc. and the negative in
these, Thou shall do no manner of work, etc. so that a man's inclination to the
breach of this Commandment, is both ways met withal. 2. In this, This precept
is not only given to our selves, but to all others that belong to us, God
proceeds here to a wonderful kind of particularity, by a particular
enumeration, comprehends all that with us, and by us may be violaters of this
Commandment, naming all which he does not in any of the other. 3. The other
Commandments are imperative only, and run in a peremptory way of command:
whereas the word here used, though it be of the Imperative mood, yet it rather
entreats then commands, Remember: and may serve as a note of separation from
the other. Imperat and suadet, it both commands and entreats. 4. And whereas
the reasons of the former Commandments are terrible, fearful, and threatening;
in this they are easy and reasonable; the main reason of this being, that no
more is required to be done by us, then was done by God himself, we ought to do
it, because God has done it. 5. Whereas none of the rest have above one
reason, to persuade and move us to the duty, this has, besides one principal,
tria statumina, three other props or reasons, so that it exceeds them all, in
the multitude of reasons to persuade us to the observance of it. 6. Lastly, to
move and stir up our regard to this Commandment, in a more especial manner, and
that it might not be thought a light matter, either to break or keep it, as we
are apt to think, God has in the very (...) of it set, notas non leves, no
slight notes: Recordare, remember; and observa keep it. We must have a special
care of the keeping of it, and to that end we must remember it. Deuteronomy. 5. 12.

The Commandment has two parts. 1. A Precept. 2. The Aetimologie, that is, The
parts of this Commandment.
the Reasons, or the persuasions to keep it.

The Precept contains in it, an affirmative part and a negative. The
affirmative in 1 The Precept.
the eighth verse. Remember the sabbath day to keep it (...), The Negative in
the ninth and tenth verses: in it thou shall do no manner etc.

For the first, that we may understand it the better, we must know, what is
meant by sabbath, and what by sanctifying. 1. Sabbath in the original
signifies rest, and such a rest which some labor has gone before, a rest
after labor (...), a ceasing, or intermission from labor. Such a rest is
described in the law. When Lev. 25. 3. 4.
the land had been labored, and tilled six years before God gave the people
charge, that it should lie fallow and rest the seventh year, and this was a
politic law. So after the labor of six days, God requires here a cessation
from work the seventh day, let that be a day set apart, rest on that day.

2. The word [Sanctifie] is twice used in this commandment, in the beginning,
and in the end, and is applied to two. 1. To God in the end (verse 11.) The
Lord what is meant by sanctifying.
blessed and sanctified it. 2. To man (verse. 8.) remember the sabbath to
sanctify it.

Now it is a rule in divinity, that when any word is given to God, and man
both, it is to be applied in a different respect, and so here this word
ascribed to God, is to be understood, sub modo destinandi by way of appointing
it so to be: and to man sub (...), by way of applying it to that it was
appointed. So when God appoints any thing to an holy use, he is said to
sanctify it, and when man applies it to the use to which God has so
appointed it, he is said also to sanctify it.

As it is sure, that by nature all men are alike before God, and differ not by
nature, How things sanctified differ from others Lev. 20. 26.
so may it be said of bread, water, wine, days etc. by nature all are alike,
and one is not more holy then another. Yet in the law, says God, concerning
the Israelites, I have separated you from other people, that you should be
mine. When God sets man a part that he should be his, either as a minister
in the Church, or as a Magistrate in the commonwealth, then this his
separation, or putting a part, is the beginning of his sanctifying.

So water, which is separated from common uses, and destinated to (...), and
the Creatures of Bread and wine, in the administration of the Lords supper,
there is naturally no more in them, then in the other of the like kind, till
they be so separated and set apart from the other, and appropriated to God, and
holy uses. So may we likewise say of days; naturally there is no more holiness
in one then in another: only Gods ordinance, by separating one day from
another for himself, makes it to be more holy then the rest.

Now it is the nature of such things, whether it be man or beast, so separated
from common use, and thereby sanctified to the Lord, that they must continue
so, and be Lev. 27. 28. 26
neither bought nor sold, nor other ways alienated, Therefore we find, that
under the Law, the Tabernacle and whatsoever was used in it about the service
of God, must be put to no other use, the fire-pans, flesh-hooks, (...) made for
the sacrifice, yea the basest instruments to stir the fire, and the meat in the
caldron, whereof a libamen Exodus 28. 29. 30.
or offering was to be, should not be put into any other; nor the pots on no
other fire nor the snuffers to any other lamp but to these in the Tabernacle.
So this is the nature of a thing sanctified, and it therein differs from
other things, that what is sanctified or separate for God, must not be
converted or applied to any other use, and so for days, such as are sanctified
or set apart for God, must be applied to no other use, unless God himself or
his church by authority from him and that upon grounds warranted by God,
dispense therein in some special cases. Other things may bedone in part upon
other days, but not upon this. The Psalmist (as before) says, he will
meditate every day and night; and every day he will praise God and give thanks
psalm. 1. 2. 145. 2. 55. 18. 119. 164.
to him: and in the evening, morning and at noon day, (thrice a day) he will
pray. Nay seven times a day he will praise God: yet all these are but on part
of the day for in the six days other things may be jointly done, with those
holy exercises, and may lawfully take up a part of the day: but this day being
a most holy day, as separated to Gods use and service, must be sanctified, not
in part, or jointly with other employments, but must solely be kept to his
service and use.

Now a question may arise, whether God sanctified this day to himself, or to
God sanctified, this day for us. Tit. 1. 15.
us? Certainly the Apostle tells us, that omnia munda mundis, all things are
clean to the clean: and God is most pure and holy, and therefore needs nothing
to be sanctified to him therefore this sanctifying must needs be for us. And
the same Apostle 1 Timothy 4. 5.
(...), this is the will of God even your (not his) sanctification, for without
holiness These. 4. 3.
none shall see God: and therefore to the end that we might be holy, did he
sanctify this day, his word and other things etc. And so by the second part of
sanctification Heb. 12. 9.
by annexing a blessing to this day, he blessed it and made it holy, as in the
Sacrament of the Eucharist he blessed the bread (and his dicere) is facere he
gave it power to increase holiness in us. And as to the bread there, so to this
day here, he has annexed a special blessing, whereby it is sanctified to us,
and that in a twofold respect. 1. Relative, as applied to the means of holiness,
prayer, word, etc. As a thing may be said to be holy, as the place where Moses
stood, as also, all that belonged Mat. 26. 26.
to the Tabernacle, because they were applied to the means of holiness. 2.
Effective, Exo. 3. 5.
in regard of the fruit of holiness, which is wrought in us on that day, and
practiced in our selves, Sanctificamini et sancti estote. Be sanctified and be
holy.

So that all which has bin said, amounts to thus much. God has set apart or
sanctified this day, to the end that it may be applied wholly, either to the
means of sanctification, as hearing the word, prayer, meditation, and other
religious duties; or to the practice of sanctification, by these means wrought
in us. And he sanctified it or gave it a blessing, that what means we use this
day of sanctification, shall be two fold blessed, and of more effect and force
to us, then what we do upon another day, not sanctified and set apart as this
is.

Now seeing God has so sanctified it, it is our duties, that as he has
sanctified it, with is blessing, we must do the like, and sanctify it too,
which consists in two things. 1. In our estimation and account of it, which is
for our judgment.

2. Secondly in the use of it, which is for our Practice. We must sanctify it.


1. We must account of it in our judgment as a day holy unto God, not as a
common day: but as a Prince is sacred among men, so this is to be reputed holy
among (...) in our judgment.
days, a day of days: that of God to S. Peter must be our Rule, What God has
Act. 10. 15.
sanctified, make not thou common.

2. For use, that we so use it. This use is well set down by the Prophet. We
must 2 In our practice.
not do our own work. No common thoughts are to exercise our brains: and as our
thoughts must be taken up with common affairs, so neither must our
communication (...). 58. 13.
be of such things, nor our practice; but our thoughts words and actions must
be sanctified, and such as tend to the practice of holiness. For (according to
that of the Prophet) If that which is sanctified touch that which is common, it
imparteth not holiness to the thing profane or common; but the common polluteth
the thing which is sanctified: Agg. 2. 13.
so that the touching, or dealing in any unholy action that day is a polluting
of the day. This we must take heed of, else, as our Savior says in another
case, A woman Mat. 5. 25.
may be chaste, yet adultery may be committed, if a wicked eye look upon her to
lust after her: so though holy things remain holy in themselves, yet we may
pollute them, and make them unholy, (as much as in us lies) by our polluted
actions.

CHAP. II.
What is commanded here. 1. A rest. 2. Sanctification. Rest is required not for
it self, but for the duties of sanctification. Reasons that the Sabbath is not
wholly nor principally ceremonial. Addition 21. out of the Authors other works
declaring his meaning in two things. 1. That the Lords day is jure divino. 2.
That the (...) Sabbath is abolisht by Christ's death, proved by him at large,
out of Scriptures, and Antiquity, in his speech against Trask in Star Chamber.

NOw here are two things, and both commanded, but not alike or equally, but the
one for the other. 1. The first is Sanctification which is the last end and
drift of God in this commandment, and that which is required for it self. 2.
The other Of the rest required not for it self.
which is the means subordinate to it is Rest without which, sanctification of
the day cannot be had, as God requires.

To make it plain. The heathen by the light of nature could see, that every
thing is then best ordered, when it has but one Office, and is ordained to do
but one thing at once, for whatsoever would be thoroughly done would be done
alone: the reason is, because we are res (...), (...) creatures, and if two
things be done at once, and together, one will be done imperfectly, because our
thoughts will be distracted between both, for part of our thoughts will be
taken of, when they are set upon several objects. so that we cannot wholly
intend two things at once. It was Adams case in the state of Inno cency: for he
having a natural soul and finite, was not able to intend the dressing of the
garden commanded him, and the sanctification Genesis 2. 15.
of the sabbath together, and therefore God would have him employ six days
upon the first, and blessed the seventh day to be bestowed in his worship. And
this Genesis 2. 3.
was the end why God instituted, blessed, and sanctified the seventh day, for a
remedy against distraction, especially in the solemn worship of God, which is
enough to take up the whole man, and ought to be without all distractions and
therefore permits none to be intent to any other thing during the
performance of it.

Now if Adam in that estate could not be free from distraction, much more have
we need of remedy against it. And therefore is this rest and ceasing from
servile work commanded, to free us from it, and to further our sanctification:
and thus comes in this rest, because this total sanctification cannot be
performed without ceasing from labor and doing our own works: for without rest
we cannot sanctify: and if our rest should hinder our sanctification it ought
to be taken away and omitted.

And indeed our Savior Christ acknowledges, that man was not made for Mar. 2.
27.
the rest, but for sanctification. Sanctification was his end, and man was
created and made for that. Rest is but a subordinate end, and man was not made
for it, but rather rest was made for man. Rest is but the means to attain to
sanctification which is man's end, and that for which he was made. For as the
Apostle says of bodily 1 Timothy 4. 8.
exercise, it profits (...), so it may be said of bodily rest, that bodily
rest profits little, or indeed nothing at all, except it be applied to
sanctification which is the end: nor does God approve of it without this but
wholly disliketh it.

The scope of this reverend Author, is not here to prove, that the command of
the Addit. 21. The Jewish Sabbath whether Ceremonial.
sabbath is wholly Moral, and in no part ceremonial, but to prove against the
Anabaptists, Familists, and other sectaries, who deny all distinction of days
under the Gospel, that it is not wholly or principally ceremonial, as his
reasons do plainly show; for that it is so in part, is confessed afterward,
where the Author says, that the strict rest enjoined the jews, of not (...) a
fire, nor dressing meat on the sabbath, was ceremonial, and obliged only the
jews. Nor can it be imagined, but that he know very well, that as the sabbath
was a type of Christ's rest in the grave, of our daily rest from sin, and of
our eternal rest, Heb. 4. And as it signified a rest from the Egyptian
servitude, Deuteronomy. 5. That in these respects it was ceremonial, and is abolisht.

And although his opinion seems to be, that the Lords day which we observe,
instead of the sabbath, is jure divino, (in which point learned men do differ,
and of which we shall speak something hereafter) yet, that the (...) sabbath,
which as it concerned the jews in a perculiar manner, is literally enjoined by
the fourth Commandment, is abolisht by the death of Christ, is his opinion
clearly expressed elsewhere.

Of the (...) he speaks in one of his sermons of the resurrection, on 1 Cor.
11. 16. where Sermon. 13. of the resurrection. page 529. (...). 1. 10.
laboring to prove the feast of Easter to be as ancient as the Apostles, among
other arguments he brings one from the Lords day, in these words. But we have a
more sure ground then all these. The Lords day has testimony in Scripture: I
insist upon that that Easter day must needs be as ancient as it. For how came
it to be the Lords day, but that as it is in the Psalm, The Lord made it? And
why made he it? but because the psalm. 118. 24. Aug. Epist. 119. 13.
stone cast aside (that is Christ) was made the head of the corner? that is,
because then the Lord rose, because his resurrection fell upon it. Where he
plainly affirms, the Lords day to be so made, by the Lord himself and that
because Christ rose upon that day.

Now for the other point, that the jews sabbath was ceremonial, and abrogated
by Christ's death, is proved at large by his speech in star chamber against
Trask, published inter opera posthuma, where among other things he speaks (...).

The Apostle ( inter alia) reckoning up diverse others concludes with the
sabbath, and immediately upon it adds; Which all are but shadows of things to
come, (Sabbath and all) but the body is Christ. The body had, the shadow to
vanish; that which was to come, when it is come, to what end any figure of it?
it cease too. That to hold the shadow of the Sabbath is to continue, is to
hold Christ the body is not yet come.

It has been ever the Churches doctrine, That Christ made an end of all
Sabbaths by his Sabbath in the grave. That Sabbath was the last of them, and
that the Lords day came presently in place of it. Dominicus dies Christi
resurrectione declaratus est Christianis, and ex illo caepit habere
festivitatem suam, says Augustine, The Lords Epist. 119. 13.
day was by the resurrection of Christ declared to be the Christians day, and
from that very time (of Christ's resurrection) it began to be celebrated as the
Christian man's festival.

For the Sabbath had reference to the old creation, but in Christ we are a new
Creature, a new creation by him, and so to have a new Sabbath, and vetera
transierunt, no 1 Cor. 5. 7.
reference to the old, We.

By whom he made the world (says the Apostle) of Christ.

So two worlds there were. The first that ended at Christ's Passion (says
Athanasius) Hebr. 1. 12.
And therefore then the Sun without any eclypse went out of it self. The second
which began with Christ's resurrection, and that day initium novae creaturae,
the beginning (and so the feast) of them that are in Christ a new creature.

It is diduced plainly.

The Gospels keep one word all four, and tell us Christ arose, (...), una
sabbatorum, (that is, after the Hebrew phrase) the first day of the week.

The Apostles, they kept their meetings on that day, and S. Luke keeps the very
same word exactly, (...) (to exclude all error) on that day they were (...),
(that is, held their synaxes, their solemn assemblies, to preach, to pray, to
break bread, to celebrate the Lords supper, (...), the Lords supper on the
Lords day: for these two only (the day and the supper) have the Epithet of
(...), Dominicum, in the scriptures to show, that Dominicum is alike to be
taken in both.

This for the practice then.

If you will have it in precept. The Apostle gives it (and in the same word
still) 1 Cor. 16. 2.
that against (...), the day of their assembly, every one should lay apart,
what God should move him to offer to the collection of the Saints, and then
offer it. which was so ever in use: that the day of oblations: so have we it in
practice and (...) both, even till Socrates time, who keeps the same word
still. (...). 5. cap. 22.

This day, this (...), came to have the name of Dies Dominicus in the Apostles
times, and is so expressly called then, by Saint John in the Revelation.
Revel. 1. 10. And that name from that day to this has holden still, which
continuance of it from the Apostles age, may be deduced down from father to
father, even to the Council of Nice and lower I trust, we need not to follow
it, no doubt is made of it since then, by any that has read any thing. I
should hold you to long too cite them in particular, I avow it on my credit,
there is not any ecclesiastical writer, in whom it is not to be found.

Ignatius, Ad (...).
whom I would not name, but that I find his words in Nazianzen, 1 Tom. (...).
in patrem.
Justin. Martyr (...). 3.
, Dion, sius Bishop of Corinth, Eusebius. l. 4.
in Eusebius. lib. 4. Irenaeus Justin. 1. 115
, Clemens. Alexandr Strom. 7.
. Tertull De Idol.
. Origin Con. Celsum.
, Cyprian Epist. 33.
, every one.

And that we may put it past all question, Justine Martyr, who lived in the
very next age to the Apostles, and Tertullian who lived the next age to him,
both say directly, (...) solemn assemblies of the Christians were that day
ever, on Sunday (...), says Justine, die solis, says (...), and leave the
(...) to their Saturn: (either in cap. 23.
their Apologies, offered by them to the Emperors) Justine made two, in his
second: Tertullian but one, the sixteenth chapter of his: that of the true day
there can be no manner of doubt.

A thing so (...), so well known, even to the Heathen themselves, as it was (in
the Acts of the Martyrs) ever an usual question of theirs (even of course) in
their examining. What? Dominicum servasti? Hold you the Sunday? and their
answer known; they all aver it. Christianus sum, intermittere non possum, I am
a Christian, I cannot intermit it, not the Lords day in any wise. These are
examples enough, I will add but an authority and a censure, and so end.

The authority I will refer you to, is of the great Athanasius, great for his
learning, for his virtue, for his labor, and for his sufferings, but above
all, great for his Creed. Tertullian had written a book de cibis Judaicis,
(which we have) so another de (...) Judaico, which we have lost, but it is
supplied by Athanasius his book de sabbato etcircumcisione (for he puts them,
and so they must go together, Circumcision and the Sabbath) In which he is so
clear and so full, for the abolishing of the (...) day, and the succeeding of
the Lords day in place of it, as no man can wish more, and the treatise is no
long one neither.

Now as in the other of meats, so in this will I end with censure. It is of the
Council of Laodicea (more ancient then the first of Nice) and of so special
account, as we find it cited by S. Basil: nay, as we find four of the Canons
made in this Council, taken out of it, and transferd and made four of the
Canons of the great Council of Nice, such was the Authority it was had in. It
is in the twenty ninth Canon, and of the authentical great book acknowledged in
that of (...) the 133. Thus it is, That Christen men may not (...), or grow
(...), that is, not make the Sabbath or Saturday their day of rest, but they
are to work that day (this comes home) giving their honor of celebration to
the Lords day. And if any in this point be found to (...), let them be Anathema
a Deo etchristo, to God and Christ both. Thus far this learned (...); by which
discourse made and penned in his latter years, it appears fully what his
opinion was in this point of the Sabbath, and how his meaning is to be
expounded in this point of the morality of the day. See more of this subject in
the third Chapter, per totum.

There is here besides in the Commandment another word [ Remember] which
because it is properly of a thing past, it refers us to some time or place
before: and there is no mention of the sabbath but in two places before: the
one of them is in Exodus, but that is not the place here meant: for God in the
end of the Commandment adding [ God (...) it, etc.] refers us to that other
place where those words are; namely to, Genesis 2. 3.

And by this occasion falls in that first question about the morality of the
day: many think the sabbath is merely a ceremony, and are persuaded that it is
so, and therefore hold, that men are not bound to sanctify it since Christ's
time, it being abrogated by him. In answer whereto we are to follow our
Saviors rule, who in the case of Polygamie, bids us inquire how it was ab
initio, from the beginning, to call it to the first institution: for the first
institution is that which will inform our judgments best, and the first end
which appears by the institution is the true end.

A thing is not said to be merely ceremonial, if a ceremonial use or end be
annexed to it, for then scarce any of the ten Commandments but should be
ceremonial, for they have many of them some ceremony annexed to them.

But that is to be accounted ceremonial whose first and principal end is to be
a ceremony, and to type out something, which this day of rest cannot be said to
do. The reason is, because Paradise and man's perfection cannot consist with
ceremonies, a ceremony cannot agree to the state of man's innocence.

This is to be understood of such Ceremonies as had reference to Christ as a
Redeemer, Annot. 23. of Ceremonies.
and so the ensuing words expound these, for otherwise ceremonies which have a
moral signification, or were instituted for other ends might stand with man's
estate in Paradise, for what was the tree of life but a ceremony.

And the reason of that is, because that before there was a Savior, there
could not be a type of a Savior, as ceremonies were; and before there was sin,
there needed no Savior: and so consequently needing no Savior, there needed
no ceremony, and needing no Savior, nor ceremony, it could not be ceremonial.

But this was it, that Adam (having in the six days a natural use in his body
of the creatures) should for the glory of God on the seventh day have a
spiritual use and consideration of them in a more special manner. And although
there might be a worship performed to God on other days, yet that it might be
more solemn, public, and universal, and the heart of man more free from
distraction, and wordly avocations, God therefore would have a special day
dedicated to his honor and service, wherein the Creature should solemnly
perform his homage to the Creator, and this was the first general end, though
other ends were after added: as in Deuteronomie it pleased God to add this
reason, that the People should remember their Delivery out of Egypt, but this
was but finis posterior, a particular and after end, and accessory. And it were
well if we might add to our days of rest the memory of benefits received. And
in Exodus God yields a reason taken from a politic end, that our family and
cattle may rest, and return more fresh to their labor.

And if any will say, that besides these ends, there was prefigured by this
rest, that rest we shall have from sin; Its true, but yet that is but an
accessory end. As in the Sacraments of Circumcision and Passover, besides the
general ends of their institution, which were to seal and signify Gods
preventing and following grace, there were other ends typical and accessory: as
that of Circumcision did signify the Circumcision of the heart, and the
Passover the sacrifice of Christ offered upon the cross. In which respects,
though those two Sacraments are abolisht, yet the Sacrament of initiation, and
another of our confirmation in grace are still continued, to wit, Baptism and
the Lords supper, according to the general ends of the two former Sacraments,
which ends do still remain. So though the Sabbath or seventh day from the
Creation be ceased, yet there is another day still remaining, because the end
of keeping a day is immutable from the beginning, to wit, that God might be
honored by a solemn and public worship.

This reason of it self is so forcible and plain, that without bringing in a
manifest absurdity it cannot be denied and avoided. When they see these ends
carry us to the Institution, and that in Paradise where no type or Ceremony
was, they seek to avoid it by saying, Its true, that God sanctified it in
Paradise, but Adam never kept it, neither was it kept till immediately before
the Law was given: which may seem to be a very absurd thing, that God should
sanctify a thing two thousand years before it was to be put in practice. This
is like to that assertion of those Heretics, that held, the materia prima to
be made by God many years before the world it self, and that it abode by him,
till the world was made. But they are confuted by the Fathers thus, That no
wise man will make any thing to be many years by him, before he shall have
occasion to put it to any use. And therefore much less would God bless this
day before there should be any use of it: to make rem ante usum.

1. We must understand, that God in Deuteronomy seems to make a distinction
between Ceremonies and the Moral Law, Deuteronomy 4. 13, 14. as, that the one
proceeded from himself immediately: the other by the ministry of Moses, so
also Deuteronomie 5. 31.

2. Again it breeds confusion, and breaks order (a thing which God misliketh)
if any thing merely ceremonial and not in some sort moral should be placed
among the ten Commandments. One of the Fathers upon the words [ Nunquid and
Saul (...) inter Prophetas? Is Saul also among the Prophets?] says, that Saul
being no Prophet by profession, est heterogeneus, of another kind, and an
irregular person among the Prophets: so it will fall out to be against order,
for a mere ceremonial Precept, to stand in the midst of moral Commandments. For
every ceremony or type of the Law, is as it was a foretelling of something in
the Gospel; so it must be referred to the Gospel, as the shadow to the body.
And indeed no typical ceremonies are in their own nature, for the type or
ceremony is to cease when the substance comes, as the shadow when the body
appears. But this Commandment for the substance of it, continues in the time of
the Gospel.

3. Thirdly, this being a principle, that the Law of Moses (expressed in the
Decalogue) is nothing but the Law of nature revived, and the Law of nature
being a resemblance of Gods image. If we say this precept is in its substance
ceremonial, then we must also say, that in the image of God something is
ceremonial, not to abide, but for a time only: but all things in him, and in
his image are eternal according to his Nature.

4. In the Law of grace, Christ delivering the sum of the ten Commandments to
the Scribes and Pharisees, Thou shall love the Lord, etc. there is no question,
but that it is the sum of the Decalogue, and therefore therein is included the
religious observation of the Sabbath, and so it will be for the substance
moral, as the love of God is, in which it is contained, or else our Savior had
delivered an imperfect sum.

5. Again, it is dangerous to hold, that any precept in the Decalogue is
ceremonial: for by this the Papists (as Parisius and Politianus) will bring
another of them to be so, and will say, that the second Commandment concerning
images is ceremonial, and then why not three as well as two, and so four and
five, and all. The best way therefore to hold the duties eternal, and to keep
them without blemish is to deny that any of these ten precepts is ceremonial in
the substance or nature of the Commandment, but that they are plainly moral.

6. To come to the time of the Gospel. We hold that all typical ceremonies of
the law are ended and abrogated by Christ's death. Then if the day of rest be
not abrogated by his death, it is not a mere Ceremony or ceremonial. And that
it is not, is plain by our Savior himself for his denouncing the destruction
of Jerusalem bids them pray that their calamity fall not in the winter, nor on
the Sabbath day: Now we know that Jerusalem was destroyed many years after
Christ's death, when all ceremonies were ended. Therefore if Christ knew that
the Sabbath as a ceremony should be wholly abrogated by his death, his counsel
might well have bin spared, that they should pray that their flight might not
be on the Sabbath day, Matthew. 24. 20. which if it had been quite abolished,
should have been no day.

Again in things merely ceremonia', there is not commutatio, a change, but
abrogatio, an abrogating of them wholly: but we see in this matter of the
Sabbath, there is commutatio, not abrogatio, the Lords day is appointed instead
of the Sabbath; but no total abrogation of the Sabbath. Thus the seals of the
Covenant though they had something typical, yet being in their general nature
moral, therefore they are changed, but not quite abrogated, whereas in things
merely typical, there is no manner of commutation, but they are clean taken away:
for Christ having broken down the partition wall, Ephesians. 2. 14, 15. has wholly
taken away the law of ordinances, etc. But it is manifest, that instead of the
Jews seventh day, another seventh day was ordained in the Apostles days;
therefore as the ministry and seals of the Covenant, and the chief place of
it, to wit the Temple, were not abolished but changed, as having a moral (...)
in them; so also was the day of the Covenant; for we read. Acts 20. 7. that the
(...) and Disciples came together on the first day of the week, to hear the
word, and to break bread, and in 1 Corin. 16. 2. the Apostle wills them in
their meetings on the first day of the week to lay aside for the poor, and
Revel. 1. 10. it is plainly called, (...), the Lords day.

So that we see in the whole time of the Apostles it was not taken away, but
changed by them, and therefore cannot be a mere ceremony, nor of the nature
of the types of the Law. But when the old Covenant ceased, then ceased the
Ministry thereof: the Priesthood of Levi was changed, and given to choice men
of all Tribes, and instead of it is our Ministry. And as the seals of the
Covenant ceased as of Circumcision and the Paschal lamb, and in place thereof
came our Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords supper: so the day of the old
Covenant is taken away, and instead thereof is put the Lords day, none of them
in the first end being ceremonial, but having a continual use, and to last as
long as the Church militant.

The reasons which might seem to have moved the Apostles to change this day may
be fitly taken from the Institution of the Sabbath in the time of the law. For
as then nothing was more memorable then the day of the creation: so when it
pleased God that old things should cease, and that there should be a new
creation, and that there was a benefit, that did overshadow the former, the
benefit of redemption; therefore when that was accomplished by Christ's
resurrection, from that day we celebrate the memorial of it on the first day of
the week, and whereas that other great work of the sending the holy Ghost,
which was fifty days after, concurd on the same day, whereby that inestimable
benefit of sanctification and speaking with strange tongues was conferred upon
the Church, and because the memory of the benefit of the creation may also be
kept on the first day of the week, as well as on the last. Hence we may see
upon what great reasons this day is established, wherein do concur the three
special works and benefits of the three persons to be for ever thankfully
remembered, viz. that of Creation by the Father, Redemption by the Son, and
Sanctification by the holy Ghost. And so much for the clearing of that point.

CHAP. III.
Additionall considerations upon the doctrine of the Sabbath, laid down in
seven conclusions. 1. It is certain some time is to be set apart for public
worship, (...) by Schoolmen, Canonists, and reasons. 2. Certain that the law
of nature does not dictate the proportion of seven or any other in particular.
3. It is most probable that the seventh day was appointed by God from the
beginning, as a day of public worship in memory of the creation, and did
oblige all mankind: though the symbolical or typical rest afterward was
enjoined to the Jews only: this proved from Scripture, Fathers, Jewish
Doctors, late Divines, reasons, etc. How the Fathers are to be understood that
deny Sabbatizing before the Mosaical Law. 4. The Lords day is of divine
institution, proved by Scripture, Fathers, public declarations of the Church,
Edicts of Princes, Canonists some Schoolmen, late Divines. 5 The fourth
Commandment is in force: for the moral equity, that at least a seventh part be
given to God; literally it requires only the seventh day from the creation,
not a seventh day. The day altered by the Apostles by special authority. 6. The
rest of the Jewish sabbath partly moral, which continues still: partly
symbolical, which is expired. How the rest of the Lords day differs from the
rest of Jewish sabbath, rest from ordinary labors forbidden by God, but the
special determination left to the Church. How the Lords day succeeds the
sabbath. 7. The sabbath kept with the Lords day by the Primitive Christians
till the Council of Laodicea was not in a Jewish manner.

The whole doctrine of the sabbath and Lords day handled in seven conclusions.
Addtion 21.


FOr the more clear understanding of this point of the sabbath, and of the
reasons The whole doctrine of the sabbath and Lords day handled in 7
conclusions.
which are here produced, and of this discourse upon that subject, I shall
briefly lay down that which I conceive most agreeable to the truth, in certain
propositions or conclusions distinguishing things certain from such as are
only probable, and submitting, all to the judicious and learned reader.

1. It is certain that some time ought to be set apart for public worship, and
that this is required by the law of nature, which dictates to every one, that
as vide Scholast in Sent. 3. d.
God ought to be worshipped, so some special time must be set apart for that
employment: 37. et in 4. d.
and therefore as when God created the world, he is said to have concreated
time with it, so when he commands a public worship, he commands 27. et. 38. et
in Tho. 2. 2. q.
withal some time for that use, without which it cannot be performed; and
therefore 112. Summistas. verbo. Ferie. et in Dominca. val to 3. did. 7.
it is confessed by all divines ancient and modern, and by men of all
professions (except familists and such fanatic spirits) that some time ought
to be set apart for holy duties, as due by the immutable law of nature morale
est quantum ad hoc, quod homo (...) aliquod tempus ad vacandum divinis etc.
says Aquinas, secunda Suar. to. 1. de Religione l. 1. Navar. c.
secundae q. 112. It is moral, that every man depute some time for religious
duties; and with him jointly agree all the rest of the Schoolmen, modern
divines and 13. et 15. Sot. l. 2. de Just. and. iure. Canonistas in Cap. 1. de
Feriis Eccles. polit. p. 378.
others. The very law of nature, says our learned Hooker, requires no less
the sanctification of times, then of places, persons, and things; for which
cause it has plased God heretofore, as of the rest, so of times likewise to
exact some part by way of perpetual homage. And so we find the Heathen, which
had no other then the law of nature to direct them, had their solemn feasts
and set days appointed for the worship of their supposed deities. This
therefore I lay down as certain because questionedby none,

2. I conceive it to be likewise certain, that the law of nature does not in
particular dictate, what day or time ought to be set apart for public worship,
but that the determination of the time or days in special, is from positive
laws, either of God or men, and therefore that the limitation of a seventh day,
or the 7th day from the creation, or any other particular proportion cannot be
deduced necessarily from any natural principle, but must be referrd to some
positive law either divine or humane. This appears in that there can no natural
reason be given, why one day more then another, or why a seventh rather then a
sixth, or eighth, should necessarily be consecrated to God, all days being in
themselves alike, and none in themselves more excellent then others, those
things which are natural, and simply or purely moral, are evident to all by the
light of nature, or may by necessary consequence be deduced from some principle
which is evident, such laws concern things good or evil in themselves; and
therefore do immutably bind all persons in all places alike: but the
limitation of a special day is not, it is neither a principle evident in it
self, nor can by necessary consequence be derived from any such principle, and
therefore cannot be referred to any natural law or dictate of reason. Therefore
not only the schoolmen generally ( nemine contradicente) with the Casuists and
Canonists, but the most modern divines, some few excepted, do generally agree
in this, as well as in the former conclusion; and though some make the
observation of the Lords day under the Gospel to be unchangable, and so in some
sort moral, as the sabbath was under the law; yet this they ground not upon any
natural law, but upon positive divine Law: and those that seem to make it a
dictate Deuteronomy. 5. 15. and 24. 18.
of nature, mean nothing else, but that there is a congruity in reason, and
that this time being fixed by Christ is unalterable by any humane power. The
reason given by some, why a memento is prefixed before the fourth
Commmandement, and none else, is because that Nature does not dictate any
particular day, and therefore men need to be put in mind of the day appointed
by God. Filencius tract. 27. cap. 1. n. 4. Ex Thom. 1. 2. q. 100. a. 7. and 2.
2. q. 122. a. 4. ad. 3. Bonavent. Richard. and aliis in 3. Sent. Did. 37. and
before them S. Chrysostom. says, that the Sabbath is a precept not made known to
us by our Consciences, as the other precepts are, and that God therefore gives
reasons of this, as because he rested the seventh day, and because they were
servants in Egypt, etc. whereas in those that are purely moral, as, Thou shall
do no murder, etc. he gives the Precept barely without any reason at all, and
that because our consciences had taught us this before, and because he speaks
to those that knew reason sufficient. Tom. 6. p. 542. Edit. Savil.

3. It is probable that the seventh day was appointed by positive divine law,
from the beginning, as the day for public worship to praise God for the
creation of the world, etc. and so did oblige all mankind; though as a Sabbath
or day of symbolical rest, it was afterward particularly given to the Jews by
Moses. For it is the opinion not only of some Jewish Doctors, but of learned
men among our selves, that in the 4h Commandment, the sanctifying of the
seventh day, and the rest then commanded, are several distinct things, and that
the first refer to the creation of the world, as the cause; the other to the
Egyptian bondage out of which they were delivered, and that therefore the one
belonged to all men, the other only to the Jews, for which cause the Sabbath
is said to be a sign between God and them, Exodus 31. 13. of which opinion seem
to be Irenaeus lib. 4. cap. 30. and Eusebius. hist. 1. cap 4.

And thus that of Genesis 2. of Gods blessing and sanctifying the seventh day,
may be expounded clearly and literally without any forced interpretation, that
God did then sanctify and appoint that day to be kept holy by a joyful
remembrance of the creation, and by other holy duties solemnly to be performed
to him as Creator of all, that being the birth day of the world, Phil. de mund
(...). and from him Reginald. prax.
which God the Lord of all would have observed; as Princes, who appoint the
birthday of their sons to be kept by their subjects.

For though I know diverse learned men Abulensis Parerius, Lorinus, panlus
Burgen. Vatab. in Genes. Musculus, Galatinus. etc. Brerewood, Bp White. Dr
Dowe, and others.
, both ancient and modern do otherwise l. 19. c. 1.
expound the words, either of Gods sanctifying the day in himself, by a rest or
cessation from those emanations of his power and goodness, or by destinating
the day to be observed afterward, or that the words are spoken by
anticipation, viz. that Moses writing that history after the Sabbath was given,
says that Gods resting on the seventh day, was the cause why afterward, viz.
when the Law was given, he sanctified that day; yet the other exposition seems
to be more clear and genuine, that the sanctification by holy duties was
commanded then, and that the rest from all labors was one of the ceremonies
given afterward to the Jews. And to this those words of Moses, Deuter. 5. 12.
seem to relate: when after the Commandment of sanctifying the Sabbath day, he
adds, As the Lord thy God has commanded thee, to wit, long before from the
beginning of the world, and in Exodus 20. 10 I take the same to be the meaning
of the words ( the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord thy God) that is, the
day consecrated to God from the beginning. Therefore Annal. (...).
(...) collects from those words in Job 38. 4. 7. where wast thou when I laid
the ad diem 7.
foundations of the earth when the morning stars sung together and all the sons
of God shouted Sect. 2.
for joy? that upon the seventh day when the world was finished, the Angels, who
who are styled the sons of God kept the sabbath. And though I will not
peremptorily affirm that the Angels kept it, yet I take it to be very
probable, that the people of God, the Patriarchs and other holy men as they
had public sacrifices and forms of worship, so they had some set times for the
ordinary performance thereof, which is most likely to have been on this day, it
is hardly credible that in the time of Enoch men should separate themselves
from the sons of Cain, by calling upon the name of the Lord (that is by some
public worship, and as learned Drusius thinks by some public forms or
liturgies) without some set and solemn time for Deus amit. in Genesis 4. 26.
the performance thereof. And Calvin himself (though far from the sabbatarian
errors) yet thinks, that the frequent sacrifices performed by Abraham, and the
other Patriarchs, Calv. in Exodus 20. in precept 4. so Mercer in Gen 2. 3.
peter Natar oc.
were usually upon this day, and therefore concludes it probable, that the
sanctification of it was before the Law. And seeing there never was any nation
in the world, but had some certain and set days for their religious exercises,
can it be imagined, that the people of God for those many hundred years before
the flood, and after, even when they were grown into great multitudes in Egypt,
com. (...). 2.
when they lived for diverse hundred years, should all that time be without any
certain cap. 7. Rivet in Genesis 2. Exercit. 13. See also the learned Grotius in
expos. decal. in precept. 4. Junius in Tertull. Apo.
time when to worship God, that they should have their sacrifices, their
priests viz, the eldest of the family their altars, and consecrated places,
their tithes which was Gods portion, (appointed by divine positive law from the
beginning, as may be elsewhere proved) and yet have no certain days for solemn
worship this seems to me altogether incredible especially if we consider that
it is morally impossible, that religion should long continue and be preserved
among any people without some certain time for the public exercise thereof.
And therefore Hookers polit. l. 5. n. 17.
though there be no express mention of any such days, yet I make no question
but they observed some, and if any, then surely this day. Besides, the ceasing
of the Exodus-16.
manna to fall upon the seventh day, for some time before the Law was given, is
an argument that the sabbath was known before as a day sacred to God, though it
begun then first to be kept as a day of rest, which was afterward prescribed
by a law. And hence it was that some relics of this day were found among the
Heathen (though much obliterated because not written in their hearts by nature)
and a high esteem they had of the seventh day, as appears by Clem. Strom. 5.
Eusebius. praepar l. 13. c. 12. who out of Hesiod, mencions (...) lux septuma
sancta 10 Septius Adv. Appi. l. 2. circa finem and Philo de die septimo, show
that there was no nation so barbarous but that they honored the seventh day,
and that it was the holy day not for one nation but for all the world. The same
is gathered from Homer and Callimachus by Clem. Alex. Strom. 5. The like we
find in Theophilus Ant. lib. 2. ad Autolicum, Suetonius in Tiberio 32.
Philostratus l. 3. c. 13. Dion. Carthus. l. 33. Lucian, Tibullus, and others.
And whereas Iustine Martyr, Tertullian, and others of the fathers say often that
before the law holy men pleased God without keeping the sabbath; they
understand by sabbatizing, not the public praise and worship of God, but the
Jewish rest upon the sabbath, which its true was proper to them and symbolical,
and was not observed by the Patriarchs. And that they mean this may gathered
from Tertull. l. 4. contra Marcion. Hoc priviliigium donatum sabbato a
primordio, quo dies ipse compertus est, veniam jeiunii dico, where we see he
derives the sabbath as a day of rejoicing from the beginning of the world, and
thereupon grounds the custom of not fasting on that day: and yet the same man
denies, that the Patriarchs kept the sabbath, that is, the Jewish symbolical
(...).

4. The fourth conclusion, which I shall propound likewise as probable at least
is, that the Lords day which the Christian Church observes instead of the
sabbath is of divine institution, that as the seventh day from the Creation was
instituted by God himself, by a positive law obliging all the world, so the
Lords day is by positive Law obliging all Christians to the end of all the
world, instituted by authority from Christ, who changed the day by his
resurrection from the seventh to the first day of the week, and that the
Apostles published and ordained it, not as ordinary rulers and governors of
the Church, but as special extraordinary legates of Christ, by order from him;
and therefore the Church now has no power to alter this day. This assertion
follows upon the former; for if the sabbath was instituted by God before the
Law, and did oblige all mankind, as we have showed already for the essential
part of it, as a day of public worship and praise to the honor of the Creator
and that the ceremonial and symbolical part by a typical rest from labor was
that' which properly concerned the Jews, then it will necessarily follow, that
the sabbath only in this latter respect expired at the death of Christ; and
that the other part, which was the observation of the seventh day as a day of
public praise in honor of the Creator of all, having no reference to Christ,
(for wherein did the observation of a certain day for divine worship typifie
Christ or his benefits?) but being grounded upon moral reasons, and not given
only to the Jews, ought to continue still, unless it were altered by the same
authority, to wit, divine: and therefore the day being altered de facto, as
appears by the perpetual practice of the Christian Church, to the first day of
the week, it will clearly follow, that this could be done by no less then
divine authority, and so the observation of the Lords day may be truly said to
be Jure divino, as enjoined by him who is Lord of the sabbath, and therefore
had power to alter the day; which he did by his Apostles. Neither is it needful
(which some urge) that a clear precept of Christ should be brought for this
out of the new testament. It is sufficient, if by necessary consequence it can
be deduced from scripture: and though in matters of faith, which are of
absolute necessity to salvation for all to know, it may be granted, that they
are all expressed in scripture; yet for other matters that concern the
discipline, order and government, of the Church, it was not necessary to have
them expressed in writing (though many of them be occasionally mentioned) it
was sufficient, that they might be known by the daily practice of the Church,
wherein every one might read them written in large and Capital letters: which
universal practice and traditio of vide Hug.
the Church in these matters he that shall deny or question, may by the like
reason Grot. votum pro pace.
question the authors and number of the books of Canonical scripture, and
whether they were written by men divinely inspired, and so by consequence may
question the p. 140. 141. and discuss. apol.
authority of the scripture it self, which is conveyed to us no otherwise, then
by Revit. p. 173. 174. etc.
the universal and Catholic tradition of the Church. Besides how dangerous it
is, that the public exercise of Christian religion, should depend upon so week
a foundation, as authority humane, which may alter its own constitutions, and is
subject to manifold errors, I leave to the prudent and judicious Christian to
consider. The Lords day then I conceive to be grounded upon divine authority,
not only in regard that all authority is from God, and so divine; for so all
humane laws might be said to be by divine authority: Treatise of the Sabbath.
for it is true which learned Breerewood says, there may be divine authority
for humane decrees: and as Molina says well, Licet quae a regia and aliis
legitimis inferioribus p. 63. Molina tract. de iustit 2. disp. 27.
potestatibus rite praecipiuntur sunt de jure positivo, quod tamen illis, post
quam it a constitutae sunt pareatur, est de jure divino, -- cum legitime omnes
potestates a Deo sunt, Deique vices suo ordine tenent, dumque illis obedimus,
earumque precepta servamus, Deo pariter in illis paremus, Deique praeceptum and
voluntatem exequimur: though the commands of Kings and other inferior lawful
powers are only by positive law, yet that their constitutions be obeyed is by
divine law; for all lawful powers are from God, and are his Deputies in their
order, so that when we obey them, and keep their Commandments, we do also obey
God in them, and fulfill his will and Commandment. But I mean by divine
authority, that which is immediately divine in regard of the subject, God, or
Christ himself, who ordained and appointed this day, though it were published to
the world by the Apostles, as the messengers of Christ, as they published the
Gospel, and those things for which they had commission from Christ. It is true
that the Apostles instituted other things as ordinary governors of the Church,
which are in themselves changeable, as cannot be denied, as their orders about
widows, saluting with a holy kiss. and the like, which are now antiquated. But
that the Lords day was not of this latter sort, but of the former, besides the
former reasons, which are stronger then any I have seen to the contrary, may be
likewise evinced by the testimony of the Church, and of the most learned and
eminent Doctors of it in several ages, whose testimony in matters of fact and
things of this nature, is the best way that I know to prove what is not
clearly and evidently set down in scriptures, and that wherein the conscience
may most safely rest.

That text of Psalm. 118, 24. This is the day which the Lord has made let us
rejoice Athan. in hoc dictum. (...) mihi tradita etc. Ambros.
and beglad in it, is generally by the fathers applied to the Lords day, as
made or instituted by the Lord; so among others, Athanasius, Ambrose,
Chrysostom, Augustine, expound it. Justin Martyr in 2, Aponl. Antonim. says
Apostolus a Christo (...) ep. 83. Chrysostom. de resurrect. ser. 5. August. de
temp. 15.
(...) celebritatem accepisse, That the Apostles received from Christ himself
the celebrity of this day. Athanasius says (...) sabbati Dominus in diem
Dominicum transtulit, that the Lord himself has transferred the solemnity of
the sabbath to the Lords day Hom. de semente, and in the forementioned Hom.
upon these words, all things are delivered to me by my father, Infers the Lords
day to be of divine institution Cyrill l. 12 in John Cap. 58. speaking of the
apparitions of Christ upon this day, says, that Christ thereby sanctified this
day for solemn assemblies. Chrysostom on Genesis 2. 3. says, here God from the
beginning intimates this doctrine to us, to lay aside and separate one day in
every week for spiritual exercises. Saint Augustine Epist. 119. seems to say
the same, that the Lords day was declared by the resurrection of Christ, and ab
illo not ab illa, caepit habere (...), from him (that is, from Christ) it began
to be made a festival. Lactantius and others tell us, that the primitive
Christians expected Christ's return to judgment on that day by general
tradition, which shows, they thought it unalterable, and so no humane
constitution. Besides particular testimonies we have the public testimony of
the Church in her canons generally received in the the Christian world. Cap.
(...) Feriis, where it is, said, tam veteris quam (...) testamenti pagina
septimum diem (...), that both the old and new Testament have appointed the
seventh day for man's rest. In that famous constitution of Leo the Emperor and
(...). 54. for the keeping of the Lords day, it is said, we ought not to
encroach upon that one day which God has chosen for his own honor. Among the
canonists some of the chief are expressly for the divine right of the Lords
day; as Abbas Panormit. in c. 3, de Feriis Anchor. and others: and of the
latter canonists, (...) at large proves the festivtiy of the Lords day ab
Apostolis divina institutione edoctis (...) fuisse, that it was appointed by
the (...) instructed therein by divine institution Variar (...). l. 4. c. 19.
n. 5. and that to make it a humane institution were nimis indecorum, which he
makes to be the opinion of some men, and not generally received. And though
most of the Schoolmen following Aquinas herein make it only an ecclesiastical
constitution of the Apostles, (which they do upon this ground, that Christ gave
no special precepts but only about faith and the sacraments, which if it could
be here insisted upon might ealsiy be proved false) yet even of them some are
for the divine right, as Augr. l de verbo Feri. e. ss. 3. and Sylvest. verb.
Dominica, who affirms it to be the common opinon in his time and for the rest
who are for the jus ecclesiasticum, diverse of them say, that though the day be
absolutely alterable, yet morally and practically it is immutable, because this
change can never be put in practice, as Suarez says, and that it is so fixed
and deeply rooted, and so agreeable to right reason, that it can never be
changed ob defectum causae, because there be no such cause to change it, as
there was to fix it on this day, and that therefore the holy Ghost would never
permit the Church to change it, because such a change could not be for
edification, so Fileucius tract. '3. cap. 2. n. 16. 17. and Ballarmine says,
(...) divinum requirebat, ut (...) dies Hebdomadis dicaretur cultui divino,
that by divine right one day of the week ought to be consecrated to divine
worship. Decultu sanct. lib. 3. cap. 11. de die Dominico.

If we come lower down, diverse eminent divines of the reformed Churches go this
way, (though its true, that both of Luthers and Calvin's followers some seem to
incline to the other opinion) as Peter Martyr loco citato, Junius in his notes
upon (...), in cap. 16. Apol. And in his lectures on Gen 23. Piscator in Apoc.
1. 10. Tylnus syntag. loc. 44. p. 276. to whom diverse others may be added. If
we come to our own church The homily of the time and place of prayer is full
and copious, expressly affirming and that often, that God has commanded the
observation of the Sunday, or Lords day: which being the public voice of the
Church ought in points doubtful to have so much weight with every son of the
Church, as to turn the scale, when it hangs in aequilibrio; to which we may
add our learned Author, that great light of this Church, in the places
forequoted, and that judicious and (...) Hooker, that Malleus Schismatieorum,
who is very peremptory in the point, as having studied it thoroughly, Eccles.
Polit. lib. 5. n. 17. to whom may be added, Doctor Fullk on Revelation 1.
Doctor Hackwell: (...), with many others of great learning and judgment; not
to mention that Rabble of our disaffected Clergy, whose Schismatical and
factious practices, together with that ignorance and pride, which is generally
seen in most of them, and their Jewish principles, which they go upon, may
justly render their judgments suspected, so that their authority can be of
little weight with judicious, pious, and peaceable men; and therefore I should
suspect this opinion, if it were not (...) by better reasons and authority then
these men bring. Now to these reasons and testimonies, if we add, How Christ
honored that day with his resurrection, his apparitions to his Disciples
after: and sending the Holy Ghost on that day: the practice of the Apostles and
the first Christians, having their religious meetings on that day, the title of
the Lords day, which it had given in S. John's time, together with those high
titles and encomiums of the day, given by Ignatius, Chrysostom, Athanasius,
(...), S. Augustine, Leo, and others of the Fathers, calling it the Queen and
Princess of days, the Royal day, the most holy Festival, the first and chief
of all days, the venerable day, etc. we may well conclude, both that it was
the will of Christ, that day should be kept holy to him, and that the Church
esteemed it no less then divine, not a humane constitution.

5. Fifthly, concerning the fourth Commandment, whether it be in force, or what
we are tied to, by virtue of the fourth Commandment, I answer.

1. It is certain, there is a moral equity in the fourth Commandment, which
extends to us under the Gospel, viz. that some time be set apart for public
worship, and that not less then a seventh part; for if God thought it fit in
his wisdom to require a seventh part before Christ's coming, in all reason, we
that live now after his coming, ought to give him as much at least, we having
received greater benefits then they that lived before Christ by Christ now
exhibited; and having better and clearer promises with a greater measure of the
(...). now ordinarily given, so that a greater measure of mortification to the
world is now required, and therefore we ought as little, or rather far less
then they to mind worldly affairs, and to have our thoughts more raised up to
heavenly things. In regard of which moral equity, this precept extends to all
times and persons, and is therefore put among the other Commandments which are
purely moral, and so retains its power of obligation, and therefore the Church
has just cause to retain it in the Liturgy, and by that usual Antiphona at
the end of this Commandment, as well as of the rest; to pray, Lord have mercy
upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this Law.

2. Secondly, in regard of the particular day literally enjoined by this
Commandment: it is certain it does not oblige any since Christ, for the special
day here required, is the seventh from the Creation, not a seventh day in
general, (as some without any ground affirm) but that seventh day in special
which was then observed, which was no other then the seventh from the Creation,
for though the first part of the Commandment specifies not the day, but
requires only to sanctify the Sabbath, yet the reason added does plainly
limit the day to the seventh day from the Creation, and cannot be extended to
the Lords day without manifest absurdity, for who would not think this reason
ridiculous, God made heaven and earth in six days, and rested on the seventh,
therefore we ought, in imitation of him, to rest on the first day when he began
to work, besides that the text says expressly, that the Lord blessed the
seventh day and hallowed it, that is, not a seventh day, but that seventh day,
viz. the seventh from the Creation. And therefore those who would ground the
Lords day upon the letter of the fourth Commandment, must of necessity fall
into Judaisme, and observe the Saturday Sabbath, which was the error of
Brabourn and (...) who were censured, the one in the high Commission; the other
in Star Chamber, and were learnedly confuted by two learned Bishops, of
Winchester, and Eli, the one in a speech in Star Chamber, now extant; the other
in a full tract of this subject.

But though the day be altered from the last to the first day of the week, yet
I do not therefore say, that the seventh day from the Creation was ceremonial,
or expired as a ceremony at Christ's death, as is commonly said by some Divines,
for wherein could the keeping of a seventh day typifie Christ or his benefits,
but it was observed as a positive Law, yet of divine institution; and being no
natural Law, but depending upon Gods will and pleasure, might therefore by the
same authority, when the new creation was finished by Christ's resurrection,
(which overshadowed the first creation) be altered to another day in memory of
that greater benefit, and so accordingly it was.

6. Concerning the rest observed by the Jews, it is certain it was partly moral,
and partly ceremonial; moral in regard that the duties of public worship,
cannot be performed without a cessation from other labors; and ceremonial as
it looked (...). 20. 11.
backward, and forward; backward as a sign of Gods rest after the creation,
and of Deuteronomy. 5. 15.
their deliverance out of the Egyptian servitude: forward as a type of Christ's
rest in Exodus 31. 13.
the grave, Hebrews 4. of our rest from the servile works of sin in the time of
Aug. tract. 30. in Joh. and alibi. and in ep. 119
grace, as S. Augustine faith, and of the eternal rest in heaven, (...) 4.
Besides all which, it was also a sign to distinguish them from other people,
Exodus 20. 12.

Now for the rest required of us on the Lords day, it is not the same with that
of the Jews, but differs. 1. Because rest is now required only in reference to
the holy duties, which cannot otherwise be performed, not for it self, as if it
were pleasing to God, or the works of men's callings unlawful, but that they
might give way to works of a higher nature, to sacred duties, which if they be
not performed, the rest is a mere mockery, Sabbatum asinorum: whereas the rest
of the Jewish Col. 2. 16.
Sabbath was required for it self, they were to rest in their rest; and hence
it was, that the Jewish sabbath is reckoned by S. Paul among the shadows that
vanished at Christ's coming, and the Fathers generally make the Commandment of
the sabbath ceremonial, which if any should now observe, he should thereby
revive Judaisme, and in effect deny, that Christ the body is come; as S.
Augustine in the place alleged, Aug. de spir. and lit. cap. 14.
and elsewhere. Quisquis diem illum (...) observat, (...) litera sonat,
carnaliter sapit; whosoever observes that day according to the flesh, is
carnally wise: and hence it is, that generally the Fathers (...) to call the
Lords day, by the the name of sabbath; for we shall hardly find in any ancient
writers the Lords day called the sabbath, till some of late in our Church
sprung up, who usually style it by that name against all antiquity and reason:
whom some others of learning have (...) followed, being carried by the stream,
and not foreseeing the evils that have since followed, and were then intended
by those men.

2. Another difference which follows from the former is, that because the rest
now is not required for it self, but as it may further holy duties: therefore
it is not so strictly required of us as of them. They might not do some works,
which were neither against (...) or charity, they might not kindle a fire, or
dress meat, or bury the dead on that day, which no doubt are now lawful; and
the reason is, because their rest was symbolical and figurative, and therefore
that it might the more exactly Bellarm. de cult. sanct. lib. 3 cap. 10.
answer to the thing figured, must be the more exact: for as Bellar. says,
Figurae (...) esse (...), alioquin non bone significant, figures must be exact,
else they do not well represent the thing signified.

Now if any shall ask what labors and works we must abstain from, and how long
seeing to rest only in the time of public worship may seem to be enough in
reference to the performance of holy duties. I conceive it the most probable
answer, that herein we must be directed in particular, by the Laws, Canons, and
Customs of the Church wherein we live, and that by divine Law, as the
sanctifying of the day is required in general, so the resting from our ordinary
labors in reference to that end, is only required in general by the Law of
God, but the particular determination, of what works, and how long, and in what
manner with (...) circumstances, of which no general Law could be so fitly
given, is left to the Bishops and Pastors of the Church, for as God has
commanded public worship, by prayer, and praises, etc in general, but the
modification of it, for form, order, time and manner of performance, has been
left to the Church, who has always ordered these things, and altered them as
there was occasion: so for the abstinence from labors, what rest may be
necessary not only in the time of public duties, but before and after, as
preparatives thereto, and means of better profiting thereby, by meditations and
other exercises; and for the more solemnity of the day, for these, and the
like, I do not find that Christ has given any particular rules, but that
every one is herein to submit to the Canons, and orders of the Church, and to
conform himself thereto, and that this conformity in obedience to God, who
requires us to hear the Church, and obey our Pastors, is acceptable to God: and
therefore those that will not rest herein, but look for particular directions
out of Scripture for every thing, which indeed they cannot find, by writing
what ever they find about the Sabbath, and applying it to the Lords day, do
unawares sall into Judaisme, and perplex men's consciences into inextricable
Laborynths; as daily experience shows; whereas the constant practice of the
Church of Christ in all ages shows, that in these things she did use that
authority which Christ has given her, as appears by the several constitutions
both Ecclesiastical and Civil; sometimes enlarging, and sometimes restraining
the liberty of people in these matters.

And hence it is, that though the Fathers usually say, that all the glory of
the Sabbath is transferred to the Lords day; and though it be commonly said,
that the Lords day succeeds the Sabbath, yet the truth is, that it succeeds not
properly, as the Heir does his Father; at least it is not Here Is ex ass, as
Civilians speak, but as the light follows darkness, and the substance the
shadow; in regard that the rest of the Jews Sabbath, as it was symbolical is
expired, and only what was grounded upon moral equity in it, is continued in
the Lords day, in which for the particular manner of observing we must look to
the canons and customs of the Church, which are of such force in these things,
that though by the common Canon Law all festivals are from evening to evening.
Cap. 1. and 2. de Feriis. (...). cap. 13. n. 5. Covar. in 4. variar. resol.
cap. 19. n. 9. yet where the custom is to observe them from midnight to
midnight, or from morning to morning: such custom ought to be kept, if there be
lawful prescription for it, Panorm in c. 2 de (...) n. 1.
as Panorm. resolves.

7. Before we conclude this observation about the Sabbath, it may be fit to
consider, why it was so long observed after our Savior, together with the
Lords day; for we find, that for many years after the Apostles times, the
Sabbath was kept, as well as the Lords day, until the Council of Laodicea,
which was not long before the Council of Nice, and that it is still observed
among the Abyssines: and that Balsam. says, that the holy Fathers (...), did
in a manner equal the Sabbath with the Lords day. Gregory Nyssen. calls those
two days, fratres, brethren. Clem. constit. l. 7. cap. 24. Diem Sabbati, and
Diem Dominicam festas habete, quoniam illa creationis, altera resurrectionis
memoria dicata est, observe those two festivals, the sabbath and the Lords day,
the one in memory of the creation, the other of the resurrection; hence was
that old Custom of not fasting upon the sabbath, or Saturday, because it was a
day of rejoicing, and therefore those (...) festival days in the 53 Canon of
the Apostles, are expounded by Zonaras to be the Sabbath or Saturday, and the
Lords day; and in the 65 Canon, it is prohibited to fast either on the Sabbath
or Lords day, (...) only the Sabbath before Easter; Ignatius in Epist. ad
Philadelph. says, If any fast (...), on the Lords day or on the Sabbath,
(...), he is a murderer of Christ. Tertul: de jejuniis says, Sabbatum nunquam
nisi in Pascha jejunandum est, none must fast on the Sabbath or Saturday, save
before Easter. And from this cause it was, that Constantine (whose Edict we may
read in Eusebius for the free exercise of Christian Religion) forbids, that
they should be impleaded on the Sabbath or Saturday, as well as on the Sunday;
because both days were observed with public meetings. And in the Synod of
Laodicea, it was appointed, that besides the Law, (which was anciently read
upon the Saturdayes) the Gospel should be also read on that day. By all which
it may seem, that the Jewish Sabbath, and the Lords day, are both to be kept;
and by some learned men it is hence urged, that the sunday does not succeed the
(...), but wassuperadded to the sabbath.

But to this I answer, 1. That the sabbath was for some time used as a thing
indifferent, as were some other legal rites in favor of the Jews, and that
they might be the less offended, and more easily gained to the Christian
Church: as S. Paul circumcised timothy, and S. Peter abstained from some meats,
etc. not as things necessary but (...).

2. That though the legal rites were void at (...) death, and then expired, yet
as S. Augustine says, some time was required for their decent burial.

3. That though holy duties were performed in public on the Saturday, for many
years, yet the symbolical and typical rest, which was proper to the Jewish
sabbath, was not allowed, or practiced in the Church, and therefore when some
began to (...) on the Saturday, by resting on that day, it was forbid by
several Councels, as that of Laodicea cap. 29. the Council of Lions in cap. 1.
de consecr. d. 3. and the Sabbatarians were generally condemned for Heretics.
And therefore the observing of Saturday as a half holy day, as it is still in a
manner kept in many places with us, was not with reference to the Jewish
sabbath, but for the more honor of the Lords day, as a preparative to that
great festival: and therefore though the Church did allow some public meetings
on that day in the Church, yet we never find that the symbolical rest, which
is the proper and characteristical difference of the Jewish sabbath from
Christian festivals was ever allowed, but generally condemned.

And thus I have done with these observations and positions which I conceived
necessary to insert concerning the (...), to give some light, if possible, to
this so much agitated question, submitting all to the judgment of my
superiors in the Church, and ready to yield to what any judicious and learned
man shall upon better reasons propound.

CHAP. IIII.
Reasons of this Commandment. 1. Gods liberality in allowing (...) six days,
and requiring but one for himself. 2 The seventh is his own proper day. Who are
comprehended in the prohibition. 1. The Master of the family. 2. Children. 3.
Servants. 4. Cattle. 5 Srangers. The general reasons of this precept. 1. Gods
rest from the creation. Addition 22. Moral reasons sometimes given of a
ceremonial precept. The reason why a rest, and why on this day, are different
things: out of Maimon, Abenezra. 2. Reason, the benefit coming to mankind by
the creation. 3. Reason God blessed the seventh day.

IN the three next verses (namely the ninth, tenth and eleventh) God first
explaineth Reasons of this Commandment.
his meaning, or gives an explication or further exposition of this
Commandment, verse 9. and 10. and then gives a reason of the Commandment, verse
11, why they should yield obedience to it. In the explication there is order
taken as well concerning works, as persons. First for works, Six days shall
thou labor, etc. verse 9. Secondly for persons, Thou and thy son, etc. verse
10. And again in the same verses there is, 1. An Affirmative, Six days thou
shall labor, etc. verse 9. and 2. secondly, A Negative, Thou shall do no
manner of work, etc. verse 10. Again, there is 1. a Permission. Six days God
has given thee wherein thou may labor, and do all that thou have to do. 2.
And secondly an Opposition or Antithesis, But the seventh day he has reserved
to himself. Six days are thine, but the seventh his. He has bestowed six
days on thee, but the seventh he has reserved to himself. In the six days
thou shall do all, but on the seventh no manner of work.

Now in the opposition there are two by-reasons included (for the main reason
is 1. God liberality allowing us (...) days.
in the 11. verse, [ for in six days, etc.] The first is, That because God
has dealt so liberally with us, as to give us six days for our selves, and to
reserve only one to himself, therefore we should be the more ready to give him
that day, for by right of Creation, we and all ours are the Lords, (for he made
us of nothing) and in that regard he might justly challenge (...) and our
service all our days, and we (being but his Creatures) could not justly
challenge to our selves one day; In so much as if it had pleased God to have
given us but one day and reserved the other six to himself, we should have had
no just cause of complaint) if he had given us day for day, we could not only
have no just cause of murmuring but also ought to have opened our mouths to
praise him for it.

But seeing he has dealt so liberally with us, in granting us six days for
our own (...), and to do our work, and reserving but one to himself, we must
acknowledge it to be a liberal proportion and so it is (...) judice; and
therefore, if we be not clean void of good nature, it cannot but content us,
and keep us from (...).

We see in Adams case that when God had finished the Creation and put him in
Paradise, notwithstanding Gods bounty to him in granting him all the trees in
Genesis 2. 16.
the garden, (one only excepted) yet the devil was presently upon him, and
upbraided God with his niggardlines, in that, he had not given him freedom to
eat of 3. 1.
all the trees in the garden; and no doubt but the same devil uses the same
policy with us still in this (...). May you not do what you will with all the
days of the week? Now the consideration of Gods bounty to us, should answer
all such suggestions, for we cannot say, but that we are well dealt withal, he
having granted us two times, and a time, to his one time; six days to one, and
therefore how careful should we be to give him that one.

This should draw from us an answer like to that of Joseph to his Mistress. My
Master has kept nothing from me but thee, how then can I do this great
wickedness, and sin against God? All the days of the week has God granted
me, only one Genesis 39. 9.
has he reserved to himself, how can I then be so unkind, and unthankful as
(...) deny him that? Let not David in this be our pattern, who having many
sheep of his own, would notwithstanding pluck the one and only sheep out of
the poor man's 2 Samuel 12. 3.
bosom: for if we having many days of our own, take from God his one day and
pluck that one sheep out of Gods bosom, and make it common for our selves, by
doing in it our opus servile servile work, we are worthy to (...) 1000.
deaths, and God being so liberal, and dealing with us in so unequal proportion
to himself, as 6. to us, for one to him, taking of us but one for six: if we do
not his work on that day, we are to be taxed of extreme injustice and
ingratitude.

This is the meaning of those words ( and do all thy work) that whereas God
might have employed us in his work, and musing on his will all the days of
our life: but he is content to forbear and spare us the rest of the week, that
in that time all our own affairs might be dispatched, and none left undone, or
to be done on this day. God might say to us, as Nathan said to David. All this
have I given thee and more I would have given thee, if that had not been
enough: but certain it is, 2 Samuel 12. 8.
that he saw in his wisdom that these six days were sufficient, and therefore
wills us to remember, and still be so careful to order our affairs on these
days, that against his seventh day comes, we may be at leisure to sanctify
it. Because it is Gods own day


2. The second reason employed, is in these words. ( But the seventh day is the
sabbath of the Lord thy God) which contain the second opposition, and intimate
to us, that the seventh day is Gods own proper day with which we have nothing
to do to employ it as we please, and that it is plain theft and sacrilege to
rob God of this part of time which he has reserved to himself. For if God had
thought fit to have given us the seventh day too, then might we have wrought on
that day also, but seeing he has reserved it to himself we cannot without
plain theft, or robbery, break in upon this day to which we have no right, by
doing our own work upon it. Render therefore unto God that which is Gods, for
it cannot be withheld (...). 22. 21.
from him without sacrilege. It is as if a man should say, you may wear those
clothes which are your own and bought with your money, but this garment which is
bought with mine, you cannot without violence take from me: so likewise because
of Gods bounty to us, we cannot without ingratitude and manifest injury to him
take this day from him; because it is his, he will have it wholly to himself.
In it thou shall do no manner of work. Thou nor thy son etc.


Those who are comprehended within the Prohibition stand in five ranks.

1. Thou, secondly. Thy son and thy daughter. thirdly. Thy man (...) and
maidservant.

4. Thy cattle. 5. The stranger that is within thy gates. who are comprehended
in the prohibition. 1 The Paterfamilias.


1. First for the Paterfamilias, the master of the family. It is reputed to be
an especial preferment to be set over the family by the Lord of the family. And
as it is honos, an honor, so it is onus too, a charge for Cui plus datur, ab
eo plus petetur, to whom much is given, of him shall be much required. and
therefore the first charge Mat 24. 45.
is laid here upon him, that is the chief. For as long as man is in the
condition of a Lnc. 21. 48.
son, or a servant, so long he may say, Ego serviam, I will serve, but if once
he come to have the charge of a family, then he must say with Joshua, Ego and
domus (...), I and my house will serve the Lord.

In reference whereto, when Christ had converted Zacheus, he said. This day
Jos. 24. 75.
is salvation come to this house: why? because this man (who is chief of the
family) Luc. 19. 6
is the son of Abraham; and Abraham instructed his family. He must say to his
family, as Christ did to his Apostles, exemplum dedi vobis, I have given you an
example. For Genesis 24. 30.
Jo. 13. 15.
if Peter or whosoever is principal fall away, then others, yea Barnabas
himself Gal. 2. 11. 13.
will be drawn away too. So though he discharge the duty himself, yet if he
take not care that others under him discharge it also, he is a debtor. That is,
he ought to (...) so far from giving occasion himself or suffering others to
violate that day by working, or setting them that are under him to servile
work; that he together with them must see the day sanctified, and take care
that all join in those holy duties which are requisite to the sanctification of
the day. 2 Children in Deuteronomy. 20. 5.


2. The second is concerning children. Saint Augustines argument is good upon
that in Deuteronomy. 20. Where if a man had new built an house the manner was to
consecrate it. That if a man that has built a house be careful to consecrate
it, being but the fruit of his hands, then much more lies the care upon him of
consecrateing the fruit of his loins. We see this careful affection in Abraham,
that he would Genesis 18. 19.
command his sons to keep the way of the Lord, for where the greatest love is,
there is also the greatest desire, of conjunction as well in spirit as in body,
and in grace and holiness, and the means thereof (the service of God) as in
nature, even natural love, if it be true and rightly guided teaches man curare
(...), to take care for their childrens good as well as their own, and that for
their souls as well as their bodies.

3. In the third place, Servants are prohibited from work on that day. We see
in the 3 servants.
place before quoted, that Abraham was commended by God for the care (...) took
for Genesis 18. 19.
his household to do his service. And the Apostle says, that in the service of
God, Col. 3. 11.
God takes no notice of the difference of (...) from others, in Christ is no
difference of bond or free, thy servants must rest as well as thy self. And God
elsewhere gives another reason for it. Remember thou wast a servant, where thou
wast oppressed with labor. God has a care of them: and charity and humanity
requires, Dent. 5. 15.
that we wear not out our family with too much toil, lest the Commonwealth be
endangered by their hard usage. We read that in the Spartan and other
commonwealths diverse insurrections have troubled the states, by overburdening
of servants: therefore God (for the preservation of commonwealths provides
here, that they may have a day of rest and refreshment.

4. So likewise of (...). Gods mercy, care and providence extends likewise 4
Cattle.
psalm. 36. 7.
to them. Thou Lord (says the psalmist) shall save both man and beast, how
excellent is pro. 12. 10.
thy mercy O God? it extends to the bodies and lives of them, for A righteous
man regards the life of his beast, says Solomon. God therefore here takes
order that the beast be not overtired. He has also charged, that the earth
shall have its sabbath: if it have not, it will cry against us, and the furrows
there of will complain, Job. 31. 38.
as holy Job speaks, for Quod caret alterna requie durabile non est: neither
land nor cattle, if they rest not sometimes, cannot hold out: one end of Gods
providence herein is to restrain our covetous humor and desire which is such
that (rather then lose the least gain) we will put our land and cattle to the
utmost, therefore by this clause God takes order to restrain it.

Another end is, that by beholding the beasts to rest, we might be the more
(...). 3. 7.
stirred up and moved to sanctify a rest our selves; not that the rest of
beasts is acceptable to God, or required for it self, but that we may be
affected therewith, and put in mind of our duties: we read that in the fast of
Nineveh, command was given, let neither man nor beast, herd nor flock, taste any
thing: let them not feed nor drink water: not that God took any delight in the
fasting of beasts, nor that it, was acceptable to him: but that the (...)
seeing their beasts pined before them (...) be moved the more to repent and
humble themselves for their sins; so here, (...) Jews seeing their beasts to
keep a kind of sabbath, might the better (...) to keep it themselves.

5. The last is, the stranger within thy gates. Now the gates of a house or of
a city, 5 Strangers
(...) scripture signify a jurisdiction, or protection. He that is within
another (...) under his jurisdiction, and as he enjoys thereby protection
against injuries by coming within another gates, so also he must be subject to
his jurisdiction: when God told Abraham, that his seed should possess the
gates of his enemies, his meaning Genesis 22. (...)
was, they should conquer and be Lords of their cities. And when Lot told the
(...), that the Angels came under his roof, he signified that they came thither
19. 8.
to be under his protection. So that if a stranger come to remain within our
(...), or under our roof he is to be under our government as well as he enjoys
our protection, and therefore is to be under our care in point of religious
duties.

(...) case of jurisdiction, Nehemiah as long as he had hope to reclaim the
men (...) and Ashdod, (...) them to come within the gates of Jerusalem with
their Neh. 13. 19.
(...): ut when he found that (notwithstanding his threats) they would come in,
and (...) markets upon the sabbath, he shut the gates against them at the (...)
of the (...) or preparation of the sabbath. And thus we see the meaning of
(...) Commandment for works and persons in general and particular. [Now there
(...) reasons for it.

(...) first, which is the general and main reason is [ for in six days the
Lord General reasons of this precept.
(...) heaven and earth etc.] the rule (as we said before) of (...) precepts is.

(...) be observed, that a moral reason is often given of a ceremonial precept,
(...) in ceremonies there is a general moral equity: (...) instances, may be
(...) 24 of Ceremonies.
(...) the Law, but when a reason is given as a full and adequate cause of such
a precept (...) the immediate and essential cause of (...) it is true, that if
such a reason, be moral (...), there the precept is so too.

Besides, it is observed by Maimonides and others, that the cause why a rest is
enjoined, and the cause why it was upon this day, are two different things. The
first (...) was the true and original cause of the rest, is expressed Deuteronomy. 5.
because of their deliverance from the Egyptian bondage, to keep a memorial of
it. The other is expressed here, for whereas any other day might have been
chosen for this rest, yet God thought fit to pitch upon this day, because it
had been consecrated for a day of joy and praise from the beginning, by a
greatful remembrance of (...) creation, and because on that day God gave over
and finished his work So Aben-Ezra, presat. in Decal. Isaac. Arania and others,
and hence it was called the sabbath. But yet though it were granted, that Gods
rest from the creation was the principal and immediate reason of this precept,
yet this makes it not so simply moral or immutable, as (...) law of nature, for
(...) still a positive precept, jure divino positivo, which may be changed by
the same authority that made it, and soits certain, that the day is de facto
changed, and (...) it was by divine authority is most probable, as is formerly
proved in the (...) observations.

(...) immutabilis precepti, facit preceptum immutabile. If the reason of the
commandment be immutable (as this is) then it makes the commandment
unchangeable for the substance of it. Because I have rested (says God)
therefore shall thou rest in honor of me. Creator imitandus a creatura, the
Creator is to be imitated by the creature, is a firm reason and immutable.

2. Another reason may be gathered out of the same words, namely, the benefit
that (...) to mankind by that which the Lord did in these six (...). Other
reasons Exodus 23.
elsewhere God uses, as proper and peculiar only to the Jews, but this
benefit Deuteronomy. 5. 15.
by the creation being general, is most fit for all, and may be a means to
employ and exercise us in the meditation of Gods works, and in his praise for
it, as the 92. Psalm shows us, which psalm was made especially for the sabbath
day. As also to the continuing of the memory of the Creation, to keep us from
Paganism: for if the duty of the memorial of the creation had been duly and
successively kept from the beginning and so continued, that great doubt which
troubled all the Philosophers so much [whether the world had a beginning] had
been taken away. And therefore this day being one especial means to keep men
from Atheism, was therefore sanctified by God, to be a day of rest. This was
one reason why the not keeping this law was so severely punished, by the
Mosaical Law, as appears by the man that gathered sticks upon that day and was
therefore put to death which was not only because the law of the sabbath was
then newly made (to wit for the ceremonial and typical part which consisted in
rest) and therefore required the severer punishment, but also because, the not
observing of that day, was in effect a denial that God created the world.

Augustine treating upon the Creation, says, it is true that God might have
been in Genesis
pleased to have said as well fiat mundus totus, let all the world be made in a
moment, as fiat lux, let there be light, in the first day: it had been all one
to his omnipotency to have done it at once, as in six (...): and enquiring
further into the cause why he did not so, could find no other reason, but that
God by creating one thing after another would teach us that we should proceed
in the musing and meditation upon the works of creation severally and in order,
as God made them. So did king David, and so did Basile and Ambrose, who wrote
some books of it. And (...). 104.
this course of meditation was much in use in the primitive Church,

3. The last reason is. Because the Lord blessed the seventh day. He did not
only rest on that day, but he consecrated it also. Besides exemplum, his
example, there is institutio, he has solemnly instituted it. So that it shall
be to us (...) animae, the Market day of the soul, for our amendment in that we
(...) amiss in the foregoing week, and for the regulating of us in the week
following.

But this is not all: the force of this last reason is in this. God says,
because have blessed and hallowed it, seeing I have appointed it, see you do
not resist me, butsubmit your selves to my ordinance. He that keeps it not,
and resists Gods ordinance, resists God himself, and they that do so
receive to themselves damnation. Romans 13. 2
Therefore that which God has hallowed we must not pollute.

We see the reasons why this rest is to be kept, let us now see how far it is
to be kept, and what is required to the sanctification of it.

CHAP. V.
How far this rest is to be kept. Why this word Remember is prefixed. Such
works to be fortorn, which may be done before or after. Necessity of a vacation
from other works that we may attend Holy duties. Man's opposition to God, when
he bids rest, then we labor, (...) contra. six works in particular forbidenthe
Jews. Whether the same (...) absolutely now forbidden the Christians. Rest
necessary only for the means of sanctification, or the practice of it, as in
works of mercy or necessity, sabbatum boum and Asinorum. Sabbatum aurei vituli.
Sabbatum (...). Sabbatum Satane.

THe substance of this fourth Commandment consists especially in these two
things. 1. In the outward rest of the body, otium. 2. In the holy duties which
are the end to sanctify it. Sanctificatio.

1. As before we are willed to remember, it both in the week before the day
come, Rest why the word Remember, is prefixed.
partly because in the day it self we are to yield an account to God of the
former fix days work in singultu and scrupulo cordis with trouble and sorrow
of heart: partly also as Augustine speaks ne quid operis rejiciatur in diem
festum, that no work, that might be done in the former days, be put of to the
holy day: so when it is come we must avoid two things, which as Saint Gregory
observes may cause us to forget to sanctify it. 1. The one is aliorum exempla
other men's ill examples 2. The other is Ludorum and spectaculorum studia, the
practice and desires we have to unlawful sports and sights: to which men are
more naturally addicted, then to the sanctifying of the day.

And in as much as we are to esteem of the sabbath as Deliciae Domini, the
delight Esa. 58. 13
of the Lord, and that these two things are main obstacles and impediments to
such estimation of it, we must not only remember it before hand, but when it
comes also.

That which we are to remember is. Otium.
A day of rest: and Sanctum.
to sanctify it. Augustine comprehends them both in two words, otium sanctum,
a holy rest. 1. A ceasing from labor: and if we ask from what labor? It is as
an ancient Canon of the Church shows, Ab eo quod antea fieri poterat, aut
quod postea fieri poterit, from that which might have been done before, and
from that which may be done afterward. And whatsoever is meant by the labor
and work of the week day, that must be forborne on this day, with this proviso,
That, Ab eo quod nec antea fieri poterat, nec postea poterit, non est
abstinendum; such works of necessity, which cannot be de done either before or
after, are not to be forborne.

The grounds are laid by Ep. 157 ad Optat.
Augustine and In Ezekiel. 20.
Jerome thus. There is nothing (as the Preacher says) but must have its time:
As we destinate a set time for our bodies repast, sleep, and the like: in (...)
time we usually take order, that we be not interrupted, Eccl. 3. 1.
or disturbed, by any other occasions. And so in other temporal things, the
more serious they are, we go about, the more care we take, that we be not
hindered in them; but that we may wholly mind them, and hoc agere. So in the
case of spirituals, there ought to be a set time for the building up of the
soul, and procuring holiness to it, and exercising holiness by it, wherein we
are to use no less care, being a matter of greatest importance: but that in
the promoting of it, all impediments. may be removed, that may hinder us in it;
ut promptiores simus ad divinum cultum, cum non habemus impedimentum, says S.
Augustine, that we may be more ready for divine worship, when we have no lets
or impediments to hinder us. And this is so plain, as that we see even the
Council of Trent (taking order for observing of holy days) has set down
concerning the holy duties which are to be performed on those days, that they
are such, Quae ab his qui ab humanarum occupationum negotio detinentur, omnino
praestari non possunt, which cannot be performed by those that are busied with
worldly or secular affairs.

So many of the Fathers that write upon this place [ vacate and videte, quia
ego Psalm 46. 10
sum Dominus, Be still and know that I am God] show, that by the rule of
natural wisdom, the Philosophers held, Postulandum esse secessum, ut melius
intendamus: a vacation from worldly affairs is necessary, that we may the
better intend etcontemplate on heavenly things. Our heads must not be occupied
with worldly thoughts, when we are about the affairs of the soul: not that the
works of the other six days are evil in themselves, but because they are apt
to distract the mind from that, which is proper to this day.

Now Otium, Rest, being the first part, it is a very strange thing that the
nature of man should be altogether so averse from Gods will, that when the
Precept is difficult and laborious, requiring some pains and travail, then they
will be idle: and where this precept is not laborious but easy, as this to
rest, they will (rather then not break the Commandment) take pains: that is,
they will even against their nature, make themselves business, and pick out
that day of all the days of the week that he has chosen, so that it shall be
a kind of policy, to make advantage of that day, and to find out some labor
on that day, on which he has forbid us to labor. And so much for the
easiness of the Commandment and the perverseness of man.

We find in Scripture six several kinds of prohibitions from working on this
day. Particular works forbidden the Jews.


1. Before the Law given, when the people departed from Elim, and came to the
wilderness of Sin, there was a prohibition from gathering Manna, there was
Exodus 16. 1, 4, 26.
better food to gather, of which he that eats shall live for ever. The Lord
is to be tasted. Job. 6. 58.
1 Pet. 2. 3.
2. A second is, As there must be no gathering of Manna, nor going out to
gather it that day, so there must be no buying of it, though it should be
brought to us. Ne. 13. 15. etc.
So Nehemiah protested against buying and selling, which shows the
unlawfulness of it: because on that day is Mercatura animae, it is the market
day of the soul, buying and selling on that day is forbidden. 3. A third is
that which the Prophet Jerem. mentions, that is the carrying of burdens Jer.
17. 21.
on that day: and the better to dissuade the people from that kind of work,
the Prophet promises, in the person of God, great blessings to them if they
forbear; 24.
and threatens great plagues upon them if they did not, for if they made that
their day of (...), God would send upon them a burden, which they should sink
under, viz. Captivity and desolation by the Enemy, he would kindle a fire in
Jerusalem, and burn up the gates and palaces thereof. verse ult. 4. Another
thing prohibited by the Law, is working in harvest time, because the inning of
harvest, and gathering of grapes might seem to be a matter of great necessity.
Exodus 34. 21.
Six days shall thou work, but on the seventh day thou shall rest: in earing
time, and in harvest time thou shall rest: so that the provision for the whole
commonwealth must give place unto the rest of this day. 5. A fifth thing
prohibited is Travailing or Journeying on the Sabbath day. Cras erit Sabbatum
jehovae, maneat quisque in loco suo, neque egrediatur quisquam die septimo: 16.
29.
to morrow is the Sabbath of the Lord, Abide ye every man in his place: let no
man go out of his place the seventh day. 6. The last is above the rest. For
whereas God (in the three Chapters before) had given Moses a platform for the
building of a Tabernacle, and taken order that he should go presently in hand
with it: yet in the 31 Chapter, he says notwithstanding, Verily my Sabbaths ye
shall keep, whosever works on that day, the same Exodus 31. 13, 14, 15.
person shall be surely put to death. Which is as much, as if he had said:
Though that work may seem most lawful, and tending most to my glory of all
other, yet ye shall not break the Sabbath to do it: and so verse 15 he gives an
universal restraint, whosoever does any manner of work on that day, shall be
put to death: any manner of work, an universal prohibition, and the penalty
threatened was accordingly executed, upon him that gathered sticks. Numb. 6. 15.
35. he was stoned to death by Gods special appointment.
And the Lord tells the people, that if they pollute the Sabbath by bearing
burdens, he would kindle such a fire in the gates of Jerusalem, that should
devour the Jer. 17. 27.
palaces of it, and not be quenched.

The Prophets generally urge the observation of this Commandment above the
rest. And we may observe, that there has seldom been any strange visitation by
fire, but where there has some notorious profanation of the Sabbath gone
before. So that when it shall please God to visit us with the like judgment,
we may conjecture what has been the cause of it.

Concerning the rest now required on the Lords day, and the difference thereof
from the Jewish symbolical rest, which was therefore more strict, see the
former Additional observation, observation 6.

Therefore to conclude this point, let them that go out to gather Manna, carry
burdens, buy and sell, gather harvest, journey and travail up and down, or do
any Sermon. 3. de quadrag,
the most lawful work, not think these things to be otium sanctum or Sabbatum
Jehovae, a holy rest, or the Sabbath of the Lord, but (as Leo says) Sabbatum
Tyri, the Sabbath of Tire.

The Council of Mentz (held in the time of Charlemain Anno Dom. 813) has this
Canon. Omnes (...) Dominicos cum omni veneratione decrevimus observari, Can. 37.
and a servili opere abstineri, and ut (...) in (...) minime sit, nec placitum,
ubi aliquis ad mortem vel poenam judicetur; we have decreed that all the Lords
days be observed with all reverence, and that servile labor shall be
forborne, and that no market be kept on those days, nor that any Courts be
kept either to condemn Can. 35.
men to death or punish them. Those that offend are to be deprived of the
communion for three years. And the Council of Tyburis ( Anno 895. in the time
of the Emperor Arnulph) has one Canon to the like purpose, as well for the
observation of other holy days, as the Lords day. In the second Council of
Mascon ( held anno 582) severe punishments were to be inflicted upon those that
should not Can. 1.
observe the Lords day, and that toto die, all the day long. As it was larger
for the fault, so it was milder for the punishment, for they suspended those
that violated this Canon from the Communion but for half a year: so strict were
they for the sanctifying of this day; and that (as one says) because God
requires the rest, not for the rest it self, sed quia hoc die Deo tantummodo
vacandum, because we must this day consecrate our selves wholly to God.

Now here will arise some questions. Whether the strict Commandment given
Whether the rest enjoined the Jews obliges Christians
to the Jews, of kindling no fire, and consequently of dressing no meat upon
the Sabbath be to be observed by us Christians.

To this we answer Negatively, for this was Ceremonial, and belonged only to
the Jews, For it is a general rule, that every moral or eternal duty of the
Law, may be performed by all men at all times. But they which inhabit under the
Northpole (as it is well known) cannot be without fire one day; and to let it
go out were to their utter destruction and so they that dwell under the burning
Zone, under the Equinoctial, cannot well keep their meat above one day: so that
this being Ceremonial, the Christian is exempted from the observing of it, as
being a thing not observable through the whole world, though it might have been
observed by the Jews: and therefore was it a peculiar precept to them only,
because they had no obstacle, but might have kept it.

2. The second question is: Whether the six several works formerly prohibited
Whether all the works fordden to the Jews, be also now forbidden.
the Jews, be absolutely forbidden to Christians; as to travail etc.

For answer to this, we will go no further then the Precept it self.

The Sabbath must be remembered (...)

Our rest must be ad sanctificandum, to sanctify it: the outward rest is
destinate sanctificationi to sanctity: ideo quiescimus, ut sanctificemus, we
therefore rest, because we should sanctify: so that where our rest is not
destinata sanctificationi, applied to sanctification, it is not required, and
where sanctification cannot be sine quiet without rest, there a rest is
required.

Certain it is that a man may rest and not sanctify; so likewise, he may
sanctify and not rest: and therefore in the first case, it is said, there are
many resters, and but few sanctifiers. Now sanctification consists either, 1.
In the means of sanctification. Or 2. in declaring our inward sanctification by
the practice and works of it in our lives. And where the rest is not necessary
for one of these, or not destinated to them, (it being a subordinate thing) it
may be forborne. The rule in Logic is, tantum destinati sumendum est, quantum
prodest ad finem: we must take so much of that which is appointed for the end,
as conduces to the attaining of that end. As in the case of Medicine, so much
is to be taken, as will serve to the end for which it is taken.

Again, for the means of sanctification, Christ defending his Disciples against
the Matthew. 12. 5.
Jews (who were altogether urgers of the bodily rest only) shows, that the
rest in regard of the sanctification may be broken: as in the Priest in
sacrificing, (that time being the most laborious time for him, as it is now the
greatest day of labor for our Minister) was blameless, because he was in
opere cultus Divini, employed in the work of Gods worship. We read also in the
Acts of the Apostles of a Sabbath Acts 1 12.
days journey; and of the like in the Old Testament, where the Shunamitish 2
Reg. 4. 23.
woman coming to her husband for the Ass, he says to her, Wherefore will thou
go to the Prophet to day? It is neither new moon, nor Sabbath, as if the custom
had been then, to go to the Prophet that day, when they had no public meetings
elsewhere. So that where public and lawful assemblies are not, a man may take
a Sabbath days journey to join in public worship with others. Thus much for
the first part of sanctification.

But this is less acceptable to God then the other part which is the practice
of sanctification, for this is the end, the other but the means: and therefore
our Savior being reproved by the Pharisees for a work of healing upon the
Sabbath, tells them, that if they had known what this means (which he cites
out of the Prophet Hosea 6. 6.
(...)) I will have mercy and not sacrifice, you would not have condemned
Matthew. 12. 7.
the guiltless. Mercy being indeed a practical work of sanctification, and
preferred before the means. So that in regard of the practice of
sanctification, a man may leave the very means, as to show a work of mercy. As
if there should happen a fire, or a man or woman to fall into a swoun, or a
woman to be in travail in time of divine service, or sermon, we are to leave
the means and practice the work, in showing mercy, by saving the life or goods
of those that need our help, and would otherwise have perished: for it is a
true rule, that periculum vitae pellit Sabbatum; the danger of life excludes
the Sabbath. For as God will be glorified on this day for the works of his
Creation, the memorial whereof was a cause of the institution of this day from
the beginning: so no less is he glorified in the preservation of his
creatures. We read John 6. 12.
that our Savior Christ was careful to save the fragments, and commanded them
to be taken up, and his reason was, because he would have nothing lost. If not
the least, much less the life of any thing may be lost, and if he be careful of
the life of other things how much more then think you is he careful for the
life of man? He practiced himself this work of mercy upon the Sabbath upon the
man that was in peril of Matthew. 12. 13.
his life.

And indeed Necessitas facit legem exlegem, Necessity makes law an Outlaw. In
the Law it is said, Thou shall not see thy brothers Ass or his Ox fall down by
the way, and hide thy self from them, but thou shall surely help to lift them
up again. Nay Deuteronomy. 22. 4.
we see in the Law, that God himself is not so strict in observing the
practice, as many now adays are. For in one place where he appoints the
sanctification of the 7th day Sabbath, and prohibits all works, yet he has
there a Proviso, Save that which every man must eat, that may be done of you.
And in the Gospel our Savior tells the Exodus 12. 16.
Jews, that they watered their cattle on the Sabbath day. Luke 13. 15.


But we must take this caution by the way, that we use not this liberty
according to the flesh, nor as a cloak, as the Apostles speak, and that these
works of Mercy Gal. 5. 13.
1 Pet. 2. 16.
in preserving the life of Man and beasts, and other of Gods creatures be used
present non imminente necessitate, in case of present not imminent necessity.
As when any present danger appears against my life, I am to defend my self: for
in presenti necessitate quisque Magistratus est, and quisque personam Dei
habet, ut potius occidat, quam occidatur: in urgent, and present necessity
every one is a Magistrate, and represents the person of God, to kill rather
then to be killed. But if the danger be not present but only imminent, as, one
tells me, there is wait laid to kill me, I must then repair to the Magistrate:
so that for present necessity or peril, there is an exemption, the Lord has
resigned his right into our hands, but not upon an imminent peril or necessity,
which may be prevented or avoided.

On the other side, we are to observe another Proviso. We must be careful that
(because God sees the heart, and we are to deal with him) we be sure the
danger could not be prevented, nor the work be deferred, but that present
danger and necessity enforces us to it. For we must not draw a necessity upon
our selves, or pretend a necessity when there is none, because God will not be
mocked, though we may delude the eyes of men.

This is to be remembered, because of the practice of some who Inn their
harvest on the Sunday, pretending that it is not Gods will, that any of his
creatures should perish, which is true, and might lessen the offense, if they
did it only for preserving the creature, and not for their own gain and
profit, which if they pretend, let them know, that God sees their hearts and
knows their intentions.

Therefore for trial of men in this case, it were good if to put a dfference
between their works on that day, and upon other days, they would do as they
did 1 Cor. 16. 2. lay up on the first day of the week, whatsoever they gain or
save by their work on that day, and give it to the poor; by this means it would
appear with what hearts they wrought on this day, whether only to save the
Creature, or out of a desire of lucre and gain. Thus we see what rest is
commanded, and how these cases may be resolved.

3. But here arises another question. When we have rested is that all, we are
to do? Surely no. It is not sufficient that we rest, if we do not sanctify
too. Leo Homil. 3. de quadrag.
said of the people of his time, that on this day their care was, been vestiri,
and nibil agere, keep holy day, by wearing gay clothes, and doing nothing. Now
as S. Paul said 1 Timothy 4. 8.
of bodily labor that it profitteth little; so we may say of bodily rest, that
it profits less. This rest is to holiness and not to idleness. We must not
be (...) on that day of rest. To keep a Sabbath therefore, and not be able to
give account of some good thing done by us in it, is that which the Fathers
call Sabbatum boum and (...) Asinorum.
asinorum, the oxen and asses keep as good a sabbath as such do.

Besides these Idle sabbath keepers, there are two other sorts of people, that
are Sabbatum aurei vituli.
neither idle nor well employed.

1. Of the first sort Augustine speaks, and they were either 1. such as did
vacare De december choreis c. 3 and ser. 1. in psalm. 32. Hier. in 20 E. zek. hom.
25.
(...), theatris, spectaculis etchoreis, spend their time in pastimes, shows,
stageplayes and dancing: or else those that 2. gave themselves on the Sabbath
venationi, to hunting. To which Leo adds such as did vacare chartis,
rationibus, etcommessationibus, passed the day in playing at Cards, and in
revelling: and so addicted were Sermon. 3. de (...).
they to these things, as that they were not at al occupied in any work
ofsanctification. Greg. 113.
These men's Sabbath, (as Augustine well observes) is like that of the people
in Exodus Cras observabimus (...) Jebovae. To morrow shall be a sabbath to the
Exodus 32. 5. 6.
Lord, they would keep a sabbath to him, but it should be (as in the next
verse) to eat and drink and play, this sabbath I say was kept to the Calf, and
therefore he calls it Sabbatum vituli (...), the sabbath of the golden Calf.

For as we may not keep open markets, go to plough or to Law on that day, so
neither should we spend the time in hunting, nor yet in dancing and sporting.
Nor spend our time ordained for sanctification in beholding sights, stageplaies
and the like. Not because these are in themselves evil or unlawful, but in that
they hinder our sanctification against such profanation of this day, severe
order was taken by diverse councels, as Council. Gangr. 5. Can. 8. Council.
Agath. 38. Can. 1.

Some christians in the primitive times were so far from this, that they would
sit in the oratory all the Lords day, praying and hearing, without eating or
drinking: insomuch as by their long fasting diverse diseases grew among them:
whereupon the same council of Gangra in Paphlagonia held (...). Dom. 327. Was
Can. 18.
forced to make a Canon with an Anathema annexed to it, against those who
thenceforward should fast upon the Lords day. But though we shall not need to
fear such zeal in our times, yet it shows to us the great and excellent
examples of abstinence used in the Primitive Church, to make them more fit for
the service of God.

1. The other sort are they that spend their time this day in gluttony, Lust,
drunkenness, Sabbatum Satanae.
and such like vices, which ought not at any time, much less on that day, be
practiced. For if the affairs of our calling, or the sports lawful on another
day must not be used on this day. much less any vice which is unlawful at any
time for hereby a double iniquity is committed. 1. first because the
commandment is violated and this day seems to be picked and singled out of all
other days despitefully against the Majesty of God, 2. Secondly because it is
an abuse of the Creatures of God and a breach of other commandments. And
therefore as the other was Sabbatum Tyri, so these do celebrare sabbatum (...),
keep a sabbath to the devil.

CHAP. VI.
The second thing commanded, is sanctification, which is the end of the (...).
The kinds of sanctification, public and private. How the holy Ghost works in
(...) sanctification. The special acts wherein the sanctification of the day
consists. 1. prayer. 2. The word read, and preached. 3. Meditation of what we
have heard, and upon the works of God out of Psalm. 92. 4. Conference. 5.
Praise. 6. Sacraments and discipline at special times. The end of these means,
our sanctification and Gods glory.

TO what end then must this rest be? why, to holiness: we must apply it to The
second (...) The sanctifying of the rest.
that end, to which God has appointed it, and use that holily which God has
sanctified. The right sabbath is called Deliciae (...), the delight of the
Lord, wherein he takes pleasure: and that is truly observed, when we not only
cease from our Esa. (...). 13
own work, as those of our calling, but of those of our corrupt nature and
will: by ceasing from that which is pleasant in our own eyes this is to keep
Sabbatum (...) a sabbath the delight of the Lord: to make it a day, honor God
and to learn Gods will, and having learnt it to practice it, whereby he may
bless us, and bring us to the inheritance of our heavenly rest. Whereas on the
contrary, if the highways of Sion (...). 1. 4. 7.
complain, that none come to her sanctuary, or that if we come, we so behave
our selves in it that the adversary mock at her sabbaths. Then God himself will
take acourse as the prophet speaks, (...) nostrarum, he will cast dong upun
our faces, even the dung of our solemn feasts, that is, he will make them as
odious to us as dung, and we shall loath them. Or (as it is in another Mal. 2.
3.
place) he will punish it with fire unquenchable. Jer. 17. 10.


The next thing is the kinds of sanctification viz public and private. public
sanctification.


1. It must be sanctified in the public assembly there must be Sacra Synaxis a
holy Lev. 23. 3.
Convocation.

The heathen man could say, that a good thing done and performed die one, is
well, but better if by many: by a whole parish or City together publicly. The
reason is 1. in respect of God, that he might have the more glory, when he is
praised in the great congregation and publicly acknowledged before all the
world, which was the chief end of the (...) institution of this day, by such
public meetings the day is sanctified to God for to sanctify a day: and to
call a solemn assembly, are all one as we may see in Joel. 1. 13 and 2. 15. 2.
In respect the church that all may be known to profess the same faith and to
be in one bond of obedience when they all meet in one place, at the same time
on the same day to glorify God. 2. That the means of sanctification as prayer
may be the more effectual, for vis (...) fortior. If the prayers of one just
man be so effectual and prevalent with God, much more when many meet together,
their prayers offer a holy violence to God, and as it were besiege heaven. 3.
in respect of the commonwealth, the heathen could (...), that this (...)
meeting together in one place was the means of (...) it maintained amity. And
the refore they which bring in tyranny seek to divide and separate men and
forbid all meetings, and assemblies by that means, to cause them to be
disjoynted (as it were) in their affections. But God in his service will have
men to meet together, psalm. 68. 6.
because they shall be of one mind. This (...) sanctification.

There is also private sanctification. From those public meetings which are
nundinae private sanctification.
sprituales, spiritual faires, every man must carry away commeatum (...)
provision for his soul, for the informing his understanding, reforming his
will, and regulating his affections, and in this we must do, as men do at a
market, provide for our use all the week following. And being thus stored, and
provided, that Ezeh. 38. 23.
great end will be gained, that God may be sanctified, that is, that he may be
magnified as the (...) expounds it.

And as the chief end of this day, is, that God may be sanctified, that is,
magnified so the subordinate end is, that we may be sanctified, by the duties
which we must Exodus 31. 13.
then perform. The sabbath was a sign between God and his people, that they
might know that it was he that sanctified them. That so they being sanctified,
might bring forth the fruits of sanctification as Christ says that he
sanctified himself for our sakes, not for his own Job. 17. 19. Now God
sanctified it 1. By appointing it to a holy use as the (...) was sanctified
from the womb. 2. By separating it from Jer. 1. 5.
Zach. 73.
other days, for things or persons sanctified are senered from common use and,
1 Cor. 10. 16.
3. by giving a special blessing to the holy duties of his worship, on that day
performed. And thus he makes it holy, or sanctifies it. And as God thus made
the day holy, we must sanctify our selves, and then sanctify the day as
Hezekias said to the Levites, sanctify your selves, and then as it follows,
sanctify the house of God, what God has sanctified or made holy, that we may
reap the benefit of it, we must sanctify our selves, we cannot make it holy,
but keep it holy, it is our 2 Cron. 29. 5.
duty to keep holy. for if a thing be destinated to an use, and be not applied
to it, it is (...). We must not then make that common which God has
sanctified, we are to apply it to the end to which God has destinated it, and
use that holily which God has sanctified. The destination is from God, the
application must be from our selves. When the instruments of the tabernacle
were sanctified Act. 10. 15.
whatsoever touches them must be holy, so here God having sanctified this Romans
15. 16.
day, all that touch it. that live and breath in it, that behold the sun or
light that Lev. 8. 10.
day, must be holy. 1 Jo. 2. 27.


Now for the means of sanctification, it is plain, that we are sanctified by
the holy Ghost and this sanctifying has a resemblance to that of the Levitical
sanctifying, where nothing could be sanctified, but it must have unctionem, be
anointed with oil, a figure of the spiritual unction, which is nothing else
but the spiritual working of the holy Ghost in our hearts so that we must first
look whether we have this unction in us, that is, whether we have the holy
Ghost, by (...) we must be sanctified, which as it is the gift of God (we have
it not of our selves) so God denies it not to those that ask it, as our Savior
speaks, we must be fitted to receive it. Luke 11. 13.
As it is God that gives it, so he gives it not to any but those that are
prepared to receive it; that we may understand this, we may take notice how the
Holy Ghost is compared to fire, now the matter must be prepared and gathered by
us, but it is God that gives the spark, and makes it burn, and when God has
kindled the spark, it must be our duty to blow the spark, and look it go not
out. Quench not the These. 5. 19.
spirit, says the Apostle, God will not give the spark it we do not prepare
matter, and though we prepare matter, yet it will not burn, unless God kindle
the fire, so that the holy ghost, and by consequence sanctification is not got
by following the devises of our own brain, ye shall not do that which is good
in your own eyes Deuteronomy. 12. 8.
(says God) but according to the prescript method which God has set down we
must gather matter for this heavenly spark, which the holy Ghost must set on
fire, and this is done by attending to the duties of public worship on that
day; for if any shall wilfully keep at home on that day, though he be never so
well occupied, having no just cause of his absence from God house, and yet
thinks he pleases God, the fathers of that ancient council of Gangra, have
pronounced an anathema Can. vlt.
against him.

For the means to sanctification the special duties and acts wherein the
sanctification The duty of sanctification
of the day consists, no other directions can be given, then what we formerly
gave for the means to attain knowledge, only we premise that which Saint
Augustine says of iteration, that a man may say, Domine scis, quia dixi,
Domine scis quia (...), Domine scis quia (...) sum. Lord thou know I have
sanctified thy name because I have preached it, Lord thou know I have spoken
of it again and again, Lord thou know I have been witness of the truth.

Sain Paul attributes sanctification of every thing to prayer premised: and
prayer.
1 Timothy 4. 5.
therefore it is termed the preparative to all the duties of a Christian; more
plainly, Mar. 35. 39.
Our Savior very early before day went out into a solitary place, and there
prayed, and afterward came and preached in the Synagogue, which is very
probable to have been on the sabbath day, whereby we may observe, that Christ
himself took prayer to be the first means of sanctification.

1. Now for the times of this exercise of prayer on the Lords day, they are two
1. Before the other public duties; and 2, After. 1. That before is either
private as of a master and his family. 2. Or else in the congregation, which is
public. Both which the psalmist comprehends in one verse. I will give thanks
to the Lord with my whole heart, secretly among the faithful, there is the first.
And in the congregation there is the last. 1. Concerning the first, we see in the
place psalm. 111. 1. Mar. 6. 46.
before quoted that our Savior went out into a solitary place, as also
elsewhere. As soon as he had sent the multitude away he departed into a
mountain to pray. 2. For Act. 16. 13.
1 Cor. 14. 16.
the other, we may gather out of that place in the Acts, that amongst the very
Heathen the religious Hellinists (which were called (...), which were a kind
of proselytes that worshipped the God of Israel) used to assemble themselves to
pray by a rivers side. But more plainly, the Apostle says, that to the prayers
of the congregation, every one should join his own Amen.

Again prayer is to be used after. For as we are not fit to receive any
spiritual 2.
Number. 6. 24.
grace before without it, so neither to keep it after; the devil will take the
word out of our hearts, after we have heard it, unless we desire of God that
it may remain with us, and seek his blessing that the seed may fructify. And
this was in the law to come from the Priests mouth. The Lord bless thee and
keep thee. By virtue whereof the devil will lose his power in taking the word
Luc. 8. 12.
out of our hearts, but it shall continue with us, and fructify in us.

2. The second is the word, which is magnified or sanctified by God for our The
word.
Esa. 42. 21.
sanctification; for as the prophet says, God has magnified the law, that is,
his word, and made it honorable, and else where plainly the, hearing of the
word is made one end of public assemblyes, gather me the people together
(says God) and I will makethem hear my words. Now the word upon the sabbath
has a double use. 1. First as it is read, and heard read, only. 2. And
secondly, as it preached, or heard preached.

1. For the first, the Church in great wisdom always thought it most
convenient and necessary, that reading should precede preaching, that when it
should be preached it might not seem strange to them that heard it. But as that
is thought a thing fit by the Church, so would it be no less expedient, that
before we come to church we would meditate on it, yet such is our
wretchlessenesse in matters spiritual, that we think we have done enough if we
can apprehend it, when it is read whereas if we would meditate on it before
hand, we might make the better (...) of it when it is read, and be the better
confirmed in what we hear preached. The Jews had their (...) the preparation to
the sabbath, and about the ninth hour of it (which is our three of the clock
in the afternoon) they usually met, and spent their time in reading of the
scriptures, that they might be the better fitted against the sabbath.

The public reading of the word in the congregation on the sabbath day is
warranted by diverse passages in holy writ: as by that in the Acts of the
Apostles, where it is said, that when Paul and his company came into the
synagogue at Antioch on the sabbath day, the rulers of the Synagogue after the
(...) of the Law and the Prophets, sent to them saying, ye men and brethren, if
ye have any word Act. 13. 14.
15.
of exhortation, say on. And by another passage in the same Chapter, where it
is said, that the Prophets were read every sabbath day. And by another a little
after, which says thus that Moses (that is the law) was read in the Synagogue
every 27.
sabbath day And lastly, Saint Paul gives a special charge, by the Lord to the
Thessalonians, 15. 21.
1 Thessalonians. 5. 72.
thathis Epistle to them be read unto all the holy brethren.

There is a use also of private reading, and that of great consequence, for
Christ says Jo. 5. 39.
plainly, that his witnesses be the Scriptures, and therefore will he have them
searched, Esa. 8. 19.
because they testified and prophesied of him. That this exercise is profitable
20.
the prophet makes plain by a question. Should not a people enquire at their
God? 34. 16.
which he explains in the next verse by; seeking To the law and to the
Testimony. And again, Seek in the book of the Law and read. And therefore we
see that the Bereans were much commended, and storied for wiser and nobler
(...) other people, why? because they searched the Scriptures daily, to confirm
their faith in the Act. 17. 11.
points preached to them.

There are other uses also in reading. In the Revelation there is a blessing
pronounced to those that read or hear the words of that prophecy, because it
might Apoc. 1. 3.
excite men to praise God when they see all fulfilled. Man seeing the
prophecies fulfilled, may thereby give him praise. And for this cause there
were (anciently) Monuments kept in Churches, which preserved and set forth the
accomplishing of Gods promises or threatenings. As the memorials of the wars
of God on the behalf of the Israelites: which was called liber bellorum Dei,
the book of the Number. 21. 14.
battles of the Lord, and their verba (...) or Chronicl es of Nathan, Gad,
Shemaiah, etc. these they permitted in a holy use to be privately read: that
seeing his promises and his threatening, denounced in them to have been
fulfilled men might the better be stirred up to the praise and fear of God.

2. Another use was, the understanding of hard places in the Scripture. It is
recorded Deuteronomy. 9. 2.
of Daniel that while hs was reading the book of (...) about the accomplishment
of the number of the 70 years captivity mentioned by the same prophet, God sent
an Angel to him to inform him in that great(...) about the time of Christ's
sufferings So the Eunuch while he was reading in the book of Esaias, had the
exposition Act. 0. 28.
of Christ's sufferings from the Apostle Philip sent for that purpose by God,
and because God does not now by such extraordinary means inform us in the true
sense of Scriptures, therefore we are to read such as have written (...) upon
such places, and so no doubt but if Philip had written any thing at that time
upon Esaias, that the Eunuch would have read it, and made use of his writeing as
he did of his verbal exposition. Therefore has God ordained expositions, such
as the book Jasher, which as some think, was a commentary upon the law, written
Jos. 10. 13.
for this end, to explicate the hard Texts of Scriptures, and (...) them.

2. Another Means to sanctification, is the word preached, of which the Apostle
speaks to the Romans, how shall they hear without a preacher, and this is one
of the Romans 10. 15.
ordinary means of faith, and so, of sanctification. The Apostle in that placeq
uoteth out Esa. 52. 7.
of two of the Prophets this text, How beautiful are the feet of them that
preach the Number. 1. 15.
Gospel of peace, and bring glad tidings of good things? And our Savior Christ
in his Jo. 17. 17.
prayer (before his passion) for his Apostles, who were to be such preachers,
says, sanctify them with thy truth. and thy word is truth; and by his own
practice in preaching he sanctified this means of preaching. And the Apostle
tells us, that the wisdom of God has appointed by the foolishness of
preaching to save them that believe; this way of saving men, the wisdom of God
has pitched upon, which is not to be altered, but to continue to thend of the
world. For though reading of the word be a necessary means to sanctification,
yet are not all men capable to understand what they read.

The (...) Custom therefore of the Church was, and so continued in the
Apostles times, that after the reading the of Law and the Prophets, some that
were learned in Gods Law and sent by him to that purpose, stood up, and
expounded to the people some text of that which was read. We may see this
plainly in the Nehem. 8. 8.
book of Nehemiah, that after Ezra and others had read in the book of the Law
to the people in the congregation, they gave the sense, and caused them to
understand the reading.

And the Apostle S. James puts the Jews in mind that Moses was preached in the
Synagogues on the Sabbath day. This practice continued (as I said) even in the
Acts 15. 21.
Apostles time. For we see in the place before mentioned, that the Rulers of
the Synagogue at Antioch, entreated the Apostles to bestow (...) words of
exhortation 13. 15.
upon them after the reading of the Law and the Prophets. The Eunuch (no doubt
but) was a man of as great capacity, as many who now adays take upon them the
exposition and preaching both of Law and Gospel: yet had not he met with S.
Philip, he would have been to seek in that place of the Prophet, which the
Apostle found Acts 8. 28.
him reading.

3. A third duty is the pondering of that which we have heard read or preached.
This Meditation.
Luc. 2. 19.
we read that Mary did, who pondered all the (...) of Christ in her heart.
Psalm 119. 97
And so did David, when he said, Oh how I love thy Law, it is my (...)
continually.

Besides the meditation of the Word that we shall hear read, or preached, the
92 Psalm (which was a Psalm peculiarly made for the Sabbath and was usually
Psalm 92.
sung on that day, the two first verses whereof (if credit may be given to the
Jews traditions) came from Adam, who used to sing them in Paradise) gives us
three further points to consider.

1. The first is in the fourth verse (which indeed is that which God here
expressly Ver. 4.
urges in this Commandment) the Consideration of the works of his hands, the
raising to our selves a Contemplative use of the Creatures; that as all the
week before, we have had a natural use of them, so on this day we should make
a spiritual. Thou Lord have made me glad through thy works, and I will rejoice
in giving praise for the operation of thy hands. 2. A second is (in the seventh
verse) a meditation of the judgments of God. Ver. 7.
when the ungodly are green as the grass, and when all the workers of
wickedness do flourish, then shall they be destroyed for ever. And this
meditation is most necessary to keep men within the bounds of obedience: for
upon the Consideration of the severe judgments which God inflicts upon
Malefactors, men are held in as with a bridle, from swerving from his
Commandments. 3. The third is (at the tenth and twelfth verses) a Meditation of
Gods benefits Ver. 10. 12.
and Mercies: or of his mercies toward them that love him, as well as his
visitations upon their enemies, both which may be included in the Hebrew word;
taking judgments for the genus of them both. Such as be planted in the house
of the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of the house of our God, etc. These,
whether they extend to our own persons, or concern our fathers house, or the
place wherein we live, or the Church round about us, every one of these afford
us an object of Meditation.
And as we see the other Creatures of God, as the wild asses, sparrows,
cranes, lilies, pismires, etc. yield matter of Meditation, thereby to stir us
up to praise the Creator. Upon which we may frame an argument, a minore ad
majus, from the less to the greater. If God have made them thus, how much more
are we bound to be thankful to him, for whom he has done infinitely more?

So the Apostle sets forth Gods judgments to provoke us to repentance, Romans
2. 2, etc.
and his mercy to move and stir us up to thankfulness. And thus, when we are
10.
Eccl. 12. 12.
wearied with prayer, and that reading and preaching of the word is ended,
meditation still remains wherein to exercise our selves, and in this duty we
may continue the rest of the day and be furnished with matter sufficient to
work upon.

4. The fourth duty of this day, is not to be contented only with meditating
Conference.
upon these things in our Closets privately, but there must be conference also
between our selves and others, about what we have heard. And this is done two
manner of way s.

1. The first is with them that have taught us, if we doubt of any thing we are
to Mal. 3. 7.
confer with the Priest. The prophet tells us, that the Priests lips should
keep knowledge, and we are to seek the Law at his mouth. we read that it was
our Saviors (...). 2. 46.
practice. For it was a custom of old, that after the solemnity on the eighth
day, the last of the feast, that the Teachers sat down at the Table, and the
Auditors (standing about them) propounded (...) and questions, that they might
be resolved in them. And so no doubt was Christ, at twelves years old, not as
an Opposer, but in the state of a Learner; though he discovered a great gift
that way above his years. And if points of doctrine fail, then others
concerning practice are to be resolved, such as the soldiers and Publicans put
to John; and the people to the Luc 3. 10.
Acts 2. 37.
Apostles.

Now because there are now adays no doubts, no putting of questions, it is a
sign. that fear of God is utterly extinguished in men's hearts: and if there be
any doubts at all, they are not propounded with that heart which they did it,
that said, Men and brethren, what shall we do? or what shall we leave undone?
but only for some sinister ends.

2. The second is between the hearers themselves, and that, 1. either among
equals, as S. Paul with S. Peter; and Elias and Elizens who communed together;
Gal. 2. 2. 2 Reg. 2. 11.
and the two Disciples, with whom Christ made a third. And it was the old
Custom, as it is in the Prophet, that they that feared the Lord, spoke every
one to his neighbor, Luc. 24. 15, 17 Mal. 3. 16.
etc. to which a special blessing is promised: That God would keep a book of
remembrance for such men, and that he would spare them, etc. By this means a
more general benefit may be reaped of what is heard, when many shall lay
together what they have observed, as in a symbolum, or common shot, whereby
some that had no benefit by the word when they first heard it, may receive some
good by it afterward, and by mutual conference men may lay open their
infirmities, and imperfections, which hinder them in hearing and applying the
word, and may receive directions from others, whose case has been the same,
how they were helped and freed from the like. 2. Or else between superiors and
inferiors, as the Master and his family.

And this was Gods Commandment to the Israelites concerning his Law, they were
to teach their children, and to whet it upon them as the word imports. Deuteronomy. 6.
7.
Thou shall talk of it when thou sit in thine (...), and when thoulyest 11.
19.
down, and when thou risest up, etc.

5. The fifth and last duty for sanctifying the day (not to be passed over) is
Praise.
praise and thanksgiving. Augustine accompteth it to be totum opus Sabbati, the
whole work of the Sabbath, as if the day were made for nothing else. And to
this end (as has been said before) the ninety second Psalm was penned to be
sung as a Hymn or song to praise God. Now praise and thanksgiving may be
either for general or particular benefits. For general benefits we have the
ninety first, sixty eight, and hundred and third Psalms. For particular
benefits, (as for fair weather after Psalm 35. (...).
rain, or rain after too much drought, etc.) we have the sixty fifth Psalm. For
these we must (with David) praise God in the great Congregation. Especially
seeing thanksgiving is accounted by David to be a debt due unto God in respect
of his goodness in hearing our prayers: and it is the very reason the Psalmist
gives for it. Praise watches for thee in Sion, or as others read it, Tibi
debetur Hymnus, 29. 2.
a hymn is due to thee from Sion, the reason is expressed in the next words,
because 96. 8.
65. 1. 2
thou art a God that hear prayers.

Besides all these mentioned, the Sacraments, and Discipline are parts of the
sanctification of the day, but are not for every day, but to be performed Exodus
12. 16.
on special days, and by some special persons, whereas the other duties of
the day pertain generally to all, and ought to be continually performed. So
that no man ought to conceive, that he has done enough in performing them
once. Qui Apoc. 22. 11.
sanctificatus est, sanctificetur adhuc; he that is holy let him be holy still.
There is a necessity of continuing in these means of sanctification, every
sabbath day. For, as our knowledge is but in part, and our prophesying but in
part, (as the Apostle speaks) 1 Cor. 13 9.
so our sanctification is but in part, there will still remain a necessity of
that exhortation, John 5. (...).
Apoc. 7. 14.
Scrutamini Scripturas, search the Scriptures. We are continually to wash our
robes in the blood of the Lamb: that is, we must still come nearer and nearer
to cleanness, until by continuing in these holy exercises, we may at last save
our 1 Timothy 4. 16.
selves.

And thus much for the several duties, wherein the sanctifying of the day
consists.

Now the means are for the end, which is the fruit of them, Nemo mediis utitur
propter media, no man ever uses means, only for the means, but for some end.
And therefore he that planteth a vineyard, and he that tilleth and sows his
ground, hoc est ultimum, fructus; that which he aims at, is the fruit, and
harvest. This is the fruit that God expects, the great end of this Commandment,
that his Name may be sanctified in and by us. We have the very phrase of speech
in the book of Numbers. Numb. 20. 12.
Because ye believed me not to sanctify me in the presence of the Children of
Israel, therefore ye shall not bring the Congregation into the land which I
have given them: this was Gods speech to Moses and Aaron. And in another place
the like, Sanctificate and sancti estote, sanctify your selves and be ye holy.
Such words Levit. 20. 7.
in respect of the two fold glory that redoundeth to God, have a double sense.
God is glorified, 1. Either by us directly, or 2. from us, by other,
indirectly; as it is in the Gospel, when men seeing our good works are stirred
up also to glorify (...). 5. 16.
him.

And therefore it is, that these words, [Sanctification, Glorification, etc.]
have a double sense. 1. First, to signify a making holy, etc. and that by
means: in which respect sanctification is a making holy. 2. in regard of
others, a declaring of this sanctification so made. By the first (according to
S. Peter) we make sure to our selves 2 Pet. 1. 10.
our calling and election. And by the second, we declare it to others, that as
we glorify God our selves, so God may be glorified by others also. Show me thy
faith by thy works, says S. James. Whereby it falls out, that because good
works have this operation to stir up others to glorify God, that our Savior
says, That a good James 2. 18.
Matthew. 12. 12.
work is lawful on the Sabbath day; such works discover our regeneration, and
if we be purged and sanctified, we shall be, as the Apostle says, (...), 2 Timothy 2. 21.
prepared or made fit for every good work. So that when God has used the means
we must bring forth the fruit.

CHAP. VII.
Works of Mercy proper for the Lords day. They are of two sorts. 1. First
Corporeal, feeding the hungry, etc. Burying of the dead a work of mercy. Such
works proper for a festival. Objections answered. 2. Spirituals. 1. To
Instruct, Counsel and exhort. 2. Comfort. 3. Reproof. 4. Forgiving. 5. Bearing
with the weak. 6. Prayer. 7. Reconciling those that are at odds.

BUt because the day was chiefly instituted for a memorial of Gods great
mercies: Of works of Mercy.
as 1. For making us, when we were nothing. 2. Secondly for redeeming us when
we were worse then nothing. 3. And lastly, For the beginning of our
sanctification: therefore in regard of these three great mercies it is, that no
work does so well agree with the day, nor that God is so much delighted in, as
the works of mercy, when we show our thankfulness for those great mercies
which we celebrate on that day, by exercising mercy toward others, whose
necessity requires our assistance. And in this regard it is, that there is a
special affinity between sanctification of the day and works of mercy. The
Prophet tells us, that God refuses all sacrifice, Hos. 6. 6.
and requires Mercy, so that sacrifice without Mercy was rejected. Matthew. 9.
13.


Let us compare this, with the Ritual sanctification in the Law.

As anointing was the first part of typical sanctifying, of which we spoke
formerly, so was there also a second, If it were a Person, his hand was filled
by Aaron, Implevit Deuteronomy. 16. 16.
manus ejus Aaron. If it were an Altar, then was there some what offered on it.
So that Oblation or filling the hand was the second way of legal sanctifying.
In the Law there was a charge to Aaron, that whenever men came to appear
before the Lord, none should appear empty. And therefore in another place there
is mention Lev. 8. 31.
made of a basket of sanctification at the door of the Tabernacle, in which was
reserved Exodus 29. 32.
the bread offered by the people, which the Priests were to eat with the flesh
of the sacrifices. And the very same order was taken in the time of the Gospel,
that on the Lords day there should be collections for the poor. But there is no
place 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2.
that sets this out more plainly, then the 26 Chapter of Deuteronomy, the
whole Deuteronomy. 26.
Chapter throughout; where the manner is particularly set down, how the people
were to bring their baskets of first fruits to the tabernacle, and offer them
there to the Lord, in token of thankfulness, and as an acknowledgement that
they received all from God.

And likewise every third year besides the ordinary tithes, they were to bring
the tithe of the remainder to the Tabernacle, for the use of the Levite, the
poor, the fatherless and stranger, that they might rejoice together, etc.

Now mercy as misery is two fold. 1. Corporeal, and 2. Spiritual. Either
outward and such as are for the good of the body of him that is in misery; or
inward, and such as concern his soul or spirit.

1. For the first of these, our Savior himself mentions six works of mercy in
2 verses For the body.
of one Chapter, which as sure as he is Christ, he will acknowledge, and take
special notice of, when he comes to judge the world, and as he will pronounce
those happy and blessed that have exercised them; so he will denounce a curse
upon those that have neglected them, three of them are in the first of the two.
1. Feeding the hungry. Matthew. 25. 35.


2. Giving drink to the thirsty. 3. Merciful dealing with, and entertaining the
stranger. 36.
And the other three are in the next verse. 1. Clothing the naked. 2. Visiting
the sick. 3. And succouring them that be in prison. To which may be added a
seventh, which is the care of the dead: we see that King David pronounces a
blessing from 2 Samuel 2. 5.
God to the men of Jabesh Gilead, because they had buried the body of Saul. And
our Savior commends the work of Mary in her anointing him, as having
relation John 12. 7.
to the day of his burial. We find also Joseph of Arimathea, and Nicodemus
recommended to posterity, for their work of mercy in this kind: the one for
begging the body of Jesus to bury it, and the other for assisting him in the
charge of interring it. Augustine gives a reason why the burial of the dead
ought to be accounted a work of Lib. de cura pro mortuis.
mercy. It is done (says he) Ne pateat miseria, that this misery of rotting
(being both loathsome to the eye and nose) should not appear to every man. As
also, because every one loves his own flesh so well, that he would have it
after his death well and honestly used, and therefore this is a benefit done to
him, when he cannot help himself. And in these respects it is a work of mercy.

That the works of mercy are most requisite (and especially upon our feasts)
appears by that which is related of David, who upon his sacrifice on a festival
day dealt to everyman and woman (the poorer sort no doubt) a loaf of bread, and
a good 1 (...). 16. 3.
piece of flesh, and a flagon of drink. And by that which is storied of
Nehemiah, who Nehem. 8. 10.
upon the Sabbath day (after the law read and expounded) commanded the better
sort to eat the fat, and drink the sweet, and to send portions to them, for
whom nothing was prepared. And certainly there is a blessing or sanctifying
proper to them and their actions that shall be mindful of the poor, and show
mercy to them. S. Paul tells the Milesians, that it is a more blessed thing to
give then to receive, especially Act. 20. 35.
seeing God so accepts works of mercy, as that he imputes not sin to the
truly charitable. Therefore it was that Daniel gave that counsel to
Nebuchadnezzar, Break off Dan. 4. 27.
thy sins by righteousness, and (...) iniquity by mercy to the poor. And our
Savior gave the like in his sermon, Give Alms of such things as you have, and
all things are Luc. 11. 41.
clean to you. Whereas he that stops his ears at the cry of the Poor, he
also shall cry himself and not be heard. Prove. 21. 13.


But it is an easy matter for flesh and blood to find objections, against
performing Object. 1.
these works of mercy. As how know I, whether a man be hungry or not? I see
none go naked, and so of the rest.

To this we answer with the fathers, potius est occurrere necessitati, quam
succurvere. Sol.
It is better to prevent or keep a man from misery, then to help him out of
misery. And for the practice of that they (...) taught, the monuments of their
charity which they have left behind them show, that they were more frequent in
works of mercy then we. And their rule was, In die domini ne extend manus ad
(...), nisi extendas ad pauperem, if you stretch not your hands to the poor on
the Lords Aug.
day, it will be in vain to stretch out your hands to God. And indeed, when God
requires thy Alms to the poor, he asks but his own, and that which he gave
thee, and but that which thou can not keep long. He requires but pauxillum,
a very little from thee for them, meaning to repay thee Centuplum a hundred
fold for it. He asks of thee but Caducum, that which is frail and
transitory, to reward thee in aternum eternally.

2. And as there were in their time some, so are there now more, that plead
their Object. 2.
inability to releeve the poor.

Our answer to this must be as theirs was, si (...) non sufficient restuae ad
(...) Sol.
Christianos, parcendum est, ut tu sufficias illis, if thou have not sufficient
for pious uses, be the better husband, that thou may be enabled to do some
good, though never so little, for God regards not the quantum, how much thou
give, (...) ex quanto, out of what thou have to give. The widows mites were
more accepted by God, then the gifts the rich men cast into the Treasury, why?
Quia multum Luc. 21. 2.
obtulit, quae parum sibi reliquit, she offered much, that left but little to
her self.

Lastly, there were some then, as there are now, that having given Alms on the
Sunday, would recover it the other days of the week, either by oppressing, and
dealing hardly with the poor, or by undermining those they dealt with.
Therefore the last caution must be out of the Prophet. The Lord of hosts shall
be exalted in Esaias. 516.
judgment, the holy Ghost shall be sanctified in justice, that is, a man's mercy
must not make him unrighteous. So that the conclusion of this point is, if a
man do dare rem suam Deo, and se peccato, aut daemoni, give his substance to
God, and himself to sin or the devil, and thereby give quod minus est Creatori,
and quod majus, inimico, the less to his Creator, and the greater to his
Enemy, he is far from keeping the sabbath aright, in the point of performing
the works of Mercy.

Now concerning the spiritual part of the works of mercy, which is to be done
to 2.
the Spirit of him that needs it, S. Augustine says, Est quaedam charitas quae
de sacculo Spiritual works of mercy,
non erogatur; there is a charity which is not taken out of the bag or purse,
such mercies are called Spirituales Elemozynae or misericordiae, spiritual
Alms, which are so much more excellent then the other, as they do mederi
miseriae principalioris partis, take order for the relief of the more principal
part of man, the soul. And there are seven of this kind.

1. The first concerns the good which is to be performed, to draw him to it,
and it consists of three branches 1. The instruction of the young, and others
that are ignorant; the Prophet describes the reward of such. They that turn
many to righteousness shall shine as the stars for ever. 2. The second branch
is, the giving of good Deuteronomy. 11. 19.
and christian advice, to him that is in doubt; hearty counsel by a friend, is
by Solomon Dan. 12. 3.
compared to ointment and perfume that rejoice the heart. 3. The last is the
exhorting pro. 27. 9.
Job. 3. 4. 4.
him that is slack in some good duty, so did the prophet David. And this psalm.
51. 13.
was one of the instructions Saint Paul gave to Timothy, to charge rich men, to
do 1 Timothy 6. 17.
good, and be rich in good works etc.

2. Another is Comforting them that are in distress, Saint Paul calls this
comforting 2 Cor. 1. 4.
1 Th. 5. 14.
them which are in trouble, and supporting the weak, and flere cum flentibus,
Romans 12. 15.
weeping with them that weep.

3. A third is that work of spiritual mercy which our Savior made a part of
Mat. 18. 15.
Church discipline, reproving of our brother privately for his fault, and the
Apostle 1 Th. 5. 14.
Matthew. 6. 14.
bids us to warn them that are unruly. 5. (...).


A (...) is, the pardoning of those that offend us, according to our Saviors
Rule, we must first be reconciled to our brother, before we offer our gift at
the AlAltar, and if he will not be reconciled, then pray for him. It was as well
Christ's 44.
practice, as his counsel, Father forgive them. So did the Proto-martyr
Stephen. Luc. 22. 34.
Gregory says, Qui dat et non dimittit he that gives and forgiveth not, does
a Act. 7. 10.
work that is not acceptable to God; sed si dimittet (...) non det, but he that
forgiveth, in Mat. 23. 5.
though he give not, shall be forgiven of God; as often as he forgiveth others si
tu ponas limitem Deus tibi ponet limitem. If thou set bounds to thy
forgiving, God will do the like to thee; but if thou for give without limit,
nor put bounds to thy brothers offense by pardo ning it, God will put no
limit to his pardonnig of thy sin.

5. Another is in Romans 15. 1. we that are strong ought to bear the infirmities
of the weak. Alter alterius onera portate, bear ye one another burden Gal. 6.
2. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14.

6. The sixth is taken out of Saint James. Praying for one another. even for
our enemies, it was Christ's counsel Matthew 5. 44. and his practice Luke 23.
34. And this Ja. 5. 16.
is reputed for a work of mercy. Augustine says, Causaberis (...) te non
possedocere, you may perhaps cavil and say, thou can not teach: some are as
forward to advise you, as you them: and that you have not the gift of
comforting: or if you rebuke them for their faults, they will despise you. But
for this, and the two last works of mercy, there can be no excuse, nunquid
dices, non possum dimittere (...), to forgive one that has offended thee, to
bear with him, to pray for him, these things may be always done, ut malitia
ignoscatur nulla excellentia, nulla sapientia, nullis divitiis opus est. To
pardon wrong done to us, (and so to bear with the weak, and to pray for any)
there is neither excellency nor wisdom, nor riches requisite or necessary.

7. The last is, the reconciling of them that be at variance, or the making
peace Mat. 5. 9.
between man and man. By this act (as our Savior tells us) we show our selves
to be the children of God, and as (he further says) there will a blessing
follow (...). 2. cont. Parmen.
peace makers. But here falls in an objection, what if they will not be
reconciled? Augustine answers it. If thou have done thy good will pacificus
es, thou art a peace maker. And these are the seven fruits of mercy spiritual.
Besides these whatsoever is a work according to the Law of God, is also
acceptable, but especially these.

CHAP. VIII.
The second rule of homogenea. Fasting, reduced hither. Commanded under the
Gospel. 1. Public fasts for averting of evil of punishment which is either
malum grastans or impendens, or of sin, for procureing of good. 2. Private
fasts, and the (...) of them. The parts of a fast. 1. External abstinence from
meat, sleep, costly apparel, pleasure, servile work, alms then to be given.
Secondly, internal humiliation for sin, promise of reformation. The third
rule, our fast and observation of the Lords day must be spiritual.

Thus far we have proceeded according to the first rule of extension, that
where any thing is commanded the contrary is forbidden, and e contra. Come we
now, as in the former, to the rule of Homogenea that is, where any thing Of
fasting the use.
is Commanded, there all things are commanded that are of the same kind; which
is the second rule. And we find in the law, that the day of humiliation or
fasting Lev. 23. 31.
16. 31.
is called a sabbath, and so may be reduced hither as homogeneal. Saint
Augustine said well, that if the state of Innocence had continued, then had
there (...) one day only to have bin observed by Christians; and that to have
been spent only in the duty of praise, and thanksgiving. But since the fall of
Adam, there are such defects and wants in our souls, that God is not only to
be glorified sacrificio psalm. 50. 10.
Eucharistiae by the sacrifice of Praise, but also sacrificio spiritus
contribulati Mat. 11. 25.
and (...), by the sacrifice of a troubled and humbled spirit, his reason is,
(...) bonum perfect ut volumns non possumus, because we cannot perform any
good psalm. 51. 17.
thing so well as we would. And he alleges that place of Saint Paul, I do not
32. 5.
the good things that I would. That tie that (...) upon us in the other sabbath
Romans 7. 19.
cannot be so well performed by us as it ought to be, and therefore multo (...)
frequentius (...) oportet we have cause to glorify God oftener by this sacrifice
of humiliation, for atonement, then by the other. So that as the other tends
to initiation of the joys to come, for praise is the exercise of the Saints
and Angels, Col. 3 1. 5.
and herein have a heaven upon earth, so this to mortification of our earthly
members in this life: and it is the ordinance of God, that each of these
sacrifices should have its day.

And though some doubt of the morality of the sabbath, yet that (...) is a
moral duty there can be no doubt. The reason is; because whatsoever was a mere
ceremony might not be used at any other time, or in any other place or order,
then was prescribed by God in the book of Ceremonies; but this of fasting has
been otherwise, for upon extraordinary occasions they had special fasts as in
the fist, and seventh and tenth month, none of which were prescribed by the
law, and had not bin lawful, if fasting were a ceremony, for ceremonies in the
time of the law, were tied to certain times and places. Again, though our
Savior gave a reason why his disciples should not then fast, yet he showed
plainly, that after the (...). 2. 15.
Bridegroom should be taken away from them (after his taking up into Glory)
Zach. 7. 5.
they should fast, and that this duty should continue.

And we see, it was the practice of the Church,, at the sending forth of Paul
and Act. 13. 3.
Barnabas. And Saint Paul himself had his private fastings, in multis jejuniis,
in 2 Cor. 11. 27.
1 Cor. 7. 5.
fasting often. And his advise was to married people, to sever themselves for a
time, to give themselves to fasting and prayer, which shows plainly, that it
was accounted a necessary duty, and therefore practiced. Now for the other
times of the Primitive church, the books of the fathers are exceeding full in
praise of fasting, and they themselves were so addicted to it, and did
therewith so consume psalm. 109. 24.
themselves, that they might well say with David. Their knees were made weak
with fasting, and their flesh had lost all their fatnes.

The day of humiliation, or day of fast, receives a division of public and
private. public fasts, Joel. 2 15.


1. For the first, it was lawful to blow the Trumpet at it. And secondly for
the second, it was to be kept as privately as might be, none must know of it:
but the ends and parts of both were alike. Mat. 6. 16.


Now the reasons of the public fast were these. 1. Either for the averting of
some evil. 2. Or for procuring some good. And because malum est aut poenae aut
culpae evil is either of punishment or of sin; this duty was performed
against both these: but especially against punishment, either of our selves or
others. And in both it is either present, which is Malum grassans, or hanging
over heads which is impendens.

1. A present evil is, when the Church or commonwealth has any of the Lords
arrows or shafts sticking in their sides (as Chrysostom says well on Jos. 7.
6.) As psalm. 38. 2.
Jos. 7. 6.
when the men of Ai had discomfited the children of Israel, Josuah and the
People humbled themselves before God by a public fast. And upon the overthrow
given them by the Benjamites, the people likewise besought the Lord in a
public Jud. 20. 26.
fast. So in the time of their captivity under the Philistims, the prophet
Samuel 1 Samuel 7. 6.
proclaimed a public fast. And the like upon a dearth in the time of Joel.

2. When as yet the judgment of God was not come upon them, but was only
imminent, a fast was proclaimed by Jehosaphat upon the Ammonites and Moabites
Joel. 2. 13.
coming against him. He feared and set himself to seek the Lord, and proclaimed
2 Chr. 20. 3.
a fast throughout all Judah. Also upon Hamans decreegotten against the Jews,
before it was (...) in execution, Esther caused a general fast to be (...)
among the Jews. And Esth. 4. 16.
when Niniveh was threatened with destruction to come upon it within 40 days,
Jon. 3 5.
the king caused a public fast to be held.

So when this punishment lies not upon our selves, but upon the Churches about
us, the like duty is to be performed. We have an example in this (...), for the
Jews dispersed through Babylon and Chaldea, in the Prophet Zachary. Zach. 7. 3.


2. To come to malum culpae, the evil of sin, In regard of our offenses
against God; and that they deserve to be punished, we are to perform this
duty, obtain pardon, and to pacify his wrath, We see, that the Jews having
offended God by taking wives of the Gentiles, though there was yet no
visitation (...) them, yet Esra, Esr. 9. 4.
and those that feared God assembled and humbled themselves by fasting and
Jesabells pretense for a fast was fair, if it had been true, viz. that God and
the king had been blasphemed by Naboth.

2. As it is a duty necessary to the averting of evil, so is it for the
procuring of some good. For which purpose we find several fasts kept in the
Apostles times, Act. 13. 3.
One at the sending forth of two of the Apostles Paul and Barnabas, and the
other 14. 23.
at the ordination of elders to desire of God, to make such as were ordained
painful and fruitful laborers in the work, to which they were called.

Now in this duty of fasting, if we look at the punishments and visitation of
God only, which are variously sent, it is hard to make Jejunium statum, to
observe any set and fixed time of (...), but as the occasion is special and
extraordinary, so must the fast be; but if we look at the sins we daily fall
into, and our own backwardnes to any thing that is good, and consider that
fasting is a great help in the daily progress of mortification and
sanctification. As under the law, they had their set days of expiation (...)
wherein they did afflict their souls and expiare (...) sua jejunio and expiate
their sins with fasting, so no question (...) that now (we having the like
daily occasions of fasting) set times of fasting may be appointed by the
Church, and that it is very expedient it should be so, and that every true
member of the Church ought to observe the same.

And as upon these public causes and calamities the whole people ought to make
a solemn day of fasting, wherein every one is to bear a part: so when the
same causes concern any private person, he ought to keep a private fast and
humiliation; which brings in the second part of a fast. Namely the private.

2. The causes of a private fast are the same with those of the public. 1.
Either for Private fasts.
Malumpoenae, the evil of punishment, or secondly Malum culpae the evil of sin.
And the first in respect of our selves, when we are either under Gods heavy
hand 2 Samuel 12. 16.
(...), as David when his child was sick, fasted: or when the evil is not yet
upon 1 Kin. 21. 27.
us, but hanged over, and threateneth us: as when Eliiah denounced Gods
judgments against (...), he fasted: which fast though it were only or chiefly
for fear of punishment, yet went it not unrewarded.

It is not thanks (...) in sickness and affliction to refrain our meat: it is
but Job. 33. 19. 20
natural so to do, Elihu in Job tells us, that when a man is chastned with
pain, psalm. 107. 17. 18.
his life abhors bread, and his soul dainty meat. And the Psalmist tells us,
that when 1 Kin. 21. 4.
fools are afflicted, their soul abhors all manner of meat. And we read that
when Luc. 7. 38.
Ahab was in grief, he would eat no bread. But to do this without affliction.
(...) Mat. 10. 38.
optimum and acceptabile (...), This is the excellent and acceptable fast. To
come 1 Cor. 11. 31.
with Mary Magdalen and betake our selves to weeping and to fast before the
(...) come, to take up our own cross, and to (...) our selves, this is an act
worthy a true Christian.

Again, when the affliction lies not upon our selves, but upon others, it may
be lawfully (...). David relates (...) himself, that when others were sick, he
put on psalm. 35. 13
(...), and humbled his soul with fasting, for them.

2. To prevent the evil of sin, either propter languorem boni, when we grow 1
Cor. 7. 5.
(...), or languish in performance of holy duties, as when our prayers are not
so fervent as they ought to be, or propter (...) mali, upon some tentation,
that cannot be avoided without fasting, for (...) says; there are some evil
spirits, that Mat. 17. 21.
cannot be cast out but by prayer and fasting

Lastly, as the public (...), so also the private, is not only for the
averting of evil, but for procuring of good: and that, either in general, as
Cornelius the Centurions fasting proved a preparative to his calling to become
a Christian: or Act. 10. 30.
in particular, as our Savior Christ fasted at his inauguration, or public
entrance Mat. 4. 2.
into his office of mediatorship; according to the opinion both of the fathers,
and modern divines.

Now as of the other Sabbath, so also of this, there are two parts. First
External, which is Abstinence. Secondly, internal sorrow, mourning, or
Humiliation.

1. In the outward fast is required a whole days Abstinence, from, even to
even, LeV. 23. 32.
and from meatand drink, (...) whatsoever is edible and (...) whatsoever is
liquid, Esra. 10. 6.
a general restraint from both.

2. An abridgment or breaking off the ordinary course of our sleep. We must
Joel 1. 3.
watch as well as fast.

3. We must lay by our best apparel, and put on more vile clothes, which in
Nehemiah Exodus 33. (...).
and sundry other places is expressed by wearing of sackcloth, which we should
Nehem. 9. 1.
also lay aside, as unworthy of any; but that to avoid shame, we must have
somewhat to cover our nakedness.

4. We must separate our selves from all that is delightful to the senses, and
from all zach. 7. 3.
the pleasures and delights of this life; for, quia non peccavit sola gula, ne
jejunet sola, because the taste has not been the only sense which has
offended, therefore that Bern.
sense must not fast alone: but the other senses mustabstain and be afflicted
also.

5. And as all these are (...), so is labor and servile work also. Lev. 23. 28.


6. Lastly, we must give alms and relieve the poor on the day of our fast. The
Esaias 58. 10.
precept we have in Esaias, among other things required in a fast, to draw out
the soul to the hungry, and to pity the afflicted soul. And an example of it in
the Centurion: Alms was joined with his fasting: for the old rule and Canon is,
Quod ventri subtrahitur, Acts 10. 4.
pauperi detur; what we spare from our belly, we must give to the poor.

But as we said before, that bodily rest profits nothing, so we may say of
bodily abstinence, it avails little, it is not an outward abstinence will
serve the turn (for the the kingdom of God is not in meat and drink) if we stay
there and go no further: Romans 14. 17.
therefore the Prophet tells such fasters, though they lay in (...) a whole
day, yet it was not that which God requires, but inward sorrow: because the
outward action is ordained for the inward, and the internal fast is that which
God chiefly accepts. What is said in the Gospel of sacrifice, may be as well said
of outward mourning, Esaias 58. 5.
I will have mercy and not sacrifice. Matthew. 9. 13. And the Prophet Joel tells
us, Joel 2. 12.
It is not the rending of the garments, but of the heart which God requires in
our 2 Cor. 7. 11.
fasts. The Apostle excellently describes the whole course of whatsoever is
required of us in this fast: when they sorrowed after a godly sort, what
carfulness it wrought Romans 8. 26.
in them; yea, what clearing of themselves; yea, what indignation; yea, what
fear; yea, what vehement desire; yea, what zeal; yea, what revenge? A true fast
must come from the spirit, and be accompanied with sighs and groans which
cannot be expressed, as the Apostle speaks in another case. Of this sorrow
there cannot be an exquisite method, but as he sets them down there, they
are of two sorts. 1. First, a fear arising from the apprehension of Gods anger
provoked, and the punishment due to us for our sins, which must work in us a
sorrow that we have offended so good a God.

2. A desire of amendment for the future, which must show it self by a more
strict care that we offend him no more: and this care must be expressed by
zeal, and if we relapse or go amiss, that then we be ready to punish our
selves for it. In a word the fruit of 1 Cor. 11. 31.
those actions which concern Mortification tend to this end, that by judging
our selves we may escape the judgment of God. It was the policy of Benhadad,
and his people 1 King. 20. 32
to humble themselves to the Kingof Israel, which turned to their preservation:
and it has been the usual practice of rebellious subjects to their Prince thus
to behave themselves, to regain his favor, and to make his bowels yearn.

But after all these, unless there be a binding of our selves by a vow and
promise of reformation andnew obedience (which must be the (...) of our fasting
and humiliation) Neh. 9. 2, (...) and ult.
all the rest will be to little purpose. Therefore we find in Nehem. at a
solemn (...) of the Israelites, when they were returned from Babylon, that
after solemn reading of the Law four times (for so some take the words, verse
3.) whereas their ordinary readings were but twice on one day, and after an
humble cessation, and serious exhortation, they all enter into a solemn vow and
Covenant of reformation of their lives, and set their hands and seals to it, to
remain as a testimony against them for ever if they should fall back. Thus if
we upon our solemn fasts do vow and promise to God, unfeignedly to reform what
we then confess to have been amiss in us, and perform it accordingly, then we
may be assured our fast is such as God accepts. And thus much concerning the
second rule, for expounding the Commandments, extending to Homogenea.

The third rule tells us according to our former method, that the love of God
is 3. Rule.
spiritual, and so as well the fast, as the observation of the festival ought to
be spiritual (as has been partly handled already) The Prophet Esaias knew the
necessity hereof, and therefore urges both in one Chapter, Esaias 58. he
reprooves their fast, because they rested in outward abstinence, neglecting the
spiritual duties, without which it is of no value, verse 3, 4, etc. and ver.
13. he tells them they must not do their pleasure on Gods holy day, but call it
a delight not doing their own ways, nor finding their own pleasure, etc. Thus
we must sanctify the Lord in our hearts, as S. Peter requires, 1 Pet. 3. 15
and so we shall sanctify the day to him in an acceptable manner.

CHAP. IX.
The fourth rule of the means and helps to keep this Commandment, viz. 1.
Places. 2. Persons. 3. Maintenance. 1 Of public places for divine worship. The
place as well as the time holy, and both to be reverenced. Add. 25. out of the
Authors other works, concerning the Adorning of Gods house, and against
sacrilege in profaning it. Addition 26. Further Additions concerning
Churches, or places of Gods worship: set places used from the beginning: the
necessity of them from natural instinct. Their dedication and the use of it.
God is sole proprietor, as of places, so of all the Churches patrimony. All
humane propriety extinct by dedication: the Clergy have only usum, ac fructum;
no fee-simple by the Law Civil or municipal in any man; but a quasi feudum
only.

IN the next place (according to the former rules of exposition) we are to
proceed 4. Rule.
to those things which help and conduce to the keeping of this Commandment, The
Means.
which we usually call the means; for where the end is commanded, there those
things are also Commanded, without which the end cannot be attained.

Now whereas the solemn duties of this day cannot be performed in a public
manner, without a place set apart, and persons enabled to perform such high and
sacred actions: and because those persons must be trained up, that they may be
fit for such great and weighty employments, and not taken up ex (...) grege,
out of the common rout, which cannot be without cost and charge. Therefore both
places and persons sanctified to these purposes, and maintenance also for the
persons, and for the universities and schools of learning, when they are to be
prepared for the work, are commanded by God, and included in this precept; and
so of these we are to speak in the next place, viz of 1. Places. 2. Persons. 3.
Maintenance.

1. For the place, we find it joined with the day in several places, Ye shall
keep places of public worship.
my Sabbaths, and reverence my sanctuary. Where the observation of the day is
joined with the reverence of the place in one verse making them thereby to be
of Levit. 19. 30. 26. 2.
one Nature. This should be observed by those men among us, who are so strict
and punctual about the day, urging it even to Jewish superstition, and yet are
(...) negligent of the place, and profane it most of all: when as it is most
certain, that the time and (...) do pari passu ambulare; and that there is no
more ceremony in psalm 133. 14.
the one, then in the other: but that both are of the like moral use, and both
alike capable 1 Cor. 11. 22
of sanctification; and the place the more capable of the two as a thing
permanent, whereas the time is transient.

The day is the day of rest, and when we hallow it, it is called the Lords
rest; and the same name is given by God himself to the place, when it is
consecrated to him, This is my rest for ever, here will I dwell, for I have a
delight therein, says God of Sion: concerning which, as the Apostles took
order, that the exterior part of Gods worship August. q. 57. in Levit. Basil.
should be performed decently and in order, so also that the place of worship
Moral. Reg. 30 Hier in Epist. Sedul Chrysostom. Theoph Theodor. Oecum. in locum, cum
aliis.
should not be profaned, but decently kept, and reverently esteemed, and
therefore the Apostle reproves the Corinthians for their irreverent carriage in
the place, whereby they despised the Church of God, That by (...), Church, is
there meant, not the persons, but the place, is the opinion of most of the
Fathers.
Have ye not houses to eat and drink in? or despise (...) the Church of God?
But if he had lived in these times, what would he have said, to see the (...)
of God, and places of worship so highly profaned and abused, and so homely and
poorly kept, that the Table of the Lord, where (as S. Chrysostom says)
Tremenda Dei mysteria, the dreadful mysteries of God are celebrated, looks more
like an oyster board, or a table to eat oysters on, then the holy Table fit for
Gods Sanctuary. This is so far from Pompa outward pomp (which is the extreme
that some men pretend to be against) that it comes far short of (...), that
decency which is required in Gods house. This is a thing to be thought on, and
though it may seem to some not to be inter graviora legis, yet I am sure it is
not to be neglected, as we see it is now adays: for as by traveling, working,
etc. we show that we esteem not the day, so the very walls and windows, and
other parts neglected, show we esteem not Gods sanctuary.

Concerning the adorning of the house of God, the Author (as here briefly) so
more Addition 25: Of adorning of Churches.
fully in other places expresses himself. Sermon. on Mark 14 4, 5, 6. page 295.
If ointment might be spent on Aarons head under the Law, seeing a greater then
Aaron is here, why not on his too? I find that neither under the Law, he liked
of their motion, What should the Temple do with Cedar? neither under the Gospel
of theirs, What should Christ's head do with Nardus? but that to his praise it
is recorded in the old Testament that said, Shall I dwell in my cieled house,
and the Ark of God remain 1 Chronicles. 17. 1
under goats skins? and she in the new, that thought not her best ointment too
good for Christ's head? Surely they in Egypt had their service of God, it may be
in a barn, or in some other corner of an house, yet when Moses moved a costly
Tabernacle, no man was found that once said, our Fathers served God well enough
without one, ut quid perditio haec? After that many Prophets and righteous men
were well when they might worship before the Ark; yet when Solomon moved a
stately Temple, never was any found that would grudge and say, Why, the Ark is
enough, I pray God we serve God no worse then they that knew nothing but a
tent, Ut quid perditio haec? Only in the days of the Gospel (which of all
others least should) there steps up Judas, and dares to lay that against
Christ's Church, that no man durst ever either against Moses Tent, or Solomon's
Temple, etc. In the same sermon a little before, viz. page 294, The Scripures
record (as a good work) that that was laid down at the Apostles feet, no less
then this that was laid on Christ's own head. And in them Ananias a Church
robber, and Judas a Christ robber both in one case. Satan is said to have
filled their hearts in that Act. And the like end came to both, and both are
good remembrances for them that seek and say, as thy did: yea, that would not
be content to detain a part ( Ananias and Judas went further) but would seize
on all gladly, if a gracious Lady Q. Elizab.
did not say, sinite. In another Sermon on John 2. 19. page 483. To reform
Churches, and then seek to dissolve them, will be counted among the errors of
our age. Christ was far from it; he that would not see it abused, would never
endure to have it destroyed, when he had reformed the abuses. After in the same
Sermon, page 485. Solvite Templum, is no Commandment (be sure) in no sense. He
commands not any Temple, not that they themselves meant to be destroyed. It
were sacrilege, that, and no better: and sacrilege the Apostle ranks with
Idolatry, as being full out as evil, if not worse then it. But indeed worse;
for what Idolatry but pollutes, sacrilege pulls quite down; and easier it is
to new hallow a Temple polluted, then to build a new one out of a heap of
stones. And if to spoil a Church be sacrilege, (as it is granted) yet that
leaves somewhat, at least the walls and roof (so it be not lead) to leave
nothing, but down with it, is the cry of Edom, the worst cry, the worst
sacrilege of all, and never given in Charge to any (we may be sure.) For God
himself said to David with his own mouth, Whereas it was in thine heart to
build me a house, thou did well, that thou wast so minded. Did well? well
done to think of building? then e sensu contrario, evil done to think of
dissolving, and that which is evil, Christ will never enjoin. Against
destroying of Churches much more may be read in that Sermon, where he (...),
that it is the proper work of a Pharisee to destroy Temples, for to them it was
spoken, John 2. 19. and that to destroy the Temple is to kill Christ, and that
Christ (comparing his body to the Temple) his meaning was to show, he would
have us to make account of the Temple, and so to use it, as we would his own
Annot. 26.
Of the Antiquity, necessity and sanctity of places for public worship.
very body; and to be as far from destroying one, as we would be of destroying
the other, etc.

To erect and set up certain places for the exercise of the rites of Religion,
is derived from the instinct of nature, and approved by God from the beginning.
It begun not (as a learned man says) with that Tabernacle or ambulatory
Temple, which Moses caused to be made by Gods appointment at Mount Sinai, but
was much more ancient. Noah built an Altar as soon as he came out of the Ark.
Abraham, (...), and Jacob, (wheresoever they came to pitch their tents) erected
places for divine worship (that is Altars with their septs and enclosures)
without any special appointing from God. To this purpose that profound and
judicious Hooker, Polit. lib. 5. sect. 11. says; That solemn duties of public
service to be done unto God, must have their places set and prepared in such
sort, as beseems actions of such regard. Adam even during the space of his
small continuance in Paradise, Genesis 3. 8.
had where to present himself before the Lord. Adams sons had out of Paradise
4. 3.
in like sort, whither to bring their sacrifices. The Patriarchs used Altars,
13. 4.
mountains and groves for the self same purpose. In the vast wilderness when
the 22. 1.
21. 33.
people of God had themselves no settled habitation, yet a moveable Tabernacle
they Exodus 26.
were commanded to make. The like charge was given against the time they Dent.
12. 5.
should come to settle themselves in the land which had been promised to their
2 Chronicles. 3. 1.
Fathers: You shall seek that place which the Lord your God shall choose. 2 Chronicles. 6. 7.
Psalm 132. 5.
When God had chosen Jerusalem, and in Jerusalem Mount Moriah, there to have
his standing habitation made, it was in the chiefest of David's desires to have
performed so good a work. His grief was no less that he could not have the
honor to build God a Temple, then their anger is at this day, who bite asunder
their own tongues with very wrath, that they have not as yet the power to pull
down the Temples which they never built, and to level them with the ground.
Thus and much more to this purpose, that learned and devont man, who amongst
others learnedly handles the several points considerable in this subject: viz.
the convenience and necessity of having set places for public worship, the
consecrating and dedicating of such places to God, the honor and reverence due
to them, and the convenience and fitnes of adorning them in the most sumptuous
manner, and that it savours nothing of Judaisme or superstition, but becomes
even the most spiritual times of the Gospel. Sect. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.

The solemn dedication of Churches serves not only to make them public, but
further to surrender up that right which otherwise the founders might have in
them, and to make God himself the owner, as that learned Author speaks, Sect.
12. p. 204. I may add, that hence it is, that not only the Civil and Canon
Laws, but even our Common Laws do account such places together with the
Churches Patrimony, and whatsoever is dedicated to God, to be Gods right, and
that he is the sole Proprietor, all humane propriety being extinguished by the
consecration, and that all that the Clergy have is usum fructuum, as
Administrators or Trustees from God, who has given them the use, reserving the
Dominion and right in himself. And therefore our Lawyers resolve, that there is
no Fee simple of a Church, either in the Bishop, Patron, or Incumbent (though
all other lands are resolved into a Fee simple, which is in some or other) but
there is a Quasi feudum in the Incumbent during life, the Law gives him
something like a Fee for life, whereby he may sue for the rights of the Church,
but a proper Fee is in none but in God alone. Those that would see more of this
subject, may read among many other, two learned Tracts, by two reverend and
learned men of this Church. The one an answer to a letter written at Oxford to
Samuel Turner concerning the Church, and the Revenues thereof. The other
entitled, CHURCH LANDS NOT TO BE SOLD. Among the Schoolmen, Thom. 2. 2. q. 91.
and the Commentators on him. The Canonists in cap. sacrilegium 17. q. 4. The
Summists verb. Sacrilegium. Especially Suarez de Religione, lib. de Sacrilegio
per totum. Thus briefly for the Places: now for the Person.

CHAP. X.
Of persons set apart for Gods service, The mission, choice, the reverence due
to them. The benefit received by them, spiritual, and temporal. Preservers of
kingdoms. Humane laws and policies not sufficient, without a teaching priest
etc. examples in diverse monarchies and kingdoms.

COncerning whom we know, that God has said of him, that he is the messenger
The persons.
of the Lord of hosts, he is appointed by God to stand between God Mal. 2. 7.
and man, and Saint Paul says of himself and other ministers of God, that they
Heb. 5. 1.
are the Ambassadors of Christ, to deliver Gods message to men of all sorts,
as well 2 Cor. 5. 20.
to the highest Prince, as to the lowest of the people. They are sent with a
commission, they come not of themselves mittam te I will send thee says God
Exo. 3. 10.
to Moses, and vade ad populum, go to the people, says God to Esaias. And this
Esa. 6. 8.
custom of sending by commission was continued by Christ and his Apostles and
by their successors in all ages of the Church. As my Father sent me, so send I
you says Christ to his Apostles. And though God by the Prophet calls these
Jo. 20. 21.
Jer. 15. 19.
(...) thus sent, his own mouth, and that the message they deliver to us, is
not (...) own, but Gods: yet it falls out with them often times, as with the
day and (...), they are disesteemed and neglected.

(...) as in former times, wicked Princes thought meanly of them, as that to Of
the reverence due to the persons.
(...) nothing, but to burn in cense, and make ready sacrifices: and (...)
appointed to their office the lowest of the people, such as would fill their
hands, insomuch as the Priests office grew into contempt: in like (...) 1 Kin.
12. 31 13. 33.
there are now some, that think the office of a minister of God to be nothing
but the reading of a few prayers, and going up into a pulpit, and speaking
there an hour, which some do without sense or reason, and without any reverence
or regard to the dignity of the work and high place to which they are called.

Therefore God himself takes order for procuring the more honor to the calling
(and that for the peoples good) that they shall not only teach and instruct
the people set Jacob to school, and learn Israel his lesson, but they shall
teach even Levit. 10. 11.
kings and princes themselves; they must give Joshua his charge, and the
highest Deuteronomy. 31. 9. 23.
on earth must not (...) to be directed and instructed by them in things
concerning God and their own salvation. Princes have need of such to assist
them, as in other acts of government, so especially in matters of religion, and
in particular for sanctifying the Lords day. They may by their statutes and
penal laws enjoyne the external rest on that day, but the works of
sanctification, wherein the celebration of the day chiefly consists, are the
proper work of the priest, he it is that must teach the Laws of God which reach
to the soul and inward man. It is the duty of Princes, who are custodes
utriusque tabulae, keepers of both tables, (...) they cannot perform the work
of sanctification themselves, to take care that fit persons be provided and
encouraged in this work. Its true, if a Prince were only (as the Heathen man
said) Tanquam subulcus, like a herdsman, that keeps cattle, to take care of
men's bodies, and of their outward estate only, and that they wrong not one
another by fraud or force, and had no charge of men's souls, nor of Religion, he
might neglect this work, but seeing it is otherwise, and that the care of the
Church is committed to him, and that the soul is the principal part, therefore
it his duty to see that fit and able persons be provided for this work, such as
may be Doctores Gentium, Teachers of the Nations. Therefore God would not have
such as were to do his work to be chosen ex tumultuario grege, out of the
common people, hand over head; but out of those that had been trained up in the
knowledge of the Law; for which purpose Jos. 15. 15.
1 Samuel 1. 1. 19. 18.
they had their several Schools or Universities, as at * Kirjath-Sepher,
Ramoth-Sophim, and Naioth. Nor were they to do Gods work till they were well
studied and able, to give reasons for that they did or said: by Gods own order
they were under the law to be from thirty years old and upward to do the 2 Timothy
2. 15.
work in the Tabernacle of the congregation. Number. 4. 3.


And as good care was to be taken in the choice of them, so ought there be as 1 Thessalonians. 5. 13.
great in the cherishing and esteem of them. To esteem them very highly in love
for their work sake. As Saint Paul speaks. We should receive them as Angels
Gal. 4. 14.
of God, as the Galatians did Saint Paul, and cleave to them, as his Auditors
did Act. 17. 34.
to him; and use them as honorably and as with as much respect as Princes
receive and entertain foreign Ambassadors: otherwise, they will neither profit
us, we shall receive no benefit by them, nor they be encouraged to go on
cheerfully in their calling.

Besides (which is worst of all) if we disesteem of them and despise them, God
will take it as an affront done to himself. He that despises you (says
Christ) despises Luc. 10. 16.
me. It is a despite done to God, not to the minister only: and God will take
it to heart and avenge his own quarrel. Corah and the rest that murmured
against Number. 16. 32. 12. 10.
Gods servants, felt his heavy indignation for it. Miriam (Moses own sister)
was made a Leper for the like offense, we see what became of them that 2 Kin.
2. 24.
scorned Elisha, though their age might have pleaded some excuse for them. And
(not to trouble you with many presidents) it is said of the Jews, that they
mocked the messengers of God and despised his words (how long?) until the wrath
of the Lord arose against his people, till there was no remedy. 2 Chro. 36. 16.


But it is objected, what if the minister be of bad life and conversation? we
find Esra. 2. 62.
that those that were polluted were put from the Priesthood. To this we answer,
many times it falls out that either for a small cause, or sometime upon no just
one, the Minister may be accounted scandalous. If the offense be given really,
and that without hope of the parties reclaiming that gives it, there is a legal
course (yet with charity) to be taken against him, the censures of the Church
must be exercised against him, but in the mean time, we must carry a fair
respect to them for his sake by whom they are sent; for the word we hear of
them is not the word of 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13.
men, but of God. Health is not refused though it come to us by the
prescription 1 Kin. 17. 6.
of a sick man. Elias refused not his food, though brought to him by Ravens.
Jo. 13. 29.
Nor was Christ's alms one jote the worse, though distributed by the hands of
Judas.

Indeed it cannot be (...) that Gods intent was to have them all lights, all
Lev. 20. 7.
holy, for he brought them near to himself, and therefore are called men of
God, Number. 16. 9.
they should be like the Baptist burning and shining lights; and if we well
consider 1 Kin. 13 1.
the work they are to undergo, we shall find they had need to be both holy and
Jo. 5. 35.
well qualified. The necessity and use of such persons.


1. They are to stand between the Lord and his people to, show them his word
and what he required them to do. Deuteronomy. 5. 5.


2. They are not only to read it, but to instruct them in it, to make men wise
2 Timothy 3. 15.
to salvation, and not only the common people, but the king also as was showed
Deuteronomy. 33. 9.
before. Number. 27. 21
2 Chr. 24. 17.


3. They are to bless the people in the name of the Lord. Deuteronomy. 10. 8.


4. They are to offer prayers to God for them upon all occasions, as 1. In Number.
8. 19. 16. 46.
time of Pestilence, when the plague raged among them. 2. in time of war, when
the 2 Kir. 2. 11.
enemy threatened their destruction. 3. In time of famine, when the land
yielded Ja. 5. 18.
not increase. 4. In time of sickness, not only for the life of the King or
Prince, Esa. 6. 10.
bnt also when sickness laid hold on private men. And lastly. Esr. 37. 4.
Ja. 5. 14.


5. They wereto be instead of Captains, to encourage the people (their
soldiers) 2 Cor. 2. 16.
to fight manfully, and to resist the assaults of the Devil, their Ghostly
enemy, these and many other things belong to the priests function.

Now (as the Apostle speaks) who is sufficient for these things? surely if he
that was so plentifully endued with the spirit of God doubted of his own
sufficiency, what may we in these times? when many take liberty (without the
emission the Apostle had) to themselves unsent to undertake this high calling,
certainly great care ought to be taken by those in authority, especially by the
Church governors that none should perform this office of themselves, and that
they who are ordained be able to undergo so great a work. For if they that
fight against us were only bodily enemies as French and Spaniards, there were
no such great need of such men: but seeing that (as the Apostle tells us) we
are to fight a spiritual combat, Ephe. 6. 12.
we must combat with (...) therefore such are necessary as can oppose spiritual
wickedness. such are Currus and Aurigae Israelis, the charriots and horsemen 2
King. 2. 12.
of Israel who must beat back this spiritual host. The holy Ghost has left it
upon record, that the life of (...) the priest; and his wisdom were the means
to keep both 2 Chr. 24. 17. 18.
king and people from Idolatry, and consequently the whole kingdom from
destruction. They are the preservers (...) kingdoms.
And as the (...) tells us, that in his time, the want of knowledge brought the
foundations of the earth (both of Church and commonwealth) out of frame: al
humane laws were defective. So (as the wise man speaks) it is wisdom and
knowledge psalm. 82. 5.
of Gods law, which is to be sought at the priests mouth that does servare
gregem ab interitu, preserve the people from perishing. And where there is no
vision, pro. 29. 18.
the people decay. For if we will look backward into the estate of mighty
commonwealthes, we shall find,, that (though the wisdom and policy of them
have been great) for want of Prophets and priests to reclaim the vices of the
soul, they have all fallen to decay. As fi st in the Assyrian monarchy, what
was the ruin of it, but Gluttony and intemperance which brought diseased bodies
and weakness, Esa: 17. 10.
and Adultery, which bred bastardslip (as the prophet speaks) and mingling of
kindreds, where by the Empire was translated out of the right line, and so
ruined: and all this for want of good instruction.

Again, look into the (...) monarchy, and you shall see, that Idleness, neglect
of tillage, mechanic arts and merchandise (every one thereby becoming (...) a
gentleman) caused the ruin of that Empire. Nor did the Grecian Monarchy come to
its period, till Alexander for want of knowing God, would himself be reputed a
God, and till his successors fell to covetousness; whereby a needles dearth
fell upon it, and the greater began to oppress the inferior, and the Prince
to burden his subjects.

And Lastly, the Roman, Monarchy came to that we see it is at this day, from
the most flourishing of all the former, by their own pride, envy, emulation,
and heartburning.

And these miseries befell al these four Monarchies by reason of these vices,
which the laws of God would not have suffered, if there had been any to teach
them, and the laws of the Heathen could not correct.

If we come to our own nation in the time of the Britains, the often and
frequent wrongs and injuries of great persons, the perverting of the Laws,
which were made to be Cobwebs to catch only the small flies, while the great
ones break through. The Corruptions of Lawyers, maintaining causes and suits
for their fee, by which the land was overrun with oppression, (Gods law being
not heard in the mean time) brought destruction upon the land.

Nor is it possible by any Act of Parliament, Law or Statute, to provide or
take, order that a man shall not be covetous, or that there be no Idleness,
Riot, Pride, Envy, or the like sins in the soul, though these (as is said) were
the chief causes that these Monarchies and other Countries came to destruction.
For Sobriety and all virtues must be begotten in the mind, and that by such
persons, as shall be able to reach and instill them out of the Law of God,
otherwise politic justice will never continue among men. Civil Acts are of no
force, except Religion be joined with them.

We read, that in the time of the Judges, every man did that which was good
Jud. 17. 18.
in his own eyes, Men could assure themselves of nothing they possessed. Six
hundred men of Dan came into Micahs house, and took away his graven Image, his
Ephod, his molten Image, his Teraphim, and his Priest. And in the next Chapter,
what an unheard of example of lust have we? and all this is attributed to the
want c. 19.
of knowledge of Gods Law in those days. And when the Priesthood was settled,
and they had a Judge, yet the Children of Israel were brought under the yoke of
1 Samuel 3. 4.
the Philistines because that calling was corrupted by Hophni and Phinees the
sons of Eli.

In the time of the kings of Israel, when that kingdom had been diverse years
2 Chr. 15. 3.
without the true God, and without the Priest to teach the law, in no nation
can be found seven such notable changes in so short a time, as you may read in
the 1 Kin. 16. 17.
book of the kings: and this was ascribed to the want of the priest, and the
Law of God. Therefore it was before that time the wish and desire of Moses,
that all the Lords people were prophets, and that the Lord would put his spirit
upthem. Number. 11. 29.
And this was the desire of Saint Paul too, that they could speak all with 1
Cor. 14. 5.
tongues, but rather that all al could prophecy. we see by experience, that
our adversaries take occasion to invade us in those places, where the people
are least instructed, and most ignorant in the word of God. All manner of sin
most abounds, where least care is taken for their instruction in the ways of
God and the knowledge of his Laws. It is our shame therefore, that we take no
better course for the increase and propagation of it to posterity, but that our
children are nouzled up in ignorance. We are many of us of king Ezechias mind:
let there be peace Esa. 39. 8.
and truth in our days. Our care reaches no further then our own time in
point 2 King. 20. 19.
of religion, and it were well if we had so much, though in other things our
care extends to posterity, Whatsoever order is taken in government, no doubt
but this will appear, the that Civil and temporal laws of the land would be
better observed and kept, if better order were taken for observing the
spiritual law, the Law of God, and encouraging those that are to teach and
instruct men in this law. Thus much for the persons.

CHAP. XI.
Of maintenance for such as attend at the altar. Schools and Colleges,
seminaries of the Church. The ancient use of them among the Jews, when they
were in Egypt, and afterward in Canaan. In the primitive Church. care to be
taken against admitting novices or young men into the sacred calling.
Maintenance due by the ordinance of Christ is. 1. (...). Reasons that the tenth
is still due under the Gospel, to the priesthood of Christ. Addition 27. About
tithes. That the tenth part was sacred to God from the beginning by positive
divine law obliging all mankind, and still in force. The law of nature
dictates not the proportion. Humane laws and customs about the modus decimandi
to be followed, provided that they give not less then the true value of the
tenth, if otherwise they are void. 2. oblations always in use in the Church.
Addition 28. About (...), some may be due and limited, by law, customs,
contract, or necessity of the Church, others voluntary and free. No power in
the Magistrate to alienate things dedicated to God.

The last is, that sufficient means may be appointed for the maintenance of
such Of the Maintenance of the Clergy.
persons whereof we have spoken, that spend their days in the ministry of the
Gospel and delivering the Oracles of God unto us. And because they must be
fitted by education and study for that service, therefore the institution of
Schools and colleges (as seminaries of knowledge divine and humane) is
necessary. And which we find to have been anciently among the people of God,
when the worship of God (...) to be in one family, after Jacobs posterity was
multiplied into a people in Egypt, we read of Ethan the Ezrahite, and Heman,
Chalcol, and Darda, 1 Kin. 4. 30. 31.
four men famous for learning, knowledge and wisdom, four great philosophers;
for it is said of Solomon, that his wisdom excelled the wisdom of the East,
that is, the Arabian Philosophers, and the wisdom of Egypt, and that he was
wiser then all men, even then (...) the Ezrahite, Heman, Chalcol and Darda. Now
we may read in (...) Cron. 2. 5. that those four were the sons of Zerah, one of
the sons of (...) 1 Cron. 2. 5.
by Thamar. And as they were men famous while they lived in Egypt, so Act. 7.
22.
Moses who brought them out of the Egyptian (...), was learned in all the
learning of the Egyptians. Now the learning of the Egyptians consisted, as in
other parts of Philosophy, so chiefly in the Mathematics, especially in
Astronomy, as we may read in the most ancient records of Pagan antiquities, and
therefore was no doubt well skilld in these sciences. After they were come out
of Egypt, when they came to settle in Canaan, they came to Debir, a city which
was formerly called Kiriath Sepher, civitas (...), the city of learning; the
Chaldee (...) (...) bibliothecarum, the city of books or libraries: Zenophon
makes it a Gymnasium, or Academie of the Phaenicians. In after times we find
that there were studies and chambers about the Sanctuary, for those that were
educated for the work of the Sanctuary; such a place had Samuel in Elies time;
1 Samuel 3. 9. 10. 5.
and after this there was familia Prophetarum, a company of Prophets, who had
the first college we read of, where the Philistims lay in Garrison, etc. yet
had they the Prophets and Students in such (...), that they passed to and fro
by them and never did them any damage.

Samuel himself also was such a friend to them, that he built Naioth in Ramah
Of Schools and Colleges.
(the beauty of Ramah) a College for the sons of the Prophets, which continued
2 Reg. (...). 3. (...). 22. (...).
a long time. We read that the Prophet Elisha had many of the children of the
Prophets daily sitting before him, and the very ceremony of Elisha's serving
Elias by pouring water on his hands is not omitted. We read also of (...) 2
Chro. 34. 22
the Prophetess, who dwelt at Jerusalem in the College, a place, as many
think, for Students of the Law of God. And in the time of the captivity Daniel
and his fellows excelled in learning and wisdom when they were at Babylon.
Afterward there was the magna Synagoga which was called Sanhedrim by the Hebrew
word. After that (as Philo Judeus relates) there were Schools at Alexandria De
vita (...).
in Egypt. And that there were Schools and Colleges at Jerusalem, (if any man
could doubt that such a great and populous City should be without them) may
appear Luke 2. 46.
by diverse places, where we read of wise men, Scribes, and Doctors of the Law,
Matthew. 23. 34. Acts 5. 34.
Counselors, etc. who must needs have some places, where they studied the Law,
1 Timothy 4. 15.
and heard it expounded, etc. Besides it was the command of S. Paul to Timothy,
that he should be conversant in the study of those things which he prescribed
him, which he could not do, if there had not been places to study in. And his
approbation of such places, he showed, when he disputed daily in the School of
one Tyrannus, Acts 19. 9. Such places then have always been, and that not
only for the study of Religion and the Laws of God; but also of humanity and
the liberal Arts.

And as there were Schools, so no doubt there were Guides, such as should
instruct them. In the time of the Gospel Gamaliel was a Doctor of the Law. And
Acts 4. 34.
not only Guides for Divinity, but Tutors too for the Encyclia, that learning
which comprehends the liberal Sciences: such as was Moses learning, and the
learning of 7. 22.
Solomon. For (whatsoever some men account of that which they call profane 1
Reg. 4. 30.
learning) none can be fitter to enter upon the sacred mysteries of Divinity,
then they which have been first well instructed and grounded in the general
learning and knowledge of the Arts.

Nor is it fit that young men should leave their studies, as soon as they be a
little initiated in Divinity (as many now adays do) but rather stay till they
have years and be well grounded. God (as is said before) would have none
admitted to serve in the Tabernacle of the Congregation, but from thirty years
old and upward. And S. Paul exhorts Timothy not to admit young novices to Numb.
4. 3.
the sacred calling of dispensing the mysteries of Christ. There are in
Scripture 1 Timothy 3 6.
as S. Peter speaks, some things hard to be understood, which they that are
unlearned 2 Pet. 3. 16.
are ready to wrest. Christ was long among his Disciples, yet they were John
14. 9.
to seck in some things. And therefore I say; as the Prophet in another case,
they ought not to go out in haste, but remain at their studies, till by the
help of their Esaias 52. 12.
Guides, their own industry, and Gods blessing, they be able to teach others;
and have approved themselves workmen that need not to be ashamed, rightly
dividing 2 Timothy 2. 15.
the word of truth, and then sacri sunto, let such in the name of God be
ordained and go boldly about the Lords work.

Now as there must be Schools of learning to fit men for this sacred calling,
so there ought to be maintenance provided for them, for the Apostle says, that
as the Priests that served at the Altar, lived of the Altar; so they that 1
Cor. 9. 13, 14
now preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel. And this by special ordinance
of Christ, who has so appointed, and the Apostles reason taken from the
maintenance of the Priests that served at the Altar, shows, that the same
proportion of a tenth part, which was paid then to the Levites and Priests
under the Law, is still due to the Priesthood, and Ministry of the Gospel; and
the Commandment for tithes extends to both: besides the Apostle reasons, 5,
8, 9, 10. etc.
that he which labors for others, ought to eat the fruit of his labors, and
be maintained by them who reap the benefit of his labors. He proves it from
the bruit creatures; the mouth of the ox must not be muzled that treads out
the corn: he proves further from men of secular callings, whether in time of
war or peace. The soldier goes not to warfare at his own charge, nor does the
husbandman feed his flock, or plant, or sow, but in hope to reap the fruit of
his pains; from whence he infers, that the spiritual husbandman that sows
spiritual things to others, ought to partake of their harvest in temporal
things for whose good he labors.

Now this maintenance if any ask what it is, I answer, that now as always
heretofore from the beginning, it consisted of something certain, and something
free and voluntary. The certain maintenance is tithes. The voluntary,
oblations: we find in Nehemiah, when they entered into a vow and Covenant to
keep the Nehe. 10. 33. 34. 37. etc.
law after their return from captivity, that both these were part of that
Covenant, viz. Tenths and oblations, which they bound themselves to pay for the
service of Gods house.

For tithes, as the seventh part of our time, so at least the tenth part of our
increase Of tithes, that the tenth is due to God.


1. From the annexing of tithes to the Priesthood of Christ, typified by
Melchizedech, to whom Abraham paid tithes after his victory over the kings.
Genesis 14. 20. Heb. 7. 1, 2. etc.
This Melchizedech was a type of Christ, as the Author to the Hebrews shows;
for he is a Priest for ever after the order of Melchizedech: and from
Melchizedechs receiving tithes of Abraham, the Apostle infers the excellency of
Christ's Priesthood above the Levitical, both because Abraham himself, from whom
Levi (...), paid him tithes, and was blessed by him, and because the Levitical
Priests that received tithes were subject to death, but here a high Priest
receives tithes, who Verf. (...).
lives for ever. In all which discourse it is supposed and taken for granted,
that tithes are annexed to Christ's Priesthood, otherwise the whole reasoning
were impertinent and to no purpose. Now if they be due to our high Priest who
lives for ever, no question but the Priests and ministers of the Gospel, whom
he has made his Stewards, and whom he has sent as his father sent him, ought
in his right to receive, and to them the people ought to pay their tithes, as
to Christ, to whom they belong: for Christ having ordained a maintenance for
the Ministers 1 Cor. 9. 14
of the Gospel, and no other certain maintenance being specified, it can be no
other then this of tithes.

2. Jacobs promise long before the law, to give tithes to God of all he
possessed, compared with Abraham's practice before, and the Apostles rule, that
the labourer Genesis 28. 21.
is worthy of his wages, with the perpetual practice of the Church (the best
expositor 1 Timothy 5. 18.
of the Law) show this duty to be moral and perpetual.

3. The chief and principal reason why God reserved the tenth for himself, and
gave it to those that served at the Altar, is moral and perpetual; For he
reserved the tenth to himself, in signum universalis Dominii, as an
acknowledgement of that Levit. 27. 30.
all we have is his, and he gave it to the Priests and Levites for their
service in Numb. 18. 21, 24.
the Tabernacle. Now, God is no less Lord of the world now, then (...), and he
has a service and worship to be performed and maintained still; and therefore
that proportion which God himself thought (...) in his wisdom ought to continue
still, especially there being nothing in it peculiar to the Jews, nor any
typical ceremony in that number, which should make it void by the coming of
Christ.

4. Lastly, by Christ's speech to the Scribes and Pharisees, about tything mint
and cummin, and leaving the weightier matters of the Law, when he tells them,
The Matthew. 23 23.
first ought to be done, and the other not left undone. And the Apostles rule,
that he which is taught in the word must communicate unto him that teaches him
in all good things; Gal. 6. 6.
it may appear, it was not Christ's intent to abrogate tithes, or the Apostles
meaning to abridge the Ministers maintenance, but that at least a tenth should
be paid.

As I said before of the time of public worship, that it is probable the
seventh day was Annot. 27.
Concerning tithes.
appointed by God from the beginning, by ageneral positive Law, obliging all
mankind, and that the day was altered by the Apostles herein authorized by
Christ, so likewise I say concerning tithes, it is the more probable opinion,
that God appointed this proportion for himself from the beginning, that as by
observing the day, so by paying the tenth all men might acknowledge God to be
Creator and Lord of all, and whatsoever they enjoy is his free gift, and
therefore this precept not being given only to the Jews, and the reason of the
Command being moral and perpetual, and no abrogation of it made by Christ or
his Apostles, but ratl es many things found in the new Testament, which seem to
confirm it, is of force still, and obliges all Christians under the Gospel; we
find it not only practiced before by the Patriarchs, but some relics of it
among the Heathen. The Greeks, Carthaginians, and Romans gave the tenth to
Apollo, to Hercules, to Jupiter, etc. The like Theophanus reports of the
Egyptians, and Herodotus of the Persians, Plutarch of others; which practice
came no doubt from the universal tradition derived from the beginning, not
wholly obliterated, though much corrupted; as all divine institutions, which
were positive and not merely flowing from the light of nature, were among them.
For as was said before of the time, so it may be said of the maintenance for
Gods worship, though natural reason dictates, that a proportion must be
allowed, and that this proportion of the tenth is very congruous and
reasonable, yet there can no necessary reason from mere natural principles be
given, why a seventh part of our time, or a tenth of our estate, and no other
proportion should be limited: and therefore those that have labored to urge
either of them as a precept or dictate of nature, have thereby wronged the
cause they undertook, and given occasion to some to make all (...) arbitrary,
when they find their reasons not to be concluding; whereas both may be jure
divino positivo, and so may bind as firmly, as if they were jure naturali,
Gods positive law binding as well as the laws of nature: besides that, this
proportion being once consecrated to God, as this has been by all Christian
Churches and Vide Canonistas in Tit. de decimis. etc.
kingdoms, it is not in the power of any to take it away. The first law for
tithes then was not given by Moses; for whereas Levit. 27. 30. it is said, The
tenth of all is In decret. Greg. et in sext. Clem. and extravag.
the Lords, this is not meant, that it came so by a Law then made, but that it
was the Lords by ancient Law and custom long before, and so refers to some Law
made at the beginning: yet then, its true, God transferred his right to the
Tribe of Levi, on whom the Scholast. in (...) 2. 2. q. (...), (...) 8, Maxim
(...) rez de (...). 1. (...) 1.
Priesthood was conferred, and so as to them the Law of receiving tithes was
new, and began then. And that the tenth is still due by divine right has been
(...) judgment of the Christian Church in all ages, testified in several
Councels by their Canons (...) Decrees, and acknowledged generally by the
Fathers, Canonists, and modern learned Divines, and by our own Church in
special, which in matters of this nature, as was said before of the Lords day,
ought to be sufficient to sway the judgment and settle the conscience of
private persons. But yet withal (as was said also of the day) though the
payment of the tenth be by divine right, in the general, so that less then
Var. resol. c. 17. n. 2.
the value of a tenth ought not to be allowed, and that therefore all customs
or humane laws to the contrary are void and unlawful; yet for the manner in
particular of tything, with the determining of all circumstances and (...) that
may arise or are incident thereto; I doubt not but the Laws of the Church and
place where we live ought to be followed, and to them we ought in Conscience to
conform, provided that less then the value of a tenth be not paid; for that I
conceive were contrary to divine Law, which, as Lindwood says in this case, no
custom can prescribe against, and therefore the practice of our modern
Common-Lawyers, allowing a modus decimandi, or custom, where any thing is paid
in certain, though it be not the hundredth part of the value, is most wicked
and unjust, and contrary to all laws both divine and humane, even to their own
common Law, which makes tithes to be jure divino, as is acknowledged by Cook
himself in many places, and therefore these practices have been maintained by
them only since the Alteration of Religion, to ingratiate themselves with the
people, and to draw the more causes into their Courts, and thereby the more
money into their own purses, Those that would be further satisfied, may among
many others that have written of this subject, see Sir Henr. Spelmans larger
work of tithes, which is sufficient alone to resolve any judicious
conscientious man in this matter.

The second sacred thing is Oblations, That is, when any man freely and
voluntarily Of Oblations. Levit. 27.
dedicateth or offers something to God out of his own estate. The particulars
are set down in Leviticus. Thus did Samuel, and Abner, and others. So did they
1 Chro. 26. 28 Acts 4. 35.
in the time of the Gospel, that sold their estates and laid them at the
Apostles feet. And these things thus dedicated were accounted holy to the Lord,
to whom they Romans 13.
transferred their right. Render therefore to every one his due, says the
Apostle. Matthew. 22. 21.
To God the things which are Gods, says Christ. What is thus freely given to
God, That what is given to God, cannot be taken away.
is highly esteemed by him; our Savior counted it no wrong to the poor, when
the box of ointment was spent upon his feet. The poor ye have always, but me
ye have not always, says he. John 12. 8.

Though oblations seem in the general to be free and voluntary, yet we must
know, Annot 28.
that some oblations as well as tithes may become due, by Law or custom. There
were Concerning oblations.
some oblations or offerings under the Law limited and commanded by God
himself, which did not cease to be oblations because they were commanded, and
there were others, which were free-will-offerings, left to the free will and
bounty of the Giver. And so it is now, some oblations may become due by Law,
custom, or compact, or by the necessity of the Church, when other maintenance
is wanting, as Aquinas observes; with whom agree the Canonists and the rest of
the School: only Suarez adds for explication, that whereas Aquinas says, the
oblation may be necessary by command, but the quantity or quality of the thing
to be offered is left free, that this is to be understood Thom. 2. 2. q. 86 a.
1. Cajet in Them. Arrag.
only where there is otherwise sufficient sustenance for the Priest, or no
Law, custom, or contract to the contrary, for otherwise in (...) cases by the
rule of justice, even the quantity and quality may be necessary, and not left
free. And this is commonly received, Major in 4. d. 15. q. 4. (...). 2. Suarez.
de Relig. lib. 1 c. 5. n. 6. Covar. lib. 1. n. 3.
nemine refragante, says Covarruvius. But now, where no law, custom, or
contract is for any oblations, nor the necessity of the Church requires them,
there they are merely voluntary, and free-will-offerings, and are the more
acceptable to God, because freely given.

But may not this which is thus given be taken away by the Magistrate? No, we
Genesis 47. 22.
see the Priests (...) was not bought by Joseph. If it be once dedicated, it
cannot Ezekiel. 48. 14.
be sold or alienated. Upon the taking of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, and
profaning the vessels by Belshazzar, we see what judgment God sent upon
(...). Dan. 5. 2, 3. 30.
And that of the sons of wicked Athaliah, that did bestow the dedicate 2 Chronicles.
24. 7.
things of the house of God upon Baalim, is noted as a high degree of
wickedness.

If they be taken or alienated by any, the Wise man tells us, Laqueus est
devorare Prove. 20. 25.
Mal. 3. 8.
sacra, it is a (...) to that man that devoureth that which is holy. Nay, it is
flat felony before God, Ye have robbed me in tithes and offerings. Ananias and
his wife Acts 5. 3.
suffered death for it. See a learned (...) ad Clerum of the authors upon this
subject, inter opera posthuma pro gradu Doctoris.
If others suffer not in so high a measure, yet it will bring a curse upon the
rest of their estate. Ye looked for much, and lo it came to little; and when
you brought it home, I did blow upon it; says God by the Prophet in another
case, which may be applied to this. It will be like Zacharies book, which
should enter into the house of the Thief, and consume it with the timber and
stones of it. But if they be reserved to the right use, then a blessing
follows. God gives good encouragement, and his promises never fail. Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, Hagg. 1. 9.
that there may be meat in mine house, and prove me now herewith, says zach.
5. 4.
the Lord of hosts, if I will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour out
a (...). 3. 10.
blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it.

CHAP. XII.
The two last rules. 1. The signs of keeping the day. 2. Of procuring the
observation by others. The Conclusion.

THus much for the fourth rule concerning the means of keeping this
Commandment. There are two things more which are required by the two last
Rules. 1. The signs that the Sabbath has been rightly kept. 2. The procuring
of the obsertion of it in others, of which very briefly.

1. Of the signs we need say little, having already showed in what duties the
The signs of right keeping the day.
sanctifying of the day consists, the performance of which are signs, that
this Commandment is kept. In general these two signs manifest the same. 1. Our
careful frequenting the house of God that day, for public service and worship:
this we find in Esaias 66. 23. from month to month, and from Sabbath to
Sabbath, shall all flesh come and worship before me, says the Lord. 2. Our
private sanctifying the day in holy duties if every city be like mount Sion,
every house (...) templi, like a Temple, and every man instar (...), like a
priest, offering up the spiritual sacrifice of (...) and praises to God.

2. The last rule is for procuring the keeping of the sabbath by others. This
is Plainly expressed in the letter of the commandment, Thou and thy son and
they daughter Job. 1. 5.
etc. And the stranger that is within thy gates. Where we see the charge is
given to the master of the family, not to let the day be profaned by any
within his (...). Examples we have for a family in Job, who sanctified his sons
and offered Nehem. 13. 19. 20. 21. etc. and 10. 31.
sacrifices for them. For a public person in the Commonwealth, in Nehemiah,
who caused the gates of Jerusalem to be shut, and would not suffer the
Merchants to come in and sell their wares upon the sabbath day. That which the
father is to Neh. 13. 22.
the family, that is the Magistrate to the City; as the one should command
those of Of procuring. the observation of this law by others
his household, so the other is to look to them that are within his jurisdiction
that they neglect not their duties in this point. Nehemiah testified against
the people for breaking the sabbath. God makes the magistrate Custodem
utriusque (...) an overseer, that men break no commandment either of the first
or second 13. 15.
table. And he is to take care as well for the keeping of the sabbath, as the
maintenance 10. 31. 23.
of the Minister. He is to call to account those that are under him, if the
sabbath 13. 17.
be broken. What evil thing is this that you do, and profane the sabbath day.

Nehemiah commanded his servants and the Levits, that no burdens should be Neh.
13. 19. 22.
brought into the City on the sabbath day and a strict charge is given to the
kings and Princes of Judah concerning the observing of the day, with a severe
threatening if they sufferd it to be profaned. Jer. 17. 18. 19 20. etc.

Now to conclude, when a man has observed all these rules concerning the
sabbath, by his own practice, and his care over them that belong to him, he may
in humble manner (with Nehemiah after his care herein) say to God. Remember
Neh. 13. 22.
me O my God concerning this also. and spare me according to the greatness of
thy Mercy. Remember says God, in the beginning of this Commandment. Remember
says Nehemiah in the end. So should we end the sabbath, and all our actions.
think of me O my God for good, according to all I have done. That I have with
my family observed the sabbath, that all we have been present before God, to
hear Act. 10. 33.
Jos 24. 15.
all things that are commanded by him, that I and my house have served the
Lord. Lord remember me in this.

Yet let us not be proud of that we have done, for at the best we are but
unprofitable Luc. 17. 10.
servants. And we have our tenebrosa intervalla, fits of darkness too, the best
of us. And in this case, as we may say Lord remember us, so also we are to say
with Neh. 13. 22.
the same Nehemiah, and spare us according to thy great mercy. It will be well
with us, if we can be able to say, remember me in hoc in this thing, if we have
done well but withal we must say spare me in this, and that offense committed
by me and in the defects that are in my best performances; spare me in thy
goodness, spare me in the greatness of thy mercy, spare me for the merits of our
Savior.

That which is here added in the former edition, concerning some sins forbidden
in this precept, is (...) here inserted, contrary to the Authors method, and
the same things are formerly handled more fully in their proper places
according to the first rule of extension, that the negative is included in the
affirmative

Finis precepti quarti:
THE EXPOSITION OF THE Fifth Commandment. Honor thy Father and thy Mother etc.
CHAP. I.
Of the sum of the second table. The love of our neighbor. How the second
table is like the first. 1. Of the Act, love. How christian love differs from
other love. The fruits of it. The parts of it. 2. The object, our neighbor.
Who is our neighbor. Degrees of proximity, and order in love. 3. The manner of
love, as thy self. This must appear in 1. The end. 2. The means. 3. The manner.
4. The order.

THis fifth Commandment begins the second Table. It is called by some the
Table of justice. As the other taught us the love and duty of man to God, so
this the love and duty of one man to another: which gives us a Testimony of
Gods love toward us: that he made man after his own image, like to himself,
and allows him a Table for his good, and that with more precepts then that of
his own.

The sum or contents of this Table is delivered Mat. 22. 39 out of Levit 19.
18. Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. In which place of Saint Mat. Our
Savior says, that the second is like the first, for indeed when we come to
the second Table, we depart not from the love and honor of God, it being no
less in the second, then in the first nay rather somewhat more. The similitude
mentioned by our Savior consists in this, that whereas he has taken order
for his (...) love in the first, so he has taken order for the love of man for
(...) in the second, and though it come not so directly to God, yet indirectly
it does, for our love to man must be grounded uponour love of God, we must love
him in and for God, therefore the Schoolmen make but one Theological virtue of
love to God and man. Tho. 2. 2. q. 23. etc. de doctr.


Saint Augustine exemplifieth it by the love and care a man bears to the
ungratious Christiana. (...). 1.
children of his friend, for though they many times are not to be loved for
themselves, yet for the love he bears his friend either alive or dead, for his
sake he overcomes that conceit, and bears affection to them: and thus in
respect of similitude, we are to love God for himself, and man for God. And for
this we have received 1 Jo. 4. 21.
a Commandment from God. That as we love God for himself, so we love man for
God: the Commandment lies upon us in both respects.

2. And further this second is like the former, because the love of our
neighbor commanded in the second is a sign of our love of God commanded in
the first 1 John 4. 20.
table, and therefore Saint John says expressly, that if any (...) say, that he
loves God, Romans 13. 9.
and hates his brother, he is a liar, for how can he love God whom he (...) not
seen, that Gal. 5. 14.
loves not his brother whom he has seen: and hence it is, that Saint (...)
and Saint (...). 2. 8.
James, say, that all the law is fulfilled in this one Commandment, thou shall
love thy neighbor as thy self, not properly and formally, but ratione (...),
as the sign or effect argues the (...), because the love of our brother is a
sign of our love to God which is the cause of our obedience to all the other
commandments, for Saint John's argument stands thus. Things that are seen, may
sooner be beloved then those that are not seen. If then our brethren cannot
find such favor at our hands as to beloved, having seen them, how shall we
love God, whom we never saw.

For as it is true downward, whosoever loves God, must love his work, and the
best of his work, and therefore man: so upward too, it is necessary. Whosoever
loves man; of whom he often times receives injuries, must needs love God from
whom he receives nothing but benefits. Saint Gregory puts them both together.
Per (...) Dei amor proximi gignitur: and per (...) proximi amor Dei (...). The
in hom sup evang.
love of a man to his neighbor is begotten by man's love to God, and the love
of man to God is nourished by his love to his neighbor? and Amor Dei amorem
proximi generat and amorproximi cale facit amorem Dei, which is all one with
the other in effect and with that of Saint Augustine Diligendo proximum purgas
oculum ad videndu (...) Deum, by loving thy neighbor thou make thy sight the
clearer to see God.

3. Again this similitude holds in regard of the punishment or reward for
keeping or neglecting of this second which is no less then for that of the
first. Inasmuch as ye did it not (faith our Savior) to one of these, ye did it
not to me and econtra; where In Jo. tract. 17.
we see the reward or punishment there mentioned to be given, will be, not for
any duty done or omitted to God himself, but as he comes to be considered in
the person Mat. 25. 45.
of an afflicted brother, for it is expressed both affirmatively, v. 34, 35.
etc. that what was done to them was done to Christ himself, and negatively, v.
42. 43, etc. that what was denied to them, was denied to Christ.

And thus we see the reason why Christ says the second Commandment, or second
table, is like the unto the first, and withal the first end or scope of it,
viz. That God might be loved not only in and for himself but also in our
brother who is to be loved for his sake.

Another end of the second table is, that as the first is the foundation and
ground of all religious society, as we are the Church of God, and is therefore
called the great Commandment, so in the second should be laid the ground and
foundation of all Commonwealths and Civil societies of men, as the first does
perducere nos ad Deum, as S. Augustine says, unite and bring us to God, so the
second unites one man to another by the matual duties they owe one to another
this is a second end of this table and it is gathered from the creation of man
at the first Genesis 2. 18. Where it is said, that it is not good for man to be
alone, and therefore he must have a helper. This second table therefore
respects the perfecting of Gods purpose in the work of his creation, that one
man be an help to another.

The words [ Love thy neighbor as thy self] contain three things.

1. The duty or act Commanded; Love. 2. The object of this Love; Thy neighbor.
3. The manner of this Love (...) diligendi, As thy self.
In the duty Commanded which is the sum of the second table, we must know first
what is the sense of the words. As there are in Latin, so in Greek and Hebrew
(...) words that signify to us the affection of love.

1. The general word is [ Amor] in latin it (...) an affection that extends it
self as well to things unreasonable as reasonable, whether it be Amor
concupiscentiae or Amor amicitiae, howsoever it be it comes under amor. And in
this respect we love all the creatures of God: that is, we desire to have them
preserved, which is, to be in the state wherein God created them; and thus we
love not the Devil (as Saint Augustine says) and his Angels but (...) Dei
judicium in (...), his just judgment upon them in placing them in that estate
and that they should continue in it.

2. The second word to express love is benevolentia, good will, whereby we
desire and seek the good of him we love, and this is only in reasonable
creatures, whereas that of (...) may be in all creatures, yet this is many
times rash and accompanied with error, and not grounded upon sound judgment.

3. The third is Dilectio, which is without error, grounded upon judgment,
and upon a good and sufficient cause, and that is when we love another in and
for God. for this distinguishes Christian love, from all other love. Saint
Augustine says that he that will be vetus amator, a true lover, must be verus
(...) astimator one that has and can give a true estimate of things, (...) as
Saint Ambrose says, quando de doct.
errat judicium perit and (...), every good act is out of square, and indeed is
lost, when Christiana. l. 1.
our judgment (...). Now in Christian love, God is the ground, for our love
will c. 42.
in 4. Luc.
decay, if it be not propter Deum for Gods sake. This makes our love extends
even to our enemies whom we ought to love for God, for though we be hated of
those we love, yet are we in no other case then Christ himself was who yet
loved his enemies, even Judas, who betrayed him. Therefore it pleased God to
recommend unto us, under the name of proximus, neighbor, all mankind, even
strangers and enemies, as our Savior shows in the parable of the Samaritan,
and the man that fell among thieves, and this is to love with judgment when
though there is no other motive of love in the party. yet we love him propter
(...), for God, for when a man loves a friend, he loves him propter aliud
quam Deum, for some other cause then for God alone: but when he loves his
enemy, there is no other cause but propter Deum, for God only.

Again when our love is ad (...) only to our friend it is debilis (...) weak
and slight work, for as Christ says, if we love them that love us, what great
matis this, the Heathnes and publicans do the like, therefore God would have
our love to be like his, stretched out usque ad (...), to those that are fardest
from us, to our very enemies, as he does when he causes the sun to shine, and
the rain to fall upon the good and bad. And this is no such hard matter as
flesh and blood would make it. Saint Augustine says, Dices non possum
vigilare, non possum jejunare, numquid dices non possum (...)? perhaps thou will say, I cannot watch, nor I cannot fast: but will thou say, I cannot love.
And this indeed is a point of special consideration, because it makes a
difference betwixt the love of Christians, and the love of Heathen, for our
love to men must flow from the fountain of our love to God. Take away propter
Deum, and then as Saint (...) says our Christian virtues (...)may be (...)
common and vulgar, such as were in the Heathen, our fortitude nothing but the
fortitude of Socrates. and so of other virtues, wherein ours and theirs differ
in nothing but in this propter Deum, for God.

And therefore our (...) rule must be according to Saint Gregory's excellent
direction (...) rinus justitiae (...) de (...) pietatis The river of our
righteousness toward men must have (...) original from the fountain of piety
to God, that is, that our love to our brother must arise from our love to God,
and though we see how our love must be guided by our judgment in the cause or
ground of it, propter Deum for God.

And as our judgment must be rectified that we are not in the cause, so
consequently our affection which follows the understanding must be right, and
herein though we are not tied to that high measure which was in Saint Paul who
Romans 9. 2. 3.
wished himself (...) from Christ for his brethrens sake, viz. for the
salvation of the Jews, yet thus far we are bound as to desire their salvation
with our own, and to will the same good to them that we will to our selves, and
to nill the same evil to them, which we nill to our selves, and consequently
there must be those works or fruits of love mentioned by the Apostle which as
they refer to our neighbor, are especialy three.

1. The first is Joy. That as we wish our neighbors good, so when any good
Romans 12. 15.
has befallen him, we be glad and rejoice at it. yea after Saint Barnards rule
gandere In (...). sermon. 49.
in bono alieno magno magis quam in proprio parvo, rejoice (...) in the greater
good of our neighbor, then in the lesser good of our own. Opposite to this is,
if either we repine, that any should come to the participation of the same good
which Math. 25. 26.
we possess; which is one part of envy; and was the fault of the unfaithful
(...) in in homl
the Gospel that did not occupy his masters talent or if we stand thus
affected, that if we have it not our selves, we will not be content, that any
other should have it. And of this part of envy is it that Saint Chrsostom
speaks thus. (...) pestiferum est (...), (...) in diabali conditionem and in
(...). (...) de doctr.
Per (...) venit in mundum, propter ipsam Abal est interemptus etc. Envy
Christiana.
is a most pestilent evil, it turns and transformes a man into the nature of a
most cruel (...).
devil. By it came (...) into the world: for it was Abel stain. It was the envy
of (...) toman, which made him seek (...) fall, because he would have (...) in
better estate then himself. And in this respect it is that S. Augustine said,
Invidia vitium Diabolicum, quo solo Diabolus reus est, and inexpiabiliter reus.
Non (...) Diabolo dicitur, (...) damnetur, adulterium commisisti, furtum
fecisti, villam alienam rapuisti: sed homini stanti invidisti: Envy is a
Devilish vice; of which only the Devil is guilty, and (...) without
expiation: for it is not said to the Devils damnation, Thou (...) committed
adultery, or thou have stolen, or thou have violently seized on another
possessions: but this is objected to him, Thou have envied man in his Innocence.

2. The next is Peace, a desire of agreement with our Neighbor, plainly
prescribed Romans 12. 18.
by the Apostle; Have peace with all men. And if at any time there happen a
breach, we should not pertinaciter aggredi, obstinately set upon one another:
for this is the badge of Satan's Disciples, as S. Gregory says; Si Dei (...)
filii qui pacem faciunt, procul dubio Satanae sunt silii qui pacem confundunt;
If they which are the Authors of peace be called the sons of God, without
question they are the Devils children which disturb it. When Christ came into
the world the Angels sung at his birth, Glory to God, and peace on earth, and
yet himself says, I came not to send peace, but a sword. To reconcile which
places we must conceive it to be, discordia Matthew. 10. 34.
in (...), war against that which is evil, which Christ speaks of in that
place: for as In Apol.
Nazianzen well says, Melior est talis pugna, quae Deo proximum facit, quam
pax illa, quae separat a Deo: that dissension is better which makes a man come
(...) to God, then that peace which separates him from God. Therefore as a
Father says, As there is nothing more to be wished for then concordia in bono,
agreement in that which is good, and nothing more to be labored against then
discordia in bono, disagreement in the (...); so nothing more to be desired,
then disagreement in evil, and nothing more abominable then agreement in that
which is bad. And as our Savior pronounces them blessed that are Peacemakers
in good, so are they no less blessed that are Peacebreakers Isidor. de summo
(...).
in evil, that make discord in evil, and they are no less the children of God
then lib. 3.
the other: and threfore peace with heretics and Schismatics must not be
held, though Matthew. 5. 9.
in lesser matters which trench not upon the foundations of faith, worship, or
government, difference of opinions may be allowed. For there may be a (...) or
disagreement allowable in questions and disputations that touch not upon those
foundations, and so, that it go not so far as to trouble the peace of the
Church, but that the unity of the spirit be kept in the bond of peace. For as
S. Gregory says, Sancta Ecclesia Ephesians. 4. 3.
consistit in unitate fidelium, sicut corpus in unitate membrorum; the holy
Church consists in the unity and agreement of the faithful, as the body in the
unity of the members. And so that this unity and peace be kept in the main
matters, liberty of opinion may be allowed in other things. For as S. Augustine
says, a man may sometimes, (...) sapere, quam res se habet, think otherwise
then the truth is; for men are not Angels to see all truth here, for we know
but in part, and therefore to (...) in some things, which concern not the
foundation is not to be accounted discordia in bono, such differences and
disputations are the way to find out the truth, men's wits being hereby
sharpened, as Iron sharpeneth iron, as Solomon says.

The third effect or fruit of love is care not to offend or hurt the party
loved, either Prove. 27. (...). Lev. 19. 14.
in his body or soul. Thou shall not curse the deaf, nor put a stumbling block
before the blind, says God; that is, we must not cause him to stumble bodily;
much less must we by any scandalous action lay a stumbling block to his soul:
For though it be necessary that offenses come, yet Christ denounces a woe
against that man by whom they come, that shall give occasionem mali, any
occasion of offense or stumbling to another, to make him fall. And as our love
requires, that we give no offense, so also it requires, that if offense be
given by any to another, whereby he is led out of the way, we must be ready
(...) correptionem fraternam, to use brotherly reproof, and so to bring him
into the way again. For this is expressly required, as a fruit of love, Thou
shall not hate thy brother, nor suffer sin to rest upon him, but shall plainly
reprove him; where we see the neglect of reproof is made an effect of hatred;
and then by consequence the duty it self must be Lev. 17. 9, 10
a fruit of love.

Thus much of that generalis dilectio, the general nature of that love, which
is due cuilibet proximo, to every neighbor.

Now the parts of this love are these.

1. To do no injury at all to any man, either faciendo malum, by inflicting
evil upon, or toward him, or (...) bonum, by withholding or detaining any good
Levit. 19. 13, 14, 15, 16.
from him. And again, that having received evil from any man, we recompense him
not that evil with the like. It is against the Apostles rule; for he says,
Recompense Romans 12. 17.
no man evil for evil. And we are to follow his counsel, lest as S. Augustine
has it, L. (...). de civ. Dei
Cito parcendum est injuranti, ne veniae viam tibi intercludas, (...) must be
ready to forgive him that does us injury, lest we shut up the way of pardon to
our selves: and S. Chrysostom says, frustra propitiari sibi Deum quaerit, qui
cito (...) in proximum In Matthew. 5.
negligit, he seeks in vain to be reconciled to God, that takes no care
speedily to be pacified with his neighbor.

2. And secondly, as we must do no evil to any, so there is a necessity of
doing good to all men, as far as we may; and because it is impossible to have
(...) motum, a particular affection to love every particular man, to rejoice at
his good, or to have a care of him, our nature and estate being finite, and not
sufficient for it: therefore for our actions we are only enjoined to these
toward all. 1. First, the duty of prayer, even for our enemies, this is like
to the Sun beams, that radius Matthew. 5. 44.
charitatis, which we send to heaven for all men. And this is imposed upon
every Luke 6. 27.
man, and to be performed for every man. 2. The second action is, to be done in
Romans 12. 14.
a case of necessity, and is that which is intimated in the parable in the
Gospel, of Luke 10. 30.
the man that fell among thieves; even the succor we owe to every man in
necessity, which is (...), that rather then we should fail in this case to help
him, we are adimere (...) multa non necessaria, take from our own all that is
not necessary, Prove. 25. 21.
to relieve his necessity; which is expressed by the Wise man. If thine enemy
hunger, give him bread; and if he thirst, give him water to drink. If we do
not, we make a breach of the first Table, according to that of S. John: (...)
has this worlds good, and sees his brother has need, and (...) up his bowels
1 John 3. 17.
of compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him? Now by the worlds
good is meant sufficiency, or abundance with superfluity, and his need not
without extremity.

The secound Council of Arelat. sets down, Quae quis salvo statu (...), pro
superfluis haberi debent concurrente fratris necessitate: those things which a
man may bestow, saving his estate or condition of life, are to be accounted as
things superfluous, if his brothers necessity be present.

And (...) under this is comprehended also the charitable performing of the
works of our vocation for the good of all that are in necessity. As the Lawyer
is not to deny his counsel to any one that shall ask it: nor the Physician his
help to any that shall require it in case of necessity. And a further
injunction then prayer and parting with our superfluity, is commanded by the
conjunction copulative in the three first verses of the Gospel: where a man is
charged, if his cloak be taken from him, to part with his coat too; and if he
be struck on the one cheek, Luke 6. 27, 28, 29.
to offer the other: which is nothing, but 1. The habitual patience of the
mind, whereby a man should be ready to part with such things, and bear such
injuries, if the glory of God require it, otherwise he is not bound. And 2.
rather to suffer more wrong then to seek revenge or return evil for evil.

2. The second thing proposed is the object of this Love, which is our
Neighbor.

Of which word [Neighbour] in our Saviors time there was a strict acception,
it was reduced to a narrow room. For the Pharisees counted none Neighbors, but
their Friends, and those of their own Country and kindred, and so they
expounded the Law, Thou (...) thy Neighbor, by restraing it to such: but our
(...) 9. 53.
Savior makes the word to be of a larger extent, and forces the Lawyer to
confess, John 4. 9.
that it extends to enemies, even to Samaritanes, which were such deadly
enemies to the Jews, that they would not (...) Christ, because his face was
toward (...); for every one from whom we may receive mercy, or to whom too we
may show mercy are neighbors, and so our Savior proves that the Samaritane
Luke 10. 37.
was a neighbor to him that fell among thieves, because he showed him mercy,
though otherwise he were an enemy to the Jews, and of another nation, for as
Saint Augustine says, he is Proximus, a Neighbor, Qui est proximo (...), that
is near to another in works of mercy, and therefore it is not cognatio (...),
kindred or cohabitation, but Mercy that (...) a man to be a Neighbor, and
seeing every man, even an enemy, may be an object of mercy, therefore every
man, even an enemy is a Neighbor. And it is not Christ's exposition only,
Deuteronomy. 22. 1.
but the Law says the very same, in the case of a stray ox or ass. If thy
brothers Exodus 23. 4.
ox or ass go astray, etc. which brother in another place is said to be even
an enemy, for there is in the same Law, (...) 23. 4, 5. where it is said, If
thy enemies ox or ass go astray, etc.

He that is the object of our love is expressed in Scripture by three words,
which are distinguished in the Hebrew, as well as in the Latin. 1. Amicus, a
friend or fellow. 2. Proximus, a neighbor. 3. Frater, a brother; which is used
by S. John constantly in his first Epistle. In all which are motives and
grounds of love. For,

1. In brethren there is identitas naturae, etc. identity of nature, which
makes all creatures love one another; one beast delighting in another of the
same kind, and little children delighting in their image in the glass, show
this.

2. Now as this similitude is a (...) of love, so is identitas originis,
identity of beginning; therefore it is a natural thing, for brethren born to
love one another, because they have the same original; and nothing so
unnatural, as one brother not to love another.

2. Between Friends, love is the cause of love, for it will be mutual and
reciprocal. (...) amoris magnes, love is a loadstone to love. Our Savior knew
this well, and therefore in the Commandment of love, he expresses it is thus,
That ye love one another; it must be amor mutuus, mutual love.

Another ground of love among friends, is societas periculi, and (...), when
men partake of the same danger or deliverance, as Captives under the Turk
delivered by the same ransom. This ground of love we have, who being all in
danger of hell, and become captives of Satan, are delivered by the same
ransom, by Christ. This makes friendship, and causes love in men that never
saw one another before.

3. Now for proximus, it is defined ab usn, of the use and benefit that one
has by another. God has not given to any man such gifts, but that he needs
the gifts of his brother. God has not given all his gifts to any one, and
therefore there is none but has need of another: and therefore (...) and
utilitas, use and utility, are the grounds of propinquity, and make men become
proximi, neighbors.

4. Lastly, there is (...) instituti; both amongst (...), friends and
neighbors, all do tendere ad idem, tend to one and the same end; that is, to
be partakers of the blessedness, which the angels of God enjoy: for this is
institutum (...), and proximi (...), and amici, and nostrum omnium, the end and
scope of my brother, neighbor, friend, and my self, and of all of us. These
then are the reasons of Gods using those words, and the reasons also of our
love.

Now in this object of our love, proximus, our neighbor, there are two things
to be (...). 1. That we must beware, we take not the sin of our neighbor, for
our neighbor; for that which has interposed it self, and indeed is not de
(...), is sin, and (...) proximus, a sinner. It is sure that, Omnis peccator,
quatenus peccator, odio habendus est, every sinner, as he is a sinner, is to be
hated; and omnis (...), quatenus (...), diligendus, every man as he is a man is
to be beloved. Therefore, Sic homines diligendi, ut non errores diligamus,
diligendi quia facti sunt, non quia fecerunt; we are to love men so, as not to
love their errors, and so to love them that are made, as that we love not that
they do; so to love that which God made them, as not to love what by sin they
made themselves. The reason is, because we have all one (...), or end: we do
therefore love one another, because we shall be partakers of the same sovereign
good of eternal happiness; and sin being an hindrance or obstacle to that end,
how can we love that which hinders from that, whereto we tend? He that loves
iniquity, hates his own soul. And so we may say, he that loves the sin of his
Prove. 29. 24.
brother, hates his soul.

2. We must know, that in proximitate, neighborhood. there are degrees of
neernesse, whereby one is nearer then another. In which respect that affection
which causes us to remember some before others in our prayers, is not from any
corruption of our nature, because omission of duty to one is a greater sin then
to another; for the duty to a father, is greater then to a stranger.

But as in natural things there is major (...), a stronger motion, where there
is major (...), a stronger inclination; so where there is a greater duty owing,
there God will have a greater affection. Because the earth is to come (...) to
the Center then the water, therefore it has majorem gravitatem, a greater
degree of (...), to draw it thither; and so where the greater actions or duties
are required, there greater affections, or a greater measure of love, which is
a weight pressing to the (...), is necessary: not only charitas, but also ordo
charitatis cadit sub (...), as the (...) determine. As therefore the affection
of love is required, so our love must be ordered, Thom. 2. 2. q. 44 Cajet.
ibid. Valent. q. 19. p. 3 and (...).
as the Schools speak The demonstration stands thus. If wheresoever there is
principium, a beginning; there whatsoever is (...) principio, (...) to it, is
(...) first, and so consequently there is an order, and so every thing, as it
is (...) or (...) off, must first or latter be intended. Now there are two
causes or principles of Love; God, and our selves, and therefore the nearer any
are to these principles, (as some men are nearer to our selves, as Fathers,
Mothers, etc. so are nearer to God by grace) the more they are to be loved. Let
us see then this order in our charity, that it may be ordinata charitas,
charity well ordered. To which purpose it must stand thus.

1. God. 2. Our own souls. 3. Our brothers soul. 4. Our bodies. 5 The body of
our neighbor or brother.

1. God is to be loved especially, and in the first place, because he is that
chiefest good, by the communication whereof we are all made good. So says S.
Augustine, (...) vera and summa vita, in quo, a quo, and per quem, bona sunt
omnia, (...) bona sunt, (...).
God is the true and chief life; in, from, and by whom are all good things. And
as another, Cum (...) Deum (...) in ipso (...), by loving God we find all
(...). in Ps.
things: God is the universal nature, to whom all things give place. He must
have the first place in our love; as in policy the public good is preferred
before all private respects: and therefore a good Citizen will be content to
lose his own goods, thereby to redeem peace to the public. We see in nature,
that heavy things will move upwards, contrary to their own particular nature,
propter salutem universi, for the good of the universe, as that ne detur (...):
so in Religion, God and our love to him, (...) dilectionis in (...), does
overcome and drown all other loves to our selves, or any other particular
object; as wesee it did in S. Paul, who out of his love to God (that he might
be glorified in the salvation of the Jews) (...) to be separated from Christ,
if it had been possible, and not incompatible with his love to God, which was
as a motion against a particular nature, for the good of the general or
universe.

2. The next is our selves, and our selves before our brethren. The reason is
because in the one there is an unity, in the other, at the most is but an
union: and major (...) habenda est unitatis, quam (...), there is a greater
regard to be had of the (...), then of the latter. And again, seeing it is not
lawful for any to commit a sin to prevent his brother (...) sinning, nay not to
save the whole world, it shows plainly, we are to prefer the love of our selves
before our brother, and in our selves our own souls before our brothers soul.

Now in the case between the health or good of our own body, and of our
brothers soul, it thus stands. There can come no participation of the glory of
God to our bodies, nisi per redundantiam, as it were by an overflowing, when
the soul being full communicates it to the body. But the soul of our brother is
capable of divine glory, and the universal good, immediately by it self, and
therefore ought to be preferred before the body of any which participates only
per redundantiam, by the overflowing of the soul, and so at the second hand as
it were; besides one soul is worth all bodily creatures in the world: a man
therefore may endanger his body, for the saving his brothers soul.

3. Then in the next place we are to seek the good of our neighbors body: and
of neighbors, 1. (...) est omnibus, we are generally to love, and succor all
that need, any whomsoever, if they be in extrema necessitate, in extreme
necessity. 2. And in the next place, of those that be in need, maxim (...),
especially we are to do good to them that are of the household of faith, as the
Apostle directs, that are of the same Religion with us, we are to relieve such
before others, if we cannot relieve both, believers before infidels. 3. And
thirdly, among the faithful, to them that are of our own country, before the
children of strangers.

4. Fourthly among those of our own country, (...), to our own, to those that
Gal. 6. 10.
have some relation to us, for he that regards not his own, says the
Apostle, is psalm. 122. 8.
worse then an (...). 5. Fifthly, of our own, to them that are of our own house
1 Timothy 5. 8.
or kindred. 6. Sixthly, in the house, to the wife on (...), rather then to
father, mother, Genesis 2. 24.
or children; for a man must leave father and mother, and cleave to his wife;
and that the husband ought to be preferred before children, appears by (...) 1 Samuel 1. 8.
speech to (...), am not I better to thee then many sons? And therefore the
children are not to lay up for the (...), but the fathers for the children, as
2 Cor. 12. (...).
the Apostle says, yet every one should have respect both upwards and
downwards.

Now for strangers, or those that are not nostri, ours; either they be rich, or
poor, of which the poor are rather to be regarded then the rich; and for the
rich, they are either such as we have received benefits from, or to whom we
have done good; and because (...) est (...) and maximum (...), the work is the
chief (...) of the (...) of any thing, and bestowing of good is, (...), (...)
which makes (...) virtue (...) visible; and in that respect it is, that a man
is apt to love his own work, or his own creature, as we say; yet we ought to
prefer him of whom we have received benefits, before him on whom we have
bestowed any, because a benefactor is more like a (...) to us, then the other
like a son. T(...) 2. 2. q. 26. a. 12, Ex. Arist. 9. Eth. But if (as Saint
(...) (...) it) there are two persons, who in all respects are equal, and we
have something that would help either of them, and that it cannot be divided.
What is then to be done? there being nothing in the one why I should pleasure
him more then the other, quid (...) sort eligerim, nothing, but to chose one
by lot. the same may be the case of every man that is to do good to another,
who in (...) all are of finite nature, and therefore are not able to do good to
all, or to satisfy all, therefore when we are joined in the like relation to
us, or the degree of (...) or propinquity, if we must help both, there remains
nothing but (...), to (...) it by (...).

Further we are to know, that in love there is a double respect. 1. Of the
object or party loved. 2. of the subject, or party that loves.

1. (...) dilecti, in (...) of the (...) loved, we are to respect (...), and to
love him more in whom the more excellent gifts ofgrace appear, so as to take
more complacency in him, and to wish him the more excellent good, as the
greater degree of glory; because the more excellent any thing is, the nearer it
Tho. 22. q. 26. (...) 8.
comes to God, and if he be better, we ought to wish him better. Thus spiritual
conjunction or neernesse is to be preferred, (...) objecti, in respect of the
object.

2. Ratione (...), (...) of the (...) loving, and here natural and (...)
propinquity or conjunction may be preferred before spiritual, as founded in
nature, and therefore more firm and immutable: and hence it is, that in
temporal things, (...). de hisce. (...) in (...). (...). 28. c. 2. n. 28. 29.
etc.
a man may prefer one that is nearer by nature, before one that is only
conjoined with us by grace. Thus if a man have money or estate to give; he is
not bound to bestow it upon the best man in the world, but may prefer one that's
nearer in nature, though not so excellent in grace. And thus far de ordine
(...), of the order of our love.

The third general proposed is, The (...) of this love, (...). As thyself.

This is ficut te, as thy self; not (...) te, as (...) as thy self, it
signifies a respect, but not a quantity. The Hebrew (...) signifies not (...)
but (...), as Job 12. 3. for as we said before, every man ought to have a
greater regard to his own soul, then to his brothers.

Now this (...) or manner of love must appear in four things.

1. The end. 2. The means. 3. The manner. 4. The order.

1. The first in (...) te (...), is in respect of the end, for which thou
love thy self, or for the same cause, And thou love thy self, because thou
love God, and so consequently, all (...) Dei, that are Gods; because thou thy
self art aliquid Dei, something of God; therefore thou love thy self, and so
consequently thou must love they neighbor propter (...) for God; and (...) for
this cause thou love thy brother, thou (...) him as thy self, in respect of
the end. So also and in this (...) thou must love thy brother.

2. The second is the (...), the applying this love to that end. And that is,
that in as much as I love my self, I wish my self good, and that not in my (...)
but best part, which is my reasonable soul: and therefore I wish more
especially the chiefest good of it, (...) bonum (...), which is, eternal
blessedness and this is it which I must look to in my brother. If I love him as
my self, I must love him ad (...) partis, for the good of his better part, and
that is Romans 7. (...).
the good of the inward man (of which the Apostle speaks) whereas the most love
only the outward man; now the chiefest good of the inward man consists in
(...) Dei in the sight and fruition of God. But because none can come to this
except the impediments be removed, which is sin; Saint Augustine (...), (...)
diligit proximum hoc cum (...) debet (...), (...) ipse (...) toto cord (...),
(...) that truly (...) his (...), must work upon him so, (...) he also love God
with all his heart. Take care to remove his sins, and as for a man's self,
(...) his will do (...), (...) him to some sin, non (...), be must (...),
because it would hinder (...) the (...) good, so ought he to love his neghbour,
as not to consent to the evil will of his neighbor in any bad action, because
that would hinder his chief good.

The Scripture speaks of things not always as they are, but as they ought to
be, and so requiring us to love others as our selves, it is not meant of our
self love, (...) it is corrupt, but as we ought to love our selves specimen
naturae capiendum ex optima natura, a pattern in nature must be taken from
nature pure and (...) in its integrity; so that a man ought not to love his
neighbor as he does himself, but as he should love himself. For Saint
Augustine says, when I love my self, either I love my self because I am or
should be blessed: the very same rule we should observe in our brother: I must
love him, aut quia est (...) ut sit, either because he is, or because he should
be good. Which I cannot do, unless I win him ab impedimentis, from the
impediments, and set him in via in (...) right way: for as Saint Augustine
says, Non (...) proximum tanquam seipsum si non ad id (...) ad quod ipse
tendis, de mor. l. 1.
adducis. Thou love not thy neighbor as thy self, if thou (...) him not to
that good, to which thou thy self tendest. And he says in another place, (...)
est regula (...), de vera (...).
it is the only rule of love, ut (...) sibi (...) bona pervenire, and illi
velit, that he would have the same good come to his neighbor, that he wishes
to himself.

3. The third is the manner. In loving any thing that is good there are two
motives first, Either it is for the sole and alone good of him that loves it or
2. Secondly, for the good of the thing it self, that is loved He that loves any
thing, not for it self, but for himself, does not love it, as himself, this is
not diligere (...) seipsum, but propter seipsum; this is not, ut faciat bonum,
sed ut potiatur quis bono, not to seek his good whom we love, but to make use
of what good is in him for our selves, as men love their instruments, merely
for the use they have of them and not otherwise; thus a man loves his shooing
horn, to make use of it, to serve his turn in the morning, and casts it away
all the day after: but our love to our neighbor should be gratuitus, without
hope of recompense, and that he that we love may have the sole good by it.
Otherwise if we love him not as our selves, for no man loves himself, ut se
potiatur, that he may make use of himself, as he loves meat drink, etc. and
therefore must he love his neighbor, not to make use of him for his own ends,
but propter seipsum, for himself, seeking and desiring his good.

4. The last is the order. It is sicut teipsum, not sicut (...), as our selves,
not as we love God; we must beware of loving him so, for we must love our
selves infra Deum, in a pitch below God; and by consequence we must love our
neighbor infra Deum, after God. Therefore we must not (...) the will of any
man, be he of never so great excellency, before the will of God. Gods will must
not give place to ours. God is not so unwise, as to bring in the second Table
to overthrow the first, but his scope in it was, that it should be a table to
direct and help us in performing the duties of the first. 1. So that if our
love to our neighbor, in the first place be for God alone, then it is Sancta
dilectio. 2. If it be to bring him to that end we aim at our (...), then it is
amor justus, a just love. 3. If it be merely for our neighbors, without
respect to our selves then it is verus amor true love. 4. and lastly if we
prefer the love of God in the first place then it is ordinata dilectio well
ordered love.

Now God in both these tables proceeds further then earthly priuces he takes
order for the regulating of the heart and soul even for restraint of
concupisence that there be no entertainment of sin within us and that we
conceive no delight in it. And this is the internal obedience of the second
table, to entertain no concupiscence prejudicial to our neighbor, and it is
the sum or substance of the tenth Commandment, which God has placed last, not
first that those two the first Commandment and the last, the one concerning the
inward worship of God, the other the inward love and duty to our neighbor,
might be the bounds of his law.

Thus far for the second table in general.

Now for the fifth Commandment being the first of the second table.

CHAP. II.
The division of the commandments of the second table. Why this is set here
between the first and second table. The parts of it, 1. A precept. 2. A
promise. In the precept. 1. The duty. Honor. 2. The object, father and mother.
The ground of (...). 1. Excellency. 2. Conjunction. The order of honoring.
differs from that of love. Why God did not make all men excellent, and fit to
be superiors. All paternity is originally and properly in God. In man only
instrumentally. The Hebrew and Greek words translated (Honor) what they
properly (...). The necessity, and original of Honoring superiors, government
a divine ordinance. Power, Principality, and excellency, (...), how they
differ. Honor due to them all. To natural parents. (...) the Country where we
live. To Princes. To spiritual fathers. To Magistrates. In respect of
excellnecy of gifts. honor due. First in respect of years. Secondly of the
gifts of the mind. Thirdly of outward estate. Fourthly of benefits received.

Honor thy father and mother. The last commandment is the fountain from whence
all the rest of the second table do proceed, as streams from the conduite
head, for as the first commandment contains the inward love and worship of God,
from whence all the other duties of the second table arise, so the last
contains the inward love and duty of the heart which we ow to our neighbor,
from whence all other duties to our neighbor do spring, so that the tenth
commandment is the fountain, and the other five are the streams. And the
streams receive a second division thus, for either they do equally, and alike
concern al men, in general as the 6. 7. 8. 9. Or else they have special respect
to some as the fifth. The general duties in the 6. 7. 8. and 9. Commandments
are subdivided into such as either concern our neighbor in his person, or in
the exterior gifts, of wealth, credit, and good name etc. And those which
respect (...) person are either as he is considered in himself in regard of his
essence, in the sixth commandment or as he is in near (...) with another by
marriage, which makes of two one flesh, in the seventh commandment. (...). (...)


Those that concern him in his exterior gifts, respect either his substance,
or estate, which is provided for in the eight; or his credit and good name, in
the ninth commandment.

Or if we take them all four together, There is a restraint in them all.

In the sixth a restraint of, wrath malice etc. and the effects thereof, for
the preservation of the lives of the members of the commonwealth; and in
respect Genesis 9. 6.
of God, for the preserveing of his Images, which is defaced by murder.

In the seventh a restraint (...) lust, concupiscentia carnis, which is
prejudicial to 1 (...). 4. 4
the good of wedlock in the civil body, and in respect of God is a defiling of
the 1 John 2. 16.
body which is the temple of the holy Ghost, and a member of Christ, and
therefore ought to be kept holy and chaste.

In the eighth a restraint of covetousnes which is concupiscentia oculorum, the
lust of the eyes, which in respect of man is an offense against the politic
state, by doing wrong to another in his goods, and in respect of God perverts
the rule of justice prescribed by him.

In the ninth a restraint of the spirit of lying and detraction, which our
nature lusts after, whereas the provision of the good name of our brother is
required, and in respect of God here is order taken for the preserving of truth.

As the other commandments respect all men in general, so the fifth respects
some in special, viz. inferiors and superiors, and other mutual duties.

This fifth commandment being placed in the front of the second table has an
eye also to the first commandment of the first table. The one commanded the
honor of God; the other of his vicegerents.

It contains a precept, and a promise.

1. The precept is, Honor thy father and thy mother. 2. The promise, that thy
days may be long etc.
Some think the first words contain the duty of the inferior and the last
words (that thy days etc.) contain the duty of the superior, because it is
the duty of parents by providing for their children, and praying for them, to
(...) their days, and so they are joined Deuteronomy. 5. 16. But because Saint Paul
makes it a promise, Ephesians 6. 1. and a precept and a promise are two
different things, therefore it is better to divide the words into a precept and
a promise.

As God in his infinite wisdom disposes all things in due order, so here he
(...) his wisdom more particularly known to us in the disposition of these
commandments: for by setting this in the first place of the second table, he
would have us take notice, that after he has taken order for his own honor in
the first table, his principal and first care is for honor to parents, from
whom next under himself we receive our being: and therefore Philo says, the
honor due to parents Deuteronomy. 17. 19.
is set before all other duties we owe to men, and placed as it were (...)
confinio, in the confines of a mortal and eternal nature, it is set in the
middle, betweenh the duties to God and man, because this commandment is the
preserver bot of the first and second table; for take away honor and obedience
to superiors, and all duties to God and man are neglected, and fall to the
ground. Besides we may observe that God delights in his charge to us, to knit
up whatsoever he especially commands in a short and narrow compass; pressing
more especially in every commandment some one more remarkable word in the
commandments negative, he makes choice of the most ugly and deformed word of
that sin, which he (...), to terrify us even from the very handmayds and
dependants of it. And in this affimative commandment he makes choice of the
best words he can, as father, and mother, for the object, and of honor, to set
out the duty unto us.

Now as we said before of the love of our neighbor, so here we may say
concerning honor, there are two grounds of either.

1. Excellency and neernes of the person in respect of God. 2. Conjunction or
(...) to our selves.
In the ordering of our love, we showed, how that we are to respect the
conjunction by nature or grace in the duties of love which we freely perform,
and that we owe not so much to those persons with whom we have no such
conjunction thus we should prefer a faithful man before an infidel, because in
the one there is only the image of God by nature, it is both by creation and
regeneration, and as Saint Ambrose says, with the faithful semper futuri sumus
we shall live for ever. And among the faithful, we should rather do good to
those of our own country, (...) to strangers; because beside the bonds of
religion, there is also a second bond of proximityan (...). And among them to
our acquaintance before those that are unknown to us, because we have an (...)
entrance unto them to do them good by persuasion etc. And among such, to our
kindred and alliance before others not (...); because we are joined and bound
together as soon as we are born, and this bond cannot be dissolved as long as
we live. And among strangers we should respect rather the poor then the rich,
etc.

This we showed was the order of love in respect of neernesse of conjunction
with us. But now in respect of excellency, and the Honor which is therefore
due to any, it is otherwise: for in some cases the person of greater excellency
must be preferred before such as be of near relation to us. S. Paul honored
Nero an Infidel appealing Acts 25. 11.
to him. Thus a stranger may be honored rather then one of our own country,
as Daniel was honored by Darius above all the Princes of Babylon: and Joseph
though Dan. 6. 3.
a stranger, by Pharaoh, above all the Rulers of Egypt. Thus one that is not
allied may be honored before one of our own kindred, as Moses appointed (...)
and not any of his own sons to succeed him in the government of Israel.

Now such persons as are to be honored, in respect of their excellent gifts,
and of their neernesse to God, which we ought to esteem and honor above all
neernesse to our selves, by any relations to us, and that not only for it
self, but also our honor and respect being the reward which God has appointed
to such gifts, although in respect of our selves also we are to regard them,
they being of great use and profit to us by their gifts. The Heathen man said,
that every one made more account of (...), then of (...), of his own things,
then of Gods, and the Apostle complains of such Phil. 2. 21.
as sought (...), their own things, and not the things of Christ; but if we
look at the (...) of any, we must not chiefly look at our selves, but to honor
God in his gifts, for we must consider them in a double respect. 1. As they
are useful and beneficial to us, and so the duty is diliges, thou shall love
them. 2. As they are near to God, by that excellency which he has given them:
and so we must do more then love them, we must honor them.

If it be here demanded, Why did not God make all men excellent alike, and fit
to Quest.
be Superiors? Ans. God made men of finite natures, and therefore of such
condition, Ans.
that one should need the help of another: for which end the woman also Genesis 2.
18.
was made to be an helper to the man. Besides seeing men grow in wisdom and
abilities for several (...) according to their finite capacities, industry, and
education, necessarily it follows, that as the stars (...) each from other in
glory, so one man does 1 Cor. 12. 21. 15. (...).
excel another. In this regard the elder brother, having as dignity of
primogeniture, so more maturity of years and reason, was appointed by God to
rule over the rest 2 Timothy 2. 20.
of the family. Yet God the King of kings, and Lord of lords, the fountain and
original of all rule, made Moses the younger brother Ruler, and as a God to
Aaron the elder brother; and preferred David before his elder brethren; and
Solomon before Adonijah and Absalom, when he first framed and composed a
national government in his own people. But having settled the platform of that
rule he intended, by the practice of David and Solomon in a Monarchical course
(the best of all kinds of governments, and approved by God, because he rested
in it) he left the managing of that kingdom and rule, to the true and lawful
heirs of David in all after times. Because they by education under their
parents, and aptness of children to walk in the steps of their fathers, and to
fit their spirits and carriage to what they are born to, would probably best
perform the royal and weighty charge of ruling as kings, and make election of
the most able, active, and faithful instruments to assist them in (...) their
great affairs.

We come now to the words of the Precept, and shall consider. 1. The object,
father and mother: and 2. The duty, Honor.

1. The object, for as Chrysostom says, they must first ( be) (...), before
they can be honored.

Our Savior says, call none father on earth, for ye have but one father in
heaven. Matthew. 23. 9.
And to speak properly according to the rules of Divinity, it is true, there is
no other father but God; for other parents, as the Heathen could say, are but
(...), the instruments of generation under God, and therefore paternity being
(...) to God and man, it is in God originally and properly, in man derivatively
and instrumentally, as we see in the words of the Apostle, who makes God the
first father of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named: and as he
is the first, so Ephesians. 3. 15.
he is the last too, for when my father and mother forsake me, the Lord takes
me up, Psalm 27. 10.
faith the Psalmist. God performs the office of a father first, before any
earthly could, and last when other fathers cannot help us.

Now if all paternity or fatherhood be derived from God to men and they be
(...) his instruments: and so be fathers by participation, their duty or office
signified (...) the name [father] must be drawn from God, as he is a father.
The word (...) father, is derived from (...) to will and desire, because of
that (...) and ready will (...) parents to take care and do good for their
children, and so Job calls himself pater (...), a father of the poor, because
of the care he had to do them good; and hence Job. 29. 16.
it is, that whosoever is made by God, a cause or Author of our good, is by
analogy (...) with the name of father. It is true, the name is first given to
God, because he is causa existendi, the cause of our being, for this also is
employed in the Hebr. (...) Genesis 4. 20.
which is given to any that is the first author or inventor of any thing, and
so it is given 2 Kings 2. 12.
to our natural parents, because that under God they are the causes of our
being: but then in the second place it belongs to them, because of their care
and propensity to do good and preserve their children. And so the mother has
her name from presering and keeping her children, (...), (...) vehensenter,
quia victum partui quaerit, because she seeks to preserve her children; and it
appears by her creation, that one end was to be a helper, or assistant to the
father in the preserving of children. And thus by consequence whosoever are
assistants for the preservation of others have this name communicated to them:
thus those that by their wisdom and counsel do assist others, as the Elders and
Rulers of the people are called parents, which the Heathen saw by Job 12. 20.
the light of nature, for Plato and Xenophon say, that a good Ruler or
Governor differs Ruth 4. 4.
nothing from a father. So then, whomsoever God has placed in a state of
excellency above us, to be a cause of (...) being, or well being, or an
assistant therein, these are commended to us by the names of father and mother.

2. Concerning the duty Honor, the Heb. (...) which is translated, to Honor,
does first signify to be heavy, on to make heavy, grave esse, or aggravari:
this is the proper and original signification of the word, and indeed naturally
it has no other; for by Metaphor only it is drawn to signify honor, because
things that are sold by weight, and those things which are precious by nature,
as gold and silver, etc. the weightier they are, the more precious they be, and
are the more esteemed; whence it comes that the weight of a thing adds a price
or estimation to it, or as we call it, (...) Honor: and thus superiors or
persons in authority, are to be esteemed and accounted of, as things weighty
and precious, and so to be honored. It is true, a magistrate considered in his
natural capacity as he is a man, is no heavier then another man, but when God
has clothed him with part of his own authority, or excellency, whereby he
represents his person, then he becomes more heavy and precious, and therefore
is to be esteemed and honored by us, and not to be set light, or accounted
light in our eyes, but we are to add as much weight to the person as we can by
our high esteem of him.

And because of this weight and high esteem of such persons, it is little less
then a miracle (which the very Heathen wondered at) to consider and see whole
nations to be at the beck of one man, that men should so readily lay their
heads on the block, or put their necks into the halter, at the command of one
person; and of one sometimes unwise, as Rehoboam was; nay sometimes a woman, or
a child: which plainly shows, that in persons vested with authority, there
is something more then man, which draws this respect and reverence to them, to
wit, a ray or glimpse of divine (...), whereby they (...) God upon earth, who
can overruled the hearts and actions of people, and draw them to an humble
(...) to his Vicegerent. The same signification has the Greek word (...)
(...), from (...) (...), to weigh, prize and Demost. in (...). and alibi.
esteem, therefore is (...) used to signify the price of a thing, or the value
of it: and hence is this word, and the latin Honor used to express the duty
of Subjects and inferiors to their superiors, as by Solon in his laws, (...),
and the Roman writers, and all that write of laws, and of the obedience due to
them; and hence also in a special peculiar manner is (...) used to signify
power and authority, by Aristotle, with whom, (...) Arist. polit. l. 3. c. 7.
et l. 5. c. 6.
(...), are the same with (...), because honor is due to persons in authority.

That we may show the necessity, and withal the original of this Honor, which
is due to superiors, we must consider what the Apostle speaks, All things are
for your sakes, that is, for the Churches sake. The Church and its good is the
end of all Gods works and dispensations there below; for (...) est propter
Ecclesiam, the state or commonwealth is for the Church, and for its good, as
may be gathered from the Apostles discourse in 1. Tim. 2. 2. where he goes thus
to work; first, he 1 Timothy 2 2.
lays his ultimate scope and highest end next his own glory. Now that they may
be saved, he would have them live (...), in all godliness and honesty. And
that they may live thus, he would have them taught the knowledge of God, that
they come to the knowledge of the truth; for men cannot live Godly till they be
taught to live so. And both these do necessarily require outward peace, rest,
and tranquillity, that they may intend this knowledge the better, and learn how
to live godly, (for in wars and tumults there is nothing rightly administered,
no (...) teaching or instruction) and therefore he adds, that it is good and
acceptable, and very expedient, that they live in peace and quiet, (...), a
peaceable life, in regard of outward invasions, and (...), a quiet life, in
regard of inward tumults, and intestine troubles. Now if the natural father and
mother could perform this alone, as they did for some time, in the infancy of
the world, and a little after the flood before mankind multiplied and
increased to greater numbers, there should have needed no other office to be
instituted for the attaining of these ends. But shortly after the flood, there
comes one Nimrod, with a company of hounds at his tail, (for the Metaphor Genesis
9.
of hunting used by the holy Ghost implies, that they deserved no better name)
with these sons of Belial he takes upon him to be a Hunter, that is a chaser of
men up and down, and disturbs their peace and quiet. Hence then comes in a
necessity of appointing a supreme civil power over men's bodies and estates to
restrain all outward force and violence, and withal a spiritual power and
authority to instruct and govern men in respect of their souls, as God did
afterward, when he settled the Levitical priesthood in the tribe of Levi, to
continue till the coming of Christ, and then the Evangelical Priesthood of
Christ, to be continued in the Apostles, and their successors to the end of the
world. For because the natural parents could not so well perform both these, as
they did at the first, therefore God appointed and ordained these two functions
and dignities, and for this cause Honor and Obedience Heb. 13. 17.
is required to both. Obey those that have the rule over you, (that is your
spiritual governors) and submit your selves, for they watch for your souls,
etc. and for this 1 Timothy 2. 1, (...).
cause it is required, that we pray for kings and all that are in authority,
that we may lead a peaceable and quiet life under them. Thus God not only
allowed, but also instituted outward government for resisting of outward
enemies, and suppressing of inward tumults; for the Apostle says, that every
soul must be subject or subordinate (...), to the higher and supereminent
powers, because there is no power but from God, the powers that be, (...), are
ordained by God, or set in their order and rank under God, He being above all,
and the rest put in their rank under him. So that we see, though man's necessity
required such a power for his defense, yet the power itself, whereby men are
bound and united together into one society is from God, and so ought to be
accounted of us, not as a humane invention, found out by men for their own
necessity, but a divine ordinance instituted by God for the good of humane
society, and therefore it said verse 4. that God, not the people, nor multitude
by their own inherent power, has put the sword into his hand, that he might be
vindex malorum, an avenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil. That
disturbs the public peace, without which men cannot so well intend to learn,
nor others to teach the way to live godly and honestly, and so to attain
salvation, and by consequent that he might be a cherisher of good men, and of
such as desire to live a godly and honest life in peace and quietness. And for
this end, is the civil government compared in Daniel to a great huge tree,
which spreads its Dan. 4. 9.
branches far and near, the beasts of the field had shadow under it, and the
fowls of the heaven dwelt in the boughs thereof, and all flesh was fed of it,
to show the benefit that men receive by government, for protection, and
peaceable enjoying their own, when every one sits under his own vine, and under
his own fig tree: and the Prophet Esaias compares a king to a great rock, which
is a hiding place from the winds, Esaias 32. 2.
and a cover from the tempest, as rivers of water in a dry place, and the
shadow of a great rock in a weary land. Therefore is every man bound to
establish authority and government, because of the weight that hangs upon it;
quia in pace ejus est pax nostra, because (...). 29. 7.
our peace rests thereupon, as the Prophet Jer. reasons who for this cause bids
from God, to pray for the prosperity of the City, whither they were carried
captives, and for the peace thereof; for in the peace thereof they should have
peace.

There are three words in the Greek to express this authority.
1. (...), (...) arising from some gift which one has above another. 1 Timothy 2.
2.
2. (...), Power. Romans 13. 1.
3. (...), Principality. 1 Timothy 3. 1.

There is an affinity between these three, and an order whereby they do follow
upon one another. For the first, God gives a man some gift, whereby he is
excellent above others, then he gives him power and authority, the sword; and
lastly some particular place of government, wherein to exercise his gift, and
to use his power; and in this order we must observe, that though the two last
cannot be severed, at least potentially or in the habit; for where God gives to
any power, he assigns him a place where to use it, (though sometimes he cannot
actually exercise it, being hindered by (...) or (...);) yet the former, viz.
(...), excellency, may be without the other two; God gives gifts and
excellency to some men, who have no power or principality conferd on them, to
the end that there may be choice, as in elective kingdoms; and that those who
have maximam (...), the most excellent gifts, may be called up to exercise
their gifts, and withal, that by their gifts they may do good in private,
though they be not called to any public place of government, as when it
pleases God for the sins of a people to curse the government to them.

1. In this order, the government is, first that of pater naturalis, the
natural father, in a family, where he exercises a threefold government, over
the wife, children, and servants: of the two first it is plain, because he is
pater-familias, the father of the family, and they are parts of it; and of the
servants likewise by the same reason: whereupon (...) servants called him by
the name of father, Father if the Prophet had commanded thee a great thing,
etc. 2 Kings 5. 13.


2. If we go out of the family, we come in patriam. There we shall find an
honor due to our country, and people among whom we were born and brought up.
Therefore the woman of Abel tells Joab, that the city wherein she dwelt had
been 2 Samuel 20. 19.
a mother in Israel: and we see that Abraham honored the people where he
lived, for he stood up, and bowed himself before the people of the land of the
Hittites. Thus Genesis 23. 7.
the people of the country are to be honored.

Now this power which resides in the fathers of several families, where it
comes to be united in one, He becomes a Monarch or King, whom S. Peter calls
(...), a humane creature, not because the power and authority is from men, for
though sometimes they choose the person, yet it is God that confers the power,
and though men by natural light are led to this government, yet it is God that
gives this light to direct them; but to distinguish it from that other power,
the spiritual government exercised by the fathers of our souls, which is,
(...), Gods creature, in a more special manner: for though both temporal and
spiritual authority are from God, yet this latter is more immediately and
purely divine then the other; and therefore the other is called (...), a humane
creature, comparatively in respect of this, which is Gods creature, or a divine
ordinance depending (...) upon divine institution, and therefore is this to be
honored in respect of this spiritual fatherhood: and this (...) by the
contrary in the words of our Savior, when he (...), speaking against the
contempt of his messengers and servants, (...), he that (...) you, despises
me, or as the Luke 10. 10.
word properly imports, he that will abrogate, disanull, or abolish and make
void, that which I have ordained and enacted, he seeks to abrogate and disanull
me; which words imply that this calling is specially ordained, and made by
Christ, and that to go about to abrogate and disanul his ordinance herein, is
to abrogate Christ's own office and function.

This divine creature then, or this office and dignity of Gods immediate
making, as it has received fatherhood from God, so there is a special honor
due to it. Though you have a thousand instructors in Christ, yet have ye not
many fathers, for in Christ Jesus 1 Cor. 4. 15.
I have begotten you through the Gospel. We see the Apostle takes to himself
the title of father, yea the very idolaters counted their priests, fathers, as
appears by Micah Judge. 17. 10.
of mount (...), who said to the Levite, Dwell with me, and be to me a father,
and a priest.

And because to this ordinance of God, there is another calling subordinate, To
govern the schools of the Prophets, and to instruct and fit men for the
Church, therefore to such is the title of father given. When Saul prophesied
among the 1 Samuel 10. 12.
2 King. 2. 12.
sons of the prophets, one asked, who was their father or governor, or
instructor; Act. 5. 35.
Elisha called Elias his father, my father my father, the chariots of Israel
etc. And in phil. 2. 22.
the new testament we read that (...) a doctor of the law, is accounted (...)
honorable in this respect; and Saint Paul calls Timothy his scholar, his son,
and says, that as a son with a father he served him in the Gospel.

4. Come we to the Magistrate. Moses by Gods special appointment, appoints some
to be rulers over 1000. etc. And gives rules of direction to the people, what
Exodus 18. 2.
Deuteronomy. 17. 16.
men they should choose, and how they were to be qualified. And Joseph when he
was governor of Egypt, says, that God sent him thither, and made him a father
to Pharaoh, and Lord of all his house, Hence Deborah is called a mother in
Israel. Judge. 5. 7.
Neither is this title and honor due to the supreme governor only, but also
to the subordinate; so Saint Peter commands to submit, as to the king, who is
supreme, 1 pet. 2. 13. (...)
so unto governors, as those that are sent by him etc. So that by this, (...),
the general of the army may be called the father of the Camp, and whosoever
has any authority in any society derived from the king, is thereby become a
father, and all honor belongs to him.

5. Lastly, if we come to that which we called excellency of gifts (...) when
this is alone, without the other two, though there be neither (...) nor (...)
principality nor power, yet there is an honor due, and this (...) or
excellency is of four sorts.

1. Ratione (...), in regard of years or age, and an honor is due in this
respect, rebuke not an elder (says the Apostle) but entreat him as a father,
the elder 1 Timothy 5. 1. 2.
women as mothers. 2. In regard of the gifts of the mind, as wisdom and
counsel, whereby one is able to direct and advise others, or to invent some
things needful and conducing to the public good: thus Jabal is called the
father of such as dwell in (...), Genesis 4. 20, 21.
and of such as have cattle, and Jubal the father of such as (...) the (...)
and the organ 3. In respect of outward estate and wealth, for money is nervus
politiae, the sinnew of the commonwealth; therefore rich and wealthy men are
esteemed in a commonwealth and called to public assemblies before others,
because if it be in need, they are most able to help. Thus Nabal though a man
of no other gifts, yet because God had enriched him, David does implicitey call
him father, by (...) himself his son, give I pray thee whatsoever comes to thy
hand, to thy servants, and to thy son (...). 1 Samuel 25. (...).
And this honor given to rich men for their wealth, must be given no otherwise
Jam. 2. 9.
then in a civil respect, otherwise it is condemned by Saint (...) (...)
respecting of persons. 4. In respect of benefits which any have (...) upon us.
Thus Job by showing mercy to the poor, had the title of father. I was a father
to the poor, and the cause Job. 29. 16.
(...) I knew not I searched out.
And thus for the meaning of these words, Honor thy father and mother. We come
now to the duties here required under this word Honor.

Honor thy father and Mother.

CHAP. III.
The mutual or reciprocal duties of superiors and inferiors. 1 Love. 2. To
wish well and pray for one another. The duties of inferiors. 1. Honor.
Inward, and (...), 2. fear. 3. subjection and obedience, active and passive. 4.
The protestation of our subjection, by honoring them with our estates. The
manner how this (...) be performed.

THese duties are to be handled. 1. In general which concern all superiors
and inferiors. And secondly in special, such as concern special ranks and
orders of superiors, and inferiors, as in the family, the Church, and the
commonwealth, Every duty consists in two things. 1. The action, and 2. The
manner of performance, and both are to be handled.

And because there are some duties reciprocal, which are mutually to be
performed both by superiors and inferiors toward each other, to avoid
needless repetition, it shall be good to speak of them generally in the first
place.

The duties which are reciprocal or mutual are.

1. First love but in an higher degree then ordinary, which is called (...) a
(...) affection, of a higher degree then that which we owe to every one, such
as either ascends from the son to the father or descends from the father to the
son, and it is either naturaland proper, between natural parents and their
children, or by analogy and proportion, between others to whom the names of
fathers and children are communicated, as spiritual fathers in the Church, and
those that are begotten by them unto Christ, of whom the Apostle speaking,
expresses the special love due to such fathers by a special emphatical word
(...) have such in reputation, or highly honor them, Phil. 2. (...). And (...)
esteem them very highly in love for their works sake, there is a particular
love which we bear to our friends, and that is (...) abundant love: but this
(...) is (...) superabundant and extraordinary, in a more special and high
degree: the want of this natural affection is imputed as a great crime, a sign
of men given up to a reprobate sense. Romans 1. 29. And it is a prophecy 2 Timothy
3. 3.
of the end of the world, when men shall be (...) without natural affection. 2.
The second mutual duty follows from the first, and is the chief property of
love, to wish well to him we love; and because Christianum votum est (...);
prayer is the Christians wish, therefore it is that we comprehend prayer among
the mutual duties of inferiors and superiors; it must both ascend and
descend; for we are exhorted 1 Timothy 2. 2.
by the Apostle to pray for superiors. The like for our country by the Jer.
29. 7.
Prophet, this is ascending. Now downwards we have the example of King David 1
Cron. 29.
for his people, as also for Solomon his son, And of holy Job, who prayed for
18. 19.
Job. 1. 5.
his sons and daughters every day. p. (...).

So much for the duties reciprocal.

Come we now to the several duties of inferiors and superiors, and first we
shall speak of Honor, which is the duty of inferiors to their superiors. In
the strict sense whereof if we take it, as our Savior said of father, there is
but one father Math. 23. 9.
which is in heaven; so may it as truly be said of honouer, if we speak exactly
and 1 Timothy 1. 17.
properly, that (as the Apostle says) it belongs only to God. But God
himself 2 Timothy 2. 20
has been pleased to communicate part of it to some men, as the same Apostle,
he created some vessels to honor, and consequently he calls some men from
among the rest to be honorable: for as the author to the Hebrews speaks, no man
takes this honor upon him, but he that is called of God as Aaron. Now God
calls men, when (...). 5. 4.
he bestows some gifts upon them, whereby they excel their fellows; for God
dispenses Mat. 25. 15.
his gifts variously, as appears by the parable; where the master called his
servants, and gave to some more talents then to others.

The scripture, as was showed before, uses three words: (...) and (...)
excellency, power, and principality. Now unto excellency honor properly
belongs, and that is of two sorts. Inward and outward.

Inward honor is, when we have honestam opinionem a good opinion of a man, in
regard of some (...) he has above us; for this good opinion, is Testimonium
excellentiae, a testimony of that excellency which we acknowledge in him above
our selves: of this Solomon speaks, when (...) advises not to meddle with a
strange woman, lest we lose our honor, that is, lest we lose the good
reputation and esteem we prove. 5. 9.
have in the (...) of others; and in another case he tells us, that a peaceable
man 20. 3.
shall have honor and good respect with men, for by a good opinion of men we
testify there is an excellency in them, (...) they have some what more then we
have: and both the Apostles (...) Paul and Saint Peter express this duty Col.
3. 18.
by the word (...) subjection or submission, to be subject, as we see Christ
was subject 1 per. 2. 13.
Luc. 2. 51.
to this father and mother in respect of his manhood, acknowledging himself to
be a child and so consequently thought some thing to be in them to receive this
honor, which was not in himself.

The (...) will make this more plain. In the case of Corah and his company;
Number. 162.
they gathered themselves together against Moses, and against Aaron, they would
not give them honor (God calls it afterward a dishonouring of him) and their
(...) was. They were not more excellent then others, all the congregation was
holy and the Lord was amongst them. Their thesis was. All men are (...) to the
Lord, and therefore Moses and Aaron, had no more excellency then the rest of
the congregation. But we see how God by a special miracle confuted their
position, for the example of all that in future times should exalt themselves
against their superiors.

The contrary to this sin of theirs, is when men do acknowledge and confess
that there is not an equality, but that some do excel them, and that this
excellency above them is not, as the Poet speaks, by chance, but by the
appointment of God; that as in creation, and generation he is the special
father that gives us being so for our well by government, that he is our
special governor, and that those above us are his instruments appointed for
our preservation when we acknowledge this exellency in others, and that it
comes from God, who has imparted his gifts to them. This is the first, and the
inward part of honor.

But now as God told Samuel concerning (...), God and man look several waves, 1 Samuel 1. (...).
for God looks on the (...) which man cannot see, it is only the excellency
which outwardly apears which we can take notice of, and honor, and so likewise
the inward honor of the heart, of which we have spoken, is seen only by God,
man cannot behold it, and therefore besides the inward esteem, or estimate of
another excellency, there must be also some exterior sign or testimony,
whereby we acknowledge it to be others, and this makes the second part of
honor, (...) honor. Such was that which (...) desired of Samuel, though the
kingdom 1 Samuel 10. 30.
were taken from him, as Samuel well knew, yet honor me (says he) before the
Elders of the people and before (...) etc. And such was that which the (...)
looked after viz. The (...) places at (...), the uppermost (...) and greeting
Math. 23. 6. 7.
in the market place. This is the second part of honor.

What this exterior honor is, and after what manner it is to be exhibited in
particular, is best known by the manner of the country where men live, because
it is not alike in all places, every country has not the same signs of
honor. Holy men in scripture have exhibited outward honor by several
gestures, or ceremonies, which may be reduced to these seven heads.

1. To rise up when a person of excellency, which either by nature or analogy,
and proportion, is our (...) in presence, Job accounted it as an honor done to
Job. 29. 8.
him, when the aged arose and stood up, when he was in presence. And Solomon a
king 1 Kin. 2. 19.
thought fit to express his duty to his mother. Bathsheba by rising up to her
when she came before him.

2. The uncovering or making the head bear was accounted a token of honor 1
Cor. 11. 4.
in use with the Saints, and a dishonor to keep it covered as we may gather by
the words of the Apostle.

3. The bowing of the knee, or all or part of the body. When (...) would have
(...) honored he thought no way better for the people to express it, then
Genesis 41. 43.
by bowing their (...) to him He caused them to (...) before (...), Abrech,
that is, bow the knee. King (...) (in the place before quoted) to add the
greater honor (...) his mother. bowed himself to her Jacob meeting his brother
Esau) bowed 1 Kin. 2. 19.
(...). 33. 3.
himself (...) times to the ground a great expression of this duty. And Ruth no
doubt Ruth 2. 10.
thought she honored (...), when she bowed her self to the ground before him.
So for the bowing of the head it is mentioned in diverse places in scripture to
set forth this duty. The (...) of (...) when they came before him, bowed Genesis
43. 28.
their heads, and made obeisance. These were signs of honor at the first
meeting or salutation.

4. A fourth expression is standing up; not only to rise before them we prefer
in excellency, but to stand up too, we see the practice of it in the people of
Exodus 18. 13.
Israel Moses (...) as a judge among (...), but it is said, that the people
stood by him 1 Kin. 1. 2.
from morning till evening. And (...) the (...) maid when she went to attend 2
Kin. 5. (...).
upon king David, was to stand before him. The like did (...) before (...). And
indeed it is the common expression of service.

5. The next is to be silent, in the presence of them we account our betters.
Job tells us, that when he was in prosperity, the Princes refrained talking (in
his presence) and laid their hand upon their mouth. Ths Nobles held their
peace. etc. And in the same Chapter he says, unto me men gave ear, and waited
and kept (...) at my Job. 9. 10. 21.
counsel.

6. The sixth is, that when of necessity we are to speak, we use words of
submission. 1 pet. 3. 6.
It is Saint Peter's note of Sarah, her submissive speech to her husband, she
called him Lord. And the speech of Rachel to her father (...) is a president of
this kind for children to their parents: (...) it not displease my Lord that I
cannot rise up before thee. And of Joseph's brethren (for inferiors to men in
authority) Thy Genesis 31. 35.
servant our father is in good health. 43. 28.


7. The last is dispersed throughout the scriptures, and comprehended under the
word ministrare, to minister and wait Luc. 17. 7. And it comprehends all such
other duties of outward honor, as are to be used by servants to their masters.
As our Savior expresses one in the masters command to his servant to make
ready that he may sup. And the maid waited on Naamans' wife. And so king David's
Luc. 17. 8.
Generals are said to wait on him. And Job in the place before mentioned says,
that 2 King 5. 2.
men waited on him, in token of reverence and service to him, so that when we 2
Cron. 17. 19
Job. 29. 21.
wait, as servants use to do on their masters, we acknowledge there by a
superiority and excellency in that party. Thus far for honor, which is due to
excellency, (...)

2. But now when the second thing, (...) power is added to excellency, then
there is another duty required in inferiors. viz fear: for as our Savior
speaks, there is no power but from God, it must be given from above, and
therefore by consequence there Joh. 19. 11.
is due to them that have power from God, part of that fear which we owe to men.

The honor given in this respect consists of the duty of fear.

This is a reverent awe and standing in fear of them that are placed in power
over Levit. 19. 3.
us. Ye shall fear every man his mother and father, says God; there is for our
Epes. 6.
parents: and Saint Paul commands servants to obey their masters with fear
and 1 pet. 2. 18.
trembling: and Saint Peter, servants be subject to your masters, with all
fear, this is for masters. Job says that the people stood in such awe of him;
that when they saw him come forth they would convey themselves out of his
presence, as if they had done something not beseeming them; the young men saw
me and hid themselves. This fear also is due to the king. The people of Israel
feared king Solomon: 1 Kin. 3. 28 prove. 16. 14.
and the same king gives the reason, because his wrath is as a messenger of
death.

3. The third thing is (...), government, to which, besides the former duties
of honor and fear, a third duty belongs viz. Obedience, which the Apostle
expresses, by (...), to be under a yoke. That is, when governors command this
or that to be done (except in things evidently contrary to the will of God) we
be content without disputing, to put our necks under the yoke of their
commands. 1 Timothy 6. 1.
Saint Bernard says, verus obediens (...) quale sit quod (...), hoc solo
contentus, quia praecipitur. He that is truly obedient regards not what is
commanded, being content only with this, that it is commanded. In the case of
parents, the Apostle gives this rule, children obey your parents (...) the
Lord, (his reason) for this is right. Ephesians. 6. 1. prove. 23. 22.
As the Apostle used the word (...) subjection, to those more excellent then
our selves, as was show before, Col. 3. 18. 1. Peter 2. 13. So here he used
(...) be subject to set forth the obedience due to governors. The like he
gives to servants, servants obey your masters etc. And he commands Titus to put
subjects in mind to obey magistrates. The like charge of obedience he gives to
Bishops and Governors in the Church obey them that have the rule (...) you. We
have examples of dutiful children in this duty. Of Isaac that obeyed his father
even to the death. (...). 3. 1.
Of the Rechabits in obeying their fathers commandment, to drink no wine, which
act Heb. 13. 7.
God himself by the prophet commends of our Savior himself in the flesh. And
Genesis 22. 9.
(...). 35. 14
of servants, we have the example of (...) toward (...). Lastly, concerning
subjects, Luc. 2. 51
we have the example of the people of (...) to (...). All that thou command
Genesis 31. 6.
us we will do. (...). 1. 16.


Now for the protestation of our obedience, wherein we express the truth of
it, order is taken for giving honor to our governors, by imparting our
substance, by way of grateful retaliation, for their care and pains, for our
good, Honor the Lord, (...). 3. 9.
says the Wise man, with thy substance and goods, etc. and so by consequent,
this kind of honor is due to those, to whom God has given the government
over us; we must (...) with the Stork; and our Savior makes this a part of the
honor due to father and mother, when he reproves those that taught the people,
that by consecrating their goods to the Temple, they were free from the
obligation of this law, (...). 7. 11. 12
of maintaining and relieving father and mother. Therefore the Apostle requires
that Romans 13. 7.
we render to higher powers, their dues, tribute, and custom, to show that our
selves are not only ready in our persons, but our goods too, at their commands.

The last part of obedience is to the other part of the Law; for the Law has
two parts, the one directive, and the other coercive or corrective: so that if
we deny our obedience, we must submit to correction, and yet with reverence, as
the Apostle Heb. 12. 9.
speaks; we must honor the Magistrate, though we be corrected. Thus far for
the act commanded, now for the manner of (...).

The second thing to be considered, is the manner how all these duties must be
performed; and this consists in three things.

1. They must be done in conscience, and from the heart, not with eye-service
as unto men, but with singleness of heart, as fearing God, as the Apostle
speaks. Colos. 3. 11.


2. They must be done alacriter, cheerfully, and readily, not with grudging,
murmuring, 23.
and repining, whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as to the Lord, and not as to
men.

3. They must be done perseveranter, with continuance and perseverance, yea,
though we suffer unjustly by them: for this, says S. Peter, is thank worthy,
if a man for conscience toward God, endure grief, (...), if he endure and hold
out, though 1 pet. 2. 19.
he suffer wrongfully.

And because we are not naturally given to perform these duties of obedience
and subjection, especially in this manner, therefore expositors yield 6 reasons
drawn from the duty, as it is expressed and enforced in Scripture, to induce
men thereunto.

1. Because God has placed this Commandment before that of our goods, yea, and
of our life: to show that the maintaining of authority ought to be dearer to us
then goods, or life it self.

2. Because the name of father and mother, is full of love and reverence,
insomuch as some unreasonable beasts perform this duty more exactly then many
men. Therefore God includes all superiors here, as Kings, Lords, Masters, etc.
under these amiable names of father and mother.

3. In regard of the long life annexed to the true performance of this duty,
long life being a thing desirable, and death a thing most repugnant to the
nature of man. To live long, and to prosper, is all that men desire upon earth.
Therefore the Apostle urges this Commandment from the promise specially annexed
to it above the rest. That it may be well with thee, and that thou may live
long on the earth. Ephesians. 6. (...).


4. Because (as the Apostle tells us) it is a thing good and acceptable to God;
and 1 Timothy 2. 3.
in another place, it is well pleasing to God; he is especially delighted, and
highly Colos. 3. 20.
pleased in it. It is both (...), good; (...), acceptable; and (...), well
pleasing unto God. What can we desire more, then to be good, acceptable, and
well pleasing to God in our actions.

5. The Apostle goes further, and says it is (...), a just thing, (...), it is
due by the rule of justice to superiors, so that it cannot be forborne without
injury (...). 6. 1.
and injustice to authority: we cannot keep this honor and obedience from them
without injury. And therefore it is that Christ says to the Pharisees,
Reddite Caesari, quae sunt Caesaris; render unto Caesar, the things which are
Caesar's. He uses the word (...), reddite, render, or restore, to show, that it
is his own: God has imparted it, if you keep it back, if you give it him not,
you do injustice, and wrong to him.

6. The last is, in regard of the expedience of it, for your own good, expedit
vobis, it stands you in hand so to do. The Apostle says, They watch over your
souls. Now where honor is detracted and withheld, there the care of
preservation is Heb. 13. (...).
also diminished and by reason thereof, the power of wickedness, and the
impudence of naughty men is increased; and the more our estate is troubled, the
greater is our unquiet and vexation. Therefore better it is, that due honor be
given to them, the better to encourage them to apply themselves to our
preservation. Besides, they that deny this to them that are of right invested
with it, and take it to themselves, set themselves against God, and go about to
build another Babel, which is nothing, Genesis 11. 4.
but bringing in of Anarchie and confusion.

This dothargue (...), a giant like nature, such as was in them that would
build a tower, whose top might reach to heaven: such do indicere bellum Deo,
bid defiance to God: and therefore the Apostle says expressly, that such as
resist lawful powers, do resist the ordinance of God, and so do fight against
God himself, and Romans 13. 2.
thereby bring damnation upon themselves. So that by weighing these reasons we
may happily be brought to obedience.

CHAP. IIII.
The duties of superiors in four things. Addition 29. Of the end of
government, and whether the people be above their governors? The manner how
they must govern. whether honor be due to one that is evil? Whether he must be
obeyed in malo? Of disobeying the unlawful commands of a Superior. Add. 30. Of
Obedience in things doubtful.

WE will now handle the duties of superiors in general. These two things are
always joined together in Gods Law, (...), and (...), to have worth, and to be
honored or esteemed worthy; and therefore S. Chrysostom makes it an axiom
upon that place 1 Timothy 5. 17. They that rule well are worthy of double honor.
The Honor, as he says, is (...), a reward of the service, they perform.
Therefore that honor may be due to them, they must mereri, be worthy, and
deserving men; and worthy they are, if they perform the part of fathers and
mothers.

The neernesse of the two significations of the word in the original (...)
cabed, which signifies both weight and heaviness, and honor; and of the
Greek word (...), which is honor, and (...) or mulct; and of the Latin word
honoro and (...), to honor and lay a burden, shows, that God would not that
any should have honor, unless they have meritum, desert; nor this meritum,
desert, without a charge; therefore they must have meritum, and by consequent,
honor may be justly required by them at our hands.

1. They are to know that they are Gods ministers; for so S. Paul calls them;
and Romans 13. 4.
S. Peter says, They are sent by God. And that as they are his Ministers, and
that he imparted 1 Pet. 2. 14.
some of his power and honor to them; so they must know that their office is
(...), for the Lord, and that they are (...), ministers of God. And therefore
David says, Tibi canam Jehovah, I will sing unto the Lord of mercy and
judgment: Psalm 101. 1.
as they have received power from God, and part of his honor which he has put
upon them, so they must do all for God: and their care must be that those under
them may be Domini, the Lords people, as they are his Vicegerents. They must
follow the rule which Jehosaphat made for his Judges: Take heed what ye do, for
ye judge 1 Chro. 19. 6.
not for man, but for the Lord. Therefore whatsoever they do must not be for
their own will and ends, but in and for the Lord. We must not be of Jezebels
opinion, that Ahab could not be a king, if he could not command and have what
he should desire, 1 Reg. 21. 7.
though it were wrongfully; for this is a wicked maxim, and semen omnium
(...), the seed of all evil. Nor of Ahabs that hated Michaiah, the son of
Imlah, the Prophet, because he prophesied nothing good concerning him, though
it were the will of (...) 22. (...).
God that he should so do. When men do not acknowledge that their authority is
(...), for God, but blot that out, and look only at their own will, then
breaks in all injustice. But they must know, that God is not so unwise, as to
give them authority against himself; and therefore they must not have an eye
to their own, but to Gods will; for they are but his Ministers.

2. Superiors must know, that one end of their authority is the good and
benefit of those that are under them: as they are first to look to God and his
honor whose Ministers they are, so in the next place, they must look to the
good of those over whom God has set them. Their honor is conferred upon them,
not merely for themselves, and their own benefit; but also for those that are
under them, not only (...) praesint, but ut prosint; to profit them that are
under them, as well as to be over and above them: and this is it that makes
their place the more weighty. King David Psalm 18. 71.
was taken from the sheepfold to be king: and why? ad pascendum Israel, that he
2 Cor. 12. 14.
might feed and govern (the word imports both) Jacob his people, and Israel his
inheritance. So children are not for parents, but parents for their children.
The Heathen, by the light of nature only, saw this: that superiority was (...)
for inferiority, and the Prince for the benefit of the people. For God at the
first, considering that children were unable to help themselves, by reason of
their inability and defects when they are young, and the danger that might
befall them, not only in their infancy, but even before they are born,
ordained a duty to be shown, and an office to be done for them, even before
they are born; there is a care of them to be taken by parents when they are in
the womb, before they are able to give them honor; and for this care of
parents, they are afterward to exhibit honor to them, when they are able.

And under this head is that the Apostle mentions, They must nourish and
cherish, Ephesians. 5. 29.
Numb. 11. 13.
and account them that are under them as their own flesh; as Moses who carried
the Matthew. 23. 37.
people in his bosom as a nurse, and made their welfare his scope: and as our
Savior snews the example of an hen who gathers her chickens under her wings,
to defend them from ravening and strong fowls. And this loving, nourishing, and
defending, are special ends why superiors were ordained. And therefore the
reason is added to the Commandment in Exodus 20. and enlarged in Deuter. 5. 16.
That thy days may be prolonged, etc. and that it may go well with thee; which,
as was mentioned before is expounded by some, not as a promise, but as the
duty, and end of superiors, viz. That they under God prolong men's days, and
are or ought to be means, that it may go well with them. This is one end of
their superiority. They are not set over the people colligere auream messem, to
scrape gold and silver for themselves; their own profit and ease is not the end
of their authority, though many times rulers look at nothing else. It was the
sin of the Princes in Ezekiels time, They accounted the Ezekiel. 11. 11
city as a cauldron, and the people the flesh to be sod in. Evil Rulers take
their own ease and security, while the profit of the people and inferiors is
no whit regarded. Therefore not without cause are the two heads before named,
of defending and nourishing inferiors, special duties of superiors toward
them.

This which is commonly affirmed, that the end of government is the good of the
Annotat. 29.
inferiors, must be understood cum grano salis; for from this principle
misunderstood, Of the end of government, and whether people be above their
governors.
some have collected, that because the end is above the means, and more noble,
therefore subjects are above their governors, and so may call them to account
for their misgovernment, and judge or punish them, and remove them if they see
cause: from which false collections, made by seditious and turbulent persons,
infinite troubles, confusions, rebellions, and desolations have followed. We
must know therefore. 1. That to procure the good of inferiors, is indeed the
duty of superiors, and one end why God committed the people to them; but not
the sole or principal end of their authority: for princes receive their power
only from God, and are by him constituted and entrusted with government of
others, chiefly for his own glory and honor, as his Deputies and Vicegerents
upon earth, for they are his Ministers, Romans 13. so that the principal end of
their government is the advancement of Gods honor, who is the supreme King and
Lord of all the world: and therefore if they fail in performance of this trust,
they are accountable only to him, who entrusted them, and not to the people
whom he has put under them, and whom he never authorized to call them to
account, but to appeal only to him.

2. It is not generally true, that all government is only for the benefit of
those that are governed: for some government there is, merely for the benefit
H. Grot. de jure belli and pacis lib. 1. c. 8. n. 8.
of the superior, as that of a Lord or Master over his servant; for the profit
of the servant is herein merely extrinsicall and advantitious: some
governments are for mutual good of both, as that of a husband over his wife,
and so some kingdoms may be for the benefit of kings, as when they are obtained
by a just conquest, which are not to be accounted tyrannical, because they are
just; for their may be a just title by conquest, when the war is upon just
grounds, whereas all tyranny is essentially unjust: and some kingdoms may
respect the profit both of Prince and people: as when a people not able to
defend themselves, commit themselves to a potent prince for protection and
safety, against potent enemies, and so become his subjects.

3. Although it be true, that in some kingdoms, especially elective, the
benefit of the people is principally regarded; and as Cicero says, Fruendae
justitiae causa Reges conftituti, that kings are appointed for administering of
justice, yet it follows not hence, that the people are above their king; for
the Tutor or Guardian is for the good of the Pupil, and yet the Guardian or
Tutor has power and authority over the Pupil: and if any say that the Guardian
may be removed if he fail in his trust, and therefore the same may be done in
Princes; L answer, that this holds in Guardians, because they have some above
them; but in kingdoms because there cannot be a progress in infinitum, there
must of necessity be a stop in some, who, because they have no superior, must
if they offend be lest only to God, who will either punish them, if he see it
needful, or else suffer them for the punishment and trial of his people: for as
Tacitus says, as we bear with the barrennes of the earth, or intemperate
seasons, and the like natural accidents, which cannot be avoided, so must they
bear with the avarice and lust of rulers. Vitia erunt donec homines, sed nec
haec continua, and meliorum interventu pensantur; there will be faults in
government, so long as there are men: but they are not always nor lasting; and
besides they are balanced by the change of good (...) intervening. And
therefore M. Aurelius said, that as Magistrates are to judge of private
persons, so are Princes to judge of Magistrates, and God alone of Princes. To
which purpose is that speech of a French Bishop to their King, mentioned in
Greg. Turon. Si quis de nobis, O Rex, justitiae tramites transcendere (...). 4.
lib. 5.
voluerit, a te corripi potest, si tu vero excesseris, quis te corripiet?
loquimur enim tili, sed si volueris, audis; si autem nolueris, quis te
damnabit, nisi quise pronunciavit esse justitiam? If any of us offend, O King,
thou may correct us, but if thou shall exceed, who shall correct thee? we
may speak unto thee, and if thou will, thou may hear us, but if thou will
not, none can condemn thee, but he who is justice it self? And that of (...).
lib. 5.
(...) is as excellent, as common: Cujus jussu nascuntur homines, hujus jussu
and Reges (...); by whose command or appointment they are born men, by his
appointment are Kings constituted. Nor does it make against this, that the
people are sometimes punished for the sins of their Princes, as 1 Kings 4. 16.
and 2 Kings 10. 17. for this was not because the people did not punish or
restrain the exorbitances of their Kings, but because by tacit consent, or
otherwise, they did communicate in their sins; and besides, God having supreme
dominion over the lives of all, may make use of it, thereby to punish Kings by
taking away their Subjects.

3. Because God has made by his Commandment a distinction and (...) of
degrees, as some to be parents; some children, some superiors, and some
inferiors; Superiors must take heed that none (...) this order, nor suffer a
parity or equality, or to submit to those whom God has placed in a lower rank.

But why did not the Prophet Nathan keep this order in his speech to King
David, Object.
but said, (...) thy servant, and Zadok the Priest, and Benaiah the son of
Jehoiada, and 1 King. 1. 26.
Solomon thy son: there Solomon comes last, though the Kings son.

Nathan knew well enough in what order to place him. But the business brought
Answ.
before David concerning Solomon (whom David had promised, and God had ordained
to succeed in the kingdom) he placed him last. (...) he had said, (...) is
about to usurp kingly authority, and carried the business closely, calling
some private friends to him, and not only passes by Me, and Zadok the Priest,
and Benaiah, but even Solomon thy son, beloved of God, and by him destinate to
sit on thy throne aster thee. So that Solomon is put in the last place
emphatically, as if the neglect and contempt done to him were most offensive to
God and David. And yet take this by the way, that the heir of all in his
minority, or during his fathers life, differs little Gal. 4. 1.
from a servant, though in possibility to be Lord of all.

Superiors must therefore keep that authority which God has given them, and
not pervert that order which God has set, as some do by their sloth and
negligence, suffering their inferiors to be their equals; and others by their
wickedness, whereby they become vile in the peoples eyes, and so as a just
punishment from God, lose that authority and reverence, which the people ought
to give them. For thus God tells the prophets in Malachy, that he had made them
despised and vile before all the people, the reason (...) is given in the next
words, because they kept not his words, but Mal 2. 9.
had been partial in his law. And for the same cause God threatens Eli, because
he honored his sons before God, whereas (...) should have honored him, he
honored 1 Samuel 2. 29.
them, and when he should have sharply reproved them, for their saults, he
entreats them them as an inferior would do an inferior, though they had (...)
God by causing the people to loath the Lords sacrifice through their lewd
carriage, yet he was not sensible either of Gods honor or his own, and
therefore God threatens to take from him the honor of the priesthood, and to
make his house poor and base, for those that honor me says God, I will
honor, and they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed. And we see also in
another place, that God tells the people by his Prophet that he will give
children to be their Princes (...). 3. 4. 5.
and babes to rule over them; the reason is expressed in the next verse, the
child shall behave himself proudly against the innocent, and the base against
the honorable.

4. As this order established by God must be maintained, so must it not be a
bare resemblance of authority, without execution, superiors must not be like
dumb idols, that have eyes but see not, mouths and speak not, etc. But they
must use and exercise their authority, they must take care with Saint Paul,
that they which are under them study to be quiet, and to do their own business.
And if any under 1 Thessalonians. 4. 11.
him break or transgress, then to show that he has not his authority in vain,
but propter vindictam malorum. to be a revenger of Gods wrath against them that
do Romans 13. 4.
evil, If they do not well he is to punish; if they do well, then to encourage
Math. 25. 23.
them, with an euge serve bone, well done good and faithful servant.

The wise man tells us, that a king that sits in judgment (is not like an
idol but) scatters away all evil with his eyes, his very looks must expel
evil. That men may know he sits there, for encouraging of the good, and
discouraging of prove. 20. 8.
the evil, he must be a terror to the workers of iniquity, says the Apostle,
and Romans 13. 3.
the wise man tells us, that the way of the Lord (whose deputies rulers are) is
prove. 10. 29.
strength to the upright man, but fear shall be to the workers of iniquity.
Fear is proper for them, they ought to fear, but some do not fear, because an
idol is in place, this is a shame to a ruler, when he is not terror male agenti
but much worse it is, if he be terror been agenti, a terror to him that does
well, if he persecute such above others. In this case we must know, that
potestas non datur (...) adversus (...), contra quae homines nolunt esse
potentes, no power is given from God but to correct Aug. l. 3. de Trinit.
vice: he must not tyrannise, God gave no power to destroy, but to prefer
mankind.

These are the four general duties which concern superiors.

1. The manner of government of a superior is, first that he be an example to
inferiors in himself King David showed it I will walk (says he) with a
perfect heart; psalm. 101. 3.
he would be an example to his people. Saint Augustine in the place before
quoted, l. 3. de Trinit.
hanc potentiam plane oportet unusquisque appetat, ut potens sit in seipso, and
miro modo adversus seipsum pro seipso. Every man should desire this power over
himself, and which is more against himself, and yet for himself, that is,
against the rebellious passions and affections of his own nature, that thereby
he may bring himself to goodness.

2. The next is ((...) he has thus gifted himself) to govern others with
moderation. It was Gods rule in the law to superiors, thou shall not rule with
rigor (...). 25. 43.
He must know, (that as the Heathen man said) this (...) to rule, was not given
him (...) nor (...) to look stately and to call men as he list, and much less
for (...) to constrain men to his own mind in a proud nature by con tumelious
words, and tyrannical deeds, in every Christian, all (...) excess of anger,
and (...) bitterness Ephesians. 4. 13.
and (...) crying out, (...) and railing, ought to be far from the meanest, and
therefore (...). 28. 51.
from him that is in the highest place, who ought to be an example to others.
Solomon counsels the governor, that he be not tanquam leo rugiens, as a
roaing lion over the people: and the son of Syracides advise is, Be not a lion
in thy (...) nor frantic among thy servants. The Prophet compares evil rulers
to roaring Zeph. 3. 3.
lions, and corrupt (...), to evening wolves, which which leave not the bones
till the morrow. Therefore good governors must express moderation, for as
Saint Gregory says, Summum in regibus bonum est, in subjectos non saevire, It
is the chief commendation of a governor not to be sharp toward his subjects.
Grig. in Reg


The third (...) is, he must not like Saul begin well, and ena ill. It is said
of Saul king of Israel, that he had reigned two years over Israel, when he had
reigned far more, because the (...) two years he reigned well, and after did
degenerate, and so now, usually governors are careful to rule well at the
first entrance into their government, but afterward post (...), after Neros
five years, like Ezech. 11. 11
the Princes in Ezekiel, that account the city as a Caldron. and the people as
flesh in the midst of it.

Now for the better enforcing the observation of these four rules upon
superiors, and that as it is in Daniel, they may know that the most high
rules in the kinndoms of Deuteronomy. 4. 24. 25
men, and gives it to whomsoever he pleases. There are six reasons laid down
together in the 82. Psalm.

1. The (...) is verse. 1. God stands among them, he stands in the congregation
of the mighty, and judges among the gods: from whence he infers the (...)
verse. 2. How long will you give wrong judgment, and accept the persons of the
psalm. 82.
ungodly; seeing (as in the precedent verse) God stands among you, and sees
verse. 2.
your actions, and not only so, but is a judge among you, and will exact an
account of vou.

2. The second reason (in the next two uerses) is grounded upon the end, why
this To defend the poor and fatherless, them that be in need, the poor and
weak: and not to oppress them, their power is contra (...) non contra (...),
not against men, but sin.

3. The third is from the evil consequences that will follow if they do not
execute in tenebris ambulare walk in darkness, do so. But this will follow by
your ignorance, all the foundations of the earth will be out of course,
concutientur omnia fundamenta, all things will go to wrack, you will bring all
out of order by it.

4. The fourth is because their power is not absolute, but only delegate verse
6. I have said you are gods, indeed you are none. The meaning of this place is
expounded by Christ himself, John 10. 35. They are called gods, because the
word of God came to them, that is, they had commission from God; there came a
commission from God to you, it was but a delegate power, therefore you are not
to rule absolutely and simply, but by commission, for you have a superior, and
God will have an account from you.

5. And for abusing that commission, you shall die like men, there shall be no
difference you shall fall wisd. 6. 6.
like Princes, you shall not die like ordinary men, as it is in the book of
Wisdom. potentes potenter punientur, mighty men shall be mightily tormented.

6. Lastly, because they have sought themselves by this honor which God had
(...), they have (...) the fat, and clothed themselves with the wool, they
killed them that are fed, but they themselves fed not the (...), that is, they
have bin content to receive the honor, Ezech. 34. 3.
but have not (...) the duty, God will arise and take his inheritance into his
own hands: he willdischarge the duty himself.

There are two questionss concerning obedience to superior to be resolved,
before we enter upon the particular duties, necessary for the right
understanding of that which follows: because in the handling of those
particulars we shall have occasion to treat of obedience.

1. Whether inferiors owe any honor to one that is evil. The resolution of
which must be affirmative, according to that of the (...) to the Romans, where
Qust. 1.
the Apostle reasons in the like case. That the unfaithfulnes of man cannot
frustrate the promise of God: and so it must be said in this case, that the
wickedness of man cannot Romans 13
take away the commandment, nor make void Gods ordinance. And Gods ordinance it
is for the powers that be, are ordained of God as the Apostle speaks. Therefore
it is not the evil of the person that can make void his ordiuance.

Now evil is taken two ways, it is either Culpae or Poenae of sin or
punishment, and so superiors may be evil in both respects, and yet obedience
is due.

1. For the penal evil; as when they are rough and froward. Saint Peter
charge servants to be subject to (...) masters, not only to them that are
good, but to the (...). 1 pet. 2. 18.
We have an example of this in Hagar Sarahs maid. It is said, that Sarah dealt
Genesis 16. 6.
hardly with her, yet the Angel (meeting with her after she fled from her
mistress for her hard usage) willed her to return to her mistress, and submit her
self to her. Saul used David, and how he sought his life without cause, yet he
departed not from his obedience to him, nor would offer him any violence, when
he had him at an advantage in the Cave, his heart smote him for cutting the lap
of his garment, and as it is in Psalm 120. 8. He (...) for peace when his
enemies 1 Samuel 24. 4.
were for war.

2. For the other of fault. As the froward and cursed Magistrate is to be
honored, Hoseah. 3. 10.
so the wicked also; for as it is God that in his wrath denies us a Prince,
13. 11.
and as Hoseah says, they shall say, we have no king, because we feared not
the Lord, what should a king do unto us, so it is he that in his anger gives a
king, as he professes by his prophet.

And many times the fault is in the people if the king be bad, It is for their
Job. 34. 30.
sins that the hyppocrite reigns, and the People are ensnared, as Elihu in Job
speaks: and therefore where people choose themselves kings or rulers, rejecting
the lawful governors, to whom the government rightly belongs; or looking at
their own benefit, or liberty, rise against their lawful Princes, and change
the government, not proceeding in the fear of God, nor looking at his glory,
but at themselves, God punishes people by those rulers they have set up.

They have set up a king but not by me, they have made Princes, and I knew it
not, Hos. 8. 4. (...)
says God by the Prophet. And as it is in the same chapter, because Ephraim
(...) made many altars to (...), altars shall be unto him to sin: so God says
concerning wicked rulers, seeing people will have such, God will plague them
with the same; people must therefore be subject to evil rulers, because by
their sins they have brought them upon themselves. And besides though they be
evil yet as Solomon says, The heart, of the king is in the hand of God, who
can guide it as he pleases, as the river of prove. 21. 1.
waters; and as he sometimes moves evil kings to make good decrees, as
Balthazar 2 Samuel 24. 1.
and Darius, and so sometimes permits Satan in somethings to prevail over a
good king, as over David when he numbered his people And as he may for a time
leave a good Prince, so from others sometimes he may quite take away for ever
his good spirit, and send an evil spirit as he did to Saul. So that it is all
one with 1 Samuel 16. 14.
God, to make an evil Prince good, and to set an evil prince over the people at
first. And though he set an evil king over the people, yet as in the case of
(...), God has given him the kingdoms, and it was his will the nations Jer.
27. 5. 7.
Esa. 10. 5.
should serve him. And the king of Assure is called the (...) of Gods wrath, as
purposely Jer. 29. 7. and. 27. 7.
sent by him to correct the people: and because it is his doing, therefore the
people are by the Prophet commanded to pray for Nebuchadnezzar, under 1 Timothy 2.
2.
whom they were captives, and to submit to him, and obey him. So likewise in
the new testament, the Apostle wills, that prayers be made for governors, 1
pet. 2. 17.
though they were not Christians then, and Saint Peter commands all men to
honor Act. 25. 11.
the king which then was Nero, to whom saint (...) appealed from his deputy,
though he were one of the greatest tyrants that ever was.

But this must be added out of Chrysostom, (...), that whatsoever honor we
attribute to such evil Princes, is not to them as men; but to God himself, and
in reverence and obedience to his ordinance, not barely (...), to the person,
but (...), to the vizard that God has put upon him: or if to the person (as it
cannot well be conceived otherwise, for the person and office must not be
severed) yet not to the person barely for it self, but to such a person as it
is vested and clothed with authority from God.

We may see this in the case of Mordecai, when Haman advised the king, what
should be done to the man whom the king would honor, which was to Esth. 6.
(...)
put on the royal apparel. etc. upon him. It is plain, that the honor done by
the people to Mordocheus was in respect of the kings robes upon him; and so are
we to conceive of evil judges, governors, rulers, and Princes, that they wear
but Gods robes, and Gods crown, for which only we are to give honor to the
person.

The heathen emblem was (...) An Ass laden with the Image of the Goddess
Isis, to which the people fell down and did reverence; but the inscription was,
non tibi, sed religioni, not to the Ass, but to the Goddess. To this we may
add in thelast place, that be a government never so bad, yet it is far better
then to have none at all: as, Tyranny is better then Anarchy, where there is
no ruler at all. And better it is to live under one Tyrant, then under many,
under an Oligarchie then in Anarchy; (...). 13. 11.
for thouhg as the prophet says, God gave his people a king in his anger, yet
he took him away, and left them no head or ruler, how? in his wrath or fury,
which is the extremity of anger. The punishment is greater to that land, where
there is no king at all, then where there is a bad one.

The second question goes a degree further, and that is, (...) malo, in malo,
(...). 2. 2.
(...) ad malum sit obediendum, whether a man is to obey an evil man in an evil
thing, or whether a man owes absolute obedience (as they call it) to an evil
superior? The answer to this is negative; for that which they call absolute
obedience is due to to God only. For the clearing of this point, it is first
to be considered, whether he that commands be nobis Rex: for every one is not a
Ruler: the robes qualify him not so far, but as he is our king, and no
farther, then quatenus nobis imperat, as he rules over us, or has right to
command us.

1. For the first entrance into this question, we are to embrace the rule of
the fathers. They say, that lex charitatis the law of Ghrist did not abrogate
legem (...) the law of nature, and therefore it is good reason, that the law of
nature, upon which the authority of fathers and mothers is grounded, should not
weaken; but strengthen the law of God. We cannot say, when we do evil, that the
law of nature is the cause, or that the law of nature which requires obedience
to parents, can warrant our disobedience to the law of God.

2. The second thing is this. That because, as we showed before, Princes are
called Gods, because the word of God came to them, Joh. 10 35. (...) their
prove. 8. 15.
authority is not absolute, but by commission, as delegated from God, and
therefore in the Proverbs, the wisdom of God, which is the word of God (the
second person in Trinity) says, per quod, per me Reges regnant, by me kings
reign: now id per quod res est, that is the essence of it; so every superior
has somewhat that gives the essence to him, as he is a superior, and that is
the word which gives him commission. Now as in the case of Saul, Samuel tells
him, because thou (...) Sam. (...). 26.
have rejected the word of the Lord, the Lord has rejected thee. When a
Magistrate wholly casts aside the word of God, if it be clear and evident,
that his command is contrary to his commission, he cease in that particular
command to be our superior, (...) his commission extends not to command
against God: and therefore though in other things he must be obeyed still, and
his commission continues in force for other matters, yet in that wherein he
acts without or against his commission, he must not be obeyed.

Now for the better and more prospicuous handling of this, we shall do well to
take notice of the word in the original, (...) Shelabim, which signifies
degrees, and in Greek (...) and (...) order.

3. In order there are two things: there is summum or (...), the topp, in
respect of which all the rest are but as steps or stayers. So that step is
better which is neereer to the top: and then there is a series a line coming
down from the top, wherein every one is placed in their (...) order or rank,
according to their calling, as on several steps or stayers, one under another,
God being the highest, and on the next step under him kings and Princes, and so
others in their order; and in this series there are bounds to limit all
persons, beyond which if they exceed, they transgress. (For God only is
without bounds being infinite and superior to all.) Now these may be referred
to two.

1. When a mangoeth aside from that summum principium, the top, and that is,
when he does accedere or recedere, go (...) nearer to it, or down further from
it, then his rank, then he breaks the (...) or order, and exceeds his limits,
in which respect we are still to keep our station, and rest in our places, and
so we shall be (...), such as keep order, though the Superior do not.

2. Because every step has a certain breadth or latitude, set and lmited by
bounds on both sides, then he transcends the nature of a Superior, that
prescribes any thing beyond those bounds: as if the Prince of this land shall
command any thing to be done in those countries, where he has nothing to do.
Or if I be bound to obey a man, whose power is only in spiritual things, I am
not by the same reason to obey him in temporals, whereof he has no cognizance,
he is not to command out of his series, he must not recedere a principio. But
if a king or ruler observe these two points of order, that he do not leave his
series, nor recedere a principio, we are absolutely to obey him.

It is said in the Gospel. No man can serve two masters, God and Mammon;
because (...). 6. 24.
their commands are contrary; but the case here may be thus reconciled, Dominus
and servus, God and the Prince his minister, are but one Agent; because there
is a subordination. In this case there is but one master, till the Prince break
the order himself, and be a master against order, and do erigere altar contra
altar, erect one altar against another. For it is in order as it is in nature.
The Prince is the chief mover and Commander, others command under him. Now in
nature heavy things descend: and if on any occasion ad conservationem universi,
they do break their natural course and ascend, this is out of order, yet is
requisite for a greater good of the universe. So is it in matters of the
Commonwealth. If the inferior Magistrate command one thing, I must not obey
him, if a superior Magistrate command another, for a greater good of the whole
land. Some are of more honorable estate then other, and the higher place any
one has, the more honor he has, and in that respect the greater duty belongs
to him. Festus was honorable, yet Nero more honorable, and if S. Paul Luke
14. 8.
fear that Festus will break order, he will appeal to Nero. And we see, if a
man be before a Judge of an inferior place of judicature, he is free from him,
if a (...) Acts 25. 11.
come from a superior Judge to take the matter into his hands. And so when the
first mover of all, God, and his word or command comes, it gives a supersedeas
to all other commands, and appeal is to be made to him.

Our Savior in another place says, Be not afraid of them that kill the body.
In Luke 12. 4.
which place it is plain, that his meaning is, that though we should not break
off our obedience from those that have that power, as long they keep within
their series, yet if once they break order, then fear them not, but him that
after the body is killed, has power to cast the body into hell, which is God;
otherwise the caveat were needless. And the conclusion in this point is, to
say with S. Peter and S. John, when the Priests commanded them to preach no
more in the name of Jesus, Whether it be right in the Acts 4. 19.
sight of God, to hearken to you more then unto God, judge ye. And when they
would not take this for an answer, but urged them as before, they plainly told
them, 5 29.
Deo potius (...) hominibus, we ought to obey God rather then men.

The reason of this stands thus. God has taken order for the inaugurating of
every son of his, into his politia or government; for our (...) must be (...),
our conversation must be in heaven; as the Apostle speaks: and in another
place, we should Phil. 3. 20
be fellow Citizens withthe saints. A child is no sooner born, but fertur ad
baptismum, Ephesians. 2. 19.
he is carried to baptism, so that he is no sooner in the world, but he is
presently sent out again: for there he renounceth the world, and gives it
over, and consequently he is to receive his laws from heaven, his first oath
being sacramentum militare, to fight against the world, flesh and Devil. And in
this respect it is, that men cannot recede or go backward from their first vow.

If therefore a superior command extra seriem suam, out of his order. we must
remember our first vow, and disobey him; but in regard of that which has been
said, that God and he are but one Agent, in whatsoever lawfully he commands, we
must give him chief and especial honor and obedience. Let him command out of
his line, then God and he are two Masters: and God of the two is to be
preferred.

We have examples in this kind. For the first Commandment which requires the
love of God before and above all others, if father or mother, or any superior
command any thing contrary to our love we owe to God, we are not to obey; for
our Savior says, He that comes to me, and hates not father and mother, is
not worthy of me. He expounds himself elsewhere by plusquam Luke 14. 16.
me; he that (...) father or mother (...), above me, etc. they are to be loved,
but Matthew. 10. 37.
less then Christ; for as (...), a lesser evil, is called good in respect of a
greater, so minor dilectio, a lesser love, is called hatred, in respect of
major dilectio, a greater love: for bonum quod impedit majus bonum, in (...)
minus est diligendum, that good which hinders a greater good, is less to be
loved: and so is superiors prove a hindrance to keep us from God, our love to
them must give place to our love to God.

2. For the second Commandment. God the great superior took order, men Dan. 3.
18.
should not bow to any image: Nebuchadonozor a superior, a Prince, commands
the contrary, and his command is out of order, for he commanded that every man
should fall down before the golden image, at the sound of the trumpet. There
was a disobedience to his command, which was no disobedience at all; for
disobedience Dan. 6. 9.
is not but (...), in order, when things are commanded in order; and
Nebuchaednezzar had transgressed that order. Darius also signed a decree out of
order. For God commands that prayer should be made to him, and Darius commands,
that no prayer be made to God for thirty days space. Daniel (contrary to the
kings decree) prays to God: the king brake order, and Daniel did not. This
was not disobedience in Daniel, but obedience to the second commandment, the
disobedience was in Darius.

3. In the case of the third Commandment. The Gibeonites obtain (though
craftily) Josh. 9. 15.
a league with Joshua, confirmed by solemn oath, and he and the Israelites
preferred the religion of their oath, before their oversight, to the time of
Saul, who made the Israelites to break it; but this was unlawful, and irregular
obedience, and therefore the people were punished for breaking this order with
three years (...), and seven 2 Samuel 21. 2.
of Saul's sons were put to death for it.

4. For the fourth Commandment. God commanded the Jews to sanctify the Macc.
1. 45.
sabbath. Antiochus commands the profaning of it. (...) and others disobey
2. 34.
his command and prospered, but Antiochus died miserably. So God gives command
6. 8.
for honor and maintenance of the Priests, Ahab commands them to be slain:
but Obadiah obeys him not, but hid them in caves by fifty and fifty, and he
thought 1 King. 18. 13.
himself not disobedient.

5. This fifth Commandment enjoins honoring of father and mother, yet we see,
because Maacha mother of Asa had gone out of her order, usurping the crown,
which of right did not belong to her, he, taking occasion from her idolatry,
deposed 2 Chro. 15. 16
her from her dignity, without disobedience to this Commandment,. The Scribes
and Pharisees (notwithstanding this Commandment) go out of order, and say, that
though a man honor not father or mother, if he offer to the Corban, he shall
be excused: Matthew. 15. 5.
but our Savior condemns their breach of Gods law herein.

6. In the sixth Commandment God says, Thou shals not kill. The (...) of Egypt
Exodus 1. 16.
commands the midwives to kill. They disobey and are rewarded by God. (...)
commands 20
the people to cast their males into the river, but Moses parents keep him by
22.
faith, and hid him three months, and were rewarded for it. And Saul commanded
2. 3.
his servants to kill the Priests, but they refused, and their refusal
justified. Here the 1 Samuel 22. 17.
Superiors went out of the line, and therefore no obedience due to them in
these particulars.

But on the other side in obeying them out of order; we see that (...) is
condemned 2 Samuel 11. 16.
for (...) Vriah in the front of the battle to be (...), though it were upon
the receipt of King David's letters. So are the soldiers for putting the
children to death at Herod's command. And the minister of Ananias for smiting S.
Paul contrary (...). 2. 16.
to justice at the command of Ananias. Acts 23. 2.


7. To the seventh Commandment. David having gotten (...) with child, 2 Samuel
11. 11
commanded Vriah to have gone to her, that he might have been thought to be
father 2 Samuel 16. 22
of the child, but he would not obey. On the contrary, Absalom went in to the
Concubines of David.

8. In the case of the eigth; we see no blame or imputation laid upon Naboth
for 2 King 21. 3.
denying his vineyard to (...): but (...) is threatened by Eliah the Prophet.

9. In the ninth it is plainly recorded to posterity for a grievous sin in the
Elders and Nobles that obeyed (...) in (...) case, in bearing false witness,
or procuring 11.
some to do it against him. And in those that at the command of the high Priest
bare Mark 14. 55.
false witness against our Savior.

We will add one example more. We see may the practice of (...) God before
Parents in our Savior, who most perfectly fulfilled the Law. And that in two
answers Luke 2. 49.
of his. The first to father and mother, when his mother at her return finding
him, in a manner reprehended him, saying, Why have thou so (...) with us? His
answer was, Wot you not that I must be about my fathers business? not meaning
(...), but Gods: he was to prefer his first, and then theirs. Vbi (...)
impediunt, ibi conveniens est, sed quando impediunt, cave ne, etc. when our
earthly fathers and governors be not our hindrance in executing Gods commands,
then it is but meet and convenient to do theirs: but when they shall hinder us
from doing them, take heed how you neglect one to do the other. In this case
obedience is disobedience.

His second answer was to his mother alone, when he being with her at a
marriage, John 2. 4.
and she telling him there wanted wine, answered, Woman what have I to do with
thee? which as S. Augustine says, at the first sight may seem to be harsh; but
making this objection to himself, (...) venerat ad nuptias (...) doceret matres
contemnere? Did our Savior come to the wedding to teach children to despise
their mothers? He answers himself by another question. What did Christ take of
his mother Marie? wherein was he (...) to her? he took from her his flesh, and
she would have him do a miracle; could he have wrought a miracle by his humane
nature? No, but as he adds, Miraculum facturus non (...) secundum
infirmitatem (...), sed secundum majestatem divinam, being to work a miracle,
he could not do it according to the infirmity of his humane nature, but
according to his divine majesty, and that was out of her latitude. And
therefore goes on, quod in me tu genuisti non potest facere (...), a miracle
could not be done by virtue of any thing I had from thee: yet afterward when
he suffered on the cross, he acknowledged her to be his mother, as he was man,
and so provides for her.

To conclude this point out of that which has been said, We must submit 1 Pet.
2. 13.
to our Superious, as S. Peter says, how? for the Lords sake: and in that
which is right and just. We must not prefer our honor or duty to them, before
religion Ephesians. 6. 1.
to God. S. (...) says (upon the words of our Savior) He that loves father
Matthew. 10. 37.
or mother more then me, is not worthy of me. Ne quis (...) Religioni (...),
etc. lest any man should prefer love before religion, Christ adds, He that
loves father, etc. Order is necessary in all our affections. After God, love
thy father, thy mother, thy children. But if there comes a necessity that the
love of parents or children come in competition with the love God, and both
cannot be observed, we are to prefer the love of God before the rest: and
concludes, Honorandus generator, sed praeponendus Creator, our parents are to
be honored, but our Creator is to be preferred, etc.

But withal, lest we go too far on the one side, it is very necessary that we
search not too narrowly, or inquire too precisely into the commands of our
Superiors, but 2 Samuel 17. 24.
rather, if it be in our power, obey. We see (...) being commanded by the King
to number the people disliked it at the first, as seeing no reason to do it,
yet because it was a thing indifferent, he did it. And in doubtful matters or
indifferent this is the rule, rather to obey then oppose.

Again in matters unjustly commanded, if they be not expressly against the
will of God, there may be a just obedience. We see it in our Saviors own case.
The tribute gatherers demand tribute of him, though of the lineage of David, and
in that respect exempted. He asks Peter, Do they use to receive tribute of
strangers, or of their own children? when Peter had answered him, that they
used to receive it of Matthew. 17. 25
strangers, Christ replied, then are we free: but lest we offend them, go and
cast thy angle, etc. and pay for thee and me. So when men will take from us, it
is better to yield, and to redeem our peace (as he did) with yielding just
obedience to an unjust command, Vt illum reum faciat (says S. Augustine)
iniquitas imperandi, me (...) parendi; my readiness to obey, makes me
innocent, when his (...) comands make him guilty.

Concerning this point of obedience to superiors, the resolution of all
Casuists and Annotat. 30.
other Divines is, That as absolute obedience is due to God alone in all things
without Of obedience to authority in things (...) doubtful.
exception, because his will is the rule of what is just, so to other
Superiors, obedience is due in all things, which are not evidently contrary to
the Command of a higher power, or evidently without the limits and bounds of
their authority. Thus Thom. 2. 2. q. 104, a, 5. Cajet. ibid. The Summists in
verb. Obedientia. Cessius de justitia and jure lib. 2. cap. 6. dub. 4, 5, 6.
Valent. 2. 2. disput. 7. q. 3. p. 2, etc. whence it follows, that the highest
power under God being in Kings and Princes, therefore Obedience is due to them
in all things which are not evidently forbidden by God. So that Subjects are
not to busy themselves about the thing commanded, to know particular reasons
for the lawfulness, but, if after moral diligence fit to be used in all
actions of weight, it appear not unlawful or forbidden by God, they ought to
obey; and the reason is evident; because the Superior has his commission from
God, and so his commands are to be looked upon as proceeding from God whose
Deputy he is; and therefore they are sufficient ground and warrant for our
obedience (God having commanded us, so frequently in Scripture to obey our
King) unless it appear clearly that he exceeds his commission, and that his
commands Romans 13. 5.
are cross to the immediate commands of God. 1 Pet. 2. 13.


I say clearly and evidently, because in things doubtful we ought to obey (the
command of a superior being a determining of the doubt) for though its true
that no man ought to do any thing with a doubting conscience, for whatsoever is
not of faith is sin, Romans 14. yet the Command of a Superior is sufficient
cause to remove the doubt, he being Gods deputy to resolve us in doubtful
cases, so that his command is a resolving of the doubt, after which we ought no
longer to doubt. For as S. Bern. says, Ipsum quem pro Deo habemus, Deuteronomy 17. 8,
9, 10.
in omnibus quae non sunt aperte contra Deum, tanquam Deum audire debemus: Him
who is in Gods stead to us, we ought in all things which are not plainly
against God, to obey as God himself. And S. Augustine says, that a man may
justly obey an unjust Prince commanding a thing doubtful, (he instances in war)
si quod jubetur vel non esse contra praeceptum certum sit, vel utrum sit,
certum non est, if either it be certain that his command does not cross any
command of God, or uncertain that it does. For herein we more certainly obey
God himself, when we obey the certain commands of his Deputy, whereas, obeying
a doubtful command of God, we certainly disobey his Deputy, and by consequent
God himself; and therefore according to that rule, in dubiis pars tutior
eligenda est, in doubtful things its best to go the safest way. Its more safe
to obey then disobey, for it is certain, the thing is commanded by Gods
Deputy, and uncertain that God has forbidden it (as is supposed in all
doubtful cases) and so by disobeying we run into a certain sin of disobedience
to God in his Deputy, to avoid an uncertain sin against God immediately.

Besides, in dubiis melior est conditio possidentis, possession is a good plea
when the case is doubtful, and therefore the superior being in possession of
his authority ought to be obyed, in what he commands, though it seem doubtful
to us; for Quisque praesumitur esse bonus, donec constet de contrario, and so
the commands of superiors must be presumed to be lawful, till the contrary
plainly appear: he that is not against us, is for us, Luke 9. 10. So that they
take a wrong course and perplex their consciences that say, this is unlawful,
for where is it commanded in Scripture; when as they ought to say, this is
lawful being commanded by my superior, for where is it forbidden in Scripture.
For though the command of a Superior cannot make that lawful in it self, which
is forbidden by God, yet it may enable me in a doubtful case to do that
lawfully, and acceptably, which without such a command had been sinful and
liable to punishment. Conscience indeed is a judge immediately under God, yet
as Alex. Halen says, it is so only in such things as are immediately
commanded or forbidden by God, but in other things which God has left to
authority, it must be guided and regulated by authority: and this doctrine is
so necessary in praxi, as Suarez well notes, for the preserving of government,
and preventing of sedition, that public peace cannot otherwise be maintained.
Neither let any say It is against my Conscience; for what is only doubtful, is
no more against the Conscience, then with it, and when the scale hangs even, as
in doubtful cases, if the weight of authority will not turn the scale, either
the authority is made very light, or there is some fault in the beam, as one
says. Nay suppose they do not well in commanding, yet so long as there appears
no sin in obeying, Toll quod tuum est, and vade, (as S. Bernard says) take
what is thine, and go thy ways, thou shall not be accountable for the evil
that follows. The excellency of Obedience is to look at Gods will represented
to us in his substitute, which may make the same act, which it may be was
sinful in him that commands, become an act acceptable and rewarded by God in
him that obeyes.

CHAP. V.
The first Combination, between man and wife. The special end of Matrimony,
implied in three words. 1. Conjugium. 2. Matrimonium. 3. Nuptiae. The office of
the husband. 1. Knowledge to govern his wife. 2. Conjugal love. 3. To provide
for her and the family. The wives duties answerable to these, officia
resultantia, Duties arising from these. The duties of Parents and children. The
duties of Masters and servants.

Now concerning particular duties between superiors and inferiors, first we
shall handle the duties of those which constitute a family, and then of others,
where in the family both Heathen and Christians make three relations or
combinations. 1. Of the husband and the wife. 2. Of the Parent and the child.
3. Of the Master and the servant.

1. The husband and wife stand first in order. 1. because the husband is
paterfamilias, the father of the family, and the wife materfamilias the mother
of the family. 2. because God kept this order in the Creation, he made man and
wife before sons and daughters. 3. Because not only children and servants, but
Magistrates and al other superiors arise from this primitive combination
between man and wife, and the first subjection or subordination of an inferior
to a superior (from Ephesians. 5. 22.
whence al other have their rise) is that of the wife to her husband, whom
Saint Col. 3. 18.
Paul requires to submit or be subordinate to the husband in the Lord (...),
etc Let them be subordinate to their own husbands. 4. Because though there be a
natural relation or conjunction between father and son; yet there is a nearer
between man and wife, she was made of his rib, and God has commanded a man to
leave father and mother and cleave to his wife: therefore we shall give to this
the first place.

And because, as the Ethnic said well (...) we must first learn when we are
young what we must practice when we become men: therefore though we be not now
in the state of marriage, yet the knowledge of these duties may These lectures
were delivered in a College among students
be useful to us for the future.

And before we speak of this combination between man and wife, it will be
needful first to consider the special ends of Conjugal society, which are two.
The first concern God, the other the parties themselves.

1. The first is, that 1. Seeing God made a promise to Abraham that in his seed
Genesis 12. 3.
all the families of the earth should be blessed; every paterfamilias, father
of a family ought to aim at this, that his family may partake of this
blessing. And secondly, that he do monstrare pietatem, show piety at home, and
labor to make his family 1 Timothy 5. 4.
godly, this being the way to attain the end, blessedness.

2. The secondary ends, which concern the parties themselves, may be gathered
from three words in Latin which the bond of wedlock is expressed by. 1.
Conjugium. 2. Matrimonium. 3. Nuptiae: whereof two signify what was before
sin came into the world: and the last, what did follow after sin; and in
these ends are some mutual duties implied also, which concern both.

1. The first is Conjugium, which is the fellowship of one yoke, when two draw
one yoke together, Hence it appears, that mutuum auxilium. The mutual help,
benefit and comfort, which the one ought to have by society with the other, is
the first end of this conjunction, that they might be better, then if they were
alone. And therefore (as you may see) it was Gods purpose before copulation
Genesis 2. (...).
was mentioned, to provide a Help for Adam. And hence it is, that the word
maritare to marry, or to join a woman to a man, came to signify the setting of
vines to elmes or other trees, to make them grow and thrive better. Now we must
not conceive, that God in this first institution accounted solitude to be a
sin, for then there was no sin; but because it was a less felicity, a less
blessed estate then society, therefore he thought fit to make sociam a fellow
to Adam, and in that respect he says. it is not bonum not good for man to be
alone, as also having regard to the time, when the world was yet empty: whereas
in these times, when the world is so well filled; and in some places over full,
society is not so needful. In which respect the Apostle seems to set down the
plain opposite conclusion to this. Bonum est (...) non tangere, it is good for
a man not to touch a woman; which is to be understood 1 Cor. 7. 11. 26
in a diverse respect because of the present trouble of the Church, which was
then under persecution, and not otherwise: for in several respects that may be
good at one time which is not at another; for otherwise when sin entered, there
was more need of the help of society, in regard of sin to be avoided, the
imperfections of old age, diseases, and infirmities etc. It was very convenient
there should be a Genesis 2. 24.
yoke fellow. And therefore it is that God says, that a man should for sake
father and mother, and cleave to his wife, and they shall be one (...). which
shows the necessity, as well as the neernes of this conjunction: and hence the
Prophet terms the wife a companion and wife of the covenant. There is a league
between them, wherein they promise mutual help. This conjunction, and the
indissolubility of it, our Savior Mal. 2. 14.
mentions in one verse, they are no more twain, but one flesh; what therefore
God has joined together, let no man put asunder.

Now if they ought to be helpful to one another in the things of this life, we
may hence argue a minori ad majus, that matches ought not to be made with
Idolaters and unbeleevers, because they will be rather hindrances, then helpers
in the best things, which concern the soul; and therefore the Apostle exhorts,
not to be unequally yoked with unbeleevers, but to marry only in the Lord; not
but that such marriages being made, are valid, for as the same Apostle says,
the unbeleeving wife is sanctified by the believing husband, and the believing
man may save his wife, and so e contra; and therefore the same Apostle says,
that the believing husband ought not to put away the unbeleeving wife, nor the
believing wife to leave her unbeleeving husband, but when they are free and at
liberty to choose, they should avoid such unequal yokes: for multa fieri non
debent, quae facta valent, many things ought not to be done, which yet being
done, are not void, or null, but are valid and firm.

2. The second is Matrimonium, which imports another end of marriage viz that
foemina fiat matter, the woman may become a mother. This was part of Gods
institution before Adams fall: for he says, Crescite and multiplicamini, be
fruitful Genesis 1. 28.
and multiply, and have dominion over the Creatures, yet the end is not barely
propagation, as of other things, to replenish the world, but there was a higher
end aimed at, to wit, the propagation of a holy seed for the enlarging of the
Church, that there might be semen sanctum, and for this cause God made but one
woman, though he could have created more (as the Prophet speaks) by the plenty
of spirit he could have made more helps then one, but he made but one, that he
might raise up to himself a godly seed. And this is one especial end of
matrimony; not to fill the world, and therefore the Apostle speaking of the
woman, and showing Mal. 2. 15.
that sin came into the world by her, yet says, this shoud be a subordinate
means to save her, that she shall bear children, which may be semen sanctum, a
holy seed, and even that sanctification shall result to her benefit, as an
under means: and so not only the increase, populi, but populi sancti, the
enlarging 1 Timothy 2. 14.
of the Church, is the second end. 15.


3. The last is nuptiae, which imports something which came aster sin had
entered into the world. For S. Ambrose says, that nubo in the first
signification has no other sense, but tegere, to cover, as it is plain in
obnubo, and the rest of its compounds; or it denotes to us, that there is
aliquid tegendum etcelandum, some what to be concealed and covered; and there
was some cause of shamefastnes, when the fig leaves were sowed together. The
cause is, that after they had sinned, the inferior parts, as the appetite,
grew to be irregular and unruly. Whereupon, as the Apostle speaks, the devil
takes occasion to tempt to (...), and therefore he advises, that to avoid
fornication, every man have his own wife, and every woman her own husband, that
1 Cor. 7. 5. 12.
so they may have Thorum immaculatum, the bed undefiled. This Solomon calls the
avoiding of a strange woman, which he accounts a special part of wisdom; and so
this end includes that duty of fidelity, which the one owes to the other; for
unless Heb. 13. 4.
fornication be avoided, there can be no mutual fidelity. Therefore the Apostle
prove. 5. 20.
says, that the one of the married persons has not power over their own body,
but the other: the third end then of this Nuptiae is to avoid fornication. So
that the three general ends of this duty are first. Mutuum auxilium, mutual
help denoted by conjugium; secondly, Proles issue, signified by Matrimonium;
thirdly, The avoiding of (...), implied in Nuptiae, which includes fides (...)
to each other, specified by Nuptiae.

This for the general ends; Now for the particular duties of man and wife.

1. Now for the particular duties, the first duty of the husband to the wife is
expressed in these word by Saint Peter, to live with her according to
knowledge, he must know how to govern her. Because as we see in the case of the
first wife, she 1 pet. 3. 7.
was beguiled by the serpent, and seduced her husband; therefore in the
sixteenth Genesis 3. 6. 12.
verse of that chapter God told her, that her desire should be subject to her
husband, 16.
and that he should have the government and rule over her: therefore she must
never follow her own will hereafter, but must be subject to her husband.

His duty therefore is to govern her. yet so, that he must (...) with her,
being Col. 3. 19.
the weaker vessel, and not to be bitter to her, as being heir with him of 1
pet. 3. 7.
the grace of life, that their prayers be not hindered, and that thereby he may
enjoy his own peace; for who would trouble his own flesh.

That he may rule and govern, he must be able to instruct her: for when the
Apostle says, that if the wives would learn any thing, let them ask their
husbands at home, 1 Cor. 14. 35.
it is to be taken for granted, that they must be able to teach them; lest such
as creep into houses and beguile silly women, 2 Timothy 3. 6. Entrap the wife. And
if she shall be carried away with blind zeal or affection, or otherwise go
astray, he must be able by wise exhortations to rectify her. We have an example
for this of Elkanah, when Hannah his wife murmured and took on for her
barrennes, he 1 (...). 1. 8.
pacified her with this wise speech. Am not I better to thee then ten sons:
withal he must so strengthen himself, that he be not seduced as Adam was by
Eve, nor be too credulous of her reports, as Potiphar was when he put Joseph in
prison upon a Genesis 39. 19.
false accusation of his wife, nor omit any necessary duty required by God,
though she be offended at it, as Zipporah the wife of Moses was at the (...) of
1 King. 12. 7.
her son. Nor hearken to her in a bad cause, as (...) did to Jezebel. Or if she
be like (...) that scoffed at David for his zeal in dancing before the (...) of
God, he must by his knowledge and wisdom be able to instruct and reform her in
the spirit of meekenes.

And as in the first place government with knowledge is required in the (...),
so submission consequently belongs to the wife, not to stand upon her own will
or wit, but to submit her self to her husband. For seeing by her own confession
she was not wife enough to resist the serpent, but was first in the
transgression, therefore justly was it laid upon her, that she should not stand
upon her own will hereafter, but should be subject to her husband: and be
governed and advised by him. This the Apostle Saint Peter calls subjection, and
Saint Paul submission; which 1 pet. 3. 1.
must be (...) as to the Lord: and in the same chapter he calls it fear, let
the wife Ephesians. 5. 22.
fear or reverence her husband, which shows, that as he has the government, so
he 33.
has power and authority, which she must fear: and this Saint Peter urges by
the 1 pet. 3. 6.
example of Sarah, who obeyed Abraham, and called him Lord. And this reason 1
Cor. 11. 4
is given, because as God is head of Christ, and Christ the head of the man, so
man is the head of the wife. Whereupon Saint Augustine says, that as the sense
of seeing is by the head, so a woman ought to seeby her husband, who is her
head; yet withal he is to remember, that as she was not taken out of his head,
because she must not be above him, as his master; so neither out of his feet;
because she is not to be his servant; but out of his side, a latere, that she
might be semper illi a latere, as his fellow and companion, almost his equal.
The Heathen king Ahasuerus and his counselors saw this duty of wives by the
light of nature, when for (...) disobedience Esth. 1. 9.
they decreed, that she should be put from her royal estate, and see the kings
face no more, and that her (...) should be given to another, and that no woman
should presume to do the like, all this should be published by a royal decree,
and that every man should bear rule in his own house etc.

This for the first duty.

2. The second duty, though it concur with the general affection of love, and
be in effect nothing else, yet it has a peculiar respect whereby it differs
from all other love, and therefore is to be specially mentioned. It is described
in Genesis by Genesis 2. 24.
three things. 1. That this conjugal love must make one abandon and leave those
to whom he is most bound, or which are otherwise most near and dear to him, viz
comparatively; for this cause shall a man leave father and mother. 2. That as
they must leave all others, so they must constantly cleave, and adhere to one
another, as is expressed by the (...) aahasit, conglutinatus est, to cleave, or
be glued together 3. This adhering must be such a near union as makes them
one, yea, (...) one flesh of two; so that the love and affection appropriate to
this conjunction must exceed all other. In all love there is a kind of union,
but all other union must give way to this, none so near as this. Neither must
this love be onley carnal and outward; of which Solomon speaks: Rejoice with
the wife of thy youth, let her be as the loving hind and pleasant Roe, let her
breasts satisfy thee at all times, and be thou ever ravished prove. 5. 18. 19.
with her love, but also spiritual, according to the Apostles rule, to love her
as Ephesians. 5. 29.
Christ loved the Church: whose love, as it resembled conjugal love, in the
three particulars before mentioned, in forsaking what was dear to him, father
and mother etc. In cleaving constantly to his Church, and uniting himself with
it, so as his Church is the body, and he the head; so this love of his was
spiritual toward the Church, By which he made it without spot or wrinckle; and
so the husbands chief care 2. 7
ought to be, to keep his wife sine macula and ruga, without spot or sin in
the sight of God.

And as this is required on the man's part, so the woman, to make her self
amiable, prove. 31. 29.
ought to resemble her, that the wiseman speaks of; Many daughters have 30.
done virtuously, but thou excellest them all; for favor is deceitful, and
beauty is vain but a woman that fears the Lord she shall be praised. This
commendation had Lydia, whom the Apostle sets forth for a pattern to other
women; that she was Act. 16. 14.
one that feared and worshipped God, whose heart God opened to attend to the
things spoken by Paul. This makes a woman truly amiable: for as there must be
love in the husband, so there must be Amibilitas, amiablenes on her part,
thereby to draw love which consists in modesty and other virtues, for as
Solomon says, A gracious (or as some read it) a modest woman obtains honor:
for beauty or favor without prove. 11. 16.
grace and fear of the Lord, is but as a ring of gold in a swines snowt. And
therefore 22
immodest outward allurements ought to be far from them: according to the
Apostles rule, they ought to adorn themselves in modest apparel, with
shamefastnes and sobriety, not with broydered hair or gold, or pearls, or
costly array, but (which becomes women professing godliness) with good works.
And 1 Timothy 2. 910
S. Peter requires, that their adorning be not in plaiting the hair, or
wearing gold etc. but in the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not
corruptible, even the ornament 1 pet. 3 3. 4.
of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price. And
the Apostle Paul in another place commands, that young married women, bear
children, 5. 14.
guide the house, and give no occasion of offense. And lastly Saint Peter would
3. 1. 2.
have them be of such conversation, that even without the word, the adversaries
beholding them may be won and converted. So much for the second duty.

3. The third duty of the husband or Paterfamilias is oeconomical. To provide
for his wife and them of his family, which if he do not, he is worse then an
infidel, as the 1 Timothy 5. 8.
Apostle says. There must be in him an honest care by just and true dealing,
per (...) oeconomicam by oeconomical prudence, to provide sufficient
maintenance for his wife and family. It was the Patriarch Jacobs care, as we
may see in his conference with Laban; for when Laban urged him to tarry still
with him, his answer was, that he had done sufficiently for him already, he had
by Gods blessing increased Genesis 30. 30.
his estate from a little to a great deal, and if he should still follow his
business, when should he provide for his own house. It is the Apostles counsel,
that men should labor for that which is good, that they may have not only for
themselves, but also to give to others, and so rather to be beneficial to
others, then chargeable. And Ephesians. 4. 24
the wiseman in a Metaphorical way advises the like. He would not have a man
to prove. 5. 15.
come always to his neighbors well when he is dry, but to drink waters out of
his own cisterne, and fontes (...) deriventur for as, let thy (...) be aisper
sed abroad: and to this end in the next chapter he urges the example of the
Auts wisdom in laying 6. 6. 7 8.
up against the hard winter; to whom he sends the sluggard for a pattern, and
10. 5
calls him wise that gathers in Summer, that is, while he has time. We
have an example of it, allowed by God and rewarded by man in the Patriarch
Joseph, who laid Genesis 41 48,
up against a dearth, while the years of plenty lasted What a man obtains this
way 49.
by his honest labor and industry is accompanied with a blessing from God;
even this blessing that he has true peace of conscience in what he enjoyes,
his conscience shall not trouble him for unlawful gains; according to that of
Solomon, The blessing of the Lord makes rich, and he adds no sorrow with it,
viz. no inward grief of (...), but rather peace and comfort. And for the wives
duty it is answerable to that of the husband. The Apostle says, that he would
have her guide the house; not so much to 1 Timothy 5. 14.
provide for the house, (which is chiefly the husbands part) but to order and
dispose well of what is brought into the house; which is in effect the same
with that which Christ commanded the Apostles, to gather up that which
remains, that nothing be lost, John 6. 12.
And this is a good quality in a woman, for though our Savior reprehendeth
Martha Luke 10. 41.
for being too much addicted to worldly cares, yet it is said by another
Evangelist, that he loved her well. And it is well said by a Father: Foelixest
domus ubi de Martha Maria John 11. 5.
conqueritur, sed none converso, ubi Martha de Maria; that house is happy,
where Marie complains of Martha, but it is not so on the other side, where
Martha finds fault with Maric. The Wise man at large describes the several
duties in one (...) Pro. 31. 10. etc
to qualify a woman in this kind, and says, that he that shall find such a
virtuous woman is happy, for her price is far above rubies. And to the same
purpose does the Apostle advise women, and in the midst of his lessons to them,
as a special means to observe the rest, he bids them to be as snails (...),
domi-portae, kcepers at home. In Tit. 2. 3, 4.
this point following the example of Sarah, of whom we read, that she was for
the Genesis 18. 6, 9.
most part, either in the tent, or at the tent door. 10.


4. The last thing is, There must be from each of these duties, officia
resultantia, duties resulting and arising, to be performed to others, viz. to
each others kindred; for by reason of this conjunction between the parties
themselves, there is mutual love and honor to be given to each others kindred.
We see the example on the man's part for this duty in the man of God, Moses; who
when his wives father Jethro came to him; Exo. 18. 7, 12.
went out to meet him, and made obeisance to him, and entertained him and
Aaron, and all the Elders of Israel. And at another time, we find what
kindness he offered to Hobab, his wives brother, that if he would go with him
into the land of promise, Numb. 10. 29.
be should partake of what good soever the Lord should do to him. Come with us,
and we Judge. 4. 11.
will do thee good. And for the woman's part, we have an excellent example in
Ruth toward her mother in law, Naomi, that by no means would be persuaded to
leave her, but would accompany her into her country; professing, that she
would not forsake her Ruth 1. 16, 17
till death. And for the shame of those that shall neglect this duty, we have
an example of Caiaphas, who (though he were a wicked man, yet) honored his
father in law, giving him the pre-eminence in examining our Savior first,
though he were the high Priest.

The second combination is between the father and the son, the parent and the
child. John 18. 13.
And as the first duty of parents is generatio prolis, the begetting of issue,
so the first end of it is for the propagation of Gods church, that there may be
semen sanctum, an holy seed, a constant succession of Godly posterity, to
praise and glorify God; for as the Psalmist says, God appointed his laws in
Israel, that the fathers might make them known to their children, that the
generations to come might know them, even the children Psalm 78. 5, 6, 7, etc.
that should be born, and that they also arise and declare them to their
children. A second and subordinate end the wise man describes, that children
might be, corona senum and Prove. 17. 6.
gloria patrum, the crown of their age, and the glory of their fathers, that
they may have psalm 128. 7.
comfort in their age. We may observe diverse excellent children in the
Scripture when the parents looked up to God, and regarded that first end of
generation. Isaac was born Gal. 4. 23.
by promise, as the Apostle speaks, and his elder brother, was but the son of
nature. In (...). 49.
the next generation, Joseph, who was the blessing of Jacob, was better then
the rest of his brethren. And so Samuel being vowed to the Lord, and begot in
his mothers lamentation, was endued with wisdom, and became a comfort to all
Israel. Solomon in all qualities the wisest of all, none was ever like him
among the sons of men. And we may consider his birth, David after he had
composed the 51 Psalm in (...) for his sins, God bles'd him with this seed. So
that it is not generation, but regeneration, which is to be respected, not the
brutish appetite, but the propagation of Gods Church which is principally to be
regarded in begetting of children, and the nurture and bringing them up Ephesians.
6. 4.
(being born) in the fear of the Lord; for there are other generations
mentioned by Solomon, prove. 30. 11, 12, 13, 14.
of which parents can have little comfort if the end be neglected.

Now for the duty of children answering this, they cannot parallel that of the
parents in this point: for the father begets the son, the son cannot beget the
father, quoniam nisi per eos non fuissent, because they had not had their
being, but for their fathers. Prove. 1. 8.
Therefore because they cannot perform any duty answerable to that of their
parents in their procreation, they must honor them as instruments of their
being, both by harkening to their instruction, as the Wise man counsels,
Hearken to the instruction of thy father, and (...) not the law of thy mother;
and by honoring them Matthew. 21. 30.
tanquam (...). The father must be honored in what low condition or estate
Luke 15. 29.
soever he be. We see the disobedient son called his father (...), Sir or Lord.
And the 1 Samuel 14. 33.
obedient son like wise professed, how obedient and dutiful he had been to his
father 1 Kings 2. 19.
for many years, though he had not done so much for him, as for his prodigal
brother. Wicked Absalom coming to his father, bowed himself on his face to the
ground: and King Solomon rose up and bowed to his mother. And the reason why
they are to perform the greatest honor to them (next after God) is, because
the greatest part of excellency Prove. 19. 26.
is esse causam, to be a cause of our being.

Now if any shall be so far gone as to reject his parents, as ashamed at them,
or 30. 17.
mock at his father, and despise to obey his mother; if he look with a scornful
eye, or with a crabbed countenance, if he do vultu laedere pietatem, mark what
punishment Genesis 9. 25.
the Wise man says shall be fall such; The ravens of the valley shall pick out
his eyes, and the young eagles shall eat them. We may see this in the heavy
punishment of Cham for deriding his father Noah, a great curse was laid upon
him. The curse reached not only to himself, but to all his posterity, being
cast out of Gods favor, Prove. 20. 20.
for the blessings both of this life, and the life to come.

If any shall go further, and give evil language, and reproach or curse them,
His Exodus 21. 17,
lamp shall be put out in obscure darkness, that is, he is filius mortis, but
a dead man. 15.
It was Gods will by a special law enacted by him in this very case; and much
more he deserves to die, if he be one that smites father or mother, (...); such
a person was accounted by the very Heathen to be a greater malefactor then a
murderer of others.

2. The second duty of parents, is (...), to nourish them continually as the
word signifies, and not as beasts, for a months space. They are not only to
take heed of Exodus 21. 22.
procuring abortive births (which was a capital crime under the Law) but if
after the birth there be expositio, an exposing of the child to the world,
which Hagar was Genesis 21. 10.
about to do, when she cast the child under a tree, the bottle of water being
spent, if the Angel had not recalled her. If through negligence it happen to
die, as the woman's 1 King. 3. 19.
son, which was overlaid in the night; or if it come to be lame, or to lose any
limb, 2 Samuel 4. 4.
as Mephibosheth, who was lame of his feet by a fall of his nurse, it is a sin
contrary Ephesians. 5. 29.
to that duty which parents owe to their children; for nature teaches every
one to 1 Timothy 5. 8.
nourish their own flesh, (as the Apostle has it) which is employed in that
which he urges in another place, of providing for their family, and not be so
unnatural, as (...). 7. 9.
when they ask them bread, to give them a stone, which our Savior counted an
unnatural thing.

Not is this nourishment all that is required of them, but they must also
provide for them for the future, according to that of the Apostle, Children lay
not up for the parents, but parents for the children. There is an inheritance
mentioned under 2 Cor. 12. 14.
the law. If a man be not able to leave an inheritance, or means when he dies,
he must Epist. 99.
take order to leave him an Art, which (as S. Augustine says) is all one with
an inheritance. (...). 21. 16.
In the choice and fitting the children to which, the discretion of the father
must discern and judge of the (...) of his children, to what art or profession
they are most apt and fit by nature, as Jacob did when he (...) his sons, with
this proviso (...), that they allot not the (...) to God, who in his Law
commanded the firstborn 1 Samuel 1. 11.
to be sanctified to him, which Hannah performed in her vow of Samuel. Exodus
13. 2.


The duty of a child answerable to this, is remuneratio, requital of benefits.
This the Apostle (...) requires, that children show piety at home, and requite
their parents, affirming that it is good and acceptable before God: and for
those that requite evil for good. (...) Wise man says, That evil shall not
depart from their house. This requital 1 Timothy 5. 4.
must not be only non subtrahendo, by not making away, wasting or pilfering
their Prove. 19. 26.
fathers goods (which is condemned as a great fault) such a son, says Solomon,
causes shame and reproach, and is a companion of a destroyer; but by aiding
them, if they want ability, for so the Apostle requires, to requite their
parents, and as it follows to take order to relieve them, that the Church be
not charged, that so it may relieve those that are widows indeed, viz. which
have no children able to maintain them. Our Savior would rather have the
Corban go without, then the father should want. And the Mark 17. 11.
Council of Gangra has a severe Canon, which does anathematize those which
Canon. (...).
shall neglect their parents in this case. And we have the example of our
Savior John 19. 27.
Christ performing this part of duty, and taking care for his mother, even at
his death.

This the very Heathen saw to be a duty by the light of nature; for at Athens,
Children after they came to be thirty years of age, were called (...),
Cherishers of their parents in their old age: and they had laws which were
called (...), the Stork laws; and the story tells us, that it was taken from
the Storks, which (as writers testify of them) bring every morning and evening
meat to the old storks, when by agethey are not able to fly; and they young
ones (when the old would drink) take them on their backs, and carry them to a
river. And the neglecters of this duty in their laws, are called ((...)) not
capable of honor; and were pronounced short lived: Homer gives the reason of
one that died suddenly, that he did not nourish his parents.

To this may be added the duty which the godly have performed to their parents
in their sickness, and at their funerals. An example we have in Joseph, who,
though Genesis 49. 50
he were in a high estate, yet came to his father Jacob in his sickness, and
when he was dead, honored him with solemn funerals. And we may see it even in
the ungodly; for though Ishmael and Esau were wicked sons, yet they thought it
so great a piaculum 25. 29.
to neglect their duty in this point, that they concurred with their (...) in
the 35. 29.
enterring of their deceased fathers.

3. The third duty of parents, is to bring up their children in the fear of
God; Ephesians. 6. 4.
(...), in the fear and nurture of the Lord, as the Apostle speaks. The former
duty (...) and (...), to nourish their bodies, most parents are careful enough
of, but this of (...), which concerns their souls, they are careless in. Men
are apt enough with the mother of Zebedees children, to take care for their
preferment, (...). 20. 21.
which is but a worldly care; but for the care of their souls, it is many
times, and with many the least of their thoughts. Let them see their son break
a bone, or the like, and they are presently much moved, but though they see
them break the Law of God, it much troubles them not. If their children come to
any temporal punishment, or shame, or if they be disfigured in body, or the
like, they will grieve and sigh, but for any deformity in the soul, or sinful
practices, whereby they incur Genesis 17. 24.
the displeasure of God, they are not troubled. Therefore their duty is, 1. in
the Deuteronomy. 4. 9.
first place to follow Abraham's example, to incorporate them into the Church
as soon 1 Cor. 7. 14.
as they can, else, as the Apostle speaks, their children are not holy.

2. After their initiating follows their instruction: because that non
recedat ab co cum senex (...), quod didicit juvenis, he will not depart when he
is old, from that he learned when he was young. And this instruction must not
be curious or (...), but after a familiar sort, and in a plain way, that may
(...) them with the principles of religion before they come to be auditors in
the Church; lest otherwise that which they hear (...) may seem strange to them:
wherein they have the examples Genesis 18. 19.
of Abraham and David. It was also the practice of godly parents in the new
Testament. 1 Chro. 28. 9.
Timothy knew the holy Scriptures from a child, as S. Paul testified of him. 2 Timothy 3. 15.


1. The best way to make instruction profitable is example: for as one says
very Leo in (...). de jejun.
truly, Validiora sunt exempla quam verba, and before opere dicetur quam
voce; examples are more prevalent then words, and a man may speak more by his
action, then his Prove. 24. 32.
voice. I saw and considered it well, and looked upon it, says the Wise man,
and so I received instruction. Therefore parents example must not be repugnant
to what they teach; for then, armatur natura exemplo: corrupt nature is armed
and strengthened by example: if their example be repugnant to that they teach,
little profit will arise by instruction. When the parents set the children a
good example, and say, Go thou, and do likewise; or learn of me, (as Christ to
his hearers) their speech and pattern together, will be very prevalent with
their children.

2. Another way to help instruction is by Discipline, which the Wise man
calls Prove. 29. (...)
the rod and reproof. And this it is which puts wisdom into the soul, which is
kept out by folly: which as it arises by impunity, which the Rabbines call,
Magna venefica a great 22. 15.
bewitcher, so the rod of correction shall drive it away. Solomon answers one
objection in this point, which is, I cannot love and correct too. That is not
so, says he, He 13 24.
that spares his rod, hates his son; hut he that loves him, chasteneth him
betimes. If you correct him not, you love him not. And indeed, in another place
he scoffs at the 23. 13.
lenity of those that make such objections. Withhold not correction from thy
child; for if thou beat him with the rod, he shall not die: there is no fear of
that, but assurance of 14.
two great blessings by it, as it follows. 1. It shall liberare animam ab
inferno, it shall deliver his soul from hell. And 2. Afferre soiatium animo
patris, bring joy and 15.
comfort to the fathers heart. But with this caveat, that it be done dum spes
est, while 19. 18.
there is hope, (...) the twig will grow so great, that it will break before it
bend. S. Augustine proving out of our Saviors words to the Jews, that we must
do the John 8. 38.
works of Abraham, tells us how we shall do them. Omnis qui trucidat filiorum
voluptates, tale sacrificium offert Deo, quale Abraham: he that kills pleasure
in his children, offers such a sacrifice to God as Abraham did. If he kill
(...), which the Apostle speaks of, those lusts which bud and spring up in
young men: this will prove an acceptable sacrifice. It is recorded as a blemish
to David, that he never displeased Adonijah, 1 Kings 1. 6.

To conclude this point, the last part of his duty toward them, is prayer, and
that particular kind of prayer, which we call benedictio, blessing them, which
makes the rest effectual and (...); else God will curse them. We see the
practice of getting Genesis 27. 10.
this blessing for Jacob by his mother, which took effect in all his
offspring. And we 49. 28.
have the example of Jacob blessing his children, and David's blessing and
prayer for 2 Chro. 29. 16
Solomon. And the curse of Noah which took the contrary effect in Cham. Genesis 9.
25.


The childrens duty answerable to this, is to obey and hearken to the
instructions of their parents: for as the Heathen says, Pudor est, pudorem
esse ei etc. it is a shame that we should be a shame to them, to whom we ought
to be a comfort: and seeing that the Prove. 17. 6.
Holy Ghost says, that children should be a crown to their parents, it were a
great shame 10. 1.
to be a crown of thorns to them. The Wise man says, that a wise son makes a
glad 15. 20.
father: whereas contrariwise he tells us; that a foolish son is a grief to his
father, and 17. 25.
bitterness to her that bare him. And he that begets a fool, does it to his
sorrow, and the 21.
father of a fool has no joy. And therefore he would have this precept laid as
a foundation Prove. 6. 20.
in their hearts: My son keep thy fathers commandment, and forsake not the law
8. 10.
of thy mother: and persuades children, to receive instruction and knowledge,
preferring it before silver and gold. This is the first part answerable to the
fathers.

The next is, they are to imitate the fathers example being good. It is said of
Solomon, that he walked in the steps of his father David: and the Prophet Esaias
(...) Esaias 55. 1, 2.
the people to take Abraham for a pattern.

And in the last place, that they subject themselves to discipline, according
to that of Heb. 12. 9.
the Apostle, where he says, we have had fathers in the flesh, which corrected
us, and we gave them reverence: this is it which puts a difference between a
natural son and a bastard. This also we are to take by the way, that as the
regarding of that we are taught is one part of our duty; so another is
obedience in the practice of it; not in regard of that which the law of God
expressly commands, for that is not thanksworthy: but in matters also of
indifferency. The Rechabites were forbidden by their Jer. 35. 6.
father Jonadab to drink wine, (a thing indifferent) and they kept it, and are
commended for it. The Heathen man could say, that it was a great honor to
parents, (...) referimus actiones nostras ad arbitrium parentum, when we refer
and submit our actions to their will and disposal. This is therefore a special
part of childrens duty to their parents, as when they take their essent, in the
(...) to a vocation, or in not marrying without their approbation. For if a vow
of a child must not be made in the fathers Numb. 30. 3.
house without his knowledge or approbation, then much less a covenant for
matrimony. Again, if it be the part of a parent to give his child in marriage,
then is it 1 Cor. 7. 38.
the duty of a child to yield to it: else it is no true child, but a Bastard,
or such a Gen 26. 35, 36 48. 9.
one as Esau, who, to the grief of his father and mother, married against their
minds.

Now against disobedient children, there was a law enacted by God worth the
observation: (...) if a man have a stubborn and rebellious son, that neither by
fair nor (...). 21. 18.
foul means would be reclaimed, his parents were to accuse him before the
Elders, and their accusation must be, This our son is stubborn and rebellious,
etc. and is a (...), or a drunkard, or hunter of (...). Then follows the
judgment and execution, that he shall be stoned. And there was little less
favor to such in the laws of the Heathen: for the father of such a person was
to bring his son to the judge of the (...), who was not to give what sentence
he pleased in favor of the accused, but dicturus erat (...) quam pater
voluerat, he was to pronounce such a sentence as should please the father.
Solon being demanded, why he left out of his laws, a law against disobedient
children, answered, because he thought there would be no such; yet (says he) I
confess I found (...) of that kind, but by diligent search I discovered that
they were but Supposititii, not true sons but changelings, and I thought that
no true son would be a (...) in that kind. And the Philosophers were of
opinion, that every father had his (...), a fury of hell to torment his son that
should be disobedient.

There is a notable example of Gods veangence (I am sure) against Else two sons
1 Samuel 3. 25.
in taking his grace from them, in that they hearkened not to the voice of
their father, and his veangeance brought them to an untimely death. Nay we see,
that though (...) gave strict charge, that no man should put (...) his hand
against his rebellious son Absalom, yet God made Joah executioner of his wrath
to kill him. I can 2 Samuel 18. 12.
end no better then with the Greek saying, (...) If a man 14.
will not be obedient to his parents, he shall obey him that is not his parent,
that is, the hangman, he shall come to an untimely end.

Now besides the duties between natural parents and children, there are others
like those officia resultantia, of which we spoke, to which the father and son
respectively are bound: and first of the father.

1, Because God oftimes takes away the father from the son, that chief duty can
no longer be performed by him, therefore God takes order, that there be
officia (...), performed by others to them, in the stead and place of fathers.
And in this respect it was, that Laban called the children of Jacob, his sons
and daughters. and this as he was their Grandfather, and if Jacob had died, the
care of their education Genesis 31. 43.
would have layen upon Laban in part.

In the law it is more plain, for God there gives charge, that if any one for
poverty Levit. 25. 48.
should sell himself; his brother, his uncle, or his uncles son were to redeem
Number. 35. 15.
him. If the next of kin was by the law to be vindex sanguinis, the (...) of
blood and so to be concerned in case of death; much more are the next of kin
concerned in case of life. We have an example of the care of kindred to the
children of the deceased Genesis 11. 31.
in Terah: for whereas Loti father was dead, Terah (his uncle by the fathers
side, and father to Abraham) departing out of Caldea into the land of (...),
thought it his duty not only to take his own son Abraham and Sarah his wife
along with him, but his Nephew Lot also. The like did Abraham; for his father
Terah being 12. 5.
dead in Haran, in the way, he took Sarah and Lot his fathers brothers son, and
brought him into the land of Canaan. The same care took Mardocheus of Esther,
who though she was but the daughter of (...) the uncle of (...), yet her father
being dead, he took her for his daughter. And for default of kindred, where
there was none to take care, God took order under the Law, appointing every
third year, Esth. 2. 15.
after the people had paid their tithes to the priests and Levites; that the
remainder should be tithed over again, there must be a tenth for the
fatherless and widow, that Deuteronomy. 26. 12.
they may eat and be satisfied. This is for (...), and (...)

2. In the next place, as there is a duty in fathers to the children of their
kindred, so likewise is there a duty of children to the kindred of their
father, and their elders. We see this most excellently described in the story
of Ruth; who though Naomi were but her mother in law, yet she would not forsake
her, but accompanied her into her own country, and there was very careful to
relieve her. Thus the Ruth. 1. 2. etc.
Kenites the posterity of Hobab, Moses his father in law, dealt friendly with
the Israelits, Judge. 4. 11.
delivering Sisera to them. And for spiritual duties we see, Cornelius his
care, he sent for all his kindred, who were ready to hear what Peter had to
deliver from Act. 10. 24.
God. And the Apostle professes his great affection to his countrymen, the
Jews, Romans 9. 2. 3.
his brethren, his kinsmen according to the flesh, that he was in continual
heavines and sorrow of heart for them.

3. And yet there is one rule more concerning this duty; which not only should
prove. 27. 10.
extend it self to kindred, but stretch it self to our own friend and our
fathers friend, as the wise man (...) us. we see the example for this in King
David when Saul's sons were executed to stay the famine, yet King David (as the
text says) spared (...) 2 Samuel 21. 7.
the son of (...), because of the league of friendship between him and (...) his
father.

And thus much for the duties of Parents and children.

3. The third Combination is between the Master and the servant, the master
being in the family, as the magistrate and superior is in the Civilbody; only
here the institution was from man, but the approbation was from God, whereas
the institution of the supreme Civil power in kings was from God. And the
warrant of calling a master father (and so honoring him) is clear from that
place, where Naamans 2 Kin. 5. 13.
servants call him father.

The scope and especial point to be aimed at in this Combination is. 1. That
all masters are to have respect to the chiefest good; that salvation, as with
Zaeheus, should (...). 19. 9.
come to their whole family. So also it was with Lydia and her family, Act. 16.
15. So with Cornelius, Act. 10. 27. With the Iayler, Act. 16. 33. And with
Rahab. (...). 2. 13. 2. That the master do dominari in bano, govern his family
for their good and his mutually; not as he, of which the Preacher took notice,
that ruled over another (...). 8. 9.
to his own hurt.

For the first institution of this relation, we read of no servants at the
beginning, for if man had continued in his innocence, there should have been
none: and there were none, we read of, till the time of Cham, who for
dishonouring his father, Genesis 9. 25.
was changed from a son to a servant of servants, by the curse of Neah, and the
confirmation of it by God. So that propter (...) or maledictionem, by sin it
was 27. 29.
first brought in. And the like change happened afterward to Esau: because he
had behaved himself lewdly toward his father, and unreverently toward God, in
neglecting and contemning his birthright, the blessing was translated from him
to Jacob, to whom Esau was made a servant.

Servitude is of three kinds or sorts. First by nature. Secondly by war.
Thirdly by Covenant.

1. The first way is depressione (...), by a defect in nature, want of gifts of
the mind. And men of this condition are ever fit to be employed rather in the
execution of other men's commands, then to command others of themselves, and are
more meet to be ruled, then to rule. And this was Solomon's opinion of natures
order, (...) prove. 11. 29.
erit servus sapientis, the fool shall be servant to the wise. And indeed he
cannot be better sped then so to be, We see this in the Gibeonites, which
became servile, and found safety and ease by it, and that service was good for
them: there was in them depressio intellectus a defect in understanding and
knowledge of God, and his service, and therefore they should be the fitter to
serve in mean works, and to be Genesis 49. 14.
governed by the Levites: when Jacob prophesied of Jssachar that he should
couch down and submit himself to the burden, and find ease by it, he shows,
that in that son, and in that Tribe there would be depressio intellectus, above
als the rest, and consequently that he was fit to be a servant And the Heathen
man considering this point Arist.
says, that God shows who are fit to serve, by defect of understanding in
some, or making the body deformed or crooked, fit for burdens, and not giving
(...) proportion, that it should be fit dominari to bear rule. And this is the
first way, whereby servitude came in, defect of natural parts.

2. The second way was by force or war. Thus the Posterity of Cham were hunters
of men: and which is strange, though the curse of God was upon him and Genesis 37.
36.
his posterity, that they should be servants, yet they were the first that
began to hunt men, and to make servants of others (thereby drawing that curse
upon themselves afterward) and thus came in servitus belli, service of
necessity; necessity being that which dat legem legi, imposes a law upon the
law: as in the case of Joseph, 10. 8.
who being sold to the Madianites by his brethren, and by them to Potiphar, was
37. 36.
by constraint become a servant. And so we see in the story of (...) and his
crew Lot was taken prisoner, and became a captive or servant for the time, till
Abraham rescued him. This is the second way. 14. 14.


3. The last way is servitus Pacti, servitude by Covenant; and this came upon
the necessity which the other brought with it. For because men were desirous to
be freed from the cruelty of the Sovereignty of tyrants, they willingly gave
themselves to such as would use them well, and were able to defend them from
the tyranny of others. And the Jews say, that the great number of servants that
Abraham had, came to him by this means: for they seeing the equity of his
government, and comparing it with the harsh dealing of those Lords they were
subject to, came willingly to him, and became of his family.

And this proved to be a great benefit to them: for when he himself had
received the seal of the covenant, the Sacrament of Circumcision, the very same
day he made all his servants partakers of it. So that though their bodies were
in subjection, their sculs were made free, and were set at liberty by it; and
therefore it was a good exchange for them. And in this respect it was, that it
was prohibited the Jews, to take any bond-servants of the Isiaelites, but out
of the heathen, that thereby more might be brought into Gods covenant.
Afterward this kind of service was established upon other respects, which
drew Godly men to it, and made it, lawful: for though that other servitude by
war, whereby one is forced to be a servant, may be unjust, so that such
servants, if they can escape, they may with a safe conscience, especially when
they are taken in an unjust war, and have not bound themselves by a free
promise, as those that are slaves to the Turks; yet no doubt but a man may by
his voluntary Covenant make himself a servant, and this Covenant binds him, as
Jacob was by covenant to serve Laban seven years for his wife, and seven years
for sheep and cattle. Thus in (...) of poverty a man may make himself a
servant, that he may have a subsistence, and in case of ignorance he may serve
to learn an art or trade (it being all one as was said before to have an art,
and to have a portion) and thus did God allow servants among the Jews, even
Deuteronomy. 15. 12.
of their brethren.

And thus came service into the world, first by the justice of God; as a
punishment of sin, though afterward this (...) is by Gods goodness become a
benefit, and useful for mankind, and therefore God has taken order for duties
to be performed both by Masters and Servants. In general the Apostle speaking
of servants, requires every man to abide in that vocation wherein he is called;
and at the 21. Verse he comes to speak of servants, and gives this rule, art
thou called 1 Cor. 7. 20.
being a servant? care not for it, but if thou may be made free, use it
rather; yet let it not trouble thee, be willing to hear the yoke of this
service. A servant if he be a Christian is the Lords freeman. 1. Cor. 7. 22.
And Jew and Gentile, bond and free are all one in Christ. Gal 3. 28. They that
do service to their masters in the Lord, therein serve the Lord who has placed
them in that calling, yea though the masters were not believing, yet they must
think them worthy of all honor and obedience. Yet in 2 Timothy 6. 1.
the Epistle to Philemon, Saint Paul having sent Onesimus (whom he had
converted) back to his master Philemon, whose servant he was, and from whom he
had run away, he exhorts his master to receive him now, not as a servant, (...)
above philem. 16.
a servant, as a brother beloved etc. Showing, the unfitnes and inequality of
that servitude (introduced at first by war) among believers; and hence it was,
that as the Gospel prevailed in any kingdom, because Christians were all
brethren, and among the Jews none were forced to be bondmen to their brethren;
therefore this state of bondmen began to wear out and vanish among Christians,
though the other two services, by nature, and covenant, still remained.

Now for the particular duties of master and servant, and first of the Master.

1. The first is, that he have artem (...) Skill in governing, art to enjoyne
Ephesians. 6. 6.
his servants what they should do. This Skill, the fathers have placed and
limited to these four heads. His commandments must be. 1.. Lawful. 2. Possible.
3. Profitable. 4. Proportionable to their ability.

1. They must be lawful, according to the will of God, as the Apostle speaks.
No obedience must be commanded preposterous: for as there is Pater in Coelis,
as well as in terris, a Heavenly, and an Earthly father, so there (...), and
(...) Masters according to the flesh, and according to the spirit, as Saint
Paul distinguishes, a master in Heaven as well as masters on earth, a spiritual
as a temporal master: and the last ought not to command any thing derogatory to
the first; for if he depart out of his line, his series, therein he is not to
be obeyed, we have an example of this in Joseph, who refused to perform the
command of his Mistress Genesis 39. (...).
when she tempted him to lie with her; How can I do this and sin against God?
not against (...), but against God. And therefore David's conditions with his
servants were, that they that were to be his servants must lead a godly life,
and walk in a perfect way. This is to be observed, for we see, that in the
worship of God, the fourth Commandment requires obedience from the master as
well as the servant; psalm. 101. 9
Thou and thy servant, it makes them pares in this, the servant has an
interest as well as the master, and the master no privilege or exemption in
Gods worship above the servant. Though they be subordinate, and under one
another in the Civil society, yet in respect of that (...) that Heavenly
Commonwealth, they are both equal.

2. Their Commandments must not only be lawful, but possible too. A thing may
be lawful, yet not possible for a servant to effect. The command of Abraham to
his servant to get a wife for his son, was lawful, but the servant wisely
objected to his master, how if she will not come? and therefore Abraham in that
case acquits Genesis 24. 5.
him in these words. If the woman will not be willing to follow thee, then thou
shall be clear of this oath.

3, Their commands ought to be profitable or useful, not vain and impertinent.
It is 2 Samuel 23. 15.
said, that David being in war against the Philistims, longed for water in
Bethlehem, 16.
and it could not be obtained, but by breaking through the host of his enemies.
Now 17.
there were three of his host so ready upon this bare intimation of his desire
(which they took for a kind of command) that they ventured through the enemies
camp, and brought him water; but he considering what an unprofitable thing he
had commanded, and how dangerous also; because there was no profit in it, and
yet it was gotten with the price of blood, would not drink it, but powered it
out before the Lord, acknowledging thereby, that it had been better he had
(...) disobeyed.

4. They must be proportionable; that nothing be commanded above his servants
strength, above that which they are able to do; nor any thing that is
prejudicial to their health, or at unseasonable times. It was a great fault in
Pharaoh and his Exodus 5. 7.
Taskmasters, to enjoyne the Israelites their tale of bricks, (which was hard
enough of it self, for they were oppressed with that) but a greater it was, to
force them to perform that, and yet they must find straw themselves, which
was wont to be brought to them.

The (...) duty answerable to this, consists of two parts. 1. fide, in faith or
fidelity. 2. Prudentia, discretion. Both these virtues are joined together by
our Savior, in that question, who is a faithful and wise servant, whom his
master may make Mat. 24. 45.
vuler over his household etc.

1. The command of the master is to be performed faithfully, the servant must
frame himself thereto. The Heathen man could say, that he which is a servant is
totus alterius, wholly his whom he serves. Whatsoever he is able to do, he
must do it for his masters good. The fathers upon the words of our Savior [No
man can serve to masters] give this for one reason of that speech, Quia servi
officium Mat. 6. 24.
est infinitum, Because the servants duty is infinite. It is as much as he can
do to serve one master, as he should; and he is totus heri, wholly that masters
whom he serves, also his time, all his strength is his masters, and he cannot
divide it to another. He shall work all day in the field, and at night his
service is not ended: the master says not to the servant, gird thy self, and
dress thine own supper, but gird thy self and make ready my supper, and serve
me: according to the example of Abraham's Luc. 17. 7. 8.
servant, who though he had traveled far, and had meat set before him, yet he
would not eat till he had done his masters business. Opposite to this
faithfulness Genesis 24. 33.
in a servant are two ill qualities. 1. Purloyning. 2, Lying. For which
servants hear ill in the Comedian.

1. Saint Bernard says, De Domini substantia ne (...) a (...), sed transeant
per te. ne aliquid haereat in digitis. Let not thy masters goods pass from,
but by thee, left something stick to thy fingers. This purloyning is utterly
condemned by the Apostle. Tit. 2. 10.
And so is wasting of that which is committed to a servants charge, and the
ordinary means of it is set down by our Savior, eating, drinking, and keeping
ill Luc. 16. 1.
company. Mat. 24. 49.


2. The other opposite is lying, We see that the false suggestion of Ziba was
very prejudic al to his Master Mephibosheth. and though the first lie of
Gehazi, which 2 Samuel 16. 3.
he made to Naaman got him somewhat, yet the last to his Master Elisha, brought
a 2 King 5. 22.
leprosy upon him and his (...) ever. The Prophet tells us, that God will
destroy all 25.
them that speak leazing. And therefore he would keep no servant in his house
that should Psalm 5. 6.
tell lies. 101. 10.


There are three other opposites, from which the Apostles S. Paul and S. Peter
would have servants free. 1. Slothfulness, 2. unwillingnesse, 3. eye-service.

1. And the first of these is a part of the first [unfaithfulnesse;] (...) he
that is idle, not faithful in using all his strength, and mispending his time
is a kind of robbery. And therefore it is, that S. Paul counsels men, not to
be slothful in business. The Heathen man would not have a servant to be glis,
a (...); but acurate agere, to do their Romans 12. 11.
work accuratcly, as the word in Hebrew imports: they must follow Jacobs
example Genesis 31 40.
in his service. The sleep departed from his eyes, he could not sleep for the
Prove. 31. 18.
care he had to his Masters business; as the careful woman, that lets not her
candle Matthew 25. (...).
go out, that is, she sits up late upon action to do her Master service. And
therefore we know, that the Master called that servant evil and flothfull, that
used not his talent well. To (...) up this, take the Wise man's judgment upon
both diligent and slothful: The hand of the diligent shall bear rule; but the
slothful shall prove. 12. 24.
be under tribute.

2. The second thing that a servant should be free from is, an unwillingnesse
to do his duty. For there are some that serve indeed, but how? they serve with
an ill will, and so do their work by halves. And in so doing they do very
unwisely; for seeing that serve they must, (it bing not every man's (...) to be
a Master) they were better to do it cheerfully, then to be forced to it, and so
lose their just reward and commendation.

Therefore it ought to be (...), with a cheerful will, and (...), from the
heart, as the Apostle counsels, as if they served the Lord, not being
responsores, (...) Col. 3. 23.
answerers again, or replying, or giving word for word; but be like the
Centurions Matthew. 8. 9.
servant, that when his Master said to him, do this, and he did it.

3. The last is (...), eye-service, or a deceitful diligence, which must be far
from servants. Not to do their work, but while their master stands over them,
and no longer: as soon as their Masters back is turned, then to give over. This
the Apostle calls eye-service, and condemns it, exhorting servants to obey with
singleness of heart, (...) 1 Timothy 6. 1.
fearing God: and he gives diverse reasons for it, as that they shall by this
means adorn the Ephesians. 6. 8.
Gospel; and that they shall receive from the Lord according to what they do,
whether they Col. 3. 24.
be bond or free, and lastly, that besides their reward by (...) with their
Master, they shall by their hearty service receive the reward of an inheritance
in heaven. So much of their sidelity. Now to their discretion.

2. The Philosopher makes a distinction of two sorts of servants: one that can
do nothing but what his Master dictates him, can go no further then he is
directed; and the other that has forecast in himself, to know what is to be
done, and can prevent his Masters commandments. The first are but as lippi
oculi, blear eyes, and but that they must see by them, their Masters had as
good be without such as have them. The other are such as the Psalmist speaks
of, their eyes are upon their Masters hands, psalm 123. 3.
they can perceive to what their Masters will enclineth to; they know their
Masters Luke 12. 47.
will, and what he is best pleased with, and what his humor is most inclined
to.

And though he have this wit, yet if either with him that had the Talent, and
knew his Masters humor he neglects to do his business, or with the wicked
Steward, Matthew. 25. 24.
he employ his wit to his own advantage, and not to his Masters benefit, in
either of Luke 12 47.
these cases he breaks the rule of obedience. They follow not the examples of
prudent servants, such as were Jacob to Laban, and Joseph to (...); they do not
prudenter, Genesis 31. 38.
with discretion. It is said of Joseph, that all he did prospered under his
hands. 39. 2.
The Hebrew word is significant (...) prudenter egit, or (...) intelligentia,
he did all with prudence and wisdom, and so all prospered; for of wisdom comes
prospering: and therefore the same word signifies both.

2. The 2d rule or duty of the Master is, not to govern aspere, (...), or
rigerously: but Col. 4. 1.
(...), according to justice and equity. It was Gods command under the law
Levit. 25. 43.
to Masters, Thou shall not rule over thy servants with rigor; and the Apostle
advises to deal justly and equally with them: and his reason is, because they
are conservi, Col. 4. 1.
fellow servants of God with their Master. The Master has a Lord too: and Gods
reason in the law was, because Masters themselves had been servants in Egypt,
Deuteronomy. 5 15.
and thereby knew what it was to be under an hard service. Therefore, quod tibi
non vis fieri, alteri ne feceris; do as you would be done by: or as you would
have other men do to your children, when they happen to become servants. It
reflects upon the general before mentioned, Diliges proximum sicut te ipsum,
thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.

Yet a Master is not so restrained hereby, as that he may not use his power of
correction upon servants that shall offend: for the Wise man says, there is a
servant that will not be corrected by words, for, though he understand, he will
not answer: for such a one stripes are needful. For there are three things
needful for a servant, Cibus, opus, disciplina, meat, work, and correction when
he is negligent; and this last is as necessary as the other. For as S. Bernard
says, Impunitas est incuriae soboles, insolentiae matter, Lib. 3. de considerat.
(...) nutrix; want of punishment breeds negligence, is the mother of
insolence, and the nurse of offense. And the Wise man says, that he that
brings up his servant delicately (that is without (...)) shall have him
become his son at Length, yea, and his prove. 29. 21.
Master too. And therefore tells us, that stripes are for the back of fools:
they that 19. 29.
will not learn and do their Masters will, are to be corrected; and qui blando
verbo (...), non corrigitur, acrius necesse est ut arguatur, says Isidore; he
that amends not by fair means, must of necessity be forced in a sharper way.

Now in this point of discipline three respects are to be had: one to amend
those which are disobedient; the second to preserve the dignity of the Master,
lest the conniving at offenses cause or breed contempt in the servant toward
him; and the last is for examples sake, that others by fear of punishment may
be terrified from the like disobedience. And no Wise Master (says Seneca)
punit quia peccatum est, sed ne peccetur, punishes only because a servant
has offended, but (...) he offend again. He therefore that thinks he loves his
servant when he corrects him not for his faults, is much deceived. For S.
Augustines rule is, (...) putes te (...) servum, quando non caedis, De (...). 7.
non est ista charitas: be not of opinion, that thou love thy servant, when
thou sparest him. for it is not love. But take this caution by the way, which
we mentioned before. Be not too rigid or severe in thy Discipline, but
according to S. Gregory Regat disciplinae virga mansuetudinem, and (...)
rigorem, sic (...) commendetur ex altero, ut nec sit rigor rigidus, nec
mansuetudo dissoluta: let the rod of discipline govern thy mildness, and thy
mildness moderate thy rigor, so one shall be commended by the other, that
neither thy severity be rigid, nor thy mildness too dissolute. Rather offend
in the best part, and deal as gently as thou may; for (...) castigatus
exhibet reverentiam castiganti, asperitate nimiae increpationis offensus, nec
increpationem recipit, nec salutem, Lib. 5. Mor.
as Prosper lib. 2. de vi contemplat. he that is gently corrected will
reverence the correctour, but if a man be exasperated with two much severity,
he will neither receive more correction, nor be (...) by it.

3. The third duty of (...) is, to provide food and apparel, things necessary
and prove. 31. (...).
convenient for his servants, according to the Wise man's direction, and to
prefer them 27. 27.
according to their deserts. And if one be a conductive or hired servant, he is
to pay Matthew. 24. 47.
him his wages duly and truly, according to the law of God. Besides, if he
have been Levit. 19. 13.
a faithful servant, he ought not at the expiration of his time, to send him
away empty, but with a reward answerable to his service. Nay the Wise man goes
further, he Deuteronomy. 15. 13.
ought (...) much to consider of him, as (...) cum filiis, give him part of the
inheritance with his children at his (...), in some cases. prove. 17. 2.


The duty answerable to this is, that the servant must return a thankful
acknowledgement to his Master, for his education, instruction, and whatsoever
good he has done unto him, and that after he shall be (...), for then (...)
this duty cleaves to him, and he cannot think himself free from (...), though
from service.

Some servants being made free forget all, for as he said, a servant made free
is a burdensome thing: and Solomon makes this one of those things which
disquiet the earth. A servant when he reigns, and a fool when he is (...)
with meat, etc. Therefore pro. 30. 22, 23.
a servant must be thankful, and not do as (...) did (which (...) proverbially
foretold) who thrust out his masters son (...). He that delicately brings up
his servant from his youth, shall have him become his son at length. This
speech 19. 21.
of his proved true, for (...) his servant, became as his son, when he deposed
his son (...), and got the (...) of the son, viz. the kingdom of Israel to
himself. And thus much for the duties of Masters and servants.

CHAP. VI.
Of Tutors or Schoolmasters, and their Scholars or Pupils. The original of
schools and Universities. Mutual duties of Teacher and Scholar, as the choice
of such as are fit and capeable. The particular qualifications of a Scholar:
Solertia, Docilitas, Diligentia. 2. About instruction. Instruction helps the
natural and infused light, so does prayer and reading the word, etc. The
Scholars duties answerable to these. The particular duties of a Teacher. The
duties of those that are to be taught. The resultant duties of both.

SO much for the duties of those within the family: now for those extra
familiam, out of the family: whereof some concern the spiritual, some the civil
ordering and regulating of men. The first whereof we (...) (...). a divine
ordinance, because it immediately concerns the soul; the other (...), a humane
ordinance, as looking properly at the things of this life.

For the former, there are two callings especially appointed, and in them their
duties to be handled. 1. The Tutor or Schoolmaster. 2. The Pastor or Minister.
And they which are to answer reciprocal duties to these, are, 1. The Scholar.
2. The people in general.

The first of these is preparatory to the other: for schools and universities
are the seminaries both of the Church and Commonwealth; and in that regard are
compared to the optic nerve, which conveys spirits, and therewith sight to
both the eyes, for they give sight, both to the right eye of the Church, and to
the left eye of the Commonwealth. And therefore before we speak of the duties
of those that govern in either of those societies, we must first speak of those
that govern and teach in schools and universities, and of the honor due to
them.

1. That the first sort come within this Commandment appears out of that
Chapter 2 Kings 2. 3.
of the 2. of Kings, where the sons of the Prophets call (...), Master: and
that a Master should be a Father, it is in the same Chapter confirmed: for
Elisha called 12.
Elijah, My father, my father, etc. The very like to which we find among the
Heathen; who had their (...) and (...), the Physicians, and the sons of the
Physicians; their (...) and (...), their Philosophers, and their sons of the
Philosophers, answerable to the Prophets, and the sons of the Prophets. And as
Elisha a Prophet calls Elias, father; so (...) a Prince, brought up under
Elisha, calls Elisha, father, because 2 King. 13. 14
of the benefit which comes by them to the Commonwealth, as well as to the
Church, in which regard they are fathers to both: and for that cause they have
(...) from both.

And therefore to justify College livings, and their other endowments, we
find, the first fruits which belonged ordinarily to the Levites, bestowd upon
Elisha and the 2 Kings 4. 42.
Prophets, because they were beneficial to the Church, which was their
principal and first end: and likewise that great presents and gifts were
bestowed upon them by the civil Ruler, because of the benefit to the
Commonwealth in the second place, as by Hazael, sent by Benhadad king of Syria
to the same Elisha.

And the principal scope of God in this was, 1. That the Law (as the Prophet 2
Kings 8. 9.
speaks) might be sealed among the disciples, that so it might be kept among
them sacred and inviolate: though some among them, sometimes by negligence of
Rulers, will Esaias 8. 16.
set counterfeit seals upon it, for as S. Peter speaks, (...), unlearned men
sometimes pervert the law: and among the learned (...), unstable men, that is,
floating shallow headed Scholars, who are not grounded and settled, though
learned, (...) do pervert the law and break the seal: against both these, viz.
men unleardned, and floating unstable 2 pet 3. 16.
men, God has bound, and sealed it up among grounded Scholars, that it might
not be perverted.

2. And secondly, that men hereby might be fitted for public employment in the
Church and Commonwealth. The Scripture expresses it by carving and polishing
(...) Hos. 6. 5.
per Prophetas, I have carved them, (which is improperly translated, I have
hewn them) by the Prophets, as a piece of wood, or stone is carved and
polished by the hand of the Artificer. For there is naturally in men caecitas
cordis; as the Apostle Ephesians. 4. 18.
speaks, the taking away whereof is a special part of this function: the manner
we Number. 24. 15, 16.
may best see by Balaams speech; who, says he, was a man born clausis oculis,
blind in understanding (as all men are) brutish in knowledge (as the Proph.
(...) has it) but Jer. 10. 14.
afterward audiendo verbum, by hearing the word, he came to knowledge, and so
ad visionem, to have his eyes a little opened, and then he was (...) oculatior,
somewhat better sighted. And hereupon it was, that they which were afterward
called Prophets, were at first called Seers, (...) speculantes, seers in a
glass; from which 1 Samuel 9. 9.
word Tsophim, it is very probable the Greek word (...), wise men came, because
such could see afar off; and plainly it is said of some when they prophesied,
mutabantur in alium virum, they were changed into other men, as it is said of
Saul, when the spirit 10. 16.
of God came upon him, and he prophesied. It makes a man wiser then when he was
born, and fit for church or Commonwealth.

For the institution of this, we find about the time when the law was given,
that God appointed not only Moses, but the seventy Elders to be placed about
the Tabernacle, to be taught by Moses (for that is meant by taking of the
spirit of Moses, and Numb. 11. 24.
putting it upon them) and then they prophesied. So that there was a kind of
University about the Tabernacle; for when one teaches another, the Jews call
it a taking of the spirit, and putting it on him. And by the word [Prophesie]
was not meant at first, prediction, or foretelling things to come only; for
neither the Greek (...), nor the Hebrew (...) do (...) signify more then to
teach, and instruct, or declare to others. As it is in the Prophet, I create
the fruit of the lips, peace, that (...), Esaias 57. 19.
by having learning, to bring peace. For, as he says, God gave him the tongue
of the learned, that he might know how to speak a word in season to the weary,
Esaias 50. 4. And as the Wise man, The mouth of the just shall prophecy, that
is, shall bring forth prove. 10. 31.
wisdom: for that other gift which was to foretell things to come, was bestowed
upon men afterward, to oppose the sorcerers, soothsayers, and Augurs, etc.
among the Heathen, and was extraordinary.

And it is plain by that of the Apostle, that prophecy at the first was taken
for teaching. 1 Cor. 14. 3.
He that prophesyeth, speaks unto men, to edification, exhortation, and
comfort: and if by prophesying were meant only foretelling or prediction, then
we were in an ill case now, (having none that can foretell things to come)
seeing the Wise man says, Dempta prophetia perit populus, where there is no
prophecy the people perish. prove. 29. 18.
And this it was, which the Prophets did by their ordinary function, viz. teach
and instruct, but when it pleased God to show them things to come, it was
extraordinary.

When the Elders were thus placed about the Tabernacle, the Levites, and
certain Numb. 6.
called Nazarites were added to them: and of these two sorts consisted their
Colleges, Amos 2. 11.
when they came into the land of promise: for before they were about the
Tabernacle, and therefore it is said of Josbua, who was so good a student, that
no Prophet or Levite could compare with him, and therefore having profited so
well Moses at his death chose him for his Successor by Gods appointment, That
he departed Exodus 33. 11
not out of the Tabernacle.

Being come into the land of promise, they sound a City well situated which was
Kirjath-Sepher, a city of books, which Joshua, that it might not be thought
they came Josh. 14. 15.
to their knowledge by the books of the Heathen, but by divine assistance, and
studying Judge. 1. 11.
the law of God, called Debir, which is (...). When this city was not
sufficient, they had three other places, Mizpeh, Bethel, and Gilgal. As also
Gibeah Elohim, (i. c.) mons Dei, 1 Samuel 10. where two things may be observed.
1. That the land was called the land of Tsuph, from (...) speculatores, or
Seers, of which we spoke before, which the Thargum expousds to be Ramah
Prophetarum. And 2. that when Saul prophesied, being not brought up in the
schools of the Prophets, 1 (...). 10. 11.
they began to wonder at it, so that it became a Proverb, that Saul was become
a Prophet upon the sudden: knowing that the ordinary way to become a Prophet,
was to come and study there, for some time, unless God would raise up some,
and make them Prophets extraordinarily.

When Samuel afterward was dismissed from governing, he returned to his
calling which himself best liked, and at Ramah he built a College, whereof he
was Master himself. And thus stood the state of this profession till near the
end of the kings, though sometimes increasing, sometimes decreasing. For in
Josiahs time, not long 2 Chr. 34. 22.
before the Captivity, we read that Huldah the Prophetess dwelt in the
College or School at Jerusalem.

After the people were led into captivity, they had a Nehar-Deang near the
river Euphrates, in which Daniel was educated with other, (...) whence (the
Jews report) that Selon and the wisemen of Greece derived their knowledge. And
when they returned (that were left) out of captivity, they had diverse schools
of exposition; such as were not not to be found, neither in Greece, nor at
Rome, nor Joh. 15. 8.
in any other place of the world. If we come down to Christ's time, our (...)
was pleased to be called Rabbi, or Master (...) and those about him (...)
Scholars or disciples, and says, that they are his brothers and sisters, and
that his father had great glory that his disciples bare much (...), and that be
which gave a cup of cold water to them in the name of a scholar or disciple
should not lose his reward. Math. 10. 42.


After Christ's ascension it appears by the Apostle, that they had use of books
and 2 Timothy 4. 13.
parchment, and that they had (...) forms or (...) of divine learning, like 1 Timothy 1. 13.
to common places, that they had need of teaching (...) and reading (...) 4.
13. 15
and meditation (...) meditate on these things, and of writing, whence came the
(...) Scribes, and of searching and enquiring. (...) search the Scriptures;
Math. 23. 34.
and in this there must be (...) attendance, and (...) abiding in it, and (...)
a being, John 5. 39.
1 Timothy 4. 13.
or whole intending of it, so that the learner must be as the Apostle speaks
15. 16.
of himself. In labors, in watchings, in fastings, by pureness, by knowledge,
by long 2 Cor. 6. 6. 7.
suffering, by kindness, by the holy Ghost, by love unfeigned. That so his (...)
his profitting may appear unto all men. And though the Apostle confesses of
himself 1 Timothy 4. 15.
that he was rude in speech, yet not in knowledge, which Festus attributed to
him 2 Cor. 11. 6.
Act. 26. 24.
with such excess, as if it had set him besides himself. And our Savior as he
took Col. 4. 14.
John and Mark from mean callings, being men illiterate, so he made his family
as it were a School or College, where they were taught some years before they
were made Evangelists; and though he gave them the spirit after, which had bin
sufficient without any other instruction, yet Christ to show the (...) of
teaching and learning, would have them learn of him in his School for some
years, and therefore he took some learned men, as Luke, who was a Physician,
and Saint Mark who was governor afterward in a great College in Alexandria.
And when he took order for the conversion of the Gentiles, he employed Barnabas
Act. 13. 12.
and Paul chiesly, who were both learned men; Barnabas was a chief teacher' at
22. 3.
Antioch, and Saint Paul brought up at the feet of Gamaliel. There were five 2 Timothy 5. 15.
1 Timothy 4. 14.
(...) or free gifts, and helps. 1. natural abilities. 2. Domestical education
3. Act. 13. 3.
Education in Schools. 4. Exercise of prophecy. 5. Imposition of hands: by
which men were fitted for the sacred function, besides the extraordintry gifts.

Until the death of Saint Stephen the Colleges or Schools remained at
Jerusalem, but afterward they were translated to Antioch, wherein were diverse
learned men, as Paul and Barnabas. But when the persecution came upon all Jury,
they removed to Alexandria in Egypt, and there Saint Mark began, Paulinus and
(...) succeeded and others, who were famous men even among the heathen. Since
which time was the law sealed among the disciples and children of the prophets
in Schools, Monasteries, and Universities. So much for the historical part.
Now we come to the duties of Teachers and learners.

And first for their qualification. They must be (...) squared and fitted.
Every piece of wood is not fit for this employment. And they must be dotati
too, men that have gifts (...) for teaching and instructing youth.

And the first thing required in a teacher, which must be laid as the ground
work for all his other duties, is to choose fit persons for his Scholars, by
judgeing of their disposition, whether they be meet for public employments in
Church or state; we see, when there were three offered themselves to follow our
Savior, he perceiving their indoles and disposition and that some of them were
not fit to endure persecution, or to leave the world, chose only one of them,
and rejected the other two. And though he had many Disciples, yet knowing all
of them not to Luc. 16. 13.
be fit for the governing and instructing of his Church, he therefore chose out
of them first 12. whom he called Apostles, and out of the rest afterward he
chose seventy two whom he sent forth, but with less power then the Apostles,
(for the twelve and the seventy two were distinct orders) and in choosing them
Christ showed he never intended to have equality in his Church, but that there
should be different degrees, according to the diversity of gifts and abilities,
and that those of the best gifts should be (...): and hence the Church
afterward had diverse offices in the Church, as so many several steps, as the
Lectores, Acoluthi etc. By which their gifts and abilities being tried they
might ascend, and be chosen to higher employments. As under the law among the
Levites, who were under the Priests, there were several orders and ranks, as
the Netophathites, Korathites, Meiarites etc. Now in the choice which our
Savior made helooked partly at the Indoles and natural aptitude of his
Scholars, for the employments which he intended for them: as we see in Saint
Peter, whom he made chief among the Apostles, there were in him three signs by
which the brethren would have wits to be chosen; as first, Constancy and
unweariednes in taking pains, whereupon Christ when he beheld Joh. 1. 42.
him, said, he should be called (...) a stone; secondly, love to his master, as
appears both by his counsel he gave him, to save himself, which argued his
affection, and his offering himself to die for him; and lastly, his indoles
mansueta, his gentle Math. 26. 35.
tractable nature, being willing to hear of his faults, though it were by his
inferior, as when he was reproved by Paul. So in the choice of the sons of
Zebedee; Gal. 2. 11.
he considered their fervent and hot disposition, whereupon they were named
sons of Thunder; upon which Chrysostom observed, that those whom Christ chose
Luc. 9. 34.
were like precious stones which that skilful lapidary knew how to discern,
Marc. 3. 17.
and though they were then unpolisht, yet by his instruction and discipline he
polisht them afterward. So that we see disciples fit for those callings, are
not to be promiscuously taken, but a choice must be made with judgment,
especially he that must be fit for the sacred calling, must be unus inter
mill, one of a Job. 33. 23.
thousand.

As there must be a choice in the teacher, so the duty lies upon him that
offers himself to be taught, if he know himself naturally unfit, he ought not
to offer himself for those high callings, nor aspire to them, when he is
naturally fitted only for inferior employments. The Prophet says, that
though in his time many that were unfit would needs be Prophets, yet in the
times of the Gospel he foretells, they should acknowledge their infirmities,
and say, I am no prophet, but an husbandman, and therein have (...) brought up
from a youth, intimating, that such as were fitted and brought up for other
callings, should not seek to be prophets etc. The wiseman asks the question,
why fools should have a price in their hands to get wisdom, prove. 17. 16.
seeing they have no heart to it. It is but time and money spent in vain. And in
another place he compares a parable in a fools mouth, to a man with lame
legs, set prove. 26. 7.
him on his feet and he falls down. And as no doctrine will enter into him,
so nei her will any discipline work upon him; for as he shows further, if he
be silver, the fining, if gold, the furnace will do him good, if there be any
metal in him, he is like to prove well: but if he be a fool or unfit, bray him
in a (...), 27. 21. 22.
and it will be to no purpose. And the prophet complains of those that he had
to do with; they were (...) or iron, refuse metal, insomuch as he had burnt
his Jer. 6. 28. 29.
bellows, and wearied his arms to no purpose. Therefore Plato insists upon
this, that those that are to be trained up in learning, must have gold in them
or silver at least, they must not be plumbeia ingenia, leaden heavy wits. And
Esaias asks the question, Quem docebit (...), whom shall he teach knowledge? It
is not those Esa. 28. 10. 13
that must be continually sucking, that must have precept upon precept, line
upon line; tell it now, and tell'it again to morrow; but such as are weaned,
and can take meal after meal, and are apt to take instruction, which is
strong meat. Heb. 5. 14.


As the teacher then must examine the disposition of the scholars, so the
scholars must interrogare seipsos ask themselves, whether they be able to
uudertake this; and if not, to take another course of life. It was the opinion
of the fathers of the primitive Church, that in making this choice of men in
their schools, that were annexed to their principal Churches, that a man ought
rather to be too strict, then too loose; and their reason was. It were (...)
that a wiseman should be in a calling without the Church, then a fool within
it: better to spare the one then to take the other.

The neglect of this, by taking into the Church all comers, was the cause,
that as the Prophet complained, the, Sun was gone down upon their Prophets,
that they Math. 3. 6.
were stich ignorant sots, Bardi, such stupid, blind guids, which caused the
people to err, and brought such darkness into the Church, that as the Prophets
(...) and Jer. 23. 13.
Michab complained in their time before the captivity and destruction of the
city, The people perished because prophecy failed.

As the first and fundamental duty must be performed by making a fit choice, so
the particular virtues and qualifications which teachers must look to in their
choice are three, Solertia, Docilitas, diligentia.

The wiseman speaking of the Ant, besides her industry says, that she has a
prove. 1. 6. 7. 8.
natural quality, that without guide, overseer, or governor, she provideth her
meat in summer, and in hearvest for winter, and this is the first endowment,
Solertia naturalis, a natural (...), or ability of nature, which ought to be in
them, that are intended to be leaders of others. And this ability is by the
active part of the understanding, the intellectus agens, whereby they are apt
to dilate and enlarge what they hear, and to work upon what they are taught,
and thereby become (...) able to learn of themselves, by improving those
principles they have received from others. This appeared in Saint Augustine,
Erasmus, and others, who in many things were (...) and without help of teachers
in those things became excellent.

2. Then they are to have possibilem intellectum, ability to conceive what is
taught, which is that we call (...), and is termed in holy writ cor latum, a
large heart, such a one as God gave to king Solomon, whereby the active part of
the understanding by that Solertia we spoke of, may have matter to work upon,
1 Kin. 4. 29.
and to deduce one thing from another, which was termed forecast in the duty of
servants.

3. To these the wiseman adds a third; they must instanter operari, by
working diligently and instantly. Saint Paul by laboring more abundantly then
the other (...). 11. 6.
Apostles, became most fruitful to the church. And where it pleases God to
bestow 1 Cor. 15. 10.
this solertiam naturalem, n. tural understanding, and possibilitatem
intellectus a large heart to conceive, and lastly (...) operari, diligent
working, to sow in the morning, at noon, and in the evening, (as the preacher
speaks) and never to let the hand rest, there is hope of such persons, that
they may prove profitable instruments in the Church or Commonwealth; and
therefore such persons, and so qualified are principally to be chosen.

Thus it must be presupposed, that the choice is rightly made, else difficultas
(...) argeet errorem (...) anitio, the hardness in proceeding between Master and
Scholar will argue, that there was a fault in choosing at the first, and then
no instruction will amend it, as in physic, if there be a fault in the first
concoction, the second cannot help it.

2. Now the choice being rightly made, in the second place we come to the
instruction it self: of which we are to conceive, that as we see in other
things, diverse things are effected by an exterior agent, as things
artificial, and some things must have interius principium a foundation within,
as things natural have their principle within them, and in some things there
must be both, as in Physic. For though in a body ill affected, sometimes the
strength of nature alone of it self is able to concoct the humor, and make
digestion, and so many times it falls out, that some become extraordinarily
learned without pains taking, as (...), yet in some bodies to help concoction,
Physic is to be applied, something must be given from without, to comfort and
help nature. So we must conceive in teaching, every one has not those enatural
parts which are sufficient, nor is every man's supernaturally and
extraordinarily inspired and qualified by God, but must have teaching and
instruction by the ministry of man from without, every man must not look to be
(...) taught immediately of God, but must in ordinary course have a teacher
which does not add any thing to the soul, but minister to it, and help it; as
Physic does not add to nature, but ministers to it, to comfort and strengthen
it, though indeed they that are instructed by men, may be said to be taught of
God, as they are said to be healed of any infirmity by him, which are cured by
Physic.

And in this we say, that the natural light works, which is lume n natural,
and that lumen ohu. 1. 9.
infusum is supplied and helped by the teacher, of whom we are to conceive,
that he is not the giver of infused light, but the minister, that supplies
matter, as oil whereby the light burns, which he does partly by making things
plain, by similitudes and examples, and sometimes by Antithesis. And not only
so, but being able to see how every conclusion depends upon the premises, and
how the medium ought to be disposed with the subject and praedicate in every
proposition, is able in the same course whereby he learnt, to show others how
to bring things into method and order. In which two things. 1. by making dark
things known and discerned. Secondly, by a perspicuous disposing and ordering
of things confused teaching chiefly consists, and by these the light is helped,
whether it be naturally or supernaturally given.

This being premised, we will come to mutual duties or qualities of teacher and
hearer.

1. The first is, they must be persuaded, as Saint James says, That every good
gift is from above, and comes down from the father of lights, and therefore
that this Jam. 1. 17.
light of knowledge cannot be had but desuper from above, as John Baptist told
his scholars. A man can receive nothing, except it be given him from heaven.
Neither John 3. 27.
knowledge nor any good thing else can be had but from God, and therefore we
must be thus persuaded, That all the light we can have, is from Gods light, as
pfal. 36. 9
the Psalmist has it, in thy light we shall see light; we have no light of our
own, but as the Apostle speaks, God who commanded the light to shine out of
darkness has shined in (...) hearts to give the light of knowledge: and by this
light being 2 Cor. 4. 6.
supernatural we shall be able to see further into mysteries then by the
natural.

1. The first means to attain to this light, is by prayer. To pray to God (as
the Apostle directs) to enlighten the eyes of our understanding. King David by
praying to Ephesians. 1. 18.
God to be his teacher, attained to this praestantiam rationis and scientiae,
this excellency psalm. 119. 66.
in skill and knowledge, that he professed himselfto have more understanding
then all his teachers. 99.


2. Another means to come to this light is, to attend to the word and statutes
of God, which as the psalmist says, gives light to the eyes. Hereby he
professes 19. 8.
that he got understanding, they were a light to his path. And not only to him
psalm. 119. 6.
that was a man after Gods own heart, but to them also that were naturally
ignorant, 104.
105.
they gave light and understanding to the simple. We find this true by 130.
experience, for since the light of the Gospl came, and was received into the
world, learning and knowledge did never so flourish, either among the Grecians
or Romans, as it has done in the christian Church. The greatest lights that
ever were in the world for all learning divine and humane have been christian
Bishops, and the truth is, there is no excellent thing worthy to be known, to
be found in any Heathen Authors, but the same or something more excellent may
be had from the word of God.

3. The third means is to follow the Apostles counsel. Awake thou that
sleep, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light. And what
this sleeping is Ephesians. 5. 14.
the same Apostle tells us in another place, it is high time to awake out of
sleep Romans 13. 11.
that is, out of sin. If we mean to have this light we must forsake our evil
ways. And indeed, as the Book of wisdom speaks, in malevolo intellectu
sapientia (...) habitabit, wisdom will not enter nor dwell in a malicious
soul. Sin must be removed. Sap. 24.
This makes the difference between us and the fathers of the primitives times;
for albeit we have more means of knowledge then they, yet they being holy men,
had this light more plentifully bestowed upon them, then we have, and far
exceeded the wisest and learnedest among us.

Having thus shown the mutual duties that concern both Teacher and Scholar,
for attaining of knowledge, we are to proceed to that first duty of instruction
already mentioned, as it concerns the Teacher alone, and the manner how he must
instruct, which may be gathered out of Solomon's words, Have I not written to
thee three times, pro. 22. 20. 21.
(so the vulgar Latin reads) in counsels and knowledge, that I might make them
know the certainty of the words of truth. Where we see he made all known to
them, that is, by reading to them, and not only so, but also did write the
same for them, and that not once, but often, and not only declared unto them
what they must learn, but counseled them also, that is, gave direction how to
profit by hearing and reading: so that the Teacher must both read to his
scholars, and write, and give counsel and direction how to learn.

More particularly in his manner of teaching three things are to be observed.
1. Facilitas, to explain and make easy to them what he delivers. Thus our
Savior that his doctrine might be better understood taught by parables.

And being thus prepared, that as Saint Augustine says, Magister sit intus,
our master is within us, we shall hear a voice behind us (as the prophet
speaks) saying, Esaias 30. 21.
this is the way, walk in it, when ye turn to the right hand, and (...) ye
turn to the left.

This being done, we shall know that it is not the teachers labor alone, his
Psalm. 127. 1, 2.
building and watching is in vain, his teaching without this lumen infusum is
to no purpose: and that the scholars study, except God gives a blessing,
availes nothing, and with his blessing dabit in somno, he will give it in
sleep. In the first place therefore, (as we said before) we must pray, and that
instantly, that he will vouchsafe this lumen infusum, that he will enlighten us.

1. Our Savior taught by parables (which practice had been (...) from Balaams
Matthew. 13. 3.
and Moses time) showing things above sense by sensible things. 2. Methodus,
23. 25.
order: we see when Christ was to make it plain to the Disciples, that he was
to suffer, the Evangelist says, that he began with Moses and the Prophets, and
so deduced the Prophecies in order to his time, to confirm his doctrine: and
the same Evang. himself Luke 24. 27.
makes this protestation in the preamble of his Gospel, that he intended to
write all 1. 3.
things, as they fell out in order. So the Apostles observed an order in
teaching the Gospel, they first taught the principles, and laid the foundation
of faith and repentance, and Heb. 5. 12, 13. and 6. 1, 2.
then proceeded by steps and degrees to other doctrines.

3. The third thing is, proportio to proportion the doctrine to the capacity of
the hearer, which requires judgment and discretion in the Teacher. Thus we may
observe this in Christ, who having taught his Disciples many things, and yet
had many more to John 16. 12.
teach them, yet he forbear, because they were not able to bear them. These
three are good rules for a Teacher. 1. To help the lumen infusum by sensible
things. 2. In a good method and order: 3. and that in a good proportion with
discretion and wisdom.

And whereas there be four ways, as we touched before, by which a man may be
Psalm. 119 23.
taught. 1. By precept. Doce me mandata tua, teach me thy statutes, says
David. Thou have made and fashioned me, to what end? that I might learn thy
Commandments. prove. 24. 32.
2. By example. Exemplo didici (...), I looked on it, says the Wise man, and
received instruction: and I have given you an example, says our Savior, that
ye John 13. 15.
should do as I have done. 3. By experience. Experimento didici, were the words
of Genesis 30 27.
Laban to Jacob, I have learned by experience, etc. 4. By discipline. Christ
himself learned Obedience (says the Apostle) by the things which he sufferd:
and it is a common Heb. 5. 8.
saying, (...), correction gives instruction. The teacher must instruct by all
these ways, as Christ the perfect pattern of a teacher did.

1. By precept; it is said, that Christ did never teach any thing by parable in
public, Mark 4. 34.
but he expounded it afterward to his Disciples.

2. By example. Christ says, Exemplum dedi vobis, I have given you an example
(...) 13. 15.
how you should do. That in all things they should do as he had done before
them. There was no exercise to be done, no way to be followed, but he had set
them a pattern for it.

3. By praectise. Christ after he had taught, examined, and questioned his
Disciples, Matthew. 16. 3.
and he exercised them, as in baptizing, and in casting out unclean spirits, so
in dispuring, John 4. 2.
Matthew. 17. 16.
in preaching. First he sent out the 12, and afterward the 72, whom he
preferred after Mark 9. 14.
to higher places. And the difference between the 72 and the 12 the Apostle
distinguishes. Matthew. 10. 1.
The chief were Apostles, they were the Architects, or chief builders, and Luke
10. 1.
the 72 did build upon their foundation which they had laid. And these were to
make 1 Cer. 3. 10.
Mark 6. 30.
or give account how they discharged their callings, as the Disciples did to
Christ.

4. For teaching by discipline, we shall find that Christ was not defective in
this neither, but that by reproof he taught his Disciples many things. In S.
Matthew. Gospel Matthew. 15. 16.
he reproves them for non-proficiency, that having been so often taught, they
were not able to understand. And in another place he reproves them for not
understanding 16. 11.
what he meant by the leaven of the Pharisees. And soon after he gives S.
Peter a bitter check, saying, Get thee behind me Satan, for dissuading him
from his passion, telling him, that he savoured not the things that were of
God, but of men. As also when his Disciples could not cast out the Devil, he
calls them a faithless and 17. 17.
perverse generation. Lastly, when they would not suffer little children to
come to him, he was offended with them. So the saying of the Wise man was
verified in them; 19. 14.
Reproof enters more into a wise man, then an hundred stripes into a fool. And
our Savior Prove. 17. 10.
knew what flagellum meant too, when the house of God was turned into a den of
thieves. So is it with those that mispend their friends maintenance, and their
time, John 2. 15.
which ought to be spent in study at the Universities. These are a kind of
thieves too, for there is a theft in time and in study, in not laboring, as
well as in not paying; and Colleges and houses erected for learning are houses
of God also. And certainly if Christ were again here on earth, he would scourge
and whip these loyterers and thieves, out of these houses. So much for the
Teacher. Heb. 5. 11.


We will now come to the duties of them that are to be taught. The Wise man
gives a Tuigitur to the Hearer. I have made known to thee this day, thou
therefore, Prove. 22. 19.
and there ends the original, and leaves the rest to be supplied, that is,
take heed that you observe, it is your part to give regard to it.

The duty of a scholar may best be learned of Christ, who when he was in the
state of a scholar, loved to hear what others said, he would not let one wise
sentence Luke 2. 46.
escape him, and was ever asking questions. He was 1. (...), 2. (...), ready to
hear and to ask questions: which two qualities are to be in every learner.

1. For the first, (...): the opposite to this is dullness in hearing, either
not to hear at all, or having heard, not to regard what they have heard. he
effect of this is that which Christ taxed his Disciples with, O amentes, and
tardi cord, O fools and Luke 24. 25.
slow of heart. Therefore the learner must be studious in hearing, that so what
he hears may come into his heart, according to that of the Wise man, Inclina
aurem tuam, prove. 2. 2.
and oppone cor tuum, incline thine ear, and lay it to heart. It must come in
at the ear, 4. 20.
and down to the heart. And when it has (...) there, it must come to the lips,
to express it in our speech, that thereby we may be able to show, that it is
settled in (...). 7. 2.
the heart.

And because the memory of man is brittle, it must be supplied by writing: the
greatest scholars were called scribae, scribes. They must first write what they
hear in Tables, and then by often reading and meditation, bring it into the
tables of their prove. 7. 3.
heart.

2. And for enquiring or asking questions, it has been a perpetual practice.
In the Law, children were to ask their fathers, and they to answer about the
observation Exodus 12. 26.
of the Passover. So also concerning other Laws and statutes. And it is Gods
command 27.
that they do so, Ask thy father and he will show thee, thy Elders, and they
Deuteronomy. 6. 20.
will tell (...). And this was Jobs counsel, to ask of their fathers, and
enquire of the 32. 7.
former age. We (...) see it also under the Gospel. The Disciples not
understanding Job 8 8.
John 16. 18.
Christ's speech intended to ask him the meaning of that he had spoken to them.
And Matthew. 13. 10.
at another time they asked him, why he spoke to the people in parables. And
his Disciples 36.
prayed him to declare the parable of the tares. Again, Christ speaking of 17.
10.
John Baptist. they make an objection to him, Why then say the scribes, that
Elias must first come? And in the same Chapter, they asked, why they could not
cast out 19.
the Devil. When there was a contention among them, who should be the greatest,
Luke 9. 46.
they came to him to be resolved. Many other questions we find they
propounded, as about marriage, about the difficulty of being saved, about the
man that Matthew. 19. 10.
was born blind, and that excellent sermon concerning the destruction of
Jerusalem, and 25.
the end of the world, was occasioned by a question which they propounded to
him. John 9. 2.
Thus by questions they drew much from him, which the Church could not without
Matthew. 23. 3.
much danger have wanted and many things now would not have been known, which
are very necessary for us to know. And therefore it is that the Wise man
counsels him that wants wisdom, to go to a man of understanding, and that
not once or Ecclus 6. 36.
twice, but even till he has worn out the threshold of his door. When Abel was
besieged, a wisewoman called to Joab, and said, They were went in old time
toenquire or ask counsel at Abel (which some think had been of old a place of
learning) whereby she intimates, that learners must be (...), such as ask
questions.

3. The third duty is Conference with his fellow-hearers. And this the Wise man
compares to the whetting of two pieces of iron, whereby the one (...) the Prove.
27. 17.
other.

2. Another duty of the Teacher is, according to S. Augustines rule, in the
instruction of a son, (...) ut doceas filium meum (...) vitia morum, mag is
quam sermonum and verborum, he would have his sons tutor to teach him to avoid
(...) in (...) rather then in speech and words. And Quintilians rule is (...)
Schools, potior mihi ratio (...) vivendi, quam vel optime dicendi habetur; it
is better to live well, then to be able to speak well. When our Savior had
given his Disciples power to cast out Luke 10. 20.
Devils, he bids them not to rejoice so much in that power, as that their names
were written in heaven. And the Apostle confesses; that though he were never
so learned, yet if 1 Cor. 13. 2.
he wanted charity, which is the soul and life of a Christian, all would not be
available to him. Our Savior also says, Si scitis hac, if ye know these
things, happy are ye if John 13. 17.
ye do them. Your blessedness consists not in the knowing of them, but in
doing them. So that knowledge in its self brings no blessedness, but practice
of that we know. And S. John says, I have no greater joy, then that my
children walk in the 3 John ver. 4.
truth: not talking, but walking is required.

1. The Scholars duty proportionable to this is that which the Prophet
mentions, Lam. 3. 27.
It is good for a man that he bearthe yoke in his youth. To lose no time, but
if he do, to Ephesians. 5. 16.
have a care to redeem it. S. Bernard laith to his scholars, Nemo (...) parvi
(...) tempus, quod in verbis consumitur (...), volat verbum irrevocabile, (...)
tempus irremediabile; Sermon. ad Scholares.
let none of you lightly osteem the time, whichyou (...) spend in words, for
words are irrevocable, and time is not to be recalled.

And withal, because it is necessary that all things be done in time, he is to
be persuaded, that as there was a time prefixed before consecration of a
Nazarite, in which Numb. 6. 13.
time he was to fit himself for the service of the Lord, and after the time of
his separation was ended, he was to come to the door of the Tabernacle of the
congregation; so there is a certain requisite time, before they can bring their
studies to any perfection, so as to be fitted for the work of the Lord; whi h
time they must not mispend, but employ it in study and labor, to fit them for
that high calling. They must not look to be Prophets on a sudden like Saul.
When an Apostle was 1 Samuel 10. 11.
to be chosen in place of Judas, they would choose one that had accompanied
with them all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out among them,
beginning from the baptism Acts 1. 21, 22
of John: and S. Paul says, that a novice must not be permitted to step into
the Teachers chair; for the fathers say, that those Scioli, those smatterres
were they that 1 Timothy 3. 6.
bring all out of course, and as the Apostle says, fall themselves soonest
into temptation.

2. They are to be at the direction of their Teachers. They must follow when he
commands; this makes them Disciples, when they do sequi, follow their Teacher,
Luke 9. 59.
they must ask leave to do any thing(...) permit mihi, give me leave to bid
my friends 61.
farewell. They must be obedient, that is the second.

3. They must live soberly and honestly; according to the Apostles rule, fly
youthful 2 Timothy 2. 22.
lusts: they must be sober and of good behavior, as the same Apostle. Not
only sober 1 Timothy 3. 2.
and not drunken with wine; for as there is ebriet as a vino, drunkenness with
wine, Esaias 51. 21.
so also without wine, as the Prophet tells us; Hear thisthou miserable and
drunken, but not with wine; but also not drunk with pride, or self conceit of
our own abiliti s. The Tit. 2. 6.
last of these the Apostle means, when he says, Be sober minded; and of the
other the Wise man speaks, Be not among wine-bibbers for the drunkard and the
glutton shall be Prove. (...). 20.
poor, and the sleeper shall be covered with rags. Nunquam fapit amator (...),
he that loves wine shall never be wise. And for those which Esaias mentions,
Drunken but not with wine, as when a man is drunk with conceit of himself
(which commonly is in them that know least) such a man has a fume risen up in
his head, and thinks ((...) as a drunken man) that he can overcome all the
world. And these are they of which the Wise man tells us, There is a generation
(says he) that are pure in their own eyes, Prove. 3. 12, 13
(and yet God knows they are not so) and There is a generation, O how lofty are
their eyes! and their eyelids are lifted up, very supercilious. But as the
Wise man tells, it is not with these proud men, but with the lowly, that wisdom
inhabits. And our Savior says, 11. 2.
Discite a me, learn of me, for I am (...) and lowly, (which S. Augustine
observed to be Matthew. 11. 29.
Christ's first discite) The servant is not greater then his master, says
Christ elsewhere; and John 13. 10.
therefore disciples must not check their Master. The Heathen said that those
scholars are protervi and petulci, that will calcitrare kick against their
Masters or Tutors. If two Scholars be taught together, the one conceited of
himself, the other a fool, There is (...). 20. 29.
more hope of the fool then of him that is too highly conceited of his own
learning. Multos hoc decipit, qui ante tempus sapientes videri volunt, ut jam
(...) quod non sunt, and quid sunt erubescere, says one, many are deceived by
this, that they would willingly Huge.
be accounted wise before their time, and begin to counterfeit what they are
not; and are ashamed of what they are.

The conclusion of this point is, that because, as the Preacher tells us, There
is a time to keep silence, and a time to speak: and in that he places silence
before speaking, Eccles. 3. 7.
every one is to be a learner, before he be a teacher. We may see it in our
Saviors example, who was in the Temple among the Doctors, how? hearing first,
and then Luke 2. 46.
asking questions; and both before he taught himself. He that does not take
this course, will in the end be forced to take up this complaint. How have I
hated instruction, Prove. 5. 12, 13
and my heart despised reproof? And have not obeyed the voice of my teachers,
nor inclined mine ear to them that instructed me.

3. A third duty of the teacher is, Tueri to defend his pupils, according to
the sense of the word, their name Tutores (...) being derived from tueri. It
was our Saviors Matthew. 9. 14.
practice, as in the case of his Disciples not fasting, when John's disciples,
and the Pharisees fasted. And in their plucking of ears of corn on the Sabbath
day. As also 12. 2.
for their not washing their hands, when they did eat. In all which cases,
Christ 15. 2
made their defense; thereby showing, he would be ready to defend them in all
matters, wherein they did not (...).

1. The first duty of the Scholar answerable to this is, according to the law
of the Nazarite. He must bring his offering, as (...) is able. So did Hannah
when she dedicated Numb. 6. 14.
her son Samuel, that he might not be (...) to (...). When Saul sent his 1 Samuel
1. 21.
servant to the Prophet, he made shift to find the fourth (...) of a (...) to
give him. 9. 7.
Shall we come to the Prophet and bring him (...)? And Levi made a feast for
our Savior. In a Council the Fratricelli were condemned for holding one
opinion (among Luke 5. 29.
the rest) that our Savior lived by begging, and not of his own, for he had of
his own, as we may gather by Judas bearing his bag.

2. Another duty is to minister to his (...), as (...) Samuel did to Eli. And
we read 1 Samuel 3. 1.
that Elisha though the eldest scholar, yet poured water on Elias hands. We 2
King. 3. 11.
(...) that John Baptist sent two of his Disciples on an (...) to Christ. And
our Savior Matthew. 11. 2.
himself sent his Disciples to make ready the passover. At another time he
commanded 26. 18.
his Disciples to provide a ship for him. He also sent two of his Disciples
Mark 3. 9.
Matthew. 21. 2.
(when he was to ride into Jerusalem) to provide an ass for him. Lastly, he
sent them John 4. 8.
to provide victuals to eat. So that the duty of ministering belongs to a
Scholar.

3. The last is (...) officium. Our Savior being toward his end, gives
charge 19. 27.
to one of his Disciples, (that he knew was able) to maintain his mother. And
not 39.
only so, but after his death some of them brought odours to embalm him. Some
bestowed a Tomb upon him, and some buried his body. So did the Disciples of
John Matthew. 14. 12.
Baptist, They buried his body. And yet here ended not this (...) officium, for
after Christ's burial the Apostle; forgate not his memory, but spuke honorably
of him. Luke 24. 19.
Jesus of Nazareth was a Prophet mighty indeed and word before God and all the
people.: showing that death takes not this duty away from the Scholar to his
Tutor, he ought to speak honorably of him after death.

Besides all this, there is a duty which all Scholars owe to Teachers, though
they be not under their charge. If they be of that calling they are to honor
them. Saul's 1 Samuel 9. 6.
servant counted Samuel an honorable man, and Gamaliel was honorable among
all Acts 5. 34.
the people. He was a Teacher of the Law, and not only those under his charge,
but all the people honored him.

These things being performed, that will come to pass which the Apostle aims
at, 2 Timothy 2. 2.
we shall have men faithful, such as shall be able to teach others, and the
Universitie shall breed such as shall be fit to serve the Church and
Commonwealth. And indeed this was the end of the erection of schools and
universities. 1. To bring forth men able to teach in the Church. 2. Men fit to
govern the Commonwealth. Of which we are now to speak.

CHAP. VII.
Of honoring spiritual fathers in the Church. The excellency and necessity of
their calling. Four sorts of ministers in the Church. 1. The thief. 2. The
(...). 3. The wolf. 4. The good shepherd, whose duties are. 1. To be an
example to his (...) 1. In himself. 2. In his family. The peoples duty
answerable to this. 2. To use his talent for their good. Rules for doctrine,
and conversation. The peoples duty. 1. To know their own shepherd. 2. To obey
and follow him. 3. To give him double (...) 1. (...). 2. of maintenante.

ANd first, of those that are to instruct and govern the Church. These are
called 1 Cor. 4 15.
fathers. The Apostle calls himself a father And so they are called not only
Judge. (...). 10.
by the Church of Christ, but by Mitah an Idolater. He hired a Levite to be a
18. 19.
father and a priest. The Idolatrous Tribe of Dan use the very same words, they
bid the Levite to come and be their father.

And because, as was said before, all paternity is originally in God, and from
him communicated to Christ, whose fatherhood toward the Church is no other but
as he is the only priest and prophet of the new Testament, and because God is
fons omnis boni, the fountain of all good, therefore he must needs have this
property Esa. 9.
of goodness, to be (...) communicative, that others may partake of his goodness;
and therefore he made the world by creating it at the first, and not only so,
but by a second creation renewed and restored all by Christ, into whom they
that are mystically incorporated, are admitted to that (...) that coestial city
or corporation, where they shall be partakers of all that goodness and glory,
which is in God.

And God having purposed to create the world for their purpose, made it with
three divisions, or distinct places. 1. Heaven to be his (...) or place of
reward. 2. Earth to be his (...) a work house. And thirdly Hell his (...)
prison. To the end that men exercising themselves here in this world, which is
the work house, according to the grace received. and the talent given them,
might either be rewarded with eternal felitity in Heaven, or punished with
eternal misery in Hell. So that the earth being made for a place of exercise,
and Heaven for a place of reward, the world was made for the Church, and
consequently all those (...) the natural to beget a holy seed; and the (...)
also for education, and this last, the fatherhood of the Prophets and teachers
in schools and universities, are all of them ordained to prepare and fit men
for this fatherhood in the Church, and for the furthering of their paternal
power in the work of the ministry, this being the principal paternity, and
other fathers being but as pales and rayles to the (...), to keep all within
their due! bounds, thereby to set this work the better forward. For we may
see, that the Apostle sets them in this order, (...) that Christ did by
Ephesians. 4. 12.
his descending, his passion etc. was to this end. First, to gather together
the Saints; which was to be (...). Secondly by the work of the ministry, by
which they being gathered, then comes the third thing, which is, to build them
up by faith, knowledge and virtue, as in verse 13. they being as S. Peter calls
them, living stones, 13
and so consequently they are to be partakers of (...) the growth or increase
till they 1 pet. 2. 5.
come to the fulness of the stature of Christ, being joined togetherwith Christ
the head, here by the spirit, and hereafter by perfect fruition of his
presence; and this was the chief and great work of all other, for which all
others (...) ordained, for which schools were founded, and the ministry
ordained, and commonwealthes established. And therefore Saint Paul says, let
no man glory in men, for all 1 Cor 3. 21
things are yours, speaking of the Church, things present, and things to come
etc. 22.
And you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. 13.


Thus we seethe institution, ordination, and (withal) the end of those which
be lawfully called to become fathers in the Church, and what account we are to
make of this work, seeing that families, schools, and commonwealths were
established, yea the whole world created for this which is effected by the
work of the ministry, the building up of the Church. And it is the want of
due consideration herein that has brought that confusion and disturbance into
the world, which we daily see.

For whereas this ought to be the thing (...) which we ought all anhelare, to
breath after; and the Prophet says, that Regeserunt nutritii and Reginae
nutrices (...), Kings Esa. 49. 23.
shall be thy nursing fathers, and Queens thy nursing mothers, that is, of the
Church, and that their duty is nutrire, whereby the churches estate might be
the more glorious. Some according to Ezeckiels Princes, think, that when they
are (...) Exe7. 11. 1. 2.
to high places, that the end for which they were so preferred is, but to soake
in 3.
the broth, to live at ease, or to do what they list, as Jezebel said, and all
their 1 Kin. 21. 7.
care is but to have pacem in (...) suis, peace in their days, and that
outward peace, 2 Kin. 20. 19.
that invasions, tumults, and broils may not hinder them in their ease and
pleasures. psalm. 49. 20.
And on the other side, when subjects are such as king David speaks of, men
(indeed) made to be in honor, but become without understanding, that they know
no other good but bonum sensibile, their bellies, tables, furniture for their
houses etc. set their affections (in the Apostles phrase) on earthly things,
(...) Col. 3. 2.
and so make that commutation which our Savior speaks of, gain the world, and
lose their souls, they would soon bring this purpose of God to none effect, if
he Math. 16. 26.
laid not his helping to hand by this work of the ministry.

And because they look only at the (...) sensibile, hence is their base
account they hold of this ministry, and that because of the outward appearance
by which they judge: we see, that after Saint Paul had given forth great words
concerning 2 Cor. 4. 5.
the power of his ministry, that it was mighty through Christ to cast down
strong 6. 7.
holds etc. yet as appears by his words after, the Corinthians contemn all
this, because they looked on things according to the outward appearance. In our
Savior himself was all the fulness of the Godhead, this power was (...) none so
full as in him; Coloss. 2. 9.
yet because, as the prophet speaks, when he was seen, there was no beauty in
him that he should be desired, in (...) of the outward appearance. We see how
he Esa. 53. 2. (...)
was handled on earth, scorned and (...) by the (...) and Pharisees, and the
(...). 23. 11.
rest of the Jews, and by (...), and his men of war, they did (...) set him at
naught, and (...) scoff at him, so that this calling which God had so highly
advanced, the world set at naught and scoff at it. And so the prophets were
used before; for Ahaziahs servants in derision called Eliah the man of God, else
why should he have called for fire from heaven to consume them? And (...)
courtiers 2 (...). 1. 9.
were likewise pleased to vent their scorn upon Elisha: why came this mad 9.
11.
fellow to thee.

But in this point the comfort is, there is a good distinction observed by
David, psalm. 52 9.
I will hope in thy name, says he, for thy Saints like it well, (as the common
translation has it) but the new (which is better) says, I will wait on thy
name, for it is good before thy Saints. There is bonum coram Sanctis, and bonum
coram mundo, the Saints have one thing good in their estimation, and the world
another. The world would think it an idle humor in a man to praise God by
siuging to him, but the Saints like it well. So that it is not the good conceit
a man has of himself (as the Apostle speaks) that shall help him, nor others
commendations of him, but he whom the Lord commends may comfort himself in 2
Cor. 10. 18.
Gods approbation.

We will now come to the particular duties of the minister.

The Apostl, e when he speaks of (...) the things appertaining to God, he shows
the end of the ministry or priesthood of the Gospel, viz. That he is to stand
and appear for us in the things which concern God, or when we have to Heb. 5. 1.
deal with God: therefore he says, that the priest is taken from among men,
that is, being fitted by education (of which before) he is selected out of the
ordinary sort of men, and ordained for men in things pertaining to God, that is
to execute the offices of the Church in our stead before God. so that this
being a place of honor, no man ought to thrust himself into the ministry, but
to expect till he shall be thought fit, and be (...) lawfully called. No man
takes this honor upon him, but he that is called of God as Aaron. Now Gods
calling is known by his gifts, whereby he fits men, by the talent he bestows,
which when we have, then we are inwardly called of God; and then having the
gift (...) that is, the power to administer holy (...), by imposition of hands,
as the Apostle speaks, we are then outwardly called by the Church. And being
thus 1 Timothy 4. 14.
called, we are to perform the duties that belong to us, of which I shall now
speak.

The duties of the ministers of the Gospel we shall find set down in several
places of Scripture, as John 10. 1. Tim. 3. Tit. 1. from which we shall deduce
them.

In the tenth of Saint John we find four sorts of shepherds mentioned, three
Jo. 10.
bad, and one good. 1. The thief. 2. The hireling. 3. The wolf. 4. The good
shepherd.

1. They are distinguished by our Savior. 1. By their calling, which is either
lawful or unlawful. The thief has no lawful calling, as the second and third
have, for he has no lawful entrance, he wants his inward calling, when he
wants his talent to enable him, and then being admitted by savor of reward, he
has no outward calling, he comes in by usurpation, which cannot give any man a
right. And thus he that comes not in by the ordinary way settled in the Church,
comes not in by the door, nor according to Christ's institution; for he that
enters not in by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth another way, the
same is a thief. Of this sort Gods speaks by the prophet, I have not sent them,
yet they ran; I have not Jer. 23. 21.
spoken to them, yet they prophesied.

There (...) two ways whereby such men creep in. First per gratiam by favor.
Secondly per munus, by gift or reward, both mentioned and prohibited in one
verse.

1. Per Gratiam, by favor, is when a man is admitted either at the suit of
some Deuteronomy. 16. 19.
great man or friend, or for alliance or kindred sake: this is respecting of
persons without regard to the qualities of the men, which in Leo's opinion was
very absurd, that men of quality should be neglected, and ignorant preferred.
And this must needs be when any are admitted upon these respects; multanos
iniqua sacere cogit affectus dum propinquitatem respicimus, says Saint Jerome;
when by affection or alliance we look on men, we are forced to do many things
(...). But if we will follow Saint Chrysostomes rule, Qui vult alterum ad
officium sacerdotale pertrahere suf ficere non judico testimonium quod opinione
collegerit, sed ut ejus (...) qui eligitur, noscat diligenter, he that will
make a minister, must not only go by opinion, but his knowledge of him. And the
reason he gives is, Qui ordinat indignos eisdem (...) poenis, quibus illi qui
indigne (...) ordinati, he that ordains unworthy ministers, is liable to such
punishment as the party is subject to which is unworthily ordained. 2. Per
munus, by reward is the other. The first must be the fault but of one that is,
the admitter, this is the fault of two, of him that admits, and him that is
admitted. 1. The Bishop that by or for reward lets in any such, that ordaines
such as have not the gifts of the mind, but the gifts of the hand. 2. To such
as attempt to come in that way, Saint Ambrose denounces this curse, Lepram cum
Giezi a sancto se suscepisse credant Elizeiore, qui gradum sacerdotalem se
(...) pecuniis comparare, let them be sure to have taken the leprosy of Gehazi
from the mouth of holy Elisha, that think to obtain the Priesthood by money.
Therefore it behooves Bishops, according to S. Paul's (...) to Timothy, to take
heed of cita impositio, lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of
other men's sins: for (as is 1 Timothy 5. 22(...)
said before) he that brings unworthy men into the ministry, is accessory to
the offenses they commit, and liable to the punishment they deserve. This is
the first thing, that there be a lawful entrance, by the door, a lawful
calling, not a coming in at the window, like a thief; for (...) malo (...)
principto, difficile bono perficiuntur exitu, whatsoever has an ill beginning
can very hardly have a good end. God never blesses the labors of such as come
not in at the door. And Saint Augustine has this observation; Diligendus est
Pastor, tolerandus est mercenarius, sed cavendus est latro. The good shepherd
is to be beloved, the hireling to be tolerated, but the thief is to be taken
(...) of.
2. They are distinguished by another mark, which puts a difference between the
other two, the hireling and the wolf, and the true shepherd: for though they
come in right, yet they want that (...) or (...) that purpose and intention
when they enter, which was in the Apostle, and is in every true shepherd, thou
know (says the Apostle) my manner of life, and my purpose etc. Which is
well (...) 2 Timothy 3. 10.
elsewhere to be (...) a natural care of the (...), as if there were some that
had spuriam curam, a bastard care. They that have not this purpose of heart,
phil. 2. 20.
are called Mercenarii, which have no care of feeding the flock, but of feeding
themselves, and therefore when they see the wolf, they flec because they care
Jo. 10. 13.
not for the flock. Their tools or instruments, are as the prophet calls them,
(...) pastoris stul i, the instruments of a soolish shepherd, which the fathers
Zack. 11. 15.
term forcipes and muletrum, a pair of sizers for the fleece, and a payle for
the milk. And therefore when the flock is in any danger, they regard it not,
but if there be the least danger of the milk or wool, then they bestir
themselves with the instruments of a foolish shepherd. The Jews call them such
as draw near to the Ark for the Corban, for the offering box; they cared not
what became of the law, so the corban sped well. It was prophesied of the stock
of Eli, that 1 Samuel 2. 36.
they should say, put me into the Priests office, that I may eat a piece of
bread, and get a piece of silver, this was their end. Abiathar a wicked man was
of his seed, and was displaced by Solomon, and Zadok put in his room. And for
want of this care of the flock it is, that others turn wolves, such as are all
false teachers who for lucre or ambition, or some such sinister ends, pervert
the truth, and instead of feeding the flock, poison them with heresies and
errors contrary to the received doctrine of the Church; such, if a presecutor
or false teacher come with authority, will fly, nay, as the Apostle speaks,
they will not only fly, but also become wolves themselves, for of such he
prophesied saying, that grievous wolves Act. 20. 29.
should enter, not sparing the flock. The Apostle would have us to mark the
issue or end of their conversation that speak the word of God to us. Now this
(...) or issue, marrs all, it discovers the mercenary, and the wolf; for if the
wolf Heb. 13. 7.
come, if persecution arise, either they will fly, as the mercenary, or turn
wolves too, and help to worry the flock; for even among your selves (says the
Apostle) shall men arise teaching perverse things, such of you as have been
shepherds shall turn wolves. So that whether he be for his belly, as the first,
or degenerate to Act. 20. 29. 30
a wolf, as the last, they are both distinguished from the good shepherd. Yet
they are to be obeyed as pastors, because they come in the right way,
obediendum est male, an evil man must be obeyed, though not ad malum, in that
which is ill: of which before in the Magistrate. But the end of these, is wosul
acording to the prophet; woe, unto the shepherds that feed themselves. Ye (...)
the fat and cloth you (...) the wool, ye kill them that are fed, but yea feed
not the Ezekiel. 34. 2. 3.
flock.

4. The good shepherd is the last sort, who as he comes in the right way, Math.
22. 12. So he is not to abuse his place after he is entered, as the evil
shepherd does, but to perform the duties of it, which duties are. 1. To show
his flock a good example. 2. To employ his talent for their good. 3. To
converse with them, as he ought.

1 He must be an example. He must lead the flock, as our Savior expresses it
after the manner of the Eastern countries, who drove not their sheep before
them, but the sheep followed them. The Apostle describes it more plainly by
the word Jo. 10. 3. 4.
Typus: he must be Typus, as the iron that gives a form to the money by making
1 Timothy 4. 12.
an impression on it. As the iron has the same form in it, which it stampes
on the coin, so must the minister by his example, represent what by his
doctrine he Tir. 2. 3.
would have the (...) to be. The same word is used in other places, it is used
1 pet. 5. 3.
by Saint Peter, bidding such men to be ensamples to the flock. It was Moses
his Deuteronomy. 33. 8.
order, in the first place the priest was to have (...) integrity of life, and
Numb. 17. 8.
then Vrim light or learning. And it pleased God to make it a sign of Aarons
call. ling to the Priesthood. That his rod was virga (...) a fruit bearing rod,
to show, that the priest, when he uses the pastoral rod for government and
discipline, must not be unfruitful himself, but must be an example in holy
life, and good works, which are the fruits of the spirit. So was it in Christ
our Prototype, as Saint Luke speaks, Cepit (...) and docere, (...) began both
to do and to teach; to do first, Act. 1. 1.
and to teach after. The like Saint Paul (when he handles this point ex
professo) tells both (...) and Titus, that a minister must be blameless by his
example, 1 Timothy 3. 2.
without spot and unreproveable. So then he must be ex mplam or dux gregis, he
Tit. 1. 6.
must be typus, a pattern or example, he must do, and then teach. This example
he may be two ways.

1. In himself, which is as you see before in S. Paul's direction to Timothy,
and Titus, to be (...), without spot; which has relation to that in the law,
No man Levit. 21. 214
that bath a blemish, or is misshapen in his body, of the seed of Aaron the
Priest, was to come nigh to offer the Lords offering. This was required under
the Law, to preserve the outward honor and dignity of the Priesthood the
better, and though in that regard it may be of moral use, yet withal hereby was
typified, that innocence and freedom from all spiritual blemishes of sin which
should be in the Ministers of the gospel. 1 Cor. 6. 3.
They should be free from all spot, because no offense should be given; that no
scandal should be given to the weak brother within, nor to the adversary
without. This made the Apostle so careful to avoid not only scandal, but all
occasion of scandal, 2 Cor. 8. 20.
that when alms were sent to poor brethren, by the care of the Apostles, he
would not carry it alone, but would have one go with him, that there might be
no suspicion of fraud, that so he might (...), provide things honest, not only
in the sight of God, but before men also, and that the adversary might have no
occasion to speak evil. Therefore the Disciples marvelled, when they found
Christ talking with a woman alone, because it was not his custom to do any
thing which might cause slander or suspicion. Thus much for the ge (...). We
will now set the four virtues which the Apostle requires to be in him, and the
four spots which are opposite.

1. The first is, that he be (...), temperans or continens, temperate and
chaste, Tit. 1. 8.
whether in a married or single estate. The opposite to this is in Tim. 3. 2.
not to be content with one Wife; so continency or single life is the virtue:
incontinency or polygamie the thing forbidden. 2. The second is, that he must
be (...), vigilant, or (...), not given to wine. The opposite is in the next
verse, one given to wine, transiens ad vinum, a tavernhunter: for the lust of
the body, and the pleasure of the taste, must both be qualified in him. 3. The
next is, he must be (...), sober: which Chrysostom distinguishes from the 1 Timothy 3. 2, 3
former, and is opposite, not to the inordinate desires of meat and drink, but
to the passions of the soul, which are called (...), irascible, it moderates
the passion of Tit. 1. 7.
anger. The virtue required is mentioned, 2 Timothy 2. 24. mildness; he must be
no striker, not furious, but one that will bear injuries, and labor with
meekness to reclaim those that err. 4. Lastly, he must be (...), grave and
modest, of good behavior; which the Councils refer to habitum, his apparel,
gestum, his gesture, incessum, his gate, he 2 Timothy 2. 22.
must not be light in his behavior. The opposite to which is, not to fly
youthful lusts 1 Timothy 3. 7.
and light carriage. To these four, we must add that which the Apostle
mentions, he must so carry himself, that he may have a good report of them that
that are Without; for it is not enough to be commended by those of his own
profession or religion, by birds of his own feather; but so, that his very
enemies may say, He is a man fit for this sacred calling, and may be converted
by his example.
2. He must be an example in his household by his example; for according to S.
Paul, he must rulewell his own house: which must be in 3 points. 1. They must
be brought up by him in the true faith. 2. He must keep them in subjection,
that they be not unruly, but obedient; for if he be not able to keep his own
under, but that they will be refractory, it argues, that he is either
negligent, or remiss and fainthearted, and therefore unfit to rule the Church.
3. Lastly, he must make them examples of reverence, 1 Timothy 3. 4.
gravity, sobriety, and modesty, (...), that they be not accused of riot,
surfeit, and excess. And in these two respects the Pastor must be exemplum
gregis.

The duty of the people must be conformable and answerable to that of the
Pastor. If it be his duty to be Typus gregis, a pattern to the flock; it is the
flocks duty to be antitypus pastoris, (...), the Pastors antitype, by following
his good example, as the iron that gives the stamp, and the coin stamped, have
the same figure. They must (...), become imitators of them, as the Apostle
advises, Remember them that have the rule over you, Whose faith follow, etc.
Have an eye to them that teach, and Heb. 13. 7.
imitate their example, ut domus presbyteri sit Magistra disciplinae publicae,
that the house of the Priest be the rule of public discipline. 2. The next
duty of the Minister, is the employing his talent, or the use of those gifts
which he has gotten in the schools; for Nemo accipit dona propter se, no man
has any gifts for himself only; but to use them, as (...) by the Parable of
the talents. 1. He must be (...), able to teach Matthew. 25.
others: now it is well observed that the Verb docere, to teach, governs two
accusative cases: as in the Prophet, Quem doccbit scientiam? Whom shall he
teach Esaias 28. 9.
knowledge? There is a quem, whom they shall teach, and a quid, what they shall
teach. For there are many in these times, that have the quem, a people to
teach, but not scientiam; many are Teachers, but want the knowledge to teach:
these were never sent by God. It is strange what hatred God did bear to the
Ass. He would have the (...) born of all creatures to be offered, but the foal
of the ass might not come within the Sanctuary, but the neck of it was to be
broken. Hesychius and others, interpret Exodus 13. 13.
the ass to be illiteratum, the illiterate man, and surely he that is such
ought not to come into the Lords Sanctuary. The Prophet says in the person of
God to such, Because thou have rejected knowledge, I will also reject thee,
that thou shall be no Priest Hos. 4. 6.
to me. And Moses says of the Levites, They shall teach Jacob thy judgments
and Israel thy Law. And the Prophet says, the Priests lips should preserve
knowledge, that Deuteronomy. 33. 10.
is, he should have ability to teach. Aquinas, and some of the latter
Schoolmen, handling the question, what is meant by ability to teach,
distinguish between competentem, and eminentem scientiam, competent and eminent
knowledge, and resolve that a Pastor must have competentem scientiam at least,
though not eminentem. Now what this competens scientia is, the Apostle
determines in one place, Tit. 1. 9. viz. He must be Tit. 1. 9.
(...), able to hold fast the true doctrine, when any Heretic shall seek to
take it from him: and this he must do (...), by learning. 2. He must be (...),
able to exhort and comfort. 3 He must be (...), able to confute and convince
all gainsayers, and opposers of the truth, and this is the Comment on that
place, as I take it.

Now unto this is opposite a Novice. He must not be a Novice that enters into
this 1 Timothy 3. 6.
Ministry; but as the Apostle elsewhere says, he must be nourished up in the
words of 4. 6.
faith and good doctrine: and after his ordination he must not rest there, but
(...), proficere, study more and more, and stir up his (...), till they burn
brighter, stir up 16.
the gift of God which is in him. And the practice of this is that which
gets him honor: for (...), they that labor, are worthy of double honor,
by putting 2 Timothy 1. 6.
their gifts to use. He must preach the word in season, and out of season; and
that upon 4. 2.
necessity (as the Apostle tells us) for, vae mihi nisi evangelizavero, woe
unto me if 1 1 Cor. 9. 16.
preach not the Gospel: yet we must know that the Apostles (...), be instant in
season and out of season, is not meant, as people would have it, as if a
Minister must preach continually, or when soever the people will: but as in
season is upon ordinary days and occasions, so out of season is upon
extraordinary occasions, when the necessity of the Church requires: when either
some great calamity, oraflliction, or benefit calls upon us; not (as some would
have it) to make the duty of the Pastor infinite; for it is one thing to be
instant, and another thing to preach: a man may be instant, and yet not preach
always.

2. Concerning the manner of doctrine, there were three faults (mentioned by
the 2 Timothy 4. 4.
Apostle) crept into the Church. 1. (...), Desire of novelties or fables, which
arises 2 Cor. 11. 4.
out of a fullness in men, that they cannot abide to hear a thing often, but
must have novelties; another Jesus must be preached to them. 2. The next is
curiosity Tit. 3. 9.
about questions of no profit, (...), they will have high points or
unprofitable handled, in which they are so entangled, that they cannot get out,
and neglect practical points. 3. The last is pruritus aurium, itching ears, a
desire to hear a 2 Timothy 4. 3.
declamation out of a Pulpit, to hear a sermon with fine phrase, pleasing the
ear, but doing the soul no good. Against all these the Apostle prescribes a
form. 1. That they teach sound doctrine that cannot be condemned. It must be
(...), Tit. 2.
sound and sincere, not corrupt with fables or false doctrine, and they must
not 1.
strive about things that profit not. 2. Against the second (...), he
prescribes, (...).
that as his doctrine must be sound and true, so he must teach those things, 2 Timothy 2. 14.
Qua sunt bona and utilia hominibus, good and profitable unto men. 3. Against
Tit. 3. 8.
the third, though he must not affect the pleasing of itching ears, by too much
niceness about words, yet 1. his matter must be such as that he need not to
give place, in regard of the stuff, to any, and that the expression be grave
and decent, not light nor neglected. The Apostle says, that (...) he were rude
in speech, yet not in knowledge. 2, And for keeping of his Auditors together
(...) 2 Cor. 11. 6.
must have vetera and nova, both new and old, not new doctrine, but new ways
of expression: the doctrine may be al one, yet the manner of delivery may be
diverse, he must have new parables, new arguments. 3. He must have a
perspicuous and methodical way, an orderly delivery, (...) like a cunning
workman, rightly dividing 2 Timothy 2. 15.
the word, which as the Apostle says, is like a two edged sword. Preaching
must Heb. 4. (...).
have two edges; for it was a fault complained of by S. Augustine, against
Preachers of his time, their preaching had but one edge, and the back did as
much harm as the edge did good; they meet not with two extremes, as when they
speak of obedience, they so speak of it, as that they would have a man never to
disobey: and when they speak of peace, they seem to take away all differences,
though the cause be just, and necessary, as if we must be at peace with the
wicked. 4 Lastly, he must deliver Tit. 2. 7.
that he speaks with authority, gravity, and modesty, knowing that the word is
not his own, but the everlasting truth of God.

2. The next point after doctrine is exhortation. And in this there is a common
(...), that teachers are impatient of their hearers amendment, if they tell
them of their (...) twice, and they amend not, they give over, whereas the
Apostles counsel is, to 2 Timothy 4 2.
exhort with all long-suffering and doctrine. They are to convince the judgment
(...) with doctrine, and then with long-suffering to expect their conversion,
(...), 2 Timothy 2. 25.
waiting if God at any time will give them repentance.

3. They must first arguere, prove the fault, and then redarguere, reprove the
person; not as the common fashion is, first reprove, and then prove. Now in
(...) of the persons to be reproved, these rules are to be observed.

1. If the person be only drawn into a fault by infirmity, then to reprove in
meekness and humility. Galat. 6. 1. 2. If it be done in contempt, then to
rebuke him, (as the Apostle directs) with all Tit. 2. 15.
authority. 3. If he be slow of nature: then to rebuke him sharply and roundly.
1. 13.
4. If he sin openly, if a public sault be committed, then rebuke him openly,
that others may fear. 1 Timothy 5. 20.

4. For disproving or confuting the adversary, in which there are 4 ends to be
aimed at 1. To convince him, and so stop his mouth if it may be. 2. If that
cannot be done, Tit. 1. 9.
yet to confound him and make him ashamed. 3. If not that, yet that he may
condemn 2. 8.
himself, his conscience may tell him that he is an error. 4. If yet he
persist, then however 3. 11.
his folly will be manifest to all men by reproving him, hereby others may be 2 Timothy 3. 9.
warned to take heedof him.

The Application of all this may be gathered from what we find in Ezekiel and
Zachary Ezekiel. 34. 4.
against the evil shepherds, whose properties are by them described, opposite
to zach. 11. 16.
those which S. Paul requires in a true shepherd, and from all of them we may
gather 1 These. 5. 14.
how a good Pastor ought to apply himself to the several necessities of his
flock; of which some are infirm (...), weak spirited, these must be comforted;
some are broken hearted, and these he must bind up; some he calls (...),
weak persons; novices that have not (...) overcome their corruptions, these
must be upholden and borne withal; some are depulsi, strayed away, which are
either (...), unruly men, and these must be admonished, that they may hear of
it; or such as are led away into heresies and (...), and these must be sought
out and reclaimed.

5. The next point is concerning his conversation with other men, (...), for
herein likewise is (...), that communication of spiritual things, which people
have Gal. 6.
from their Pastor: it is not only in doctrine, and sacraments, but also in his
conversation with them. Wherein he must be, 1. (...), hospitalis, given to
hospitality. 2. (...), 1 Timothy 3. 2
very friendly to all that are well given. 3. (...), a just dealer toward all;
and because Tit. 1. 8.
there may be summum jus, rigor of justice in holding or exacting his own,
therefore 1 Timothy 3. 3.
he must be (...), no brawler, and consequently (...), patient, or rather one
that is equitable, and stands not upon strict right; the opposite to which is
forbidden by the Apostle, who says, he must not be (...), self-willed or
obstinate, that will not remit Tit. 1. 7
or yield any thing. And because questions of right are usually about temporal
things, therefore in order thereto, he must not be (...), a lover of money, so
as to entangle 2 Timothy 4. 2.
himself in worldly matters that he cannot attend his calling, nor one that
seeks them by unlawful gain, he must (...). And thus much for the Pastors duty.

1. Now the duties of the people to the Pastor, are. 1. They must be (according
to the mark of true sheep, set down by our Savior) as sheep knowing their own
shepherd, John 10. 4.
and able to discern him from a stranger. And thus knowing him, to keep within
his fold, and not to wander after other shepherds. They must (as the Apostle
speaks) know them which labor among them. For it is a great disheartning to a
Minister, that 1 (...). 5. 12.
though he take much pains with his flock, yet (...) they hear of another, that
is (...) lingua (...), has a voluble (...), though he have only (...)
verborum, the froth of seeming good (...), and little substance, yet the last
shall be preferred, and they will (...) their own and follow the other. They
must not give (...) to (...) and (...), and be seduced by them to the bypath
of error.

2. The second duty is obedience to their Pastor, whether it be by following
him, John 10. 4.
as our Savior, speaking of the good (...), says, The sheep follow him; or by
being persuaded by him, (...), (as the word (...)) which is, when they profess
Heb. 13. 17.
they will submit to be ruled in their judgment and practice by him, and
withal do (...), submit or give place, though they be not persuaded, till they
be better persuaded; when they will suspend their own judgment, till they be
better informed; for without this the other is but (...) obedience. For he that
said he would not go, and yet afterward went, did hisfather more honor, then
he that made as ifhe would go, but did not. To follow a Pastor therefore is
another thing, then to profess and say we will follow him; there is more
required, viz. to follow him in our practice, and to submit our judgment to
his, knowing that he is (...) over (...) by God, to direct and guide us in
matters of our souls: Discentem opotet (...); it is true in all arts and
sciences: and if we will be scholars in Christ's school, we must not (...) our
judgment to the judgment of the Church, but submit thereto, and to our own
Pastor in special, unless it appear evidently that he is in an error, (which
may (...) be known) (...) without this, we can (...) obey or follow in our
(...). It is most true which S. Augustine says, Pertinet ad nos cura, ad vos
obedientia, ad nos vigilantia pastoralis, De verb. Dom. in (...). ser. 62
ad vos humilitas gregis; The care belongs to us, and obedience to you,
pastoral watching is ours, the humility of the flock is (...). When (...) was
(...) in Moses his room, he was to come to Eleazar the Priest: and at his word
he must go out, and at his word he must come in, for Eleazar must ask (...) of
God for him. This was Gods order which was never (...). though now it be
neglected: and though men ask the counsel of the Lawyer for their (...), and of
the Physician for their body, and follow their directions, yet the Minister is
not thought fit to (...) them for their fouls, but here every one can give
counsel as well as the Minister.

3. They must give the Minister honor, double honor. They which labor,
(...), 1 Timothy 5. 17
which take extraordinary pains in the word and doctrine (for the emphasis lies
in that word) let them be counted worthy of double honor, (...) the Apostle.

1. The honor of reverence, which extends both to our judgment and (...). In
our judgment, by having a reverent (...) of them, (...), Phil. 2. 29. honor
them highly; and then in our affection, a singular degree of love is due to
them, The Apostle says, they must be (...) highly in love. We beseech you
brethren to know them 1 These. 5. 12.
which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and (...) you, and to
esteem 13.
them very highly for their works sake.

2. The honor of maintenance. Let him that is taught in the word communicate
to Gal. 6. 6.
him that teaches in all good things, faith the Apostle. God threatens in
Zachary, that whereas he had broken one staff, if the (...) wages were not
(...), he would Zach. 11. 4.
break both, and what can then follow in the Church, but Barbarifine and
Ignorance, and by consequence Epicurisnie and Atheism. When men are sick, they
can send for the Minister to comfort them, then they think of Heaven, when they
must leave the Earth, but when they are recovered, there is no (...) use of
him, or when they are in health, they regard him not. It is well expressed by
the Prophet, when there were great droughts or rains, or (...) weather, they
remembered God and called Hos. 7. 14.
to him, but when they had what they desired, when they had got in their corn
and wine, they rebelled against him But God protests against this dealing, he
will not be so mocked Remember me in the days of thy youth, and in thy wealth
else (...) shall have no answer Eccles. 12. 1.
of me, when the evil days come. S. Augustine commenting upon the words before
recited [they which labor in the word and doctrine, let them be counted worthy
of double (...)] says, Scilicet (...) obediant, and exteriora (...), (...) in
Tit. 1. 5.
sed et terr. (...). This double honor is not only to obey in spiritual
things, (...) to them in temporals. For good (...) of the word ought not to be
(...) with high honor only, but with earthly (...) too. that (...) may not be
(...) 1 Cor. 9. 13.
sad and (...) in the want of (...) to (...) their charge, and may also (...)
14.
in their (...) obedience in (...) matters. (...) not (says Saint (...)) that
they which minister about holy things, (...) of things of the (...), and they
which wait at the Altar, are (...) with the Altar, even so has the Lord (...),
that they which preach the (...), should live of the (...). (...) is (...)
ordinance, not our benevolence. We are not at our liberty, but tied to it by
(...); and the minister has power from God to demand it (...) his own. And
thereupon it is that Saint (...) speaking of Saint (...) in this very point
(...), (...) (...) lib. de. passtorib. c 2
(...) 2 Thessalonians. 3. 8
surpata, sed (...), that though the Apostle chose rather to work with (...), 1
Cor. 9. 12.
and did not require milk from his sheep, yet he told the (...) that he had
power to have taken it, and that his fellow Apostles used this (...), not as
usurped, (...) as given them, (...) by God. And (...) it (...) but reason,
(...) Apostle says, If we have so un unto you (...) things, is it a (...)
thing if we 2 Cor. 10. 15.
reap your carnal things. But to conclude this point. The (...) of (...)
honor performed is from the want of (...). It was Saint (...) hope of the
Corinthians, that when their faith (...), his means would be (...). And so
(...) it be of ours, if your faith increase, we shall be crowned and (...), and
where this is wanting, we cannot expect it.

Concerning the difference of Bishops and (...), that they are (...) orders,
and that the Bishop is superior not (...) (...), but (...), and that by divine
right, the reverend author has fully proved it in his (...) to (...) (...)
first in latin, and lately translated into English, wherein any (...) man may
find full satisfaction. And (...) the power of the Priest or Minister of the
Gospel in binding and loosing, read a learned sermon made (...) the Author on
this subject, on John 20. 23. published among his other sermons.

CHAP. VIII.
Of fathers of our country, Magistrates. The duty of all toward their own
country. God the first magistrate. Magistracy Gods (...). Power of life and
death givento kings by (...), not by the people. Addition. 31. That regal power
is (...) from God, proved out of the authors other writings. The (...) of
magistracy. (...) To preserve true religion. 2. To maintain outward (...).
Magistrates (...) to shepherds in three respects. The (...) of the (...) power,
via of kings, and of inferior officers. The duties ofsubjects to their Prince.

AFter the fatherhood of the Church, order requires, (...) of those, whom even
nature and the Heathen by the light of (...) have reputed Genesis 45 8.
and termed Patres (...), fathers of the country; which are (...). (...) Judge.
5. 7.
which sort the chief (as has been showed) are in Scripture called fathers, as
(...), and the women mothers, as (...), a mother in Israel. And because their
(...) is Pater (...), God has commended the countries care especially to every
(...). For this end it was, that when God commanded (...) to leave his fathers
Genesis 12. 1.
house, he gives the country precedence, and sets it before kindred and fathers
psalm. 137. 4.
house: and we see what tears the people of God shed when they (...) carried
(...). 1. 4.
out of their own country into a strange land, and when (...) required them to
sing the Lords song in a strange land, (...) would not. And (...) psalm. 137. 1.
hearing of the misery of Jerusalem and his country men, sat down and (...).
On the other side, when the Lord (...) again the captivity of (...), when the
people were restored to their country, they were so over joyed, that they
seemed to be in an ecstasy, they were like to them that dream, they would
scarce believe that which they saw. And indeed a man's country and the good of
it being bonum totius, every man's good, a general blessing, it ought to be
preferred before bonum partis, a particular good; every man, especially the
prince and Magistrate ought to have a chief care over it. We see, that when the
body is in danger, men are willing to endure the (...) of a member, opening of
a vein, or scarifying, for the health of the whole We may see this care in the
very Heathen, both in word and deed, as first what they say in matter of
profit; unicuique pluris facienda est vtilitas communis, quam propria, the
common benefit is to be regarded before a man's peculiar commodity. And for
matter of danger; (...) saluti privata (...) est postponenda, private safety is
to be negelected, when the common comes in competition. And they go a little
further, that men are tied in such an obligation to their country, ut nemo
(...) parem refert gratiam, etiamsi vitam impendat, a man can never be grateful
enough to his country, though he lose his life for the good of it. And this
they made good in deed as well as in word: as appears by (...) king of
Athens, that to save his country from the conquest of the Dorians, Sigon.
willingly lost his life: and by Horatius Cocles, that to save Rome from
Porsennas Live.
Army adventured his life to the admiration of all ages. This being their
Maxim in this point, pro patria (...) honestius ducitur, quam vivendo patriam
and honestatem deserere, That it was far more honorable to die in a good cause
for the country, then by living to leave the country and honor both.

Now concerning Magistracy it self, we find it to be properly and originally
in God, and that he exercised it by himself at first immediately, as we may see
in three several cases.

1. In judgeing the Angels that kept not their first state. 2. In sentencing
Adam, Judge. 6.
Eve, and the serpent. 3. In the doom of Cain for murdering his brother. All
Genesis 3. 4. 11.
which make it evidently (...), that Magistracy properly is Gods own
prerogative. Afterward it came to man by Gods institution and ordinance, omnis
enim potestas a Deo est, there is no power but of God. Romans 13. 1.


When Cain had been censured by God for his cruel fratricide, and (as the text
says) went out (...) the presence of the Lord (his native country) and began
to increase in his (...), he built a City, and the first that we read of, and
his posterity increasing and inventing Arts, they began to (...) commonwealth
in it. Lamech, by reason that his sons Jubal and Tubal were inventers of arts
useful for the commonwealth, grew to that insolency, that he would bear no
injury at any man's hands, but would be his own judge, and oppress others at
his pleasure. This city of Cains, where Lamech and his sons lived, made the
godly first to band themselves together, and to take order for their defense;
for after Enos Seths son, when Seth also began to be generative, and to
increase, they made open profession of the name of God, being a distinct body
by themselves; so that here was City against City, and this was the first
occasion of civil government.

And indeed (...) potestas the (...) power had been sufficient to have governed
the whole world; but that (as the Prophet speaks) some men in process of time
were like the horse and mule, whose mouths must be held in with bit and psalm.
32. 10.
bridle, which produced another larger government, which should be more
powerful to rule such kind of unruly people, which was by giving (...) vita et
necis, power of life and death to one man, which because the people could not
give, for (...) est Dominus (...), no man has power over his own life, and
therefore none can give that to another, which he has not in himself;
therefore it is, that God, who has absolute dominion and power of life and
death, put the sword into the hand of the supreme Magistrate, and appointed
that the people should be subject to him; which was well liked by all upon this
ground, (...) timere unum quam multos, It is better to fear one, then many.
Better one wolf then many, to put man's life in continual hazard.

And now came in magistracy with power of life and death, to be Gods own (...).
For when after the flood people began to multiply, and that God foresaw that
wickedness would increase among men, even to cruelty, he made an Gen 9. 6.
(...) for Magistracy, and gave the sword into one man's hand, to execute
vengeance, and to do justice, (...) shedding his blood, that (...) the blood of
other men: which power of life and death, we do not find to be granted by God
before the flood. And soon after we, read that Melchisedech (whom diverse
writers agree to 14. 18.
be Sem) took upon him the title and power of a king, to defend Gods people
from Nimrod and his fellow hunters.

This power of life and death, manifestly proves, that (...) never had nor
could Addit. That. (...) power is only from God.
have their power from the people, or from any other but from God alone. And
that this was the positive (...) of this learned Author, is manifest by his
late and accurate sermons, perfected by himself, in many of which he expressly
proves this point, and purposely insists largely and learnedly upon it:
especally in his sermon upon Pro. 8. 15. By me Kings reign P. 933. etc. Which
is nothing else but a large tract upon this subject. Among other things he
speaks thus. Per me regnant, and that is not per se regnant, another person it
is besides themselves, one different from them. And who is that other person?
Let me tell you first, it is but one person, not many, per me, is the singular
number, it not per nos, so it is not a plurality, no multitude they hold by.
That claim is one by per me, one single person it is, per quem. The other a
psalm. 93. 97.
Philosophical conceit it came from, from those that never had heard this
wisdom preach. 99.
In this book we find not any sovereign power ever seated in any body
collective, or derived Deuteronomy. 5. 14.
from them. This we find, that God he is King. That the kingdoms be his, Jer.
27. (...).
and to whom he will, he gives them. That ever they came out of Gods hand by
any per me, any grant into the peoples hands to bestow, we find not. This per
me, will bear no per alium, besides; he that must say, per me reges, must say
per me coelum and terra.

After he says. There is a per of permission, as we say in the Latin, per me,
but you may for all me; but this per we utterly reject, for though the latum
per may bear this sense, yet the Greek (...) the Heb. (...) will by no means,
the phrase, the Idiom of the tongue will in no wise endure it. How take we per
then? what need we stand long about it, having another per, and of the same
person to pattern it by. Omnia per ipsum facta sunt, says Saint John, and the
same says Solomon by and John 1. 3.
by after in this chapter. Then as by him all things made there, so by him
kings reign here. The world and the government of the world, by the same per
both; one and the same cause Institutive of both. That was not by bare
permission, I trust, no more this.

Per ipsum, then, and if per ipsum, per (...), quia ipse est verbum. For how
were they the creatures made?

Dixit and facta sunt, by the word, by him. And how these Kings? by the same
psalms. 145. 6.
Ego dixi; even by the same, that he himself, Dixit (...), Domino Deo As he
then; 82. 6.
they. And so does Christ himself interpret, Ego Dixi (...) a word came 110. 1.
to them. And what manner was it? Saint Paul tells us it was (...) an
ordinance, John 10. 35.
Romans 13. 2.
a word of high authority, the imperial decrees have no other names but (...)
This now then is more then a per of Permission, a per of Commission, it is a
special warrant, an ordinance imperial, by which kings reign.

-- Expressed by his word: his word only (...) nay his deed too, his best
deed, his gift, Dedi vobis Regem: gift of grace, as even they acknowledge in
their styles, that gratia 1 Cor. 15. 10.
Job. 8. 6. 7.
Dei sunt quod sunt. Given by him, sent by him, placed in their thrones by him,
vested psalm. 18. 39.
with their robes by him, girt with their swords by him, anointed by him,
crowned 89. 20.
by him. All these by him's we have toward the understanding of per ^m, so by
him as 21. 3.
none are, or can be more.

-- By him, nay more then by him -- There is not by in the Hebrew, and yet the
word is (...) but that in true and exact propriety rendered is not by me, but in
me. The meaning is, that they are first in him, and so come from him. And yet
so from him as still they be in him, both Corona Regis, says Esaias, and Cor
Regis, says Esa. 62. 3.
Solomon, their persons and estates both in manu Domini. And in him, as he
says, my prove. 21. 1.
father in me, and I in him, so they in him, and he in them. -- For as it is
true, Jo. 17. 21.
They reign in and by him, so it is likewise true, he reigns, in and by them
-- he in them as his Deputies, they in him, as their Author and Authorizer. He
by their persons, they by his power.

-- Now I weigh the word Reges, what? any by him? any in gross qualification?
what without any regard of religion at all? sure if none but true professors
had been here (...), it must have been but per me Rex, for none but one, but
this Solomon, was then such, of all the Kings of the earth; but in that it is
Reges, the holy Ghosts meaning is, to take in all the rest. Hiram, and Pharaoh,
and Hadad, they are in too, in this Reges: for where the Scripture
distinguishes not, no more do we, be their religion what it will, by him they
are.

But what if they take too much upon them, (Corahs exception) Then it is Dedi
Numb. 16. 3.
vobis Regem in ira, says God by the Prophet. Angry I was when I gave him, but
Nos. (...). 11. 8. 10.
I gave him though; per me iratum, it is but per me still.

But this onus principis, say they in the Prophet, how may we be rid of it? is
there any other per me to go unto, to deprive or depose them? sure where the
worst is reckoned that can be of them, Clamabunt ad Dominum, is all I find. No
per to do it but he. By him, and by none but him these be; by him, and by none
but him, they cease to 1 Samuel 8. 18.
he. In nature every thing is dissolved by the same means it came together. In
law, (...) and destitution belong both to one. In divinity, the Prophet in one
and the same verse says, Dedi vobis Regem, (in the forepart) and with one
breath abstuli (...), in the latter; so both pertain to him. Dominus dedit,
Dominus abstulit; Hos. 13. 11.
and for this new per me, we argue from the text. He makes no King we know, and
as he makes none, so he can unmake none.

-- It is (...) true, that the main frame of government, the first raising of
it, could be by none but this per me. But I (...) upon particulars rather;
wherein any that shall but weigh, what difficulties, what oppositions be
raised, what plots and practices to keep Reges from Regnant, those from it
whose of right it is, shall be forced to confess, that even by him they have
their first entrance. Take him, (...) next (...) Solomon, and he that shall
mark Adonijahs plot, drawing the high Priest, Abiathar, and the general of the
field Joab, into a strong faction against him, shall find, Solomon was bound
to acknowledge. that per me, he came (...) if he will not, Adonijah himself
will, he was forced to do it. That the kingdom was turned from him, and was his
brothers, for it came unto him (even per me,) by the Lord. This confession of
his is upon record. 1. King 2. 15.

-- If per me Reges be from Christ, from whom is the other Per me Rebels, Per
me Regicidae, from whom they? If by me Kings reign, be Christ's? by me Kings 2
Cor. 6. 15.
slain, whose per is that? That per cannot be the per of any, but of Christ's
opposite; who is that? Quae conventio Christi and Belial? what agreement has
Christ, and Belial? there he is, you see whose brood they be, that go that way
even Belials brood.

He out of his (...) against per me, can neither endure Reges nor Regnant, but
stirs up enemies against them both, both Reges and Regnant. Against (...),
Regicidas, to assault their persons: against Regnant, Rebels, to subvert
their (...).

This and much more to this purpose we may read, learnedly, and elegantly, in
that sermon,

The like we may find in his other sermons, as in that on 1 Chr. 16. 27. Touch
not mine Anointed. P. 800: 801. etc. 807. And in many other places.

As we have showed the original of Magistracy, so we shall add somewhat
briefly The ends of Magistracy.
of the ends of it: which are two.

1. The chief end of (...) is, to preserve religion and the true worship of 1 Timothy 2. 2.
God, (as was showed before) that men may live together in all Godliness and
honesty. Therefore Abraham not finding this in Caldea, where he was pars
patriae, Genesis 12. 1.
one of the country, chose rather by divine warrant to leave his country and
kindred, and sojourn in a strange land. And this end is intimated, when Israel,
being under a Heathen King in Egypt, one that knew not Jehovah, desired to
leave Egypt, and Exodus 5. 13.
to go and serve God in the wilderness. The want of this end made the Priests
and Levites leave their country and their possessions, and depart from Jeroboam
to Judah and Jerusalem, because Jeroboam had (...) religion, and cast them out
2 Chr. 11. 13.
from ministering in the priests office before the Lord? and because this is the
chief 14.
end of all Magistracy, God appointed, that the king, as soon as he was settled
in this throne, should have a copy of the law to read, for his direction in the
exercise Deuteronomy. 17. 18.
of his office. When this end therefore cannot be had, where true religion is
not maintained, a man may leave his country, and live elsewhere, where it may
be enjoyed.

2. After this comes in a second end, outward peace and (...), That as the
Apostle speaks, we may lead a peaceable and quiet life. Hence is the Magistrate
called 2 Timothy 2. 2.
a Pastor or (...); It is true, the Minister is called a Pastor, and much ado
there is, in urging thereupon, great and extraordinary pains and diligence in
him about his flock; but seeing the title is as often or ostener given to the
Magistrate, it is strange, that there should be no such diligence required of
him; for we find, that the Metaphor Genesis (...). 24.
is given first of all to the (...), as to Joseph and David in (...), and Psalm
78. (...)
generally to all rulers, who are to be set over the people, that they be not
as sheep Numb. 27. 17.
without a Shepherd.

Now this (...) implies three things required in the Magistrates office.

1. To gather and keep the sheep together, for their (...) safety against
wolves, Eze34. 11, 15
that they may not stray: and to this end to provide them good pasture, where
they may seed together.

2. Because there may be dissension among the sheep, and as the Prophet speaks,
there are fat and lean cattle, and the fat do thrust with the side, and push
the diseased, Ezekiel 34. 18.
and having fed and drunk themselves, do trample the grass, and trouble the
water, that the lean sheep can neither eat nor drink quietly, therefore the
shepherd must judge between them. I will set up a shepherd over them, and (...)
shall feed them, even my servant David. So that, to keep the fat from hurting
and oppressing the lean within the fold, that all may feed quietly, is the
second part of the Shepherds office.

3. Because there is a wolf without the fold, an outward enemy, therefore the
John 10. 12.
Shepherd must watch and protect the sheep against the wolf, as well as against
the great goat; that is the third part.

All these are to be in the Magistrate, and they depend (...) follow upon one
another.
1. Princes and Rulers must feed the flock and not themselves only, they are
(...), nourishers of the Church. 2. They must procure peace at home, by
protecting the weak against the strong, administering justice equally. 3. They
must keep out foreign invasion, protect them against foreign enemies, as
appears in the example, regis non boni, of none of the best kings, Saul; He
takes 1 Samuel 11. 5.
care, (...) quid sit populo quod fleat, that the people have no cause to weep,
that they be be not di quieted by Nahash the Ammonite, etc. Thus we see the
ends of Magistracy.
Now for the duties. Of the duties of Subjects to their Princes, read a learned
discourse of the Author in his sermon on Proverbs 24. 21, 22, 23. Fear God and
the king, etc. as also what Caesar's right is, which is due from the people, on
Matthew. 22. 21. Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, etc. And for the
excellency of Regal government, and how great a blessing it is to the Church,
and what miseries and confusions follow where it is wanting, see the Authors
sermon on (...). 17. 6. In those days there was no king in Israel, etc.

1. As there was (...) in the Ministry, by unlawful entrance and intrusion
Duties of (...) and people.
into that calling, so is there also in the Magistracy. It is said of the
people of Laish, that they lived careless, because they had no Magistrate.
Therefore the Danites fell Judge. 18. 7.
upon them and slew them, and usurped authority over them. But to prevent this,
men are not to take upon them a government (...); for as our Savior in the
(...) John 10. 7.
of the Ministry said, I am the door: so in the case of Magistracy he says,
Per me prove. 8. 15.
Reges regnant, by me Kings reign, and Princes decree justice. If once it come
to that which God speaks by the Prophet, Regnaverunt, sed non per me, they
have set up Hos. 8. 4.
Kings, but not by me; they have made Princes, and I knew it not: If once God
be not of their counsel, and they assume this honor to themselves, not being
called of God Heb. 5. 4.
Amos. 6. 13.
(as the Apostle speaks) or (as the Prophet) take to themselves horns, [that is
power] by their own strength, these are usurpers, not lawful Magistrates. An
example we have of an usurper in Abimelech, and of his practices to get a
kingdom. 1. He hireth lewd and vain persons, 2. makes himself popular, and 3.
commits murder, even upon his brethren: And those that had right to it, he
either took Judge. 9. 3, 4, 5.
(...).
out of the way, or drove away for fear. For these are the three practices of
usurpers, as Jotham tells them in his parable. This then is the first duty of a
Magistrate, to come in by a just and right title, not to usurp.

2. In the next place, being rightly settled in charge by God, we must consider
the division which S. Peter makes, into 1. either (...) the king, whom he calls
(...): or 2. (...), which are under officers appointed by him, as Captains in
time 1 Pet. 2. 13. 14
of war, and Judges in time of peace. God gives the reason for under officers
to Moses, Because one man is not able to bear the (...) alone. And the very
same reason Numb. 11. 17.
does Jethro give to Moses, when he advised him to take under officers to help
him to Exo. 18. 14 etc
judge the people. So did Moses to the people; when the people were multiplied,
he Deuteronomy. 1. 9.
confessed he was notable to hear all causes himself.

Now concerning under Officers, this rule must be observed; that there be no
more of them then is necessary; that the (...) of them exceed not so, as that
they be a (...). 5. 15.
burden and clog to the Commonwealth. We see in Nehemiahs time, that it was
not the supreme Magistrate, but the under officers that dealt hardly with the
people. The more of them, the more fees were exacted, which becomes gravamen
Reipublicae, a grievance to the Commonwealth, the people cannot bear it; and
therefore is it neither safe, nor stands it with the policy or justice of the
(...) to admit too many of them.

1. The peoples duty about the election of the king or supreme Magistrate
(where he is elective and not by succession) must be such, as Quem Dominus Deus
(...) elegerit: Deuteronomy. 17. 15.
thou shall choose whom the Lord thy God shall choose. According to the same
rule must be the (...) of inferior officers: if the choice be made otherwise,
it is vicious for the manner, but not void; Multa tueri non debent, quae facta
valent. 1 Kin. 1. 20, 33
Bathsheba urged many reasons to David to declare her son Solomon to be his
successor, and David nominated him: but it seems it was not so much by her
persuasion, or his own affection, but in a solemn assembly of Peers, he gives
the main reason, that as 1 Chro. 27. 4, 5
God had formerly chosen himself before all the house of his father to be king
over Israel, and Judah: so had God likewise of all his sons chosen Solomon to
sit upon the throne of the kingdom. And indeed the choosing of a man for his
gifts, is all one, as if God himself had chosen him. After these two, David and
Solomon, God appointed their (...) to succeed and sit on their throne.

2. The next rule is, the person to (...) chosen king, or an officer of a king,
is to be Deuteronomy. 1. 13.
one of the nation, and not a stranger: and the reasons are. 1. Because he will
be best 17. 15.
affected to the people among whom he is (...). 2. Because he is better
experienced with the laws and customs of the nation, then a stranger can be. 3.
He best knows Acts 26. 3.
the temper of the people, as Paul spoke of Agrippa, in that respect a fit
judge.

For the particular and proper duties and qualifications in a Prince, they are
these. Deuteronomy. 17. 16, 17.
1. He must not be affected to Egypt, that is, to a false or contrary religion,
he must be sound in Religion. 2. Not given to pleasures, especially the
pleasures of wine or women. Solomon's many wives made him lay many burdens and
charges on the Jews, which when they could not persuade Rehoboam to lighten,
they rebelled against their king first, and against God afterward; and at
length were captivated. 3. Nor a (...) of silver and gold, in the same verse in
Deuteronomie, not covetous; only he must be (...) careful as the Heathen
directs, to lay so much together, (...) amicos beneficiis obstringere, ac
indigentibus suppeditare, been merentibus remunerare, and inimicos jure (...):
by good turns to bind his friends to him, to relieve them that are in want, to
reward the well-deserving, and revenge himself upon his enemies.

4. Which is first to be done, because it includes all the rest, as soon as he
is settled in his throne, he must provide a copy of the law; out of which he
must learn. 1. To Prove. 29. 14.
fear God. 2. And to see it practiced, first by himself, and then in his Court,
and lastly, by all the country. 3. He must learn to be humble. 4. To do
justice to the people, and then his throne shall be established for ever. Saul
being made king had another heart given him. 1 Samuel 10. 6. This God gave him
when he came among the Prophets. Gods counsel to kings is, Be wise now, O ye
kings. This Wisdom religion teaches, and it prevents honors, and riches, and
pleasures, from drawing aside the hearts of Princes. He that is thus qualified
is meet for a kingdom.

1. Being thus elected and qualified, and placed in his (...), he is to know,
that he is not there by his own power, but as we see the style runs, Caesar
Dei gratia, and permissione (...), by Gods favor and permission. And whereas
the law makes this 1 Timothy 6. 15.
distinction of power, there is potestas arbitraria, an absolute power, and
potestas delegata, Prove. 8. 15.
a power delegated by another, he is to acknowledge, that (...) has only
(...) delegatam from God, the other is invested in God alone: he is the King of
kings, Lord Paramount. Per me reges regnant, by me kings reign, says (...).
The king mustconfesse with the Centurion; I am a man under authority, though I
say unto one go, (...). (...). 9.
and to another come, and they both obey me: (...) he said, I am under Claudius
Lysias, he under Foelix, Foelix under the Emperor, and God over rules us all.
And this even the Heathen did see. Regum in proprios, reges in (...) imperium
(...) Jovis; the government over the people is in Kings, and over Kings
themselves in God alone.

I have said, ye are Gods, says God by King David, in respect of the
government (...) 82. 6.
of men; therefore they must rule as (...) God himself ruled personally upon
earth; and how is that? If he did vouchsafe to keep the power in his own hand,
he would rule by his word. Princes then must rule according to this word, they
must make no laws contrary to this: and because perfect skill in the word is
hardly to be expected in Princes, but in those at whose mouth the law of God
must be sought, viz. the Priests, Numb. 27. 21.
therefore the Prince is to receive direction at the mouth of Eleazar. And this
is his first duty.

The peoples duty answerable to this, is to acknowledge, that a King is Gods
Deputy, 1 Samuel 10 26.
and to submit to his authority, which is done by Gods touching the heart; for
obedience proceeds from the spirit of God, as well as power from God. Our
(...) gives a good rule in this. For there were two (...) of people in Jury,
one that made made an Insurrection with Theudas against Caesar, about (...), he
and his followers would acknowledge nothing due to Caesar, (...), spirits of
opposition. And secondly, there were spiritus aulici too, Herodians, that would
have (...) to have all, even the things that were Gods. And these men came to
Christ, with the Scribes to tempt him. Is it lawful to give tribute to Caesar,
or not? They would try which side Christ would join to; but he goes in a middle
way: He condemns Matthew. 22. 21.
the seditious party that denied Caesar his tribute: and yet joins not with the
Herodians; He says not, Omnia sunt Caesaris, all things belong to Caesar: but
Caesar has his Quae, and God has his Quae; so he goes from Theudas, but not
to the (...), but stays at Obedience, which is in medio.

2. The second duty of kings is, because God has been so liberal to Caesar, as
to make him his (...), (for quicquid (...) de Deo, etcreaturis, derivatur a
(...) ad creaturas, whatsoever is spoken of God and his creatures, is derived
from God to (...) treatures, and so that Supremacy which is in kings, is
derived from God, who is supreme over all; he was able to have done all alone,
and if (...) had followed the course of the world, conceiving that author
alienae potentiae aufert de (...), or perdit suam, he that is author of another
man's power takes from, or loses his own) He would not have bestowed any part
of his dignity upon another, as we see he has imparted to Caesar. Now Caesar
must not (...) him, by breaking into the pale of Gods power, which he has
reserved to himself: for (as we see) there is a (...) a division: Christ makes
a distinction between quae Caesaris, and quae Dei; therefore he must be careful
to leave God his own: he must not dominari (...), (...) over the conscience,
for none keeps court in the conscience but God alone. Therefore he must not
command any against his allegiance to God, sealed in (...); He must not command
any thing against the word: for as S. Jerome says, what(...) paid to Caesar
against the word, is not not Caesaris vectigal, Caesar's tribute, but (...), the
Devils. He knowing Gods glory to be his end, must only be custos leg is, the
keeper of the law, that (...), of all the works commanded in the law, by
prohibiting outward violence against the law of God. The Minister can but
exhort and persuade; and do he what he can, some will use outward violence; to
restrain which is the proper work of the Magistrate. When there was no king in
Israel, every man did what was Judge. 17. 6.
good in his own eyes; which is proved by Micha's attempt, making a Teraphim,
and by the robbery of the Danites, Chap. 18. and the ravishing of the maids by
the Benjamites, Chap. 19. Therefore for defending from external injuries, he
must be custos (...) tabulae, keeper of both tables. S. Augustine says, Reges
si in Contra Crec. lib. 3. cap. 51
suo regno quae bona sunt jubent, and mala prohibent, faciunt, non solum quae
ad humanam societatem attinent, sed ad divinam religionem: If Kings command
their Subjects good things, and forbid them evil, they do not only that which
belongs to the preservation of humane society, but Gods service also. And
again, In hoc sciunt reges a Deo praecipi, (...) Deo inserviant, in quantum
Reges: Kings must know, they are to serve God as they are kings. They are then
to be Gods servants, as they are kings, but not to exceed the power given them
by God: their supremacy must not extend to what God either reserved to himself,
or committed peculiarly to the Priests. Vzziah took 2 Chro. 26. 16
on him by his supremacy to burn incense in the Temple, which belonged only to
the Priests, but God stroke him with leprosy. (...) on the other side, by his
29. 5, 6.
supremacy, would order matters of Religion, but how? not as the former did, or
K. H. 8.
as a late King, who would have whatsoever he proposed to be good Divinity: but
he commands the Priests and Levites to do, what belonged to their office; he
usurps not their office, but makes them do their duty: and this is the
supremacy which a Christian Prince ought to have. Their care must be to provide
for religion and Gods service, to see all done by those to whom it belongs, not
to act themselves. King Asa, whose heart was perfect, (as the text says)
removed not the high places. He did 1 King. 15. 4.
jubere bona, sed non (...) mala. King Ezekias did both. And under this we
comprehend 2 King. 18. 9.
that kind of compulsion, which we see in the Gospel. Compellite ut introeant,
compel them to come in: there must be foris necessit as, ut sit (...)
voluntas; a necessity Luke 14. 23.
abroad, to make a will within. In S. Augustines time there were diverse
Donatists that by compulsion were converted, and thanked the Emperor for
compelling them.

3. Another part of the duty of a Prince is, (as he is the head of the People)
to be careful to feed them. The Tribes of Israel tell King David, that the Lord
told him, 1 Samuel 11. 17.
when he made him King, That he should feed his people; Hot histriones, or
canes, but 2 Samuel 5. 2.
subditos, as a Father speaks upon Hosea 7. 5. We have the description of a
(...) by 1 Sa. 18 11. etc
Samuel at large. He accounts all as born to be his drudges and slaves; and the
Wise Prove. 28. 16.
man calls such, great oppressors: and the Prophet, evening wolves (not
Pastors) zach. 3. 3.
and roaring lions. He must not be of their minds, but like Aristides of
Athens, who was so careful of the Commonwealth, that he used to wish, that
either his house Diod.
were the Commonwealth, or the Commonwealth his household. So was it with
Joshua, his care was, in the first place to divide portions for the Tribes, and
afterward had his Josh. 19. 49.
own portion. Not like some Rulers, that choose first, and serve others last.
And Nehemiah (though he had an hundred and fifty at his table, and that the
precedent governors Neh. 5. 14, 15, 16, 17.
had taken much money from the people, yet) did not take so much as he might
for the space of twelve years together.

Now this provision must begin with care for the soul; as Jehoshaphat did, who
2 Chronicles. 17. 9
sent the Levires thorowout the kingdom, with the book of the Law to teach the
people; and to this end, that there may be a perpetual supply of this food,
there must be a Naioth in Ramah, persons educated, as in Bethel, in Mizpeh, the
schools for the Prophets, and children of the Prophets, from whence Teachers
are to grow up one under other.

2. The next care must be for the body. Pharaoh laid up corn against a time of
dearth. 2 Chronicles. 9. 21 19. 5.
And not only so, but he must send ships for foreign commodities, as Solomon
did. To prevent and end injuries and contentions at home, Judges must be
appointed, after Jehosaphats example.

Lastly, to preserve them from foreign invasions, he must (with the same King)
2 Chronicles. 17. 2 13. 14.
set garrisons in his own cities, and have captains and soldiers, as he had in
some cities of Ephraim taken by his father.

1. The first duty of the people, answering to these is, as the Wise man
counsels, (...). 24. 21.
1. Fear God and the King. 2. Not to meddle with those that are given to
change, that is, with rebels and seditious persons, who would change Laws,
Religion, and Government. There are diverse shires and corporations in the
kingdom, and every of them have their several Magistrates, and (...) over them,
but they are all under one Prince; like as the Kings of the earth, are as so
many justices of peace in several kingdoms, all constituted by one God, who is
over all. Now if any of these subordinate Magistrates rebel against their
Prince, he is a Rebel both to the Prince, and to God, and so are all that
hearken to him, or join with him. Therefore as we must not obey Kings against
God, so must we not obey any inferior Magistrate against Romans 8. 28.
kings: ut omnia cooperentur in bonum, that all things may work together for
good, as the Apostle speaks.

2. In regard of their care over us, we are to follow Christ's example in
obedience. and to know, that we are according to the right sense of his words,
not dare, but Matthew. 22. 21.
reddere (...), quae sunt Caesaris; to render (not to give) to render his due;
for we know, it is the rule of Justice, (...) reddendum quod suum est, to
render every one his own. We have (...) of theirs in (...) hands, and (...)
illicita (...), dummodo quae sunt requirit, it is no unjust demand in any man
when he requires but his own. As in regard that he secures out tillage he must
Aug.
have tribute, out of our lands: for keeping the seas peaceable, he (...) to
have vectigal, custom; and in time of necessity and wars, he must have
subsidies. Besides that which Nehemiah calls the governors bread, (...). Neb.
5 15.


3. The third duty of the Prince is in cases of appeal called Canon Regis, or
Regni, to do justice to all. It is justice that establishes the Throne. Saint
(...) says, prove. 16. 12.
just (...) Regis pax est (...), tutamen (...) etc. The justice of a King is
the peace of the people, and (...) of the kingdom. And Saint (...) sine
justitia magna (...) nibil aliud sunt quammagna (...), without justice great
kingdoms are nothing else but great dens of thieves.

And in the administration of justice he must be careful, ut osejus non (...)
prove. 16. 10.
in (...), that his mouth transgress not in judgment: and in so doing his
kingdom 14. 34. 11. 11.
shall be exalted, and the rather if in his time he take care. 1. That the
righteous psalm. 72. 7.
flourish, if good men be encouraged. 2. And that the evil be scattered, prove.
20. 8.
that the innocent be not oppressed or kept under, (...) that the wicked have
11.
their desert his eye must not spare them, The dross must be taken away Deuteronomy.
19. 10.
from the silver. Take away the wicked, and the kings throne shall be
established prove. 25. 4. 5.
in justice.

The peoples duty in regard of this Justice, is to fear him; we must fear him
if we Romans 13. 4.
do evil, for he bears not the sword in vain, for he is the minister of God,
a revenger, prove. 20. 2.
to execute wrath upon him that does evil, as the Apostle tells us. If we 16.
24.
do well, fear not with a servile, but a filial fear, for ruler; are not a
terror Luc. 12. 4.
to good works, but to the evil; to whom the Kings wrath is as the roaring of
a lion. Prove. 20. 2. Will thou then not be afraid of the power, do that Romans
13. 3.
which is good.

4. The fourth and last duty of Kings, which procures both fear and honor is,
their humble and meek behavior in government, and using their power. Not
bragging of their power as Saul. Cannot I give to every of you fields and
vineyards, and make you captains etc. Nor (...) of their power as Pilate to
Christ; know thou 1 Samuel 22. 7.
not that I have power to crucify thee, or to release thee? this comes to
pass Jo. 19. 10.
because they cannot (...) digest that great happiness they have, but forget
that rule of the Apostle, that all is given them for edification, not for
destruction: no man has received power to do hurt, but only to do good. Haman
2 Cor. 10. 8.
could not digest the power he had, but all the (...) must know of it. Saint
(...). 5. 11.
(...) gives a good rule to magistrates. Talis debet esse (...) ut is qui
praeest, ease circa subditos (...), quatenus (...) timeri aebeat and iratus
amari, (...) eum nec nimia lenitas vilem reddat, (...) severitas odiosum. 1. 3.
Moral:
Such should be the moderation in government, that he which rules should stand
in such terms with his subjects, as that they may fear him when he is well
pleased, and love him when he is angry: that neither too much lenity make him
contemptible, nor too much severity bring him into hatred. (...). 4. 13.


The Heathen man makes this distinction between a Tyrant and a good King. The
good king will say, I am to do this, I pray pardon me, it is my duty. The
Tyrant says, I may and will do it. Therefore his counsel is, that though they
may do it all (...), yet it will be prudence in them, to take others along with
them, that thereby their authority may be the less envied, and that they do
sometimes depart from their right, and not urge always (...) jus. For as the
Preacher says, better is a poor wise child, then an old foolish king, that
will take no counsel. Naaman took his servants counsel. 2. King. 5. 14.

The conclusion of both is panciora licent ei, quam (...), (...), He should
take the least liberty of all other, who has liberty to do what he lift. Thus
he ought to think, and thus to think is a great part of that humility and
meeknes, which ought to be in Princes: otherwise as the heathen says, this
(...) fear, may bring (...) flattery, but never (...) hearty good will to him.

1. The duties to answer this is, 1. (...) not to fear him so much, as to be
afraid of him, lest any hurt should come unto him. The (...) (...) not let
David adventure himself in a dangerous war against his rebellious son, 2 Samuel
18. 3.
and their reason was, thou art worth 10000 of us. So again in the war with the
Philistimes, they swear Thou shall no more go out with us, and why? they
esteemed him as the light of the kingdom, and say, that thou quench not the
light of Israel: if he should miscarry, they accounted themselves to be but 2
1. 17.
in darkness.

2. Another part of their duty is, to bear with their Princes infirmities; if
they fail at any time, to cover their failings, and to bury them in silence:
the contrary to this is, when men blaze abroad the faults of their governors,
and speak evil of them, a thing severely forbidden in scripture, which counts
it a kind of blasphemy to speak evil of those who are in Gods place. They have
blasphemed thee, and standered the footsteps of thine anointed, says the
Psalmist. Thou shall not Exodus 22. vlt.
revile the Gods, nor curse the ruler of thy people, says God. And Saint Peter
notes it as a high degree of wickedness, in the sectaries and (...) professors
of his time, that they despised government, presumptuous they were,
self-willed, and 2 pet. 2. 10.
were not afraid to speak evil of dignities etc. And the preacher goes home,
Ecclef. 10. 20.
forbidding even to wish evil to the King, though it be in thy thought, much
(...) openly.

It is true, Elias, when Ahab became a troubler of Israel by permitting Jezabel
to murder Gods prophets, and set up the worship of Baal, told him from God,
that he was the troubler of Israel; and thereupon this extraordinary prophet
convinced the kings error, put to death the (...) prophets, and left Ahab to
Gods judgments, if he amended not; this he did by (...) and immediate
commission from God, which others cannot follow, unless they have the like
warrant.

Now for under officers, what their duties are. The duties of under officers
are.

1. They must be men of courage, able men, not drawn by favor or power of
Exodus 18. 21.
great men. They must not be drawn aside by fear, or favor of any. Now how
Deuteronomy. 16. 19.
may that be? if they fear God. This takes away all vain fear of men, and
corrupt affection, and makes them constant in their way. 2. They must be true
and just, not wresting judgment for (...). 3. They must be wise, having not,
only prudentiam, 3. 11.
in general, but prudence to know how to apply general rules to particular
cases, and when to use equity and moderation. Where this is not but fools are
prove. 26. 21.
preferred to bear rule, it is as Solomon says, as if one should guild a
potsherd, or as 13.
if a precious stone should be buried in a heap of stones. Where this prudence
is wanting, power is like a sword in a mad man's hand, he is like a fool, that
if he have a pellet in his cross bow, cries, have at you; and so lets it fly
at any without distinction. If this be not fit in kings, much less in those
which are subordinate to him. And that these qualities are in him must be known
to the tribes, to those he lives amongst. Exodus 18. 2.


1. If he be not courageous, he will be scared with si non facias, non es (...)
Caesaris, and so he will be an accepter of persons. So 2. if he be not just, he
will accept John 19. 12.
Act. 24. 26.
a gift, It was the fault of Foelix. In the first case, he that respects
persons will transgress prove. 28. 21.
for a piece of bread. In the latter, he that receives gifts, overthrows a
kingdom. 29. 4.
And thirdly if he want understanding, every one will despise him, and his
authority will be contemptible: therefore he must have all these qualities,
that so he may judicare justitiam, and that justissime, give judgment and that
most justly. He must not pervert the law, thereby to color his oppressions,
like those the Pialmist speaks of, who sit in the chair of wickedness, and
frame misch (...) by a law. If he be such a one like the unjust steward that
wastd his masters goods, if he abuse his princes psalm. 94. 20.
authority, who has entrusted him, he ought upon complaint to be put out of
his stewardship, and that by him that put him in, that so more fit may be in
his place.

CHAP. IX.
Of fathers by excellency of gifts. The honor due to them, is not debitum
justitiae, as the former, but debitum honestatis. 1. Of those that excel in
gifts of the mind. The honor due to them. 1. To acknowledge their gifts. Not
to (...) or deny them. Nor to extenuate them. Nor undervalue them: Nor tax them
with want of other gifts. The duty of the person gifted. 2. To prefer such
before others, to choose them for their gifts. Reasons against choice of
ungifted persons. The duty of the person chosen etc. 2. Of excellency of the
body by old age, and the honor due to the aged. 3. Of excellency by outward
gifts, as riches, Nobility etc. Reasons for honoring such. How they must be
honored. Fourthly, excellency by benefits conferred. Benefactors are fathers.
Rules for conferring of benefits. The duties of the receiver.

WE said at the beginning, in the explication of this precept, That those
duties which belong to any, propter rationem (...) excellentiae, by reason of
any special excellency, may be referred hither; and we did distinguish the
(...) the excellency of the person, from (...) power, and (...) principality
and government, for the former may be without the other two: there may be
excellency of gifts in some, who yet have no authority nor power conferred upon
them, nor are put into any place of government, and in some they do all concur,
as in good princes and governors. Now where there is the first, viz excellency
of gifts, though they have not power or principality, there is an honor due to
such, by virtue of this commandment; for honor is nothing else but testimonium
excellentie, a testimony of that excellency which is in another, and
therefore such ought to be honored, though they want the other two.

Dignitas sometimes signifies a state of dignity and honor, and sometimes
only the merit or worth of the person, whereby he deserves honor and dignity,
though he have it not. Of the former we have hitherto spoken, and the honor
due to persons so dignified; of the honor due to such, as have only the
latter, we are now to speak. And according to this two fold consideration of
dignity, there are two degrees of debitnm, duty to be performed, which the
Casuists and schools call 1. debitum legis, and 2. debitum (...).

1. A legal duty, or that which is required by law, which cannot be denied to
the party without injustice, and to which a man may be forced: such is the duty
owing to parents, Masters, Tutours, Ministers, Princes and Magistrates, of
which hitherto.

2. The other is due in honesty, and though there be no compulsion, to perform
it, yet if we would be such as we ought before God, this duty must not be
neglected: such is the duty of honor which we owe to all men for their gifts,
of the mind, body, or fortune etc.

This being premised, we come to those that have excellency separated from
dignity, who yet in regard of their excellency are to be honored. And here
according to the threefold good, there is a threefold excellency.

1. Of Mind, as knowledge etc. which they call excellentiam doni, excellency
of gifts. 2. Of the body, as old age. 3. Of fortune or outward estate, as
Nobility, riches etc. 4. To which we may add, the applying of any of these to
others for their benefit, whereby men are said benefacere, to do good, or
become benefactors. As when by the gifts of the mind, from those that are
gifted, or from rich men, by their estate, or aged men by rules of experience,
we receive good, they become then benefactors to us, and so an honor is due to
them from us, co nomine, for that cause.
1. For the gifts of the mind. They are called fathers, who excelled others
Genesis 4. 21.
in any such kind of excellency. Thus are they called fathers in scripture,
that have (...).
the gift of invention of arts: as Jubal who invented music. So likewise
Joseph was called Pharoahs father, for his wisdom, and policy, and art in
governing Egypt. 1 Cor. 12. 4.
And such gifts as these are called by the Schoolmen Gratiae gratis datae,
graces given freely by the spirit of God. And upon whom these (...) are
bestowed, they are to be reverenced and honored, in respect of the giver, and
the end for which he gives them, which is (...) the profit of the whole body.
And though these gifts be in some that want the true love of God, (which is
that gratia gratum faciens, the grace which makes a man accepted of God as a
son) and that the most able and sufficient men be not always the most
religious, yet there may be use made of his gifts, and his (...), endowments
must have honor; for vaspropter donum, the very vessel for the gift must have
respect.

1. The reverence to any such is: first freely to acknowledge that to be in
him, which he has, and commend it, and praise God for bestowing it on him, as
if he had imparted it to our selves, and pray that God would increase it in
him, and make it become profitable to others. Not to think it a derogation to
our selves to honor him that has it, not to be of their mind that say, Qui
auget (...) famam, detrahit suae, that he which honors another, detracts
from his own worth. It was not Ezechiels opinion in commending Daniel for his
wisdom, as in that speech, Art thou wiser then Daniel? nor of Saint Peter, that
commended Ezech. 28. 3.
Saint Paul's Epistles, and acknowledges a great measure of high and abstruse 2
pet. 3 15.
wisdom to be in him; especially considering that Saint Paul had reproved him
Gal. 2. 11.
to his face. Nor of Saint Paul concerning the other Apostles, when speaking of
James, John, and Peter, he calls them pillars of the Church. Nor of Saint John
Baptist in the commendation of Christ, not worthy to loose the latchet of his
shoes. Math. 3. 11.
And this is to be done not only to good men, but to evil also. Gedeon sets
out the deed of the Ephraimits, acknowledging his own insufficiency, in respect
of their great atchievemeuts. And as in outward gifts, so in inward. Achitophel
Judge. 8. 23.
is highly extolled for his wisdom by David, though he proved his enemy, 2 Samuel 16. 23.
yet David accounted him as an Oracle of God. And this is the first kind of
reverence due to them.

The contrary to this is. 1. When we stand affected as Saul who (being vexed
with with an evil spirit) was much moved that David's 10000. 1 Samuel 18. 7. 8.
should be preferred before his 1000. 2. Secondly, as some deny, so others
extenuate the gift that is in another. The manner is to say, it is (...), he
has such a gift, but it is not so much as the world conceives it to be. As the
devil said of Job, He is righteous indeed, but not as he ought, he serves God,
but it is for a reward, Job. 1.
not freely out of love.

3. When men can neither deny the gift, nor extenuate it, for the measure
wherein it is: then they will under value the gift it self, and vilify it,
saying, it is but a mean gift, little profit comes by it, either to the Church
or commonwealth. It is better to be well read etc.

4. When the gift is such, as it is rare and excellent in the view and
approbation of all men, that we our selves cannot but confess as much, then we
either tax and upbraid him with the want of other gifts, or with the abusing
of this; or lastly, we find some fault in his life; one thing or other stands
in our way, that we have not power to reverence it for it. We see it was so in
Christ's own case, when he cast out a devil, which one would think was a work
worthy of honor, yet instead of that the Pharisees told the people, he wrought
this miracle by the Math. 9. 34.
power of the devil And then they fell upon his breeding: what great matter can
there be in him more then others. He is but a Carpenters son etc. and then they
13. 55.
fell upon his life and conversation, and sift and examine that, he is a friend
of 2. 11.
publicans and sinners.

Answerable to this, there is a duty also required in him that has the gift. 1
That he acknowledge whence he has it, and say with Saint James; It is desuper
Jam. 1. 17.
from above. Saint Paul confessed as much: by the grace of God I am that I am;
nothing 1 Cor 15. 10.
grew naturally in him. And consequently this ought to teach him humility, and
not to be lifted up with it, as the prophet speaks. This want of humility
spoils Ezech. 28. 17.
all graces whatsoever. Saint Gregory says, Qui sine humilitate virtutes
congregat quasi in ventum pulverem portat. He that has graces and (...)
without humility does Hom. 6.
as it were carry dust in a great wind. And therefore S. Bernard said well,
Magna superbia, De diligendo
and delictum maximum est, datis uti tanquam innatis, it is a great arrogance,
and Deo.
the greatest offense, to use things given, as if they had been natural.

Now the best way to (...) our humility is, by acknowledging the defect of Romans
7. 24.
1 Cor. 15. 10.
other gifts in us, or at least by confessing that we (...) about us a body of
sin with S. Paul, that so the grace or gift, which God bestows upon us be not
in vain, as it is seen in many. For it may be in vain two ways.

1. In respect of the Church: for it is many times seen, that there are many
great and good gifts in many men without fruit. 2. In regard of himself: A man
may have gifts and never do good to himself, 9. 27.
neither in this life, nor in the life to come; he may be a Preacher to others,
and yet be a probate. A man's own conceit, as the Wise man speaks, may tear his
soul as a wild Ecclus. 6. 2.
Bull. And, as S. Chrysostom says, there are some, who fidem praedicant, and
(...) In Matthew. 23.
agunt; pacem aliis dant, and sibi non habent: that preach the faith, and their
actions are without faith; they give peace to others, and want it themselves.
2. The second duty that we owe to men of gifts is, praeferre and praeeligere,
to prefer and choose such before others; yielding most honor to them that have
best Romans 12. 10.
gifts. God does (...), separate men by their gifts, and wheresoever God has
placed 1 Cor. 4. 7.
his greatest gifts, at him he points (as it were) with his finger, that we
should 12. 31.
give him the greatest honor. It is the Apostles counsel to cover the best
gifts earnestly; and why the best gifts? that by them you may profit most:
therefore by consequence, 7.
they that by their gifts profit most, even de jure and lege talionis, should
have the best place, to do most good therein; and so for mean gifts, mean
places. Learning Prove. 3. 14, 15
(says the Wise man) is to be preferred before silver and gold; yea, and 8. 11.
precious stones. This is his order: If there were a choice to be made of gold,
silver, precious stones, and learning, learning (says the Wise man) must be
chosen before the other.

It is strange, that the first point in Moral Philosophy being that bonum est
eligendum, malum fugiendum, good is to be chosen, and evil avoided; and the 2.
quod melius est, magis eligendum, of things good the best is to be chosen, and
e malis minimum, the least of evils, that though these be principles in Moral
Philosophy, and received grounds, yet now they must be proved, and when they
are proved, yet they are not followed.

In the case of Rebellion, a sort of men, and they rebels, met and cried, The
counsel 2 Samuel 17. 14.
of Hushai is better then Achitophels, therefore we will follow it. In the case
of Idolatry, he that will make an image will take the best wood, the best
timber he can Esaias 40. 20.
get. Thus can the wicked do, yet cannot we put the same in practice, we see
what is best, and will not follow it.

They that founded Churches and Colleges had this reason. They would not give
their lands to their kindred, lest they should have haeredes promiscuos, they
knew not whether their heir would be good or bad: but in Colleges they were
assured they should have haeredes ex optimis, the best heirs in the whole land;
this was their opinion, and the ground of their institution, but now it is
otherwise.

But the neglect of this choice ex haeredibus optimis, (in Colleges) is a
crossing the first institution, and a breach of great trust; for they as they
left their lands and goods to so pious an intent, so they made their statutes
for the most part imperative, and that they should be observed virtute
Sacramenti: This is sum mandare sub virtute Sacramenti: and therefore the
Canon Law says, Clarissime exponunt Legislatores, se sum velle, quod mandant
virtute Sacramenti; that which is enjoined by virtue of an oath, is most
strictly required, when Founders say I charge you by your oath to deal
faithfully with me, according to my will in observing these statutes; and
therefore it is a grievous sin to cross these pious intentions, and not
praeponere meliores, to choose the best first. There is an ill opinion, that
the Electors are in this case like Potters, and the Scholars like Clay in their
hands, they may choose what they will out of the same Mass, without any
distinction in the person, and make vessels of honor, as they please, as if
election were not res (...), matter of reward, for those that deserve best, but
that election is ex mera gratia, merely out of their good will, without any
desert in the person chosen. But this is not Gods mind, for he, in appointing
men for any office or employment, (...) such as he has fitted by gifts. The
Prophet was a chosen shaft in Gods quiver. When Saul was rejected by God, he
Esaias 49. 2.
chose a Neighbor of his, ( David) and why? because he was better then the 1 Samuel 19. 28.
other. Therefore when a better is neglected, and a worse elected, it is not
Gods, but the Devils election.

It was Jehu's message to the Rulers of (...), to choose the best of Ahabs 2
King 10. 3.
sons, and (...) him on his fathers throne. The Heathen themselves observed
this rule. (...) deposes Vasthi, and gives her royal estate to a better then
she. Esth. 1. 19.
And it was Pharaohs reason in preferring Joseph, though a stranger, because
there is Genesis 41. 39.
none so discrect and wise as thou art. Samuel was to choose a King; at first
he was overseen in choosing Eliab, but when God had directed him not to regard
the stature, 1 Samuel 16. 7, 8, 9, 12.
but the gift, because God looks at that, then he goes on roundly; of all
Ishai's children, neque hunc, neque hunc, neque hos, nor this, nor this, nor
these were to be chosen, till he came to David, and then hic est ipse, this is
he.

1. For conclusion of this point. If right choice be made, there is a blessing
promised. And if election be made of those in whom the Lord (...) not, there is
a fearful curse denounced, which should be a principal reason why care should
be Esaias 56. 1, 5.
taken in elections. 65. 12.


2. A second reason is, that such as are irregularly chosen prove afterward
vain Zeph. 3 4.
and light, unprofitable, ventres otiosi, mere bellies, fit for nothing. God
never blesses 1 Samuel 2. 29.
them that are not rightly chosen. Eli was blamed by God, for not correcting
Hophni, now it is far worse to make a Hophni, then not to correct a Hophni.

3. It is a Maxim in Divinity, Indignum promovere decipere est, it is fraud
and deceitful dealing to promote an unworthy person. It is a breach of the
trust which the founder reposed in them, and so they deceive the party that
gave his estate to promote those that are worthy. They deceive the world too,
for they make alye to the world, and do evidently bear false (...), for they
say in effect, This man is fittest. They deceive the Church and kingdom: if any
should come to a temporal Lord, and commend to him an unprofitable servant,
promising one that should serve his turn, this were plain deceit; and such
treachery is in their dealings, that place unprofitable servants in the
service of God, or the Commonwealth.

4. By this means they do ponere sub periculo, endanger the souls of those
committed to them. For, set an unfit workman about any thing, and the work will
be in danger to marred, and this danger is four fold.

1. Those that come in by favor, know they are like clay in the hand of the
Potter, and their (...) that bring them in, and therefore consequently must be
servile, to do as they will have them. Like to the Doctores Bullati, the Popes
Doctors, that must hold this rule, Quod Papa approbat, nemo potest improbare:
what the Pope approves no man must gainsay. Such men must sow pillows under
their Patrons elbows, and sooth them up in their sins.

2. The second danger is, that they have not both the accusative cases; only
the quem, whom to (...), but not the scientiam, knowledge wherewith; so all
that are committed to them lose both time and expense.

3. There can be nothing well done, when the place where they are, is ingluvies
onocratali, like to a maw, where there is sordes and nutrimentum, both bad and
good zeph. 3. 1.
nutriment: we know that to have one good and one bad joined in an exercise, it
can not be well performed.

4. Lastly, the danger is, in the perpetuity of an ill condition of that place
where such are chosen members of a society, for they cannot but take in such as
they are themselves, they will not for shame choose any better then themselves:
and so here is a hazard of the place for ever.

Now the duty of the elected in respect of his place is, to be humble and to
say with Saul, (...) not I a Benjamite of the smallest of the Tribes, and my
family the least of 1 Samuel 9. 21.
that tribe: how comes it that I am preferred to this place, I deserve it not:
and with David, What am I, etc. We see here is both appetitus etcontemptus
honoris, a desire and a 18. 18.
contempt of Honor. There is a laudable desire of honor, when one (...)
nothing against it (...) agendo, when he commits not that evil which should bar
him from (...) and there is a laudable contempt, when one does nothing that is
evil for attaining of it. But to prefer one because he is of kin, or near by
education, or a friend, or spe lucri, out of hope of gain, or to (...) one that
is good and fit; and that because though he be good, yet he will not be good
for our turn. This is to shoulder out the gifts which should only be regarded
in elections.

2. Being in place, he must not think he is fallen into the pot, that he is in
a place (...). 11. 3.
of rest; but he is to use that place so, that a greater preferment may befall
him, to the end that he may do the more good, then he could do in a lower place.

3. The third duty is, utendum se praebere, to offer himself that men may make
use of his gifts: for (...) accipit donum propter se, no man has a gift for
his (...) use alone: but he must say, as the Philosopher to Antisthenes, (...),
I live to this end to be used by others. The Wise man says of wisdom, that she
sends out her maids, Prove. 9. 4, 5.
[the under arts] and cries her self to the simple, Come. And our Savior
(when John 1. 39.
two Disciples asked him where he dwelt) (...) them come and see: and they went
with him home.

The duty of the Inferior in this is, to make use of the gifts of him that
has more or better then himself. Eo se confer ubi (...) est, to resort to
the place where God is: and where is that? The people are said to enquire of
God, when they enquire Exodus 18. 15:
of Moses. So in another place, when they enquired of the Prophets. There are
things too hard for some, therefore they are to be resolved by them that have
better Deuteronomy. 1. 17.
gifts. Thus much for the excellency of the mind.

2. We come now to bonum corporis, the excellency of the body. Old age.
Canities venerabilis est, gray hairs are to be had in reverence. There is an
(...) law for it. Levit. 19. 32.
Thou shall rise up before the hoary head, and honor the face of the old man.
And the Prophet joyneth ancient and honorable in one (...). And we may see
that it was Esaias 9. 15.
ever accounted for a blessing to that City that did enjoy the aged. The
Prophet reciting zach 8. 4.
the benefits that Jerusalem should enjoy at the restoration, has this for
one. Old men and old women shall dwell in thy streets. And it made Job at a
stand, he knew Job. 21. 7.
not what to think, when he saw the wicked grow old. Sure it is, that among the
curses which the man of God denounced against Eli, this was one, There shall
not be 1 (...). 2. 31.
(...) man in thy house. The Apostle therefore wills, that Elders should be
honored 1 Timothy 5. 4.
and entreated as fathers; which honor consists in several duties that the
younger sort must perform toward them. viz.

1. When ancient men are in place to be (...), and lay their hands upon their
mouth, Ecclus. 32. 9.
and give them leave to speak; the reason is given by holy Job, because there
is Wisdom Job 12. 12.
with the ancient, and in multitude of years is understanding. Elihu being a
young man, Waited till Job spoke: and gave his reason, I am young and ye are
old, I was 32. 4.
afraid, and durst not show my opinion; I said, Days should speak, etc. The
Philosophers 7.
8.
rule was, that when we have made our own demonstrations, we must give way to
indemonstrabilia, the positions of old men without demonstration, because they
are grounded upon long experience. The neglect of this was the ruin of 1 King.
12. 8.
(...), who regarded not the counsel of the ancients, but took counsel of the
young men.

1. Answerable to this is the duty of the aged. First, they are not to be (...)
centum annorum, children of an (...) years old. S. Jerome translates it
Elementarios senes, Esaias 65. 20.
Old men that were to learn their A B C: as they have canum caput, a gray head,
so they must have canum intellectum, an understanding answerable. And therefore
it is said, that honorable age is not that Which stands in length of time,
nor that is Wisd. 4. 8, 9.
(...) with number of years, but wisdom is the gray hair unto men: and in
another place, O how comely a thing is judgment for gray hairs, and for
ancient men to know counsel. Ecclus 25. 4.


2. The second is assurgere, to rise up before them, in sign of reverence.
Thou Levit. 19. 32,
shall rise up before the (...) head, says the Law; because they are in a
(...) manner the image of God, who is called (...) dierum, the ancient of
days, their Dan. 7. 9.
hoary head is a crown to them, even a crown of glory, as the Wise man speaks,
and so they have a resemblance of eternity. (...) est vestigium (...), old age
is Prove. 16. 31.
a print of (...). 29. 29.


There is (...) temporis, and (...) meriti, an age of time, and an age of
merit, and there are as S. Jude speaks, arbores (...), trees that begin to
blossom in the end of harvest, when (...) fruit should be gathered: such are
true representatives of an old man without understanding; but yet, though they
be such, they are to be honored for their years, though they be not worthy
(...) pati, to receive this honor, yet it is meet for us hoc agere, to give it
to them. They must not be such trees, but David's trees, bringing more fruit in
their age; the older the more wisdom must psalm. 92. 13.
appear in them.

2. Answerable to this, they must so live, that their age may deserve honor.
The Wise man tells us how this may be. The hoary head is a crown of glory: but
how? if it be found in the way of righteousness: and then (as he speaks in
another place) The beauty of old men is their gray head. The Apostle describes
in particular six qualities prove. 16. 31.
that they should be endued with. 1. Sobriety. 2. Gravity. 3. Temperance. 20.
29.
4. Soundness in faith. 5. Charity. 6. Patience. Tit. 2. 2.


3. The third duty is to provide for their ease, for age brings Weakness,
therefore young boys must not sit, and ancient men stand. God provided for the
(...) of the (...), after they were fifty years of age, they were exempted from
the service of Number. 8. 24, 25
the Tabernacle, and yet had their allowance. The Prophet Esaias mentions it as a
sign of great confusion, and of judgment imminent, When children shall
presume against the ancient, and the base against the honorable. If we carry
our selves thus to aged persons, sic fiet nobis, so it shall be done to us,
when we come to years, and sic fiet nostris, Esaias 3. 5.
so shall others do to our fathers, and to our children, when they grow old.
Old age is a burden, but young men should help to make this burden light to old
men, by giving them reverence, which if they do they shall reap a blessing, by
their blessings and prayers, which are in a special manner (...) with God: as
on the other side by neglect of this duty they may expect a curse from God and
the aged; for the blessings or curses of fathers or mothers are usually heard
of God, and made good upon obedient or disobedient children.

3. We come now to the third kind of excellency, consisting in bonis fortunae,
the goods of fortune, as they are called; or in outward estate, as in Nobility,
and Riches, etc. for noble men, and rich men are in Scripture (...) called
fathers, and consequently there is an honor due to them. Nabal was rich, and
David in his message to him implicitly calls him father; Give I pray thee to
thy servant, and to thy son David, whatsoever comes to thy hand: and Naaman
the Syrian was an honorable man, and his servants call him father; My father,
if the Prophet had commanded thee a small matter, etc. The reason hereof is.

1. Because of the Common good, that they may bring to the Commonwealth in
times of peace and of war: (...) rei-publicae pecunia, money is the (...) of a
Commonwealth, and therefore because God has blessed them above others in
their (...) relation, the Commonwealth does prize and esteem them accordingly,
and prefers them above others, setting them among the elders in the gate; for
if they have been careful in their own house, it is like they will be so also
in the Commonwealth. prove. 31. 23.


Their duty answerable to this is expressed by the Apostle, to communicate
their (...) for the benefit of others, and to be rich in good works. Nehemiah
had besides 1 Timothy 6. 19.
his own family, 150 others which he maintained at his table. Barzillai was a
rich man, and he provided for David all the time that he lay at Mahanaim, when
he was in danger by (...) rebellion, for which David would afterward have
rewarded him. So when the king of (...) came to invade the land of Israel,
(...) the king gave him a thousand talents to (...) him, which was leavied as
the text says of all the mighty men of wealth, of each man fifty shekels of
silver; and so by this means the land was preserved. Thus rich men are, and
ought to be serviceable for the public, and for this cause they are to be
honored.

2. A second reason is, because men that are rich may exercise some virtues
which others cannot do, as Magnificence, (...) erality, Alms, etc. and great
men may (...) and help forward good causes, and therefore there is reason that
such should come in partem honoris, to have part of the honor. Examples of
this we have in those that (...) Chron. 31. 6
offered liberally for the Temple, (which they could not have done, unless
they had (...)) so that there was much left, which was employed for the
maintenance of the Levites: and in the woman that moved her (...) to provide
and furnish 2 King. 4. 10
a chamber for the man of God, which they could not have done, unless they had
Mark. 6. 41.
been able: and in those that cast in their wealth into the (...) for the use
of the Temple. Thus rich men may and ought to be helpful to the Church, to the
(...), to Schools, Colleges etc.

Answerable to this, the care of rich men ought to be, as well good, as great;
when (...) sought to pervert Sergius (...) the Deputy, a great man in the
Country, S. Paul withstood him, and labored to keep the Deputy constant in
the faith. And the same Apostle, after many lessons to Timothy, tells him, that
the love of money is 1 Timothy 4. 10.
the root of all evil, and that by lusting after it many err from the faith,
and thereupon bids him take special care about rich men, intimating the danger
of rich men, and the special care he should take about such, that they may be
instruments of good to others. The Heathen man (...), if he were to make
Amphions harp, he would take greater pains about it, then in making a harp for
a common harper.

Again the duty of the rich, as is there further urged by the Apostle, is not
to be 1 Timothy 6. 17.
high minded, (...) trust in their riches. The wise man observed, that they
count their prove. 18. 11.
riches their strong tower.

And hence it is, that when they have any cause or controversy with another,
though they have no right, yet they will think to carry all by their wealth,
none must oppose them. Such a one was Nabal, so proud and surly, that no body
could 1 Samuel 25. 17.
speak to him. But such should remember, that as (...) says, the rich and
(...) meet, and the Lord is the maker of both; this should make them humble.
And if they be thus toward others, then their duty is like David, to account
themselves their sons, and them their fathers.

4. The last kind of excellency, for which men are to be honored, is
Excellentia (...), the excellency of a benefit. (...) are called fathers. Job
says. Job. 39. 16.
He was a (...) to the poor: and whatsoever is sub (...) beneficii, comes
within the compass of this Commandment: and he that receives a benefit, is
bound to (...) them from whom he receives it

There are three duties of the Benefactor, and as many required of him that
receives a benefit.

1. Rich men must be benefactors, they must do good to some or other.

Its true, they are not bound to any particular person, none can challenge any
thing exdebito, from them: for this is the difference between (...) and
beneficium, they may be bound to particular persons in (...), but not in
beneficio, for here they may make their choice to whom, but they must do good
wheresoever they are. They must not mark men's (...), though their benefits be
ill bestowed upon such, for as the Heathen man said, Melius est ut (...) benefi
ium (...) illum, (...) apud te, It is better thy benefit be lost in his hands
then in thine. A benefit must be freely bestowed, though the party deserve it
not; we must not look at his (...) to us, for (...) est decipi, (...) cum
daret, he is worthy to be deceived, that when he gives, thinks upon receiving
again. Like to those that in the course of giving benefits, look not, (...) but
(...), not where they may place them upon the worthiest and most deserving, but
upon them that will be most beneficial to them. Such a benefactor is as a man
to his gelding, that when he means to use him in a journey, gives him so much
provender, because he is to use him, and he will not otherwise hold out in his
journey. And this takes away the honor of the Physician and Lawyer, that saves
a man's life, or his estate, when they do it (...), for a reward. (...), qui dat
(...), (...) loses the honor of the benefit, that looks at some reward. Its
true, he cannot sufficiently be recompensed, that saves a man's life, but if he
prostitute his art for gain, he does buy and sell, and so (...) his honor; yet
this is the course of the world, that it may be feared that in short time men
will make indentures to (...) mento be thankful, when they bestow their
benefits.

2. Another rule is, they must do it speedily. It must not stick between their
fingers: for Ingratum est beneficium quod (...) inter manus (...); (...) sunt
beneficia parata, (...), (...), (...) a (...), (...) in (...); it is a benefit
little worth that sticks long in the givers hands; and they are most (...),
that are most ready, casie to be obtained, and where there was nothing hindered
them, but the modesty and bashfulnes of the receiver: for indeed such (...),
are not only (...), but costly. Nulla res (...) constat, quam quae precibus
emitur, there is nothing cost more, then that which is obtained with much suit
and petition. And as it is cruelty to prolong the death of a condemned person,
and a kind of (...) (as we say) to rid him quickly out of his pain: so the
prolonging of a benefit, tortures a man between hope and fear. And therefore
Duplex fit bonitas cum accedit celeritas, and minus decipitur, cui negatur
celerius, that benefit is worth two, that a man bestows speedily, and his
expectation is less frustrate, that has a quick denial.

Therefore as he said, Apage homines quorum lenta sunt beneficia, (...), away
with those men that are quick to do one an injury, but will consider on it
before they will do you (...) good; for now, prosunde odium simul, and instilla
beneficium, men will power out their hatred all at once, but a benefit must not
be had but by degrees. They must weary out a man's patience, and then some
little benefit: Seneca says well, They must have longum spectaculum potentiae
(...), Their worships and Honors pleasure must be attended, and at length with
(...) the gift, there must be (...) some gratuity returned. Thus the benefit
becomes Lapidosus (...), gravel in the mouth, and so not thanks-worthy.

3. The third duty is, That when a man has done a good turn to another, he
must forget it, and not publish it: for as Seneca says, tacit danda sunt
beneficia, ut not a sunt solis quibus prosint: interdum etiam ipse (...)
juvatur fallendus est, (...) habeat, (...) a quo accepit, (...), benefits are
to be bestowed in a silent way, that they only who are bettered by them, may
take notice of them; nay sometime it is an honest deceit to keep the party that
is relieved from the knowledge of his benefactor. And though Seneca were but a
heathen, without the true knowledge of God, yet herein he came nigh to the
prescript of our Savior in the distribution of Alms. For indeed that is true
liberality, when a man conveighes it with silence, blows not the trumpet, and
when he does works of mercy, not by way of ostentation, but supplies the
necessities of men (...), in a secret manner, that the mouth of the poor, not
his own, may commend him. He that bestows a benefit upon one, ut ducat in
triumphum, to make him the object of his vain glory deserves no thanks for it.

To these we may add two more. viz.

1. That he not only forget it, but that he upbrayde not the receiver: and
why? Lacerat animum recipientis and premit frequens beneficiorum (...), the
often (...) a man in mind of the good turns he has received, is a great
pressure and torture to an ingenuous receiver. And indeed it comes many times
to (...), that by this means good turns are turned into bad, and brought in
contempt, that it repents the receiver that he ever made suit for them: and in
this case beneficium accipere est libertatem vendere, a man loses his liberty
by taking benefits.

2. A man may give freely, readily, without boasting, or exprobation, and yet
want the chief, which is the affection, For multum interest inter materiam
beneficii and (...): Itaque nec aurum, (...), nec quicquam eorum (...) a (...),
beneficium est. sed ipsa tribuentis voluntas. There Is great difference between a
benefit and the matter of a benefit; so that it is neither gold nor silver, nor
any thing else, which a man receives, that may be called a benefit, but it is
the mind and affection of him that gives it.

Now in giving there are also certain cautions to be observed.

1. The first caution is Seneca's. (...) omni (...) dare debeas, tamen in
beneficio (...) sunt mores, though we ought to give to every one that asks
and has need, yet in bestowing our benefits we ought also to consider the
manners of them that (...); that is, to prefer honest and well conditioned
people before others, that have need; Beneficium (...) dignis das, omnes
obligas, A man obliges all to him, that does good to them that are worthy of
it.

2. Another is, that our liberality keep the rule of proportion. Saint Ambrose
says,, (...) est, (...) benefacis, quotidie (...). We are to keep a mean in
our liberality, to do well to day, that we may do well to morrow also: his
reason is, Deus non vult simul (...), sed dispensari, God would not have us
power out our estate at once, but (like good stewards) (...) them as need shall
require. Discretion is a necessary quality in a giver. Therefore we must take
heed that our liberality exceed not our means, for unjust actions always
follow such bounty.

1. The (...) duties of the receiver are these. First he that receives a
benefit owes a recognition or acknowledgement of it. Seneca (out of whom the
Fathers have most of that they write upon this subject, and certainly but for
some stoical tenets his books de (...) are excellent and worth the reading)
says; (...) beneficii inter duos lex est: alter oblivisci statim debet (...),
alter (...); quidedit (...), (...), (...) qui accepit, the law of a benefit
stands thus between the giver and the receiver: the first should presently
forget what he gives, the other never what he receives; he that gives should
hold his peace, but he that receives should not be tongue tied. Therefore the
receiver is to acknowledge that such a one was Gods instrument to conveigh such
a blessing to him. He must (...) habere accepti beneficii, quae fuit petiti,
have the same cheerefulnes after the receiving of a benefit, which was at the
asking of it; because (...) does so soon senescere, a good turn does so soon
wax old, therefore a man's value and estimation should be still the same.

2. There must not only be an inward acknowledgement, but also effusio
(...)-(...), the pouring out of the affection, by an outward acknowledgement in
words, for this is Testimonium excellentiae, an outward testimony of the
excellency of such a one, whom God has exalted to be a benefactor, and so a
performing of this duty of honor to him. If he remember it, I need not; for
(...) est satisfactio pro beneficio, he is satisfied by upbrayding me. If he
forget it, I must not, but tell it, and not extenuate it, but be benignus
interpres, a candid interpreter of his affection that bestowed it: as that it
was a great benefit, or at least that it was great to me; or lastly, that his
affection was great to me. And by so doing he shall not lose, but benefit
himself; for invitat ad (...), qui (...) suscipit modica, he invites a
benefactor to give great things, that gratefully entertaines small ones.

3. The last is to express thy thankfullnes really when occasion shall be
(...), that he shall have the like need of thee, as thou now have of him (which
thou must not desire or wish) and in the mean time to acknowledge that thou
can not recompense him. I mean this (...) must be for real benefits, for
there are some so accounted that deserve not the name: men now a days call
(...) injuriae beneficium, they think they do a benefit, when they give over
doing of injury; and it is a policy with some, mergere aliquos ut (...), to
throw men into the water that they may pull them out, and when they have pulled
them out, they think they are beholding to them; such are not worthy the name
of benefits, nor are we tied to gratitude for such, but for other benefits, if
the benefactor stand in need, I must help him, if I be able, if not, yet my
diligence about him, and the best counsel I can give, he must not want; I must
always wish him well and acknowledge that I am never able to recompense him:
otherwise I am unthankful, and unthankfulnes is a great vice: benficiorum
(...), siccans fontem pietatis, the bane of liberality, and a dryer up of the
fountain of goodness. Therefore if we can, we must rependere majora, requite
them with greater; if not that, yet par pari, do like for like; if not that
neither, then we must transfer ad Deum, commend them over to God by our
prayers, and desire him to requite them.

Yet (by the way) we are to take notice, that there are some cases, wherein a
man is not to be said to be unthankful, though the benefactor so account him.

1. As first, if a superior bestow a benefit upon an inferior, expecting,
that he shall like what the other loves, and mislike as he misliketh, and so
to be at his command, or else he will repute him as an unthankful person. But
unthankfulnes is res gratiae, non officii, a matter of grace, not of duty, and
therefore it is no unthankfulnes not to follow him in his humor.

2. Secondly, If he require any thing of me by way of justice or duty, it is no
unthankfulnes in me to deny it: for as in his benefits, there was a licet dare,
(...) non dare, it was lawful for him either to give, or not give; so in matter
of thankfulness, there is a licet (...) aut non (...), a lawfulnes to do or not
do that he requires; if he require it in re (...), by way of thanks, I will be
thankful, but if in re officii, by the way of duty and justice, or for that he
has done to me, he must pardon me, and yet I am out of the mark of
ingratitude.

3. Lastly, he would have me to follow his appetite, and do an unjust act, and
I refuse to consent to him in it, is this unthankfulnes? no surely. For the
rule is, Quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne feceris, a man must do as he would
be done unto: that love he bears to himself, must be the square of his love to
his neighbor; nor is it required, that I should do any more for my neighbor,
then for my self. If any appetite then should lead me to any unjust thing,
should I consent to it? no; for so I should hurt my self in consenting to sin
against my own soul. In like manner, if my neighbor require m: to do a thing
unjust, I must not consent, for it is against the love I owe to my own soul,
which must be the rule of my love to him. And so, for the pleasure he has done
to me, he would have me do my self and him a displeasure, by my consenting to
do evil at his instigation, to hurt both his soul and mine own, and so to do
evil for good. There may be in this case species ingratitudinis, a show of
ingratitude, at the first sight, which a good man may be taxed withal, but
being weighed in the true balance, it is no unthankfulnes at all. A good man
per mediam infamiam bujus ingratitudinis, will tendere ad officium; this
reproach of unthankfulness not deserved, will make him look the more strictly
to the duty of true gratitude. And thus much for the special duties of
Inferiors and Superiors required in this Commandment, and the sins
forbidden, according to our first rule for expo uning the Decalogue.

CHAP. X.
That this law is spiritual. The (...) of Superiors and Inferiors must
proceed from the heart. Special means conducing to the keeping of this
commandment. Signs of the true keeping of it.

FOr the second rule of extension, that where anything is commanded or
forbidden, Second rule. of extension to Homogenea.
there all that are Homogenea, of the same kind or nature are commanded or
forbidden, we shall need to say nothing, all the Homogenea being already
handled, under the first rule.

3. The third rule tells us, that the law is spiritual, and reaches to the
heart, Third rule of extension, This law is also spiritual.
and so is this law, it must be kept in heart and spirit, as well as in the
outward man, both by superiors and inferiors.

1. For the superior. We see that David fed his people not only intelligentia
(...) but in simplici ate cordis, with a faithful and true heart: and Saint
Peter psalm. 78. 73.
expresses the duty of superiors (as it ought to proceed from the heart) by
two 1 pet. 5. 2.
words, (...) and (...) 'willingly, and readily. And because as was touched
before, there may be an usurpation of power, without any just title, as well as
an abuse of lawful power, therefore none must in heart (...) or desire to
usurp authority over others, they must say with David, non est exaltatum cor
meum, my psalm. 131. (...)
heart is not haughty, and remember the Apostles rule, (...) quis sapiat supra
quam (...), Romans 12. 3.
not to think more highly of himself then he ought, but be sober minded: for as
the heathen observed, it ost falls out, that there is (...) animus sub rudi
(...), an high mind under a beggars cloak; some are like the bramble in the
Parable Judge. 9. 15.
that would be king over all the trees, or like the thistle, that would match
with 2 Kin. 14. 9.
the Cedar of Lebanon.

2. The spiritual duty of Inferiors is, first, with a ready and willing mind
to obey their superiors, as it is in the song of Barak and Deborah, the people
came Judge. 5. 9.
willingly: Not like (...), who would have no governors, Tumultuarii spiritus,
spirits of opposition, nor yet like the Herodians (the other extreme we
mentioned before) spirteus aulici, servile flattering spirits, the former obey
no further then they are forced. Job tells us (...) some like these, that
as soon as the cord is loosed, Job 30. 11.
will loosen the bridle themselves; these are the sons of Belial: and the other
sort are as far in the other extreme, who are servilis spiritus, of a servile
and base spirit. To avoid both extremes, we must obey as the people promised to
obey (...). All (...). (...). 16; 17
that thou command we will do, and whither soever thou sendest us we will
go; tantum si (...) fuerit tecum (as some read the words) only if the Lord be
with thee, so long as thou do not depart from him, we will not depart from
thee. That tantum must be our direction, we must obey so far as they go not
contrary to Gods commands; if they command contrary, we may disobey, and yet
remain good Subjects. This for the spiritual part of this Precept.

4. The fourth rule requires the means conducing to be handled, and these also
have been partly handled before, and therefore may be passed over here; only
some more means we may observe for the Superior in his duty, out of the 101
Psalm.

1. To think of his account, Quando veniet ad me? When will God come? This
Psalm 101. (...).
must be his thought, he must give an account, how he has executed his place.
God will demand ubi est grex (...)? Where is the flock that was given to thee?

2. The next is in the same verse: for the well ordering of a kingdom he will
begin at his own Court; if a king, if a Master of his own family, he must begin
at himself, John 8. 34.
I will walk in my house with a perfect heart. Our Savior says, Qui (...)
peccatum, servus est peccati: he that commits sin is the servant of sin, and
he is not (...) to rule over others, that is under the bondage of that, from
which he should deliver others.

3. Thirdly, his eyes must be upon such as are faithful in the land: he must
pick Psalm. 101. 6.
out those that are integri, wise, sound, and (...), which are worthy to be in
place of government. He must be careful to know such as are (...) to be called
ad (...), to rule under him, that so when there is occasion he may employ them
in public service.

4. He must consider what they be which he rules over, they are the City of
God, (...)
and therefore he must not esteem of them lightly. It is Gods work, and they
are Gods people, Citizens of Gods city. The Heathen man could say to a (...)
Remember you are over (...) men, and over Athenians, thereby admonishing him,
to be moderate and careful in his government: much more should it make all
Christian governors careful, when they consider the dignity and worth of those
they are set over, that they are the city and servants of God, and redeemed by
the blood of Christ, etc.

And as these are some means, the consideration whereof may work in Governors
a care to perform the duties of their places aright; so again, there are means
to keep men from usurping authority, and affecting, without lawful title, power
over others, or aspiring to higher places then they are fit for. To this end
they should labor 1 Samuel 24. 14
to humble themselves, as David did, who accounted himself a dead dog, a flea,
26. 20.
a (...) and no man. And seeing the defect of gifts in themselves, to be
content (With Psalm. (...). 6.
the Apostle) with what place soever they are called to; and with David to say,
Ecce me, Behold (...) am I, let God do with me what seems good to him. Thus
ought a man to 2 Samuel 15. (...).
stand (...) to preferment, and to say, If I be fit for the place, God can
provide it for me. If he do not, what dignity soever it be, I can be as well
without it, as with it. He ought to think with himself, that though he be
Dominus ingenii and lingue, have wit and (...) at command, yet if he be servus
peccati, a servant of sin, there is matter enough to humble him. And because
there is in every man naturally a spirit that lusts and longs after honor as
the babe longs for the breast; therefore with David, he should ablactare, wean
himself from aspiring thoughts, by such considerations, as these. Psalm. 131. 2.
Nay the same king goes a degree further. Michal thought he abased himself too
much 2 Samuel 6. 22.
by dancing before the Ark, but he told her, he would yet be more vile and base
in his own sight: so far he was from aspiring after an higher estate, that he
would prepare himself to be in a lower condition, if God should please to set
him lower. Thus it would be good, if we would prepare our selves before hand,
and to say as Balak did to Numb. 24. 11.
Balaam, though he were a Heathen king, I thought to have promoted thee, but
God has kept thee from honor: he acknowledges it to be Gods hand to keep
(...) from preferment, God disposes of honors and preferments as he pleases.
When the sons of Zebedee would needs sit one on the right, the other on the
left hand of Christ in his kingdom, Christ tells them, Those places must be for
them, for whom his Father (...) prepared them. In Ezekiel it is said, the
Prophets were like foxes in the desert: and so in the Ezekiel. 13. 4.
Schools of the Prophets, we find every one like foxes, hungry and ravening
for preferment, as a testimony of that excellency that is in him. Thus we are
ambitious still of higher places, forgetting that lesson of our Saviors, of
taking the lowest places. Luke 14. 8, 9.
A good Steward (as he says) will give to every one in the house (...), his
portion, 12. 42.
and no man ought to expect more: he that will have more then his (...), his
portion, requires an unjust thing of the Lords Steward.

5. According to the fifth rule we are to speak of the signs of the
performance of (...) fifth rule.
these duties.

1. For Inferiors. The signs of their honoring their superiors may be
gathered The signs.
from that speech of the Heathen, Nec dicto, nec facto, aut (...), I have not
neglected my duty, either in word or deed, or by so much as an ill look: and as
for (...), the common saying of vultu saepe laeditur pietas, shows that by a
wry countenance, a man may break this precept.

The signs (in the next place) when inferiors give honor to their superiors
may be these; and a man may be honored or dishonored, Dicto, Facto, Vultu,
for these three ways laeditur pietas.

1. Facto. We must show our reverence to them by our deeds. Our outward acts
ought to be such, as that they may rejoice and take pleasure in their
government, and not grief, as the Apostle speaks. David's heart smote him, when
he had cut off Heb. 13. 17.
Saul's skirt. He did not hurt Saul in the Cave, yet his heart touched him,
because (...) 1 Samuel 24. 5.
had touched his garment, and had thereby dishonored him, by spoiling his
garment. We must not then do the least act that may reflect upon our
superiors, but (...) our honor by all acts of obedience and duty; yea, by
doing more then we are bound to; this is a good sign that we do truly honor
them, if we do not barely our duty, but abound in every good work, by doing
more or oftener then law requires. The Apostle speaking of a duty tells the
Philippians, that it was not so much the matter 2 Cor. 9. 8.
of the duty he esteemed, or weighed, the paying of tithes or maintenance, but
Phil. 4. 17.
(...), the fruit abounding, that should be accounted as an overplus at the day
of reckoning; this was it he valued. By this means we shall not be like Simeon
and Levi, Genesis 34. 30.
that made their father stink among the inhabitants of the land, but cast a
comfortable Esaias 9. 17.
2 King. 2. 23.
smell, that God and our superiors shall take pleasure and delight us.

2. Dicto. Honor must be shown in words, as on the contrary contempt may be
shown in words, as we see in the example of the children that mocked (...), and
were destroyed by bears; and of the Pharisees that derided Christ, which is
elegant in the original (...), naso suspendebant, they took it in snuff, and
expressed their derision Luke 16. 14.
by drawing together the nose, they made noses at him. Therefore blessed is he
that speaks to an understanding ear; an obedient ear will be willing to hear
his faults Prove. 15. 31.
25. 12.
without deriding or (...) at his Superior.

3. Lastly vultu, for the countenance. Honor as well as contempt may appear by
the countenance. We see Cain liking not his brother, hanged his look, his
countenance Genesis 4. 5.
31. 2.
fell. Laban upon displeasure taken against Jacob, altered his countenance, it
was not to him as before. S. Jerome upon the 16 verse of the 80 Psalm, says,
there is (...) increpationis, a chiding countenance, and (...) detractationis,
a countenance that can detract, which is, as the Wise man says, when one does
harden his face, or put on a bold face when he is rebuked, or has, as David
says, a proud look, whereby Prove. 21. 29.
he does as much as in him lies, (...) laedere, dishonor him by his looks.
Elisha says, Psalm 131. (...).
2 King. 3. 14.
that if he had not reverenced the face of the king of Judah, he would not once
have looked upon Jehoram; intimating that to Superiors especially being godly,
reverence must be showed, and that it may be shown even in the looks.

For Superiors, because as they say their power is bottomless, so their
abuses are bottomless: therefore there are certain signs of a good government.

1. The Prophet tells us, that in a good government, the eyes of them that see,
shall not need to wink, and the mouth of them that can speak, shall not need to
be silent, a Esaias 32. 3, 4.
man may speak the truth freely without danger or control: a flagitious man
shall not be called, Good Sir, and as it is verse 5. the base shall not be
called liberal, nor the churl bountiful. He gives us to understand, that in an
ill government a man must see and not see, as the Poet said, Quod scis, (...).
We may see this in the examples of Esaias and Amos. Amos lived in the days of
Vzziah and Jeroboam, and he tells us, that then it was a time for the prudent
to keep silence, because it was an evil Amos. 5. 13.
time. A wise man must hold his peace, lest it should fare with him, as with
the Levite, when the Danites cried, Tace, hold thy peace; which he was forced
to do Judge. 18. 55.
lest they should have slain him. It was certainly no sign of good government,
when our Savior for saying he was not bound to accuse himself before Caiaphas,
was (...) John 18. 22.
on the face by a Catchpole: and when Ananias commanded S. Paul to be smitten
Acts 23. 2.
on the mouth, because he pleaded his own cause; whereas Esaias living in the
days of Hezekiah, a good king, durst say to Shebna, Who are you? whence come
you? and God deal thus and thus with you.

2. A second sign of evil government is, when men cannot have justice, but are
delayed by those that should right them. S. Paul notwithstanding his appeal to
(...), could get no justice, because Nero being upheld by his under governors,
must also uphold them. Achish could confess that David was upright, yet he 1 Samuel 26. 6, 7
told him, he must not go with him for fear of displeasing the Lords of the
Philistims.

3. Another sign is by their speech: which the Heathen observed: A good
Governor says, (...), it is my duty, and I must do it. An evil Governor will
say (...), I have power and I may do it: He boasts with Saul, I can give you
vineyards, etc. and with Pilate, I have power to crucisie thee, and power to
let thee go.

4. A fourth sign is out of Menander, when their eyebrows swell so, that they
will refuse to amend what is amiss. If there be any fault, and if you tell
them not of it, they will say, Why did you not tell me of it? and if you do,
they will say, (...), we will consider of it; and then it shall be as much
amended, as if it had never been mentioned: and also you shall, when
opportunity serves, be remembered with some mark of displeasure, as one too busy
or pragmatical. When one told Joah of Absaloms hanging in a tree, he asked him,
why he did not kill him; but the other replied, that considering the kings
strict charge to the contrary, Joah himself (if the fact had been done by
another) would have been ready to accuse him to the king, and to have him
punished.

5. It is a sign of ill government, when Religion is pretended to stop
justice. It was much practiced in the primitive times, and often complained of by
the Fathers. If any of the Rulers or Officers had wronged a Christian Bishop,
and he had complained to the Emperor who promised justice, and appointed a day
for hearing; then would the Deputy come and say, This man is a Christian; he
ought to be patient, and to Acts 16. 37.
forgive injuries, and not to go to law, its against the principles of his
religion. And thus they were dismissed without justice and reproached for their
labor. So it is often with others: especially, if any Clergie-man seek for
justce.

6. Lastly, The thriving of the righteous is a good sign. In his days (says
the Psalmist) shall the righteous flourish. But on the contrary, when as the
Heathen observed, The flatterer is chief in esteem (...), and the Sycophant the
next, and (...), the lewd and naughty person is the third. This is a sign of
ill government. Such a Sycophant was Doeg, who accused David to Saul, and made
him pursue 1 Samuel 22. 9.
him; his crime was such, that there was no sacrifice appointed by the Law to
(...) it; and therefore David said, Let him be cursed before the Lord. It is
reported, 26. 19.
that when Caesar first entered upon his tyrannical government, he gave
preferment, sic (...) non (...); and tamen inquinaret ornamenta, so that the
men had no honor by them, but dishonor was brought upon the preferments, and
these places of preferment are discredited, when unworthy men as Sycophants and
lewd persons are placed in them by governors.

6. The sixth rule for expounding the precepts is, that we do not only observe
The sixth rule, Of procuring the observation by others.
them our selves, but cause them to be observed by others. According to this,
we must not only honor our Superiors, but draw others to this duty. The
negative precept is given by the Wise man, My son, Fear God and the King, and
(...) not Prove. 24. 21.
with those that are given to change, etc, We must neither be principals nor
accessories in any rebellious course against our Sovereign, neither do any
thing of our selves, nor draw others to join with us in any such unlawful
course. An example we 1 Samuel 24. 10.
have in David, when he had Saul at (...), he would not hurt him himself, nor
would he suffer Abishai to destroy him; for who (says he) (...)
can stretch out his hand against the Lords anointed, and be innocent? And as
they contain a dehortation from disobedience and rebellion, so e contra, we
have an exhortation for obedience and subjection. Gedaliah, as he was willing
to submit himself to the Chaldees, so he exhorts others, Let us serve the king
of Babel, and it shall be well with us. When any shall rise in the gainsaying
of Corah, against Moses or Aaron, 2 King. 25. 24
we must not only not join with them, but withdraw others from them, and say
with Moses, Depart from the tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of
theirs, Numb. 16. 26
lest ye be consumed in all their sins. But on the other side, if they require
things directly and evidently contrary to the commands of God, Deo potius quam
hominibus, we must not obey them our selves; nay, we also must exhort others
not to obey them: if their authority be lawful (though abused) we must rather
suffer then resist: but if it be usurped, and without any color of title, we
may resist them, if we be able; for (...) without title (while the lawful
Governor has not (...) his claim) are to be accounted as public thieves and
robbers, its lawful for any to destroy them: and thus we may say with David,
Quis consurget mecum, who will rise up with me against the evil doers? We must
get as many as we can to join with us, to deliver us from the oppression of
such as (...) or invade the authority of our lawful Sovereign.

CHAP. XI.
The second part of this Commandment, A promise of long life. Reasons why this
promise is annexed to this Commandment. How this promise is made good. Reasons
why God sometimes shortens the days of the godly, and prolongs the days of
the wicked.

WE are now come to the second general part of this Commandment, which is the
Promise, That thy days may be long, (...). a prolongation of days. In the
second Commandment, there is a general promise, to them that love God and keep
his Commandments. In this there is a particular promise for them that observe
this Commandment; and therefore its true which the Apostle observed, Ephesians. 6.
2.
that this is the first Commandment with promise, that is, with a particular
promise.

Now the reasons why God adds a promise and reason to this Commandment may be
these.

1. Because (according to the proverb) Adorant plures (...) solemn, quam
occidentem, there are more that worship the rising, then the setting Sun: and
old men are compared to the sun going down. Job says, that a man toward his
end is like a candle burning within the socket, or a lamp despised. So
consequently our fathers having one Job. 12. 5.
(...) in the grave, are neglected, because there is no further hopes of
receiving benefits by them, whereas if they were still growing up with us,
there were further expectation of good toward us. Therefore God adds this
reason or motive to stir us up to give due honor to them, even when they are
old, because we shall be rewarded our selves with honor and long life.

2. Secondly, here is a convenient proportion between the promise and the duty,
which is most (...). The Heathen man says, Si acceperis (...) gratis, tuere;
if thou have received a benefit, preserve it. We received a benefit in our
birth from our parents, that is our life: be thankful to them, and so maintain
it; for God then will have our life preserved by them from whom we had it, and
that is, by their benediction if we shall continue in our honor to them.
Pietas, says S. Ambrose, in parents grata Deo, merces (...), (...); this
piety toward parents is In (...) 118.
1 Timothy 4. 8.
acceptable to God, and is the just reward from children to parents, etc. And
S. Paul says, it has not only the promise of this life, but of (...) to
come. And therefore this second (...). 5. 16.
reason is explained, ut bent (...) sit, that it may (...) well with us. For,
as it is said, that if all the Adverbs, as diu, etc. were linked together, and
been and male were left out, they were nothing worth. And therefore God makes a
comment upon this Commandment, after he has said [that thy days may be
prolonged] he adds, that it may (...) been well with (...): ut non (...) sit
longa, sed (...); that thy life be not only long, but happy.

Now parents blessing much conduces unto this, that by their blessing we may
Genesis 9. 25. (...):
prolong our days. The blessing of Noah to Sem, reached to life eternal, and
of Japhet to this life, that he should dwell in (...) terra, be enlarged and
dwell in 25.
the tents of Sem: and a curse fell upon Cham, both for this life, and the
other, and that upon (...) and his posterity.

This blessing of the parents is effectual, because it is a fruit of faith, as
the Apostle tells us, in the case of Isaac blessing Jacob, and of Jacob
blessing the sons of Joseph; and as their blessings, so their curses are
effectual; we see it in the story Heb. 11. 20. 21
of Isaac. He (...) (...) fetch him venison, that he may bless him; Rebecca
counsels Genesis 27. 7.
Jacob to prevent (...); he dares not lest his father curse him, yet at his
mothers 12.
instigation he adventures, and Isaac blesses him with a blessing which
afterward 28.
proved effectual, for when (...) came to be blessed, Isaac told him, dedi
fratri 33.
tuo benedictionem, and erit (...), I have blessed him, and he shall be
blessed: yet 25. 28.
(...) loved (...) better then Jacob; but this was the work of Gods providence,
that Isaac should give the blessing to Jacob.

So likewise in Jacobs blessing of Ephraim the younger before Manasses the
elder, 48. 15.
the younger should be greater then the elder, though he should be great too: a
strange blessing it was (for the manner) and mighty (for the (...)) and when
Jacob blessed Joseph, because he had fed his father, (a part of the honor here
49. 25.
commanded, as was showed before) therefore he blessed him with the blessings
of the heavens, of the air, and of the deep; and this blessing proved
effectual, for that Tribe continued longest in prosperity, and remained with
Judah, when, the ten Tribes were carried captive, and never returned. Thus the
parents are psalm. 115. 15.
the instruments which God chooses to convey his blessings by; you are the
blessed of the Lord, as the (...) speaks; The blessing is Gods, and parents the
instruments.

Before we leave this a question must be answered.

How is this promise fulfilled, since we see by daily experience, the contrary,
we see Quest.
that dutiful children have died in the strength of their years, and
disobedient and stubborn have prospered and lived long; and therefore that is
very true which the Preacher Eccl. 9. 2. 3.
tells us, all things come alike to all etc. Answer.


1. We say, that riches honor, long life, and other outward things are but
gifts of Gods left hand, and are common alike to all, as well to the bad as to
the good. Isaac in his blessing gave the fat of the earth to Jacob, and after,
verse 39. He gives it to his brother (...); and prosperity is the lot of the
wicked as well prove. 3. 16.
as the godly, ne boni nimis cupide prosequerentur, lest the good should be set
too eagerly upon it; and adversity is common to the godly, as well as the
wicked, ne (...) turpiter effugiatur, lest the godly should (...) it basely.

2. Again, the reason why adversity is common to both is, because if it should
sall upon all the wicked in this life, question would be made, where is that
judgment we look for? And if wholly upon the godly, we should be apt to say,
(...) non respicit 2 (...). 3. 4.
psalm. 10. 12.
nos, God regards us not, his providence fails. And therefore to let us see,
that his providence continues, he will give to his children some good things
here, and to let us know, that he has judgment in store, he imparts some of
them to the wicked. Nor will he bestow all upon the ungodly, because then Hab.
1. 16.
they would be (...) to conceive, that they were not at Gods dispose, but would
sacrifice to their own net, and attribute all to outward means: nor all upon
his Job. 1. 9.
children, lest the devil and his instruments say, as he did concerning Job;
does Job serve God for naught? Obeit.


But how then shall we acquit God of injustice, and how is his promise of long
life, to them that honor their superiors performed?

1. The distinction of been and male, will acquit him. A promise must carry a
benefit Answer.
with it, if not, it were better to be without it then to have it. Now long
life, without that blessing of going well with a man, is a displeasure. It is
the comfort Deuteronomy. 5. 16.
and delight which we enjoy in our life, which is here promised as a blessing.
For Saint Augustine says, non est vera vita, ubi non seliciter, vivitur, that
cannot be called a true life, which brings not content and happiness with it.
Eliah being persecuted by 1 King 19. 4.
Jexebel, thought his life not a benefit, and therefore quits God of his
promise, Now, O Lord, take away my life. And indeed long life may be no benefit
in two respects.

1. In regard of the evil times. (...) was a good king, but the times began to
be evil, Jerusalem was (...) long to be destroyed. Therefore Huldah the
prophetess sends him word, that God would gather him to his fathers, and that
he should go to his grave in peace, and his eyes should not see the evil that
God 2 Kin. 22. 20.
would bring upon that city. God shortened his days, to free him from a further
evil, he being but 39 years old when he died.

2. In regard of himself; lest he should be corrupted. The righteous is taken
away Esa. 57. 1.
from the evil to come. It is said that (...) was raptus a facie malitiae,
taken away from seeing wickedness, lest either he should have been infected or
grieved at it: and so the pleasure of his long life here, would have been a
displeasure to him, by the danger of eternal death.

2. The second answer is, to that which is secondly objected [that though God
takes them out of this life in these respects, yet the compensation is more
then equivalent] he makes them amends, and that fully. For as when (...)
promised Marc. 6. 23.
(...) half his kingdom, if he had given her all, it had been no breach of
promise in him, so (...) God give to those that honor their parents vitam
perpetuam, everlasting life, instead of (...), a long life, he performs his
promise to the full, so he that promises ten pieces of silver, and gives ten
pieces of gold; and he that promises an hogshed of beer, and gives as much
wine, breaks not his promise.

3. But the (...) and most sufficient answer is this. There is no temporal
thing, that does cadere in promissum Dei, come within Gods promise further then
it shall be conducing to the life to come: for this life is but via ad vitam,
the way to the other, and better life. And therefore whatsoever God promises
in the way it is but as it furthereth to the end. (...) pars perfectae (...)
est (...) foelicitas, earthly felicity is no happiness, unless it dispose us to
eternal felicity: because (as it was said before) all things must (...) in
(...), work together for good; (...) it a disponatur de (...), (...), that the
less blessings (...). 8. 28.
may be so disposed, that they may agree with the chief good; or at least ne
periculum fiat de maximo, the greatest good may not be hazarded by it. And in
this respect it is certain, that as it is not prejudicial to the life to come,
God keeps his promise. Therefore (as one says) our lives may be ventured pro
Rege, lege, and grege, for the King, the law, the flock.

1. Pro Rege, for the king. Thus when David was in danger of being stain by 2 Samuel 21. 16.
(...)-Benob one of the sons of the Giants, (...) hazarded his own life, to
save 17.
David's, and so rescued David and slew the Philistim. psalm. 44. 22.
Jude verse. 3.


2. Pro lege, for religion. For thy sake (says the prophet) we are killed all
Jam. 5. 10.
the day long, Contend earnestly for the common faith, says Saint Jude.

3. Pro grege. As the prophets were examples, so must we.

In these cases, if a man should be desirous of life, he may live, but this
life will prove derogatory to the life to come. But if in the same cases we
shall lose our lives, God does not only reward us with (...) the life of glory
in the other world, but with vita memoriae, we shall have an everlasting memory
and honor in this world. The righteous shall be had in everlasting
remembrance, says the father, and the memory of the just is blessed, says the
son: and men shall say, Praised psalm. 112. 6.
prove. 10. 7.
be the Lord that ever such a man was born; and say, (...) mortuus est iste,
how bravely died such a man.

Now (...) are some reasons also, why God prolongeth the lives of the ungodly,
and though they cannot expect it by virtue of his promise as the godly may, for
no promise is made to the wicked.

1. To give them time to repent, that they may recover themselves out of the
snare of the devil, as the Apostle speaks. And this we see in Saint Paul by his
2 Timothy 2. 25.
conversion, and the not (...) of Solomon, when he had forsaken God, (...).
and followed strange women, and false Gods, was the cause sine qua non, of his
returning to God.

2. Secondly, God has thereby a respect to the progeny of the wicked; If 2
Kin. 21. 14.
God had cut of (...) while he had been young, good Josiah had not been 16. 20.
born: and if Ahaz had not been suffered to live, (...) had been lost.

3. Thirdly, (...) wicked (...) to live, that they may be rods and scouges for
the exercise and (...) of his Church. The prophet in the person of God calls
Esa. 10. 5.
Ashur, the rod of his anger.

4. The last reason may serve as an universal (...). God (...) such men to live
long, to (...) long suffering, by his patience and long suffering. The Apostle
(...) the same, when he says, what if God willing to show his wrath, and to
make his power known, endured with much long-suffering the vessels of wrath.
But as the Prophet tells them, God will not suffer them to escape Romans 9. 22.
for ever.

1. The godly shall come out and look upon their carcasses, and in the mean
Esa. 66. 24.
time they shall be but as condemned persons, nay they shall condemn one
another. 2 Kin. 9. 31.
(...) condemns Zimri, had Zimri peace which slew his Master? And Absalom, 2 Samuel 16. 17.
though he were rebellious to his father, yet he could condemn Hushai, for
leaving David; is this thy kindness to thy friend.

2. As the Prophet Esaias has it in the forenamed verse, (...) non (...), their
worm shall not die, Conscientia ipsorum paena, their very conscience shall Aug.
be a punishment to them. So that their life may be (...), not (...), long, but
without delight or joy.

3. The third is out of the same verse, ignis (...) non extinguetur. Their fire
shall never be quenched. Their misery shall never have end.

4. And lastly (there too) they shall be an abhorring to all flesh. They shall
be odious psalm. 34. 16.
to every good man. Their name shall be forgotten. God will root out the prove.
10. 7.
remembrance of them from the earth. The name of the wicked shall rot.

And though God take away the righteous betimes, yet in the way of righteousness
is life, and in the pathway thereof there is no death, as the wiseman speaks.
12. 28.


And to conclude with the words of the Preacher, though the days of the wicked
be prolonged, yet it shall go well with them that fear the Lord: But it (...).
8. 12.
shall not go (...) with the wicked, neither shall he prolong his days, which
are as a shadow, because he (...) not before God.

THE EXPOSITION OF THE Sixth Commandment.
CHAP. I.
Why (...) commandment is placed in this order. How it coheres with the rest.
Of unjust anger, the first step to (...), how it differs from other affections.
Of lawful anger. unlawful anger how prohibited. The degrees and fruits of it.
The affirmative part of the precept, to preserve the life of (...). The life of
the body, and the degrees of it. The life of the soul, and the sins against
it. The scope of this commandment.

Non occides. Thou shall do no murder, or Thou shall not kill.

WE have seen, that whatsoever duty was between men, as Superiors, and
Inferiors, pertained to the fifth Commandment, which has been handled at
large. Now the duties that are called (...), which are common to all, follow in
the four next commandments. This sixth concerns the life of man, and the
preservation thereof. The seventh respects chastity, and the preservation of it
in wedlock, and out of wedlock. The eighth takes care of meum and tunm, the
goods, propriety, and estates of men. And the ninth concerns the reputation
and good name of a man.

This commandment conducing so much to public and private peace, is rightly
and in its due order placed next to the (...) whereby authority and government
is established with due respect and honor. And the lawgiver considering the
frailty of man's memory, has in his infinite wisdom under one word [murder]
comprehended a whole catalogue of sins, and made choice of this word, which
signifies the highest degree of sins of this nature, to show how odious the
other degrees are, and that those affections of unjust anger, hatred etc. Are
murder in his sight, which otherwise would not perhaps have seemed so heinous
to man, if they had not been expressed by that word.

This commandment is expounded in the law by Moses, where not only murder
itself is forbidden, but all the degrees and causes (...) men come to it, as
Lev. 19. 16.
(...)-bearing, standing against the blood of our neighbor, hatred, not
rebuking a 17.
neighbor for his sin, revenge, grudges, etc. And as in the law, so in the
Gospel 18.
by our Savior himself there is a large comment upon this law, from the Math.
5. 22. etc
two and twentieth verse of the fifth of Saint Matthew to the 27. And from the
38. verse to the end of the chapter, where rash anger and malice is made
murder in the heart and revenge even against enemies is severely forbidden.
The like is in Saint John's Epistles almost throughout them all, but especially
in one place, most plainly and especially; whosoever hates his brother is a
murderer. By which God shows, that (...). 3. 15.
God rather gives his laws to the heart (the fountain of the affections) and to
the affections, then to the actions, as men do their laws. And when we have
well weighed these places, we shall find that to be true, which the Apostle
says, that Anger and hatred (...) the gate of the (...), whereby he enters
into the soul; Be angry and sin not, neither give place to the Devil; for
hereby is way made for strife and debate (the proper Ephesians. 4. 27.
work of the Devil) as S. James speaks. James 3. 16.


For the order and dependence of this Commandment upon the former, it is very
exact. For,

1. First, the fifth was concerning parents, the beginners and Authors of our
life, therefore no object comes better to be treated on in the next place,
then life it self; which flows as an effect from the former, and every man
ought to prize and esteem it both in himself and others. And as it ought to
follow the fifth, so ought it to go before the rest; for we must first have
life and being before we can partake of wedlock, goods, or good name, (...) do
all depend upon life, and therefore the Commandment for preserving of it ought
to stand before these.

2. The ground of the fifth Commandment was self conceit; to restrain that
conceit which men have of their own excellency, whereby they assume honor to
themselves, and are unwilling to give honor to whom it is due. Hence men are
apt to hate those that are better and more honored then themselves; for omnis
iniquitas mentitur sibi, all iniquity deceives it self, and we may observe that
the first murder came from Genesis 4. 5. 8.
this, Cain hated his brother, because he was accepted and preferred before
him, and the text says plainly that he slew his brother, because he was better
then himself, for 1 John. 3. 12.
his brothers works were good, and his own evil. So was Esau's anger kindled
against Genesis 27. 41.
Jacob, because of his prerogative of birthright which he had bought, and for
the blessing which he stole from Esau. The like was in the Patriarchs against
Joseph: so 37. 4. 8.
that in both cases (had they not been prevented) they had proceeded even to
murder, when they hated them. All this, I say, grows upon the conceit, that we
are not honored so much, and others (in our opinion) are honored more then
they should be. Thus then we being thwarted and crossed, do as Ahab did, fall
into anger and revenge, and (to obtain our desires) into murder. And therefore
in the placing of this Commandment before those that follow, there is very good
order observed.

It is true, as diverse have well observed, that (...), the fervor of spirit
or animosity, proceeds from (...) desire, and our affections are hence called
(...) violent and earnest. We see in natural things, fire, whose natural place
is to be above, desires to be there, and therefore it has the quality of
lightness given to it, whereby it is apt to ascend, and if it be hindered in
its course, it has another quality, viz. hear, to burn through and make way,
whereby it will search, and by its own strength (...) to remove the impediment.
Such a thing is in the soul of man; for God having given us light to know what
we have to do, gives also a desire to do it, and so we make toward it, we go
up; for therefore has he given us that part of the mind which we call (...),
which is answerable to the lightness in the fire: and then answerable to calor
heat, he has given us (...), and by the zeal of it we remove all impediments
in our course.

1. Now the first step or motive to murder is anger, which is vindex laesae
concupiscentiae, the revenger of our desire impaired; this being not satisfied,
there naturally follows ebullitio sanguinis, a boiling of the blood, for we
commonly say, when a man is crossed in that he desires, His blood rises, upon
which follows (...), anger, and a desire of removing the impediment. But this
we are to understand, that anger is not of the same quality with some other
affections, as namely that of envy, that does sound ill, as soon as it is named,
for it implies a grief at the good of another, which is simply and altogether
sinful, as being directly contrary to the virtue of love: but anger is not
simply evil in regard of the act or object, but when it fails either in the
cause, or the quantity, or measure, then our Anger may be faulty. Be angry,
says S. Paul, but sin not. Ephesians. 4. 26.
So that there may be anger which is not sinful: and when anger is a sin, often
it comes not in regard of the object, nor at any time in regard of the
affection it self, which is indifferent, but when we are angry either without
cause, or upon a trivial and light occasion, or when upon a just cause we keep
no measure, but our anger is extreme.

To be moved with indignation, in Gods cause, or for the public good, is a
virtue, and it is called Nemesis, indignation, as when a man does see a thing
committed against Gods glory, that ought not to be done, or a thing that ought
to be done, not done to the glory of God, or the good of the Church and
Commonwealth. This is ira per zelum, a zealous anger, and is called Ira
spiritus sancti, a holy anger. Such an anger was that of our Savior against
them that profaned the Temple. And that of Elias when he saw the worship of
Baal set John 2. 14.
up, instead of the true worship of God. And this anger venerable Beda commends
In Joh. cap. 2.
to us: Zelo domus patris Salvator impios (...) Templo, zelemus and nos domum
Dei, and quantum possumus ne quid in ea pravum geratur, insistamus: our Savior
in zeal to his (...) house turned the wicked out of the (...), let us be as
zealous for that house, and be (...) and careful as much as in us lies, that
no wicked thing be done there, etc.

The other is ira per vitium, a faulty anger, or ira (...), a fleshly anger,
and that Matthew. 5. 22.
is, when a man is angry without cause, condemned by our Savior, who threatens
22.
him that is angry with his brother (...), without a cause; or when it is extra
modum, beyond all rules of moderation; when a man gives place to wrath, and
lets it run out of all compass, contrary to the Apostles rule, who bids us,
resist anger, and not give place to it. S. Gregory gives us a rule for this
kind of anger; Ira cum delinquentium Romans 12. 19.
culpas insequitur, non debet menti quasi Domina prire, sed post rationis (...)
In Moral.
quasi ancilla fumulari; when anger prosecutes the faults of Delinquents, it
should not go before the mind like a Mistress, but follow reason as an
handmaid: and when the affection is not thus ruled by reason, then it is no
more Nemesis, but radix amaritudinis, a root of bitterness, or venenum
serpentis, the poison of the serpent that infecteth our nature. Heb. 12. 15.


Now this sinful wrath, which is the spawn of those sins which S. James
reckons up, is either the first motion rising in us, or else it is suppuratio
vitii, an impostume, or inward ranckling of it: and this, if it be against a
Superior, it is called a grudge; if against an equal, (...); if toward an
inferior, it is termed disdain; and this grudge if it continue longer, will
grow into an impostume of envy, and so will rancour into hatred, and disdain
into contempt. After which they usually break out, and have two issues. 1. In
the tongue. 2. In the Countenance. If it breaks out 1. in the tongue, it is
called spuma vitii, the (...) or froth of the vice, which being against
Superiors is called (...), whispering or detraction: of such S. Bernard In
Sermon.
says, (...) portant in ling (...), they carry the Devil in their tongue. And
when it is against equals, it is called (...), contentious railing and
brawling: and lastly, against Inferiors it is scoffing and reproaching: or
else 2. it breaks out in the countenance, which is called, Icterus vitii the
jaundice of sin, we shall know it if it be against Superiors, per obliquos
(...), by the crooked and learing eye; if to an Esaias 2. 11.
equal, by the whole face; and to an Inferior by high and lofty looks, as the
Prophet calls them.

3. Besides these it breaks out in actum and (...), into execution, into the
hands and feet, and then it is called Lepra peccati, the leprousie of sin, and
produces fighting and bloodshedding: which Leprousie stays not within our
selves, but infects others also, Come let us smite him with the tongue. These
are all a kin to murder. Jer. 18. 18.
And this is a brief enumeration of those things, which shall hereafter be set
forth at large.

And as in this Commandment, there is a prohibition of murder and its kindred,
so is there also an injunction in general to do all things that may conduce to
the preservation of our Neighbors life: of which also we shall speak hereafter.

The Hebrews have a saying, that every man ought to be lignum vitae (...), a
tree of life to his Neighbor. What it is to be (...) vitae, a tree of life to
our Neighbor, the Wise man tells us in sundry places: fructus justi, the fruit
of the righteous is a tree of life, to deal justly with him, and offer him no
wrong; and in (...). 11. 30.
another place, Desiderium expletum, a desire fulfilled is a tree of life, that
is, by (...) 13. 12.
and doing good; and again, (...), a gentle tongue, which gives gentle
speeches. These are ligna vitae, trees of (...), for by these we make our 15. 4.
Neighbor to have cor sanum, a (...), or joyful heart, which is indeed the
life of the flesh, as he tells in another place; for without this, this life
is, as the Heathen said, 14. 30.
(...), life without life.

It is a foolish opinion of some that think, that the body and senses are the
best things they possess, and thereupon infer that murder has only (...) to
the body: but the truth is, there is a murder of the soul as well as of the
body. So that murder is referred to two lives. 1. The life present. And 2. the
life to come.

The world and the Common law account it an offense, if the body, or good
estate of it be endammaged. The good estate of the body is called incolumit as
corporis, the good plight and habit of the body: and this consists in 3
things (which are all included in murder, as degrees to it.)

1. (...) integritate corporis, in the perfectness of each member of the body.
The body therefore is not only prejudiced, when life is taken away totally,
but when the body loses an arm, or a leg. A maim will (...) a good action. 2.
In incolumitate sensus, in the soundness of the senses of our bodies, when we
are at ease, without pain, and therefore when a man is wounded, hurt, or
stricken, though no limb be taken away. This bears an action of Battery. 3. In
liberate motus, in freedom to go whither we will. When a man is unjustly
committed to prison, and there wrongfully detained. The law in this case allows
the party so restrained, his action against the person that deprives him of
this liberty.
Now as there is inconlumitas corporis, soundness of body: so there is of the
soul too, called (...), the tranquillity of the soul, and this may also be
endammaged. The good estate of the soul consists also in three things.

1. In dilectione, in love; against which comes in odium, hatred, with its
crew Gal. 5. 22.
and retinue. 2. In (...), joy. Against this comes that, which so handles a
man, that he falls in (...), into Torporem (...), a sloth or drowsiness of
soul, so that he takes (...) delight in any good thing, or if he fall into
envy. 3. In pace. Peace is the last, which is twofold. 1. Either within a man's
(...), quiet thoughts, against which comes scandalum, scandal given: or 2.
without, between him and others, and the opposer of this is discord and
contention.
So that not only offenses against the body, or the incolumity and good
thereof, but offenders contra animam, against the soul, and the (...), the good
plight thereof, Genesis 27. 46.
are comprehended within this Commandment, as breaches thereof.

When Esau against the will of his parents had matched himself with strange
women, Job 10. 1.
the daughters of Heth, the text tells us, that Rebecca professed, She was
weary Genesis 45. 26,
of her life, and this weariness of life Job calls amaritudinem anima, the
bitterness 27.
of his soul. Esau in this act was a trespasser against this Commandment. On
the other side, Jacobs soul being as it were dead by the report of Joseph's
death, (...) imprisonment, and Benjamins departure, it is said of him, when he
was told that Prove. 17. 22.
Joseph was alive; that his spirit revived, as if before it had been dead The
Hebrews have a phrase (...) animam, to kill the soul, and the English have the
like, to kill the heart: and the Wise man has one near to it: Spiritus tristis
exsiccat ossa, a broken spirit dries the bones; for grief is a cause of
diminishing the natural heat, so that he that ministers this occasion to any
man, does what he can to shorten his life, and is within compass of breach of
this Commandment; for whatsoever is contrary to (...) life, or (...)
well-being, is forbidden by this Commandment, Thou shall not Genesis 9. 6.
kill.

The scope of this Commandment, is not any private benefit, but the public
good, as was said before of the Law in general; for the sin forbidden here is,
1. In respect 1 Cor. 12. 13.
of God himself. God will not have any man killed, and his reason he gives,
because 27.
man is his own image; and it is accounted a capital crime against earthly
Princes to deface their image. 2. In regard of the Church. Christians are all
one body in Christ, therefore he that shall take away any member of it, makes a
rupture in that mystical Levit. 26. 6.
body. 3. In respect of the Commonwealth. Peace is a great benefit, and a
great blessing Psalm 36. 9.
when men shall live without fear; besides, Tutela singulorum, the safety of
every private person, who as he has received life from God, so he has
received reason, by the use whereof he is to preserve it. For as the Psalmist
says, God is the fountain of life, from whom life is derived to every man, and
it is he that has given man, nobilem rationis usum, whereby he may procure
himself both incolumitatem corporis, the good plight of body, and (...), good
habit or tranquillity of soul: and with this he has fenced him round. So much
in general. Now for the particulars.

CHAP. II.
Of murder in general. The slaughter of beasts not prohibited, but in two
cases. Of killing a man's self, diverse reasons against it. Of killing another:
many reasons to show the greatness of this sin. The aggravations of this sin
from the person murdered.

THe Manichees held a fond opinion, that because it is said, Non occides, Thou
shall not kill, that a man ought not to kill a beast or (...), or cut down a
tree, or (...) up an herb, because there is life in it. But this error may be
confuted, even from the Creation, for before the flood, God says, Behold I
have given you every herb bearing seed, and every tree, etc. to be to you for
meat; he gave all things for the use of man, as alter the flood, Every moving
thing that lives, etc. And under the Gospel we see Genesis 1. 29.
it most plainly. S. Paul tells the Corinthians, that whatsoever is sold in the
shambles, 9. 3.
that ye may eat. 1 Cor. 10. (...).


1. The reasons are evident. First, where there is not (...) societatis, right
of society, there cannot be societas juris, not participation of right: but
they have no right of society with us, because they want reason: and therefore
it can be no injury to them to kill them; for where there is no right no jui,
there cannot be injuria, wrong.

2. To use a thing to that end for which it is ordained, is no sin; but the
less perfect was made for the more perfect, therefore herbs were ordained for
beasts, and both for the use of man.

1. Yet in two cases we are prohibited the killing of beasts; first when it
turns to the detriment of our neighbor. It is not the killing of the beast,
but the wrong (...). 22. 1.
and detriment done to our neighbor that is the sin.

2. If we kill it in the (...) of our wrath, exacting or seeming to (...) from
it that power of understanding, of which it is not capable. S. Augustine
describing the impotencie, or rather (...) of the passion of anger, says,
(...) est, cum (...) opinio turbulent. appetitus (...) ed, (...) facilitatem
actionis (...), (...); In (...). ad Nep.
non (...) tantum, sed (...) irascimur in scribendo, (...); (...) and
frangimus, aleatores (...), (...) penicillo, etc. this passion so diverts a
man's judgment: that we are not only angry with men, but the writer with his
(...), in dashing and breaking it, Gamesters with their (...), Painters with
their (...), etc. when they do not please them; when they have not that
facilitatem (...). And this is contrary to Gods (...), for he saves both man
and (...): and so do the godly; The righteous man regards the life of his
beast, (...) the (...) man, that is, exacts not psalm 36. 7.
in his passion more from his beast, then is within his strength, or capacity.
prove. 12. (...).


Come we now to man-killing, which is murder here specified.

There are two sorts of slaughter prohibited by this Commandment. 1. Sui, of a
man's self. 2. Alterius, of another.

1. For the (...), though the Heathen we read of (as (...), Seneca, Cato, and
others) thought it a (...) sin to kill another; yet they (...) lay violent
hands upon themselves, and thought it lawful, and were held in great (...) for
it. But Christian religion tells us, that it is an unlawful act, and that no
man has power over his own life, for these (...).

1. First, we must needs grant, that under the (...) of (...) occides, is
comprehended, Non occides (...). Because, as (...) before, the (...) rule of
this Law is, (...) teipsum, thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self, then non
(...) alium, (...) non occides (...), thou shall not kill another, as thou
(...) not kill thy self; and therefore the prohibition of killing another,
includes a prohibition of killing ones (...); the one is against the law of
charity and of (...), as well as the (...) for we are by nature most nearly
linked and united to ourselves, and nature provides for self-preservation
before the preservation of others; for it first provides alimentum (...), by
(...) of meat in the stomach, before it gives propaginem (...), propagation of
the kind, for the (...) is of that which remains after the (...) of the (...).

2. Every man that live (...) in a society or commonwealth is a part thereof,
and (...) (...), at his own (...), but (...), of the society or Commonwealth
where he lives, and (...) cannot (...) or (...) without detriment to the whole.
And therefore it was, that the (...) their goods to their (...), as it is with
(...), because the state being injured by them in the loss of a subject will
be in some (...), by depriving them of power to dispole of their (...).

3. Our life is the gift of God (as (...) (...) it in her long) (...), (...) 1 Samuel 2. 6.
that gives life, and we ought not to dispose of any gift of God without the
(...), or (...) to the will of the donour. And the (...) because we (...) with
a (...) Cor. 7. 23.
(...), (as the Apostle tells us) which implies a (...) from (...) to him that
bought us we are his servants. And then, as the (...) says, (...)? who (...)
thou that (...) another (...) servant (...) may we say, (...) (...). 14. 4.
qui interficis (...)? who (...) thou that (...) servant? It is worse then
brutish to kill, drown, or bring upon our selves (...) death. The very swine
would not have run into the sea, but that they (...) Math. 8. 32.
by the devil.

And therefore Saint (...) (...) the act of (...), that (...) violent hands upon
himself rather then he would fall into the hands of (...) (...). It is a great
error for any man so hold, that a man may kill himself, (...) 1. (...) 2 Macc.
14. 37. etc.
temporales molestias, that he may avoid (...) troubles, (...) (...) did,
whereby he does incidere in (...), fall into those that are eternal or 2. ut
(...), to hinder another man's (...), when he shall thereby (...) in (...), fall
into a grievous sin of his own or 3. (...), for his own sin, desperately,
as (...) did, there being a way to (...) out by (...): upon which act of his
Leo (...) thus; (...), O (...) and (...), in sermon.
quem non (...) ad (...), sed (...). O (...), thou were more wicked and unhappy
then all men, that would not be led by repentance to God, but (...) by (...)
to hang thy (...). (...) lastly, (...); that they may not (...) like (...),
that (...) her self, and the women in the primitive times, that drowned
themselves, lest they should be (...): for by this means (...) in (...),
(...), They (...) into certain sin, to avoid an uncertain. So much for sui,
the killing a man's self.

Concerning killing of another.

2. Now for (...), the killing of another, the reasons against it are (...).
The two first are general, and were applied in the (...) of Sui.

1. Diliges (...), Thou (...) thy neighbor as thy self: and the rule is, (...)
vis, (...), do as thou (...) be done unto.

2. Thy neighbor is Gods image, and thou must not (...) it (...) as (...) cum
(...). The particular reasons are.

1. We are all one (...), as the (...) speaks. And the same prophet (...) Esa
(...). 7.
it as a fearful judgment upon (...), that it should come to (...), that a man
9. 20.
should eat the flesh of his own arm. And this is done, if we (...) and dev
our one Gal. 5. 15.
another, as the Apostle speaks. No man never (...) own flesh, says the same
Apostle: (...). 5. 29.
we must not hate our brother, much (...) kill him.

2. This sin will make a man become (...), the devils first born, for he was
(as our Savior told the Jews that sought to kill him) a (...) Jo. 8. 44.
from the beginning; and by his (...), ye shall not die at all, he Genesis 3. 4.
brought in a certain (...), for by one man, sin entered into the world, and
death by sin, as the Apostle speaks and so by this means, as much as in him lay
he murdered all the (...) of mankind.

3. Murder is (...) one, of the crying sins, and will not cease, till God
take revenge for it; as in Abels case, the (...) of (...) comes up 4. (...).
to Heaven and Gods ears are always open to this (...), though to others he
may seem not to hear.

4. It is a sin that God will have diligently searched after, as we may see in
the case of an uncertain murder; when God appointed, that the judges and (...)
of the city shall come, and wash their hands in the blood of an heyfer over the
(...) Deuteronomy. 22. 1. etc
man, and protest their innocence, (...) their hands have not shed this man's
blood, nor have their eyes seen it. Without which (...), Gods wrath would by no
means be pacified.

5. It is a cursed sin, (...), (...) Cain, says God, and accursed Genesis 4.
11. 19.
he was, for he was a banished man (by his own confession) and a (...) and
vagabond. He was cast out of Gods (...) that is, excommunicate or cast out of
the church, (...) from the place of Gods (...) worship, which is called his
presence, and so (...) of his grace and favor. This was the first sentence of
excommunication, which was (...) executed for this sin.

6. God sets a special mark upon him for it, which the best expositors say,
(...).
was hor rour of the (...), which of all other (...) does (...) accompany this
sin of (...). So that this sin will (...) the (...). The (...) found this
horror: it never (...) them from their first act (...) Joseph, till Joseph's
comforting 42. 21.
and forgiving them. 50. 15.


7. Cain himself passed sentence of death for his bloody act against himself.
Blood for blood, according to that of the heathen. Homicida quod secit (...).
Let the murderer look for the (...) that (...) has done to another. Cains
fear was, that whosoever should find him, would kill him, and accordingly it
falls out, that psalm. 55. 23.
(...), (...) of blood, (...) dies. (...), shall not live out half their (...),
a man slayer may expect that measure from others, which he has meted out to
others.

8. God himself so approves of Cains sentence, that though the horns of the
Altar were a sanctuary for other sins, yet a murderer (...) he fled thither,
was to be Exodus 21. 25.
taken away and put to death. It was (...) (...) that slew (...) and Amasa,
slain (...) King. 2. 34.
by (...) at the horns of the (...).

9. Nay God will require the blood of a man even at the hands of a beast: much
Genesis 9. 5.
more at a man's hands.

10. Lastly, Gods speech to (...) is very remarkable; the voice of the blood of
thy brother (...) to me from the ground: the very earth, which is senseless 4.
10.
received that which he shed out (...) his brothers veins, and cried for
vengeance, and shall man that (...) sense let it out? He that (...) this sin,
passes beast and earth, and (...) creatures.

Now an homicides fact is augmented by circumstances, for the person who is
slain, is either public or private.

1. This sin committed upon (...) public person, is the more grievous of the
two, because it is (...), (...) against many: the offender does what he can to
quench (...) light of Israel. To murder a King or Prince, is of so horrid a
nature, (...) Sam. 21. 17.
the heathens abhorred it. (...) the murdering of the Common father of a
country, yea as much as in men lies, a murdering of God himself, for they
strike at God in his vicegerent and therefore though diverse Princes have been
taken away and murdered (...), yet never any people in the world pretended by
any color of legal (...), or show of mock (...) to touch the life of a Prince;
(so odious they accounted it) (...) counted it a wicked thing to crucify a
King; Shall I (...) your king? to which they could answer nothing, but that
they had no King but (...), acknowledging, that if he had been a King, (as they
accounted him none) that it had been a monstrous thing.

2. If upon a private person. 1. He is either (...) to us in kindred. 2. Or else
he (...), a stranger.

1. To shed the blood of them that are of our (...), or allied to us, is a most
heinous sin, because super (...) respectus, here (...) a double respect. 1.
As he is a man; so it is (...). 2. He is either father, and then it is (...);
or a brother Exodus 21. 15.
which is (...), etc. He that strikes father or mother, shall surely be put to
death, but if he shall kill them, there is no death answerable to his offense:
the Heathen say, he should have (...) mortem (...), a (...) and an ugly death.
And if any man have but one brother, or son etc. As the women of (...) said to
David, it is worse to kill him, then if there were more, because there was but
one (...). 14. 7.
spark left (as she said) and he (...) to quench it.

2. Of those that are (...), strangers, that are removed from us; 1. they are
either of strength to (...) themselves, or else, 2. Weak and impotent, as the
Orphan, widow, stranger etc. For the last sort of these; it is a more (...) sin
to kill one that is impotent, then him that is our match (as we say) and is
able to resist. God himself takes especial care of these in the law, that they
be not (...) vexed or oppressed, much less their lives and blood spilt. This
is (...) cruelty, the (...). 22. (...).
Greek comes from (...) (...) raw, because such cruel persons are like those ra
venous beasts, that eat crude or raw flesh. To such belongs that threatening of
our Savior, Qui (...), He that shall offend one of those weak or little ones
etc. better it were a (...) were hanged about his neck, and that he were thrown
Math. 18. 6.
into the (...).

Among those that are able to withstand us, it is far worse to lay hands upon a
good and innocent man, then on a wicked: for by spilling the blood of a good
man, we not only sin against the rule of charity, but against (...) also, he
being unworthy of death. We do (...) most wrong to him, to whom we owe the most
good. We sin also against the commonwealth by such an act: for a good (...)
(...) as the Heathen man said, a common good. And lastly, we sin against God
himself. If any man offer violence to them, he does it to God; for he that
(...) (...). 2. 8
them, (...) the (...) of his (...).

CHAP. III.
The (...) of this Commandment. 1. That Kings and princes may lawfully put
(...) to death. That herein they are Gods ministers. Three rules to qe by them
observed. Their judgment must not be. 1. perversum, nor. 2. Vsurpatum, nor. 3.
Temerarium. 2. That in some cases they may lawfully make war. In a lawful war
is required. 1. Lawful authority. 2. A just cause. 3. A just end And. 4. A
right manner. Addition 32. Of the causes of a just war. Some other cases
wherein a man may kill and not break this Commandment. First, for defense of
his life against sudden assaults. Inculpata tutela. Secondly, by chance and
without his intention.

How a King may put offenders to death.
YEt we must understand that kings and princes are in some cases exempted from
this Commandment, and commanded to kill, and that upon pain of grievous
punishment; (and therefore here falls in the rule of (...), the rest belonging
to the rules of extent) for this law only prohibits private persons from
killing upon their own authority. And a lawful Prince may lawfully do it two
ways.

1. When he puts to death in a legal way those that are guilty of heinous
crimes. 2. When for the just defense of himself and his subjects, or otherwise,
he undertakes a just and necessary war.
1. For the first, there is an objection of some, that no man is to kill, or be
Math. 5. 39.
killed, upon the speeches of our Savior, Resist not evil. But the answer is
easy; for it is not public (...), but private revenge, that is prohibited. But
for public Deuteronomy. 32. 35
vengeance, God tells us, it is his. Which place Saint Paul quoteth. And God
has Romans 12. 19.
derived his power to kings, who are his delegates, who, as the same Apostle,
are 13. 4.
a (...) to the evil, for they bear not the sword in vain; but have it given
to them, to execute vengeance upon malefactors, and may by Gods own immediate
warrant put an (...) to death.

Thou (...) not suffer a witch to live, says God. And a wise king (says
Solomon) Exodus 22. 18.
scatters the wicked, and brings the wheel over them. Thine eye shall not
pity prove. 20. 26.
(says the law) but life shall go for life etc. For the nature of man is so
perverse, as Deuteronomy. 19. 26.
that without (...), thou shall kill, ne occides, Thou shall not kill, will not
be observed. God has given this power and commandment to kings and princes,
who are the supreme Magistrate, (...), ne sanguit (...). that blood should be
shed, to Prevent a further shedding of blood. As in the body, the Physician
prescribes, (...), (...), an incision must be made, to prevent an excision or
cutting off the member; and in curing of some diseases of the eyes, the sight
must be as it were (...) up for some days, and the eye covered that it cannot
see, that so the sight may be preserved, and the eye may see better afterward.
So here the shedding of nocent blood by kings and those that have authority
from them (for to such and none else has God given the sword of justice) is
the way to prevent the shedding of innocent blood.

In the beginning Government was established upon this ground, Optabilius est
timere unum quam multos, it is beter to fear one then many; and therefore more
fit it was for one to have power to kill, then for all to have this power. And
he that has this power may lawfully use it, and cut off some thereby to
preserve the whole body. For as in the natural body, if any member become so
infected, as that without cutting it off, the whole body will be endangered,
(as in the case of a gangrene) the rule is, melius est utpereat unus, quam
unitas, better to cut off that member, then the whole body perish, so it is in
the Civil body, better one offender be cut off then the whole land endangered.
And as in a common fire, when one house is on fire, if water will not quench
it, the best way to prevent the rest from taking fire is by pulling it down.
Extinguit incendium (...), by the ruin of that they stay the fire from doing
more harm: so in the Civil state they stay further mischief by one man's ruin.
And therefore God commands, Tollere Deuteronomy. 19. 19.
homicidam, ut malum tollatur ex Israele, to take a way the manslayer that evil
may be taken away from Israel. And this malum to be taken away is two fold.

1. The wrath of God against the whole land, which is defiled so long as
innocent blood is shed and not punished.

2. Liberty of offending further, (which arises by impunity) by doing justice
on the offender is prevented: for, as God says, those that remain, shall hear
and 20.
fear and shall henceforth commit no more such evil.

Thus we see that blood may by shed without pollution of our hands, nay it is
so far from that, that Moses calls it (...) themselves to put some to death
by lawful authority; so that Tamnecesse est homines habere, qui accent alios ab
(...), quam oculis habere palpebras, it is as necessary to have men to keep
others from exorbitancies, as for the eyes to have lids, for they keep out
outward injuries, and that which would hurt the eyes; yea they keep and
preserve the sight from hurting it self, which without eye lids would disperse
it self with continual beholding the object. Therefore the Prophet David says,
that it should psalm. 101. vlt.
be his common exercise every morning to cut off all the wicked from the city
of the Lord. This is or should be the study of the wise king, as Solomon says,
how to scatter the wicked, and to make the wheel to go over them. It was found
at first when prove. 20. 26.
magistracy was established, that Cains city was the cause of Seths, and that
even amongst the seed of Seth, were some of Cains spirit, which were to be
restraind with the sword, or else they would like the Rams and He goats in
Ezechiel, (...) (...). 34. 18.
at the lean sheep with their borns: and therefore that blood may be shed to
prevent 21.
the shedding of blood, is evident; for he that sheddeth man's blood, by man
shall his blood be shed, and he that takes the sword shall perish by the
sword. Now it is properly God and not man that sheds the blood of wicked
persons, for he is (...) Dei, the miuister of God, to whom God has given the
sword, and he must not bear it in vain. Now as we do not impute the death of a
man slain to the sword, but to him that strikes with it, so must not we (...)
the death of a malefactor to the judge or king, but to God, whose minister he
is. For Quod organon (...) vtenti, id minister est iubenti, the minister is no
more to him that commands then the instrument to him that uses it.

Now jubens est Deus, the Commander is God, for as we look not at the sword, so
neither must we to man the minister, but to God, whose delegates Princes are,
when they cut off evil doers.

Now as the Sheriff may not execute any man, but, ex praescripto (...), by
warrant of the kings writ, so may not the prince or magistrate do any thing in
this behalf, but ex praescripto Dei, by warrant of Gods writ, and his prescript
is only Exodus 23. 7.
against malefactors. The malefactor must die by Gods command, but the innocent
1 Samuel 25. 29.
and righteous slay thou not: his soul must be bound in the bundle of life. He
must not go beyond his prescript or bounds in either case. For he that
justifies the wicked, and he that conde mneth the just, even they both are
abomination to the Lord, Prove. 17. 15.
says Solomon. The sparing of the guilty, and condemning the guiltless are
alike (...) sins in the sight of God: we have examples of Gods anger to such as
have transgressed in either kind.

1. For the acquitting and sparing the guilty. Saul by Gods command and
prescript 1 Samuel 15. 3.
was sent to destroy the Amalekites, and he having got Agag the king into his
hands, spares him; but what followed? his utter rejection; because thou have
rejected the 23.
word of the Lord, he has rejected thee from being King. Again, God gave
Benhadad the King of Syria into the hands of King (...): whom he let go
contrary to Gods prescript. And what followed? You shall hear the words of the
Prophet: Because thou have let go out of thy hand a man whom I appointed for
utter destruction; therefore 1 King. 20. 34.
thy life shall go for his life. A heavy sentence.

2. For putting the innocent to death, we see (...) condemned of murder for 1
King. 21. 13.
causing (...) to be stoned: and what a fearful judgment, God denounced
against him for it by the Prophet. As also against King David for the death of
Vrijah. And 21.
against Jerusalem for stoning the innocent Prophets. Matthew. 23. 30.


We have seen by this time, that a Magistrate may (without breach of this
Commandment) put malefactors to death, with the reasons for it, and the evils
ensuing upon the neglect of it, he keeping himself within the bounds prescribed
by God. Now we must see what rules must be observed in putting an offender to
death. And they be three.

1. That it be not judicio perverso, it must be a right judgment. As the
nocent must not be spared, so the innocent must not be put to death, his very
hairs must be preserved: of which we have spoken before.

2. Nor judicio usurpato, by an usurped judgment; every judge is to keep his
own limits: Quis es tu, qui judicas alienum servum? says the Apostle, Who art
thou that Romans 14. 4.
judge another man's servant? If beyond jus gentium, the law of nations, any
Prince put another man's subject to death, it is usurpation.

3. Lastly, not judicio temerario, rashly without lawful trial. The Judges
(says Deuteronomy. 19. 18.
Moses) shall make diligent enquiry. He that is condemned must be sons, guilty,
and 17. 6.
that must be proved upon accusation confirmed by testimony of two or three
witnesses. 19. 5.
We see this practiced by men otherwise wicked. What accusation bring you John
18. 29.
against this man, says Pilate, in the case of our Savior. And in S. Paul's,
Foelix the Acts 23. 35.
Governor told him, that he would hear him when his accusers were come.
Lastly, Festus pronounced it to be against the custom of the Romans to deliver
any man to die, before 25. 16.
he should answer his accusers face to face. And S. Ambrose says, Judicis non
est, In 1 Cor. 6.
sine accusatore damnare: quia Dominus Judam, licet fuisset fur, cum non esset
accusatus, minime abjecit: It is not the part of a Judge to condemn any man
without an accuser, for our Savior cast not Judas off, though he were a thief,
because no man accused him. Nor is an accusation to be received, nor blood to
be shed, but either upon the parties own confession, or upon proof by the
mouths of two or three witnesses. And these are the rules, against which if any
man condemn another, Qui De (...). (...) lib. 3.
ita maleficum interfecerit, homicida judicabitur, says S. Augustine, he shall
be accounted no better then a murderer.

Of the Lawfulness of war in some cases.
2. The second case wherein a Prince or Magistrate may lawfully shed blood is,
in undertaking a lawful war, either abroad against the enemy, or at home
against Rebels. For as he has a sword to govern the people of his kingdom, his
own subjects, so has he gladium exteriorem, a sword to defend them from the
enemy abroad. Certainly had not war been lawful, God would not have had a whole
Chapter written Deuteronomy. 23.
for the direction of his people, when they went to war. Praeliaveris praelia
Domini, says Abigail to David, My lord fights the battles of the Lord. So
that the Lord has his battles as well as peace. And S. Augustine, Noli
existimare neminem Deo placere posse qui armis bellicis (...), in his erat
sanctus David, cui Dominus Ad Bonif.
magnum testimonium perhibet: be not of opinion that none that follows the
war can please God, for holy David was a soldier, and God gives an ample
testimony of him.

It is true, S. Paul counsels us to be peaceable and quiet. If it be
possible, as much Romans 12. 18.
as lies in you, have peace with all men: yet it is with a si fieri (...), and
quantum in (...) est. If we have labored to obtain peace and cannot, then the
Apostle (...), the Magistrate bears not the sword in vain. (...) here is (...)
to him, this (...) gladii, to force peace from the unquiet. Suscipienda bella,
ut in pace sine injuria vivatur, war must be undertaken, that (...) may live in
peace without suffering wrong. Cicer.


You shall hear S. Augustine justifying the lawfulness of it. Nemo bella per
Mosen Contra (...).
gest a miretur aut horreat, etc. Let no man either marvel or tremble at the
wars undertaken by Moses, because in them he was not cruel, but obedient to
Gods command: nor was God cruel in commanding, but just in retributing to the
good, and terrifying the wicked. For what is there to be blamed in war? Is it
because some die therein (that have a time to die) that the rest may live in
peace? To reprove this, is not the part of a religious, but a fearful man. It
is the desire of hurt, cruelty in revenge, an unplacable mind, fierceness in
rebelling, lust to rule, and the like, which are worthily to be blamed in war.
And therefore wars begun at Gods, or his Deputies command are lawful and good.
Else John Baptist would have said to the soldiers that asked him a question
concerning their salvation, Arma abjicite, militiam deserite, neminem
percutite, (...), (...); cast away your arms, forsake the wars, strike, wound,
kill no (...): but because he knew, (...) they by being soldiers, were no
murderers, but ministers (...) justice, not revengers of their own injuries,
but defenders of the public safety, he answers them, Do no (...), (...) no
man, be content with your wages. So that he teaches them their duty in war,
but Luke 3. 14.
does not take it away, nor makes it more unlawful under the (...), then (...)
the Law. And because S. (...) knew, that the Manichees were apt to (...) S.
John, he bids them to mark what our Saviors opinion was in this point. Reddite
(...), etc. Give unto (...) that which is (...), and what was meant at that
time by Matthew. 22. 21.
Tribute money, for tribute is paid for the maintenance of soldiers in time of
war. And when the Centurion had told him that he had soldiers under him, and
how obedient (...). 10.
they were to him, Christ commended his faith, but commanded him not to desert
his calling. Thus we see that a war may be under taken lawfully, without any
derogation or impeachment to Christian religion. But (as we said) it must be a
lawful war, and that it be so, (...) rules are to be observed.

1. It must be ex justa (...), by lawful authority from the King, to whom Judge
1. 1.
God has given the sword. The Israelites before they went to war consulted
with (...) Sam. 17. 37.
the Lord. And David went not to fight with Goliath till he had king Saul's
warrant. (...) Faust.
S. Augustine says, Ordo naturalis mortalium (...) accomodatus (...) poscit,
ut suscipiendi belli authoritas atque consilium sit penes principes: not only
Christian religion, but even the Law of nature requires, that the authority and
command for war, be from the Prince. And therefore it stands all others upon,
to consider what they do, when they (...) any war, without the Authority or
(...) of their Princes, much more if it be against him: for let the cause be
never so good or specious, though it be for religion, or for God, yet without
his authority to whom God has committed the sword, all the blood they shed, be
the persons never so wicked, is murder, and they murderers. Let them consider
further what the Heathen man could see, That omne bellum sumi facile, (...)
aegerrime desinere, nec in ejusdem potestate initium and (...) esse; It is an
easy thing to begin, but a hard matter (...).
to end a war, the beginning and the end being not in one and the same man's
power.

2. It must be also in justa causa, upon a just occasion, and then it is like
to speed the De nov. mil.
better. Si bona fuerit causa (...), (...) exit (...) malus esse non potest,
says S. Bernard, If the cause of battle be good, the event seldom proves
amiss (supposing withal lawful authority to warrant it.)

The causes of a just war are the same with the causes of a just action in Law;
for Addition 32.
ubi judicia (...), incipit bellum, where courts of justice end, war begins.
They Of the causes of a just war.
are generally made three. 1. (...) defense against invasion. 2. Recovery of
what is unjustly taken from us. 3. The punishing of some great injury and
wrong, All which are mentioned in that (...) of (...) against the (...), Omnia
(...) defendi, Live. (...). 5.
repetique, and ulcisci fas sit, to defend, recover, and revenge. Thus Abraham
undertook (...). 14. 15.
a war for recovery of Lot, in whom an injury and wrong was offered to himself.
But here it must not be every light and small injury, for which war may be
undertaken, but great and notable, or a continued course of injuries. And even
when there is just cause, yet until necessity inforces, war must be avoided:
for as S. Augustine, (...) Aug. de Civ.
gerere malis videtur (...), bonis vero necessitatis; evil men count it a
happiness Dei (...). 19. (...). 7.
to go to war, but good men avoid it unless necessity enforce them. Seneca
could say, Non (...) homini homine prodige utendum, one man ought not to be
prodigal of another. Though David fought the Lords battles, yet God would not
let him build his Temple, because he had shed much blood. The Heathen Greeks
thought some expiation necessary even for them that had shed blood upon a just
cause. And in the Greek Church, that ancient Canon was long observed, which for
some time restrained them from the Eucharist, that had born arms even in the
justest war.

3. It must be ad (...) justum. There must be a just end proposed before a war
be undertaken. There must not be cupiditas nocendi, a desire to destroy, or
libido dominandi, a lust to reign over others. But the main end must be the
glory of God, and the next, (...) in pace sine injuria vivatur, war must be
taken in hand that we may Cicer.
live in peace without receiving injury.

4. And lastly, It must be (...) debito, in a right manner; according to that
rule given by God to his people: When thou go out to war with thine host
against thine Deuteronomy. 23. 9.
enemies, keep thee from all wickedness. How can men expect good success in
fighting against men, when by their sins they war against God. Abigail said of
David, that he fought the battles of the Lord, and evil had not been found in
him all his days, 1 Samuel 25. 28.
Where this is wanting, it may be said to such, as David said of Joab to
Solomon, when he gave a charge concerning him, that the blood of war was upon
his girdle, and in his 1 King. 2. 5.
shoes. And thus we see what is required to make a war just and lawful, and
where it is thus qualified, as in the Prince authorizing it, it is an act of
public justice; so in the soldiers, it is an act of Christian fortitude, when
men fight for their religion, their king, and their country, and as they said,
propter populum nostrum, and urbes Dei (...) Sam. 10. 12.
nostri, for our people, and the cities of our God.

There are other cases, wherein a man may kill, and yet not sin against this
Commandment.

1. The first is, when a man is suddenly assaulted, either upon the highway,
or elsewhere, where he cannot make use of the power of the magistrate. In this
case when the necessity is extreme, he may cum moderamine inculpatae tutelae,
for saving his own life, kill him that would take it away, that is, when he
cannot otherwise preserve his own life. In this case necessitas is not only
exlex, without the Law, but legem dicit legi, prescribes a Law even to the Law
it self. But necessity must be taken as it ought, that is, not only pro
imminenti necessitate, a necessity near, but pro termino indivisibili, when at
the Instant a man must defend himself, or his life is lost; in this case every
man is a Magistrate. This may be confirmed out of the Law, (...) Exodus 22. 2.
minore ad majus, The Law says, If a thief be found breaking up an house by
night, and he be smiten that he die, there shall be no blood shed for him. Then
if I may kill a man for breaking into my house to steal my goods, and not be
within compass of murder, much more if he would take away my life. And this
was the cause (as S. Augustine says) that gladius Petri, S. Peter's sword may
be (...), in (...), to terrify men from offering violence, and to preserve one
from danger. And seeing the Law allows a man to carry his sword about him for
his own defense, it is not for nothing, but implies that he may use it in some
cases, otherwise it were in vain to wear it.

But when the terminus is divisibilis, that the necessity is not without a
latitude, nor the danger present, (...) we are to follow S. Paul's example, who
when some (...)
had bound themselves by an oath to kill him, but the necessity was not
present, but there was time to make use of the Civil power; therefore in this
case, Paul does not (...) upon them, and seek to kill them presently, but
caused it to be revealed to Lysias the chief Captain; and so we must reveal it
to the Magistrate: but the danger being present, a man is by the Laws of God
and man allowed to defend his own life, against the unjust invasion of another,
though thereby he kill another; for this is not murder, but inculpata (...), a
lawful defense, which is, when there is no purpose of shedding blood, but only
to preserve a (...) own life, in order to which if blood be shed, this is only
per accidens, and not intended; for every one ought by all law, plus favere
vitae (...) quam (...), have more respect to his own life, then the life of
another.

2. Another division is here to be considered, a man may be slain either ex
(...), or praeter (...), either of purpose, or besides it. In natural things,
we do not (...) that (...) to nature, which is only per (...), by accident,
and not per se. Now answerable to this distinction of per se, and per accidens
in things (...), is that of ex (...), (...) praeter (...), in things Moral; and
therefore if blood be shed praeter (...), without any purpose of shedding it,
this is not to be accounted murder. For God himself appointed Sanctuaries to be
built for them to fly unto that shed blood praeter (...), and God would not
build Sanctuaries for any sin. If one be hewing a tree in the wood, and his
hatchet fall, and by chance Deuteronomy. 19. 4.
kills his Neighbor, he having no such intent or purpose, the (...) must Exodus
21. 13.
deliver him from the avenger of blood, and restore him to the city of refuge.
S. Augustine Numb. 3. 5. 11.
goes further, and proves that the intention is so necessary in murder, that if
we take what is praeter intentionem for murder, then we must cease to have, or
use any thing that may be an occasion of hurt: a man must not have (...),
instruments of husbandry, as spades, axes, etc. because with these a man may be
killed; nor must one have trees in his orchard, or (...) to plow withal,
because a man may hang himself on one of the trees, or the ox may gore; nor
have any windows in his house, because one may be cast (...) of a window and be
slain: thus by this means a man must have nothing, because almost every thing
may be used praeter intentionem, besides his intention. But absit, as he says,
God (...), when they are kept for another end.

Yet to make a man innocent in this case, that kills (...) praeter (...),
besides his intention, there must be two qualifications.

1. He must have been employed in re licita, in a lawful business, otherwise
he is not to be excused. If men strive (says the law) and hurt a woman with
Exodus 21. 22.
child, that she die, then life for life must be paid. This in case of
contention, which is res (...), an unlawful act. The like may be (...) in
gaming, (...), and the like.

2. There must be debit a (...), a due and just care taken, to have (...) his
death, as in casting timber, stone or tile from a house, to give warning: the
case is set down in Exodus, of a man opening or digging a pit, and not covering
it again, 33.
as he might have done.

CHAP. IIII.
The extent of this commandment. Murder committed 1. Directly. 2. Indirectly.
A man may be accessory to another death six (...). A man may be accessory to
his own death diverse ways. Of preserving life.

THus much for the restraint of the Commandment, and in what cases the death of
a man comes not within the compass of murder: Now for the extent of it. There
are diverse cases wherein a man is guilty of wilful murder, and that either 1.
Directly, 2. or Indirectly. A man may commit this sin,

1. Directly, as Joab killed Abner and Amasa. If one man smite another with any
2 Samuel 3. 27.
20. 10.
instrument of (...) stone, wood, etc. whereby he kills him, he is a murderer,
says Numb. 35. 16, 17, 18.
the law, and (...) die for it.

2. Indirectly, and this is of three sorts.

1. When it is not openly (...) or (...), (...) in some colorable way: as 1.
by poison, as they in Jeremy, Mittamus lignum in panem ejus, let us put some
poisoned wood into (...) meat So the vulgar Latin reads it, which the Author
follows.
. 2. By (...) and (...), (...) under the Law. Jerem. 11. 19.
3. By killing children in the womb, by medicamenta (...), a grievous murder,
Deuteronomy. 18. 10.
(...) by two Councils: If a woman take strong purgations (...) Council. Ancyr.
(...)
Can. 21.
partum, (...) cause abortion, she is (...), a Murtheresse. 4. If a man Council.
Worm.
be Cooperator, Accessorie: as 1. Judas was accessory to Christ's death, by Can.
35.
betraying him with a kiss: he colored the (...) with a kiss. So did Joab
Matthew. 26. 40.
when he (...) (...) and Amasa; He took Amasa by the beard, and kissed him 2 Samuel 3. (...)
and then smote him under the fist (...). 2. By bringing one into danger, as
(...) did David, 20. 9. (...)
who made him captain against the Philistims; to what end? my (...) shall 1 Samuel 18. 17.
not be upon him, but the hand of the (...) shall be upon him. As Saul dealt
with 2 Samuel 11. 15 (...)
David, so did David with (...), when he wrote letters to Joab, to set (...) in
the forefront: for though the enemies slew him, yet it was Davias murder.
(...) have (...) Vriah the Hittite, says Nathan.

3. By bearing false witness, as those that testified against Naboth. 4. By
advising 1 King. 21. 5.
the death of the innocent; thus (...) was guilty. 5. By exhorting and (...) 6.
10.
up others; the Scribes, and High Priests did not put Christ to death, yet they
stirred up the people, and persuaded Pilate etc. And therefore were murderers
of Christ. 6. By consenting to the death of another; as (...) did to the death
of Steven. 7. By not hindering, when a man is in authority, and may and ought to
hinder Act. 7. 52.
it; Pilats washing his hands would not acquit him. The not punishing 8. 1.
of (...) for the blood he unjustly shed, troubled David when he was near
death, and therefore he gave order to (...) to take a time to punish him.

2. A man is indirectly guilty, by unnecessary exposing himself to danger, when
he may by ordinay means prevent it, in this case he that does the first an
(...) Ecclus. (...)
the last, is accessory to his own death. Qui amat periculum, periculo (...),
(...). 4. 6.
says the wise man. Our Savior would not thrust himself into it, we must not
Levit. 13. 4.
tumble down, when there are stairs to go down. For prevention of danger, we
see God prescribes a law, to prevent infection of leprosy. The Leprous man
was to be shut up, and if any would go to him, and endanger himself, this was
presumption. and And Saint Paul, though he had Gods promise to come (...) Act.
27. 24.
to land, yet he commanded the Centurion to use the means (when he was in a
storm) 31.
to avoid the danger, by lightening the ship etc.

3. By neglecting the means which God has given for the preservation of life,
as Diet, Physic, moderate labor, and recreation. When a man is sick, the Son
of (...) gives good counsel, In thy sickness be not negligent: why what must a
Ecclus. 38. 9.
sick man do, but in the first place send for the physician? No, he prescribes
a rule contrary to the practice of the world; first, pray unto the Lord, leave
off from sin, order thy hands aright, and cleanse thy heart from all
wickedness: here is prayer and repentance first, then give place to the
physician, for the Lord has created him, let him not go from thee; there is
his place; not the physician of the body first, and of the soul last. And we
see that in the case (...) Tim. 5. 23.
of diet, Saint Paul (...) Timothy, to drink no more water, but a little wine
for his stomach.

By (...) into excess, as into surfeiting, and drunkenness, a man may shorten
his life, (...) Saint Hilary says, that this does (...) adimere, and mortem
(...), it not only takes away a man's reason, but life too. And (...) says,
that (...) and naturalem (...) enervat, (...) generat, mortem intempestivam in
psalm. 25.
adducit, it weakens a man's natural parts, begets infirmities, and brings
untimely death: so that excess in meat and drink kills by degrees. Our Savior
gives a caveate against it, take heed to your selves, lest at any time your
hearts be overcharged with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and so that day come
upon Luc. 21. 34.
you unawares.

So in those things which the Physicians call non naturalia, a man by the undue
use of them may shorten his life, and by the moderate use of them lengthen it.
Therefore the (...) exhorts, that having food and raiment, let us be therewith
1 Timothy 6. 8.
content, And make not provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof. So
likewise in the case from rest, and release of affairs. Our Savior took the
Apostles with Romans 13. 14.
him apart, that they might have leisure to eat and to rest a while: for the
Psalmist Marc. 6. 31.
psalm. (...). 3.
tells us, it is but losti labor to have to rise up early, and take late rest,
and eat 2 Cor. 7. 10.
the bread of carfulness: for a man may by the (...) much bending of his
mind to prove. 17. 22
these earthly things, bring death to him the sooner. A broken spirit does but
dry up the bones, and cause him to die before his time. Tristitia mundi,
worldly sorrow brings death, says the Apostle.

Now as there must be no neglect in us in respect of preserving our own lives,
so neither must there be in regard of our neighbors. God commanded the builder
to Deuteronomy. 22. 8.
put battlements upon his house, lest another should fall from it. And if a man
knew that his ox used to push, he was to tie him up, and if he failed, if any
Exodus 21. 29
were killed he was to die himself for it with the ox. And if the rule of the
wiseman hold good, as certainly it does, that we must not withold our hand
from doing good, we wust not forbear to deliver them that are drawn to death,
then prove. 3. 27.
must we not only keep them from danger of death, but by the rules of 24. 11.
extension, we must do what we can to help them, and save their lives. Pasce
(...), says saint Ambrose. Non pavisti? occidisti, feed that sheep which is
ready to (...), if thou feedest it not, thou killest it. Hence is the use of
Physic necessary, and those that are skilful, are bound to use their skill, to
preserve the life of their brother. Is there no Balm in Gilead, is there no
Physician, that the Jer 8. 22.
people be not healed,? says the prophet: which speech implies and supposes
the use of physic. The prophet Ezekiel says, that God has ordained plants
for man's use, The fruit for meat, and the leaves thereof for (...). And under
the law Ezekiel. 47. 12.
it was provided, that if any man did (...) infer (...), offer violence and
wound Exodus 21. 9.
his neighbor, be should pay for his healing: by which places is implied the
lawful use of physic, and the duty of the physician; which is, to preserve the
life of his neighbor; whereas now by the negligence of physicians, many
patients are like the woman which had a bloody (...) in the Gospel, who had
spent her whole estate Marc. 5. 25.
upon the physicians, and yet was never the better, but rather worse; such is
the practice of some, to their shame be it spoken. As it is a great sin in
them, so it is a great punishment for men to fall into their hands: which made
the son of Syrach say, He that (...) before his maker, let him fall into the
the hands of the Ecclus. 8. 15.
Physician.

But now as we must preserve the life of the body, so also (...) corporis, the
good plight and integrity of it, as we said before. If the least part of the
body be Lev. 24. 19.
hurt, the whole complains, and says, (...) me? why smites thou me? Neither
the whole nor any part must be hurt. The law forbad, the causing of any blemish
Exodus 21. 25.
upon our neighbor, the giving of a wound, if any rupture, or vstulation by
fire happen, it is an injury, and the like must be inflicted upon the party
that Lev. 24. 20.
was the cause: for if there be (...) partis, a dismembring of any one part, it
is (...) ad mortem (...), it reflects upon the whole body. And therefore the
law requires eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot,
burning Exodus 21. 24.
for burning, wound for wound, stripe for stripe. And he goes further. He 25.
that causes but a blemish in a man, so shall it be done to him again. And
Lev. 24. 20.
as a wound is (...) integritatem, against the integrity and perfection of the
body, Deuteronomy. 19. 21.
and plaga contra sensum, a stripe against the sense; so is a wound, binding,
or imprisonment contra (...), against the motion of the body. David repeated it
at Abners burial as a great honor, that his hands had not been bound, nor his
feet put into fetters, he died not as a malefactor; for these also are
accounted as injuries done 2 Samuel 3. 34.
without authority; but lawfully inflicted by the magistrate, they are as
punishments, Deuteronomy. 32. 36.
and then justifiable. So that next to life, this (...) corporis, the
preservation of the body in its integrity and perfection, is to be regarded.

CHAP. V.
Of the murder of the soul. Several signs against the life of the soul. How a
man may be accessory to the death of his soul. This sin may be committed both
by them that have charge of souls, and by private persons. That this law is
spiritual, according to the third rule.

Of the murder of the soul.
(...) come now to the murder of the soul, which is forbidden, as well as the
murder of the body. And indeed the murder of this is so much the more
grievous by how much the image of God is more in it, then in the body: and
therefore if the blood of the body cry to God for vengeance, it is certain that
Genesis 4. 10.
the blood of the soul will cry much louder.

Now the life of the soul may be said to be taken away. 1. In respect of the
present: 2. Of the life to come.

1. If a man live not here with a contented mind, if his soul be not filled
with good, Eccles. 6. 3.
as the preacher speaks, an untimely birth is better then he; that is, he had
as good never to have been born: now he that ministers occasion to discourage
(as the Apostle) or to discontent another, and so makes his life odious to him,
he offends Gol. 3. 21.
against this commandment. We see in (...) what grief can do: Simeon being
detained in Egypt, and Benjamin to be carried thither, if any mischief should
(...) 42. 38.
befall him, he tells his other sons, he should be but a dead man, but as soon
as 45. 27
he heard of (...) welfare, it is said, that his spirit revived, as we said
before.

This killing of the spirit comes three ways, in opposition to those three
things, wherein the life of the soul consists, of which we spoke before, (...).
1. Joy. 2. Peace. 3. love. Against the first is, when men grieve others, as the
Egyptians did the (...), when they brought them in amaritudinem spiritus, into
(...) of spirit. Exodus 1. 14.
Against the second, when they bring them as they did the Israelites, (...)
spiritus, into anguish of soul, so that they would not hearker. to Moses, when
he brought a message from God; when the heart is broken with sorrow, the inward
peace and harmony is disturbed: for heavines in the heart makes it stoop as
(...) prove. 12. 25
observed. Against the third, when a man is brought to a hating and lothing of
himself, and all other things, so that he can take no joy in any thing. None of
these must be done to any neighbor, but least of all to the godly. It is a
wicked thing to grieve the soul of a righteous Lot, for by this means we bring
him to the first death, to (...) dulnes and deadnes of spirit, whereby he is
not fit to go about 2 pet. (...).
any thing that is good. This is done by provocation or (...), (as they
provoked God in the wilderness) and therefore all irritation must be psalm. 95.
(...).
avoided.

2. The soul also may be murdered in respect of the life to come; especially
by him, to whom the cure of it is committed. And this may be done diverse
ways; as sometimes by him that has the cure, as.

1. By causing men to stumble at the law, (...) in lege, (...) the Prophet:
Mal. 2. 8.
or by teaching as (...) did (...), to cast a stumbling block before the
children of Israel, which Christ taxes in some of the Church of Rev. 2. 14
Pergamus.

2. Indirectly, and by negligence, in not doing his duty. The prophet (...) of
Ezekiel. 33. 6.
such, that if any perish through his default, the Lord will require his blood
at his hands. Prosper upon these words (...), (...) etc. That is to say, if
thou shall not tell a man of his faults, that he may be converted and live, I
will condemn thee into everlasting fire, that have not rebuked him, who by
reason of thy silence has sinned.

Saint (...) says, Omnis qui male vivit (...), (...). de pastore.
(...) in (...), (...), and forte qui (...), (...), (...), (...); (...), (...).
He that lives ill in the sight of those over whom he is set, as much as in him
lies, kills them, and perhaps he that follows his example, dies, and he that
follows not, lives, yet in respect of his cure, they both die. And therefore it
is, that Prosper tells them, (...) de vit. contempl. l. 1.
(...), et (...) sue (...), (...), (...), (...), A minister ought to live
piously for examples sake, and to teach so in regard of the performance of his
duty, being assured, that justice will not favor him, from whose hands the
soul of him that perishes, is exacted. And Saint (...), Penset ergo sacerdos,
qui in Mor.
ad satisfaciendum districto judicio de sua tantummodo anima fortasse vix
sufficit, and quot regendis subditis (...) apud Deum rationis tempore, and,
(...) ita dicam, (...) animas habet, let the priest therefore consider and lay
to heart, how he that perhaps can hardly tell how to satisfy or answer for his
own soul at the day of judgment will be able to render account for so many
souls, as are committed to his charge.

2. Though one have not the charge of souls, yet as a private person he may be
guilty of the spiritual death of another soul, if either by counsel, or
otherwise, (...), or (...), by word, or deed, by example etc. He cause his
brother to fall; Math. 16. 22.
as Peter by his counsel was a scandal to Christ, and would have prevented his
suffering, (if Christ could have been dissuaded) and so the great work of man's
redemption (...). 2. 13.
had been hindered. So the same Apostle by his example gave offense and misled
the Jews and (...). The like did they whom Saint Paul reproves, who by their
examples induced others, weak persons, to eat of things sacrificed 1 Cor. 8. 12.
to Idols, with doubting consciences. Let all such as prove scandals to others,
remember that woe denounced by our Savior. That it had been Math. 18. 6.
better for them that a millstone were hanged about their necks, and that they
were thrown into the sea.

And in the case of the souls murder, a man may be accessory to the death of
his own soul; as he may to the murder of his body.

1 By neglecting the means of his salvation: for all must not lie on the
minister, phil. 2. 12.
we have our parts too. Work out your own salvation, says the Apostle, with
fear and trembling. If we neglect it, we are accessory to our own perdition.

2. By seeking after worldly things too much. The same Apostle tells us in the
3. 19.
next chapter, that they that mind earthly things inordinately, end in
destruction.

3 By giving himself over to sin, without sense, and working uncleannes with
greedines, Ephesians. 4. 19.
and make no conscience of sinning. Heb. 10. 2.


4. By deferring repentance from time to time, till he find no place for it,
it 12. 17.
was Esaus case. And it is the masterpiece of the devil, where he works this
neglect. Saint Gregory describes it excellently, Cum in gravi (...) miser homo
labitur, suadet ei (...) ne (...), ne (...), (...) in cord (...);
misericordiam (...); (...); (...) in (...) in homil.
suggerit: (...) sic in (...) Dei and (...) and pereat. When a wretched man
falls into grievous sin, the devil disswades him from repentance, from
confessing his sin, then tells him it is a small sin, then preaches mercy
to him, and promises him long life, and urges him to continue in his sin,
till at last he brings him into Gods displeasure and desperation with himself,
and so he perishes. And this is by deferring repentance.

3. The third rule for expounding the law is, that it reaches to the heart, for
Gods law is spiritual; and so this law reaches not only to outward murder,
in in regard of the act, but to murder in the heart. The Pharisees counted it
not murder, unless blood were shed, and the life taken away, but Christ's
teaches us, that the law goes further, it restraines not only the arm, and
the blow that is Math. 5. 22.
given, but the first motions and desires of the heart; If any hate a man in
his heart, or be angry without a cause, he is guilty of the breach of this
commandment: for the outward acts done or committed, whereby any is murdered,
are nothing else but (...) the fruits of unjust anger, which is that (...) of
bitterness Heb. 12. 15.
from whence all outward acts spring, and this root must be plucked up; and
therefore he pronounces plainly, that out of the heart proceed murders etc.
Those Math. 15. 19.
that restrain only the outward act, are like those that apply plasters to
the armor or weapon, Which will never cure the wound. The reason given by God
himself, why man-killing is not sometimes capital, is, because he that killed
his brother, did not hate him before; whereas he that hated his brother, and
slew him, was to die without mercy, and not to have any benefit of sanctuary.
And this briefly for the third rule.

CHAP. VI.
The fourth rule of (...) the causes of the sins here forbidden. Of unjust
anger, and the fruits of it. It consists of, 1. Grief. 2. Desire of Revenge.
The effects and fruits of it. 1. Toward Superiors. Envy. The causes of envy:
the greatness of this sin. 2. Toward Equals. 3. Toward Inferiburs. The
sappuration or breaking out of anger against Superiors. 1. By the eyes and
face. 2. By the tongue, 1. By murmuring, 2. tale-bearing, 3. backbiting.
Against Equals, by 1. dissension, 2. brawling, 3. railing. The fruits of anger
in Superiors. 1. Threatening. 2. Scornfulnesse. The last fruit of anger, viz.
murder of the hand.

THe fourth rule teaches us, that all the means or causes, which concur, or
conduce to any act forbidden or commanded, are likewise forbidden or commanded.
Here come in all those sins formerly mentioned, which are occasions, or
provocations to murder, as unjust anger, and all the fruits of it.

As it was said at the beginning when we entered upon this Commandment, that
pride is the (...) of all the breaches of this Commandment; so we say now that
it is the fountain of unjust anger, and of all those sins that arise there
from. Only Prove. 13. 10.
by pride, says the Wise man, comes contention and wrath: and the Apostle
dehorting from provocation and envy, mentions vain glory or pride first, as the
cause of both; Be not desirous of vain glory (says he) provoking one another,
envying one another. Gal. 5. 16.
For as was said formerly, every man sets down this with himself, That he is
good, and therefore whosoever loves him does his duty: as on the other side,
whosoever hurts or injuris him, is necessarily evil, and one against whom he
may justly conceive anger; for omnis (...) just a, each froward man thinks his
anger just, according as we said before, omnis iniquus mentitur sibi, every
wicked man deceives himself. And from this proud conceit of a man's self, arises
unjust anger against all such as do any way offend him.

This anger is compounded of two things. 1. Grief for some indignity offered to
us. 2. Desire to requite it.

1. In the first is, (...) animi, or (...), animosity or inward boiling of the
blood, or fretting, from which through pride we condemn the party that injured
us, as evil; Gal. 5. 20.
and thence follows mala men's, a malicious intent toward him, the judgment
being Prove. 24. 19.
corrupted by the affections, and therefore the Apostle joins anger and malice,
(...) Ephesians. 4. 31.
together, and exhorting to put away all anger, and wrath, and clamor, he
adds, with 1 Pet. 4. 15.
all malice, because this makes us condemn all his actions as evil: for hereby
we 1 Timothy 6. 4.
become busy in other men's matters, full of evil surmises, and judices malarum
James 2. 14.
cogitationum, judges of evil thoughts: and thus we come to have an evil
opinion of him that offends us.

2. Then follows the second thing, (...), desire of revenge, James and John
(...) in Christ's company, and perceiving the Samaritans not willing to receive
them, would Lnke 9 54.
needs call for fire from heaven to consume them.

Now if this anger be toward Superiors, or men in high place, dignity and
estate, or eminent for virtue, then it produces envy, which is odium (...)
respectu superiorum, quia eis non (...), a hatred of another man's felicity in
respect James 4. 5.
of Superiors, because we cannot be equal with them. For there is in this
case, as Job 5. 2.
S. James says, a spirit in us that lusts after envy; and as Elihu says in
(...), Envy 2 Cor. 12. 20.
flayeth the inferior, (as some read it) because that inferiors are apt to
(...) those Prove. 27. 4.
that are above them, or exceed them any way. And hence arises in inferiors,
as the Matthew. 27. 18.
Apostle calls them, (...) swellings toward others, which either presently
break Genesis 4. 30. 1.
forth, or if they lie long and come to suppuration, or impostume, as (...)
calls them, 1 Samuel 18. 5.
they prove rubigo (...), the rust and canker of the soul, which is a fearful
thing, and worse then anger; for anger is cruel, and wrath raging, but who can
stand before envy? says the Wise man, this usually produces murder. Pilate
saw that it was out of envy, that the Jews delivered Christ to be put to death.
Therefore Seneca says, that is casier for a poor man to escape contempt, then
a rich man envy. We see it in Cain that envied Abels acceptance. In Rachel that
envied Leahs fruitfulnefse, and Saul David's happiness.

1. The occasion of this sin is grounded especially. 1. Upon the merits, and
weldeserving of others, we envy them, because they are (...) then our selves.
S. John 1 John 3. 12.
tells us, it was the cause why Cain slew Abel: because his own works were
evil, and his brothers righteous. For every man desiring his own excellency,
thinks that he which is more excellent then himself, does offuscare lumen
ejus, darken and eclypse his light, stand in his way, and if that man were
(...), he should be more esteemed: therefore by this envy, he seeks to bring
him under water, that he alone may swim above.

This we may see in the Princes against Daniel, because Darius had preferred
him Dan. 6. 4.
above them. And in John's Disciples, they thought that Christ stood in the
Baptists John 3. 26.
way, and got all from him, because more people followed him. And in the elder
son against the younger, who when he came home from the field, and saw the
entertainment of his younger brother, he envied his brother, and out of envy
would not go in: the reason was, he thought himself better then his brother,
the fatted calf was never killed for (...), etc. though he had deserved better of
his father. Luke 15. 28.
Thus nothing can be done, but envy will make it matter to work upon. If David
once come to his ten thousands, Saul will never after be brought intueri (...)
rectis 1 Samuel 18. 8, 9, 10.
oculis, to look aright upon him, but the evil spirit will enter into him: for
so we read verse 10. that the next day there came an evil spirit upon him; for
there are none that the Devil can so easily fasten upon, as upon such. The
making of a better coat for Joseph, and a little more love of Jacob to him then
to the rest, was a mavelous moat in the eyes of his brethren; and it is true
that Jacob said, though in another Genesis 37. 4.
sense, an evil or cruel beast has devoured him: for envy is fera (...)
pessima, the worst of all wild beasts. S. Basil says, Canes (...) cicurantur,
etcultu mansuescunt (...), invidi vero ad obsequium efferantur: dogs become
tame by feeding, De Invid.
and lions mild and gentle by nurture, but envious men, the more you observe
them, the wilder they become.

The greatness of this sin, as one says, is such, that propter magnitudinem
sceleris futura paena non sufficit, ergo and hic plectitur, so heinous it is,
that hell alone is not a sufficient torment for it, and therefore it is
punished here also: it is a punishment to it self; for as the Wise man says,
envy is putredo ossium, rottenness to the bones. Prove. 14. 30.
As he that wished himself an (...), that he were all eye, so such as are
envious cannot wish themselves a greater misery and torment.

The Saints and Servants of God are not envious. Moses when (...) brought him
word that Eldad and Medad (...), answered him, Enviest thou them for my Numb.
11. 29.
sake, would God that all the people of the Lord did prophecy, and that the
Lord would pour out his spirit upon them. He would not be of Pompeyes mind
that could endure no equal. He was so far from envying the number and increase
of the People, that he wishes, the Lord would make them a thousand times more.
The Saints can be Deuteronomy. 1. 10, 11
content others should overtake them, yea, and go before them; but envy can
endure neither. Abigail when David sent messengers to take her to wife,
answered that she was not fit, Let me be a handmaid rather, to wash the feet of
my Lords servants: so 1 Samuel 25. 41.
every good man thinks himself not meet of that honor which God bestows upon
him, but that he deserves some lower place.

2. The second branch is against equals.

And in this case, if our arm have strength, he shall feel presently what we
can do. The Wise man gives the envious three servants, Pride, Fury, Scorn.
Proud and Prove. 21. 24.
haughty scorner is his name, who deals in proud wrath.

But if he be so our equal, that we cannot presently meet with him, then we
play Absaloms part, when he was angry with Ammon, he said nothing for the
present, 2 Samuel 13. 22
sed manet alta mente repostum, but kept it in mind, which Ammon afterward
(...) at a sheepshearing, and so should David himself, if he had gone down to
the feast: for as the Wife man observed, The wicked dissembleth his wrath, and
Burning lips, Prove. 10. 18.
and a wicked heart ar (...) a potsheard covered with silver dross, for he
that hates dissembleth with his lips, and (...) up deceit within him. This we
see in (...), who 1 (...). 26. 23, 24.
comes to Jacob with (...) and Phicol, that they might make a league with him,
Isaac wondered, Why come ye to me, says he, seeing that you hate me, and have
put me away from you: yet they would have a league with him till they could
have an opportunity (...) revenge. And so we see it is a great part of worldly
policy to keep league with one we hate, till we can (...) perfundere, be
revenged on him. Thus it proves true, 1 John 3. (...).
which S. John says, Qui odit (...) Homicida est; He that hates his brother is
a murderer: for where there is hatred, it (...) seeks (...), or such revenge,
as proceeds to murder.

3. If he be our inferior against whom our anger is set, we look upon him with
Prove. 18. 3.
(...) and contempt for as the Wise man says, When the wicked comes, then
comes contempt, although the contempt of an inferior, is a reproaching of his
Maker, as 17. 5.
he tells us in another place. This is the property of the wicked to despise
and scorn 2 King. 19. 21.
others, whom they conceive to be in any gift, or in power, or otherwise their
inferiors. Luke 23. 11.
Rabshek (...) sends a scornful message to (...): (...) and his men of war Luke
16. 14.
Genesis 21. 9. and 25. 34.
set our Savior at naught, and scorned him: the (...) mocked at his doctrine:
(...) mocked Isaac, etc.

2. Anger as we showed before, after it has rankled inwardly, and comes ad
suppurationem, to an impostume, appears or breaks out in the countenance, which
we called icterum peccati, the (...) of this sin: of which we are now to speak.

Anger appears by the eye, and there is a wound given by the eye; (...) Cant.
4. (...).
ictu oculi tui, thou have wounded me with thine eye, says Solomen in the
(...), speaking of the (...) of the eye in another sense. And among those six
things which God especially hates, he reckons a haughty or a (...) eye. It
appeared in Saul's eyes when Prove. 6. 17.
he envied David, his eyes began to be obliqui, he looked awry at him: and the
Wise 1 Samuel 18. 9.
man bids us avoid him that has an evil eye: and our Savior cond (...) the
servant that had nequam oculum, an evil eye. So we see there is oculus nequam,
invidus, obliquus, (...) evil, envious, (...), which discovers the disposition
of the heart.

As envy, so anger and malice appear in the face, and by other outward signs.
The Prove. 6. 13.
froward man winketh with his eyes, speaks with his feet, and teaches with
his fingers, that is, when he does bend his fist, and stamp with his feet,
supplodere (...), when he prove. 10. 10. and 16. 30.
once winks, he means no good, for he that winks with his eyes causes sorrow.
So to bite the lip, to look on one, as if he would look through him, is a sign
of anger. psalm. 37. 12
The ungodly looks upon the just, and (...) at him with his teeth. An example
of Acts 7. 14.
Mark. 9. 18.
it we have in those that stoned Steven. Sometimes it comes to spuma, the
foaming of the mouth, and then the angry man is like him that was possessed
with a Devil.

It appears likewise by the tongue, which is therefore compared to a sword that
wounds deep, to sharp arrows that stick fast, to Juniper coats, that will burn
a long time. Of such the Psalmist complained, that had war in their hearts, and
though psalm 120. 3. and 55. (...) and 52. 3.
their words seemed smooth as butter and oil, yet they proved gladii acuti,
sharp swords, and cut like a raisor. And here come in those (...), fruits of
anger, which proceed from the tongue, which shall be handled in the ninth
Commandment, as they hurt a man's name: but here as they are breaches of this
Commandment. As

1. Murmuring, which is chiefly against superiors, a sin forbidden by the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 10. 10.
Be not murmurers, as some of them murmured, and were destroyed of the
destroyer. phil. 2. 14.
and therefore he says in another place, Do all things without murmuring.
Judas was John. 12 5.
angry, when he murmured at the box of Spikenard poured on Christ. Ad quid
(...)? to what end is this wast? he thought the money would have been better in
the bag which he bore. So were the Israelites when they murmured against Exodus
14. 15.
Moses.

2. Whispering and tale-bearing, (...); this is when the party is so great,
that the angry man cannot deal with him, or if he should speak openly of him he
should not be credited, then he carries tales, a thing severely forbidden. Thou
shall Levit. 19. 16.
not go up and down as a talebearer among thy people. And the Apostle speaks
of (...), whisperings, and (...), whisperers, and condemns both. (...) Wise man
2 Cor. 12. (...).
says, that without tale-bearers strife and contention would quickly cease.
(...). 26 20. Romans 1. 29.
and verse 22. His words are as wounds, he speaks with (...), and seeming
grief, but they go down into the uttermost parts of the belly. There are six
things which God (...). 6. 17.
hates, and the seventh is an (...) to him, and that is, a whisperer or
talebearer, 2 Cor. 12. 20.
that sows contention among brethren. Romans 1. 30.


3. Backbiting, (...), detractio, a sin frequently forbidden, and condemned,
such 1 pet. 2. 1.
James 4. 11.
are like to (...) that sting though they be charmed. The Wise man shows how
(...) 10. 11.
they must be dealt with, a sour countenance drives them away, as the north
wind Prove. 25. 23.
does rain. The reason may be taken from that in Leviticus, (...) shall not
curse the Levit. 19. 14.
deaf. Now he that is absent, is deaf and hears us not, and therefore such as
curse the deaf, all the congregation shall curse them.

4. When men are hindered, that they cannot be avenged this way, by detraction,
then they will wreak themselves by cursing. This is a (...) of anger, which
appears in the (...), which (as S. James says) is full of deadly poison; what
that James 3. 8.
is, he shows in the next words, with this curse we men, who are made after the
similitude of God. This is that poison, the practice of it is forbidden. They
that are thus cursed Col. 3. 8.
Ephesians. 4. 31.
need not care, for God acquits them from curses without cause, they shall not
hurt Prove. 26. (...).
them, but like arrows shot against a wall of (...), they shall return upon
them that sent them.

And as these fruits of anger appear chiefly against superiors, so there are
other fruits which are seen chiefly toward equals.

1. Wrath the first begotten (as the Heathen said) is no barren Gentlewoman,
she has a daughter like her self, called (...), dissension, which if it be in
the Romans 16. 17.
heart, is called discord, if it break out, is called contention, which is
(...) acrimonia, an unseemly bitterness, taking of parts. The Apostle speaking
of the Heathen, Romans 1. 29.
mentions (...), such as were full of debate, (...) (...) debates, and 2 Cor
12. 20.
joins (...) and (...), variance and dissentions, and exhorts them to live,
(...), Gal. 5. 20.
not in strife. S. James condemns it, as against the royal law of Christ, and
S. Paul Romans 13. 13.
says, that such contentious persons belong not to the Church, for the
Churches of James 3. 6.
1 Cor. 11. 16.
God have no such custom. It is the Churches honor to cease from strife, and
it is said Prove. 20. 3.
of our Savior, that he endured much contradiction of sinners. Heb. 12. 2.


But now when we speak against discord, we (...) only in (...), in things that
are good, not in malis, in evil things; for as nothing is more to be wished
then peace in good things, so nothing is more to be wished then (...) in malis,
for this is as necessary as concordia in bonis, agreement in good. When S. Paul
knew that one Acts 23. 6.
part of the company were Pharisees, and the other Sadduces, he cried out, that
he was judged for the resurrection of the dead, and so set them together, and
escaped himself, this was not unlawful. And not only S. Paul, but Christ
himself says, that he came to set discord and dissension in the earth.

2. Besides this we find another, Ephesians 4. 31. (...), envying or brawling:
This the Lord complains of by the Prophet, He came down and looked for
judgment and justice, but there was crying and roaring. It was said of Christ,
non (...), non Esaias. 5. 7.
(...), His voice shall not be heard in the street: and such disposition as was
in Matthew. 12. 19.
Christ, must be in all his members. The contrary we see in wicked men, as in
those Jews, who (when S. Paul said, God had sent him to the (...)) made a
(...), Acts 22. 23.
and rent their garments, and threw dust in the air, etc.

3. If (...) must not be, (...) lefse the third which is contumelia, railing,
and yet this takes hold on most men soonest; for as the Heathen man said,
Promptissima (...) contumelia, railing is the most ready and most easy revenge.
To this may be referred that of our Savior, to say (...) to a brother, or to
say, (...) fool, or when a man shall debase the gift of another, or speak ad
contristandum, togrieve him. We find (...), despightful persons, and (...),
revilers, condemned by the Apostle. Such Romans 1. 30.
do grieve the saints of God, who thereupon have heavily complained. The
Prophet 1 Cor 6. 10.
David counted it a great part of his calamities that he was railed upon and
reviled. Jeremy Psalm. 79. 10, 13.
Jerem. 20. 10.
complains, that he was railed at on every side. S. Paul says, that at
Philippi 1 These. 2. 2.
they were shamefully (...), yet they went on and preached the Gospel at
Thessalonica notwithstanding. And in these consists chiefly the murder of the
tongue.

Besides there are two other fruits of anger, especially seen in Superiors,
and proceeding from contempt.

1. Threatening. Saul armed with authority, breathed out threatenings against the
Acts 9. 1.
Church; and (...) speech when he came to the crown was, My father chastised 1
King. 2. 14.
you with rods; but I will scourge you with scorpions, my little finger shall
be heavier then (...). 29. 11.
my fathers loins; for as Solomon says, a (...), ( viz. in government)
profundit spiritum suum, shows all his power at once, and therefore, as was
said before, government must not be committed to a (...) person, for such a one
is like a fool that Prove. (...).
puts a pellet into a cross bow, and shoots at random, and therefore he (...)
stones (...), and (...), (...)both, and that it is (...) to meet a (...) robbed
of (...) then a furious man. Saint Peter says pro. 27. 3.
of Christ, that when he suffered, he threatened not, though he had power. 17.
12.
enough, for he could have had twelve legions of angels to attend him, if he 1
pet. (...)
had pleased.

2. (...), which is the proper fruit of contempt. The faithful have complained,
that their soul was filled with the (...) of the (...). (...) counted the
reproach of his enemy worse then death, and therefore he desired his psalm.
(...).
1 Samuel 31. (...)
(...)-bearer to kill him, lest the (...) should fall upon him and (...) him.
Therefore the wise man's counsel was (...), (...) the (...), and (...) prove. 22.
10.
(...) cease. We find it condemned in several places, it is a special means
to Ephesians. 5. 4.
prove. 12. 18.
contristate the (...) and bring down the hearts of good men, when they see
themselves made a (...) to the very abjects, and become as the Apostle speaks,
(...) a spectacle to the world. Consider that mirror of patience, Job, this
was one special 1 Cor. 4. 9.
Job. 30. 1.
thing that grieved him, the very abjects came against him and derided him. The
prophet (...) also complains of it, and it is (...) as a high degree of
desperate wickedness Jer. 20. 9.
in the people, that they (...) the (...). It was a great part of our Saviors
2 Cron. 36. 16.
sufferings, they had their fill, in scorning him, first the servants, then
(...), then Math. 27. 27. (...)
(...), after him his soldiers, then the High priests, and all that went
(...), as we 31. 41.
may read in the history of the Gospel, and (...) much for signs of anger, in
the countenance and tongue.

3. After this in the third place (as was shown before) comes (...), the
murder of the hand, whereby the life or limbs of another are taken away:
wherein if many join it is a (...), and such are called by the Apostle, 2 Cor.
12. 20.
(...) tumults, in the commonwealth, which if they proceed further, are prove.
17. 11.
called by (...) seditions, or rebellions, whereby the civil body is (...) and 1
Cor. 1. 11.
not only that, but the body of Christ the Church is also thereby (...) and
The (...)
torn in pieces.

CHAP. VII.
Of the (...) against anger. How to prevent (...) in others. How in our selves.
Anger must be, 1. Just in regard of the (...). 2. (...), for the (...). 3. We
must labor for gravity. 4. For love without (...). The virtues opposite to
(...) anger. 1. (...). 2. Charity. In the first, there is 1. The (...) against
anger, which consists in three things. 2. The remedy in three (...). How
charity prevents anger. The fruit of charity, (...). 1. To the dead, by (...).
To the living. And that first, generally to all. Secondly, specially to the
faithful. Thirdly, (...) the poor by works of mercy. Fourthly (...) to our
(...).

We come now to the means against anger.
TO prevent anger in others, we must forbear irritation, or provocation.
Solemon speaks of some that will (...) and be angry when no cause is given,
prove. 3. 30.
whom he condemns, and on the other side there are other to be condemned, that
give cause, by irritating and provoking others, as (...), one of (...) wives
(...), when they went up yearly to the house of the Lord (...). 1. (...).
and (...) her with her (...), whereby she continually (...) her foul, the wise
man says, that as churning (...) forth butter, so is provocation the ordinary
means of wrath. Therefore he condemns such as do (...) pro. 30. 33.
Eccl. 7. 8.
im bitter the spirit of any. We see by the example of (...) the meekest psalm.
106. 33.
man on earth (...) it will work. They (...) him so that (...) with his lips;
take away provocations, and anger will (...). The badge of an (...) prove. 15.
18. and 18. 6. and 29. 22.
man is, (...) to stir up, or provoke men to strife, as we may see in diverse
places of the proverbs.

1. To prevent unjust anger, in our selves, there are diverse (...) to be
labored for. 1. Just anger (...), indignation or anger (...), on a just cause,
for only unjust anger is here condemned, just anger is a virtue commanded.
Beangry, says the Ephesians. 3. 25.
Apostle, and sin not, so that there is a lawful anger, (...) it be without
sin, as in a superior toward those that are under him and deserve
punishment, there may be magnus (...), as Solomon speaks, which is a fruit of
justice. Our Savior forbids drou. 19. 19.
anger (...) when it is (...), without a cause, for otherwise when there was
cause, Math. 5. 22.
Luke 24. 25.
he calls his disciples after his (...) (...), fools, and the Apostle calls
them Gal. 3. 1.
(...), foolish (...), and the fathers upon Luke 10. 40. say of those (...)
those many things that (...) was troubled withal, this was one, the untowardnes
of the servants of the house. 2. As our anger must be just in respect of the
cause, so for the measure, it must be moderated, that it (...) not when there
is just cause, and to this end that virtue of (...), (...). (...) is requisite,
for it moderates anger both toward those that are under us, and all others we
converse with, so that al are the better for it. It begins with (...),
humblenes of mind: therefore the Romans 12. 16.
Apostle begins with humblenes, and when he exhorts to meeknes, he (...) Ephesians.
4. 2.
Col. 3. 12.
humblenes before it, with all (...) and (...); and put (...) (...) of mind,
Gal. 5. 22. 23.
(...) etc. These virtues and others of like nature he frequently exhorts to,
Romans 12. 9.
and where he mentions one of them, he lightly sets down all the rest 1 Cor.
13. 4.
which belong to this commandment, as we may see by inspection of Jam. 3. 13.
1 pet. 3. 8.
the places. 3. A third virtue, is gravity (...). The Apostle exhorts to follow
(...), (...), (...) things are grave, or venerable, This is a special virtue,
and therefore he puts in the first (...); (...) (...), whatsoever things are
venerable, and then (...), and (...), and (...) whatsoever things are, just,
pure, or lovely etc But of this more hereafter, because (...) is a virtue
specially belonging to the last commandment. 4. A fourth virtue is mentioned by
Saint James, when he tells us that the Jam. 3. 17.
wisdom which is from above, is (...), without hypocrisy, and by saint Paul
Romans 12. 9.
when he says, let love be without dissimulation, our love must not have a
show of love, zeal, etc. and be frozen in effect, as Absoloms courtesy, which
was not hearty but affected, and that of the Pharisees to Christ, who made a
fair show, and called him Rabbi, and said that he was a man sent from God, and
taught the truth without respect of persons, but all this was affected and
hypocritical; so had (...), so had (...), so had the devil (take them together)
their (...); the devil told the woman (very honestly) he was sorry God had
dealt so hardly with them, as to forbid them the tree of knowledge etc. As if
he had been greatly moved with their condition, but it was affected, and when
this affecting is, says Solomon, he will meet you early in the morning, and
salute and bless you, but I had as leive (says he) he should curse me. And
thus much for unjust wrath, and the means against prove. 27. 14.
it.
Besides these there are two other virtues opposite to unjust wrath, 1.
Innocence 2. Charity.

1. Innocence takes order that we hurt no body. And 2. Charity takes order to
do them all the good we can; both for soul and body.

The first has two parts. 1. (...). 2. (...). The preservative, or the (...),
and the sanative, or the medicine.

The first consists in three things.

1. In Avoiding of offenses, endeavoring to have peace with all men, as Romans
12. 18.
much as in us lies, and not to think evil, or carry our selves unseemly
toward any, 1 Cor. 13. 5.
as the Apostle exhorts. 2. Not only this, but also in looking back, and when
any evil is done to us, to take it in the best sense. The Apostle speaks of a
good and right interpretation of things as they are meant, we must believe
well, interpret all in the best, and so leave no place for suspicion. Saint
James call such anger (...), which is without partiality, not standing upon his
own (...), discretion,, he stands not doubting what his meaning might be, but
does Candide interpretari construe it fairly. 3. The third is a willingness
sometimes to depart from ones right for peace and (...). 3. 17.
quietness. Saint James says, that true wisdom is (...), gentle or guided by
equity and moderation, and Saint Paul plainly requires it, let your (...) phil.
4. 5.
moderation be shown unto all men. By these three rules anger is prevented.
2. But now for the (...) the healing, after the wound is made, there are 3.
other rules prescribed by the Apostles and prophets. 1. To support, or to bear
with one another, for though anger may come into Ephesians. 4. 2.
a wise man's bosom, yet it must not rest there, it rests only in the bosom of
fools; Col. 3. 12. 13
we must therefore be long-suffering and not put in more bitterness, to make a
bitter Gal. 5. 22.
thing more bitter. We must as the Apostle says, (...) bear all things. 1
Cor. 13. 7.
Yea we must be as the Prophet David was, fni tanquam surdus, I was as a deaf
psalm. 38. 13.
Jam. 5. vlt.
man, he was not deaf, but tanquam surdus, as one dease, and as Saint James
speaks, we must (...), cover a multitude of sins. 2. We must not keep in mind
any injuries done, but labor to forget Lev. 29. 18.
and forgive. Thou shall not bear any grudge against the children of thy
people, says God. 3. If we have done the wrong, we must seek for
reconciliation, as our Savior commands, and this must be partly with good
words, for a soft answer (...) Math 5. 23.
prove. 15. 1.
away wrath, and partly with gifts, for a gift in secret pacifieth anger, and a
prove. 21. 14.
gift in the bosom great wrath. This is the way to heal anger, when it is
broken out.
2. The second virtue opposite to anger, is charity, the fruits and effects
whereof, are opposite to the several parts and branches of unlawful anger. 1.
Against the inward boiling of anger in the heart. Charity makes us lie down
psalm. 4. 8.
Ephesians. 4. 3.
in peace and sleep, as the Psalmist speaks, and it keeps the unity of the
spirit in 1 Cor. 13. 4. 5.
the bond of peace, as the Apostle speaks, it does not (...), it envies 1 pet.
38.
not, is not puffed up, and therefore Saint Peter calls such as have it (...)
such as love unity of spirit. 2. Against the icterus peccati, the outward
iaundise appearing in the face etc. Math. 6. 22.
Where charity is, there is that, simplex oculus, a single eye, of which our
Savior 1 Cor. 13. 5. 8.
Col. 3. 12.
speaks, charity does not (...) look undecently or with (...), and Gal. 5. 22.
for our words, where it is, there is (...), and (...), vrbanity, and Heb. 13.
16.
suavity. 3. Against the outward act of murder, charity produces Beneficence,
which is the Gal. 5. 12.
same with that (...) goodness, which the Apostle mentions, which is according
Romans 15. 14.
to the objects divided into several parts: for.
1. There is beneficence to the dead, By burying them, by showing love and
Ruth. 2. 20.
Genesis 23. 4.
kindness to their seed, according to that in the Canticles; love is stronger
then death. Cant. 6. 8.
The grave will not quench it. 2. There is beneficence to the living, and that
either 1. general to all men, 1 pet. 3. 8. 2.
called humanity (...) yea even to evil men, as correptio fraterna, to reprove
Tit. 3. 4.
them, and not to suffer sin to rest upon them, and to pray for them, or else.
Romans 12. 10.
Lev. 19. 17.
2. Specially to the Godly, we must do good to all, but especially to the
household Romans 16. 7.
of (...). (...) John makes it a sign that we are translated from life to
death, 1 John 3. 14.
to love the brethren, and Saint Paul counts it a dignity, to do good to such
Gal. 6. 10.
(...) as is worthy the Saints, implying, that it shows the worth and dignity 1
John. 3. 14
Romans 16. 2.
of a Saint, to do good to such. And among such, those that are our own, our
friends; or are near to us, are to be respected chiefly, (as was showed before
when prove. 18. 24.
we spoke of charity in general) for a man that has friends must show himself
friendly and there is a friend that sticks closer then a brother.

After these, we come to another sort of people, to whom beneficence must be
Col. 3. 12.
showed, ( viz to such as need) by works of mercy and alms deeds. The Apostle
requires (...) bowels of mercy.

Now this consists in diverse things, as in rejoicing with them, suffering with
Rom 12. 13.
them, by sympathy of affection, when we do (...) as the Apostle speaks, by 1
pet. 3. 9.
giving what they want, if we have it, and if we have it not, by wishing them
well 1 pet. 4. 9.
and giving them comfortable speeches, and praying to God for them, by
practizing Romans 12. 13.
that virtue of hospitality (...) so much commended.

Lastly, this part of Christian charity must be extended even to our enemies,
whereby all these duties now mentioned (...) illustriora, become the more
illustrious Col. 3. 13.
and praise worthy, by forgiving them, praying for them, and assisting them 1
pet. 3. 9.
in their necessity, thereby we become perfect and resemble our heavenly
father, Romans 12. 20.
as our Savior speaks, when we so far overcome our affections, that we make
our Math. 5. vlt.
sun to shine upon them with others, by doing them good, though not for their
own sakes, and do not let our sun go down upon them, by stopping our benefits
toward them, when they have offendedus.

Thus we see the virtues opposite to anger, which must be labored for as means
to prevent and suppress this passion.

CHAP. VIII.
Rules for the eradication of unjust anger. 1. To keep the passion from
rising, 4. Rules. 2. After it is risen, to suppress it. How to carry our
selves toward those that are angry with us. 1. To give place. 2. To look up
to God. 3. To see the devil (...) of the second thing in anger viz. Revenge.
Reasons against it. If our anger have broken out. Rules what we must do. Of the
act, viz. requiting one injury with another. Rules in going to law. The sixth
rule of (...) others to keep this Commandment.

THere remains something more to be said about the eradication or taking away
the root of unjust anger, and this may also be referred to the means.

1. First, to keep this passion from rising in us, we must observe these rules.

1. We must not have (...), we must be void of prejudice against Gal. 6. 1.
our brother, considering as the Apostle says, that we are subject to the like
temptations, and men in their anger, become corrupt in judgment for holding
this principle that those that offend us are evil, we are consequently
persuaded that we our selves are good, and therefore we will show our power on
those that provoke us, therefore every man must know, that he has to deal
with men of like infirmities with himself. prove. 22. 24.


2. It is expedient not to join friendship with an angry man, such an one as 1 Samuel 25. 17.
Nabal was, if he have vesparum examen, a swarm of waspes about him, as the
heathen said, as such have, who have shrewd memories to requite ill turns, he
must be avoided, so also a scorner must be shunned, who makes more account of
his jest then of his friend, and had rather (...) quam dicteriam perdere, lose
prove. 22. 10.
his friend then his jest, such must be cast out, and then Contention will cease.

3. Reject the talebearer. For where no wood is, the fire goes out, and where
pro. 26. 20.
there is no talebearer, strife cease. And therefore the wise man says
further, v. 24.
though he speak fair, yet believe him not, for if he be believed he will utter
the gall of Aspes, there are abominations in his heart which he will not
forbear to vent.

4. Strive not with a man without cause, it he have done thee no harm, prove.
3. 30.
says Solomon, and meddle not with contentions that belong not to thee, except
prove. 26. 17
it be to reconcile brethren that are at variance, as Moses did when he saw
Exodus 2. 13.
the two Israelites strive, otherwise we may provoke anger and bring upon our
selves, the fruits of anger. These are things which the Apostles, Prophets, and
other holy men of God have exhorted unto before the affection be risen.

But now after it is risen, we must take care to keep it in, that it break not
out, a wise man will defer his anger, for as Solomon says, the spirit of a man
will prove. 18. 14.
bear his infirmity, and more plainly. The discretion of a man deferreth his
anger, 19. 11.
and it is his glory to pass over a transgression. He must not let it gush
out, but suspend his affections, as one advises the Athenians to do in another
case. If Alexander be dead to day, he will be dead to morrow and the next day,
and therefore do not make bone fires too soon. This affection of anger must not
be (...), sed pedissequa rationis, it must not out run, but wait upon reason,
Therefore S. James exhorts us to be tardi ad iram, slow to wrath; and he gives
a very good James 1. 16.
reason of it, because this supersluity of man's wrath, does never operari (...)
20
Dei, work the (...) of God. For as the Wise man says, the beginning of
strife, is as when one lets out water. As when one cuts a bank, it is easy
Prove. 17. 14.
to stop the water at (...): but after it has got way, it carries all before
it.

Now this anger of which we speak, must be understood, either of our selves
toward others, or of others toward us. Of the first we have hitherto spoken,
and of our anger against others, and the rule in general was, Resistite, resist
it. Of the other we are to speak, when others are angry with us, and here. Romans
12. 29.


1. The first rule is, Cede, Give place. It is the Apostles counsel, Give place
unto 1 Samuel 25. 37.
wrath. It was Abigails wisdom not to tell Nabal of his faults in the midst of
his cups, but to tarry till the next day: for anger is momentane a insania, a
momentany madnesle. And this may be done, if we think not too much of it; for
cogitatio iram auget, anger increases the more we think of it: and therefore
the Philosophers rule was, that this affection must be smothered with another
(...), as of joy, fear or the like.

But there is another rule which the holy Ghost gives, which is, in our anger
to see 1. God. 2. The Devil. Job ascribes the taking away of his goods to God:
though the Job 1. 21.
(...) and Sabeans (...) him, yet he looked higher, he saw further, he saw Gods
hand in it, and therefore he bare all with patience, because he knew God would
never 2 Samuel 16. 11.
permit it, but for his good. So David, when Shimei railed upon him, said to
his servants. Let him alone, and let him curse; for the Lord has bidden him.
So also the Devil may be seen in our anger, as the Apostle intimates in that
speech, Be angry, and Ephesians. 4. 27.
sin not, neither give place to the Devil, because wicked men, when they
provoke us, are but the Devils instruments herein. Therefore Chrysostom says,
It is a foolish thing in a dog to run after the stone that is cast at him, and
to bite that, leaving him that threw it; or when one is soundly beaten with a
(...), to demand that, to break it, and not turn upon him that gave the blow:
and it is sure that wicked men are nothing else, but the Devils stones and
staves: our part therefore is to oppose the Devil, and we cannot scourge him
worse, then by this virtue of patience; for this is one of those bona opera,
good works, which as we said before, are flagella Daemonum, whips for the Devil.

Thus much for repressing the inward motion of this passion, either by keeping
it from rising, or after it has risen, to keep it from breaking out.

Now for the outward act which consists in revenge, whereby we think to do to
our adversary, as he has done to us, we must labor to restrain it, by
considering 1 pet. 2. 23.
our Saviors example, who when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he
suffered, Deuteronomy. 32. 35.
he threatened not, but committed it to him that judges righteously; and look
to Romans 12. 19.
God that says, Vengeance is mine, and I will repay. We must be so far from
assuming pro. 24. 17, 18.
this to our selves, that we must not rejoice when our enemy falls, nor must
our heart be glad when he stumbleth, lest the Lord see it, and it displease him
and he turn his wrath from him to us. Job gives us a pattern for this; He
rejoiced Job. 31. 29.
not at the destruction of him that hated him. But the most are here like the
king of Israel, who when the Syrians were brought into Samaria by the Prophet,
so that he had them at an advantage; he asks the Prophet, My father shall I 2
Kings. 6. 22.
smite them? So if we have an advantage of our enemy, we are ready to smite
them. But David's practice was better, which we should the rather follow, when
he had Saul at an advantage in the Cave, so that he might have 1 Samuel 24.
smitten him, yet he did it not, but only cut off the lap of his garment;
whereas if some had had him in this case, they would have cut his skirts so
near, that (it is Chrysostomes saying,) efudissent e renibus ejus (...), they
would have let out the best blood in his body. This should be far from us, for
we may observe that this desire of revenge is most incident to the weakest
creatures: we see the least are soonest angry, (...), habet and musca splenem,
there is the Ants anger, and the Flies anger, and women more angry then men,
and among men, those that are old, sick, and weak, and quo infirmiores, (...)
is iracundi; the weaker, the more angry ever. but he that is magnarum virium
the ablest is least subject to this passion, he does not sentire se percussum,
not resent a blow.

Now if this anger cannot be prevented that it break not out, it is to be
sorrowed for and repented, and we mnst labor to stop it in regard of the
measure, we must look to the suppuration or (...), to have it healed and dried
up. A man may sometime be angry, but he must not requiescere in ira, (as is
said before:) S. Paul sets us the Ephesians. 4. 26.
longest time for keeping it, Ne occidat Sol: and the reason is, every
Christian is to Mark 11. 25.
offer his evening sacrifice of prayer, and before we pray, we must forgive.

The charge of this is set down negative and affirmative by S. Matthew from our
Saviors mouth, (...) show the necessity of it. If ye forgive men their
trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you: but if ye forgive not,
neither will your father Matt. 6. 14, 15.
forgive your trespasses. And if we number our remissions or forgivings, then
ours shall be numbered to us by tally; if we forgive sine fine and numero, we
shall be forgiven in the like manner. So much for Suppuratio.

Now for spuma, the foaming of it out by the tongue. He that does this,
disquieteth his friends. And yet we are to consider, that we have to do with
men, and such men Ecclus. 28. 9.
as sometime offend with the tongue, though not with the will; who is it that
offends not with the tongue? It is an unruly member, no man can tame it.
David in James 3. 8.
his anger said, All men are liars, Samuel and all, because God had deferred
that Psalm. 116. 11.
which Samuel told (...) should come to pass, the kingdom. Seeing then that
there is no man but offends with his tongue, we should (...) David's practice,
esse tanquam 38. 13.
surdus, to be as it were deaf, and give no regard to what we hear spoken in
anger; not to be deaf, but tunquam surdus, as one deaf, is good in this case:
for when one has heard evil (...) words, they are as the son of Syrach speaks,
like a coal of fire, which if one blow on it, it will kindle, if he spit upon
it, it will go out. The Ecclus. 28. 12.
Heathen man considered this by the light of nature. If he be thus angry
without a cause, quid faciet (...), what will he be if I provoke him, and
requite one angry word with another. And therefore the Philosopher, when one
reproached him, cast up dust into the air, and when the other asked him why he
did so, he answered, Injicio pulverem vomitui tuo, I throw dust to cover thy
vomit; and indeed it is nothing (...), but vomitus bilis, a (...) of choler.

Solomon says, He that answers such a one, whether he be in (...), or in
earnest, he shall go Prove. 29. 9.
by the worst. If he be wise, thou art yet wiser by forbearing him, (...) the
wiser for not returning word for word. Therefore he would not have a fool
answered, 26. 4, 5.
lest we become like him, and be as he that reproving a sault in another
commits a greater himself, and so runs into a great absurdity; for against a
fools words, magnum remedium negligentia, the best course is to neglect them:
so that sometimes he must not be answered, lest we make e stulto (...), of a
fool a mad man; and yet again, sometimes he must be answered, when he is among
such as himself, that think well of him, (...) he seem wise; but if he be among
wise men, answer him not, for they will regard rather, quid tu taceas, quam
quid ille dicat, thy wisdom in silence, then his (...) in speaking.

The last thing in anger is the Act it self, or requiting of one injury with
another. Now though this be no way lawful, neither is revenge allowed under the
(...) by our Savior, though under the Law they were allowed, eye for eye, and
tooth for tooth, Matthew. 5 and 6.
because a far higher degree of love is now required under the Gospel; yet we
may distinguish between revenge and reparation for the damage we have sustained
in our (...), person, or name. Revenge is, when we seek the hurt of him, with
whom we are angry, though we our selves receive no benefit thereby, and this is
utterly unlawful now, either for private persons, or any others, as
Magistrates, etc. But the other, viz. reparation for the loss or damage we
have sustained is no way contrary to Christian love, nor forbidden by Christ,
but may lawfully be sought by the hands of the Magistrate, when it cannot
otherwise be had: we are not to be (as the Pope once said of England) a good
ass to bear all burdens. A man may strive lawfully, especially in Gods cause.
Strive for the truth (says the Wise man) and that 2 Timothy 2. 5.
unto death, and this is (...) far from the sin of anger, that it is accounted
a virtue called Ecclus. 4. 28.
zeal. In the case of (...) and tuum, we see that Abraham said to Lot, Let
there be Genesis 13. 8.
no strife between me and thee, Abraham for (...) departed something from his
right.

But because by so doing we many times pluck upon us a more grievous burden
then we are able to bear, and thereby give occasion to men to work upon our good
and quiet nature, we are warranted to have recourse to the Magistrate to
relieve us by Law. And for this purpose were Magistrates appointed, and Laws
made, (...) earum Isider.
(...) humana (...) audacia, that men's insolences might be restrained by fear
of them.

Yet there are some rules to be observed in our going to Law.

1. It must be for some considerable matter, not for every trifle. Not quod
opus est, but quod necesse, not for that we may do, but for that necessity
drives us to: not every trivial action, but such, as if it be not remedied,
will breed an inconvenience, Exodus 18. 22.
and (...) as nothing but the Law can rectify and redress.

2. Before we bring it into forum civil, before the Magistrate, we must
endeavor to have it ended by Good Men (as we call them) some wise and
understanding men 2 Cor. 6. 4, 5.
to judge of it.

3. Our Savior being required to deal between two brethren in the case of an
inheritance, says, Who made me a judge? And in the next verse adds, Beware of
covetousness: Luke 12. 14, 15
we must not go to Law with a covetous mind; that is another rule.

4. We must not by presuming upon our wealth, savor, or (...) with the Judge,
enter upon a suit, and endeavor to take away the right from the poor, that
every man's suum may be (...) must not go to Law with a corrupt mind, as the
Heathen Esaias 10. 2.
man said to the Judge in the words of the Law, Si (...) est adversarii, habeat
ille, if it be none of mine, let mine adversary carry it. This is another rule.

5. Our Prosecution of a suit must not savor of gall: we are to preserve
charity, keep a charitable mind with our adversary.

6. The last rule is prescribed by Solomon. Strive not hastily: his reason is,
lest thou Prove. 25. (...).
know not the end. For many have repented of going to Law when they have come
to the end. Abigail, when David was angry with Nabal, used this very argument
to stop his fury; My Lord will never (...) himself, that he has not shed blood
causelessly. (...) a man sometimes bear injury, and refrain from evil words, he
shall never repent of it, or unwish it; if not, he may often repent it.

For the sixth rule, the procuring of this Commandment to be kept by others, we
Rule 6.
have it commended both in the negative and in the affirmative. For the
negative, Moses seeing two of his brethren, Hebrews strive, he endeavored to
hinder their Exodus 2. 13.
contending: and for the affirmative, our Savior pronounces a blessing to all
that make peace with others. Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be
called the children Matthew. 5 9.
(...) God.

THE EXPOSITION OF THE Seventh Commandment.
Thou shall not commit Adultery.

CHAP. I.
The scope and order of this Commandment. Of Marriage. The institution and ends
of it, explicated out of Genesis 2. 22, 23, 24. Married persons are, 1. to
leave all others, 2. to cleave to (...) another. Rules for those that are to
marry. Duties of those that are married, general and special.

THE scope of this Commandment is to preserve Chastity, and to hinder all kind
of pollution and uncleanness.

The order of ranking this Precept in this place is this. The former
Commandment provided for a man's self, this for the nearest and dearest thing to
himself, next to body and life, in respect Genesis 2. 24.
that man and wife are by Marriage united and made one 1 Cor. 6. 16.
body. Erunt duo in carne una; they two shall be one flesh, says God. Ephesians. 5.
31.


Before we come to treat of the sin prohibited by this Commandment, we will
take a view of one chief cause, upon which this prohibition is grounded: which
is Marriage.

1. And first of the thing it self, Conjugium or Matrimonium, what it is.
Wedlock or Matrimony is a Covenant and conjunction of Man and Woman, taken and
agreed on with mutual consent, for the propagation of mankind, and the mutual
good of both, instituted in the beginning by God himself in Paradise, between
Adam and Genesis 2. 22. 23, 24.
Eve in their innocence; God only being the Maker of it, as both Father and
Priest in the Marriage, before the Congregation of Angels.

This may be easily gathered out of the story, which contains, a prophecy, a
gratulation, a consent in Adam and Eve, and a law for the future.

1. The prophecy. Adam first speaks illative by inference de (...). This is now
bone of my bone, etc. He had been asleep when the rib was taken from him, and
yet could tell that the woman which was not before, was taken out of him, as
perfectly as if he had been awake at the Anatomy. And secondly de futuro, for
the time to come, that a man, to cleave to his wife, should leave father and
mother. This should be the practice of posterity: for he had neither father nor
mother, and therefore could not speak it of himself. 2. His gratulation. Leah
being fruitful after a long barrenness says, Now will I 29. 35.
praise the Lord. So Adam seems to say, God brought to me, so many thousands of
creatures, I awake, and rightly understanding all, yet found I no helper like
or meet for me, but they were all either brutish, dumb, hairy, or the like. But
now at this time God has brought me one that is bone of my bone, and flesh of
my flesh, and though sleeping, yet I have found one meet and like; so like, as
almost the same with me. 3. His consent, which though it be tacit in Eve, yet
he expresses it, by acknowledging, This is now bone of my bone, and will
hereafter be flesh of my flesh. 4. In the words [ Erunt, they two shall be one
flesh,] there is an (...) or statute in Heaven and earth touching marriage and
therefore not to to be repealed. Prima (...) perpetua regula. The first
institution, shall be a perpetual rule; when God by Math. 19. 6.
Adam spoke there, he spoke to posterity; be it therefore enacted, that from
henceforth Erunt etc. And this shows it to be juris divini.
2. The next is, that marriage is an honorable estate: not only tolerable,
allowable, or commendable, but honorable; and so it was ever reputed in all
ages, by Heb. 13. 4.
all persons: we see that Christ honored it with his own presence, and his
first Joh. 2.
miracle. Neither is it in aliquibus sic, in aliis non, honorable in some, and
not so in Tit. 1. 6.
others. For not (...) the Patriarchs, Priests and Prophets, under the law were
1 Timothy 3. (...).
married, but under the Gospel, Elders and Priests were married. So were
Apostles 1 Cor. 9. 2.
and Bishops.

3. The causes or reasons why marriage was instituted, are generally or
principally two. 1. First, the (...) and propagation of mankind. 2. That man's
life might be more comfortable, and delightful to him, but these causes may
more especially be enlarged to three.

1. God in the beginning said, It is not good that man should be alone, I will
make Genesis 2. 18.
a help meet for him. The first cause therefore was the benefit and commodity of
man. For God thought that Adam could not live pleasantly and well, unless he
gave him a wife. And therefore a wife is not to be accounted a necessary evil,
as some phrase it, but as a help. Whosoever then has not, nor ever had wife or
children, is ignorant of a double blessing. And this the very heathen did
acknowledge. He that wants a wife, is in as ill case as he that wants a hand,
an arm, a foot, or an eye. But besides the blessing by procreation (...)
children, this cohabitat on or living in society with a wife is most profitable
and comfortable. Her company gives a man refreshment after labor, and makes
him to forget sorrow and (...). Nothing so grievous, nothing so burdensome,
but a man and wife, living lovingly together, can well overcome it. 2. The
second cause why matrimony was instituted, was the procreation of children, and
education of them, in the fear of God. That there might be semen Mal. 2. 15.
sanctum, a holy seed. That there might be a (...) of propagating by succession
the Church of God. It was Gods care, in the creation, when he blessed Adam Genesis
1. 28.
and Eve, with (...) and multiplicamini, be fruitful and multiply and (...) the
earth. 9. 1.
Thelike care he had, at the re-creation upon the general deluge, with the same
benediction. 1 Cor. 7. 2.
3. The third cause was to avoid fornication. Let every man (for that cause
says Saint Heb. 13. 4.
Paul) have his own wife, and let every woman have her own husband To keep the
bed 1 Cor. 7. 9.
(...). And it is better to marry then (...), as he says elsewhere. Therefore
marriage is not to be accounted either a sin, or an act of uncleannes but
rather concubitus cumpropria (...), est castitas, lawful marriage is chastity.
If thou take a Chrysostom. Genesis 3. 18.
wife (says Saint Paul) thou sinnest not, and if a virgin marry, she sins
not, primus gradus castitatis est (...) virginitas, secundus fidele conjugium.
The first (...) of chastity is pure virginity, the second faithful wedlock. So
that for these three reasons marriage is good, and non est (...) esse solum, it
is not good for man to be alone, said God.
Non est (...), it is not good, says God, it was not, (...), it is not good
for me: but non homini, not for man. Gods decrees are ever for our good.

1. Solitude is not good. Society is good. Homo est animal sociale, man is a
sociable creature. It is good to strengthen one, lest a man fall: and to help
if he do fall. Two Eccl. 4. 9. 11.
are better then one (says the Preacher.) And if two lie together, they have
heat, but how can one be warm alone. 2. Solitude is unpleasant. 1. In regard of
God, for his purpose and intent is to communicate his goodness with many, and
not to restrain it to one. 2. In regard of it self: for (...) est sui (...),
goodness is no niggard, or close handed and therefore Heb. 2. 10. obi.
God would, that there should be a generation sui similis, of one (...) to it
self. 3. In regard of the world, not perpetuando, for perpetuity, sed (...),
for Genesis 24. 60.
32. 12.
the cause of increase. 13. 16.

But this (...) was necessary, may some say, when there was but one man in the
22. 17.
world, it is not now, when there be so many thousands: when people are
multiplied 1. 2.
tiplied as the sand of the sea, and like the dust of the earth, and like the
stars of Heaven. psalm. 24. 2.
It was needful, when the earth was inanis and vacua; empty, not now, when Esa.
7. 20.
there is terra and plenitudo (...): an earth full of inhabitants; and so full,
that it Genesis 1. 28.
needs rather tonsuram, the fhaving, which the Prophet speaks of, then the
command 9. 1.
of repleteterram, replenish the earth, or crescite and multiplicamini, be
fruitful Sol.
and multiply.

Yes it is still bonum, good to the worlds end, and necessary. For though Moses
says it is good to marry, and Saint Paul to abstain. Yet if we distinguish
the persons, Esa. 56. 4.
we shall reconcile the places, all the difference is in homini and esse. Math.
19. 21.


It is true, that there are some persons exempt: as (...), and every man that
1. Cor. 7. 7.
has his proper gift. Yet to others not so qualified a wife is permitted, it
is bonum 9. 5.
1 Timothy 3. 2.
for others to marry, either for propagation of children, to increase (...)
Genesis 30. 1.
Church, or for comfort, or to avoid incontinence. The three reasons before
mentioned. (...) Kin. 1. 2.


There are also times offorbearing; a time to refrain embracing, as the
Preacher Eccl. 3. 5.
tells us: as in times of distress, in sad times. But again, at other times it
is Math. 24. 19
1 Cor. 7. 26.
good for man. All rests in this, that which course soever we take, we do (...)
Joc. 2. 16.
Deo, draw near to God; and accordingly it must be measured and taken as bonum,
1 Cor. 7. 6.
or not. We must not use this liberty for a cloak or veyle; nor for wantonness,
psalm. 73. 28.
1 pet. 1. 16.
nor for a snare. 1 Timothy 5. 11.


Therefore for the avoiding of the inconvenience of solitarines, God thought 1
Cor. 7. 35.
fit to make another to keep man company, yet this one was to be meet for him:
for a man were as good to be alone, as never the better for company. He made
pro. 21. 19.
not that one. 1. Either to molest or trouble him, such a one as Solomon speaks
Sir. 25. 25.
of: that it were better for him to dwell in the wilderness then with her, a
contentious prove. 31. 12.
and angry one. Nor an unprofitable one, a gadder. But one that should be able
to do 26.
him good; to be a helper to him. 1. In pietate, a woman that fears the Lord,
30.
not a (...) to draw him from his religion, but such a one as may save him: 1
(...). 16. 31.
1 Cor. 7. 16.
that may win him to goodness by her life and conversation. 2. In prole, the 1
pet. 3. 1.
Prophet asks the question, why God made this one? and answers himself that he
Mal. 2. 15.
might seek a godly seed. 3 In (...), to help him, in guiding and ordering 1 Timothy 2. 10.
things, belonging to household. To act (...) part in making provision. To pro.
31. 27.
look well to the ways of her household, and not eat the bread of Idleness.
(...) Tim. 5. 14.
The Apostle tells us, that one part of her help must be in guiding the house.

Lastly, God did not think every help meet for man. 1. Not beasts, they are
jumenta helps: but they are too low, under our feet. 2. Nor Angels, and they
are helps too, but too high, above our heads. 3. But a woman in the mid way,
collateral, a latere out of the side. Like, conformable, in shape, speech and
reason, quasi alter ipse, image ipsius, as another himself, his own image. And
all this is a Ephesians. 5. 30.
mystery signifying the union of Christ and his Church. The Apostle says, we
are 1 Cor. 6. 17.
members of his body, (...), and bones, we are joined to him. Saul was told
that his Act. 9. 4.
persecution of the Saints, was the persecution of Christ. And as man is to do
for the woman, and she for the man, to leave father and mother, so Christ
tells us, Luc. 14. 6.
we must do for him. We see it plainly, that all must be left, neither father
nor kindred Deuteronomy. 33. 9.
must be owned, if they come in competition with Christ.

There are in this law two words which every man is bound to observe. First
relinquet, he shall leave; whom must he leave. And secondly, (...), to whom he
must (...).

1. Relinquet he must leave all for his wife. This seems to be somewhat
unnatural: Deu. 32. 11.
for the bond of nature works much downward. Moses in his song, describes
Nah. (...). 11.
the tenderness of the Eagles to their young ones, and the Prophet tells us Jer.
4. 3.
of the love of lions to their whelps, and the Prophet (...) of the care of
Seamonsters Fsa. 49. 15.
Exodus 20. 12.
to their young, and the Prophet Esaias makes it as a thing unpossible prove. 30.
17.
that a woman should forget the son of her womb; yet is she within this law of
Exodus 21. 17.
relinquet; again, we see the bond upward is greater. God commands the love to
Parents, and the censure of unnatural, is heavy. The ravens of the valley shall
pick out their eyes. Nay even death is to be inflicted on them, this affection
is zealously expressed by Ruth, she would nor leave her mother, though but a
motherin law.

Yet this relinquet transcends all, breaks all. We commonly leave not a thing,
but for that we love better. Now if father and mother, or children etc. come in
competition with the wife, or the husband, the first must be waived as a thing
not so (...) in conjunction, for the last. And indeed it is a thing (...),
(...). (...). (...).
supernatural, a miracle, that a woman living with her parents, where as (...)
Genesis 24. (...).
said to Hadad, (...), (...) thou lacked with me? where (...) wanted nothing,
should Exodus 4. (...).
as (...) relinquere, leave them, to go to one that was known but the day
(...), into another country, and as the daughter of Jethro did, to go from him
into Egypt with Moses.

But it is not to be understood by that we have said, that God does (...)
utterly extinguish our love to parents, he is so sar from that, that he does
(...) ordain and command children to love them also: as he said. But this bond
or union has this privilege and prerogative, that if it fall out, that we
cannot do both, then there is no portion for us in our fathers house, and we
must do as Michal Genesis 31. 14.
did, who displeased her father to save her husband. (...) Sam. 19. 11.


1. The reasons are, because this (...) the (...) conjunction conjux qute
(...), that of the wife was before that of the father. So that the parent is in
the degree of love with and of our neighbor, the wife in that degree of love
wherewith we love our selves individually. 2. And children are aliquid (...),
some (...) of a man's self, the Apostle makes the Ephesians. 5 28.
wife (...), himself, he that loves his wife (says the Apostle) loves
himself, Thirdly, children are of seed and blood, and will be flesh and bone,
but are not, The wife is bone of his bones, and flesh of his flesh (...). 4.
They are of the loins and womb; she of the side nearer his heart. So much of
(...), now of adhaerebit.
2. Adhaerebit, he shall cleave etc. Relinquet, to leave, is one degree, and
associabit to live and keep company with her is another: but adhaerebit to
cleave to her is the nearest conjunction that can be. Relinquet is animi
consensus, the consent of the mind. Adhaerebit is animi etcorporis copula, the
conjunction of the mind Esa. 49. 7.
and body, flesh of my flesh. This is that gluton amoris, that glue or soder of
love Genesis 34. 3.
which cannot be loosened. Shechems soul clave unto Dinah. This surpasses the
2 Samuel 20. 2.
strongest friendship that is, even Jonathans to David whose soul was knit to
him. And the effects are 1. In (...) or (...), living together sine (...),
without 1 pet. 3. 7.
severing. (...) inseparabilis, an unseparable sticking to. 3. In
reciprocatione 22.
(...), mutual acts of love. 2. In fidelitate, in true (...) each to other,
keeping Ephesians. 5. 25.
Heb. 13. 4.
the bed (...). 4. In perpetuitate, not departing from each other, till God
severs 1 Cor. 7. 10.
them, and that. 1. Either by death. 2. Or else by divorce, which must not 11.
35.
be pro (...); (...), for every trifle, but first, either pro adulterio, for
adultery, secondly, Romans 7: 3.
Math. 5. 32.
or pro inquietatione, for unquietnes. If otherwise it is (...), 19. 9.
a rending of one piece of flesh from another, and an act of the devil and his
imps. For 1. Cor. 7. 15.
conjugium a Deo divorttum a (...), God makes marriages, and the devil divorces
Aug. in tract. 9
upon the part of the offender. God only permits the not offended party to
seek a divorce upon just and lawful occasion.

To avoid therefore this unsodering, two things are to be observed. First, to
be cautelous in our choice before it come to (...). Secondly, to observe and
perform the duties mutually belonging to each of them, when they come to be in
(...).

1. The cautions are many. Negative and affirmative. First, for the negative
part, Genesis 4. 19.
we are not to desire more then one: not two as (...). Polygamy is prohibited
at least under the Gospel, for if this privilege might have been granted to
any. Adam of all others had most reason to have claimed it: and he was but one
to one: not plures in (...) many in one flesh, (...) fecit unam (...), one rib
made but one flesh. Let every man have his own wife, and every woman her own
husband; 1 Cor. 7. 2.
says the Apostle. 6. 16.
2. We must not desire another man's wife: she must be a rib from our own prove.
2. 17.
(...), not (...): it is a breach of a covenant. (...) carnes, due corpora is
flat adultery. 3. We must not desire a wife of our own kindred, not (...)
patris, neither (...). (...).
in the line, ascending or descending that's plain Incest Non e lumbis, sed e
Mal. 2. 15.
(...), not out of the loins, but the side. It must be a godly seed. 4. Seeing
marriage is (...) divini, of Gods institution, and that oeconomia is propter 1
Cor. 7. 39.
(...), the dome (...) society is for the Church, we must not match with those
Deuteronomy. 7. 3.
that are irreligious or wanton: but in the Lord. Not the seed of Canaan, nor
as Jud. 14. 2.
Samson, though difference in religion do not make a nullity of the marriage,
yet Genesis 6.
there is a great incongruity in it. 34. 12.
5. Nor must we marry to satisfy our lust, that is Deus ventris, and it
provoked God to wrath: nor for greediness of dowry, that is Deus mundi. 6.
There must be no disparity, either in condition, nature, or years. The Heathen
man could give a rule for this, tuae sortis uxorem ducito, marry a (...) of thy
own condition. 7. Nor must we marry hastily. God said not (...), let it be done
hand over head: Genesis 2. 18.
but faciam, I will make man a help upon deliberation. Adam must sleep upon it,
before it be done. 8. Nor must it be done without consent. 1. Of parents;
Abraham's approbation 24. 4.
must go along with (...), and Hagars with Ishmaels. We must not take 21. 21.
wives, of our selves as they did, that seeing the women fair, took them
without 6. 2.
consent this is not Gods faciamus, but sacit ipse sibi. Adam did not so; nor
Eve 2. 22.
for though they were near enough to each other, and one might easily have
found the other, yet Adam stayed; and (...) ipse assumpsit, sed Deus adduxit,
he took her not, but God brought her. 2. The children are to give consent too.
Laban and Bethuel told Abraham's servant, that they would know Rebeccas mind,
24. 57.
and have her consent. The woman must be pleased to dwell with him: else it is
58.
not adduxit, but pertraxit, to force her. 1 Cor. 7. 12.
9 (...), this work must not be attempted without prayer, we must not trust
Genesis 24. 11.
our own election, without Gods Approbation, which is best attained by prayer.
63
Abraham and Isaac durst not enter upon it without this.
We have seen the negative cautions, what to avoid in our choice, now see what
in the affirmative we are to take. The best rule is in the general to follow
Gods course; he brought Adam a meet one. Now there are but three allurements,
to persuade with a man in the choice of a wise. 1. Pleasure in regard of
beauty. 2. Profit in respect of dowry. 3. Virtue in relation to good qualities:
of which the last is the chief, (howsoever it is made the least now adays.)
Such a one and Ruth 3. 12.
so endowed was Ruth: she was known by all the people to be a virtuous woman.
prove. 3130.
1 pet. 3. 4.
This is that above all other will make her a meet one. Favor is deceitful,
and prove. 31. 26.
beauty is vain, but a woman that fears the Lord, she shall be praised, says
Solomon. 14. 1.
The ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, is of great price in the sight of
God: says 31. 14.
Peter She that opens her mouth with wisdom, and in whose tongue is the law
of Psalm. 144. 12.
(...). Such a one was Abigail, one that by her wisdom builded her house, and
Jer. 5. 8.
was like a merchants ship, a good huswife and provident. If to these, she be
like Genesis 34. 8.
a polished corner of the temple, it makes her a meet one.

Such a one being found, we must not presently adhinnire, (...) after her, like
Jeremies fedd horses, there must not be conjunxit before adduxit (which was
Shechems Jo. 2. 1.
case) we must tarry till adduxit, and that in Gods house, Jesus must be at
Genesis 3. 12.
the marriage, God must give her as parent, and join both as priest by the hand
Math. 19. 6.
of him that he has appointed in his place. And it must be in Gods house, not
clandestine, Genesis 1. 28.
and then they shall receive a blessing.

Now for the duties general and mutual between them: they consist in two
things. 1 These. 4. 4.


1. In fidelity and loyalty. They must possess their vessels, in holiness and
purity, 1 Cor. 7. 5.
and not defraud one another, but keep the marriage bed undefiled. They must
Heb. 13. 4.
draw both one way, and bear each others burden 2. Love. She was made of a
bone meet to the heart, and that was coupled with a fellow, therefore their
love must be hearty. He must love her as a part of 1 Cor. 11. 3.
himself: and she him, as wounded for her. Again she must love him as her pro.
12. 4.
head, and he her, as his crown. He must be better to her then ten sons. 1 Samuel 1. 8.
And she embrace him and his love, tanquam (...), non (...), as a vine and
psalm. 128. 3.
not ivy.
1. Now severally concerning their duties. The man must dwell with the woman 1
Pet. 3 7.
with knowledge to direct her. Provide and take care for his house and family.
He must Genesis 30. 30.
1 Timothy 5. 8.
cherish her, he must delight in her, rejoice with the wife of his youth. Isaac
sported Ephesians. 5. 29.
with Rebekah. Suffer and bear with her infirmities, and not be bitter to her.
To end this, Prove. 5. 18.
he must love her fervently, cooperate with her willingly, provide all things
carefully, Genesis 26. 8.
and though he be the nobler part, not despise the less noble; give good
counsel 1 Pet. 3. 7.
seasonably, admonish her opportunely, and defend her faithfully. Colos. 3. 19.


2. The woman, in respect that she was not made first, but Adam, and that she 1 Timothy 2. 13.
was taken elatere, out of his side, therefore her duty is to submit and be
subject to Genesis 3. 16.
Ephesians. 5. 22.
her husband, and do her duty at all times to please him. She is also to be
adjutrix, 1 Cor. 7. 34.
a help to him. She is a bone, part of a coupling or rafter in a building, she
must gird Prove. 31 17.
her loins with strength, she must not be trouble some; for it were better for
her husband 21. 19.
to dwell in the wilderness then with her, if she be a contentious woman. Nor
must she 6. 26.
undo him, nor (...) out his goods. Not prove as Jobs wife, cursed; but like to
Job. 2. 10.
1 Samuel 25. 8.
Abigail, gracious and mild. Not like Michal David's wife, a (...) or taunter;
2 Samuel 6. 20.
but like the Shunamite, charitable and virtuous. Not like Jezabel, haughty and
cruel; 2 Kings 4. 9
but like the woman of Tekoah, humble. Finally, she must love her husband 1
Kings 21. 25
ardently, serve him obediently, bear and educate her children carefully: not
oppose 2 Samuel 14. 2.
Tit. 2. 4.
his government scornfully: So much for the cause or thing upon which this
Commandment was grounded. Now to the Commandment it self.

CHAP. II.
The dependence of this commandment upon the former. The ends, for which it was
given. The object of this Commandment, concupiscence or lust of the flesh. The
several branches and degrees of the sin here forbidden. Diverse reasons against
the sin of uncleanness.

Non Maechaberis
THis Precept is as the former, in words very brief, and under the name of
Adultery, forbids all degrees of uncleanness, and all those acts that dispose
thereto, thereby to show what reckoning God makes of lust, and all those acts
that tend to Adultery, and of all the lesser degrees of this sin, viz. that
they are all (...) in his sight, as rash and unjust anger is murder before him,
as we showed in the last. Now Adultery implies not only (...), uncleanness,
but injustice too, and that in a high degree, by communicating that to many
which is proper to one; for the husband has not power over his own body, but
the wife; and econtra: and therefore 1 Cor. 7. 4.
it is injustice to give that to another, which is not in our power, but is
already given to another by marriage. Thus we see by the word here used what
account God makes of all those vices, which are subordinate to Adultery.

The Commandment itself is expounded Leviticus 20. 10. in the law: and in the
Gospel by Christ, in the fifth of S. Matthew, verse. 27, 28. etc. And by the
Apostle 1 Corinthians 5. and 6. 15. and throughout the whole seventh chapter of
the same Epistle.

The order and dependence is this. The principal cause why murder was
prohibited was, because man is the image of God: now the image of God consists
especially in pureness and chastity, as one of the Heathen Poets could tells
us, (...), Bacchil. in princip. carn.
God is a pure mind: and therefore fitly does this Commandment, wherein purity
of soul and body is commanded, follow (...) that wherein the defacing of Gods
image is forbidden. The truth of this may plainly be gathered by the contrary;
as soon as our first parents eyes were opened, they saw themselves naked, being
ashamed to see their nakedness, they got figleaves to cover their shame, which
argued that the pureness Genesis 3. 7.
of this image was lost, and that they were ashamed of those irregular motions
which began to arise in show.

The ends of this Commandment are four.
1. In respect of God, who is of purer eyes then to behold evil: therefore
Abac. 1. 13.
we must not (...) be pure in heart, if we will see him, or have him to see us;
but Matthew. 5 8.
we must possess our bodies also (our vessels) in holiness and
sanctification, not in the 1 These. 4. 4.
lusts of (...), as the Heathen that know not God. 2. In respect of the Church,
and the good of it. God by the Prophet says, that he Mal. 2. 15.
took order that one man should be joined to one woman, why? that he might have
a holy seed. That the Church might be kept pure, undefiled, and unspotted; for
as James 1. 27.
the Apostle says, our bodies are the members of Christ, and not our own. And
therefore 1 Cor. 6. 15, 19
he (...) against Christ the head, and the Church his body, Who takes the
members of Christ, and makes them the members of a harlot. 5. 11.
3. For the good of the Commonwealth; wedlock being (...) parens, the Parent
of the Commonwealth, the (...) of cities and kingdoms. And in that respect it
is, that the Wise man in diverse places counsels us to refrain from strange
women. (...). 2. 16.
Abimelech charged his people upon pain of death not to touch Abraham's wife.
And 5. 2.
(...) sentence upon his daughter in Law was no less, when he heard that she
7. 3.
had played the harlot. So in the Law it was no less then death to offend in
this Genesis 26. 11.
kind. And God charged Moses to admonish the Israelites to refrain from this
sin, 38. 24.
because it defiled the land, and would be a cause that they should be (...)
out of it. Lastly, Deuteronomy. 22. 29.
Levit. 18. 27.
S. (...) tells us, that Sodom and Gomorrah, and the cities about them, for
giving 8.
themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh, were set forth
for an example, Jude verse. 7.
suffering the vengeance of eternal fire. 4. For the particular good of private
persons, and that two ways. 1. That every one may enjoy that, whereof he is
Proprietary, and chief Lord, and that wholly to himself. And this is occulta
lex (...), the secret law of nature. Therefore if another partake or share with
him, or be but suspected so to do, it drives Prove. 6. 34, 35
him into jealousy, which the Wise man calls the rage of a man, and he
accounts it such an injury, as cannot be satisfied with any ransom. 2. That his
name may be perpetuated by legitimate children of his own. We see that God
would have no bastard enter into his congregation. And by this also a Deuteronomy. 23.
2.
man preserves the chastity of his wife. And these four are the ends.

Now for the affection it self and ground of the Commandment, as it was (...).
heat, in the other Commandment; so here it is (...) concupiscence, that this
deals withal: not that every concupiscence is evil, for the Apostle tells us
of (...) an evil concupiscence, to intimate, that there is some Concupiscence
or desire, Col. 3. 5.
which is not evil. And in another place he wills us, not to have providence,
and care of the flesh, to fulfill the lusts of it: implying that there is a
lawful care of the flesh to Romans 13. 10.
be had, so that the lusts of it be not fulfilled.

More plainly; there is in man, as in all other creatures, a desire, first to
preserve himself in (...), and secondly, in specie. And therefore in respect
that these are most necessary, it pleased God to (...) a bait for both, that
men might be allured to them; for as there is a pleasure in eating and drinking
for the one, so is there for the other in the act of generation. And there is a
rule, in maxim (...), maxima (...) as maxim allicit; in things most necessary
the greatest pleasure allureth most. And another, quod maxim allicit, maxim
corrumpit, that which allureth most, corrupts most. And the reason is, quia
appetitus tendit ultra modum, the appetite exceeds the due measure. For we
persuade our selves, that if the doing of it once be good, the doing of it
often will be better, and so we come at last to do it too much, because the
appetite knows not what is enough, and so it falls into corrupt custom. For
the course of our nature is, when it avoids any evil, it avoideth it so
vehemently, that sometime, if there be any good with it, it puts out the
good too: and if (...) desire any good, it desires the evil too that sticks
to it. Therefore moderation and temperance is to be used; for virtue stands in
medio, between two (...): yet temperance is magis in (...), more in the want
then in the excess, as (...) is mag is in (...), more in the excess then in
the want.

This Concupiscence of the flesh, as it is in us, so it is in beasts, and
therefore it has the lowest place: and is, as Plato says, alligata ventri,
tied to the belly, as a man would (...) a horse or an ass to the manger. Now
being thus in the lowest place, yet being of necessary use, the rule is, In
maxim necessariis (...) est maxim necessarius, in things necessary, order is
most necessary, and this order is that the lower desires should not take up a
man wholly; when the lower is most vehement, the higher is most hindered: but
the lower faculties are to give place to the superior, and not to take up the
whole man. Chrysostom says, Dedit Deus corpus (...), (...) illud in (...),
and non dedit animam corpori, ut illam in terram deprimeret; God gave the body
to the soul, to lift it up to the (...) of heaven and heavenly things, and not
the soul to the body, to press it down to the earth. Therefore Gods intent
was, that as we may have a lawful Concupiscence for the maintenance of our
life, and for propagation; so we should use them no further then this necessity
requires. And this Concupiscence has its purity. Now that is called purum,
pure, that has (...) alieni admixtum, no mixture of any thing with it. But
because in this life there will be some mixture, as the Prophet tells them,
their wine was mixed with water: we must be (...) 1. 22.
careful that the mixture be not disproportionable, as to have but a drop of
wine in a vessel of water.

The Prophet says, that there was a time when man was in honor, but certainly
he is Psalm. 49. 10.
now so degenerate from that he was, that he has lost his understanding, and
is become like to the beasts that perish; for he serves his lust, riches, and
pleasures. For this cause it is, that another Prophet says of the people of
his time, that they were (...) addicted to this evil concupiscence of the
flesh, that they were like (...) admissariis; Jer. 5. 8.
to fed horses, every one neighed after his neighbors wife. Therefore, as the
Apostle speaks of the Law in general, so we may of this Commandment, that it is
Poedagogus, Gal. 3. 24.
Prove. 3. 24.
our Schoolmaster to instruct us; that how sweet (...) stolen waters are, yet
the end Gal. 5. 16.
of them is bitter and deadly. And that we should not use our liberty for an
occasion to 1 Cor. (...). 29.
the flesh, like brute beasts; but as knowing that we were created for greater
things: and that we should have our minds lifted up to overrule our bodies,
and not use our liberty, as if we had no rule to walk by.

Having spoken of the ground of this commandment, we come now to the fountain
from whence this sin arises, and then we shall speak of the means or occasions
that draw us to it.

1. For the first, the Apostle reckons up the fruits of the flesh, Gal. 5. 19.
Adultery, Gal. 5. 19.
fornication, uncle annesse, (...), etc. which our Savior says proceed Mark
7. 21.
from the heart, where they be considered, either as they are ipsum venenum,
the very poison of our nature, which the Apostle calls Concupiscentia carnis,
the lust of the 1 John 2. 16.
flesh; or (...) suppuratio, an inward festering of this desire, an inward
boiling of the Ezekiel. 24. 6.
pot with the scum in it, as the Prophet calls it.

2. The means that draw us to this sin. 1. The first is subactum solum, when we
make our selves meet and apt ground to receive this vice. The Physicians call
it (...), when a man is disposed by evil humors tending to diseases: as those
that are Plethorique have their bodies still fed with some bad humor. Now this
humor of wicked lust is fed by two means.

1 Pergulam, By intemperance, surcharging the stomach, which is called crapula,
when it is with meat, and vinolentia, when it is with drink. 2. Per desidiam,
or otium, By idleness, which is either in excess of sleeping, or else in
(...), a defect of labor and exercise. 2. Secondly, after the subactum solum,
there is another thing which is called Irrigatio (...), the watering of the
seed in the ground so fitted. It is as when a man is sick, and will not
withstanding give himself to those things which are (...) evil for his disease:
as when he that has an ague will drink wine, or he that is troubled with the
(...), the Ptisick will not for (...) sharp things, or he that has the Colic
will eat honey. Such a thing is in our Concupiscence. Solomon calls it
illecebram concupiscentia, Prove. 7. 23
the inticement to lust, and it brings forth the sin called Lascivia,
wantonness, or immodestia, immodesty. And this is either in the body, or from
without.
1. In the body, it is either (...), platting of the hair, and fucus coloring
of the face: or in the apparel, (...), or in the gesture, either some common
gate used generally, or a certain kind of particular gate, or gesture, which
by a peculiar name is called Dancing.

2. From without, our lust is watered, either by corrupt company, or by reading
lascivious books, or by beholding lascivious pictures, as (...) in Terence, or
such plays and spectacles as contain matter of unchaste love, and are apt to
breed this sin in us, or by giving ear to wanton tales, or histories, or songs,
that nourish the humor of lust. And thus for the means.

3. For the signs we will use no other then them we had before. The jaundise
of it is in the eyes too, and it has its foam in sermon (...), in filthy
language. And not only that, but in frequenting such places, using such
actions, and at such times, as may justly be suspected.

Now for the outward act it self, we have first, the dispositions to this sin,
such as in Physic, are called (...), the grudgings before an Ague, such as
were in the Act of adultery. Levit. 13. 4.
other Commandment, quarrelling and battery before murder. Such are these
here, like to the signs of the leprosy before it break forth. Of this kind
are, 1. Incasta prove. 7. 13.
oscula, unchaste kisses. 2. Wanton embracing the bosom of a stranger. 3. Going
about 5. 20.
or endeavoring to procure the act, whether it be by waiting at the door for
an (...).
opportunity, or by (...), or enchantments, or any other means.

The act it self one may be guilty of two ways, as S. Augustine says, 1.
Either (...), by ones own motion and inclination: or 2. (...), by the
persuasion of another, and they both come to one and the same.

Again it is practiced, either with a man's own self, corpus (...) secum, which
is called (...), or (...), (...) or (...); or with another: and if with
another, it is that which is called (...), the abomination not to be named,
with beast or mankind. And with mankind, it is either willingly, or
unwillingly. The party patient not consenting, it is called (...), a rape,
which may be with either sex, for there may be a rape in both: or else
agreeing; and this either with male or female: with male, such an one is called
(...), (...) that defiles himself with mankind. 1 Cor. 6. 9. 1 Timothy 1. 10. and
this sin is commonly called Sodomy, or the sin of Sodom. With female, either
with one or more: with more, if there be a pretense of Marriage, it is
Polygamie; if without any pretense thereof, it is (...), whoredom. If with
one, it is either in wedlock, and then it called (...), excess of lust. For
there is a fault even in Matrimony, as S. Ambrose says, (...) amator (...)
proprie est adulter, a man may commit adultery with his own wife; or it is out
of Matrimony, either with a party allied, which is incest; or with a stranger,
not allied; and then we consider her, either as (...), married to another, or
as (...), free; if married, or (...), betrothed (for all is one) then it is
Adultery. And this is

1. When both are married, which is worst of all. 2. When the woman only is
married, and the man single. 3. When the man only is married, and the woman
single. The second is a greater evil then the third, because in it there is,
corruption prolis, an adulterating of the (...) begotten.
If one be free and unmarried, either he retains one peculiar to himself, and
then she is not a common (...), but a (...); or else there is not this
continual keeping; and then if she be not common, it is, stuprum, (...),
whether she be a virgin or a widow, especially if she be a virgin; if she be
common, it is fornication properly, though that name be given to all.

Besides these, the act is either once committed or often iterated; and then
for distinction sake, we may call it luxuriam, lechery in the habit; and the
party a (...), when he sets himself after it: or that (which is beyond this) as
there was Genesis 18.
(...), so there (...) (...), the cry of adultery, when they dare impudently
defend it. Last of all, there is (...), and that is either private, of a
particular person for his daughter or (...), or any of his kindred, which is
called Prostitution: or else public, of a (...), in permitting and tolerating
stews, as at Rome, and other places. These are the (...) branches of the sin
prohibited in this Commandment.

Before we proceed in the handling of these (...), let us take a view of some
reasons against this sin of (...), why it ought to be odious to man, as it is
to God.

1. It is of all sins the most brutish, and makes a man come nearest to the
condition of beasts, making him to lose the nobility and excellency of his
nature. And therefore it is that the Prophet compares Adulterers to (...)
horses, (...) Jer. 5. 8.
(...); and to exen going to the slaughter. God himself says, (...) shall not
bring prove. 7. 22.
Deuteronomy. 23. 18.
the hire of a (...), or the price of a dog into the house of the Lord. The
learned observe upon this place that a whore is compared to a bitch, that has
many (...) following after her.

2. The second has a dependence upon the first, yet it has a peculiar
consideration. Hof. 4 11.
There is no sin whereby the light of man's reason is so much extinguished,
(...). 4. 18. 9.
nor put so much besides the pre-eminence it has over the affections or the
(...). The Prophet says, that it does auferre (...), take away the heart; for
(...), it swallows up the reason and understanding: and by this (as the Apostle
speaks of the heathen, that committed all (...) with greedines.) their
understandings were darkened, and their hearts blinded. It is one of the
Epithets they give to (...), (...), because it steals away the understanding.
We have experience of it in Solomon; we see what fottishnes he grew into after
this sin had taken hold of him, even to fall down to every block and stock.
(...) by this fell into murder, and to cover one sin with another. And it is
just it should be so, for the light of our Actions coming (...) God, and our
annoynting coming (...), as (...) faith, from Gods annoynting, he will not
commit this ointment to such a stinking box. They are like swine that trample
this Math. 7. 6.
pearl of understanding under feet.

3. The third is (...). Of all sins this is most inexcusable; because other
sins may have some color or excuse, but this has none, because God having
ordained a remedy for this, which is marriage, he that will not use that remedy
is 1 Cor. 7. 2.
without excuse.

4. The fourth is, that whereas God has been pleased, to make marriage a holy
institution, and a holy resemblance of the union betwixt Christ and his Church,
it is a manifest contempt of the ordinance of God; and not only that, Ephesians. 5.
23.
but whereas God has added this (...) to marriage; that thereby mankind
should be increased; on the contrary by this means they bring the curse of
barrennes threatened against whoredom: they shall commit whoredom (says the
Prophet) but not increase. So that they go about (as much as in them lies) to
Hos. 4. 10.
destroy the race of mankind: and therefore (...) calls them (...) in genus
(...), sacrilegious breakers of wedlock, and trespassers against mankind; for
not only the world (...) the worse for these courses which would soon bring it
(...) an end; but also it takes away the resemblance between Christ and his
Church in holy marriage.

5. It is against a man's own body. For as Saint Paul argues, every sin which
a man (...), (...) without the body; but he that committs fornication, (...)
against his own body; and that both by defiling it, so that as Saint (...)
says, the garments are spotted by the flesh, as also by weakening and decaying
it: for as the Physicians say, the (...) of the (...) humor, the generative
(...) is a Jud. 21. 23.
special cause of preserving the life of a man: and there is nothing brings
greater debility to the (...), whereby the (...), the radical moisture, is
consumed, and the life shortened, then this sin: besides that, it brings
rottennes to the bones, and breeds many (...) diseases, as daily experience
shows, like that water of jelousy under the law, or cursed water, Numb.. 5. 27
which if (...) woman had defiled her husbands bed, caused her belly to swell,
and her thigh to rot.

6. And it is not only against a man's own body, but against others also: for
it has this peculiar to it, that whereas in other sins a man may (...)
solus, perish alone, in this he must have one to perish with him for company.
There is duplex (...), a double murder committed by this one finne.

7. It is injurious to Christ two ways. 1. He has bought us, and paid a price
1 Cor. 6. 15. 16
for us. Now if we shall alienate that which is not our own, we do as if we
should (...).
pull down another man's house, nay, (...) Regis (as (...)) the Kings Palace, to
which we have no right. 2. And not only so, but being Christians, and Christ
our head, and we the members, if we unite our selves to a harlot, do we not
(...) in (...) est, as much as we can, bring Christ to be the head of a (...)?

8. Lastly, if all these will not move us, then let us consider the punishment
of it. Shall I not visit (says God by the prophet) for these things? yes
surely he will (...) Jer. 9. 5.
and punish, and that many (...).

1. It is a punishment it self, for as Solomon says, those whom God hates
shall fall prove. 22. 14.
into this sin; such as he has ordained for punishment, shall be punished
with this sin. 2. It is maxim probrosum peccatum, a sin that makes a man
most infamous, it brings 6. 34.
a reproach never to be wiped off. 3. It brings a man to beggary; for by a
whorish woman a man is brought to a morsel of bread: yea the adulteress will
hunt for the precious life, and Job says, 6. 24.
it is a fire, that will consume to destruction, and will root out all a man's
increase. Job. 31. 12.
4. Beyond all these, whereas every punishment should exceed, that whereof it
is a punishment, the Apostle tells us, that those unclean lusts, which the
heathens where given up to, were punishments for their Idolatry; (...) that
this sin seems Romans 1. 24.
to exceed in some case, that of Idolatry. And therefore the same Apostle
says, that if a woman be married to an Idolater or unbeleever, and will dwell
with him, 1 Cor. 7. 12. 13
she may; but he says not so for an adulterer: Idolatry does not so nearly
dissolve 15.
the bond of marriage, as adultery. And, again the children of an Idolater or
unbeleever (if the one party be a believer) are holy, and are received into the
covenant, as members of the Church, but the seed of Adulterers is profane; a
bastard must not enter into the congregation, not to the Deuteronomy. 23. 2.
tenth generation.
By these reasons well weighed, we may in part conceive, what account God makes
of this sin. We come now to the particular branches referring to this sin
already mentioned.

CHAP. III.
Of the degrees of this sin. 1. The first motions, or cogitationes
ascendentes. 2. Suppuratio, the festering of it inwardly. 3. subactum solum,
the fitting of the soil, which is. 1. By excess. 2. By Idleness. Exc esse is.
1. by gluttony. the effects of it. Opposite to which is the virtue of
temperance, which consists in modo, in measure, which respects. 1. The
necessity, of life. 2. Of our calling. 3. Of pleasure and delight, wherein are.
5. Rules. 1. For the substance of our meat. 2. For the quantity. 3. For the
quality. 4. Not to eat too greedily. 5. Not too often. 2. Of excess in
drinking, in what cases wine is allowed.

ANd first for the inward cause, the malignant vapors arising in the heart
which we called the poison of our nature, that inbred concupiscence, and those
first motions, and the (...) ascendentes, we shall forbear to speak of them,
till we come to the tenth commandment: and here we will speak in the 1 Cor. 7.
9.
second place of that which we call suppuratio, or the festering of it, which
the Apostle Hos. 7. 4.
calls (...), to burn; and the Prophet illustrateth by a similitude; As an
oven prove. 23. 33.
heated by a Baker, so is an Adulterer: though we see no sparks without, yet
there is a great heat within. Solomon says of him, cor ejus loquitur perversa,
his heart utters perverse things, though outwardly he says nothing. Saint
Augustine says, Ego domine (...), cum cogitationes meaenon (...), Lord, I
oftentimes hold my peace, when my thoughts within me are not silent. And so
when the oven waxes hotter and hotter, then comes consensus consent: and then
he says, O vtinam a desire follows, and (...) qui facturus est jam secit, he
that goes about a wicked action, has already acted it in his heart. Therefore
we are to strive against this Cardiacal passion.

In the next place come we to the solum subactum, the soil fitted for this
sin. And this (as we showed before) is done by gluttony and idleness. Gluttony
we said was in meat or drink. In meat, it was (...) too much feeding; gula
vestibulum luxuriae, the throat is the porch whereby lechery enters. And that
by reason that the faculties (...) the body are sod sposed, that (...) is (...)
(...) the nutritive faculty is the shop of the generative; and that being well
looked to, there is hope, that the other may be better dealt withal. The Apostle
tells us, that one of the ftruits of the flesh, is (...), uncleannes, to which
he adds (...) banketting or revelling, as a cause of it. Fulness of bread was
one of (...) sin of Sodom. Upon which place Ezekiel. 16. 49.
Jerome says, venture been pastus cito disponitur ad libidinem, a belly well
fed is soon disposed to lust. And again, nunquam ego edacem (...) castum
putabam, I never accounted a great eater chaste; pro qualitate ciborum est ordo
memborum; according to the quality of the meat is the disposition of the
members, a well fed belly will quickly wax wanton.

This excess is injurious to God in destroying his creatures, whereas Christ
appointed John 6. 12.
the fragments to be gathered up, that nothing might be wasted. It was Luc. 15.
12.
the Prodigals fault, fruges consumere male, to wast Gods creatures in vain.
(...), Solomon says, it will bring a man to poverty. Therefore it is the
counsel of the son (...) 18. 10.
of (...), become not a beggar, by banqueting upon borrowing. The heathen man
could say, (...) patrimoniorum exitium culina, to spend a man's patrimony in the
kitchen, is the basest thing that can be. This is it that makes graves of lust,
when by surfeiting men hasten death, as those Israelites that longed for
quails, and were smitten while the flesh was between their teeth; whereupon,
the Numb. 11. 34.
place where they were buried, was called Kibroth-Hattaavah, that is, graves of
lust.

And indeed it is gentile vitium, our national sin; there are too many graves
of lust in this kingdom. When we are sick, we call for sanitatem health, and
having it, we become soon afterward by (...) to be (...), betrayers of our
health by surfeiting.

Besides the ill effects it works in the body, it does much hurt to the soul
too; for it makes all sermons, and other exercises of Godliness unfruitful,
choking the good seed like the thorns. Nolte gravari, says our Savior to his
disciples, Luc. 8. 14.
because the heart thereby becomes so heavy, and the brain is so unapt, 21.
34.
by reason of the fumes that ascend from the stomach, that a man is fit for
nothing but sleep: Saint Gregory says, that perhaps he may be fit adineptam
laetitiam, sed ad (...) praeterea, for scurrilous and unsavory mirth, and
nothing else. And in another place, cum venture se in ingluvie extendit, membra
in luxuriam erigit, lib. 7. Mor.
when the belly is oppressed with gormandizing, the members are prone to
lewdnes.

Besides this, there is first, hebetudo mentu dulnes of the mind; and then
follows (...). 6. 6.
durities cordis, hardness of the heart; when men drink wine in bowls, they are
not grieved at the afflictions of Joseph, there is no sympathy between them and
those that want.

Besides, as Moses said it was with Jeshurun, (...) recalcitravit, being made
fat he began to kick; so it will be with the body, which will be like Solomon's
servant Deuteronomy. 32. 15.
that's brought up wantonly, bring up a servant wantonly, he will prove
stubborn and proud, feed him deliciously, and he will be check mate with you,
(...) prove. 29. 21. (...).
a (...) not broken, and a child left to himself (...) become stubborn and
rebellious; so does the flesh. These desideria carnis, desires of the flesh
militant Eccles. 30. 1
adversus animam, fight against the soul; and what folly is it to strengthen
our enemy

To avoid these inordinate lusts, we are to follow Saint Paul's example,
castigare corpus, to keep our body under: and one way to chasten it is
castigatio per 1 Cor. 9. 27.
damnum, by hindering it from some thing it desires; as (...) jumentorum, to
keep under laboring beasts, as when we would take down a pampered horse, the
way is, to abate him of his provender. This in effect is temperance, which the
Philosopher calls (...), promum virtutum, the butler of all virtues. Nature
cries out (...), it is the voice of the flesh (...) let me not be hungry, let
me not be thirsty, let me not be cold. (...) when he was an hungry, desired
Jacobs pottage lentis edulium, pottage of lentiles, it seemed savory to him:
and the Philosopher says, (...) non (...) aurea pocula, thirst cares not for
drinking in gold: but under the color of supplying nature, it commonly falls
out that nulli defiderio resistimus, we give way to every thing we desire, and
therefore we grow wanton, when we will not have it in this dish, or not have it
unless thus dressed, and then venture est molestus cliens, the belly is a
troublesome client; whereas of this temper ought we to be, that having food and
raiment, we should be (...) Tim. 6. 8.
therewith content: and this is the right temperance.

We know that we are debtors to the flesh, but not to live after the flesh, and
that Romans 8. 12.
God made the belly for meats, but yet we must not say with them, let us eat
and 1 Cor. 6. 13.
drink, for to morrow we shall die: nor live in pleasure, and nourish our
hearts, 15. 32.
as in a day of slaughter, as Saint James speaks: nor make such provision for
(...). 5. 5.
the flesh, as to fulfill the lusts thereof. This is far from the rule of
Temperance. Romans 13. 10.


Now temperance consists in modo, in measure, and that modus is in medio,
measure is in the mean or middle, which is known by per regulam, by rule. And
the rule of temperance is three fold.

1. The first is (...) vitae, the necessity of our life, and our life
necessarily requires but convenient food and raiment: (...), says the Apostle,
having food and raiment, let us be therewith content. 1 Timothy 6. 8.
2. The second is necessitas officii, the necessity of our calling. The Apostle
tells 1 Cor. 9. 25.
us, that he which is (...), that striveth for the mastery, must be temperate
and abstemious, and keep a strict diet. So he that is a student, and lives a
contemplative life, may detract in his diet; but a husbandman that labors
much, and sweats it out, may add, he must have a greater proportion. The
direction in this point must be according to men's several callings and
employments. 3. The last is voluptas, quae neutrum horum impedit, so much
pleasure, as will hinder neither of these. Moderate pleasure may be used in
eating and drinking, so that it neither endanger our health, nor make us unfit
for the duties of our callings, but if it prove hurtful, or prejudicial to
either of these, if this voluptas, this (...) in meats and drinks, be either
against life, or our duty, it is peccatum, a sin. According to these rules, we
must (...), bridle our desires, we must make temperance our (...), our
coachman, and give her the bridle, that she may as well constringere as
relaxare, bridle as let loose, as occasion shall be offered. Saint Augustine
says, Temperantia froenos gutturis (...) and relaxat, temperance both
restrains and gives liberty to the appetite: and the Heathen man says,
(...) Venus waits on plenty and fullness. And that we may the better know how
Eurip.
to restrain or enlarge our selves in the use of meats, we may further
consider, that this last rule divides it self in five branches. 1. For the
substance; we must not fare every day (...), splendide, delicately, Luc. 16. 19.
with the (...) Glutton, the Israelites were weary of manna, and must needs
have Numb. 11. 6.
quails; but for Daniel and his companions, who had, moratos ventres, no
dainty Dan. 1. 12.
palats, but temperate appetites, (...) served their turns well enough, and
yet they looked never the worse. Elies sons must have roast meat, they cannot
away 1 Samuel 2. 15.
with sodden, but Elias provision was no more then a cake, and a cruse 1 King.
19. 6.
of water; and Elisha provided nothing, but a pot of potrage, for the children
of 2 Kin. 4. 38.
the Prophets. 2. For the quantity. They that have taken measure of our throat,
and other parts of our bodies, say, that the throat is less in man, then in
any other creature of answerable proportion, to teach us temperance, and to
beware of superfluity, either.
1. By surcharging our nature or disabling our selves for the duties of our
calling, like those (...) whom the Prophet speaks, that make themselves sick
with (...); Hos. 7. 5.
therefore our Savior warnes his disciples, to take heed of Crapula,
surfeiting, ne Luc. 21. 39.
gravet corda, lest it overcharge your hearts with surfeiting. Saint Augustine
confesses Ezekiel. 16.
of himself, that being at a table furnished with many dishes, he was easily
over taken. 2. Or by exceeding our estate: which was Nabals fault, who was too
1 Samuel 25. 36.
high in his feast, by a note; he made a feast like a prince, there was
superfluity. 3. For the qual ty: stand not upon curiosity, or exquisiteness;
it was in part Marthas fault, but Christ gave her a gentle reprehension for it.
And the Apostle Luc. 10. 41.
charge us not to make (...), provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts
thereof; Romans 13. 14.
as those that study sapores non naturales, for exquisite sawces to provoke the
appetite; for this is the way to bring him to his tears, even to weeping,
because we make our belly our God, and to move God to destroy both it, and
them: for as Saint Gregory says, haec arca (...), and quae in eo reponuntur,
the belly will phil. 3. 19.
be consumed, and whatsoever we put into it, and therefore it is folly to make
that our God. This in regard of the meat. Now there are 2 rules more in regard
of our selves.

1. That we eat not too greedily. For this is os porci habere, to have a
hoggish or swinish appetite. And this made the Devil (as S. Jerome observes) to
make choice of the heard of swine to enter into, because of their greediness.
They were like Matthew. 8. 32.
Cormorants given to devouring. S. Jerome says, Vbi satietas est, ibi Daemones
agunt choreas, where this greediness and fullness is, there the Devils dance.
S. Augustine says, that it was Esau's fault: Ardenter comedit, quia ardenter
desideravit; he must needs eat greedily, that longed after it so earnestly,
that he sold his birthright for it. Jude 12.
S. Jude calls this, vesci sine timore, to feed without fear. Therefore the son
of Syrach Ecclus 31. 12.
gives good counsel in this point. If thou sit at a bountiful table, be not
greedy upon it. 2. That we eat not too often. And in this rule we must have
recourse to the former, of (...) and (...), of our life and calling: not so
often as to hinder our health, not so often as to hinder our calling. Not too
early. Woe to thee, O land (says the Ecclus 10. 16.
Preacher) when thy Princes eat in the morning. Not too late. Woe to them (says
the Esaias 5. 11.
Prophet, joining them together) that rise up early, that they may follow
strong drink, that continve till night, till the wine inflame them. This
assiduitas, continuance in eating, he compares to greediness of dogs, which
never can have enough; when men say, to 56. 11, 12
(...) shall be as this day, and much more abundant. Their minds are
continually occupied in thoughts of eating. All those (...), comessations,
mentioned by the Apostle, are forbidden; as also those (...), drinkings, and
(...), vinolentia, mentioned Romans 13. 13.
by S. Peter: these, though some of them are less grievous then the other,
because 1 Pet. 4. 3.
in some there is, avorsatio a fine, a direct aversion from the end; others do
but in some sort, aberrare a fine, come some what wide of the end, yet all are
forbidden. Ephesians. 5. 18.
The Apostle forbids excess of wine, as well as of lusts, vinolentia, drinking
too much, as well as crapula, gluttony; having regard no doubt to those
secundae mensae, second courses, banquets, comessations and drinkings, such as
are now in use.
S. Augustine in his confessions, upon our Saviors caveat against surfeiting
and drunkenness has this passage; Domine, ebrietas long est a me, fac
quaeso, ne unquam appropinquet mihi; crapula autem nonnunquam obrepit servo
tuo, fac quaeso, ut long absit a me: and quis est qui non rapiatur
aliquantulum extra met as necessitatis? quisquis est magnus, magnificet nomen
tuum, ego autem non sum, quia homo peccator sum. Sed tamen ego in his positus
tentationibus, certo quotidie cum cupiditatibus: Lord I am far from
drunkenness, grant I pray thee that it may never come near me: but gluttony
has often stole upon thy servant, grant I beseech thee, that it may be far
from me: and who is there that is not sometime carried beyond the bounds of
necessity? whosoever is perfect shall magnify thy name, such a one I am not,
because a sinful man; yet being in the midst of these (...), I strive daily
with my concupiscence. And this I do further, 1. for unnecessary refections, I
have clean cut them off. 2. I follow Solomon's counsel. Be not amonst
wine-bibbers, amongst riotous eaters of flesh. prove. 32. 30.
3. Mihi sufficit apparatus meus, mine own provision contents me. 4. Whenever
I go beyond the bounds of necessity, I do not say, Cras erit ut hodie, and
amplius; to morrow shall be as to day, and much more abundant. This says he I
do; and then he comes to this exhortation, fratres (...), quam lenissime sed
tamen instantissime vos rogo, brethren, though but gently, yet most instantly I
beseech you, do you the like.

2. As gluttony or excess of meat is here forbidden, of which we have spoken;
so also drunkenness, or excess of drink. The Apostle dehorting from
drunkenness says, Ephesians. 5. 18.
there is in it (...), luxury or lust, be not drunken with wine, wherein is
(...), because it inclines to unclean lusts. And the same says Solomon, Look
not upon the Wine, when it is red, and shows his color in the cup, or goes
down pleasantly, and why? Thine prove. 23. 33.
eyes shall look upon strange women. And therefore S. Peter does not only
forbid 1 pet. 4. 3.
drunkenness, (...), drunkenness, which the Fathers call voluntarium
Daemonem, a voluntary Devil, when a man willingly bereaves himself of reason;
but also (...), drinkings or compotations, whether they be such as inflame us,
and though they take not away our reason, yet kindle our blood and spirits; or
whether by using them, we get such a custom and habit, that we are strong to
do it, and being free from drunkenness, can behold the infirmity of others
with Esaias 5. 11. 22
pleasure; for there is a woe pronounced against this strength. And in any of
these cases, the excess of drinking is forbidden; not only because it
deceives a man, and the drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty; but
also because it disposes a man to Prove. 20. 1.
this sin: as we see in Lot, who by too much wine committed incest, even
without 23. 20.
knowledge, and unwittingly: but most commonly a man does it knowingly, and
Genesis 19. 33.
wittingly, and so makes him self a fit mold for the Devils impression. The
Wise Pro. 23. 34, 35.
man says, that they are like to a man sleeping in the midst of the sea, when
they are awaked, they return to it again. For it is such a vice, that a man
having gotten a habit of it, can hardly leave it off.

Yet are we not altogether prohibited the drinking of wine, but in some cases
it is allowed, as these, and the like.

1. For bodily infirmities, according to the Apostles counsel to Timothy. In
this 1 Timothy 5. 23.
case the use of wine is lawful. Timothy was so far from excess, that having
an infirmity upon him, he would not adventure upon wine without Paul's
direction. 2. In heaviness of mind, whether natural or accidental. Give wine
to those that Prove. 31. 6.
are of heavy heart. 3. Upon some public benefit of the Church or
Commonwealth, there may be a public gratulation, and therein a more free use
of the Creatures, and whatsoever does not hinder or oppose Temperance, may be
lawfully used to solemnize a day of public joy. When the people were ready to
mourn, Nehemiah forbids it, and instead Nehe. 8. 10.
of mourning, bids them eat the fat, and drink the sweet, and testify their
joy by the lawsul use of the Creatures, for the benefit which God had
vouchsafed to his Church. This is the third.
But ont of these or the like cases it must not be used: as they did, of whom
the Prophet speaks. When God called to mourning and weeping, they fell to joy
and gladness, Esaias 22. 12.
to slaying of Oxen, and killing of sheep, to eating flesh, and drinking wine.
And there be still some men that can take hold of the Apostles counsel to drink
wine, (...), but of that part of it ((...), a little,) they take no notice at
all.

The sum of all is, there must not be Redundantia, excess. It was accounted an
Amos 6. 6.
especial fault of the Princes of Israel, They drank wine in bowls, etc.

The five rules above mentioned you may apply to prevent this sin, and to
govern your self in the use of wine or strong drink.

Both these vices are salved by one virtue, called (...), temperance, a virtue
here commanded. S. Paul makes it a special fruit of the spirit, and exhorts
Titus to preach it, and exhort young men especially to it, and such as bend
their minds to knowledge, and study of learning: and therefore S. Peter
exhorts, as to add to virtue knowledge, so to join to knowledge temperance;
for scientia est cum abstinentia, temperance is the way to knowledge.

CHAP. IIII.
Of idleness: the second thing which fits the soil for this sin. Diverse
reasons against it. It consists in two things: 1. too much sleep, 2. want of
exercise when we are (...). Against sleepiness. Rules, for 1. the quantity: 2.
the manner. Of idleness in our callings. The remedy against sleep and
idleness.

THe second thing which makes solum subactum, fits the soil for this sin of
lust, fullness of bread, so abundance of idleness, was one of the Ezekiel. 16. 49.
causes of Sodoms sin. One answered by the light of nature, to him that asked
what Luxury was; that it was nothing else but (...), the passion of an idle
mind. And this is a sin highly displeasing to God in many respects.

1. Evertit consilium Dei, and finem hominis: it does what may be to overthrow
Gods purpose, and the end whereto man was created. For God in the very
beginning created man to labor. He put man into the garden of Eden to dress
it: not only ut coleret Genesis 2. 15.
eum to serve him; but ut coleret terram, to till the earth, neither without
the other. Afterward when he had transgressed Gods command, this labor was
enjoined him as a perpetual penance for his offense. In sorrow shall thou eat
all the days of thy life: 3. 17, 19
and in the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread. Nor does the Gospel show it
self more favorable in dispensing with this law. Why stand ye idle? says our
Savior. Matthew. 20. 6.
And it was the Apostles complaint, that he heard, that there were some that 2
These. 3. 11.
wrought not at all. Nor shall it ever be abrogated. Man, says David, goes
forth to psalm. 104. 23.
his work, and to his labor till the evening. Therefore is it that Solomon
sends the idle prove. 6. 6.
person to the Ant, and that the son of Syrach compares a slothful man to the
filth of a Eccl. 22. 2.
dunghill. In this respect therefore is this sin to be condemned. Ephesians. 5. 16.


2. In regard of the loss of time, a thing (...) precious, that the Apostle
exhorts us Gal. 6. 10.
by all means to redeem it, if we have misspent it. And the Psalmist sets it
down as a Psalm (...). 13.
curse upon the people, that God consumed their days in vanity. 2 These. 3. 10.


3. In regard of the breach of the next Commandment which forbids stealing. For
he that consumes his days in idleness, makes use of the creatures, to which
he has no right. The Apostle says, He that does not work, should not eat. The
Heathen call Ambrese
such men (...), an unnecessary burden. The Scriptures compare them to Locusts
that devour all where they come; and the Fathers term them unprofitable and
superfluous Creatures. The Apostle (alluding to this) says, Let him that
stole, steal no Ephesians. 4. 18.
more, but rather let him labor.

4. In regard of the breach of the sixth Commandment forbidding (...). For
idleness is the mother of many diseases. For as there are none of Gods
creatures but putrify without motion, as the air and water, stagnantes (...)
stantes aque, nec dulces nec salubres, ((...) Seneca) standing waters, are
neither sweet nor wholesome; so ease in the body brings forth (...), the gout,
and other diseases. Computrescit in Joel 1. 17.
stercore (says the Prophet,) the seed rots under the clod. And it were to be
wished, that not only the loss of time, wasting the creatures, and the hurt of
the body were all the prejudice that came by idleness, so that the soul might
be kept untainted by it; but that also is subject to detriment by it: for from
nihil agere, doing nothing, Ecclus. 33. (...)
comes male agere, doing ill. Idleness teaches much evil, says the son of
Syrach, and by this comes the disease which S. Basil calls podagram animi, the
gowt of the soul.

Now idleness consists in two things. Either 1. in too much sleep: or 2. in
not being exercised (when we are awake) in the works of our calling.

1. For the first, of too much sleeping. After the Apostle had told the Romans
it was high time to awake out of sleep, he gives them a caveat, to walk
honestly, as in the day; not in gluttony vnd drunkenness, nor in chambering
and wantonness: after (...), Romans 13. 11,
(...), and (...), drunkenness, then he comes to (...), which we translate
(...), 13.
but it is properly lying long in bed; and there is joined with it (...),
wantonness, the companion of (...), and beginning of concupiscence. The
Prophet (...) Amos 6. 4.
those of his time, with stretching themselves upon their beds, and not without
cause, for another Prophet tells us, that by it men begin (...) nequam, to
devise iniquity, Micah 2. 1.
to have wicked thoughts. We see the experience of it in David, who after his
sleep, was disposed to take the air in his Turret, and by that means was made
fit 2 Samuel 11. 2.
for the impression of this vice, upon the sight of a tempting object: for
which cause, Solomon gives good counsel (...) this purpose, Love not sleep,
lest thou come to poverty, open thine eyes, and thou (...) be satisfied with
bread; for having spoken verse 11. of young men, that by their actions they may
be known, whether their work be pure, and whether it be right, and in the 12.
verse, that they may be known by this, whether they apply their ears and eyes
to knowledge, as God created them, he (...) in the 13. verse, that otherwise if
they love sleep, these effects of it shall come upon them.

For remedy hereof two things are to be observed in sleep. 1. The Quantity. 2.
The manner.

1. For the quantity. Our sleep must not be too long. Vsque quo dormis? How
long will thou sleep, O sluggard? ultra horam, beyond the hour: there is an
hour when to Romans 13. 11.
arise; Hora est jam, says the Apostle, the hour is at hand, or as we read it,
it is now high time to awake out of sleep: but the sluggard when the hour
comes, when he should arise, lies still in his bed, and is as a door which
turns always upon the hinges, Prove. 26. 14.
and yet remains in the (...) place. 2. For the manner of our sleep. It must
not be like that of Jonah who was in a Jonah 1. 5.
dead sleep in a time of danger: It must not be (as S. Jerome calls it)
sepultura suffocati, as the burial of one without breath, but requies lassi,
the rest of one that is weary. Esaias 29. 10.
The Prophet threatens it as a great plague from God, to be given up to the
spirit of slumber, which is true of all (...), drowsinesse of the body, as well
as the soul. And as Jonah was in the midst of the tempest when he slept
soundly, so these are under Gods visitation, who are possessed with this spirit
of slumber.
2. The second point of idleness is, when we are not exercised in the duties
of our calling, but give our selves to ease. Desidiae est somnium vigilantis,
sloth is the Heb. 12. 12.
dream of him that is awake: and by want of labor and exercise, and giving our
selves to ease, we come to the hanging down of the hands, and the feeble knees,
of which the Apostle speaks, and so become fit for no good thing. For as all
other creatures of God by standing still grow corrupt, as we see in standing
water, which putrifies, and being putrified, ingenders toads and such venomous
creatures; so in man, ease brings discases both in body and soul it produces in
the body podagram, the gout, and it brings forth the like indisposition in the
soul, which made S. Basil call it podagram animi, the gout of the soul. And
therefore S. Ambrose calls idle persons, creaturas Dei superfluas, superfluous
creatures of God, which do no way profit the body politic, where they live,
but are as the Heathen man says of the (...), such qui animam pro sale Cicero
habent, who have their souls instead of salt, to keep their bodies sweet.
S. Paul measures not idleness only by doing nothing, but also by not doing
2 These. 3. 11.
the duties of a man's place. As he that is placed in the University, and
studies not, though he hawk, hunt, or dance, or uses other exercises that are
laborious, yet because 1 Timothy 5. 12.
he does not that which he ought to do, he is to be accounted an idle fellow.
If men be, as he says, (...), not working at all, then they become busy
bodies: and if women be idle, then will they be pratlers, or tatlers, upon which
comes tale-carrying, lying, (...) and forging, whereby they disquiet others.
And not only so, but they are busy bodies, meddling out of their callings,
where they have nothing to do. These are to be restrained. And because hereby
grows a disposition from the body, for evil motions in the soul; therefore S.
Peter enjoins the virtue of abstinence, and commands us to abstain from such
fleshly lusts, as do militare contra animam, (...) 1 (...). 2. 15.
against the soul.

The remedy against sleep is that which the Apostle calls sobriety, properly
2. 7.
watchfulness; (...), be sober, be vigilant, says he in another place: for
sleep and drunkenness are (...), works of the night, and we are (...),
children 5. 8.
of light, and of the day; our desires therefore ought to be after the works of
the light and of the day, and we must walk accordingly.

2. The remedy against idleness the Apostle gives us: (...), to set our 1
These. 4. 11.
selves to do our own business, and the works of our calling. And blessed
shall he be whom the Lord when he comes shall find so doing. Luke 12. 43.


We said before, that in this sin there is suppuratio, the festering of it
within; and after that there is subactum solum, the soil fitted by feeding the
evil (...), by gluttony and idleness, of which we have now spoken.

CHAP. V.
The fourth (...). Irrigatio soli, the watering of the soil by incentives and
allurements to this sin, which are either. 1. In or about our selves, or 2. In
others. Of the first sort are, 1. Painting. 2. Strange wanton apparel. 3.
Lascivious gestures. Of the second sort are, 1, Lewd company, and obscene
books. 2. Obscene pictures, and wanton dancings. Of modesty the virtue opposite.

THe next thing is irrigatio soli, watering of the soil, of which we are to
beware. irrigare solum, water the ground, foment and dispose the soul to this
sin.

And these allurements or (...) we consider, as they are in our selves, or as
Incentives in or about our selves
in others. Those in or about our selves, are diverse.

1. As the using of (...), painting the face, which was the sin of Iezabel, she
painted 2 King. 9. 30.
her face, and tired her head. Of this one says, that it is not facies, but
larva; they have not a face, but a vizard. But the Prophet tells such, In vain
shall thou (...) prove. 9. 14, 15
thy self fair, for thy lovers shall despise thee, thou that rentest thy face
(or eyes) with painting, alluding to the custom of women then, of (...) their
eye brows with stibium or (...), as some learned think. Jer. 4. 30.


2. The strange (...) our selves in apparel, which is condemned even in women
who are rather to be tolerated herein then men, because it is mundus muliebris,
1 Timothy 2 9.
the adorning of women. Saint Gregory says, what a deformity is it in men 1
pet. 3. 3
when it is found fault with in women. The places before quoted condemn (...)
as used, in a wanton lascivious manner, and for unchaste ends.

1. The platting and wreathing of the hair. 2. The adding of gold and silver
to adorn them. 3. Rare and strange, or costly apparel: such as our Savior
implicitly Luc. 16. 19.
taxes in the rich glatton, who was clothed with purple and fine linen. This
affectation of such vanity and cost in apparel, with so much industry and care,
while the adorning of the inner man is neglected, is here forbidden. For of
this we may say, (...) in studio vestium (...) deesse; let no man conceive or
(...) himself that he can be free from sin, that takes too much care about
apparel. As for vestitus peregrinus, strange apparel, God by the Prophet
threatens Zeph. 1. 18.
to punish such as are clothed with strange apparel. Saint Paul's reason against
such care to adorn the body is, because it becomes not those that profess the
(...) of God. And Saint Peter has two reasons against it. 1. Because the chief
care should be about the hidden man of the heart: for as Cato once said, (...)
corporis 1 pet. 3. 4.
(...), (...) magna mentis incuria, where there is great care of the body,
there is usually greatest neglect of the mind: therefore not the outward, but
the inward man Sarah etc. Therefore follow their examples.
3. Another allurement is, the gesture; a proud allureing gate. God threatens
that he will devise evil against such as go haughtily. Esaias describes the
particulars, Mic. 2. 3.
and tells us the manner of their proud walking. 1. They are haughty, going on
(...). Esa. 3. 16.
2. They have erectum guttar, stretched out necks. 3. They have (...) antes
oculos, rolling and wanton eyes, looking wantonly. 4. minutos passus, a mincing
or tripping gate: they go as if they were (...), shackled. And the Prophet for
these thundereth against the daughters of Sion, but much more would he have
Ambros.
done against the sons of Sion; gestum natura dedit, sed gratia (...). There is
a generation, says Agur, whose eyes are haughty, some have proud prove. 30. 13.
gates naturally, but though nature has given it, yet grace can amend it.

Now we come to the watering of our lust by those provcations and incentives
The incentives without (...). psalm. 50. 18.
which are without us.

1. The kingly Prophet tells us of some which have consortium cum adulteris,
are partakers, or keep company with adulterers. The wiseman (speaking of a young
man that had entered into the company and communication with a harlot) says,
he goes after her, as an ox to the slaughter, or a fool to the stocks, or a
bird to the pitfall, and feels it not, till the dart strike through his prove.
7. (...).
liver.

And indeed lewd company is very dangerous for this sin, as we see by that
the Apostle tells us, modicum fermenti corrumpit totam massam, a little leaven
(...) the whole lump. Which though it may be applied to any vice, yet Saint
Paul 1 Cor. 5. 6.
there applies it particularly to this; showing that this vice has an
especial quality in it to infect and leaven others. The holy Ghost bids us
beware of evil company: and not only of those that are notoriously evil, but
of suspicious company, and prove. 7. 8. 9.
(...) times. The young man (in the Proverbs) went to a suspected house, and at
a suspected time, in the twilight when it was now dark: and these two disposed
to this vice. 1. Haunting suspicious places. 2. At suspicious times. We are not
only to refrain from evil, but from the show of evil; and we must provide for
1 Thessalonians. 5. 22.
things honest, not only coram Deo, before God, but also (...), before 2 Cor.
8. 21.
men, as the Apostle exhorts.

Under bad company, come bad books, that speak broadly of filthy and obscene
matters. The heathen man called his books comites, his companions. Though he
were solus alone, yet as long as he had his books to bear him company, he was
nunquamminus solus, quam cum solus, never less alone, then when he was alone.
1 Cor. 15. 33.
Evil books contain many evil words, and evil words corrupt good manners,
prove. 9. 17.
as the Apostle tells out of Menander, speaking of the sayings of the Epicures;
7. (...).
and evil words are like stolen waters which are sweet, and as bread eaten in
secret which is pleasant.

2. To ill company and bad books may be added such things, as by the eye and
the ear make the same impression in the soul: as namely, imagines obscaenae,
obscene and filthy pictures, such as that of Baal-Peor: which they carried
about for public view, to stir up lustful thoughts; (...) longed to look on
it, and as it is in the psalm, they joined themselves to Baal-Peor, and eat
the offerings of the dead. It was Hos. 9. 10.
the counsel of Balaam, to bring them to see the image and offer to it, and
then to draw Numb. 31. 16.
them to commit whoredom with the daughters of Moab: and therefore the Apostles
advise is, ne scortemur, let not us commit whoredom. We know what he says in
(...), the parlors were hung with Danae, and Jupiter coming to her; and you may
see his conclusion. The wiseman tells us of the harlots chamber, which was hung
with Tapistry, which was very like to be such as (...). And by analogy 1 Cor.
10. 8.
hereto, all Choreae (...), wanton dancings, as that of Herodias, Ludi
Theatrici, prove. 7. 16.
Math. 622.
stage plays, become allurements, by stirring up the mind by the eye or 2
Macch. 4. 14.
ear, and are therefore forbidden. The reasons, as the Councils allege them
are Council. Agath
very good. Can. 28. Carans Concile.


1. Because our eyes thereby behold much vanity. 2. Because a man cannot go
upon (...). 3.
hot coals, and his feet not be burnt. Or can he touch pitch and not be
defiled, or Can. 23. (...)
see wanton actions, and his affections not be moved; and. 3. There is loss
and expense psalm. 119. 37.
of precious time. prove. 6. 28.


So that by what means soever the concupiscence and spirit of fornication is
watered, Ecclus. 13. 1.
whether it be by lascivious words, songs, or sights, by the eyes or by the
cares moved to wanntonnes, it is said to be baculum lascivientium, the
supporter of lasciviousnes, and casts off the cords of discipline, and is the
beginning of all wickedness. 1 Timothy 2. 9.


Now the virtue of modesty is proper to restrain these, the object whereof is
honestum: (...) restrain them.
which as it has only an inward beauty, so is it only by an inward eye
discorned and for this the Saints love one another; as the outward beauty
allureth the adulterers eye. Therefore it is, that Saint Paul in diverse places
stands much upon this Ephesians. 5. 3.
point; as it becomes the Saints, (...), we must look to that which the (...)
like, and which is decent in their eyes.

There are two sorts of likers.

1. There is a sort of men, to whom if we do not conform our selves in the 1
pet. 4. 4.
same excess of riot, they think it strange: and they that are used to it,
think it becomes them well: but these shall one day give account to him that
judges both quick and dead. 2. There is another sort of likers mentioned by
the Psalmist, I will wait on thy name, for thy saints like it well. That is
decent and meet, which the Saints like of; and so we must judge, quid (...),
and quid offendat sanctos, what is liked or disliked by the Saints, and
therefore the Saints go all by this rule, quid deceat, Math. 18. 6.
what becomes them; and ne quid (...), that they do nothing to offend Christ's
little ones.
CHAP. VI.
The fith degree, the breaking out of this sin. 1. The eye. Secondly, in the
speech. Thirdl by the symptoms (...) the act. The virtue opposite is. (...).
Of the outward acts of uncleannes. 1. Self polution or nocturna pollutio,
whether always a sin. 2. Bestiality. 3. Sodomy. 4. Whoredom, scortatio. 5.
Polygamy. whether lawful. How this sin of uncleannes may be committed in
matrimony, some rules about marriage. How out of matrimony. 1. With one allied,
which is incest. 2. With a stranger too us, but married to another, which is
adultery. Many aggravations of this sin. 3. With such as are not married
(...). 1. By keeping a concubine. 2. By deflouring. 3. By (...) and wandering
lust. 4. By prostitution. The highest pitch of this sin, is to defend it.

THe son of Syrach speaks of some men, who may be know what they are, The!
breaking of this sin.
when one sees them. Their apparel, gesture, and gate, declare what is in them;
and the prophet speaks of an outward pride in Israel, that will testify to her
face; so for this sin where it lodges, it discovers it self by outward signs:
which are either in the eye, or in the tongue.

1. For the eye, our Savior says, he that looks upon a woman to lust after
her, Math. 5. 28.
has committed adulltery with her in his heart: and therefore by the glances
of (...). 7. 22.
the eye, the adultery of the heart appears; and hence Saint Peter speaks of
(...) 2 (...). (...). 14.
an adulterous eye, and of some that have eyes full of adultery, some
passively, Genesis 6. 2.
others actively,; and of this we have diverse examples. The sons of God 39. 7.
saw the daughters of men, and we see what followed. Potiphars wife cast her
eyes 12. 14.
34. 2.
upon Joseph and lusted. The Egytians upon (...). And Shechem the Prince of 2 Samuel 11. 2.
the country upon (...). Lastly, King David upon Bathsheba, upon which what
prove. 6. 25.
evil followed, the story may inform us. And therefore Solomon gives us this
caution. Ephesians. 4. 29.
Col. 3. 8.
Let her not take thee with her eyelids. prove. 12. 14.
2. For the speech; which is the froth or some of this sin, it is forbidden
Math 12. 36.
by the Apostle by the name of (...) sermo putridus, rotten or corrupt
communication, which must not once be named; because, a man shall eat the fruit
of his lips. And if every idle word shall be accounted for, much more shall we
account for all wanton and broad speeches of filthy matters. Nay we are not to
speak too plainly of lawful and conjugal duties, betwixt man and wife, we see
the holy Ghost makes choice of modest words in that kind, and (...) out
choice terms to express them: as Adam cognovit, Adam knew Eve his wife: and
it ceased Genesis 4. 1. 18.
to be with Sarah after the manner of women. And matrimonial duties are called
11.
by the Apostle due benevolence; to teach us, to use the like modest
expressions 1 Cor. 7. 3.
in these matters.
Now as it is sure, that impudicus (...) est impudici animi, a wanton eye is
the discoverer of an unchaste mind: and impudicum labium signum impudici
cordis, an unchaste tongue a sign of a wanton heart; so it is as sure, that to
speak broadly Heb. 12. 28.
concerning secret things is, inverecundia, want of shame, which is against
that 1 Timothy 2. 9.
Godly fear and shamefastness mentioned by the Apostle: for our conversation
should be (...) with reverence and fear, and (...) with shamfastnes and
sobriety; and as for (...) filthiness and filthy talking, they should be far
from us, as the Apostle urges: and lest any should object and say, Ephesians. 5. 4. 6.
that stolen waters are sweet, he prevents them, saying, Let no man seduce you
with vain words, for, for these things comes the wrath of God upon the children
of disobedience.

Before we come to the outward act, we are to consider the (...), as they The
Prosymptomata, or foregoing symptoms.
are called in Physic, the Antecedents, or as it were grudgings before an
Ague, such as go immediately before the act. And they are either in Conatu; the
endeavor, or attempt, as first, by Sorcery and Witchcraft to provoke lust,
when they are past the 2 Kings 9. 22.
flower of their years, as did (...): (...) calls them (...). 2. By laying Job
31. 9.
wait at the door of our Neighbor. 3. By alluring speeches, Numb. 31. 16. all
which are the more horrible, when they are accompanied with murder; For the
adulterous woman, as Solomon says, has cast down many wounded, and many
strong Prove. 7. 26.
ones have been slain by her. Or else Praeludia, Previous actions, that bring
on the outward act: As 1. Amplexus impudicus, Immodest embraces, embracing the
bosom Prove. 5. 20.
of a stranger, impurum osculum, an unchaste kiss. The Harlot (in the
Proverbs) had a strong or impudent face, she caught him (the young man) and
kissed him. 2. Touching with the hands those parts that ought to be kept
secret; the woman was to be put to death, that puts forth her hand, etc. though
it were to deliver her Husband from those that strove with him. 3. By making
them drunk, that they Deuteronomy. 25. (...).
may discover their nakedness. And above all these, there are some things, in
naming Abac. 2. 15.
whereof the Apostle is at a stand, and says, that there are some things
(which he Ephesians. 5. 12.
wrappeth in silence) of which it is a shame even to speak.

Against these is opposed the virtue called (...), shamefastness. The Apostle
(...). 4. 7.
says, God has not called us unto uncleanness, but ad sanctimoniam, to
purity and holiness; Phil. 4. 8.
and that every one ought to (...) his vessel (...) (...), in sanctification
James 3. 17.
and honor; and instead of giving our selves to those things, we ought to
think upon Deuteronomy. 22. 12.
Genesis 9. (...).
such things as are honest and pure: For as S. James tells us, The wisdom which
is from above, is pure in the first place; and therefore God took order under
the Law, that such unseemly parts might not be seen; which Cham seeing and not
turning away had a curse pronounced against him.

We come now to speak of the act it self. Within the act of incontinency are
The outward act. Self pollution.
comprehended.

1. That with ones self, which the Apostle calls (...), or self pollution or
defiling Col. 3. 5.
of ones own flesh; or filthiness of the flesh; opposite to (...), holiness,
he Gal. 5. 19.
2. Cor. 7. 1.
makes (...), this defiling of the flesh, 2 Cor. 7. 1. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 5. (...) 1 Thessalonians. 4. 5.
the lust of uncleanness, which includes the act; for the act of this sin is
nothing else 2 Pet. 2. 10.
but the bringing forth of those inward lusts. But more plainly S. Peter calls
it (...), the lust of uncleanness, or the desire of polluting: with which,
Jude Jude 8. 23.
speaking of wicked men, says, Sopiti inquinant carnem, these filthy Dreamers
defile the flesh, and not only their flesh, but their garments are polluted
also; and such hatred he would have against this sin, that we should not only
hate the sin, but even the garment spotted and defiled with it. For besides the
diseases and weakness which it brings upon the body, it likewise, by polluting
the body, is opposite to our Baptism, in which there is an outward washing of
the body, as well as an inward of the soul.

Now because of these words of S. Jude, here falls in this particular,
Nocturna Nocturna pollutio.
pollutio, nightly pollutions.

If it be therefore, 1. By reason of infirmity and weakness of nature. 2. Or
Ex (...) vasorum, from the fullness of the spermatick vessels. 3. Or upon the
laxitas partium, looseness or dissolution of those parts upon violent
exercise, or heat, by hard riding, etc. and not proceeding from lust; in these
and the like cases, it is no sin: yet with this proviso, that (though it
proceed from some or all of these causes) there be ingrata recordatio, a regret
and sorrow in remembering it: otherwise it will be imputed as a sin; but if (it
being not in his thought) seed pass from him against his will, and without his
knowledge, if he be grieved at it, when he feels or knows of it, in that
case it is no sin.

But on the other side, if a man be given to drunkenness, or other excess,
and by reason thereof it issue from him, though it be not sin ratione actus
(...), by reason of the act subsequent, which is involuntary, there being no
purpose to commit the sin, yet it is a sin, and liable to punishment, ratione
actus praecedentis, by reason of the precedent act, that is, drunkenness; for
that which is not voluntary in the act, may yet be voluntary, and therefore
sinful in the cause; and thus if from surfeiting there come (...) seminis, this
is a sin: or if by often rolling of wanton cogitations in the day time, it be
procured in the night; or that willingly by day (...) night he spill his seed,
as Onan did, it is a great offense in Gods sight. The Apostle (...). 38. 9. 10.
calls it, (...) uncleannes, the fathers Mollitiem, effeminatenesse, and the
law terms it, the sin of Onan, and the censure of it is, it was exceeding
wicked in Gods eyes.

2. If it be cum alio, with another, then comes Bestiality (...) an abomination
Bestiality.
not to be named, buggery with a beast, forbidden by the law, and punished with
(...). 18. 23.
death both of man and beast; and not only with the death of the body, but
with 20. 15.
that of the soul too. Without shall be (...) abominable buggerers. They which
make a confusion (as it is called) between themselves and beasts, shall be
brought to Rev. 21. (...).
Lev. 18. 23.
worse then a beastly confusion in the end.

3. If it be with mankind, it is either with consent of both parties, and then
it is a sin in both; or if either party, whether male or female be forced by
violence, Rape.
and seeks to resist, but cannot, that party is innocent: but the enforcer
Deuteronomy. 22. 25.
committs a double sin; one in the violence, which is against the former
commandment; and the other in the very act (...), against this; and therefore
by the law he was to die.

4. Of those that yield consent, they are either males or females: for so
strong Sodomy.
and strange is our concupiscence, that any thing is sufficient to stir up the
coals and kindle it: and the heathen could say, Quod in foeminis sexus facit,
id facit in puero aetas, that which the sex causes toward women, the age
causes toward boys. Thou shall not lie with mankind, as with womankinde,
says the law: and why? for it is an abomination. And the offenders against
this law are to be punished with Lev. 18. 22.
20. 13.
death. There are two reasons for it.

1. It is an unfruitful work of darkness, and contra bonum prolis, against
the benefit of procreation, which is one of the principal ends of matrimony.
Ephesians. 5. 11:
2. It is also against nature, altogether unnatural, the natural use being in
the other Romans (...). 26
sex, therefore the Apostle makes it the sign of a reprobate mind. And not
only a 27.
sin in it self, but a punishment also of other sins: For, for this sin it was,
that God himself 28.
came down and sat in judgment against the five Cities, which plot of ground
Genesis 19. (...).
is an unprofitable Sea to this day, called Mare mortuum, the dead sea, because
it nourishes no living thing in it: and it is also called Lacus Asphaltites,
of the unfruitfulnesse of it, answerable to the sterility of this sin.
5. With the female this sin is committed, and that either with more then one,
or Whoring.
with one alone; with more, either without law, or with color of law. That
without all color of law, is called Scortatio, Whoring: and this is not only
forbidden, but in the (...). 23. (...)
next verse, the Whore is resembled to a Bitch, and Whoremongers to a company
of dogs. 18.


For the punishment of it; by the light of Nature it was punished with Death,
the Genesis 38. 24.
offenders were to be burnt, as we see in Thamar. And because the civil laws of
men inflict small punishment for this sin, therefore God himself will punish
it, Whoremongers Heb. 13. 4.
and adulterers God will judge: yea, God will judge it both in the world to
come, for the whoremongers are (...) among those that shall have their portion
in the fiery Lake; and also in this life, with strange and extraordinary
judgments, as Lue Gallica, with the French Pox, an abominable and filthy
disease, not heard of in former Ages.

6. Under color of law, or pretext of marriage comes Poligamy, a fault
wherewith Polygamie.
sundry of the Patriarchs and others were entangled, yielding to the corrupt
customs of the Countries about them, not enquiring after Gods will. But nature
it self might have taught them that where the care of both sexes is requird for
education, there the very beasts of the field, and fowls of the air are,
coupled but one with one: but where the dam alone, or female may bring up the
young, there it is otherwise.

This is plain even from the Creation, where it is said, male and female
created he them: Genesis 1. 27.
but more plain from that of our Savior, And they twain shall be one: flesh;
where we Matthew. 19. 5
Mark 10. 11.
see the number set down expressly: as also from another speech of his,
whosoever shall put away his wife and marry another, commits adultery. In
the Law it is forbidden; Thou shall not take one wife to another, or take a
wife to her sister. The terms of brother Lev. 18. 18.
and sister are applied to any thing that is alike, even to inanimate things:
as if to one half of a thing the other half be added, it might well be called
the brother or sister of it; therefore by sister may here be understood another
wife: but whether it be so to be understood or no, yet the reason added there [
lest thou vex her] is sufficient. The very vexation and trouble in the house.
This what it was, we see in Abraham's house, Genesis 21.
while Hagar remained in it; and in Jacobs, while Rachel envied Leah; and
lastly, in Elkanahs 30. 1.
between Hannah and (...). So that the inconvenience which hereby arises, 1 Samuel 1. 6.
in hindering bonum oeconomicum, the peace of the family, is reason strong
enough to evince the inexpedience, if not the unlawfulness of it.

But it is objected, that it was lawful at the first, for the increase of
(...), and Object.
propagation of the world.

In answer whereof we say. That indeed, if ever it had been lawful or allowed,
it Answ.
had been so in the beginning. But the Prophet Malachy calls men to the
beginning in this very point, and tells them (as our Savior told the
Pharisees) ab (...) Ma (...) 19.
sic, from the beginning it was not so; and that God having plenty of Spirit
and power Mal. 2. 15.
to have made more, yet made but one: one Eve for one Adam: and wherefore one?
because he sought a godly seed. And therefore Polygamie was unlawful from the
beginning, and much more in all ages that should follow (...).

Again, the first that the holy Ghost notes to have had two wives was wicked
Genesis 4. 19.
Lamech of (...) race: and though Jacob had two also, yet he learnt it in (...)
Aram among the Idolaters. The Prophets therefore having spoken against it, and
Christ also. And the Apostle directing, let every woman have (...) (...) own
(...), and (...) 1 Cor. (...). (...).
husband have (...) his own wife: whatsoever (...) and (...) have been devised
to defend it, it is utterly unlawful.

In Matrimony this sin is committed uxore propria, with ones own wife, for we
(...) to (...). (...). Ambrose and The (...) use of (...) marriage bed.
others of the Fathers, use often a saying of Sixtus a Philosopher, that (...)
est (...) uxor is suae ferventior, (...) man may commit adultery by too much
(...) of love to his Levit. 18. 19.
wife. This (...) was forbidden by the Law, and punished. There ought to be no
approaching 20. 18.
(...) in (...), no, not to a man's own (...), if it were, both parties were to
be cut off from among the people.

But because here we may fall into infinite questions about marriage, and not
very pertinent to this place. we will therefore here content our selves only
with these few considerations, because we have spoken of them more largely
already.

1. We must have Abraham's care, not to match with the Canaanites, with the
wicked, Genesis 24. 3.
1 Cor. 7. 39.
but as S. Paul directs in Domino, in the Lord. 2. Secondly, consent of
parents must be had. Speak to the King, says Tamar to Ammon, for he will not
withhold me from thee: (...) thereby that she had not 2 Samuel 13. 13.
power to bestow her self. 3 As God brought Eve to Adam, and gave her to him,
so must we desire that our Genesis 2. 22.
wife may come by the hand of God, and he to make the match: which is when the
marriage is made by the Priest (Gods deputy) in the face of the Church. 4.
Which more nearly concerns this place. In marriage we must so behave our selves,
1 Cor. 7. 29.
in having wives, as if we had none, and to be content to master our lusts so,
that for 5.
the duties of Christianity, we may separate our selves for a time. 5. We must
not depart or divorce our selves, but only in case of Adultery, according
Matthew. 5. 32.
to our Saviors rule. 6. After we are divided by the death of one party, so to
abide if we can: or at least 1 Cor. 7. 40.
not quickly to wax wanton and marry again, but to stay for a time, til the
body of the 1 Timothy 5. 11.
party deceased be dissolved into earth, from whence it came.
Out of matrimony we commit this sin, 1. Either with one allied to us. Or 2.
Incest.


1. If she be allied to us, either by father or mother, as agnata or cognata,
it is called incest, and is forbidden by the Law, and punished with death. It
is set down as a principle, Thou shall not discover the shame of thy mother,
because she is thy mother; Lev. 18. 6.
nor of thy sister, because she is thy sister: as though by the light of
nature, the very 20. 17.
naming of mother or sister were enough to keep us from meddling with them. No
man was hotter against this, then (...) in his (...). And yet this sin (...) a
time was winked at. But the land (...) out the (...) and the Perizzites for
this abomination. And (...), before the Law, for this very sin of incest,
Levit. 20. 23.
forfeited both his right to the kingdom (which went from him to (...)) and to
the Priesthood, which went to Levi. Possess your vessels (says the Apostle)
in (...) and honor. Now the honor we are to give to them of our own flesh,
is, that 2 These. 4. 4.
we do not approach or come near them. Other reasons (...) are. 1. The
neernesse of education, of those that are our (...), or joined in consanguinity
with us, is such, that it would prove a great (...) of (...), and a great
occasion of this sin, if such marriages were allowed with those that usually
live together in the same house, as parents and children, brothers and sisters,
etc. usually do. 2. Because not only a family within it self, but also one
family with another, should have friendship and (...), which is most especially
procured by marriage. Now if (...) should be made within the same family, every
house would be a commonwealth within it self; whereas by marriages abroad,
there is unity and familiarity contracted between one family and another. It is
true, the consideration of Adams children, who could marry with no other, makes
(...) to decide, how far that consanguinity or (...) extends, wherein marriage
is prohibited; yet this is agreed upon by all, that in the right line it was
never permitted nor allowed in any case; as for the collateral it may be said
as before of (...), and divorces, they were winked at for a time, but never
allowed as (...). God says, that for this sin of incest, or marrying within
the degrees prohibited, the (...) the (...), the (...), because of such (...)
(...) was punished for (...), as we showed before: and for the (...), (...)
stood to it, and (...) in the quarrel, that Herod (...) wife. And the Apostle
says, that one should have his fathers Mark 6. 18.
wife, was a fornication not (...) named among the Gentiles. And the Prophet
says, that 1 Cor. 5. 1.
a (...) and his father (...) go in to one maid, is a (...) to the holy name of
God, and that Amos 2. 7.
he will not spare them. So though for necessity it were tolerated in the
beginning, yet of it self it is unlawful.
2. Come (...) to those that (...) strangers and not allied (...) us, and they
are either, (...)
1. If married or (...) (which is all one) it is adultery, and forbidden by the
law, Levit. 18. 20.
and punished with the death of both parties. God is pleased continually to
liken 20. 10.
(...) to this (...) of adultery, (...) there is (...) he (...) himself
against; (...). 22. 22.
and under this name, all kind of pollution or uncleanness is contained, that
so the heinousness of this sin may be the more discovered. And though the
politic Laws of men have not made it so, yet by the judgment of many Divines,
it is capital. And good reason it should be so. For it is the perverting of the
whole estate of those two Families, whereof the parties delinquent are members.
If it be not known (which God seldom suffers to be kept secret, for though he
deal otherwise in other crimes, Numb. 5. 12.
yet here he stays not for a legal accusation, but gives the reins to the
jealous man to put the womanto her purgation, though he cannot directly accuse
her) then if it be kept close, and the fault be in the woman, there is a (...)
thest committed: for the man nourishes and brings up a child, that is not
his, and lays up inheritance for it, to the great wrong and prejudice of his
other children. If it be known to the parties, then God gives this sin a plain
(...), by taking away (...) natural affection, both from the children to the
parents, etcontra, from the parents to the children.

Besides this, such children shall not take deep root, they shall be rooted out
at the Eccl. 23. 25.
last: as appears by Augustus's dealing with his Bastards; Medea with her
issue; by Absoloms and Adonijahs fall. It fared so between (...) and his
brethren, there was no natural affection between them.

In which soever of them the fault be, there is a sin against the rest of the
children; yea, and a sin against one that is not, namely against him that is to
be begotten: for he shall be born a Bastard: and consequently such an one as
shall not be accounted or reputed one of the congregation of the Lord, to the
tenth generation. Deuteronomy. 23. 2.


It is also against the state of the Commonwealth, for it polluteth the Land,
so Lev. 18. 27.
that it will spue out the inhabitants, and the Land cannot be quit of
pollution without bloodshed. And therefore it is certain, that if adultery be
not punished, it makes way for the ruin of the Land, rather then other things
committed against the public state, as Murders, Poysonings, etc. (the fruits
of this sin) which yet were punished with death by the Lex Iulia: the ground of
which Law is, because the adulteress living with the lawful wife, has
opportunity to mingle poison with her meats: and therefore every Commonwealth
has cause to make it capital. David after adultery falls to murder: and
Herodias, because John Baptist reprehended it, could not abide him, and never
left till he had got his head off. Whereas a good wife is a possession above
pearls, the heart of her Husband may safely trust in her, as the Pro. 31. 10. 11
Wise man says.

Besides this, two mischiefs more attend this crime. 1. Incest, where the fault
is kept close; for by this means, those that marry, not knowing how they are
allied, nor who is of their race or lineage, it falls out, that sometimes they
may join themselves with those they are near unto, and so commit incest, 2.
Frequent divorces, or separations, when one party knows or suspects the
incontinency of the other, from whence hatred and debate usually arise; and it
is plain by the whole course of profane Histories, that the greatest Wars both
foraign and domestic in many Nations have from hence had their original,
because there commonly follows an extreme hatred of each other upon this
occasion; as Ammou hated Tamar exceedingly: 2 Samuel 13. 15.
so that his hatred, after he had knowledge of her, was greater then his love
was to her before.

To this we may add the breach of the ninth Commandment; Persidiam,
unfaithfulness, and of the third, Perjurium, perjury: For at the solemnization
of marriage, there (...) a mutual and solemn Oath, and vow unto God in the
presence of the Congregation, to keep the mariage-bed undefiled.

Besides, God by the Apostle tells us, that this sin shall darken the
understanding Ephesians. 4. 18.
of the wise, and make them foolish; which effect we see it wrought in Solomon:
and Hos. 4. 11.
the Prophet tells us, that Aufert cor, it takes away the heart of the strong,
as it did in Judge. 16.
Sampson.

By all which we see, that this vice is prejudicial to the Commonwealth; for
the curse of God for it, is not only against the parties offending, but upon
the Commonwealth too. God says, They shall commit adultery, but shall not
increase; and Hos. (...). 10.
where there is defect of men to till the ground, there must needs be
barrenness, a Jer 23. 10.
just punishment of this barrenness of the womb. For this fault were the two
Tribes punished, as the ten Tribes for Incest. So that the Commonwealth is
endamaged by this sin, and therefore accordingly was the punishment made
Capital. (...) Baker was taken out of the same prison, where Joseph was
committed upon a false Genesis 40. 22.
accusation of this crime, and was hauged: so that it seems among the Egyptians
to have been capital. Among the Babylonians Adulterers were burnt with fire, as
may be gathered by that threatening of the Prophet against Ahab and Zedekiah,
that for committing Jer. 29. 21, 22,
villainy with their neighbors wives, the king of Babylon should roast them in
23.
the fire. And the comparison made by Solomon shows, that Adultery is worse
then Prove. 6. 30. etc
thest.

2. Of them that are solutae, free and unmarried, either the party continues
with Keeping a concubine.
us, and then it is called concubinatus, the keeping of a Concubine, or a (...)
that is not common: for such being servants, and by that means base, men would
not marry Genesis 21. 10.
with them, because it is a disparagement. God has showed how he (...) this,
by 35. 22.
continual crossing it; first in Agar, Cast out the bondwoman and her son. Then
in Jacob, Judge. 19. 2.
2 Samuel 3. 7.
by Reubens incest with Bilhah. A Levite took a Concubine, and as soon as he had
16. 22.
taken her, she began to play the whore. Saul was punished in his Concubine
Rizpah, to 1 King. 11.
whom Abner went in. And David was punished in his Concubines, with whom
Absalom lay in the sight of all the people: and Solomon's Concubines with his
wives turned away his heart from God, to set up Idolatry.

In the next place the act is committed, either once only, or often. Once only
is called stuprum, deflouring, which may be done, either to a widow, or to a
virgin. This Deflowring.
God forbids by the Law, and punished with death. We see Gods hand was upon
a Dent. 22. 23.
whole city, for the rape of Dinah, a virgin. And we know what should have
followed Genesis 34. 25.
upon dishonouring of Tamar, a widow; for a virgin, and widow, when they are
38. 25.
not in potestate sua, sed in potestate patris, in their own, but their fathers
power, there is in both cases by deslouring them, an injury done to the
parents, as well as tothemselves.

The act often committed is called fornication: which word, though it be many
vaga (...), a wandering Fornication.
just, or vagus concubitus, a promiscuous use of many. This sin we find
reckoned up 1 Cor. 10. 8.
among those other of the Heathen Romans, for which God gave them up to their
Numb. 25. 9.
Judge. 20. 18
own desires: and the same Apostle makes it one of the fruits of the flesh. The
punishment Prove. 2. 19.
of this sin we find mentioned by the Apostle out of the book of Numbers, 5. 12
in the case of Zimri and Cozbi, where twenty four thousand were destroyed: and
for 23. 27.
the abuse of the Levites Concubine, twenty five thousand, almost a whole
tribe. This 7. 10.
is a bewitching sin. Solomon says, They that enter into it, shall hardly
return again: and at last, he that uses it shall wonder at himself, and say,
how have I been deceived? The falling into this sin, is like to the falling
into a deep narrow pit, where a man cannot help himself, and therefore shall
hardly get out. The harlots guests are in the grave, they that are buried in
the grave, can never rise again by any ordinary power; and so they that are
given over to this sin, can never return, without special and extraordinary
grace; nay, her guests are not only in the grave, but even in the bottom of
hell, whence there is nulla redemptio, no redemption; she strikes a man into so
deep a pit, that he can hardly ever get out again without the special grace of
God, as Solomon did, who spoke this out of his own experience.

Beyond all these, there is prostitution, which is either of private persons,
which is Prostitution.
called prostitution, when a man prostitutes his daughter, sister or kinswoman,
or a Levit. 19. 29.
woman prostitutes her self, etc. This is also severely forbidden in the law.
Or publicly Ezekiel. 16. 24.
allowed. They built stews or brothel houses in every street which he there
detesteth. 1 Reg. 15. 12.
And so have Godly princes ever been careful to remove them, as Asa did.

The last pitch of this sin is defensio, defending it, as we know some have
done by The cry of Sodom and Gomorrah, Defense.
is great, says God, because their sin is very grievous. The Sodomites (...)
out upon Genesis 18. 20.
19. 9.
Lot, when he reproved them for it, justifying their wicked act. And Solomon
says, prove. 30. 20.
that the Adulteress is so impudent, as to wipe her mouth and say, I have done
no Jer. 3. 3.
wickedness. And this is it, which the Prophet calls frous meretricis, a
whores forehead. Numb. 25. 6.
(...) brought a strumpet before Moses and the Congregation, when they were at
phil. 3. 19.
their (...) openly into his tent. And of such it is, that the Apostle
speaks. That glory in their shame.

CHAP. VII.
The remedies of this sin. 1. Chastity of a single life. 2. Matrimonial
chastity. The means to preserve us from this sin. Of drawing others to keep
this Commandment.

NOw against these vices there are two virtues opposed as remedies.

1. Castitas coelibatus, chastity of a single life. 2. castitas conjugalis,
matrimonial 1 Cor. 7. 8.
chastity, both commended by Saint Paul.

1. For the first, there is no doubt but it is beter then the other, either, if
we take of chastity.
it simply, He that gives not his virgin in marriage does better; or in regard
of the verse. 38.
present necessity, which is to be thought upon; for the Apostle would have men
26.
to be without carfulness. But in a married estate, there is the care and The
benefit of a single lise
trouble of a family to attend it; she that is married cares for the things of
this 32
world.

Besides; the married must neither watch, nor fast, nor pray without each
others consent, which the unmarried may do freely, at their own will, without
the consent of another. Besides, he that is single may better provide for
himself, and shall not need to be chargeable to others, which was one of the
Apostles motives to preach the Gospel freely, that he might not be burdensome,
hereby also a man may live more free from covetousness, and exercise the
virtue of liberality the better.

And lastly, as the Apostle urges, the unmarried may the better attend upon the
Lord without distraction. They may be more constant in adhering to Christ, and
suffering for his cause, more willing to die and to follow Christ, Minus mali
metuit, qui minus delicias gustavit, he fears the evil of affliction the
less, who has had a least taste of the delights and pleasures of the world,
whereas those (...) natural affections of parents, and married persons, beget
in them a greater care of res familiares, their domestical affairs, that they
may provide for their children etc. Whereby they are more wedded to the world,
and more distracted in their devotions, and easilier drawn from God and from
Christ. For these reasons chastity of single life is chiefly to be desired. But
if we cannot attain to the first, to castitas coelibatus, then we must fly to
the second, which is castitas conjugalis, conjugal chastity, which is the
remedy provided against concupiscence.

Now the means of preserving our selves from this sin of concupiscence, we thus
consider. The means (...) preserve us from this sin.


1. To know, that it is not tentari, to be tempted, but uri, to burn, that the
Apostle speaks against. Not to be tempted, but to be set into a heat, and
inflamed. His meaning is not, that the gift of continency includes within it
naturalem. (...) privationem (...), privation of natural sense, but the motions
of the flesh, he shall have do what he can.

The inward boiling, (...), a man may examine thus.

1. Whether it be in him, as a punishment for sin or, only as a temptation
(for Causes of inward burning
it is certain, that adultery, and unclean lusts are oftentimes, a punishment
of pride) Hos. 5. 4. 5.
The spirit of whoredom is in the midst of them (says the Prophet) and in the
next verse follows the reason. The pride of Israel does testify to his face.
And whosoever can accuse himself of pride, he may well fear, that the spirit
offornication is in him.

Saint Paul observes, that when the heathen Romans grew so proud, as to think
Romans 1. 22.
themselves wise, then God gave them over to uncleannes (...) and to (...) 24.
affections; we see also in Adam, that when he would needs be quasi Deus, as
Genesis 3. 7.
God, the first punishment that came upon him for this pride, was his need of
figleaves to cover the shame of his nakedness, God punishing thereby contumeliam
spiritus, with contumelia carnis, the contempt of the spirit, with the reproach
of the flesh.

2. Again, there is (...) a sadness or heaviness in man concerning spiritual
things, 2 Samuel 11. 2.
an unlusttines to good exercises. He must first sleep and then (...), and so
he comes just to David's case when he lusted after Bathsheba. A man must have
pleasure in some thing or other: and because he has it not in the spirit, he
will have it in the body: and when he once feels it in him, then begins
his mind evagari circa illicita to wander about unlawful things; and so by
degrees there come in, first importunitas mentis, an importunity of the mind,
then (...), desire; then (...), opportunity; then (...), petulantia; then
(...), final destruction.

2. If it be a Tentation only, it proceeds from a cause, either withour, or
within. Temptations without us.
Without. 1. Company. If a man's eyes or hands offend him, he must pluck Mat. 5.
29, 30.
them out, and cut them off, much more must he refrain the society of evil men,
Prove. 23. 20.
though they be as dear to us as our eyes and our hands. Be not among evil
persons: 1 Cor. 5. 6.
For Modicum fermentum, A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump. A man must 1
Pet. 4. 4.
forsake the company of riotous persons.

2. Pleasing Objects; as the allurements of the eye. In this case the Wise man
advises Prove. 5. 3.
what is to be done, Come not near the door of her house: we must do as Job
did, Job 31. 1.
Make a covenant with our eyes. Impera Evae etcave serpentem, and tutus eris:
sed tutior si lignum non aspexeris. Command Eve, and take heed of the Serpent,
and you shall be safe, but more safe you shall be if you come not near the tree
to look upon it. By the eye, men begin to love what they see, and that love
which at first is pretended to be chaste and lawful, proves afterward lust;
such begin in the spirit, but end in the flesh. Therefore the Apostle exhorts
to admonish the elder women as mothers, the 1 Timothy 5. 2.
younger as sisters, In omni castitate, in all chastity: and S. Peter would
have love to 1 pet. 3. 2.
be, cum omni puritate, with purity, and so love as far as you will: But a man
must watch over himself, and vereri omnia opera sua, be jealous of all his
works, because it is most certain, that naturally we are subactum solum, fit
soil to receive the seeds of this sin.

Within. Either from the Body or the Soul,

1. For the body, as by the eye first, for by this member concupiscence
receives its 1 John 2. 16.
greatest watering. S. John calls it it the lust of the eyes. And our Savior
says, Whosoever Mar. 5. 28.
looks upon a woman to lust after her, has committed adultery already. S.
Peter 2 pet. 2. 14.
tells us, that there are eyes full of adultery. So also we see, that by the
eyes men have Genesis 9. 22.
fomented this sin. It is laid as a fault, that Cham looked upon his fathers
nakedness. Ab. 2. 15.
Woe to him, says the Prophet, that gives his neighbor drink to look upon his
nakedness.

The Devil, when he would work mankind a mischief, used this argument to our
first parents to transgress Gods commandment, that their eyes should be
opened. But Genesis 3. 5.
our Saviors counsel is, ut claudantur, to close them up: because that
whatsoever passes the eye, affects the heart. It is the broker of lust; and
therefore let no man say, Quid nocet vidisse? what harm does it to see? or as
they did in the Psalm, concerning psalm. 12. 4.
their tongues; so here, we are Domini oculorum, our eyes are our own, who
shall (...) prove. 17 24.
Eccl. 2. 10.
us? for the eyes of a fool (as the Wise man tells us) will be ranging: and
Whatsoever (says Solomon) mine eyes desired, I kept not from them. Qui
innocens aspicit, aspectu fit nocens; though a man be innocent when he looks
upon an ill object, it is rare, if he become not an offendour by it. And non
libet inspicere, quod non licet concupiscere, it is not lawful to look on that,
which is not lawful to desire. But we ought rather to pray with David, Averte
oculos, turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity; psalm. 119. 37.
and with holy Job, make a Covenant with our eyes. Can a man take fire in his
bosom, Job 31. 1.
prove. 6. 27.
and not be burnt.

And as we ought to keep our own eyes from this sinful looking upon others, so
are we also not to draw the eyes of others to such unlawful looking upon our
selves. For it is Ejusdem libidinis videri and videre to see and to be seen,
proceed from the same lusts. It is all one, Emittere suos, and admittere
alienos, To glance with our own eyes, or draw others to look upon us.

Now by the Rules of Logic, if the eyes are to be restrained, no less are the
other parts of the body, as the hands, feet, mouth. Touch not, taste not,
handle not, says the Col. 2. 21.
Apostle. For as Christ said, If thine eye offend, pluck it out: So in the Law,
The Mat. 5. 29.
hand that offended in touching the secret parts was to be cut off. It was with
the Deuteronomy. 25. 12.
hands that Potiphars wife caught Joseph, when she said, Lie with me. We must
Genesis 39. 12.
Ephesians. 5. 3.
therefore Pactum facere, make a covenant with all our members. As with the eye
and the hand, so with the mouth and feet, and ears: For the tongue and ears,
There is (as the Apostle says) uncleanness not to be named, neither to be
spoken nor heard. And let no corrupt (...) proceed out of your mouth. The feet
are offenders also in this kind in passing to the house of a strange woman, so
also may the whole body, if it be too much pampered, for (...) when it waxes
sat, it is apt Deuteronomy. 32. 25.
to kick. Therefore we must castigare corpus, keep under the body, to make it
chaste; 1 Cor. 9. 27.
there is Physic prescribed in scripture to this purpose, labor and
painfulnes, avoiding of excess in diet, and apparel: to be in hunger and
thirst, in cold and nakedness 2 Cor. 11. 27.
in watching, and fasting, and to avoid excess of sleep.

2. If it be from the soul; flee fornication, and youthful lusts. Saint
Ambroses rule 1 Cor. 6. 18.
is, vide ne ingrediaris conflictum, stand not resisting or combating, but
fly, and withdraw 2 Timothy 2. 22.
thy self from solitude, to good company.

And together with this, because it has pleased God, to make his word as a
tree of life, and the leaves thereof as medicines for those that are soul-sick;
the reading of Gods word will be profitable for us in this case, especially if
we read and meditate upon such places, as do ex diametro pugnare, flatly oppose
this vice. Genesis 18. 20.
As in Genesis, where God accounts this a very grievous sin, and that he
has appointed a remedy against it, Marriage. And that he suffers not a man to
fall into 1 Cor. 7. 2.
it, unless he be angry with him. That it is so infamous a sin, that it
makes a man as prove. 22. 14.
one of the fools of Israel. It bereaveth a man of his gifts. It is a brutish
(...), 2 Samuel 13. 13.
Ephesians. 4. 18.
which causes a man to live like a beast: and as Saint Jerome says of it,
delectat in Hos. 4. 18.
momentum, cruciat tamen in aeternum, it is delightful for a small time, but
will torment a man for ever.

Besides all these, we must use prayer. It is an especial sign of wisdom, to
keep prayer.
ones self from a strange woman. And wisdom is such a gift of God, as comes
not, pro. 2. 16.
but by prayer. And if our own prayers will not prevail, we must seek other
men's 6. 24.
prayers; Abraham prayed for Abimelech. We are to make our necessity herein
known 7. 5.
to other men: and say as Simon (...) did to Peter, pray ye to the Lord for me,
and as (...). 1. 5.
Pharaoh did to Moses, entreat the Lord for me. Vae soli, (...), Genesis 20.
(...).
(...) in hoc vitio, woe to him that is alone, but most of all, if he be tempted
to this Act. 8. 24.
(...). Exodus 9. 28.


And if all this will not help, but that there still remains (...), a (...),
then there is a remedy provided for it, he must know that he is called to enter
into the state of matrimony, which is an holy estate, instituted by God in
Paradise. And this 1 Cor. 7. 9.
must be the last refuge, to preserve continency: thus by laboring to keep
down the body, by avoiding excess in diet, ease, sleep, etc. and giving our
selves to sobriety, fasting, prayer, with watchfulnes and modesty in all
outward things (...), Chastity in a single life, or per (...) conjugalem,
chastity in a married estate, we may perform this commandment.

The last rule is, that as first, we ought to give no ear to them that
persuade us to this vice, but oppose them with all our might, for therefore the
Israelites did by The last rule concerning others.
Gods command vex the Midianites, for laying this stumbling block before them:
so in the next place, we must endeavor to persuade others to the virtue of
chastity, Genesis 39. 9.
as Joseph did his Mistress. And Tamar Ammon. Do not so, for no huch thing 2 Samuel 13. 12.
ought to be done in Israel, do not thou this folly.

THE EXPOSITION OF THE Eighth Commandment.
CHAP. I.
The coherence, and dependence of this commandment, upon the (...). The object
of it; the desire of riches. The scope of the lawgiver, in respect of. 1.
Himself. 2. The (...). 3. The commonwealth 4. Private persons. Of right and
propriety. How meum and tuum came in. Of right by first occupancy, and
prescription Reasons. for propriety. Of propriety, jure belli, four things
(...) in propriety.

Thou shall not steal.
QVo (...) e carne transitur in mundum, By which commandment we pass (...) the
flesh to the world; from the heat The connection and dependence of this precpt
and the foregoing
of young men, lust; to the desire of old men, wealth. From Baal-Peor the idol
of the flesh, to Mammon the God of the world. In worldliness and worldly
dealing, whatsoever is prohibeted or prescribed, is pertaining to this
commandment, as all concerning the flesh, in the former. The original of the
breach of this commanment is from that, which Saint John calls concupiscentia
(...), the lust of the eyes, as of the former commandment, the lust of the
flesh. 1 Jon. 2. 16.


The larger expsition of this commandment you may find in Levit. 19. 11. 13.
Lev. 19. 11.
And from the. 35. verse, to the end. In Exodus (...). 1 -- 16. Deuteronomy. 15. 1 --
22. In the new Luc. 12. 15.
Testament, by our Savior in Math. 5. 42. etc. And more largely Luc. 12. 14
and 46. Ephesians. 4. 28.
Saint Paul sets down both the affirmative, and the negative parts of it in
one verse 1 These. 4. 5. 6.
Let him that stole, steal no more; but rather let him labor etc. And in
another place, after he had expounded the seventh commandment, he comes to
this. Let no man go beyond, (...), oppress, or overreach his brother.

So that from these places and the like, a general equity of what shall be
handled in this commandment is drawn. But we are to remember withal, what was
said in the beginning, that it is not the outward act it self alone, not the
civil theft of the hand contrectatio rei alienae the touching of other men's
goods, which is meant here, but it is the mind also that God deals with.
(...) cor interrogat, non manum, God examines the heart, not the hand only,
for as there is not only manus adultera, sed cor adulterum, an adulterous
hand, but an adulterous heart too; so there is not only manus fur, but (...),
also, as the heathen man says, the heart is a thief as well as the hand.

The dependence of this commandment upon the former two is very exact: for in
the two former commandments order was taken for the actions of that part of the
soul, which is exercised about nutrition and generation, or the desires that
all men naturally have of meat, drink, and apparel for the preservation of
themselves, in individno, and to increase and propagate in the world, for the
preservation of their species or kind, for when there is a desire stird up by
hunger, desiderium (...) motum, that desire sets a man a work, and because for
the preservation of life, we need food and raiment, and therefore we fall into
that question, What shall we eat? 1 Timothy 6. 8.
or what shall we drink? or where with shall we be clothed? And when we have
children Matthew. 6. 31.
or posterity, we must also provide for them, as part of our family: and so by
Consequence 1 Timothy 5. 8.
every man is to labor and take care in this world, and that either propter os
Eccl. 6. 7.
suum, for his own mouth, as the Preacher speaks; or else (as the Apostle) to
lay up for 2 Cor. 12. 14.
his children. Now from hence arises this worldly concupiscence, which is the
Object of this Commandment, and so the ordering of this worldly desire very
fitly follows the former.

The end of this Commandment is to moderate that desire of Riches, which of it
The end of this Commandment
self is no sin, but lawful and good; for as a desire suscipere prolem, to have
issue in the right way is lawful, (as we showed in the former Commandment;) so
procurare necessaria, to provide necessaries is no less lawful and good in
this. But, as in the former, there is first a desire, which is lawful, and then
we come reduplicare amorem, to double our love, by inordinate desires, which
brings forth insaniam, madness: so here in this, there (...) first a desire of
that which is (...), and then we come reduplicare desiderium, to double that
(...), and to covet for our vanities and pleasures, and from thence to double
again, and to have for our (...) desires and lusts, and so we see how men come
from fleshlinesse to worldlines, and withal, how this Commandment hangs upon
the former.

In the book of Wisdom, man's life is divided into two parts. 1. The first part
is Wisd. 15. 12.
Ludus, sport, or pastime; They counted (says he) our life a pastime, and this
part is acted by young men, whose zeal is for pleasure and mirth, etc.

2. The second is Nundinae, a fair, or a market, as it follows, Our time here
is as a market for gain; for say they, we must be getting every way, though it
be by evil means: and this part is acted by men, when they grow in years; for
then their zeal for pleasure is gone, and their zeal is wholly for the world,
then their life is a (...) for gain, and as the Apostle says, they account
godliness to be nothing but gain. Now then as at first a man's appetite has
relation to the first of these, the pleasures and lusts of the 1 Timothy 6. 5.
flesh; so secondly, because (as the Wise man says) though feasts are made for
laughter, and wine to make men merry: sed argentum respondet omnibus, but money
answers Eccl. 10. 19.
all things; which, as the Philosopher says, is (...), fidejussor pro omnibus,
undersuerty for every thing; therefore from this second affection arises (...)
the love of money; and then, if they have money, they promise to themselves an
(...), (...), love of money.
an all sufficiency, that they shall want nothing. And therefore the Poet
Menander shows, that the cornu Amaltheae, of which the Poets feigned so much,
was nothing else but money: for if that be once had, there is no fear, but
(...), friends, (...), helpers, (...), witnesses, (...), company to dwell with
(...), and all will be supplied abundantly. And this persuasion of
self-sufficiency, being thought a great part of felicity, is that which in the
first place makes men so dote upon money: and then secondly, there is Genesis 26.
16.
(...), a power and grandour joined with it, as it is said of Ismael and his
sons. Hereby Prove. 18. 11.
men grow mighty, and Solomon says, that the rich man's wealth, is an high
wall, Genesis 26. 16.
and a strong tower of defense. (...) growing rich, made Abimelech fear that he
(...) grow mightier then himself, and therefore entreated him to be gone.

This then is that which sets men so forward in this course, because they
look to (...)
find in money, a sufficiency, an (...), which because they find not
according to their expectation, hence arises a desire of more, and so comes in
(...), covetousness, and desire of more: and as the heathen man observed, when
they have this (...), then they must have another (...) beyond that, and
another beyond that, and so it still proves (...). For this is the suggestion
of the Devil, If you had more it would be better for you, and the reason that
you are in no better case, is, because you have too little. And so man goes
forward by degrees, till he come to that which the Preacher speaks of, He Eccl.
5. 10.
that loves silver shall not be satisfied with silver: and to be like the
(...) of the Prove. 30. 15.
Horseleach, that always cries, Give, (...): and thus he either goes on in
infinitum, (...). 4. (...).
and though he have none to care for, yet he cease not to gather; which he
describes to be a Monster; or else he returns to the flesh again for the
natural conclusion of riches is that of the Rich man, Ede, bibe, lude, Soul,
eat, drink, and take thine ease, Luke 12. 19.
thou have enough, and so redit (...) in circulo, he returns as it were in a
circle. And thus we see, that the gathering of riches, has either a monstrous
end, when they are gathered for no end, or else they return to their natural
end, to satisfy the desires of the flesh.

Now the scope and aim that God the Lawgiver had in giving in this (...), The
(...) and end of (...) Comandment.
that every man may enjoy his outward estate; for after he had taken order
about the (...) of his body, as well from violence as impurity by the
twoforegoing Commandments, which concern his (...), he comes here to that which
men in the next place (...) esteem, viz. their wealth and outward estate: and
therefore God takes order here, that this may be preserved to them, and that
for diverse reasons.

1. In respect of himself, that we might be like him, in showing mercy and
doing 1 In respect of God.
good to others, that we may be able to communicate to the necessities of our
neighbors, Matthew. 5. 43.
by acts of mercy and love; for herein God propounds himself in a special Luke
6. 36.
manner, as a pattern for us to imitate. Be ye merciful (says Christ) as your
heavenly father is merciful.

2 In respect of the Church.
2. In respect of the Church, which is Communio Sanctorum, the Communion of
Saints. S. Paul charge Timothy, servare depositum, to keep that which was
committed 1 Timothy 6. 20.
to his trust. Chrysostom says, that not only Timothy, but every man has
one depositum 2 Cor. 12. 15.
or other, whether it be wealth, learning, art or strength, it is his
depositum, and put into his hands, to the end that he employ it to the benefit
of the whole Body, that there may be a communion of saints, in these outward
things, as well as others.

3. In respect of the Commonwealth, that outward peace may be preserved, 3 In
respect of the Commonwealth.
which is not only in preventing murder and bloodshed, forbidden in the sixth
Commandment, but also by preventing oppression and (...), that every man may
enjoy 1 Cor. 6. 7.
his own, and by restiaining all injuries to any in their estate, which is done
by this Matthew. 22. 21.
Commandment; for we ought (...) to be ready to part from our own right then 1 Timothy 5. 18.
to do others injury. And in this regard, that we be able to give to Caesar
that which Esaias 10. 2.
is his right, Tribute and Custom. To the Labourer, his hire. And lastly, the
Priest Levit. 27. 21.
has a right, as appears by the Law, by a statute for ever. They that sow to
us spiritual Number. 18. 11.
things, must reap our carnal things. Romans 15. 27.


4. Lastly, in respect of every private person, this law is the fence of his
possessions; 4 In respect of private persons
that he may enjoy his own in peace, and (...) the labor of his hands, while
he lives; and when he dies, he may dispose of it to his children.

Before we come to the things forbidden and commanded in this Precept, we must
Exodus cap. 21. 22, 23,
Eccl. 2. 24.
first treat of Right and Propriety, which is jus (...), and also of
Alienation, called Psalm 128. 2.
by the Lawyers jus (...), right of transferring of that a man possesses to
another

2 Cor. 12. 14.
Because the distinction of Res alienae and nostrae, of what belongs to another
man, and what to us, is the ground of the prohibition of this Commandment, and
the unjust taking and detaining of that which is not our own is the matter of
this Commandment, comprehended under this word steal, and the object of the
desire here moderated, is (...) and (...), Mine and thine.

1. We must know the meaning of the word furtum, stealth.

The Civil Lawyers define furtum, stealth, or furari, to steal, to be rem
alienam (...), to lay hands (...) on that which is another man's. Divines go
further, and say that it is theft, Consentire fraudulosae (...); to consent to
the fraudulent laying hands on that which is another man's: and in the handling
of the tenth commandment, we shall see, that concupiscere rem (...), est
furari, even to covet another man's goods, is to steal.

The original of Propriety.
But how comes it to pass, that there is Res mea and (...), mine and thine,
or a propriety of goods in one and not in another.

psalm 24. 1.
Certainly, the earth is (...) Lords (as the Psalmist speaks.) And the land is
mine (as he Levit. 25. 23.
himself tells us.) And as the land and the earth, so every beast of the forest
is his. All Psalm 50. 10.
the World and the Creatures in it are the Lords; he is Lord Paramount: and
withal the (...) tells us, how men came to have propriety in things; for after
God had 115. 16.
made all, Caelum Caelorum Domino, terram vero dedit (...), hominum, The heaven
of heavens is the Lords, he reserves that for himself, for there his throne is
placed: but the earth he gave to the children of men; so that there God gives
over his right to the earth, to the sons of men, that is, he communicates and
derives a secondary right to man, whereby he is not only usu fructuarius, but
also (...), he has not only the use of the world and the things therein, but
also a right, so that he is truly Lord and Owner, but yet God has the
original right (...) in himself, he remains Lord Paramount, even of what he
has given to the sons of men. The earth then, God has given to the Children
of men: not only ut replerent terram, to replenish (...). 1. 18.
it, but to (...) it also, and rule over it, dominari, and over the Creatures
that are therein, as we see his first Charter made to Adam; and after man had
forfeited this Charter, God renewed it after the flood to Noah and his sons.
This in the general. Genesis 9. 2, 3.


Now more (...) for the division of what God had thus given, and for the How
meum and tuum came in.
propriety amongst men. It is true, that if man had continued in innocence,
there would not have needed any division of the earth, every one would have
been content with that which had been sufficient for him, and none would have
been troubled with that unruly appetite and desire of having more, and the
earth would have been sufficient for all. But when sin entered, it was then
necessary there should be a division, and a meum and tuum, among men. And
though the first occasion hereof was evil, (as commonly good Laws arise ex
malis moribus, from evil customs) yet God was pleased with it, and approved
it. Cains persecution of Abel, and others, was the cause why Seth, and the rest
that feared God, severed themselves from him and his posterity by a public
profession of the worship of God, and would not live in common Genesis 4. 26.
with them. The first enclosure of what was formerly common, or the first
impropriation to particular persons, that we read, of was that of Cain, when he
built a City, Genesis 4. 17. He chose out a plot of ground, and built a City, and
called it after his sons name. This act of his gave occasion to the Fathers and
Patriarchs, hereby seeing Genesis 4. 17.
that Cain would else usurp government and power, and considering the
expediency of it for their peace and safety, in well ordering of private
possessions, to do the like: and thus came in propriety before the flood.

After the flood, when all the world was common again, and all private interest
was destroyed, Noah having all the world before him, had all jure primae
occupationis, by right of the first possession, or first seizure, and his sons
from him: and whether by Noah's allotment of the chief parts of the world to his
three sons; Africa to Cham, Asia to Sem, and Europe to Japhet; or whether it
were by mutual agreement among themselves, its plain, they had all by this
right of prima occupatio: and thus propriety came in presently after the flood.
Other examples we find afterward, when Terah came out of Ur of the Chaldees
with Abraham and Lot, etc. they came to Haran in Canaan, where they dwelt by
right of first occupancy: and afterward, when Abraham and Lot came out of
Egypt into Canaan, where they lived together, a while in common, upon occasion
of their herd-mens strife, they agreed to part the country between them; and
Lot, though he were younger, had the choice: thus we see how things stood at
the first. Epictetus shows it by a familiar similitude, when a dish is
brought to the Table, before it is cut up, it is common to all that sit at the
Table; but after it is cut up, and every man has taken his share, then quam
quisque occupavit partem, what part soever a man has taken to himself, that is
proper to him and not common to the rest, so that it were neither justice, nor
civility to take it off his trencher. Thus at the first all the earth was
common to mankind, but then by the first Deuteronomy. 11. 24.
occupancy or possession, or by consent, it came to be divided. Omnem locum
quem calcaverit pes vestra, every place whereon the souls of your feet shall
tread (says God) I give unto you, it shall be yours. So that it was pedis
occupatio, or calcatio, the treading of the foot, or first occupation, that
entitled every man to his first right.

Thus if a people possesses a country, either not inhabited before, or which
is terra derelicta, a country forsaken by the former inhabitants, primus
Occupator, the first possessor or discoverer has the right to it: as we read
that the posterity of Simeon, entered into the land of Gedor, seeking pasture
for their flocks; and they found 1 Chro. 4. 39.
pasture fat and good, and the land was wide and quiet, and peaceable, for they
of Ham 40.
had dwelt there of old. So that now the land being uninhabited, they took
possession of it, and that lawfully.

The rule is, Immobilium est (...), mobilium usurpatio. Prescription carries
things immovable, and usurpation moveable. And there is good reason for it.

1. Because it much concerns the Commonwealth to look after terrenam pacem,
(...) lites oriantur in insinitum; that controversies arise not perpetually to
the disturbance of the public peace. Therefore to prevent such inconveniences,
we must have (...) to Prescription and possession. And this jus praescriptionis
is no new thing. In the treaty between the Amorites and Jephthah, they claim
restitution of certain lands which the Israelites had taken, as they passed
from Egypt to Canaan. Jephthah Judge. 11. 13.
answers, That they had enjoyed them 300 years, and asks them, wherefore did
you 26.
not recover those lands within that time? And having this right of
prescription kept them.

2. Another maxim, and which has more show, is Interest Rei-publicae, ut re
sua quisque been utatur; it concerns the Commonwealth to take care, that every
one use his own well. For if an Owner neglect his possessions, unless the
Commonwealth look after them much detriment may arise; and therefore it takes
order to punish such for their negligence, by depriving them of all claim. And
thus if one leave his ground untilled and unmamanured so many years, or such a
prescript time, he shall lose it. And upon these reasons it is, that men have
right by prescription and possession.

And in these forenamed cases of right either in communi or proprio, because
men are thus lawfully vested in that they possess, it is a sin to put any out
of possession invito domino, without the owners consent. The Law says, Thou
shall not remove thy neighbors Deuteronomy 19. 14.
land mark, which they of old time have set in thine inheritance. And under the
Philip. 14.
Gospel S. Paul tells Philemon, that without his mind he would do nothing to
his prejudice.

Now that it was Gods will, that the earth should be thus divided, appears
plainly Deuteronomy. 32. 8.
in Moses his song, where he says, The most High divided to the nations their
inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, and set bounds to the people:
and after the flood, it is said, That God scattered the people over the face of
the earth, and Genesis 11. 9.
Acts 17. 26.
S. Paul says, That God determined the bounds of the habitations of mankind.

And that private propriety, is agreeable to his will, may appear both out of
the Old The lawfulnes of propriety.
and New Testament.

We see that Abel (the son of the first proprietary) offered Sacrifice of the
firstlings Genesis 4. 4.
of his own flock. Of Abraham the Scripture reports, that he was rich in
flocks and 13. 2.
24. 35.
cattle, silver and gold. His servant reported the like of him to Laban; The
Lord has blessed my Master greatly, and he is become very great: and he has
given him flocks and herds, and silver and gold, etc. which he possessing
proprietatis jure, by the right of propriety, left to his son Isaac, and he to
Jacob. So that the Patriarchs before the Law, had goods of their own.

Again we find, that when God had brought the people into the land of promise,
Josh. 13. 7.
Joshua divided it by his appointment, to the Tribes: some by lot, and some by
consent. 14. 2.
17. 17.
As also viritim to particular men, as to Caleb; and the people invested Joshua
14. 13.
himself. There are many passages to confirm this in the Proverbs of Solomon
and the 19. 50.
Prophets: as Drink waters of thine own (...), and running waters out of thine
Prove. 5. 16.
own well. And in Ezekiel, The Prince himself was not to thrust the people out
of their Ezekiel. 46. 16.
inheritance.

Now these places and the like, though they show the lawfulness of propriety,
yet the Anabaptists are not satisfied in that, because they are not out of the
New Testament, and so not binding to us Christians. But in that also we may
find testimonies sufficient to confirm this point. S. John had a house of his
own, from that hour John 19. 27.
(says the Text) that Disciple took her to his own home. So had Mary the
Mother Acts 12. 12.
of John.

It is true that we read in the Acts of the Apostles, (the place chiefly urged
by them) That all that believed were together, and had all things common: but
in the 2. 44.
same book S. Luke tells us what kind of Communion this was. Neither said any
4. 32.
of them that ought of the things which he possessed was his own. By which we
may collect that the Christians of the Primitive Church possessed houses,
lands, and goods of their own, yet so that in the use they were common to
others, and though the propriety 5. 4.
rested still in the possessors; yet when there was a necessity they sold them,
to supply the poverty of them that wanted, lest they might return to Judaisme.
And if they sold them, certainly they were their own. S. Peter clears this
fully in his speech to Ananias, While it remained, was it not thine own.

And as they had propriety in lands and possessions, so in goods too, which we
(...). 25. 35.
may thus prove. Our Savior promised a kingdom to such as fed the hungry, gave
drink to the thirsty, harbored the stranger, (...) the naked, and visited the
sick, and them that were in prison, and by this did grant that the faithful had
a propriety in their goods, by which they might be charitable, and beneficent
to the needy. For take away propriety, and take away all beneficence, and
alms. Out of a common 1 Timothy 6. 17.
stock, a particular man cannot be said to give that which is his own. And 18.
Saint Paul teaches rich men how to employ their wealth, and directs the
Corinthians what proportion they shall lay aside for the poor, out of their 1
Cor. 16. 2.
estates.

In the Acts we read of many that had the disposing and use of their own
estates, Act. 9. 36.
as of Tabitha that was full of good works, and alms deeds, witness the coats
and garments which she made for poor widows. Cornelius the Centurion likewise
39.
was a devout man, and gave much alms. And these good works cannot be
conceived 10. 2.
to be done, but out of that, which they possessed, as their own. Saint Paul
20. 33.
Math. 27. 57.
says, he never coveted any man's silver, or gold, or apparel. We find also
many Act. 16. 14.
of the faithful to have been rich, as Joseph of Arimathea; and Lydia the
seller of 8. 27.
purple; as Candaces, Eunuch. Diverse other testimonies might be produced, but
these may serve sufficiently to prove a propriety of possessions and goods to
be lawful for Christians.

Besides those original ways of propriety, there is also a propriety, by the
right of war, or law of Arms, because the Magistrate has power and authority,
in diverse cases to use his sword abroad as well as at home, and may punish a
foreign enemy in some cases, even by expelling him his land. It is true, that
the Apostle counsels, if it be possible, as much as lies in you, have peace
with all Romans 12. 13.
men, but not long after, he adds, the Magistrate bears not the sword in
vain. Saint Augustine upon the war of the children of Israel against the
nations that opposed their passage into Canaan, says, nec belli per mosen
gesta (...) quis aut horreat, quia in illis divina secutus imperia, non
saeviens, sed obediens (...). Let no man marvel or be astonished at the battles
fought by Moses, because in following Gods command, he was not cruel but
obedient. Now by these battles he conquered Deuteronomy. 2. 24.
land from many nations, as from the Amorites, which we saw even now were held
psalm. 105. 44.
to the time of Jephthah and long after. And the Psalmist tells us in general
terms, that Genesis 48. 21.
God gave them the lands of the heathen. We see that long before Moses time 2 Samuel 8. 3.
Jacob bequeathed to Joseph, that which he had gotten from the Amorites, jure
Jer. 27. 3. 6.
justi belli, with his sword and his bow. As also David conquered the land of
the Philistims. And God gave the kings of Edom, Moab, Ammon and Tire to his
servant Nebuchadnezzar, as the Prophet styles him. Lastly, (...) recovered from
Benhadad, the cities which he had taken out of the hand of his father, by war.
And so much of the right of propriety.

And in this Jus proprium, Right of propriety, or having a thing thus proper to
ones Four things. in propriety.
self, are included four things.

1. He has not only Dominium, the Lordship and dominion over it, but (...),
the use also: As a Man may use his Horse to ride on, or the like. 2. He has
Fructum, the fruit and profit of it, as in goods, so in lands. The (...) having
left her house and land, because of Elisha's prediction to her of a Famine, at
her return was not only restored to it by the King, but to the mean proffits 2
Reg. 8. 6.
of it also from the time she had left it. 3. Next he has Consumptionem, the
right of spending that he possesses. The Preacher says, It is good, etc. to
eat and drink, and enjoy the good of all his labor, etc. for it is his
portion. And we see in the Gospel, the woman spent all that she had to recover
her health, thus a Man may kill his Horse or any other Beast. 4. Lastly, he
has Alienationem, right of alienation, as by selling, or giving it away, he
may either retinere keep it, or transfer, dispose of it to another, and that
either Math. 20. 15.
freely, or upon a valuable consideration. 1. In the parable of the laborers,
the Lord of the vineyard faith to one of them, licet quod libet facere, it is
lawful for me to do Ezech. 46. 18.
what I will with mine own. And the Prophet says, that not the Prince himself
shall take away any man's inheritance, nor thrust him out of possession. 2. He
may transfer in posteros, leave it to his posterity. The same Prophet tells
us, That if the Prince endow a man with possessions, the inheritance thereof
shall be his sons, it shall be their possession by inheritance. And to that
purpose it was, that God prescribed rules for it. The father in the Gospel
tells his eldest son, (after he had given his youngest a portion) son all that
I have is thine. And this is either liberal and free, as just gift, or
illiberal, as to let out a thing to hire for a time. It is also, either a
translation of the whole, as well the use, as the propriety and thing: or only
of (...) fructum, the use and profit thereof, and that either for a time, or
for ever. See it in particulars.
CHAP. II.
Of alienation and the several sorts of it. Of free al (...). Illiberal, by
contracts, which are of three sorts. 1. Do ut des. 2. do ut facias. 3. facio ut
des. Of contracts by stipulation, promise, writings. Real contracts, by
caution, pledge, etc. Personal, by suerties, hostages etc.

TO alienate the propriety, with the use for ever, without any consideration,
is called Alienation and the several sorts of it.
donatio, a gift, as when Pharaoh gave sheep, oxen, asses, and servants to
Abraham, and this is either done by one in his life time, and then it is
usually called a gift, or at his death by his will, and this is called a
legacy; and so the right of succession is translated to the child, by the the
fathers death.

Now if the thing it self be translated liberally or freely, but for a time,
there it is called mutuum, a loan which is free and without consideration. But
if not the thing it self be transferred, but the use of it only, then it is
properly called commodatum, when a thing is borrowed freely, to be used, though
this is commonly taken for that which is lent for some particular use, when the
end is named. And these are the (...) of free alienation.

2. Illiberal (...) is, when a thing is put out upon consideration, and is
usually called contractus (...). This is of three sorts, and is usual with us.

1. The first is Do, ut des, I give, but you must give (...); as when a man
lets a farm, with (...) that his tenant shall husband it and pay him a rent,
which is called (...), 2. The second is, Do, ut facias. I give, but you must do
something for it, as Homage, fealty, or service. 3. The last is, Facio ut des,
I do for you, that you may pay me for my pains, as in work and wages, and this
they call contractum servilem, a servile contract.
1. Do, ut des. And this giving in liew, is either First, Rei pro re, of one
thing for another, or Secondly, Rei pro pretio, of some thing at a price.

1. When it is, thing for thing, it is called (...), Commutatio, or Permutatio,
Exchanging, and this was the first brood, after men grew weary of (...). If 1
Reg. 2. 21.
it be money for money, it is called cambium Exchange. If of one thing for
another, it is Bartering. Ahab would have bartred in this kind with Naboth for
his vineyard. 2. When a thing is for a price, if it be pecunia pro Re, money for
goods etc. then Genesis 42. 25.
it is emptio buying, Joseph's brethren carried money into Egypt to buy corn.
And God told Moses, that the people might buy meat of the posterity of Esau,
for money. If it be rei pro pecunia, of goods etc. for money, then it is
venditio, selling. Sihon Deuteronomy. 2. 6. 28
king of the Amorits refused to sell the Israelits meat and drink for money.
Ephron sold the cave of (...) to Abraham for four hundred shekels of silver
current Genesis 23. 16.
money. If a man sell by whole sale, then it is negotiatio, merchandising; if it
be by parcels, it is (...).
Besides the Alienation of the thing it self, there is alienation of the use
only, and not of the property, which if it be usus rei pro pecunia, use of a
thing for money, it is locatio, letting. If (...) pro usu rei, money for the use
of the thing, it is conductio, hireing.

2. Do, ut (...). To give, that one may do something in liew of the gift, as
Homage, fealty, or service. Thus we may see of old there have been (...) ex
jure Regio, kings have created them, when they gave lands to be held upon some
service. Joseph on (...) behalf, when he had bought the Egyptians lands,
restored them again, upon condition of a fifth part of the increase to be paid
into the kings exchequer.

3. Facio, ut des, to do something for which a man looks to be paid, or to
receive something for it. And this is 1. either (...), pro opera, one work for
another. (...) Judge. 1. 3
said to Simeon his brother, come up with me into my lot, that we may fight
against the (...), and I likewise will go with thee into thy lot, which is
facio, ut facias Or 2. Opera pro pretio, work for a price. As when the
laborers in the vineyard received a penny a day: which is facio, ut des, to
work for a hire, or wages. As our Savior says, the workman is worthy of his
hire. Math. 20. 2.


Now in the cases of Alienation of property before mentioned, because sometimes
we suffer one to have the use, but dare not trust him with the property, there
arise contracts of diverse natures, as by words, by writing, by pawns, pledges
and suertiships etc.

At the first, we see they durst trust one another up on their bare word. This
in him Several kinds of contracts.
that requires it, is Stipulatio, a stipulation, or indenting; in him that
gives it, Stipulatio.
it is Sponsio a promise, or covenant. Sponsio.


After, (...) their contracts were by writings (which with the other kinds
hereafter mentioned are proles humanae (...), the issue of men's breach of
promise) (...) the one Chirogrophum.
party were content with the other parties own writing alone, this is called
chirographum, his handwriting; if other men's hands be joined with it, it is
(...), a Syngrapha.
writing subscribed by many. Thus when (...) bought a (...) of (...), there
were writings drawn between the parties. (...) subscribed, and sealed the
evidence, and witnesses were taken. Tobit when he left his country and departed
into Media, committed ten talents to the trust of Gabael, yet for his better
(...), he took a writing under his hand for it. The unjust steward caused his
Lords debtors to make bills under their hands for what they ought.

Besides these assurances by words and writings, there are others which are
either Real contracts.
real or personal; real, are either in regard of some oath, which is (...), a
Caution. pledge.
caution, or for the recovery again of something received and delivered, which
if it be something moveable, it is called, pignus, a pledge or pawn; as when a
raiment. and an upper millstone were prohibited to be taken in pawn, whereby
may be inferred, that something, might be lawfuily pawned. If immovable as
Mortgage. (...). 5. 4.
lands, it is called Hypotheca, a mortgage. As we find that the people
borrowed money upon their lands.

If it be personal, it is either in war, and then called Obses an Hostage: such
as Jehoash king of (...) took of Amaziah king of Judah, when he had over come
him, and taken Jerusalem; or in peace, and this is either for a public
receivers who Suerties.
is accountable to the common: wealth, which is called praedes, when the goods
of him which is suerty for such an one, are liable, or for private persons, as
in actions, they which under take for others, are called (...), their bail and
in matter of money, or debt, or promise, (...), sureties. As Saint Paul was for
Ouesimus. The wiseman counsels him that is suerty for another, to make his
peace as soon as he can.

CHAP. III.
Of the desire of (...). For regulating whereof we must consider. 1. The order,
in respect of. 1. The end. 2. The means. 2. The measure of our appetite which
must be guided by four rules. Of the suppuration of this sin, by (...) love
of money, the branches of it. Of subactum solum, the soil fitted. Icterus the
iaundice af it. 1. In the eye. The foaming at the mouth. The (...) of theft
here forbidden committed. 1. In getting. 2. In the use of riches.

NOw that we have seen the object of the desire which is here moderated,
consisting Of the desire of wealth.
in (...) and (...), let us see, how our desire of it ought to stand affected,
wherein we may take notice of two things. 1. The order. 2. The measure of the
appetite, which is regulated by this commandment.

1. For the order. Whereas there are two things that a man's desire is carried
unto 1. The enjoying of the end it self. 2. The means which tend to the
enjoying (...) that end there must be therefore (laith Aristotle) a division of
the faculty, a double desire, a double love, or a double concupiscence, because
there are two things, of which, one is greater then another: the first is the
end, viz. God and eternal happiness in him, of which we desire, the (...). The
second is the means, which we do appetere, desire as they may further us to
the end. Therefore the end being the greater of the two, the love of that must
be Prior and Major first and greater then the love of the means, to wit, the
things of this life, which must be desired in the second place, and in ordine
ad spiritualia, (...) in order to our spiritual and eternal good. 2. For the
measure. As in Physical administering of medicines to the Body, there is a
certain quantity and measure prescribed, which if it be lessened, it purges
not all the peccant humor; if it be more, it not only purges that humor,
but somewhat which it should not purge; so in the affections and appetite of
the soul: there is in some, a desire of these things, which is defective, and
too careless, as in idle persons, or such as (...) of a superstitious conceit,
or otherwise, count it unlawful to desire them, or look after them. And in some
other there is such an immoderate and excessive desire, and affection to
worldly things, more then there should be, that they will forget their duty to
God, rather then neglect them; such are called profane persons in scripture,
and likened to Esau, who would forgo his birthright, his blessing which God
did bestow upon him, for a mess of pottage. Therefore it is very expedient,
that we take the measure first, what we may desire. And that we may do after
this order.
1. Remember that which the Apostle directs us to (...) having Rules to
moderate our desires.
food and raiment be therewith contented. A contented mind is a great
treasure, and if God bestow no more upon us then these, we must not murmur fot
want of super 1 Timothy 6. 8.
fiuities: for God, as he has plenty of spirit, so he has plenty of wealth,
and Jud. 16.
could have made all men rich, if he would. And it was out of his great wisdom
that he made some poor, that as the rich might have (...) benignitatis, the
reward of their (...), so the poor might have mercedem patientiae, the
recompense of their patience, as Saint Ambrose says; and so as Solomon says,
the rich and poor meet together, for the Lord is the maker of them both.
Therefore every man is to rest contented, if God shall call him no higher, nor
bestow more upon him, he must avoid distracting cares, which breed noisome
lusts, when he sees Gods will and pleasure, and thus he must stand, then, as
the Apostle alludes to the gathering of Manna, he that gathers much shall
have nothing over, and he that Exodus 16. 18.
gathers little shall have nothing less, when they die. This is therefore
the first 2 Cor. 8. 15.
rule concerning the measure to be observed, we must not desire more, nor seek
to rise higher then God will have us.

2. Though we must be contented with our estate, yet is it lawful to gather in
Heb. 13. 5.
Summer, and to provide against winter, which care the wiseman commends prove.
30. 25.
in the Ant, and (...) before us for our imitation, to provide for the future,
by all honest and lawful means, with a sober and (...) mind.

3. A man may (...) more, and take care for those that belong to him, and thus
when he sees his household increase, his care in providing for it ought to be
the more provided; that his desires be still limited with the former
conditions. He must provide for his household with Jacob, that so he and they
may drink out Genesis 30. 30.
of their own cisternes, and not be chargeable to others, but rather (...)
habeat (...) prove. 5. 15.
qui deriventur foris, ut tamen just ipsorum (...) sit, that he may have
wherewith 2 Cor. 12. 13.
to be liberal to others, yet have enough to live of himself.

4. Lastly, a man may lawfully desire to have, not only for himself, and his
Excd. 30. 12.
family, but also wherewith to pay his half shekel, his offering to the Lord;
to Math. 22. 21.
help the Church: to pay tribute to the King, to be beneficial to the
commonwealth, (...). 4. 28.
to relieve the poor Saints, and others that have need.

Thus far if lawful means be used, and a sober mind kept, the measure is kept.
But if we go (...) this, then we come to that which the Apostle calls (...) the
love of money, which is the root of all evil, from which root, these branches
spring. 1. (...), that others are in better condition then our selves. As the
(...), when they wished they had tarried in Egypt, they preferred the life in
Egypt, before that in deserto in the wilderness. The flesh pots of Egypt
before the Manna, that God gave them from Heaven. 2. (...) and overcaring, and
(...). 6. 31.
taking thought, Quid comedam? quid edam? quid (...)? what shall I eat? what
shall I drink? wherewith shall I be clothed? This distracting care, this (...),
which divides the soul is incident to rich men, when they have much. The rich
(...) in the Gospel, thought within himself, what shall I do? 3. It breeds a
nest of Horse-leeches Luke 12. 17.
Prove. 30. 15.
and (...), that have (...) bisulcam, a cloven or forked tongue, that cry give,
give: and unde habeant nihil refert, sed oportet habere; it skills not how we
have it, but have it we must: and in this there consists that Suppuratio
Concupiscentiae, a festering of the desire.

Now, in the next place for the making of (...) solum, the soil (...), the way
is, (...)
to carry a bigger sale then we are able to bear: by soending more then we are
able, and wasting plus quamopus est, more then needs. For by this means men
fall into want, whereby they become fit soil for the Devil to cast in his seed;
for the Devil finding a man to be thus fitted, moves him to stealth and other
unlawful (...). In the parable of the prodigal, we see that the prodigal fell
into riotous company, among wasters, and sic dissipavit patrimonium, and so he
wasted his substance. It a man (...) such company, they will set him supra
analogiam, above his allowance, he must spend disorderly till all be gone, and
then he says, as they in the Proverbs, Come with us, let us lay wait for
(...), let us lurk privily for the innocent without cause; (...) us swallow
them up alive as the grave etc. We shall find precious substance, we shall
fill our houses with spoil, etc.

The (...) or Jaundise of this vice is likewise discovered by the eye. Ahab saw
(...) in the Eye.
a thing which served for his turn, and lay well for him, and he was sick till
he had it, 1 Reg. 21.
though he had enough of his own: and when he could not obtain it by lawful
means, he made a shift to get it by wrong, even by the blood of an innocent.

For the foaming of it at the mouth, there be many of the speeches of such men,
Foaming at the Mouth.
mentioned by the Heathen, Menander is full of them: and much to this purpose
is Eccl. 7. 11, 12
in the book of Ecclesiastes, and in the Wisdom of Solomon. They say wisdom is
good, but with an inheritance; and as wisdom, so money is a defense, etc. Of
the act forbidden.


Concerning the act it self of theft, forbidden in this Commandment.

The several ways whereby men become guilty thereof, we may conceive by those
several uses of wealth, which we said were lawful; which are by Lawyers and
Divines reduced to those two. 1. The attaining or getting of riches. 2. The use
of them. In the first, respect is to be had to justice: in the second both to
justice and charity, for as we said before, they are given us, not only for
our selves, but as the Apostle says, for the exercise of our liberality
toward those that want; and so we find in 2 Cor. 9. 11.
the Law, that God took order, that out of the substance of the rich, the
Levite, (...). 16, (...)
Stranger, Widow, and Poor, should have their portion. Thest therefore is
committed 12.


1. Either in the attaining and getting of wealth and riches, from whence is
(...), acquisitio, possessio. 2. Or in the use and dispensation of that we have
gotten, which is (...), usus. For he is fur (...), qui male acquirit, a thief
to another man's estate, that gets an estate unjustly: and he is fur sui qui
male (...), a thief to his own that uses it (...). And therefore in the
getting there must be a respect of justice: and in the use and dispensation,
there must be regard both of justice and charity.

CHAP. IIII.
Of unjust getting in general. The kinds of unjust getting. 1. By rapine and
violence, 2. By fraud. The first is either under pretense of authority, or
without any pretense. The former is. 1. For a man's own benefit. In times of
war, or in times of peace: and this is either by power or authority, or by
pretense of Law. 2. For his Neighbors detriment. Unjust getting without any
pretense of authority or Law, is either Piracie by sea, or Robbery by land.
The affirmative part. 1 That every one have a lawful calling. 2. That he labor
in it.

Of Theft committed in getting Wealth, in acquisitione.
Of (...) getting in general.
THings in the beginning by the Law of nature were common, and since, though
men have gotten a propriety (as aforesaid) in them, yet in case of extreme
necessity as the Wise man says, Men do not despise a thief, if he steal to
satisfy his soul, when Prove. 6. 30.
he is hungry: and the law says, When thou come into thine neighbors
vineyard, thou Deuteronomy. 23. 24.
(...) eat grapes thy fill, at thine own pleasure, but thou shall not put any
into thy vessel. In of extreme necessity, a man might make bold with his
Neighbors corn field or vineyard for his present necessity, so he carried none
away. And we see still that in all positive Laws, whereby propriety is
distinguished, there is none of them that hold in case of extreme necessity.
And there is a right which every man has in things which remain common to this
day; as in feris Naturae, wild beasts, appropriate to no man; fowl and fish,
and in such things which are found on the sea shore, as Pearls, Gems, etc.
concerning which the rule is jus occupanti, the propriety is invested in them
that find them; because part of the possession of every country is alloted to
remain to the benefit of the poor.

Afterward, for the proprieties which arise by public right, we laid down
four, viz. 1. Seizing on a country uninhabited; 2. on those things which were
left and forsaken by the owners, which are res derelictae, things given over;
3. Pre. scription; 4. the right got by the bow and sword, or the right of war.

And for private right, there are liberal and free, and illiberal alienations,
of which we have spoken; and in all these there is justa acquisitio, a just way
of getting.

Contrary to which are the unjust ways of getting, whereby theft is committed,
which may be reduced to three heads.

1. The first two we may find in Leviticus, Non extorquebis, neque fraudabis
proximum Levit. 19. 13.
tuum, Thou shall not rob thy Neighbor, neither defraud him. The first is
rapina, robbery. which is extorquere per vim, domino invito, to extort any
thing by force, the owner being unwilling. The other is furtum, theft, which is
fraudare, inscio domino, to deceive any man without his knowledge; both are set
down also in one verse by Hos. 7. 1.
the Prophet. And a third is Parsimonia or parcitas, Parsimony or
Niggardliness, of which afterward.

The Genus to these is briefly set down by the Prophet; Congregare non sua, to
Abac. 2. 6.
gather or increase that which is not his. And our Savior mentioning this
Commandment, Mark 10. 19.
(...), Do not steal, presently adds, (...), Defraud not; for stealing and
defrauding are very near of kin. And it is certain, that they which desire
riches, fall into many temptaetions: and as the Heathen man says, Qui vult
dives fieri, vult cito 1 Timothy 6. 9.
fieri, he that has a desire to be rich, has a desire also to be quickly
rich: and this impetuous desire of being suddenly rich, makes him that he
cannot be innocent, but Prove. 28. 20.
must be entangled, with some of these three, either with Rapine, Fraud, or
Niggardliness.

Now that which is gotten by any of these ways, is not without a curse: as 1.
Of that which is got by Rapine, Force, and Extortion, God says by the Wise
Prove. 25. 7.
man, That it stays not with them that get it, but semper erunt in (...),
poverty ever 11. 24.
12. 27.
attends them. And the Prophet says, Vae tibi qui spolias, nam tu ipse
spoliabere; We to Abac. 2. 8.
thee that spoilest, for thou shall be spoiled. 2. For the deceitful man that
gets his wealth Prove. 22. 23.
by fraud; the Psalmist says, Non dimidiabit dies suos, he shall not live out
half his Psalm 55. 23.
days. 3. For the Niggard it is said, that he that putreth his confidence in
riches shall fall. Prove. 11. 28.
The Heathen man could say, that they shall be as spunges, and some mightier
then themselves shall squeeze them, till they be dry again.

But howsoever it fares with them in this world, they shall have a great curse
1 Cor. 6. 10.
hereafter; for they shall never inherit the kingdom of Heaven. In the mean
time the 5. 11.
Apostle tells us, that they are not to be accounted brethren of the Church,
for he prohibits us from keeping company or eating with them. And this for the
sin in general.

In particular, the sin of unjust getting by force or violence may receive this
division. The particular kinds of unjust getting.
1. Some there are that set themselves to spoil their Neighbors in suum
commodum, to benefit themselves. 2. Others that do it only or chiefly, in
detrimentum and damnum proximi, to hurt and damnifie their Neighbors.

1. Them that do it for their own benefit, we may consider thus. 1. They do it,
1. By (...) and violence.
either cum pretextu, under color of authority, or 2. sine pretextu, without
any such pretense.

1. They which do it cum pretextu, under color of authority, do it either. 1.
In (...). For men's own benefit.
(...), in War, 2. or in Pace, in time of Peace.

1. In time of war, if a man spoil or make havoc (...) all he meets, he is
called In time of (...).
Praedo, a robber. And this is that which John Baptist counsels the
soldiers to beware Luke 3. 14.
of, when he says, Do (...) to no man. Ezekiel. 38. 10, 14.
2. In time of peace, there are diverse that commit this sin, and that diverse
ways. In time of peace.

Some do it 1. partly by their authority and power: and 2. partly under color
of Esaias 3. 15.
Law, and justice, and this either 1. immediately by themselves, or 2. by their
under officers and servants.

1. The Prophet tells us that there are Principes socii furum, some Princes
that are By power.
Companions of thieves: and Ezekiel of some that were like wolves ravening for
their Esaias 1. 23.
prey: and Zephany, some that are as roaring lions. These are they that say
with Laban, Ezra 22. 27.
It is in my power to do you hurt: and with Pilate to our Savior, Know thou
Zeph. 3. 3.
Genesis 31. 39.
not, that I have power to crucify thee, and have power to loose thee? They
have power John 19. 10.
in their hands, as the Prophet speaks, and presuming upon it, take away from
others, Micah 2. 1, 2,
that which is not theirs, by force and violence. Do thou govern the kingdom
of Israel? 1 Reg. 21. 7.
says Jezabel to Ahab, that is, have thou so great power and authority, and
can not take a vineyard from Naboth? Elies sons could execute and make use of
their power, 1 Samuel 2. 16.
and take the meat by force.

And these unjust acts some do exercise by usurpdtion, as the children of Dan,
who Judge. 18. 25,
went and robbed Michah of mount Ephraim, and afterward spoiled a whole (...),
27.
Laish: and Abimelechs servants, who by violence took from Abraham's servants a
Genesis 21. 25.
well of water, for which Abraham reproved Abimelech.

Others by extortion, when they are no usurpers, but rightly possessed of their
places, yet by color of their offices and places exact upon others. This was
the fault of Shebna: and of this the Psalmist speaks, when men do ponere
molestiam praeter statutum, vex and oppress beyond law, exact (...) no statute
will warrant: against such the Prophet pronounces a woe, Woe be to them that
decree wicked decrees, and write grievous Esaias 10. 1.
things which they have prescribed. So did the Servants bear rule over the
people, besides the governors, whereby they were exceedingly oppressed, and
unjustly took Nehem. 5. 15.
from men, that which was theirs by propriety. Therefore the Baptists rule to
the Publicanes and toll-gatherers was, Require no more then that which is
appointed unto Luke 3. 13.
you.

And in this place we speak not only of Princes and Magistrates, but also of
petty Lords and Gentlemen, of whom as S. Augustine says, that magna regna,
great kingdoms, so he might have added magna latifundia vel dominia, great
lordships or possessions, remota justitia, magna latrocinia sunt, without
justice are but great robberies. The answer that the Pyrate made to Alexander
the great, taxing him for his pyracy, is worth the observation; Thou robbest
whole countries and nations (says he) with a great army, and I only some few
passengers with one ship, and a small company of Seamen. And the Lawyer made
this difference between these great and little Thieves to be only this, that
the one wears a Chain of Iron, and the other a Chain of gold.

The like may be said of Noblemen, Gentlemen, and hard Landlords in respect of
Esaias 3. 14, 15
their poor Tenants, of whom the Prophet says; The spoil of the poor is in
their houses: and that they beat the people to pieces, and grind the faces of
the poor. And Micah 3. 3.
Micah that, They plucked off their skins, brake their bones, and chopped their
flesh as small Esaias 3. 14, 15,
as herbs to the pot. The meaning whereof is, that they bind their poor
Tenants to such hard Covenants, as neither by justice they ought, nor can their
estates bear; and then when they come to be indebted to them, they use them, as
that evil servant did his fellow servant, whom he took by the throat, and bid
him pay what he ought, and Matthew. 18. 28.
because he could not, he cast him into prison; which practice we see is
condemned by our Savior in that parable. And in the Law, If a man lent any
thing to his brother, Deuteronomy. 24. 10.
he must not go into his house to fetch a pledge (as if he were Lord of the
house) but 11.
he must stand without till the other bring him a pledge, and if he were poor,
he must not sleep with his pledge. But by oppression and exaction, men become
such as Esaias speaks of, that join house to house, and field to field, till
there be no place; that Esaias 5. 8.
they may be placed soli, by themselves in the midst of the Earth. Soli they
will be, they will dwell alone, by Enclosures and Depopulations. Lords alone.
Rulers and Magistrates they will be alone, and have the sale of things alone.
Monopolizers also they will be, and will sell all things alone themselves, and
at their pleasure and price; especially if they can fortify and arm themselves
by authority: when things come to this pass, it goes hard with the
Commonwealth in general, but chiefly with the poor.

2. The other sort are they which oppress their Neighbors under color of
Law, By pretense of Law.
which should be a sanctuary and a rock to the poor. Do not the rich oppress
you by tyranny, James 2. 6.
and do they not draw you before the judgment seats? says the Apostle. And
the Psalm 94. 20.
Psalmist says, there are some that frame mischief as a law. The Preacher
tells us, that Eccl. 3. 16.
he saw wickedness in the judgment seat; Ye have turned judgment into gall,
[by corruption] Amos 5. 7.
and the fruit of righteousness into wormwood, [by protraction] (...) the
Prophet. 6. 12.
Esaias 10. 2.
They keep the poor from justice, making a prey of the widow, and spoiling the
fatherless.

The same Prophet tells us the reason, why men fall into this (...): Every one
loves 1. 23.
gifts, and follows rewards, which hinders them from judging the
fatherless, nor does the widows cause come before them. Of the same mind is
the Prophet Amos, They afflict Amos 5. 12.
the just, and oppress the poor: and what is the reason? they take bribes or
rewards. And therefore, when Moses directed the people to choose them Judges,
he forbids Deuteronomy. 16. 19.
them the taking of rewards, and gives his reason; for a reward (says he)
blinds the eyes of the wise, and perverteth the words of the just. We see the
experience of it in the sons of Samuel, after they were made Judges; They took
rewards and (...) 1 Samuel 8. 3.
2 Samuel 16. 1.
judgment. And David himself, by taking Ziba's presents, awarded to him
Mephibosheths inheritance, upon a misinformation.

Now these sins, as by the very light of nature they were odious, so by the law
of God were they to be punished severely, being crying sins. If you oppress a
stranger (says Exodus 22. 21,
God) or vex and trouble the widow or fatherless, that they cry to me, I will
surely hear 22, 23.
their cry, and my wrath will be kindled, and I will kill you, etc. And holy
Job reckons up a catalogue of these sins, and in the end of that Chapter,
tells what punishment Job. 24. (...) ver. 2. ad 9.
shall fall upon the transgressors. 1. Their portion shall be cursed in the
earth. 2. The grave and the worms shall consume them. 3. The pitiful man shall
forget them. 4. Their remembrance shall be extinguished. 5. They shall be
broken like a tree. 6. And though they be exalted for a time, yet they shall be
brought low, destroyed, and cut off, as the top of an ear of corn. Nathan the
Prophet representing David's sins in a parable of a rich 2 Samuel 12. 5.
man, that had taken away the poor man's sheep, David (conceiving it to be a
real story) swear that the party so offending should surely die. And his son
Solomon gives this precept: Rob not the poor, because he is poor, nor
oppress the afflicted in judgment. Pro. 22. 22. 23
His reason is, for the Lord will plead their cause, and spoil the soul of
those that spoil them. So much for those that spoil their neighbors in (...)
commodum, to their own benefit.

There are a second sort that do mischief, in detrimentum and damnum proximi,
to the 2. For their neighbors detriment.
detriment and hurt of their Neighbor, without benefit to themselves: and
these are they ofwhich the Psalmist speaks, that offend of malicious
wickedness. As they that Psalm 59. 5.
turn cattle into another man's field or vineyard, that out of malice, spoil
other men's corn, to Exodus 22. 5.
their great hurt, and for no good to themselves. As also they that set their
neighbors 6.
houses, barns or stacks on fire: These are called Incendiaries. And likewise
Sorcerers 7.
18.
and Witches, that wreak their malice upon their neighbors cattle and goods.
These Job. 1. 16.
are the Imps of Satan, who to vent his malice upon Job, did him much harm in
this kind.

Come we now to the other sort, that commit this sin sine pretextu, without any
Unjust getting without pretense of law or authority.
pretense, either of power or right. O trust not in wrong and robbery, says
David: for this is not a course to live by.

For Robbery, it is either upon the sea, and then it is called Piracy: or upon
the Psalm 62. 10.
Ezra 27. 26.
land; and these are either, predones and Latrones, such as rob on the high
way, of which By robbery, by sea or land.
our Savior makes mention, in the parable of him that fell among thieves; or
(...), such as commit Burglary, by breaking houses open. These are capital
sins, Luke 10. 30.
Exodus 22. 2.
O my soul come not thou into their secrets: they make the ways unoccupied,
and travelers Genesis 49. 6.
to walk in by paths. Thus much concerning the first kind of unjust getting,
Judge. 5. 6.
viz. by rapine or force, we come now to the second, which is per fraudem, by
fraud.

Non fraudabis, thou shall not defraud. And in this, as in the other, the theft
is Levit. 19. 3.
either furtum manifestum, manifest (...), or occultum, close; and herein those
men that are called receptores, receivers, or sacularii, are guilty as well as
the actors, for as the proverb is, It is all one to hold the sack, and to (...)
it, the receiver and concealer Exodus 22. 4.
being as deep in the sin, as the stealer, with whom the stolen goods are
found, he is to (...) the law. To receive res raptas and furtivas, goods
stolen, knowing them to be so, is to be a plain thief.

Now because the Apostle setting down the Affirmative part of this precept,
requires two things in every man. 1. A calling. 2. And secondly, to labor in
that calling; Let every man labor and work with his hands, the thing which is
Ephesians. 4. 28.
good: and (...) he will not have any man eat, that will not work; we will
speak 2 These. 3. 10.
of them that have 1. no calling at all, or else 2. an unlawful calling, or
that have 3: an (...) calling; or lastly, 4. that have a calling, but live idle
in it; all which are sins against this Commandment.

1. The first are, Quibus nulla vocatio, they that have no calling at all, such
as Of such as have no calling.
the civil law divides, into, beggars or rogues, and (...) gentlemen, as the
one ought not to live, (...), by begging, for as much as in us lies, there must
Deuteronomy. 15. 4.
be no beggar in Israel; so the other, because they are idle and will not take
pains in a calling, are against the public good of mankind. In paradise, our
first parents Genesis 2. 15.
were placed in the east part of Eden ut operarentur, that they might dress
and keep 3. 19.
the garden, out of Paradise, they were to eat their bread in care, or in the
sweat of their brows, which these men do not; and therefore are thieves, and
are justly here ranked amongst them. 2. The second are Quibus vocatio mala,
that have an unlawful calling, and do that which is either altogether evil,
such was (...) the silver smith, who made Dianas Act. 19. 24.
shrines. And such are they that were prohibited by Gods law: Harlotts, Bawds,
Deuteronomy. 23. 17.
18.
and keepers of Brothel houses, or else that which is vain and unprofitable. As
Lev. 19. 29.
those that use curious arts, fortune tellers Gypsies, Juglers, Stageplayers,
and the 26.
like, and these are no better then the former; God putting no difference
between 31.
nequam and (...), an idle servant, and no servant, an ill calling, and no
calling, is Act 19. 19.
all one in the sight of God. 3. The next are Quibus incerta vocatio. They that
have an uncertain calling, that are so fickle, that no calling will please them
long. They are like a wheel, ever psalm. 83. 13.
1 Cor 7. 20.
turning. The Apostle gives a rule opposite to this, Let every man walk in the
same 1 These. 4. 11.
vocation wherein he was called, and let him meddle with his own business, for
while he cannot settle himself, and follow constantly that vocation whereunto
God has called him, and wherein he may live cheerfully, and serve God
faithfully, he falls into poverty, God not giving a blessing to such inconstant
people; but (as the Psalmist says) they become as stubble before the wind,
and as it is in our proverb, they psalm. 83. 13.
are like the rolling stone, that gathers no moss. 4. The last are they,
Quibus est vocatio, sed in illa otiose vivitur; That have a calling, but live
idly in it; Quibus (...), whose labor is in play and idleness, that sleep in
harvest, these are opposite to the state of mankind both in and prove. 10. 5.
out of Paradise, as we showed before.
And as at the first, the Lord appointed, that man should be a labourer, so at
the last, when he shall give his hire and reward, he will say to his steward
voca operarios, (...) call the laborers, and give them their hire; so when he
comes to punish, Matthew. 20. 8.
he will not only punish servum (...), the wicked servant, but also, servum
Matthew. 25. 30.
(...) and (...) id est, superfluam creaturam, the idle and unprofitable
servant, that superfluous creature, and cast him into utter darkness.

CHAP. V.
The second way of unjust getting. viz by fraud, or close thest. the lawful
ways of acquiring. 1. By gift. 2. By inheritance. 3. By industry wherein are
to be valewed. 1. Labor. 2. Hazard. 3. Charges. Of right, by damage. Of money,
the measure of contracts,. Close theft is. 1. In contracts. 2. Out of
contracts. In contracts, is 1. By selling that which cannot be sold, as, the
gifts of the spirit, things annexed to spiritual offices, things consecrated to
God benefits, as loan of (...) etc. 2. When there is not a proportion between
labor and praemium. 3. About buying and selling, in respect of. 1. The
measure. 2. The commodity. 3. The price.

WE are now to come to the second part of unjust getting, which is by fraud,
or close theft, which is properly and usually called Furtum, theft. But first
we must show the lawful ways of acquiring, to which theft is contrary.

1. A man may come to have a right, Donatione, by donation or gift. Nunquid
dabitis Lawful ways of acquiring.
mihi de substantia vestra? Will you give me of your substance? says Job, and
this 1. By (...).
which is given must be our own, and not another man's. Job 6. 22.


2. By inheritance, Haereditate: as may be gathered, by Abraham's reasoning,
when 2. By inheritance.
he had no son, Ecce servus meus haeres erit, Lo my servant shall be my heir.
And God took order in the law, that a man's estate should descend to his
children, both sons and Daughters; so that the Lex salica, the Salique law in
France is a foolish law, and against both the law of God, and the law of
Nature: and when our Savior John 4. 38.
says, I have set you to reap where you have not labored, he shows that
there is power to convey, not only our lands, but also our labors to others,
who may hold them by a good tenure. 1. Donatione. 2. Haereditate. 1. By gift.
And 2. By inheritance.

3. By industry and pains, a man may have a right to those things which he has
3. By industry, wherein are to be valued,
neither by gift, nor inheritance, and that in a threefold consideration, viz.
In respect of his 1. Labor. 2. Peril or hazard. 3. Cost or charges, which he
may lawfully value, in any contract, as in buying and (...).

1. In respect of his labor. Therefore Laban told Jacob; It was no reason, he
1 Labor.
should serve him, and labor for him (though he were his brothers son) and
have nothing, and therefore says he, tell me what shall be thy wages. Whereby
it plainly appears, that labor requires, Compensationem, a recompense. Our
Savior says, Dignus est operarius mercede, The labourer is worthy of his
hire. There is a rule of equality to be observed. (...), says the Apostle,
that there may be an equality. So 2 Cor. 8 14.
there is an equality between opus and merces, the labor and the reward, and
therefore (...). 24. 15.
God commands, that the wages of the labourer be not detained, and if it be
detained, it is peccatum clamans, a crying sin. So that he is a thief, who
detains the reward of him that takes pains for him. 2. In respect of his peril
and hazard, which may be estimated, and so ought to 2 Hazard.
be. Caleb made Proclamation, that whosoever can get Kiriath Sepher (which was
Josh. 15. 26.
a well fenced City, and hard to be won) should be rewarded, and when Othniel
won 1 Samuel 17. 25.
it, he had his daughter for a reward: The same course took Saul, when Goliath
the Philistim came to defy Israel, he that will venture upon that Philistim.
(...) be my son in law, and shall marry my daughter, etc. and when David slew
the Philistim, he had Saul's daughter. The like we find about Jebus, which held
out against David; He that gets Jebus, shall be Captain of the host,
whereupon Joab went up (...), and 1 Chro. 11. 16
was made Captain. And for this cause it is, that because the Merchants (...)
is greater then the Husbandmans, because the one ventures only his seed, the
other his estate and life, therefore his gains ought to be greater. 3. In
respect of his cost and charges. Thus Joseph having been at charges, in laying
3 Charges.
up corn, and providing houses for Granaries, and furnishing himself with more
(...) was needful for (...) alone, only in bonum publicum, for the public
good, might therefore sell the corn at a price answerable to his charges, which
they call multiplicem usuram, a multiplied usury; and so we find God, allotted
to Cyrus, when he 2 Chro. 36. (...).
gave him all the kingdoms of the earth, that which they call, usum preciosum,
a most rich reward.
Besides these three which arise from Industria, industry and pains, there are
two more. 1. Damnum or Detrimentum, damage or loss. For if a man's beast feed
in 1 Damage.
another man's field or vineyard, he shall make satisfaction. 2. Money, which is
praetium Exodus 22. 5.
2 Money.
indeed, for money answers all things, and so God appointed that it should be
Eccles. 10. 19.
the ground and measure of buying and selling under the law, and gave rules
accordingly Levit. 25. 14. and 27. 18.
in buying and selling.

These things premised, we come to that in which is Furtum occultum, close
theft, (...) close theft.
which is either in contracts, or out of contracts. In contracts, theft is
committed, either about things which cannot or ought not to be sold, or about
things which may be lawfully bought and sold.

1. In contracts of the first sort a man may commit theft. (...) Contracts.


When that is sold which cannot be sold, because it cannot be valued, being of
a higher nature then gold or silver, as the grace of God, or gifts of the
Spirit. Acts 8. 20.
When Simon Magus would have bought the gift of the holy Ghost, s. Peter
(abhorring his motion) said, Thy money (...) with thee: this ever since had the
denomination of Simonie from him.

2. Of the like nature to spiritual things (which cannot be valued for money,
and therefore cannot be sold) are also those which are annexed to spiritual
things, and therefore cannot be transferred but to those which have those
spiritual things, as cure of souls, right of receiving tithes, etc. which are
annexed to the order of Priesthood, and therefore cannot be sold.

To this Head may be referred the converting of things to a common or (...)
use, for gain, etc. which are consecrated and appropriated to sacred and
spiritual uses. Such theft was committed by them that bought and sold in the
Temple (a place appointed for prayer and divine worship) whom our Savior drove
out of the Temple, and tells them, they made the house of God a den of thieves.
For though it were lawful for some to sell, and others to buy what they needed
for sacrifices or offerings in the Temple, yet to buy and sell in that place,
consecrated to God (which they did, thereby to get the greater price) was
unlawful, and therefore Christ calls it theft.

And as Simonie is committed thus, in re sacra, in selling of holy things, so
there is a kind of Simonie in selling of Justice, which is a sacred thing: and
therefore s. Augustine and s. Ambrose say, that Quid dabitis mihi, ut faciam
justitiam? what will you give me to do justice? is all one with Quid dabis mihi
ut vendam tibi Deum? what Esaias 5. 23.
will you give me to sell God to you? Therefore the Prophets cry out against
these, Mic. 7. 3.
that justify the wicked for a reward, and against Judges that ask reward. And
we see Acts 24. 27.
this sin in the Apostles times, Foelix hoped for money from S. Paul, to acquit
him.

A third thing to be comprehended under, Selling that which cannot be sold, is
the selling of gratuita beneficentia, what ought to be freely and liberally
given without reward. Thus for an Usurer to sell the loan of money, is Vitiosus
contractus, an unlawful Psalm. 112. 5. and 37. 21.
contract. The Psalmist makes it a note of a good man to lend freely, and our
Savior bids us lend freely, (...), looking for nothing again; and that we may
Luke 6. 35.
not think we shall be losers, he adds, your reward shall be great, and ye
shall be the children of the highest. Gratuitum and mutuum, loan, and no hope
of recompense, must go together. He that does inscribere pretium liberalitati,
set a price upon his liberality, corrupts the virtue. For as Donatio liberalis
est alienatio, sine omni mercede in aeternum; Giving is a free alienation of
our right to a thing for ever, without recompense: so Mutuatio est liberalis
alienatio, sine omni mercede ad tempus, Lending is a free alienation of a thing
for a time without any recompense: both lending and Psalm 112. 5.
giving ought to be free. A good man is merciful, and lends. If his lending
be with expectance of reward, the virtue of mercy is utterly lost.

2. In things that may be bought and sold, because two things are required in
contracts. 2 In labor, and the reward of it.
1. In some there is Labor and merces, the labor and the reward. 2. In others
Res (...) and pretium, the thing prized, and the price: therefore there may be
theft committed in all these. 1. About the labor and reward, when either of
these is wanting, or where an equality between them is not observed. The
Magistrate has tribute paid him for his care of the public, and the Levites
portion is due for his service at the Altar. Now if they kill the fat, and
cloth themselves with the wool, and instead of feeding the flock, care only
for feeding themselves, they are Ezekiel. 34. 3.
as the Prophet calls them, Companions of thieves and robbers: Fures officii,
thieves in their office.

So when a Scholar has Pretium sapientiae, the price of wisdom, the reward of
Prove. 17. 16.
study; if he have not curam sapientiae, a care to attain wisdom, by taking
pains in his studies, he is Fur, a thief in study, because there is not an
equality between the reward and his labor. So on the contrary, if any of these
do labor in their place, they must have their reward, and it is theft to
defraud them of it, for the labourer is worthy of his hire: yea, the labourer
in Gods Vineyard must have Decorum pretium, a Deuteronomy. 24. 15.
goodly price, or a rich reward, (as may be gathered by the contrary from that
in Zach. 11. 13.) there must be a proportion between the labor and the reward:
He must have a reward, and that a liberal reward. God required that a servant,
which Deuteronomy. 15. 14.
after six years service was set free in the year of Jubilee, should be furnished
liberally at his departure: and if for bodily service such a free and liberal
reward be due, much more for the service of men's souls: to defraud such
therefore of their reward, or to pinch them in it, is theft.

2. As theft may be committed in those contracts, where there is Labor and
praemium, labor and reward; so in those other, where there is praecium and res
appreciata, In buying and selling.
as in buying and selling, wherein are to be considered; 1. Mensura, the
measure. 2. Merx, the commodity sold. 3. Praecium, the price. In (...) which a
theft may be committed.

1. For the measure, if we thereby understand, that which is the measure of all
commodities 1. The measure viz. Money.
and their value, viz. Money. Here may be a kind of theft, either bycorrupting
the measure, when men do (...) pecuniam, counterfeit money, or mingle a baser
substance with the metal, whereby as the Prophet complained, The silver is
become Esaias 1. 22.
dross; contrary to which was Abraham's practice, who when he bought the field
of Ephron, He weighed him 400 (...) of silver, current money with the Merchant.
Or by clipping and lessening it in the weight or quantity; for God appointed
under the law, that the shekel should be of just weight, containing 20 Gerahs.
Whosoever therefore do adulterate money in the quality or goodness, or lessen
it in the weight or quantity, make a general disproportion in all contracts,
and bring in an universal confusion, commit theft, and in civil societies are
punished Vt (...) majestatis reos, as men guilty of treason.

Again, if by measure, we understand that standard whereby the commodity to be
sold is to be measured, to lessen or falsify, this is theft; and therefore the
law commands a just weight and balance: and the Scripture says, that false
balances, and diverse weights or measures, are abomination to God. But this
properly comes under the next branch, when the buyer is couzned, in the
quantity of the commodity which is sold.

2. For the Merx, the commodity sold, theft may be here diverse ways committed.
2. The commodity.
1. In the substance of it, if it be false or counterfeit, or mingled and mixed
with other In the substance
things, the Prophet Amos reproves them that sold quisquilias frugum, the
refuge of wheat; and Esaias speaks of wine mixed with water. Thus the wares may be
corrupted Amos 8. 6.
in the substance. Esaias 1. 22.
2. In the quantity, it is plain theft, when a false weight, or a deceitful
balance is Quantity,
used, which Solomon says are an abomination to the Lord. Levit. 19. 34.
3. In the quality, when there is some fault in the commodity, which the seller
Prove. 20. 10. and 11. 1.
knows, and either declares it not to the buyer, or abates not the price
accordingly: Quality.
this is theft, condemned by the Councels, as turpe lucrum, filthy lucre, and
forbidden by God himself, under the name of deceit, or false dealing, Levit.
19. 11. Ye shall not steal, or deal falsely, etc. 4. Lastly in the manner of
uttering it. When the seller takes advantage of the ignorance Manner of
uttering.
of the buyer, and seeks to overreach and deceive him. Jacob would have his
sons to take no advantage of an oversight in another, when they found (...)
money Genesis 43. 12.
in their sacks mouths, Take double money with you, and carry it again in
your sacks, Levit. 19. 1.
perhaps it was an oversight. The Prophet reproves those that devised how they
Jer. 9. 5.
might go beyond their Neighbor; and the Apostle (...), See that no man go
beyond 1 Thessalonians. 4. 6.
or defraud another, (...); and he gives a (...) reason, for God is the avenger
of all such; though they may deceive men, yet they cannot deceive God. This is
all Luke 19. 8.
one with Stellionatus, gross couzening, such as Zacheus had been guilty of,
and (...) at his conversion, promising to make four fold restitution, as
knowing else he could not be forgiven by God: (...), If I have overreached or
couzened any, I restore him four fold.
3. For the price; herein also theft is committed, when the price is not given,
but 3 The price.
men work upon the ignorance or necessity of one another; for men must not
think when they come to buy and sell, that they come to a spoil, where they may
catch what they can get: Solomon reproves those that (...) a commodity, or
undervalue it for their own advantage; It is naught, it is naught, says the
buyer, but afterward, Prove. 20. 14.
when he is gone, he boasts of his penny-worths. And the Prophet pronounces
Amos 8. 6.
a woe against those that sell the needy for shoes; which is by Expositors
said to be, When men being in need, so that they must have money upon any
terms, the buyer will wring them so hard, that they shall have life or nothing
for the ware. This the Prophet Micah calls Hunting our brother with a net. Such
frauds as these are Mich. 7. 2.
severely forbidden in Scripture: Under the Law, whosoever had deceived his
brother, Levit. 6. 5.
was to make restitution, and to add a fifth part in the day of his trespass
offering. The Psalmist tells us, None shall be admitted to stand in Gods holy
place, who Psalm. 24. 4. and 15. 4.
has sworn deceitfully. Nay so far we must be from this, that if any swear to
his own hurt, he must not change: And s. Peter makes it a note of our new
birth, to lay aside 1 Pet. 2. 1.
all guile, (...), Laying aside all guile, etc.
CHAP. VI.
Of theft out of contracts. This is 1. In the family, by 1. Purloyning. 2.
Mispending. 3. Idleness. 4. Withdrawing ones self from service. 2. Without the
family, is 1. Of things consecratea: by Sacrilege. 2. Of things common, and
those either public or private. Of theft personal and real. The aggravation of
theft, in regard of the poor, etc. Against enclosing of Commons. The
conclusion, about unlawful getting.

NOw of thefts that are without contract, these are either Domestica, within
the family, or forinseca, without.

1. The first, of, or within the family; as a bad servant. For Fur domesticus,
fur maximus est, the domestic thief is ever the greatest thief; and the reason
is, because of the trust he receives. And such an one may be a thief, these
four ways.

1. Intervertendo, by purloining their masters goods, or (according to the
sense of Tit. 2. 10.
the word) by turning the profit out of his, into their own purses. This was
the Luke 16. 6.
2 Reg. 5. 22.
unjust Stewards act, and Gehezies; and the text says, that Judas (one of our
Saviors Jo. 12. 6.
Disciples) was a thief, because he diverted privily somewhat to his own use,
out of the bag: this is furtum domesticum, theft within doors. 2. Dissipando,
by wasting and mis-spending his goods, in drunkenness, riot, and Deu. 21. 20.
other excess: Like that servant, that in his Masters absence began to smite
his fellows, Prove. 29. 3.
Luke 16. 1.
and to eat, and drink, and to be drunken. And the prodigal son, that spent his
12. 45.
fathers estate upon Harlots. 3. Torpendo, by consuming his estate by
idleness: this is Fur laboris, one that steals Ephesians. 6. 6.
his labor from his Master, and by that means wastes his estate. For servants
should Luke 17. 9.
not do eye service only, or that which they are commanded alone, for that is
not thankworthy; but labor faithfully, and be as provident for their Masters,
as they should be for themselves. But if instead of doing faithful service,
they grow negligent and idle, they are within the compass of the breach of
this Commandment. The Wife Prove. 18. 9.
man says, that He that is slothful in his work, is even the brother of him
that is a great Mat. 25. 26. 30
waster, and shall receive that doom, Thou wicked and slothful servant, etc.
Cast that unprofitable servant into utter darkness, etc. 4. Lastly,
Subtrahendo se per fugam, by withdrawing himself from his Masters service, and
becoming a fugitive, robbing his Master of his service; for a servant is part
Eccl. 2. 7.
of the Masters possessions. Though Agar served a hard Mistress, and thereupon
left Genesis 16. 6. 9.
her service, yet the Angel sent her back, and bad her humble her self. And
though s. Paul could have been contented to have retained Onesimus, yet because
he was Philemons Phil. 13.
servant, from whom he had fled, he returned him back.
Theft without the family is either of things consecrated to God, and this is
called Theft without the family.
Sacrilege. Sacrilege.
things common and profane.

1. For the first; there was a Law for it, That if any should by ignorance take
away Lev. 5. 15.
things consecrated or holy to God, he should bring a trespass offering. The
Apostle matches it with idolatry, Thou that abhorrest idols do thou commit
sacrilege. God Romans 2. 22.
himself immediately punished this sin, in Ananias and Sapphira, and that with
capital punishment, with death, and that a sudden death, giving no time for
repentance; thereby to show how he hated this sin, and what a severe avenger
he is of it. It is noted of Abimelech (though a King) that he took seventy
Judges 9. 4.
pieces of silver out of the temple of an Idol, his god Baal-Berith; and what
followed appears in the same Chapter, He was slain by a woman with a v. 53.
piece of millstone which broke his scull. Athaliah the Queen, with her sons,
had broken up the house of the Lord, and took the things that were dedicated to
God, 2 Chronicles. 24. 7
23. 15.
and gave them to (...); she was drawn out of the Temple, (the place she had
24. 7.
(...),) and then slain, and her sons had no better end. The alienating of the
sacred vessels of the Temple, and applying them to profane uses by Belshazzar
at his feast in Babylon, caused that terrible handwriting on the wall; which
made all his (...) to shake, and foretold him, that the Kingdom was translated
to Dan. 5. 2.
the Medes and Persians, which happened presently after, for he was (...) that
same Verse ult.
night.

2. Theft of things profane or common, is either, 1. Of such things as are
public. Public theft.
Or 2. private.

1. Public, when things belonging to the Public State or Commonwealth, are
Peculatus.
stolen; as if one rob the Exchequer, etc. And this is called Peculatus, when
the King is robbed, or any thing stolen out of a public place; such also were
those Balnearii fures, that stole out of the Bath (a public place) the clothes
of them that were bathing. And to these may be added, such as receive moneys
out of the public treasury, and convert it to other private use. Such were the
Priests 2 Kings 12. 15
in the time of (...), who received every man's half shekel, brought in upon the
Kings Commandment for the repair of the Temple, but neglected the reparation:
whereupon an other course was fain to be taken; a Chest was provided with a
hole in it, into which every man put his money for that use.

personale, of living things, as 1 Men, 2 Beasts. 2. Private theft is either
Furtum Private theft, personal and real.
reale, of things inanimate.

1. The stealing of men, is called Plagium, and such thieves Plagiarii. This
sin was punished with death, by the Law, He that steals a man and kills
him, Exodus 21. 16.
shall dye the death; yea, if he were only about such a thing, he was to dye
for Deuteronomy. 24. 7.
it. Saint Paul accounts it so great a sin, that he reckons Man-stealers
among 1 Timothy 1. 10.
Genesis 40. 15.
Whoremongers, Buggerers, Perjured persons, and other the most grievous
sinners. This was part of Judas his sin, who sold his Master for thirty pieces
of silver, though Matthew. 26. 15.
withal there was herein a betraying him into the hands of his enemies who he
knew would pu him to death.

2. The stealing of beasts is called Abiegatus, and the men Abigei, stealers of
cattle; such were the Sabeans and (...) that took away Jobs Oxen, his Asses,
and Camels. Job 1. 15. 17.
Against this we have an express law, wherein the offender is to restore in
some Exodus 22. 1.
cases four fold, and in some five fold.

2. Real theft, is the stealing of things inanimate, that have no life, as of
Exodus 22. 7.
Money, (...), Apparel, etc. for which the offender by the Law was to restore
two fold.

Thus we see the several sorts of theft. Now all these are aggravated, in
regard The aggravation of all.
of the person against whom they are committed; as to rob the stranger, the
poor, the fatherless, or widow: this brings a greater curse upon the finne,
and makes it become peccatum clamans, a crying sin; If they cry unto me (says
God) Exodus 22. 21, 22, 23.
I will surely hear them. Therefore there is a special prohibition against
taking a Deuteronomy. 24. 17.
pledge of the Widow, and Job mentions it as an act of men transcendently
wicked, Job 24. 3.
(...) drive away the ass of the fatherless, and take the widows ox for a
pledge. And Solomonn advises, Not to enter into the field of the fatherless,
for their Redeemer Prove. 23 10.
is mighty, and he will plead their cause with thee. 11.


And here, partly under this Head, and partly before, comes in the Enclosures
Against enclosing of Commons.
of Commons, which may well be reckoned among those peccata clamantia, crying
sins: For this theft is aggravated by this circumstance, that it is against
the poor.

For as when Countries were first seized upon, and possessed, and the first
partition was made, (...) man had his own peculiar, distinct from other men's;
(as Caleb had Hebron allotted him by Joshua,) which became their inheritance.
So there was Jos. 14. 13. 14.
consideration had of that protestation of God, That there should always be
some poor among their brethren, as objects of their charity and mercy, and
therefore there was left for them a division of Lands in Common, whereupon they
might live, which ought not to be alienated: for God takes order under the Law,
Deuteronomy. 19. 14.
that those ancient Land marks should not be removed, which they of old time
had set: and there is good reason for it, because all the parties therein
concerned cannot at once be pretent, and therefore the right cannot be
alienated; for all the poor from the beginning to the end, are interested
herein; and those that are not born cannot consent to any such act. Hence God
appointed (to show the greater detestation of this sin, and to deter the
people the more from attempting any such matter) that the curse should proceed
out of their own mouths. All the congregation was to curse them that did any
such thing. Solomon's censure Deuteronomy. 27. 17.
against such as remove the Landmarks, is, That GOD himself will plead the
cause with them. The Prophet Hosea when he would set forth wicked Princes by
as odious a comparison as he could, says, they are like those that remove
Hos. 5. 10.
the landmarks. How odious this was, may appear by the setting up every where
Metas terminicas, upon the borders; and the imprecations against them that
should remove them. The Prophet Micah threatens it as a great judgment upon a
people, and which should bring doleful lamentation upon them, that the portion
of Mich. 3. 4.
the people should be changed, and their fields divided, etc. And Job though
without the Law, yet saw so much, that he reckons this among the practices of
wicked men, to remove the land mark Job 23. 2.


And thus much for the ways of unjust getting, and the several sins
committed therein.

When we begun to speak of the act of theft, we showed that it might be either
in the unlawful getting of riches, or in the unlawful use of them; and the
several ways of lawful getting we reduced to two heads. 1. Furtum, theft,
which is getting by deceit. 2. Rapina, which is by violence. They are
distinguished by Nazianzen thus; in the one there is (...), manus injecta, the
laying on of hands, whereby a thing is taken by violence, In the other (...), a
compassing by (...) or deceit. Now whatsoever is got either way, is not to be
accounted as a (...) from God: And therefore Chrysostom upon that petition in
the Lords Prayer for temporal things, (Give us our daily bread) says, Habere
convenit etiam malis, habere autem de manu Dei, sanctis tantum, the wicked may
have these outward things, but to receive them from the hands of God, as
blessings from him, is peculiar to the Saints; for Deus parare non vetat, sed
cum peccato parare, qui enim cum peccato parat, ei diabolus dat quod manducat,
non (...): God forbids us not to get them, but to attain them with sin; for
what any attains by sinful means, he receives it as a gift from the Devil, not
as a gift from God, nor can he justly make this petition to God; and he that
thus receives his daily bread, receives also (...), a pledge of some judgment
that shall (...) him.

CHAP. VII.
Of the virtues opposite. 1. Just getting. 2. Restitution, commanded both in
the Law and Gospel. That we must make restitution, not only of what is
unlawfully got, but of some things lawfully got. As 1. Of what belongs to
another by gift. 2. Of things deposited. 3. Of things found. 4. Of things lent.
5. Of what will prejudice the public, if it be detained for our private
benefit.

OPposite to this vice of unlawful getting, is the virtue of just getting: Of
the virtue of just getting.
which is the subject we are now to handle. It is called studium honest rem
parandi, an endeavor to get by honest means, where men do (...), grow rich
without fraud. Concerning which every man ought to be persuaded, that as
Solomon says, A little which the righteous has, ( viz. which is got by lawful
means) is better then the great revenues of the wicked Prove. 16. 8.
(got unjustly.)

The Apostle sets both down together in one place, where speaking of covetous
Tim. 6. 5.
men, who set themselves to get by any means, he says, they are men of corrupt
minds, and destitute of truth, and gives the reason, because this is their
position, that gain is godliness: gain got by any means they count lawful, let
men say what they will, they applaud themselves in their unjust gains; like the
Heathen that said, Let me have the money in my bag, and let the people call me
pillar and poller, or what they will. But in the next verse he shows the
practice of just getting, when a man can invert the proposition, and say, that
(...) is gain; accounting only that the true gain, which is got in the way of
godliness. This is indeed the true gain, which is got according to Gods
prescript, not by man's overreaching; when a man can say Genesis 43. 12.
concerning all his gettings, as Jacob did to Laban; call me to account when
you will, Genesis 30. 33.
Cras respondebit pro me justitia mea, my righteousness shall answer for me in
time to come.

Now though to this virtue of just getting, it belongs, to keep and preserve Of
Restitution.
us from evil and unjust dealing; yet because the World is full of it, and most
men have mentem malam, a corrupt mind, and run on in an unjust course of
acquiring, till the conscience be touched and awakened, whereby they are
stopped. Therefore to this must be added a second virtue called Restitution,
which is absolutely necessary if a man have over-shot himself in the way of
unjust getting.

It is one of the most frequent and principal common places throughout the
Fathers. saint Augustine sets down this for a Canon, Non remittitur peccatum,
nisi restituatur ablatum, the sin of an unlawful purchase, or getting, is never
pardoned, unless restitution be made of what is unjustly got.

The ground of this is laid both in the Old Testament, and in the New. In the
Old, God appointed, that he that had trespassed against his neighbor, should
confess his sin and make recompense, adding a fifth part more. Agreeable to
which is Numb. 5. 7.
that speech of Zophar, before the Law, He shall restore his labor and devour
no more, Job 20. 18.
according to his substance shall his restitution be, etc. The reason is added
in the next verse, For he has undone many, and spoiled houses that he never
built. And as this was known before the Law, so we find it practiced under the
Law. For after the return from Babylon, when diverse had oppressed their poor
brethren by usury, etc. Nehemiah gave order, That they should restore their
lands, and vineyards, Neh. 5. 11. 12.
and houses, and the hundred part of the money, the wine and the oil which they
13.
exacted of them. And they said, We will restore and take nothing of them:
Whereupon he called the Priests and took an oath of them, that they should do
according to this promise. And Nehemiah shook his lap, and said, God shake
every man from his house and from his labor, that performs not this promise,
etc. to which all the congregation said, Amen.

If we come to the Gospel, S. Paul gives a general rule, to render to every man
his Romans 13. 7.
due; and in the repentance of (...), this was one part, which he publicly
protests Luke 19. 8.
he would perform, (...) if he had wronged any man by couzenage, forgery, or
falsehood, he would restore him four fold.

And as restitution must be of goods (...) gotten, so also there is a
restitution to be made of some things, which are got by a lawful contract.

1. As first of things which belong to another, by donation or free gift, they
must be restored, God takes order, that the inheritance shall be given to the
first born, though Deuteronomy. 21. 15.
he were by a wife not beloved, because of right it belongs to him. 16.


2. Of things which are committed to our trust, the Depositum must be restored.
So under the Law, If any man did deliver money to his neighbor to keep, or Ox,
or Exodus 22. 7. 10
Ass, etc. he must make restitution to the right owner, or else there is a
violation of Justice.

And with these Depositarii to whom things are committed in trust, are likewise
to be reckoned, Fiduciarii (as the Civil Law calls them) Trustees, such as are
put in trust with children and their (...), while their parents are living, or
Tutors and Guardians after they are dead. They must make account for the
Depositum, the thing committed to their charge. For the latter, we have the
example of Mordecai, entrusted with Hester, his Uncles daughter, the text
says, he brought (...) 2. 7. (...)
her up, as if she had been his own child, which is the utmost that could be
expected. And for those that have charge of children during their parents
lives, as Masters and Tutors, they must according to that of Solomon, utter and
write to them many times excellent things in Counsel and knowledge, etc. They
must diligently read to them, and instruct them, and give a true account to
their parents of what they receive for their use, and not with the unjust
Steward write down 50 for 80.

The same also belongs to Executors, (...) such as are put in trust with
administration of the goods of the dead, and to Feoffees entrusted with
conveyance of lands, or disposing of them to pious uses. David was entrusted by
Jonathan with his posterity, 1 Samuel 20. 15.
and he promised not to cut off his kindness from his house for ever, which
trust we find, he accordingly performed, when after the death of Saul and
Jonathan, he enquired 2 Samuel 9. 1.
if there were any left of the house of Saul, to whom he might show kindness
for Jonathans sake. The contrary practice we find in those wicked husbandmen,
in the parable of the vineyard, who when the Heir was sent to receive the Luke
20. 14.
fruit, said among themselves, This is the Heir, come let us kill him, (...)
the inheritance shall be ours, for which we see how grievously they are
threatened, and what a woe the Lord of the vineyard denounces against them.

3. With those things which go, sub ratione (...), under the name of trust, are
joined such things as go sub ratione inventi, as strayes, of which the law is,
If thou meet thine enemies ox or his ass going astray, thou shall surely bring
it back to him again; Levit. 6. 4, 5.
or if thou be far from him or know him not, thou must keep it, till he seek
after it, Numb. 5. 8, 9.
and then restore it; and if the owner never come for it, either by ignorance,
not knowing where it is, or by (...), not requiring it, we must not convert it
to our own use, but restore it to his kindred, or if he have no kindred, then it
must be given to the Lord, to be employed in pios usus, for pious and
charitable uses.

4. To these may be added those things which are lent. As, 1. those things the
use whereof is freely given us for a time, these must also be restored; for as
S. Augustine says, tametsi benign dimittitur, tamen non injuste repetitur,
although it were freely lent, yet it may be (...) demanded again; and therefore
he that restores not what is lent, is unjust: God took order under the law,
that it should not only be restored, but also, if any hurt befall it, it shall
be made good, and if it perish, another shall be given Exodus 22. 14.
for it. 2. For those things that are hired, and not freely lent, order is also
taken for their restitution; It shall be restored if it perish not, and if the
owner be by, it shall not Exodus 22. 14.
be made good, for it is a hired thing, it came for the hire.

And because the unfaithfulness and breach of trust in men has brought in
writings, as Bills, Obligations, Pledges, Sureties, etc. therefore even for
them also has God taken order in his word, that every one must perform, what
he has once undertaken. The Psalmist makes it a note of a good man, not to
change if he have once sworn, though Psalm 15. 4. and 37. 21.
it be to his own loss and hinderance; and for restoring the pledge, both the
Law and the Prophets insist upon it; he that restores the pledge. etc. shall
live, he shall (...) die: and e contra, for the surety, the Law was strict, he
must not (...) spared, and the world was Exodus 22. 26.
Eze. 11. 7, 12. and 33. 15.
come to that pass, that they would take the garment of him that was surety,
and let the other go free; therefore Solomon advises him that is surety, not to
rest, till he has Prove. 22. 26. and 20. 16.
discharged what he has undertaken: and if he that is surety ought to be thus
careful, and 6. 1, 4.
much more ought he for whom he is surety, because the care and trouble brought
upon the other is by him.

5. Lastly, in regard of the Commonwealth, there is an unjust detaining, when a
man for his own private benefit, keeps back any thing to the detriment of the
public, in (...) case restitution is also to be made; therefore Solomon says,
that he that withholdeth corn, the people shall curse him, etc. And thus much
for the several branches of this Virtue of restitution.

The Casuists, who are very copious upon this subject, and have involved the
matter by many intricate and needles questions, have yet well reduced all to
certain heads, comprised in a Distich, Reginald. (...) paenit. lib. 10. tract.
3. n. 135


Quis, quid restituit, cui, quantum, quomodo, quando,
Quo ordine, quove loco, quae causa, excuset iniquum.
We shall first premise a few things, for the better understanding of what
follows. (...). cas. cons. tract. 32. cap. 1


1. By restitution is meant, an act of commutative justice, whereby equal
compensation is rendered, or satisfaction given to him from whom any thing is
unjustly taken or detained, or who is unjustly damnified by another.

2. The necessity appears by the (...) of Scripture already mentioned, wherein
Addition 35.
it is expressly (...), as necessary to (...) of sin, and so to salvation,
necessitate Concerning (...). This Should have been at fol. 475 The Casuists,
etc.
(...), though not (...).

3. If any ask the (...) why it is so little urged by our Writers, and
Preachers, and the practice of it become such a stranger to us, seeing it is so
necessary; I answer, that among many reasons that may be rendered, these two are
apparent.

1. The abuse and mistakes about the doctrine of free justification, and about
the Ezekiel. 33 15. 18. 6, 12
difference between the Law and the Gospel, (of which some touch was given
before) Luke 19. 8, etc.
for diverse make the Gospel to consist of mere promises, as if all precepts
were See the fourth Addition p. 58.
legal, and that there could be no (...) remission, if any thing be required of
us, though only by way of qualification to make us capable, and not by way of
merit: which as it is directly contrary to the whole current of Scripture, so
it opens a gap to all libertinisme, and makes the whole duty of Christian
obedience, and this of restitution in special, merely arbitrary in relation to
pardon, and therefore it is no wonder, that where such (...) are sucked in,
that the practice of this duty is neglected. 2. The neglect and (...) of
peoples examining themselves, and advising with their Pastors concerning the
estate of their souls before they come to the holy Eucharist, few take their
counsel and directions concerning their actions in particular, but content
themselves to hear them in the pulpit, where they speak only in general: hence
people go on headlong in unjust courses without check of Conscience, and no
restitution is made, but what Law enforces; whereas, if the Priest knew the
state of his flock, restitution would be made, without any noise or breach of
charity, or multiplicity of Law suits; and hence it is, that the Lawyer has
got this part of the Priests office, and all matters of restitution are removed
from the court of conscience, forum conscientiae, where the Priest as Gods
Delegate might determine things of this nature without trouble or charge to
any, to the forum Civil, the courts at Westminst. where, by those Pests of the
Commonwealth, unconscionable Lawyers, suits and quarrels are maintained, to
the shame of Christianity, and the great hazard of peoples souls.
Now for the particulars above mentioned, we shall resolve them briefly.

1. Quis, who is bound to restore? The answer is, 1. He that has any thing of
Exodus 21. 13 19. 22, 3. 14. 14. 15. 23. 1.
another man's, by Loan, (...), etc. or that has unjustly damnified another,
either in the goods of his soul by scandal, etc. or of his body by wounding,
maiming, killing, etc. Deuteronomy 19. 19.
or of his (...) and good name, by slander and disgrace, or of his outward
estate (which is most proper for this place) by theft, rapine, fraud, deceit,
extortion, or any other unjust act: 2. All that partake with him, as causes of
damnifying another; these are set so (...) that Distich, Thom. 2a. 2ae. q. 62.
a. 7. (...). l. 10. (...). 3. (...). 135.


Jussio, consilium, (...), palpo, recursus,
(...) mutus, non obstans, non manifestans.
Here are nine sorts of persons included as participating, some by words only,
as Filiucius tract. 32. cap. 1, etc. 2 Samuel 14. 30. and 12. 7.
the four first, by whose command, counsel, consent, or commendation, another
is induced to wrong his brother; others by fact, as the receiver, and the
helper, and these concur by a positive (...); others by a negative act, as they
that hinder not, by word, Psalm 50. 18.
or by deed, when they might and ought ( ex officio, and not only ex
charitate) to have hindered, or do not manifest it after, when they are bound ex
officio so to do. All such are tied to restitution, if they be effectual causes
of the damage. For the Rule of both Laws (...) and Canon is, Qui (...) dedit,
damnum dedisse (...).

2. Quid, what must be restored? whatsoever of right belongs to another, or if
Romans 13. 7, 8.
the thing be lost or perished, then the value, together with the fruits and
profits, and (...). 24. 13, 14, 15.
the damages (...) by unjust detention.

3. Cui to whom? To the party (...), as the former places show: but yet in
(...). 22. 13. 14
Levit. 6. 5.
some cases, Interdum non est officium reddere quod acceperis, says S.
Ambrose, a man is not bound to restore what he has received, as when the
restoring will be to the hurt of the owner, or to the public damage of Church
or Commonwealth: thus a sword is not to be restored to a madman, but to him
that has the keeping of him. If the owner be dead, then to him, to whom his
goods of right ought to descend, Numbers Matthew 25. 41.
(...). 4. 27.
5. 7, 8. If the owner be not known, then to God, who is Lord of all; the Lord
Paramount to whom it escheates, and to Christ the Heir of all, that is, to the
Priest for Gods worship, Numb. 5. 8. and to the poor members of Christ.

4. Quantum, how much? The whole damage, if it be certainly known, if it be
doubtful, then as it shall be valued by honest and indifferent men.

5. Quomodo, in what manner? It may be either a by man's self, or by another,
who is known to be honest and faithful; otherwise, if he (...) in his trust,
this excuses not the party. 2. If the damage be secret, one may provide for his
credit, by using a (...) to restore it, for he is not bound to open
restitution, if he can do it otherwise. 3. If Luke 19. 8.
the whole be to be restored, it must notbe done by parts.

6. Quando, when? presently without delay, for otherwise the sin is continued
and increased, so long as restitution is deferred: the negative precept (of not
keeping that which is another man's) included in the affirmative, binds semper,
and ad semper. Say not to thy neighbor come again to morrow, says Solomon. If
it be meant of the Prove. 3. 27.
poor, to whom we owe only ex charitate, it follows a fortiori, when any thing
is due ex debito justitiae.

7. Quo ordine, in what order? Where a man is able to satisfy all, he is not
tied to any order? otherwise he must follow the Laws under which he lives.

8. Quo loco, in what place? This is not much material, when any question
arises about this, the positive Laws determine it.

9. Quae causae excusant, what causes free a man from restoring?

1. The disability of the party; for as God in this case accepts of a willing
mind, 2 Cor. 8. 12.
so oughtman: but this excuses only, so long as he is not able. 2. The
cession, or giving up of all his estate to satisfy his Creditors, this frees
him Cod. qui bonis cedere possunt: and ff. de cessione bonorum.
by the Civil Law, provided, that if he be able afterward, he satisfy to the
full. 3. The express or tacit consent of the Creditor, provided that this
forgiving be, 1. by him that has lawful authority: 2. that it be free and not
extorted. 4. When the present restitution might endanger a man's life, or
damnifie him more then the other should have benefit thereby: this for a time
may be a just cause to defer restitution. 5. Ignorance, not of the Law of
restitution, for this noman ought to be ignorant of, and if he be, he ought not
to take advantage by his own negligence, but of the fact, when a man knows not
that he has damnified another, provided, it be not gross, (...) wilful and
affected ignorance. 6. If there be a compensation made to the party wronged
some other way, either by moneys, commodities in trading, etc. or by something
equivalent to the damage; this frees him in foro conscientiae.
The larger explication of these particulars must be had from the Sea Thom. 2.
2. q. 62. Cajet. Valent. and reliq. ibidem. Summist. verb. (...). Scholastici
in Sent. 4. did. 15. Soto de Just. and jure lib. 4. q. 6, 7. Lessius de Just.
and jure lib. 2. cap 7. Azor. to. 3. lib. 4. Molin. tract. 2 Disp. 714, etc.
Navar. Enchirid. cap. 17. Covar. ad Reg. peccatum. 2 Par. n. 5.
Casuists.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the second general, viz. unjust keeping. The right use of riches is, 1. in
respect of a man's self: the sins opposite, 1. Parsimony, 2. prodigality; two
degrees of it, 1. to spend unreasonably, 2. Above ones means. 2. Inrespect of
others, viz. the poor, where we are to know two things: 1. How we hold our
riches, or by what tenure: 2. What we are to conceive of the poor. A threefold
necessity, 1. of nature, 2. of our person, 3. of our estate and condition.
Several motives to communicate to the poor.

HItherto we have spoken of the right getting of riches, which is, when we have
not increased our estate, either by detaining from others, that which is none
of ours, or by taking away from others, that which they have right to, but want
power to retain, or by that which they call generatio pecuniae, the increase of
money, by usury; when our gettings are by none of these ways, then are we just
Lords and owners of what we have. It is well said, (...) justitia est condus,
ibi Christus est Dominus, where justice is the layerup, there Christ is Lord of
those goods, and of such we have a good tenure, but the devil is the Lord of
what is got otherwise; S. Augustine Luke 8. 14,
upon the parable of the seed says, that worldly gains are thorns, and a thorn
non (...) sine laesione, is not gathered without danger of (...), it may run
into ones hands, and hereupon comes that proverb, Omnis dives iniquus, aut
haeres iniqui, every rich man is either an unjust man, or the heir of an unjust
man.

But now, when a man's estate is justly got, then in the next place, he is to
take care Of the right use of riches
about the use of it, which is the second thing to be considered.

This use respects, either a man's self, or others. Of the first the Wise man
speaks, Eccl. 6. 7.
when he says, that all the labor of a man is for his mouth, (that is, for
his own necessities:) Of the second the Apostle, when he exhorts the
Corinthians to be rich in liberality, by considering the necessities of others.
He offends against the first, who when God has given him riches, wealth, and
honor, so that he wants nothing for his soul Eccl. 6. 2.
of all that he desires, yet God gives him not the power to rule thereof, but
a stranger eats it: this is vanity and an evil disease. And he offends
against the second, who looks only at himself, and wants bowels of compassion
to wards others.

These two uses are both comprehended by Solomon in two verses, Drink waters of
Pro. 5. 15, 16.
thy own cistern there is our own use; and then what follows, let thy fountains
be dispersed abroad, and rivers of waters in the street, here is the use of
others. The Apostle speaks of a double sowing, answerable to this two fold use
of riches, a sowing to the Gal. 6. 8.
flesh, and a sowing to the spirit, whether it be propter piosusus
ecclesiasticos, for pious uses that concern the Church, and the Ministry, or
propter usus civiles, for pious uses which concern the Commonwealth, as the
relief of the poor, etc. Both uses may be best and plainlyest seen in Christ's
practice, who when he bade Judas dispatch, the John 13. 29.
rest thought, that because he bore the bag, that Christ's meaning was, either
that he should he buy such things as were needful, that is, for their own use;
or else that he should give something to the poor, which is the second use, so
that by the words of the Disciples it appears, that those were the two uses of
our Saviors purse; first, to provide things needful for themselves, and
secondly to contribute to the necessities others, of these two uses we are now
to speak severally.

For the first use which concerns our selves, we must know, that here is a
double The first use, which concerns our selves.
extreme to be avoided.

1. Niggardliness, or parsimony. 2. Profuseness, or prodigality. Two extremes
to be avoided.

1. For the first of these. As a man may kill himself, and thereby become felo
de se, and 1 Niggardlines
as (...), uncleanness may be committed with a man's self; so there may be
furtum Eccl. 4. 8.
in se, theft against a man's self; for as the Preacher says, there is one
alone, etc. for whom do I labor, and bereave or defraud my self of good, quare
defraudo animam meam? (...) is a fraud and theft committed against a man's self.

S. James tells such men their doom. Their rust shall be a witness against
them, and shall eat their flesh, as it were fire: upon which place S. Ambrose
says, Esurentium est James 5. 3.
cibus etc. it is the bread of the hungry that grows moldy by thee, and the
drink of the thirsty that sowres by thee; so that he is guilty of a double
theft, against himself, and against the poor. Of this man, by the consent of
Interpreters, (...) the Prophet Hosea, when he says, that he sows to the
wind, and reaps the whirlwinde, Hos. 8. 7.
the stranger shall reap the fruit of his labors.

The common plague of this sin, as the Heathen man observed, is, that Quod
profunda hausit avaritia, when the prosound avarice of one, has gathered much
together, there shall come another, qui luxu pejore retundet, whose profuse
vanity shall scatter it. And the hand of the Lord is often upon such men, by
disappointing them of their ends; for wherea, their sparing is, either 1. that
they may enjoy their riches in their latter days, when they are old, as the
rich fool in the Gospel, who said, Soul, take thine ease, eat drink, and be
merry, thou have much goods laid up for Luke 12. 19, 20
many years, etc. God disappoints them, (as it is in the next verse, this night
they shall take away thy soul, and then whose shall all these things be, etc.
or 2. that they may be kept therewith in the day of sickness: here likewise
they fail of their ends, when they are in sponda languoris, upon their sick
bed, they can have no comfort in their Psalm 41. 3.
riches, their wealth cannot ease them of their pain, they grow worse and
worse, and ofttimes though they spend all their money upon the Physicians, as
the woman that had the issue of blood, yet they are never the better, (as the
Rabbis use to say) they shall not shift from the sick man's pallet, to the bed
of health: or 3. that they may leave great estates to their children: in this
also God often crosses them, Job. 20. 10.
so that as Elihu speaks, Their Children shall seek to please the Poor: they
shall be (...), as we see by common experience, that a prodigal son is usually
the heir to a niggardly father.

2. The other extreme, is profuseness or prodigality. He that rightly uses his
riches, 2. (...)
is, (...), a steward, and his work a dispensation, but he that runs into this
extreme is a prodigal, and his work is (...), wasting, he flings his money from
him, as if he cared not for it, or were angry with it; as Seneca says, Ita se
gerit, ac si iratus esset pecuniae, he behaves himself, as if he were fallen
out with his money.

As the inordinate desire of riches, began from that other (...), that lust
mentioned in the foregoing Commandment, so lightly it ends in the same, when
men spend what is unjustly got, in lusts and pleasures, vain and sinful, and
sometimes monstrous and unnatural. And herein the prodigal, as well as the
covetous, is fur sui, a thief of his own; for being profuse and prodigal (...),
where he needs not, he steals from himself (...), what he may need, he wastes
and consumes himself in superfluities, so that at last he wants such things as
are necessary.

The Philosopher observed, that they which are (...), quick and eager in such
things as concern themselves, and the satisfying their own lusts and pleasures,
are (...), dull and heavy in any thing that is good; when any charitable or
good work is offered to them, as the redeeming a captive, etc. they are very
sparing and backward, though profuse and prodigal in other matters, as in a
riotous supper.

But as we must remember, that as justice, justice must be our condus, our
layer up, so we must have a promus, a layer out too, and who that is, the
Heathen man tells us in that speech of his, (...), Temperance be thou my
steward. And that to avoid this extreme of prodigality, we must avoid that
which is (...), the whetstone of riot, which is nothing else but (...), vain
glory, which if one can take away, he may know the Compass of his own (...),
and so shall never fall into this sin.

And although it be true which some may say, that how much soever they spend,
yet they have enough, they are able to do it, though they do with the rich man
in the Gospel, (...), fare deliciously every day, yet their abundance will not
Luke 16. 19.
excuse them from riot, seeing they are but stewards, and must give account to
God of what they have, and how they use it. The Heathen man could say of those
that spend profusely, because they have enough, that this is no reason, for
(says he) if you should allow your Cook a bushel of salt, for the use of your
house, and he by putting too much into the pot, should make the Pottage too
salt, if he should answer and say, he did it because he had enough, you would
not be satisfied with such a foolish answer. No more will God, who has given
abundance to some men, be satisfied with their answer, that they spend
riotously, and say they may do it, because they have enough.

And if this be a sin, in those that abound and have (...), much more
grievous is the sin of them that spend above their ability, whereby they spend
that which is another man's, and run themselves into debt, to the ruin of
themselves, and those that depend upon them.

Now of this (...), prodigality and excess there are two degrees.

1. When they spend (...) unseasonably, upon no just occasion, daily, or
oftener then needs, as the rich Glutton, who fared deliciously every day. 2.
When they spend (...) above their strength, which is, either above their means
and faculties, further then their estate will bear, or else above their
condition, (though their estate will bear it) of the former we have an
instance in him that began to build (...), a tower, which he was not able to
finish, of the other Luke 14. 28.
in Nabal, who though he were rich, yet it was above his condition to 1 Samuel
23. 36.
make a feast like a king, it is not lawful though a man be able, to live above
his rank and condition, much less if his purse will not reach. Therefore David
Psalm 69. 22.
prayed that his enemies table may become a (...) to them, because by excess
it becomes a snare both to the soul and body, to the soul which will hereby,
despumare in libidinem, wax wanton, and to the body by bringing diseases upon
it for as (...) says, such shall (...) at the last, when the flesh, and their
body is consumed, Prove. 5. 11.
and not only to soul and body, but to the estate also which is hereby wasted
and consumed. Thus that speech of Zophar is made good, though (wealth, unjustly
got) be weet in the mouth, and the covetous hide it under his tongue: though it
be Job. 20. 13, 14 15.
sweet in the getting, (and we may add, in the spending too) yet it shall be
bitter at the last; Though he swallow down riches, yet he shall vomit them up
again, God shall cast them out of his belly, etc. And thus much for the first
use of riches, which concerns our selves.
2. Come we now to the second use of our outward estate, viz. That which The
second se of riches, 1. Concerning others.
concerns others. As we must provide for our selves, so we must give to the
poor: we must sow to the spirit, and not spend all upon the flesh: and as we
must drink out of our own Well, so we must let our Fountain run abroad. Now a
days men sow only to the flesh; though as we showed before, this ground
brings forth nothing but rottenness and corruption; meat is for the belly, and
the belly for meat, but God will destroy both the belly and it. But we must sow
to the spirit, if we Acts 20. 35.
would reap eternal happiness. Our Saviors saying was, Beatuis est dare quam
accipere, it is a more blessed thing to give then to receive; and this it seems
was his common saying. Those that are in want count it a blessed thing to
receive, but he tells us, it is a more blessed thing to give; and the Apostle
makes men rich by giving, Being 2 Cor. 9. 11.
enriched in every thing to all bountifulness.

To stir us up the better to this duty, it is expedient for us to know:

1. How we hold our riches, or how we come by them. 2. What we are to think of
the poor. We must know two things.

1. For the first, we may see in Deuteronomy 26. that men may know that all
they 1. By what tenure we hold our riches.
have is from Gods gift, God took order that they must acknowledge it by
performing an homage to him. 1. The man must bring his basket with his Deuteronomy.
26. 2. 10
first fruits, to the place where God should place his name, and the Priest
must take it and set it before the Altar, and then he that brought it must say,
A Syrian ready to perish was my father, etc. He must acknowledge that God
brought him out of Egypt into that fruitful land, and that there was nothing in
him or his progenitors, why God should deal so bountifully with him or them,
and that in acknowledgement that he holds all he has of God as Lord Paramount,
he brings his first tenths as a token of his homage.

2. Having brought his basket before the Lords he must say, Sustuli quod
sanctum Verse 13.
est de facultatibus, verse 13. I have taken out that which is hallowed ( viz.
the fruits and first fruits, etc.) out of my substance, I have not spent it
upon my self, but have taken it out, and given it, ad usus Ecclesiasticos, for
the Levite; and ad usus civiles, For the stranger, the fatherless, and poor,
and that not as an arbitrary thing done of his own accord, but by necessity of
duty, for he must say, he did it according to Gods commandment. So that we see
here, every man must confess, 1. that all he has is held of God, ex libera
elemosyna, as free alms from his hands. 2. That there is a rent, a duty to be
paid, which is a tenth at least, for holy uses, for the priest and Levite, and
the service of the Altar, and after that a second tenth for the poor, and 3.
that both are due by God command.

2. For the second point, what we are to conceive of the poor, the Psalmist
says, 2. What we are to conceive of the poor.
that the man is blessed that judges wisely of the poor, men are apt to err
in their judgment of them, for the common conceit of them is, as of persons
psalm. 41. 1.
that concern us not. To rectify our judgment, we must judge of them, as God
judges, whose judgment we are sure can never be reversed. How is that? As
himself tells us in Deuteronomy, he has taken this order, that there shall ever
be some Deuteronomy. 15. 11.
poor in the land; and there I command thee (says God) (it is not counsel or
advice) that thou open thy hand to thy brother, and to thy poor, and to thy
needy in the land: so that the poor are appropriated to us, they are made
nostri, ours: we cannot shake off this affixum, this hanger on, which God has
fastened upon us: and consequently he has given strict precepts for their
relief, 1. Negative, Non obsirmabis cor, Verse 7.
thou shall not harden thy heart against them, and nec claudes manus, nor shall
thou shut thine hand: we must neither be hard hearted, nor close fisted toward
them, Verse 9.
nay, there must not be an evil thought in our heart against them, (...) they
cry unto the Lord against us, and it be sin to us, the wages whereof is death,
as the Verse 8.
Apostle speaks. 2. Affirmative, Thou shall open thy hand wide unto him, and
shall surely lend him sufficient for his need in that he wants. There is a
double estate of the poor, some are so, that if any thing be lent, they can
employ it so that they can live thereby and pay it again. Others are so
impotent, that lending will not help them; therefore God takes order for both,
we must lend to the first, and give freely to the other. Our Savior joyneth
both together, Give to him that asks, Mat. 5. 42.
and from him that would borrow turn thou not away.

Again, s. Augustines counsel is, if we would have the word to fructify in us,
not to let thorns grow among the seed, but to (...) the seed with a hedge of
thorns, which is the proper use of them, and this is, when our riches are
bestowed in works of mercy, or else we must inserere verbum spinis, (...) upon
these thorns, by relieving our poor brother. Here is a science to be (...), we
must open our hand and lend him, or if that will not serve, we must give him.
Thus we must graft, and then we may look for fruit in abundance.

Christ tells us, that God has given us our talents to this purpose.
Negotiamini Luke 19. 13
dum venio, Occupy or trade therewith till I come; we must employ them for his
advantage. Now this occupying is, as himself says in another place, by
improving our talent, and laying of it out for the use of the hungry, the Mat.
25. 35. 40
naked, and the sick, if we expect the blessed reward from him: this is the
best way of increase, and the surest way to bind him to reward us: For he
has to this purpose made a new promise in the Gospel, that what shall be done
to the least of these his brethren, he will account it as done to himself. As
for those that the Wiseman speaks of, which have viscera crudelia, cruel bowels
( the mercies Prove. 20. 10.
of the wicked are cruel,) or as the Apostle speaks, (...) viscera, no bowels.
or Phil. 2. 1.
as saint John speaks, Viscera clausa, close bowels shut up, so that no fruit
of 1 John 3. 17.
mercy comes from them; the love of God abides not in them, (...) can they
expect any part of this reward.

Under the Law God took special order to meet with this sin; six years they
Exodus 23. 11.
were to plough and sow the land, and what should come of it, they were to
gather in (...) themselves (the tenths both for the Priest and poor still
deducted) but in the seventh year, they must let it lie, that the poor of the
people may eat; and so they were to do for the Vineyards and Olives. And when
they did reap their Lev. 19. 9, 10.
fields, they were not wholly to reap the corners of their fields, nor to
gather the gleanings of the harvest, etc. but must leave them for the poor and
stranger. And by an Deuteronomy. 22. 1.
argument a comparatis we may gather, that if when a man saw his brothers Ass
go astray, or any harm befall him, he must not pass by, but help him, much
more must he help his brother, if any weakness befall him.

Nor because our own necessities must be regarded in the first place, for our
direction A threefold necessity.
in this case, we must know, that Divines speak of a threefold necessity, which
some reduce to two, including the third under the first. Tho. 2. 2. q. 32. a.
5. 6.


1. Necessitas naturae, the necessity of nature; thus every man is to provide
for Cajet. tom. 2. opusc. tract. 5. c. 6.
himself food, apparel, house room, and such necessaries to sustain nature. 2.
Necessitas personae, personal necessity, which extends not only to our selves,
but to those also of our household, for which if a man provide not, the Apostle
says, Navar. Enchir.
c. 24. n. 6.
he is worse then an Infidel. 1 Timothy 5. 8.
3. The third is necessitas status etconditionis. When besides the former, we
would have wherewithal to live according to our state and condition, and this
consists not in indivisibili, in an indivisible point, but admits a great
latitude according to the several ranks, callings, and conditions of men. Thus
if a man have 300 l. he has as much as will serve him in his condition, and
yet if another has 3000 l. he has no more then will serve him in another
condition.
Now when a man has what is necessary in the two (...) respects, then he must
prefer the necessities of the poor, before his own in the third respect; for
then that precept of Christ takes place, (...), give alms as much as yeu are
able. (...) (...) quod (...), quantum potestis maxim, it a respondet (...).
That is, when the two first necessities are served: for if there be necessity
either of our nature or person, we are not then bound to give, but of the
surplusage, which we have over and above, unless it be in case of extreme
necessity of our brother, or of the public necessities of the Church, (our own
necessity not being present or extreme) as those Corinths commended by the
Apostle, who though they were (...), in deep poverty, yet they gave to their
Hebr. (...)
power, yea, and (...), beyond their ability. Deuteronomy. 16. (...).
2 Cor. 8. 23.


Chrysostom gives this reason why we should part with cur money, in works of
mercy, because else, says he, we do not love it: For though covetousness be
the love of money, (...), and they which are most covetous, have the most close
bowels, and are most loath to part with it, yet he proves that they do not love
it aright; for the true love of a thing is not amor concupiscentiae, to desire
a thing for our own use, as a man loves meats and drinks, but amor
benevolentiae, when we love a thing for it self, desiring its good: for the
true act of love, is Velle ejus bonum, quod, vel quem amamus, to wish the good
of that thing or person which we love; and therefore if a man love his money,
he wishes well to it, Vt been sit ei. Now the well-being of every thing is,
when it is so, as God has appointed; for the been esse, the well being of
every thing in the world is, Ita esse ut Deus ordinavit. Therefore if any man
do wish an esse to his money, in that order which God has ordained, then he
wishes the good of it, and consequently loves it; otherwise he wishes the
evil of it, and consequently loves it not. Now Gods ordinance is, that every
thing that is good, should be (...), or sui diffusivum, of a communicative
nature, diffusive of itself, and the end of money in special, is to be
communicated, and so if we communicate it in a right manner, it attains the end
for which it was ordained, and so we (...) that we love it. (...) a miserable
case were we in, if the Sun should not communicate his heat and light to us,
but should keep it to it self; or if the Earth should keep in her fruits, and
not yield the same to us; we should say, this were contrary to their nature,
and to the end for which they were made, and contrary to their well-being, as
well as ours: and so it is contrary to the nature and end of money, to keep it
to our selves, and not to communicate it to others.

Among many notes and signs of the Church, it has pleased God to make choice
of this one, as an infallible sign that we are true members of it, If we
communicate to the Saints, (...), says the Apostle, communicating to the
necessities of the Saints. Here is (...), fellowship and communion. Again, this
virtue is called Romans 12. 13.
liberality, by the Apostle; because that when we are Liberales, liberal and
(...), we 2 Cor. 9. 13.
do liberare animam a vitiis, free our selves from vices. It is also called
(...), a ministry, because it is a service we owe to the Saints, a debt or a
rent we must pay to 2 Cor 9. 1.
them. Again, he calls it (...), a free gift, because it must be freely and
readily given. 2 Cor. 8. 19.
Now a days men give nothing freely, rather do ut des, or do ut facias, is in
use, men give to those that shall give to them, or they give to them that shall
do something for them, but this is not (...), a free gift, which the Apostle
requires: and (...) he calls it (...), a blessing; because by doing thus, this
fruit shall come, the poor 2 Cor. 9. 5.
shall bless us, and God also shall bless us. Thus by all those several
expressions of the Apostle, it appears, that the use of riches, is to have them
communicated; and therefore if any do appropriate that to himself, which God
would have common, he perverts the use of it.

Again, this use of communicating to others appears, in that good works are
compared Gal. 6. 8.
to seed, and doing good, to sowing. He that sows to the spirit, shall of the
spirit Hos. 10. 12.
reap life everlasting, says the Apostle. And sow in righteousness and reap
in mercy, says the prophet. (...) parce seminat, parce metet, and qui seminat
in multis benedictionibus, 2 Cor. 9. 6.
metet in multis benedictionibus; He that sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly,
and he that sows bountifully, shall reap bountifully. A man may so love his
seed, that for pure love he lets it lie in his Barn, till Worms breed in it,
and consume it; and then he does amando perdere, by loving lose it: Therefore
he does truly love his seed, that does projicere semen, cast his seed into the
ground, which returns him fruit an hundred fold: this is truly amare semen, to
love his seed. Thus we see if the temporal blessings of God be seed (as in
truth they are) there must be a casting of them away and a scattering of them,
that we may receive them again with increase.

And yet in this casting them we do not lose them, nor our right and interest
in them, for when a man has sown an Acre of ground, if one ask him, whose is
that seed, he will not say it is the grounds, but his that sowed it: so if a
man could be brought to this persuasion, that semen est serentis, non
recipientis, that what is sown in works of mercy, is his that sowes it, and
not the grounds on which he sowes it, he would not sow sparingly. Thus we see
the true state of riches, they are seed which must be sown.

Now as the Husbandman does credere illud quod non (...), believe that which he
sees not, that when he casts in one grain, and sees it rot, and though many
showers and suns do fall upon it, yet at last he believes an Autumn will come,
and that he shall reap an ear for a (...); so if God enlighten our eyes, and
give us hearts credere quod non videmus, to believe what we do not yet see, we
shall reap the fruit thereof, which shall be videre quod credimus, to see and
enjoy what we believed; and so we shall find, that this seed of good works,
though at present it seem to be lost, and cast away, yet it is serentis, it
belongs still to the sower, and that an Autumn or harvest will come, when it
will return an hundred fold.

And thus we see the ways of just getting, by lawful means, without deceit or
violence; and when things are unjustly got, the necessity of restitution.

We have seen also the right use of riches, both in regard of our selves,
against prodigality and covetousness, the two extremes; and also in respect of
others, by bounty and liberality, and so we see what is forbidden or commanded
in this Commandment.

CHAP. IX.
That this Commandment is spiritual. Of Covetousness: diverse reasons against
it. The means to keep this Commandment. 1. Contentation. 2. To walk in our
ways, which that we may do. 1. We must have a lawful calling. 2. We must be
persuaded that riches are Gods gift. 3. We must live according to our means. 4.
Observe the rules for getting and using of riches.

ACcording to our former method, we must now show, as the third rule of extent
The third rule, That this Law is spiritual.
requires, that this Commandment is spiritual, and looks at the heart. Christ
says, that thefts, covetousness, deceits, etc. come from the heart; and so
all unjust gettings Mark. 7. 22.
being of affinity with them, come from the same fountain, which fountain must
be stopped or damd up, if we will be observers of this Commandment: and therefore
the Apostle mentions the corruption of the mind first, and then covetousness
1 Timothy 6. 5.
after, when men account gain godliness.

If man had continued in the state of innocence, his desires both natural and
oeconomical Of covetousnes
would have been ruled and guided by reason; but by the loss of that estate,
the mind or rational part, which should be guide of his actions is corrupted,
whereupon his desires are irregular and immoderate, so that he comes appetere
(...), to desire fullness and (...).

The belly has an appetite beyond that which is sufficient for it: and so by
the corruption of the mind, the appetite is unruly, whereby we are disquieted
by continual craving. This within us, like the daughters of the Horseleech,
cries still, give Prove. 30. 15.
give, bring bring, etc. Against which there must be one within us, that says,
there is enough: to which end there must be an (...), a self-sufficiency, or
contentedness of mind; for as (...), luxury or excess, is the corruption of
our nature, so (...), or contentedness, is (...), the riches of our nature.

But now where there is (...), covetousness, or a desire of more, the Apostle
1 Timothy 6. 9.
shows us how the case stands which such a heart. 1. That such men will be
rich, this they resolve upon, and because it holds especially in evil things,
that quod volumus, valde volumus, whatsoever we desire, we do earnestly desire
and long after it, in so much that as Solomon observed, even the slothful covet
greedily all the day long, and Pro. 21. 15, 16
what they desire they will get as quickly as they can: therefore such men will
berich as soon as they can; and then, as the Wise man says, He that makes
haste to be Prove. 28. 20. and 20. 21.
rich, shall not be innocent: and an heritage though it be quickly got at the
beginning, yet the end of it is not blessed.

2. That because of this greedy desire, they fall into diverse temptations: the
Devil sets (...), a temptation, some round sum, or great gain which he offers
them, and then (...) a snare, wherein they are caught. He requires some small
thing of them, nothing but a false asseveration, a few words, or a false oath,
or with the unjust Luke 16. 6.
steward, only a dash of a pen to set down 50 for 80; thus the bait is laid to
draw them into the snare.

3. That God seeing them thus resolved and willing to be caught, he (...) them
fall into the snare, in his just judgment, as a punishment of their inordinate
desire of (...), and (...) inflicts further punishments, as that of the
Preacher, He that loves money, shall not be satisfied with it; the reason
whereof is, because the mind cannot be Eccl. 5. 9.
satisfied with any thing but God. And then from many desires, verse. 10. the
covetous man falls into many cares; for when goods increase, they are increased
that eat them, and what good comes to the owners thereof, but the beholding of
it with their eyes; so that as his desires increase, so do his cares, as we see
in the rich fool, Quid edam? quid bibam? quid induam? What shall I eat? What
shall I (...)? what shall I put on? Or if he be rich, then his care is, quid
faciam? what shall I do? I have not barns enough; rich, but not rich to use it.

4. Besides this, he adds, that (being thus distracted with worldly cares) such
men shall err from the faith, not only by falling into damnable errors, but
by not believing, nor regarding either the promises or threatenings, or the
Commandments of God. This was the punishment of Judas, who because he was
covetous and defrauded his Master, for, fur erat and loculos (...), (...) was a
thief and bore the bag, therefore, John 12. 6.
as we (...) afterward, he came to make so little account of Christ, or of the
doctrine which he preached, that to show he believed it not, he sold his (...)
for thirty pieces.

5. And from this which is very heavy, such men fall further, (...), into
destruction and perdition. 1. Into destruction of the substance they have got.
The Prophet Zachary speaks of a flying book, wherein were written the curses of
Zach. 5. 4.
God, which should enter into the house of the thief, and the swearer that
swears falsely, and should consume the Houses with the timber and stones
thereof, so that no good (...) shall come of what is unjustly gotten. And
therefore the (...) man could say, If you would have your chest full of (...),
and would have them to continue with you, see that you get them well, (...),
whatsoever is unjustly brought into the house, has no safety or sure footing,
either God will take it from them, and as Zophar says, they shall vomit it up
again; or else he will Job. 20. 15.
take them from it, by shortening their days, Non dimidiabunt dies suos, they
shall not live out half their days. Dies Deiveniet tanquam fur, nulli autem it
a (...) fur, ut furi, the (...) of the Lord will come suddenly as a thief, but
to none so like a thief, as to the thief. But this is not all, for 2. they
shall fall (...), into perdition of the soul (...). 25.
too. At the last day, they must hear that sentence, Go ye cursed into
everlasting (...), etc. 35. 40. 45.
such as have (...) taken any thing from others, non controvertitur de iis,
there shall be no question of them, but they must go into perdition, and
therefore they are not mentioned, nor is there any plea or excuse for them. As
for those that have not given to others, they plead for themselves, and their
plea is answered, non dedist is, you have not given to me, says Christ,
because you gave not to my brethren: but for (...), such as taken from others,
by fraud or violence, there is no question made of them. (...) they shall (...)
that true which the Prophet speaks, They have (...) themselves for an (...) of
barley, and a piece of bread: they have gained a handful Ezekiel. 13. 19.
of (...), and have lost the kingdom of heaven; they will then find, that it
will advantage them nothing, to win the whole world, and to lose their souls.
And because the (...) man compare, the (...) man's desires to hell, as if they
were insatiable Prove. 30.
and would hold as much as hell, and as if there were an affinity and just
adequation between them and Hell; therefore like must go to like, Hell is the
place prepared for them; for the Apostle (...) down this conclusion, that no
thief, nor covetous man, nor (...) the kingdom of God. 1 Cor. 6. 10.


We come now according to the fourth rule, to the means and helps we must use
for The fourth rule concerning the means that (...) the (...) of this
commandment.
the (...) this Commandment.

And because Covetousness, which is the root of all, is in the heart,
therefore to (...) it and pluck it up by the roots,

1. We must labor for a contented mind, (...), let your conversation be
(...); how is that? in the next words it follows, and be content with 1.
Contentation
those things you have, that is, when a man, for his personal and natural
necessity, has Heb. (...). (...).
that which is sufficient, he must rest and be contented therewith; and for the
supply of what is necessary for his estate and degree, which admits a great
deal of latitude, and has not his medium, in indivisibili, consists not in an
indivisible point, he must (...) trouble himself with anxious cares, but must
cast himself upon God; yet he may lawfully take what God in his ordinary
providence shall cast upon him by lawful means: but if he have not this, if he
have what is necessary in the former respects, he must be content.

When a man is not contented, there comes in (...), a dividing and disquieting
of Matthew. 6. 25.
the soul, and then he distrusts the Providence of God, whereas, S. Peter out
of the Luke 6. 22.
Psalm tells us, that the righteous cast their care upon him, because he cares
for them: 1 Pet. 5. 7.
they have this persuasion, that God will not let them want (they using lawful
means psalm 55. 23.
and relying upon him) yea, that the very lions shall rather want then they. It
is true, 1 Timothy 5. 8.
Paul allows men (...), providence and industry, for procuring necessaries for
their nature and person, and they that want this care, he says are worse then
infidels, and have denied the faith. But there is a difference between (...),
providence, and (...), anxious care, for the one does not possess and take up
the soul, but leaves the heart wholly to God, and may consist with prayer to
him; but the other takes up all, or most of the heart, so that one cannot
attend to prayer, and other duties of Gods worship, as we see in Ezekiels
hearers, who when worldly cares took up their hearts, regarded not the
exercises of Religion, as the word preached to them; insomuch, that the Prophet
taxes them, that with their mouths they made feasts, but their heart Ezekiel. 33.
31.
ran after covetousness, so that do what he could, he could not draw them from
it. The Prophet Hosea says of such, that cor eorum (...) est, their heart
(...) divided, viz. between God and the world, so that through their worldly
desires and cares, joined with distrust of God, when they come to present
themselves before God, he cannot have it whole and entire, nay, many times the
world takes it up wholly, so that God can have no part: therefore to prevent
and avoid this, Contentedness, resting upon Gods providence, not excluding
(...), but (...), is the first thing.

2. The second thing is laid down by the Psalmist. Blessed is the man that
fears Psalm 128. 1.
the Lord, and walks in his ways. This is when a man so looks up to God,
that he 2. To walk in our ways, that is,
also uses lawful means, and walks in those ways which God allows: and this
includes in it diverse things.

1. He must set himself in a lawful calling, he must eat his bread, either in
the care and 1. To have a lawful calling.
study of the mind, or in the sweat of his brows; either jure manus, or jure
oculi, by the labor of his hands, in bodily works, or of his eyes, by reading
and study. S. Paul says, that those that live idly, live altogether out of
order, and such he would 2 These. 3. 11.
have to be avoided; and therefore this is certain, that every man must keep
himself in an honest calling. 2. Being settled in a lawful calling, he must
stand thus resolved: first, he must (...) 2. To be persuaded that riches are
Gods gifts.
not to be chargeable to others; and secondly, not only so, but also to be
helpful and beneficial to others, if God please to enable him.
Now to attain this, he must be persuaded, that as God will have some to be
poor, so it is he that makes rich, and that whosoever would have divitias sine
verme, riches 1 These. 3. 8.
without cares and sorrows, as S. Augustine says, must be persuaded, that
riches Ephesians. 4. 28.
are the gift of God; and that whomsoever God would have to be rich, he would
Deuteronomy. 15. 11.
have them use only lawful and direct means for the attaining of them, that
is, to do nothing, but according to the strict rule of Gods will, for the
attaining of them.

Those that keep to this rule, we shall find that God has extraordinarily
blessed them, we may see it in Isaac, God blessed him strangely, so that he made
him feared of Genesis 26. 11.
the Philistims; and so its said of Jacob, that his rightcousnesse in his
service to Laban Genesis 30, 33.
would answer for him, verse. 33. and that he increased exceedingly in cattle
and servants. 43.
etc. and although, as himself confessed, with his staff he came over Jordan,
yet Genesis 32. 10.
when he went back, God had increased him to two great bands, etc. Thus God
will have some rich, and these are Divites Dei, Gods rich men, rich indeed,
such as use only lawful means. And there are others that shall not grow up,
God will have them poor, they shall not have Isaacs increase, but their labors
shall be (...) no further then God sees needful for them.

Again, there are some evil men that grow rich, but withal God adds sorrows
with their riches. But Benedictio Dei ditat, says Solomon, the blessing of the
Lord makes rich, and he adds no sorrow with it. This is the difference between
those that are Gods rich (...)
men and others. The Heathen man divided riches (...), into (...), and (...),
such as are got by violence, and such as are the gift of God, and he says,
that (...) are (...), such as come by the gift of God are far the better. There
are some that would come by them by evil means: and though they use what means
they can, as Balaam did, yet Numb. 24. 11.
they cannot be rich, who, when all came to all, he could get nothing, but
lingering after (...) of preferment, at length lost his (...): and so Judas,
though he stole out of the bag, and sold his Master, yet it prospered not with
him, it brought him to the halter. And we see daily, that Witches and Sorcerers
though they give their souls to the Devil for riches yet not one among them
proves rich; and if any get wealth by unjust means, this is not the gift of
God, but only by his permission. Thus God will have some rich and some poor,
that the one, being poor in spirit, may wear the crown of patience; the other,
being rich in good works, may wear the crown of bounty. Every man therefore
must stand thus persuaded, If God will have me to be rich, he will so bless me
by lawful means, that I shall be rich: (...) not, he must say as David did
concerning the kingdom, Here I am, let him do what seems good in his own
eyes: 2 Samuel 25. 26.
and with S. Paul, he must learn (...), to be content in every condition, he
had learned phil. 4. 12.
(...), to suffer need, etc. and to be content therewith, and (...), to abound,
and in every condition to behave himself, as one submitting to the will of God.
This indifferency every one must labor for, and to stand so affected, that
acknowledging riches are (...) God, and that both states and conditions, viz.
of Riches and Poverty, are from God, he can be content with either. If God
exalt him, he will bless him: if he will not, he can say, I can suffer want.
And he that is not thus persuaded, and resolved, God usually punishes him,
either by letting him fall into covetousness, and then, dum semper metuit ne
indigeat, indiget, whilst he is continually afraid he should prove. 5. 12.
want, he is in want, and so is punished with the evil he fears: or else, as the
Wise man 6. 12.
observes, strangers are filled with his wealth: and this strange judgment God
brings upon it, that it thrives not with him, it decays and melts away, no man
knows how, nor can any give a reason of it, and sometimes when his bags are
full, and his barns too, he dies, and cannot enjoy what he has so carefully
(...) up.

3. In the next place, being settled in a calling, and brought to this
resolution, he 3. To live according to our means.
(...) take away the whetstone which sharpens the edge of men's desires after
riches, viz. living after too high a sail: and as S. Paul exhorts, he must live
(...), Tit. 2. 12.
(...) and justly. First he must keep within his measure and scantling, by
living soberly, and then he shall live justly; for justice is always wrackt
and stretched, if sobriety be broken. If a man be brought under the power of his
(...), that he must have such meat, and such apparel, then he must have money
to provide such things, and if it cannot be gotten by direct means, then
justice must be wracked to obtain it by indirect; and (...) this is another
rule which he must set down, he must sobrie (...), live soberly, that he may
live (...), righteously, he must be a note too low rather then a note too high.

CHAP. X.
Rules to be observed, 1. in just getting: 1. By Donation. 2. By Industry. 3.
By Contracts, wherein must be considered, 1. The need we have of the thing
sold. 2. The use. Three degrees of a just price. 1. Pium. 2. Moderatum. 3.
Rigidum. 2. In just using, wherein are rules. 1. Concerning our selves, 1. For
preserving our estate. 2. For laying it out. 2. Concerning others, giving 1. to
God, from whom we receive all. 2. to the poor. Rules for the measure and manner
of giving. Motives to stir (...) up to give to the poor. Of procuring the
keeping of this Commandment by others.

When a man is thus affected and prepared, then there are other rules to be 4.
To observe the rules for getting and using of riches.
observed, both for the getting, and using of riches, as we showed before.

1. For getting by gift or donation, as (...), gifts, or inheritances, the rule
of the world is, I will take what I can get, or what any will give; but this is
an evil rule: for I must not desire to take of every man, but (...) mercedem,
or debitum; 1. For getting by donation, gift, etc.
where I have done good offices, and deserved well of their (...). We see the
practice of Abraham, who though he might reasonably have taken a good booty of
the king of Genesis 14. 23.
Sodom, yet he would not take a shoe-latchet of him, lest he should say, he had
made (...) rich: and when the field of Ephron was offered him for nothing, yet
he Genesis 23. 16.
would pay for it; so that it cost him four hundred shekels. And in after times
we read, (...) refused great offers from (...) the Syrian; and when he had a
lodging 2 King. 5. 15.
provided by the Shunamite, he studied to requite it. Courtesies and gifts (...)
not 2 King. 4. 11.
be received of every one, but there must be a choice made, and discretion
used. S. Paul, because he had a good (...) of the Philippians, received a gift
of them, but of no Phil. 4. 15.
other Church: and Lydia entreats, If ye have judged me to be faithful, come
into my Acts 16. 15.
house. We must therefore make choice of those, to whom we must be bound; the
(...) would have not only beneficium, a benefit received, but judicium also,
he would know from whom; for some are like him the son of Syrach speaks of,
That open their mouth like a town crier, to day they (...), and to morrow they
will ask it again.

2. For getting by Industry. 1. A man must be faithful in that he undertakes,
when 2. By (...).
he expects any thing for his pains. S. John gives (...) a good Commendation,
for dealing faithfully; and of Jacob it is said, that he did his service
faithfully with all 3 John 3.
his power; and those that that were to partake of the holy things, were to
approve Genesis 31. 6.
their fidelity: this is the first thing. 2. The second is a branch of
sobriety, to be content 2 (...). 31. 18
with ones wages, as S. John the Baptist answered the soldiers; he must not be
like him in the Parable, whose eye was evil, that was discontented, because he
had not more then another labourer. He that repines, and thinks he has not
enough, will be unfaithful in his work, and not go on with it; like those
murmuring Israelites, that Exodus 16. 3.
murmured in the wilderness, and (...) they were in Egypt, by the fleshpots
again.

3. For getting by Contracts. We laid down diverse rules before, concerning the
3. By contracts wherein must be considered,
adequation of the price to the value of the thing contracted for. To which we
may add some other things considerable in the prizing of things.

1. (...) need of the thing, for it is not only the intrinsecal worth, but the
need of 1. The need of the thing sold.
it also, which makes it valuable; for as S. Augustine says, unus panis, one
loaf of bread is worth twenty flies and one field better then a great company
of mice, not in respect of their nature by creation, for living creatures are
more noble and of more worth then things inanimate but in regard of the need we
have of them; for thus sometimes a good horse is more esteemed, then an
unprofitable man, because there is more need of the one, then of the other. 2.
To the need they add the use, for if a thing be fit for our purpose, if it be
durable, 2. The use.
if it have manifold uses, this increases the price.
Now, because the want of things is varied many ways, therefore the price is
varied accordingly. As in regard of the place, thus in the middle of the land,
sea fish is dearer, then near the sea. So in regard of the time, as corn
presently before harvest is dearer, because every man is to look to the getting
in of his corn; and the longer from harvest, the cheaper it is. So also the
scarcity of a thing may increase the price, because there are but few that have
it to sell; as also utentium inopia, the scarcity of such as use it, when there
are but few that will use it, and great pains is taken to make it, this makes
the price uncertain.

The need of a thing being uncertain, makes the price uncertain, so that it
consists not in termino indivisibli, in an indivisible point. And then further,
a man's charges which he is at, and the damage he sustains for the getting of
it, and his care for the keeping of it, and his labor to polish and trim it,
and the danger he passes through in attaining it, these are all valuable: but
now, what a man's pains is, and what cost he is at, is not easily known. And
therefore because this justitia contractuum, this justice and equity in
bargaining cannot easily be brought under certain rules, because men will take
too much liberty for their own gain and profit, we must avoid the extremes, and
labor to (...) the medium, or the mean price, and here it is best sumere (...)
(...), to take the mean or middle, with some breadth or latitude; so if a man
in bargaining, set himself to come just to the middle point (for the price)
though he miss a little, he is not therefore unjust. If he decline the
extreme, before he attain the medium, the point he argues at, till he be better
informed, or have learned otherwise, he is not therefore to be censured, as
unjust.

This medium, is that which they call justum pretium, a just price or value,
which In a just price are 3 degrees.
as I said, admits a latitude, for of this they make three sorts or degrees.

1. Pium pretium, an easy rate, as when for public uses either Civil or
Ecclesiastical, 1. (...).
we part with a thing at a lower rate, then we could sell it for. 2. Moderatum,
the moderate price, when there is a moderate proportion between 2. (...).
the thing and the price, when the thing is worth so much (as we use to say) to
a brother. 3. Rigidum, the rigorous price, when the utmost value is stood upon;
as one would 3. Rigidum.
seh (as we use to say) to a Jew, and above which if we should go, it were
(...) injustice. So long as one exceeds not any of these degrees, it cannot be
said, he is unjust, but yet the safest course is, to come as (...) as we can to
the medium, the middle or mean price,
And for our better direction herein, all circumstances are to be considered,
as we Levit. 27. 13.
see under the Law, when God gave rules for sale of cattle, oflands, houses,
unclean 15. 19. 27. 31.
(...), tithes, etc. In all these cases he takes order, that the value of the
thing be given for it, and (...) partem, a fifth part more for the gain. And
before that, under the Law of Nature, we see, that when Joseph bought all the
lands of the Egyptians, Genesis 41. 24.
he (...) a (...) part of the increase for Pharaoh, when he gave them seed to
sow their ground. So also in point of equity, length of time is to be
considered in Lev. 25. 16. 14
the price; when any land was to be sold, they were to reckon till the year of
Jubilee, and according as it was nearer, or further off, so the price was to be
lessened, or increased: and thus, according as a thing is more or less
durable, or which must seldom or often be renewed, so is the price to be set.
As for Merchants, because of the danger and hazard they run, in venturing their
goods, and sometimes their lives too, and because their (...) are great, etc.
therefore a greater proportion of increase by way trade, is to be allowed them,
then unto others.

4. For restitution there need no more to be added, then is said before. If any
Rules for restitution.
thing be unlawfully gotten, it must of necessity be restored. If it be debt we
owe, Numb. 5. 7.
we must not sleep till it be paid, or if we cannot presently pay it, we must
say with Prove. 6. 4.
him in the Gospel, Have patience with me, and get a longer day, If the thing
we Matthew. 18. 26.
have be none of ours (though we have strength to keep it) we must not withhold
it from the owner. And these are rules to be observed in the getting of wealth.

2. In the next place, these rules are to be considered which are for the use
of it, both 2. Rules for the use.
for preserving of it, and for laying out.

1. For the preserving of it, Solomon's rule is, that every man should know his
1. For preserving our estate.
own estate, and the estate of his cattle, etc. and that he should not commit
all to the trust of others; for as they say, the Masters eye makes the horse
fat, and his steps Prove. 27. 23.
the ground; and he gives a reason in the (...) verse, (...) non sunt (...),
riches Verse 24.
are not for ever, as they will not fly into a man's mouth, so if he look (...)
to them, they will fly away.

And as he must take care himself, so secondly, he must not by superfluous
courses diminish them; but remember that rule of Christ, (...), buy what is
John 13. 29.
necessary, and what there is use of, not with Esan, to sell a birthright for a
mess of pottage, he might have taught his belly better manners.

2. For the use in laying out our riches. 1. Concerning our selves: this is
Christ's 2. For (...) it out.
rule, Gather all that is left, that nothing be lost, there must be nothing
wasted. Under the Law, when they came before the Lord, after the third years
tithe paid, they Luke 6. 12.
were to make protestation before the Lord among other (...), that (...) had
not Deuteronomy. 26. 14.
spent or wasted any part of it upon themselves, or suffered it to perish by
evil looking to, ctc. The Kites, the (...), and Vultures have not devoured it;
for as one says, the prodigal man's goods, are laid up in Rocks, and high
trees, where (...) Vultures and Ravens can come at them. To prevent which
waste, God gave the Israelites a law, Bake what you will bake to day, and sees
what you will sees, and Exodus 16. 23.
what (...), keep till the morning. As there must be a Sanctus Bonifacius, a
Saint Getter, so there must be a Sanctus Servatius, a Saint Saver: there must
be a good Saver, a good Getter, and a good Keeper. If you have bonum Servatium,
a good Saver, you shall have bonum Bonifacium, a good Getter. They are the
words of Luther, on those words, Look what you left of what was baked on the
sixth day, lay up for the seventh. The Rabbis say, that if a man do not gather
in vespere Sabbati, on the evening of the Sabbath, he shall esurire in Sabbato,
be hungry on the Sabbath day.

And when we have thus done, we must observe that other rule mentioned by Luke
14. 28.
Christ, (...), a man must sit down and reckon what his estate will reach too,
and (...) our layings out accordingly: and then that we observe that rule of
the Heathen (implied in that of Christ) that our condus be fortior promo, and
promus debilior condo, that our layer up be stronger, then our layer out; for
if it be weaker, then our estate will go out too fast, and then a man shall not
sufficere rebus suis, have sufficient for his own affairs, nor shall resejus,
his estate, sufficere sibi, be sufficient for himself, and then he will break
the rules of justice to supply his wants.

2. For that other use in laying out, which concerns others, we see, that a man
Rules for relieving the poor
must judge wisely of the poor, and that some poor are appropriated to us, and
that we psalm 41.
are in respect of our goods, but negotiatores, Stewards that must give account
of them. Deuteronomy 15. 11.
We receive all from God, and consequently there is a rent charge, which we
must Matthew. 25. 45.
pay out of them, juxt a benedictionem Domini, as the Lord has blessed us, and
by acknowledging Deuteronomy. 6. 16, 17
(as before) that there is nothing in us, or our Progenitors, why God Deuteronomy. 26.
5.
should deal so liberally with us, and that therefore we owe an homage to him
out of 10. 13.
our estate, which we must perform.

We must remember that Charity does not only not seek her own, but gives to
others, and is bountiful; and the Apostle makes an opposition between stealing,
and 1 Cor. 13. 5.
laboring to have wherewith to give to others that need, to show that the poor
must Ephesians. 4. 24.
be always in our mind, and that every one must say, I work for them, as well
as for my self.

David speaking of the materials for the temple, says to God, Quod de manu tua
accepimus, damus tibi, What we have received of thy hand, we do return to thee
again: 1 Chro. 29. 14.
he says not with Judas, Ad quid perditio hac? to what end is this wast. We
Mark 14. 4.
must give then, and that of the best: God took order, that nothing which was
Deuteronomy 15. 21.
maimed, or blind, or that had any deformity, should be offered to him: and
Solomon prove. 3 9.
exhorts to honor God with our substance, and with the first fruits of all our
increase. On the contrary, if a man detain any thing due to God, God calls it a
spoiling or robbing of him, and says, that such are cursed with a Curse.
Therefore S. Augustine Mal. 3. 9.
tells us, that Date, and Dabitur, Give, and it shall be given you, are
Brethren.

In particular the rules of giving to the poor.

1. Because, as we showed formerly, it is a sin not to give, therefore every
one must give, except he himself be in extreme necessity; out of which case
every man must give somewhat, according to his ability. The reason is given by
the Apostle, Every man shall be accepted according to that which he has, and
not according 2 Cor 8 12.
to that which he has not. The Widows two mites are accepted, and she greatly
Luke 21. 4.
commended by our Savior: and he that gives a cup of cold water in Christ's
name: Eark 7. 41.
shall not want his reward.

Giving in some cases, and lending in other, are both enjoined by our Savior:
Matthew 5 42.
and we have rules prescribed for the measure. Those Believers in the Acts,
gave to Acts 2 45.
every one, as they had need, they had respect to the necessity of the party;
they were not like the prodigal, of whom the Heathen said, that he fared the
worse for his luxury. Alms should be (...), chaste virgins; but they become
(...), harlots, when they are prostituted without regard to the person. Neither
as the Apostle says, must men so give, that others may have, and themselves
want, that others may find case, 2 Cor. 8. 13.
and themselves disease; like those that have the passio diabetica, who can
hold nothing, but give promiscuously to any so long as they are able, for by
this means, their liberality does perire liberalitate perish with liberality.

2. As for the measure, so also for the manner God gives rules; as, that we
give freely, God does not love (...), but (...), not one that gives of
necessity, but a cheerful giver: Charity must not be wrung out of us. As we
must not give promiscuously, but use discretion, so we must (...), not search
too curiously after the party, nor (...) or weigh too much their worthiness;
for as the Heathen said, we must give not homini, to this man, but humanitati,
to mankind, (...), a fellow feeling compassion is due to nature, and to the
Law we must give our approbation.

2. Another rule is given by the Wise man, Say not to thy Neighbor, go and
come Prove. 3. 28.
again, and to morrow I will give thee, when thou have it by thee: we must give
presently, lest we be like him that S. Ambrose reproves, Qui pauperi dabit
potum cum acidum, panem cum mucidum, who will give the poor his drink when it
is sour, and his bread, when it is musty.

These are the rules (...) which we must be guided in giving, and by thus
doing, as the Psalmist says, a man shall be sure to eat the Labor of his
hands. The Lord will keep Motives to works of mercy
him in his sickness, he will be his Physician, and his seed shall not want.
psalm 128. 2. and 41. 3. and 37. 25.


Neither shall he receive only Corporal blessings, but by this means he shall
abrumpere peccata, break off his sins.

For when a man finds his bowels open to the poor, it is a good sign and
symptom Dan. 4. 27.
of Gods mercy and forgiveness to him. When Cornelius gave alms, his calling
Acts 10. 2.
was near. Our Savior says, Give alms and all things shall be clean (...)
you, Luke 11. 21.
speaking of Ceremonial cleanness under the Law: and S. James says, this is a
part of that moral purity required under the Gospel, for pure religion and
undefiled before James 1. 27.
God, is to visit the fatherless and widows in adversity, etc.

Besides all this, we shall hereby as the Apostle says, lay up a good
foundation against 1 Timothy 6. 19.
the time to come, when we shall be called to give an account of our
stewardship; for this is that which will come in rationem, to be accounted for
at the last day, the relieving Matthew. 25. 27.
or not relieving of Christ in his members: I was hungry, and ye fed me, or fed
me not, says Christ. In the (...) of the talents, the Lord asks the
unprofitable servant, why he gave not his money to the exchangers. S. Ambrose
on that place, asks who be those (...), those money changers? and he finds at
last, that Pauperes are Campsores, the poor be those money changers. And
therefore he says, If a man be to go into another country, where he shall
need money, if he be in danger of thieves and robbers by the way, or if his
money will not be current in the place whither he is to go, he goes to the
exchanger, delivers him his money, and takes a bill of his hand, which he
carries with him, and so he fears neither robbers by the way, who he is sure
will not rob him of a piece of paper, nor that he shall want current money in
the place he goes to: so says he, is the case of every man in this life, he is
traveling to his heavenly Country, and therefore he should do like a
Traveller, who will neither load himself with that which may endanger his life,
nor will pass for current in the place to which he goes, but will so lay it
out here, that he may receive it there.

Now, as Job speaks, We came naked out of our mothers womb: and as the Apostle
Job 1. 21.
says, We brought nothing into this world, and it is certain we can carry
nothing out of it, 2 Timothy 6. 7.
for if we would, we are sure to be stripped of all as we go. The proud are
robbed, says the Psalmist, they have slept their sleep, and when they awake in
the morning, they find psalm 76. 5.
nothing in their hands. And then secondly, if a man could carry any thing in
his hand, yet it is not gold and silver that will serve there, it will not be
current in an other Job 35. 7.
world. Therefore the best couse is, in our passage hence, to make friends of
the temporal Mammon, to deliver it here, that we may receive the worth of it
there. And this is, as Ambrose speaks, to be dives in libro sigillato, rich in
the sealed book; as (...) was, whose alms came (...), into Gods book of
remembrance.

This is the committing of our wealth here to Christ's factors and exchangers,
the poor, for whom he himself is surety: what ye do to them, says Christ, ye
do to me, I will make it good: he gives us his bill for it, which is the very
gospel, the word of God, which cannot fail, wherein he has promised, that not
a cup of cold water, but shall be returned. This is our warrant for delivering
here, and receiving it there.

The Heathen man said, that works of mercy do swim out with us; and the
Scripture says, that the just, when they rest from their labors, opera eorum
(...), their works shall follow them; for when as others are like him that
dreams of a great dinner, Revel. 14. 13.
but when awakes, he is hungry: they that are rich in these works shall be
surely rewarded, their works shall be accounted to them: to them shall be said,
Come ye blessed of my father, etc. (...) conclude, he that follows after
righteousness, by just dealing, both in getting and restoring, and after
mercy, in using of his (...), He shall find life, and righteousness, and
honor and (...) hereafter in the world to come.

The last thing to be touched is according to the sixth rule, to procure the
keeping The 6. Rule.
of this precept in others, the Psalmist makes it a sin, not only furare to
steal, but (...). 50. 18.
currere cumfure, to run with a thief; and Solomon says, That he that is
partner with Prove. 29. 24.
a thief, destroys his own soul, therefore we must not communicate with
others in this sin. And not only must we observe this in the Negative part,
but also in the Affirmative, we must draw others from the breach of the
precept, as the Psalmist, who exhorts others, not to trust in oppression and
robbery, and if riches increase, that they Psa. 62. 10.
set not their hearts upon them. The like does Solomon, when he says, that
bread of deceit Pro. 20. (...)
is sweet to a man, but afterward his mouth is filled with gravel, and
therefore he warns every one, not to let mercy and truth forsake him, so he
shall have favor in Prove. 3. 3.
the sight of God and man. Thus to avoid this sin of theft both in themselves
and others, has been the practice and endeavor of the Saints in all Ages.

THE EXPOSITION OF THE Ninth Commandment.
CHAP. I.
The words expounded. What is meant by (Non respondebis) in the Original.
Addit. about the meaning of the word (...) respondere. What by (witness.) Four
witnesses. 1. God. 2. The conscience. 3. Men and Angels. 4. The Creatures. What
is meant by (false,) what by (contra, against) what by proximum, Neighbor.)
The coherence and dependence of this Commandment. The scope and use of it. 1.
In respect of God. 2. Of the Church. 3. Of the Common wealth. 4. Of private
persons.

Exodus 20. 16. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy Neighbor.

FOr the exposition of this Commandment we must have recourse to those places
of Scripture, where the sin here forbidden is prohibited, and the duties here
employed, are commanded, as in the Levit. 19. 11. 16. 17.
Old Testament, to Levit. 19. 11. 16, 17. Ye shall not lie one to another: and,
Thou shall not go up and down as a tale bearer among thy people. And, Thou
shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, etc. And to Zach. 8. 16, 17. Speak ye
every man the truth to his Neighbor: And, Love no false oath. And in the New
Testament, to Matthew. 12. 34, 35, 36. Zach. 8. 16. 17
Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, for a good man out of
the good treasures of his heart brings forth good things, etc. and to Ephesians.
4. 25. where we have Mat. 12. 34. 35, 36.
both parts of this Commandment. The Negative, (...), Cast off lying; Ephesians.
4. 25.
and then in the next words, the Affirmative, (...), etc. Speak every man the
truth to his Neighbor.

First, to make plain the words, and the meaning of them. This Commandment The
explication of the words.
is not delivered in one word, as some of the others, but consists of diverse
words, which rendered according to the Hebrew run thus, Non respondebis
testimonium falsum, super vicinum tuum, thou shall not answer a false testimony
concerning thy Neighbor.

The words non respondebis, thou (...) not answer, must be understood according
1. What is meant by Non respondebis, the first words.
to the Hebrew (...); in which, to answer is (to speak) whether there be any
question asked or no. So the Evangelists often begin a story, thus, Jesus
answered and said, though no man spoke to him, nor demanded any thing of him.
So that by answering Mat. 11. 5.
is not meant only, speaking the truth when it is demanded, but also to speak
truth (...) we speak, though no question be asked of us. For the Hebrew (...)
(...) signifies (...) to speak or utter ones mind, and therefore we find it
used to express singing, as in Exodus 32. 18. where Moses says he heard vocem
cantantium, the voice of them that sung, (...) the same word is used, so that
it signifies to speak, either by way of question, or answer, or otherwise.

Although it be true, the word (...) may signify generally to speak, and so is
often rendered Annot. of the meaning of the word (...) respondere.
by (...). and sometimes by (...) respondeo; and though all contained under the
general signification may be reduced hither, yet it is more probable, that
literally and properly in this place the word is strictly taken for answering,
because the custom was among the Jews, that the Judges did adjure the
witnesses, by the name of God to speak the truth, to which the witnesses made
answer? and therefore whereas we read, Levit. 5. 1. If a soul sin and hear the
voice of swearing, and be a witness, etc, Levit. 5. 1.
The Hebrew is (...) which is rendered by the Greck (...). And (...) the voice
of one adjuring, etc. as referring to the adjuration of the Judge, to which the
(...) was to answer. So also guilty persons or such as were accused, were wont
(...), to be (...), as we see in the example of Achan adjured by Joshua, and of
our Savior adjured by the High Priest. The form of such adjurations was (...),
Jos. 7. 19:
Give glory to God, as in that place of Josh. and John 9. 24. or in other words
equivalent, Mat. 26. 63.
as (...), I adjure thee to speak the truth to me in the name of the Lord, 1
Kings 22. 16.

The next word is, witness. Thou shall not bear false witness, etc. which we
The second word Witness.
(...) applied four ways in Scripture.

1. To the great and chief witness, God himself. When (...) was (...) accused
1. God.
Job 16: 19.
by his friends, he appeals to this (...), Ecce testis meus est in Coel. s,
(...) my witness 1 John 5. 7.
is in heaven; and S. John says, There are three that bear witness in heaven,
the (...), the Word, and the Spirit, every person in the Deity is a (...) of
the truth, and (...) witnesses we have of our thoughts, words, and (...),
whether they be (...) or evil. These are true and faithful (...), God is often
styled the God of Rev. 3. 14.
(...), and (...) is called that true and faithful witness, yea, truth it
(...); and the John 14. 6.
Holy Ghost is Spiritus veritatis, the Spirit of truth. These are the
witnesses, with John 14. 17.
whose testimony we must (...) our selves: This must be our comfort, (...) our
praise is not of men, but of God, who only can judge of the sincerity (...)
our (...). Romans 2. ult.
(...) men may often be applauded by the wicked, when a good man shall be
slighted; (...) such (...) shall not stand a man in stead; it is not the (...)
of (...) that makes one praise worthy, nay, it (...) a great judgment, to be
well spoken of and (...) by wicked men. Woe be to you, says Christ, when all
men shall (...) well of you. Qui Luke 6. 26.
laudatur ab hominibus vituperante Deo (...) salvabitur ab hominibus damnante
(...), He that is praised by men when God abhors him, shall not be saved by men
when God condemns Romans 2. 29.
him: He is not a Jew that is one out wardly, but he that is one inwardly.
whose praise is not of (...), but of God. Therefore the Apostle, when the (...)
past rash 1 Cor. 4. 3.
judgment upon him, tells them, (...) pro minimo (...), etc. It is a small
matter for me to be judged of you, (...) that (...) me is the Lord.

2. Now (...) this great witness, in the second place comes (...) witness
which 2 The conscience.
the Apostle (...) of, Romans 2. 15. Attestante ipsis conscientia, Their
conscience bearing Romans 2. 15.
them witness: and Romans 9. 1. I (...) the truth in Christ, my conscience also
bearing me (...). Of (...) the Heathen man said that it is (...) testis, as a
thousand witnesses, Romans 2. 18.
because it is the knowledge of our selves, and of our own (...), and (...) he
(...) him Miserum, miserable, Qui contemnit (...) testem, that despises this
witness: For (...) that regards not the testimony of his own conscience, will
not (...) of this Commandment, in bearing (...) witness against his brother;
and when men (...) not to the voice of their conscience, it is the beginning of
all apostasy both in faith and practice; and therefore the Apostle says, that
the wrath of God is (...) from Heaven against all such as suppress or smother
the truth in unrightcousnesse. (...) when men have a wicked affection or
inclination to any sinful act, and though their consciences speak unto them and
tell them, this they ought not to do, and they will not hearken unto it, then
they detain the truth in unrighteousness, for they suppress and keep down the
truth as a prisoner, which would shine forth in their hearts: For (...) the
Heathen man said, the foundation of Gods justice begins here, when he speaks in
the hearts and consciences of men, and they will notwithstanding do the
contrary, for this moves God to leave them to themselves; and as 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11.
s. Paul says, to give them over to strong delusions, that they may believe
lies.

And though this witness be great, yet God is greater then our consciences, as
s. Paul 1 Cor. 4. 4.
and s. John say; and therefore S. Paul says, that though our hearts acquit
us, yet are 1 John 3. 20.
we not thereby justified: Men do often dream strange things of themselves, and
are deceived in their judgment and purposes, for the heart of man (as the
Prophet speaks) is deceitful above all things, and therefore when our
consciences come to be (...) up, coram magno judice, before that great Judge,
it will appear, that in many things we have been mistaken, which made S. Paul
say, That though he knew nothing 1 Cor. 4. 4:
by himself, yet was he not thereby justified, (...), For he that judges me
(says he) is the Lord. (...) we give to Conscience the second place.

3. Because God does not now speak from heaven, and a man's conscience may be
seared, that it will not speak, and when it speaks, it speaks only to a man's
self, and cannot be heard by others: therefore a third witness is requisite,
which is, that one man bear witness to another. Vos est is mihi testes, says
Joshua to the people, Ye are my witnesses, that ye have chosen the Lord to
serve him, and they said, Sumus testes, we are witnesses. And concerning this
kind of testimony is this Commandment specially given, that the truth may be
established by witnesses, (...) which this Deuteronomy. 17. 6, 7.
(...) was made, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses, every truth
should be established; Mat. 18. 16.
he that is worthy of death must be convict by two or three witnesses, but at
John 8. 17.
the mouth of one witness he shall not dye. And the hands of the witnesses
must be 2 (...). 13. 1.
Heb. 10. 28.
first upon him to put him to death. Jos. 24. 27.


4. (...) all these, there is a fourth witness, viz. the dumb and livelesse
creature. 4 The senseless creatures.
When Joshua had made a covenant with the people, he took a great stone and
pitched it under an Oak, saying, Behold this stone shall be a witness unto us,
etc. there is the witness of a stone: and the prophet (...) says, That the
stone in the wall Hab. 2. 11.
shall cry out, and the beam out of the timber shall answer it, and shall
testify against men for their covetousness and oppression; here is the
witness of a piece of wood. s. James says, The rust and canker of their gold
and silver shall be a witness against James 5. 3.
the rich men of those times: Here gold and silver bear witness. All which
show, that because man is unfaithful, therefore recourse must be had to other
creatures to be witnesses against him.

Thus Moses begins his Song, and Esaias his prophecy, with Hear O Heavens, and
Deuteronomy. 32. 1.
give ear O Earth, etc. And the Prophet Micah, his plea with the people, Hear O
Esaias 1. 2.
mountains the Lords controversy; and this counsel was taken, either because
no men Mich. 6. 2.
were lest who were fit to be Judges of the matter, and therefore he speaks to
the mountains; no man was free from prevarication, and therefore none was fit.
Or else because this is testimonium facti; as when men's actions do testify for
or against them, as the rust of their gold and silver, did testify their
covetousness in hoarding it up.

There is not only vox linguae, a voice or testimony of the tongue, but also,
vox operis, a voice and testimony of the work: Job says, That the wrinckles of
his face, Job 16. 8.
and his leanness, did bear witness against him. And so there is Falsum
testimonium facti, a false (...) in fact, as in Hypocrisy; as well as falsum
testimonium dicti, a false testimony in word. Now of these four witnesses the
two former belong to the first Table, the two latter to this Commandment.

The third word to be explained is ( False,) Thou shall not bear false
witness, The third word ((...).)
etc.

The word in the Original (...) has three significations, whereof the Latin
word ( Falsum) will bear but one, for it signifies, 1. Falsum, a falsehood. 2.
Mendacium, alye. 3. Vanum, a vain thing.

1. Falsum, falsehood, is to speak, aliter quam se res habet, otherwise then
the thing it self is, when sermo non est adaequatus (...), when the speech is
not agreeable and consonant to the truth of the things. 2. (...), to lie, is,
(as the common derivation is) ire contra mentem to go contrary to our own
mind, which is, when a man speaks, aliter quam ipse sentit, otherwise then
himself thinks, the contrary of which, is that which David requires, to Psalm.
15. 2.
speak the truth from the heart. 3. Vanum, a vain speech, is such as makes not
for the end of speech. Now speech was ordained for two necessary uses; whereof
the one concerns the life to come, the other this present life. The first end,
is to build men up in faith and piety toward God, the other to maintain
justice and charity among men: whatsoever speech therefore conduces not to one
of these two ends, is vain, because it is signum mendax, a false or lying
sign, for it wants the signatum, the thing signified. And therefore all (...)
foolish talking, and (...), filthy or unsavory speech, condemned by the
Apostle, Ephesians. 5. 4.
are here forbidden, as not conducing to the ends of speech, and therefore are
Col. 3. 8.
vain and frivolous.
The next word is (...) in socium tuum, which we render (against thy Neighbor)
The fourth word contra against.
upon which translation many have undertaken to maintain the lawfulness of
Officiosum mendacium, an officious lie, because it is not against our
neighbor, but for his good; as if one tell a lie to save a man's life or goods:
but the words of the Commandment do not infer it: for they may be generally
rendered, super socium, or proximum, about or concerning our neighbor, whether
for him or against him. As that place in Psalm. 15. 5. (...), which our
translation renders, contra innocentem, against the innocent: And Tremelius,
Pro innocente, for the innocent, may be better rendered super innocentem,
concerning the innocent, whether it be for him, or against him.

To lie (...) our neighbor is apparently unlawful, the very (...) have
condemned it: But the law of God, and Christian charity condemn it, when it is
for him, even to help him It were good in (...), that the interpreter would
observe this rule, to let the words stand in as large and broad a sense as they
will bear, for so if need be they may be restrained by other places; but if
they be rendered in too narrow or strict a sense, as here, pro or contra, for or
against, the ignorant and unstable will take occasion to wrest them, as here to
exclude from the prohibition, whatsoever is not against our neighbor.
Therefore the words here may be best rendered, ( concerning thy neighbor,)
which may signify and include both, ( against) and ( with) our neighbor. For
as the word signifies ( against) so also it signifies ( with), and is so
rendered in Genesis 30. 33. (...) my righteousness shall answer (for me) and so
the proposition may have a general sense including both.

Lastly, here is ( Neighbor) mentioned, to parallel this Commandment with the
The last word proximum Neighbor.
third, which do herein meet, as it were ex aequo, that both prohibit the abuse
of the tongue, and differ in regard of the Object, which in the third
Commandment is God, in this, our Neighbor. For as there we are forbidden to
use our tongue in any way which may be derogatory to God, by the unhallowing of
his Name; so here we are forbidden to use it against our neighbor, in any way
which may bring damage, or be prejudicial to him.

Thus far (...) the explication of the words.

For the coherence of this with the foregoing Commandment, and the dependence
The coherence and dependence of this Commandment.
thereof upon it. Some give this reason. That whereas in the former, all unjust
ways of getting are forbidden, amongst which lying and false speaking is one:
For the Heathen man said, (...), Where a lie must be made, let it be made: And
where must a lie be made? he answers, (...), when any gain is to be got by it.
Therefore to meet with this common (...) of men, God restrains all lying and
false testimony in this Commandment. And this reason of the dependence has
some show in it.

(...) conceive, that as God established authority in the fifth Commandment,
for the good of humane society, and in the three next gave order for
promiscuous duties, which are common to all, so here in this, if there should
be any breach of those three last, whereby men must have (...) to Judges, and
make use of their authority, Exodus 22. 8.
because those in authority must proceed upon evidence and proof by witnesses,
Therefore God sets this Commandment in the next place, wherein he takes order
for witnesses to speak the truth, and not to give false testimony against any.
This seems to have (...) from several places of Scripture; for if any should
violate the sixth Commandment, the Elders of the City were to examine the
matter, and sentence was to be given upon him, by the testimony of witnesses:
So for the seventh: If any man should (...) his Wife, the Elders of the City
must judge of the Deuteronomy. 22.
matter, and the father and mother of the woman shall witness of her
virginity: And for the eighth, the like order is taken, (...) goods deposite
stolen Exodus 22. 8, 9.
out of a man's house; if (...) thief could not be found, the master of the
house must be brought before the Judges, to speak whether he put out his hand
to the stolen goods. So that we see, for the rectifying of whatsoever is
amiss in those three Commandments, this was added. It is not enough to have
authority, and Judges, etc. but there must be witnesses to prove matters of
fact: And Lev. 5. 1, 5.
Deuteronomy. 17. 6. 7.
therefore under the Law, God gave special (...) both for giving witness, and
for receiving the testimony of witnesses.

Others, upon the comparison which the holy Ghost makes between credit or good
name, and wealth, preferring that before this; and because that honesta fama,
an honest report, or good name, is alterum patrimonium, another patrimony,
therefore they give this reason of the coherence; that because order was taken
for other patrimonies in the next before this, therefore here he takes order
for the preserving of a good name, which is that secundum or alterum
patrimonium, a second patrimony.

But the second opinion is most probable, to which the best Expositors incline.
For the Prophet Esaias reproving the people for departing from God, by lying, and
uttering words of falsehood, adds, that judgment was turned backward, Esaias
59. 13. 14
and justice stood afar off, because this was Germanus effectus, the proper and
natural effect of false witness, to pervert justice and judgment; and
therefore it is, that false testimony is abomination to God, For lying lips
(says the Wiseman) Prove. 12. 22:
are an abomination to the Lord. And therefore God took order, that if a false
witness should arise against any man, to testify falsely concerning the
breach of any of the other Commandments, the Judges should enquire and punish
him Deuteronomy. 19. 16. 21
with the same punishment, whether pecuniary or corporal, which the party
wrongfully accused should have suffered.

Now for the scope and purpose of the Lawgiver: in this precept it is four The
scope of this Law.
fold. 1 In respect of God.


1. In respect of himself, his own glory, which is manifested by truth; for in
himself God is truth, and his Spirit is the spirit of truth, his Mercy,
Justice, and other Attributes are manifested by his truth and fidelity; God
therefore would have truth preserved; truth in Religion makes for his glory:
Therefore Christ John 18. 37.
who aimed in all things at the glory of his Father, says, For this cause he
was born, to bear witness of the truth, and so by proportion it is the end for
which every man is born, to be a witness to Gods truth: If any shall speak or
preach any falsehood or untruth as from God, they dishonor him, and therefore
the Apostle says, that if Christ were not risen from the dead, himself and
others 1 Cor. 15. 15
who had preached the same, would be found false witnesses against God, by
preaching an untruth. And not by truth in matters of Religion, but also in
civil Jos. 7. 19.
judicatures God is honored by speaking the truth. And therefore when Achan
was questioned about the (...), Joshua says, My son give glory to God, when
he would have him for to confess his fault: So that confession of the truth
brings glory to God, as well in judicial matters, as in matters of Religion. 2.
In respect of the Church, saint Peter speaks of some, (as he calls them,) 2 In
respect of the Church.
Magistri mendaces, lying Masters, or false Teachers, who endangered the souls
2 Pet. 2. 1.
of them that heard them. For, besides the dishonor of Gods Name by false
Teachers, there is also a hazard of the peoples souls, by their false
Doctrine. Quis est mendax, nisi qui negat Jesum esse Christum, (says Saint
John?) Who is a liar, but he that denies that JESUS is the CHRIST? He that
affirms any 1 John 2. 22.
Heretical false Doctrine is a liar, and by his lies endangers the souls of
the people. The preserving of truth then, not only in regard of Gods glory,
but also for the safety and good of the Church, is another end of this
Commandment. 3. In respect of the Commonwealth, that (...) and Peace might
be preserved 3 In respect of the Commonwealth.
by witnessing the truth. Abraham called the Well which he had dug,
Beerjheba, the Well of the Oath, and that he might peaceably enjoy it, gave
Abimelech seven Lambs, to witness that the Well was his: and that Cumulus
testimonii, that heap of witness, was a heap of stones placed, as a witness
of the covenant between Genesis 31. 47, 48
Jacob and Laban, that they would live at peace, as friend, and allies. So
under the Law, all proceedings of justice, were to be established by truth,
which must Levit. 5. 5.
be by the testimony of witnesses; and therefore all public acts (...) justice
were to be grounded upon the truth of some witnesses. (Save only in the case
of Jealousy.) 4. In respect of every private man, this Commandment is the
fence of every 4. In respect of private persons
man's name and credit, which is of much worth: For a good name fastneth a man's
bones, says the Wiseman: It does him much good within, and so it does Prove.
15. 30.
without also, for it casts a sweet savor, and therefore is compared to a
sweet Eccles. 7. 1.
ointment poured forth; and if it come to be prized, it passes gold and
silver, For a good name is rather to be chosen then great riches, and loving
favor rather Prove. 22. 1.
then silver and gold, as Solomon says. And indeed it is the cause of both,
especially of the latter; for a good name or credit brings favor, and withal
riches. Gamaliel being a man of note, and of credit, all gave ear to him. Men
Acts 5. 34. 40.
will go to Physicians that are well esteemed, for their advice; and a cunning
Lawyer shall be sure of many Clyents, and a good Tutor of many Scholars: And
most customers will resort to such as have most credit, and the best report.
CHAP. II.
The necessity of a good name. The sin forbidden in general. Wherein. 1. The
root of it. 2. The Suppuration or rankling of it inwardly, by false surmises
and suspicions. 3. The fitting of the soil, by readiness to hear false
reports. 4. The watering of the soil, by busying our selves in other men's
affairs.

NOw for an entrance into that which follows; it will be needful to show the
The necessity of a good name.
necessity and use of a good name and credit among men. Though in respect of
Gods judgment of us (by which we must stand or (...)) it matters not much what
men think of us; yet there is an injunction laid upon every man, to Let his
light shine before men, that they may see his good works, and glorify his
Father which is in Heaven. Matthew. 5. 16.
It is a duty of every man to do what good he can to others: now there is
little or no good to be done by that man that has an evil report; so that
there is duplex necessitas, a double necessity laid upon every one; he must
have bonam conscientiam (...) se, a good conscience for himself, and bonam
famam propter (...), a good name for others, as s. (...) faith.

And therefore howsoever in respect of God, and our duty to him, setting
scandalum (...), and scandalum (...) aside, we (...) stand resolved, as the
Apostle 2 Cor. 6. 8.
was, to go through good report and bad report in doing our duty, thereby Phil.
4. 8.
to do good to others; yet if with (...), and (...), and (...), whatsoever
things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, a
man can join (...), whatsoever things are of good report, this is the best
course and the best way to be taken, to do good both to our selves and others;
and little use will be made of a man's gifts without it.

It is true, a man must regard the testimony of God, and his approbation before
the testimony of his own conscience, and the testimony of his conscience,
before the witness of men; he must say with the Philosopher, Malo viri boni
famam, (...) conscientiam perdere, I had rather lose the name and report of a
good man among men, then hazard the loss of my conscience; but yet where all
these can (...) together, a man should desire them all, because by this means
his gifts will be useful, for the enlarging the Kingdom of Christ, and edifying
of his Church; and therefore the care of the Apostles was, though they were
counted deceivers, yet they were true, and would 2 Cor. 6. 8.
give no (...) of offense; and the reason is given, that their ministry might
not be blamed, and so by that means they should be the less able to do good.

Besides, in regard of a man's own self: A good name should ever be carefully
regarded, because whilst a man has it, he will be the more wary and
circumspect over his ways, that so he may keep it: Whereas Jer. 3. 3.
when it is (...), he puts on that frontem meretricium, spoken of by the
Prophet, Psalm. 58. 4.
a (...), and like the deaf Adder stops his ear against all admonition.

In all these respects and considerations therefore, it is a sin for a man to
neglect his good name. The Heathen man so esteemed of it, that he said, Excepto
probro, reliqua omnia maledicta nihil existimo, Except slander and reproach
(which reflected upon his good name) he would endure all other railings; for
the wound made by a slander will hardly be so (...) but that some scar will
remain. For in this case, he that is slandered is disabled from doing that good
which otherwise he might; good men will be suspicious of him, and evil men
will never speak well of him, and therefore every man should be very careful of
his good name.

We proceed now to the offense it self, or the sin here forbidden, ( False
witnessing.) And this our Savior tells us, proceeds from the (...), For Out of
Matthew 15. 19.
the (...) proceed evil thoughts, etc. and among other things, (...), False
Mark 7. 22.
witness, and (...), Foolish speaking. So that the root of this sin is in
the heart, where there is (as we showed in the former Commandments) a natural
inclination, Grassari ad famam, to rob a man of his good name, thinking thereby
to be better thought of our selves, and by casting dirt upon other men's faces;
to make our own seem the fairer.

But in the next place, when men come to that which Esaias speaks of, to 2 The
suppuration.
dig deep, to hide their counsel; or with those in Jeremy, To consult and
devise devices against their neighbor, how they may smite him with the tongue,
and slander Esaias 29. 15.
him so that none may credit him, this goes further; for this is Suppuratio,
Jer. 18. 18.
the rankling of it inwardly. To this we refer those evil surmisings mentioned
by the Apostle. (...), Light suspicions, which are upon little or no ground. 1
(...) 6. 4.
These we handled before in the sixth Commandment as occasions of unjust
anger, and by consequence of murder: But here we speak of them, as they are
hurtful or prejudicial to another man's fame, or credit.

And from this saint James says, that men proceed further, viz. From Jam. 4.
11, 12.
groundless suspicions and surmises, to take upon them the office of the
Lawgiver, viz. To judge and condemn: And not only to give wrong judgment
upon their brother, but to judge before the time, as saint Paul says, and so 1
Cor. 4. 5.
they judge too hastily. And not only to judge of some outward actions, from
which no necessary conclusion can be drawn, but also of secret and inward
thoughts, and of matters doubtful, which might be well interpreted and taken in
a good sense; as we see the Jews did with Christ, and John Baptist: Of whom
the one, for not eating, but abstaining, was said to have a melancholy Matthew.
11. 19.
Devil; and the other, who came eating and drinking, was accounted a
winebibber, Luke 7. 34.
a friend of Publicans and Sinners. And thus, whereas some outward things may
be done to good or bad ends, they judge hastily De rebus seriis, of the most
weighty matters, not regarding, (...), or consequentia, what went before, or
follows after; with other circumstances which may often vary the nature of
outward actions.

Now this test is repentinus, this sudden witness, nunquam vere judicat, never
Prove. 12. 19.
gives a (...) verdict; as we see in those Barbarians, who no sooner saw the
Viper Acts 28. 4.
cleave to Paul's hand, but they concluded, that he was a murderer. Thus men
give sudden judgment: whereas they ought as the Apostle speaks, With meekness
to instruct them; waiting, if God at any time will give them repentance. 2 Timothy
2. 25.
And whereas they should keep to the Apostles rule, That some men's sins are 1 Timothy 5. 24.
open beforehand, going before to judgment, and some follow after: men give
judgment presently without distinction. No sooner is a Viper seen upon the
hand, but they pass the verdict.

And whereas GOD takes order, that Vbi malum contingit, ibi moriatur, that
private faults should be privately buried: Contrary to this, (...) discover
the secret sins of others, whereby they become slanderers, though they speak
the truth. The Wiseman condemns him that reveals secrets; and it was Prove.
11. 13
the (...) aggravation of Chams sin, to tell his brethren of his Fathers
nakedness, Whereas Joseph being a just man, and finding that Mary was with
child, supposing it might be by one with whom she was pre-contracted, would
not (...), make her a (...) example, but was minded to put her away privily.

Neither do (...) only discover the private faults of their brethren, but
amplify them, and make them greater then they are, as he that brought news to
David, That Absalom had slain all the Kings sons, there was not one of them
(...), when only Ammon (...) Sam. 13. 30.
was slain. Thus the common rumor goes, when but one is killed, that all are
killed. And beyond all these, when they have once spoken of a fault, they never
leave it, but go over it again, and so as Solomon observes, By repeating a
matter they separate very Prove. 17. 9.
friends; when the wound seems to be whole, and repentance made, yet they will
refricare cicatricem, (...) over the wound again, and make it bleed afresh.
These are some degrees of an affection or appetite that (...) after envy,
especially that of judging the worst in doubtful matters for if one will
reason, as Shemei did against David, 2 (...). 16. 7.
that because Joab and Abner were bloody men, and adhered to David, therefore
David was a man of blood; and so will proceed ex dubiis, upon doubtful and
uncertain grounds, it will open a window to all other degrees of the sin here
forbidden.

3. In the third place we proceed (as in the former Commandment) to subactum
3. The fitting of the soil.
solum, the fitting and (...) of the soil for the seeds of this sin; and this
is, when there is, pruritus aurium, the itching of the ears; or as the Wiseman
speaks, a willing hearer, or one that gives ear to a naughty tongue: For, as we
say, if there were Prove. 17. 4.
no receivers, there would be no thieves: so if there were no itching ears that
itched after the nakedness of others, there would be no Chams to tell them of
it. And the Psalmist among the notes of a good man, gives not only, that he
will not slander nor Psalm. 14. 3.
backbite another, but also that he will not take up, or receive a false report
against his neighbor. For if a man do but Vultum contrahere, draw his (...)
together, and shake off the slanderer, it is certain he will not return again.
Discet non libenter dicere, cum didicit non libenter alios audire, he will
learn not to be forward to speak, when he perceives others unwilling to hear,
as S. Augustine says.

In some men, there is first a delight to hear of men's imperfections, and
secondly, a credulity or readiness to believe, as we see in Potiphar. No
sooner was the word Genesis 39. 20.
out of his Wives mouth, but presently Joseph was clapped up in prison; she was
believed without examination: Whereas the righteous are like to Gedaliah in
(...), Jer. 40. 16.
as S. Augustine says, who when Jonathan told him that Ismael would slay him,
he would not believe him, because he would not suspect any such thing by him.
They are not (...); and will not easily admit a talebearer, nor indulgere,
give regard to him by believing what he says, or concluding it to be true, or
by any gesture show respect to him, without due proof and examination of the
matter.

4 In the fourth place follows, Irrigatio soli, the watering of the soil being
thus 4. The watering of the soil.
prepared, and this is, when men do (...), busy themselves in another
Diocese. This curious searching after faults in others, is the note of an
Hypocrite, as our 1 Pet. 4. 15.
Savior shows. Thou (...), Cur aspicis? why spiest thou a mote in thy brothers
eye? not cur vides? why see thou? it is (...), to epsy, not (...), to look
or see other men's (...), to enquire after them what they say or do, which makes
men breakers of this Commandment. This arises partly from idleness, as the
Apostle shows (of which we spoke formerly) for when men begin to be idle, they
become 1 Timothy 5. 13.
tatlers, and busybodies, going about from house to house. This is an
affection not becoming a discreet man.

A perfect resemblance of this vice we have in Ahimaaz, who was so earnest to
carry the news to David, that many would not have sued so earnestly for the
best Office in all Jury, as he did to carry tidings. It is noted as the vice
the Athenians (...) Sam. 18. 19.
were infected with, they minded nothing in the (...) but to listen after
(...). Surely by this means, when men look only outwardly what others do,
(...) show either a neglect of themselves, or they fall in jucundum
spectaculum, into a pleasing dotage upon themselves: for as S. Jerome says,
Qui sua non (...), aliena carpunt, they that are careless of (...), are
always observing other men's carriage, they are still noting other men's
practices. They are ready to ask questions concerning others, as Saint Peter
did concerning Saint (...), What shall this man do? to whom Christ answers,
What is that to thee? follow thou me. (...) John 21. 22.
had a desire to know, what John should do; but Christ reproves this
pragmatical humor in him, and bids him look to himself, and keep within his
own Diocese. Thus every one must, as the Apostle exhorts, (...), do his own
business, he must 1 These. 4. 11.
search into his own actions, and then he shall have little leisure to look
after other men's. And for the remedy of this, let him remember that of the
Heathen, Qui confidit virtuti (...), non invidet (...), he that is confident of
his own virtue, will never envy another man's. And thus we see, how this sin
rises first in the heart, and rankles there, and what it is, which (...) the
soil for it, and waters it to make it fertile: we come now to the outward act.

CHAP. III.
The outward act, of which two branches. 1. False words. 2. Idle and vain
words. Of false speaking in general; this is two fold. 1. In judgment. 2. Out
of judgment. In judgment, by false witness. Of lies in general. Six persons
in every judgment, who may be guilty of false witnessing. 1. The Judge. 1. By
cherishing Law suits. 2. By deferring justice. 3. If his judgment be, 1.
(...), 2. rash, 3. perverse. 2. The Register by making false records. 3. The
Accuser, 1. By accusing falsely, 2. upon uncertain grounds. 3. by prevaricating.
4. The Defendant, 1. by not confessing the truth, 2. by appealing without
cause, 3. by not submitting to the sentence. 5. The (...). 1. by not declaring
all the truth, when (...) is lawfully called. 2. by not delivering the
innocent, though he be not called, 3. by delivering the wicked by false
testimony. 6. The Advocate, 1. by undertaking an evil cause, 2. by perverting
the Law. Of giving false testimony in Elections.

THE Act of this sin consists specially in words, which are, as our Savior
speaks, 5. The outward Act.
according to the treasure of our hearts. Now there is not only an evil
treasure of the heart, out of which a man brings (...) evil things, but also an
idle treasure, out Mat. 12. 35, 36
of which a man brings forth idle things, viz. idle words, for which a man must
give an account.

Under these two heads we may comprehend the branches of this sin, which may
admit this division, of 1. false words, and 2. vain or idle words.

1. False words are, either when our words disagree from the truth and essence
of 1. False words
things, or when they disagree from our own mind. And both may be considered,
either as they concern our selves, or our brethren; for whatsoever speech is
either prejudicial to ourselves, or our neighbor, is condemned, as against the
rule of charity. And though it be neither hurtful to us, nor to our brethren,
yet if it contain falsehood, it is against the truth of God, and therein we are,
as the Apostle speaks, found false witnesses against God. 1 Cor. 15. 15.


False doctrine is here included, as opposite to true doctrine, but not as it
is in the third Commandment; for there it is forbidden, as contrary to Gods
glory, here, as hurtful to our brethren, and their spiritual good. We must not
add to his word, nor take from it, nor change it, by making any other way of
salvation, as those false teachers did among the Galatians, that preached
another gospel, which, as the Apostle says, Prove. 30. 6
is to preach alium Jesum, another Jesus. This was touched before, and therefore
we Gal. 1. 9.
shall say the less (...). Only this we add, that it is a good rule given by
S. Basil; not only (...), but also (...), not only all lies and falsehoods,
but also all turnings and wrestings of Scripture are condemned, as among
others, he specially instances in one, viz. the making of the litteral sense
typical, or turning the Scripture into allegories, and from thence inferring
doctrines which the Holy Ghost never intended. This gives occasion to all
Heresies, when men choose what opinions, they themselves please, and make the
Scripture a nose of wax to patronize them. As to make Adam the reasonable part
of the soul, and Eve the seniual, and thereupon to infer this as a positive
doctrine, That if reason command sense, we shall avoid the temptation of the
serpent; but if the sensual part prevail against reason, we shall be overcome
by the Tempter, as Adam was by harkening to Eve; this is to pervert the
Scripture: we may indeed (...) to such things in Scripture, as the Apostle does
to Sarah and Hagar; but to say, this or that is meant by such texts, is to make
the Scripture like a (...) man's hose, or Cothurnum, a (...), that will serve
either leg, and makes all Religion uncertain. Ezekiel makes it an (...) to God,
to say, In obscuris (...), I have written to you in dark or doubtful speeches;
but by this means all is made doubtful, so that people shall be doubtful what
to hold in any point.

We come now to false speaking in particular, and here we must consider, 1.
false False speaking 1 In judgment. 2. Out of judgment.

testimony which is given in judgment: and 2 falsehood uttered out of judgment.

This distinction is intimated by Solomon, Proverbs 19. 5. where he says, A
false witness shall not be unpunished, and he that speaks lies shall not
escape: where we Prove. 19. 5.
see, he make this division, that some are false witnesses, viz. such as speak
falsehood from judgment; and others speak lies at other times, that is out of
judgment; and the very same we find by him repeated in the ninth verse. The
same may be inferd in the words of this Commandment; for when it is said, Thou
shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor, that is in judgment: this
(...), that there may be also falsum testimonium, false witness that is not
contra proximum, against our Neighbor.

Before we speak of these in particular, we shall only say this briefly in Of
lies in general.
general, concernig all lies, That all lies are from the Devil, who was a liar
from the beginning; for the first word that ever he spoke was a lie; those then
that utter lies John 8. 44.
belong to him. The Psalmist makes it the proper mark of wicked men, whom he
describes by this, they speak lies from the very womb. And that this is no
small sin, appears Psalm 58. 3.
by that fea: full threatening against liars, Perdes omnes, qui loquuntur
mendacia, (...) shall destroy all (...) that speak lies. All lies, whether they
concern our selves, Psalm 5. 6.
our Neighbors, or none, make us false witnesses to God. And therefore we
find in the Revel. that in the place of torment shall be (...), every one that
loves or makes a lie, he that either loves to hear it, or that speak it, so
that lies are condemned, both actively and passively, if we make them, or love
to hear them. Revel. 22. 15.


Come we now to him that speaks false in judgment. And for this false
witness, Solomon gives us a good comparison, for he says, A man that bears
false witness, Of false speaking in judgment
is a hammer, a sword, and a sharp arrow. Now thus he is compared, partly
because his Prove. 25. 18.
face is hardened, so that he blushes at nothing, be it never so false; for
having once lost his (...), he comes to have frontem meretricium, as the
Prophet speaks, a whores forehead, Jer. 3. 3.
and (...) known to the one party, viz. to him that hired him, to be a Knave,
he grows impudent, and testifies any thing, and so strikes like a hammer, or a
sword, or whatsoever does wound the deepest, he sticks at no mischef he can do
to the party against whom he speaks: and partly, because that as S. Bernard
speaks, there are three parties, who are (...) by him at once, by one and the
same tongue.

1. Judici est Malleus, He is a hammer or maul to the Judge, whose judgment A
false witness is, 1. A hammer
and understanding he (...), so that like a man astonished by a blow on the
head, he knows not how to determine aright. 2. To the party that hired him, he
is gladius, a sword; for, though he speak for 2. A sword.
him, yet (...) is a sword to destroy his soul. He makes him believe, that by
his purse he has prevailed against the truth, and having done so once, he may
do so at other times, and so he (...) him in this evil course. 3. He is a sharp
arrow to him against whom he witnesses, though he has the 3. An Arrow.
least harm, if he can bear it with patience; for his false testimony is like
an arrow that sticks in him, it wounds him, either in his goods, or life, or at
least his good name is blemished by it.
Now this bearing of false witness, is not to be referred to the witness
alone, but it takes hold of all (...) persons that have to do in judgment,
either as parties, or others that act in it. (...) Accuser is called a
witness, If a false witness rise up against Deuteronomy. 19. 16.
any man, etc. and so by like reason, may also the Defendant, reus, the party
accused, be called a false witness. The Actor, or Accuser by an untrue
accusation, and the other by an untrue defense, may bear false witness. And so
may the Judge, by a wrong determination: and the Notary or Register, by
recording the sentence, otherwise then it is pronounced, or by leaving out, or
inserting any thing into it: And so may the (...), by pleading for a bad cause:
for in every judgment there are these six. 1. The Judge. 2. The Register. 3.
The Plantiffe. 4. The Defendant. 5. The In every judgment are.
(...). And 6. the Advocate.

1. The Judge: it is not perilous on his side, if he give wrong Judgment. He
1. The Judge.
had need be a man of wisdom; for it is said, that judicium est (...), the
judgment is Deuteronomy. 1 17.
Gods; and therefore whosoever he be, that being a judge gives a wrong
sentence, facit Deum mendacem, he makes God to speak a lie: and whosoever
induces a judge by (...) witness, or otherwise, to give false judgment, he
perverts the course of nature, and as much as in him lies, changes God into the
Devil. 2. For the Notary or Register, he is guilty by making false records, or
decrees. 2. The Register
Artaxerxes Notaries could (...) a decree upon search, that Jerusalem had of
old time Ezra 4. 19.
been a rebellious city, and had made insurrection against Kings, which were
false records; Ezra 6. 2.
for when Darius a good king came to reign they could find in the Palace, in
the house of the Rowls, where the treasures were laid up in Babylon, that they
were so far from rebelling against those, to whom they were subject, that they
would not attempt, so much as to build the Temple, without Cyrus his decree. 3.
For the Plantiffe or Accuser, there was order taken under the Law, that he must
3. The Plantiffe
Levit. 5. 1.
utter, what he has seen or known, not any thing false or uncertain, and if he
do not Genesis 39. 7.
utter it, he must bear his iniquity. He must not accuse any falsely, as
Potiphars wife did (...). 3. 8.
Joseph, that he would have layen with her; or as Haman did the Jews, that they
1 Samuel 13. 3.
observed not the Kings Laws; or as Ziba did Mephibosheth, of aspiring to the
kingdom; Daniel 6. 13.
nor out of malice, though the thing be true, as they did Daniel, for praying
thrice a day. 4. For the Defendant, he must confess what he has done, being
required in due 4. The Defendant.
form of Law, before lawful Authority. Achan confessed all to Joshua. Josh. 7.
19, 20.
5. For the Advocates, They must follow, as the Law says, that which is
altogether 5. The Advocate.
just; it is spoken not only of Judges, but also of Officers. Now those
Officers were causarum cognitores, knowers and followers of causes, such as
Atturneys Counselors Deuteronomy. 16. 20.
etc. they must not undertake the patronage of an evil cause, nor encourage
their Clyent, when his cause is bad, they must inform him aright what to do,
not misinform the Judge, nor wrest the Law, nor respect persons, nor protract
causes, nor extort bribes, and draw from their Clyents, more then their usual
and lawful Fees. 6. Lastly for Witnesses, God took order, that if any did
accuse another, and did 6. The Witnesses.
testify a false matter, look what penalty the other should have undergone, if
he had Deuteronomy. 19.
been guilty, the same should be inflicted upon him, if the thing proved false.
Thus ought the judgment seat to be established on every side.
To go over these more particularly.

1. For the Judge. He may be guilty of the breach of this Commandment diverse
The Judge offends, 1. by cherishing law suits.
ways.

1. By cherishing Law suits, whereby untruth is uttered in the judgment seat.
The Apostle said, that it is (...), a fault for brethren to go to Law one with
another, meaning 1 Cor 6. 7.
it was a fault in those that begun, not in those that are (...), constrained
to answer, therefore it must necessarily follow, that it is a fault in a Judge,
to encourage men to go to Law. There must be untruth either in the Plantiffe or
Defendant, for there cannot be truth on both sides; and if the Judge shall
encourage men to go to law, there must needs be much untruth spoken at the
judgment seat, which is highly derogatory to God, (as the confession of truth
is for his glory.) Therefore S. Paul's advise is, that Law suits should be
diminished and lessened, as much as may be, and that there should be no suit,
but when there is (...), or (...), a defraudation, or hurt, or wrong done that
cannot be borne. The cherishing therefore of Law suits by a Prince or a Judge,
is the way to open a wide window to breaking of this Commandment.
And therefore to prevent this mischief, which is a judgment upon this land,
now since the Reformation, it were good that some order were taken herein: as,

1. That there might be (...), Examiners and Inquisitors of all causes, as
there were in Greece, such as were to approve or allow of quarrels and suits,
and to judge whether they were fit to be prosecuted or no. 2. Or else as they
had in Rome, that men should contend ex sacramento, each man should lay down
his pawn when he went to law, in manum Pontific is ad sacros usus, in the hands
of the High Priest for sacred uses, and if his cause or quarrel proved not
good, it was to go to the repairing or adorning of the Temple.
If some such courses be not taken, Law cases will multiply, there will be
(...), a Deuteronomy. 1. (...).
fault. The judgment seat was erected by God, that hard and difficult cases
only (...). 18 (...).
should be brought thither, and not for every trivial matter. But we see the
contrary to say that the matters now usually brought before the Judges, are
matters of difficulty, were (...) and untrue.

2. The Judge may (...) by delaying justice; he ought to give quick dispatch,
to 2. By delaying justice.
delay justice is injustice; therefore Moses though he were very able for
dispatch, being excellent in knowledge, yet that causes might be the sooner
ended, he appoints Exodus 18. 23.
more Judges, as his father in law counseled him. Jethro thought it absurd,
that the Exodus 18. 14.
people waited, and their causes depended from morning till night. How absurd
then is it for causes to depend from year to year? This that thou do is not
well, said Jethro, that the people should wait thus, and verse 23. he tells
him, if this which he advises be done, the people might go home quickly. This
would be the benefit of quickdispatch. As multitude of suits, are causes of
much falsehood, and false witness; so also is the long depending of suits, by
non-suits, dilatory pleas, and other shifts, to delay justice.

3. The Judge may offend, if his judgment be, as we showed before in the fifth
How the judge may be (...).
Commandment, 1. Vsurpatum, usurped. 2. or Temerarium, rash and hasty, or 3.
Perversum, perverse and wrong.

1. Judgment is usurped, if he give judgment in a cause of which he has no
cognizance, or upon one, over whom he has no jurisdiction. To such may be
said, what the Apostle says in another case, who art thou that judge another
man's servant? Romans 14. 4.
to his own Master he stands or falls. 2. His judgment is rash, either when it
is suddenly given in a hard case, or before Deuteronomy. 1. 17.
both parties be heard. It was a blemish in David, by a rash judgment to give
away 2 Samuel 19. 29.
Mephibosheths lands to Ziba, and after with much ado, to let him have the one
half, and Ziba the other. By the Law both parties were to meet before the Lord,
before any thing was determined: and that Heathen Judge said, It was not the
custom of the Acts 25. 16.
Romans to condemn any, before he have his accusers brought face to face, and
be heard speak for himself, Solomon gives the reason, He that is first in his
own cause seems just, Prove. 18. 17.
but his neighbor comes and searches him. Therefore this is one step to rash
judgment, to give credit to the party that speaks first; by this means Ziba so
far prevailed, that though (...) prove all the lands to be his, yet he must be
content with one half. 3. He ought not to give perverse judgment, but must
say, All the words of my Prove. 8. 8.
mouth are righteousness, there is nothing froward or perverse in them. The
Law is express, Thou shall not pervert judgment. Now judgment may be
perverted, either Exodus 23. 2.
when the wicked is absolved, or accounted just, or the just is condemned and
accounted wicked, both which, Solomon says, are abomination. The words
translated according Prove. 17. 15.
to the original are, He that justifies the unjust, or unjustifies the just,
etc. because it is all one in case of justice, to affirm a thing to be, and to
make it so. He must not in some cases, release the guilty upon any pretense:
under the Law, no satisfaction was to be taken for the life of a murderer, but
he must die; for blood cannot be Numb. 35. 31.
cleansed, but by blood: when God therefore appoints the punishment, it is not
in 32, 33.
the power of the Magistrate to remit it, yet in some cases it is left to his
Arbitrament; but with two conditions: 1. That it be expedient, or not against
the good of the Commonwealth. 2. That the party wronged be content with it.
2. For the Notaries or Registers. The Prophet says, That as some decree
wicked The (...).
decrees, that is the Judges; so there are some that write grievous things,
which may Esaias 10. 1.
be applied to Registers, and a woe is denounced against both; for the Register
many times, makes the record more grievous then the decree, which if it go not
exactly, according to the sentence pronounced, it is a false record. And to
such as do thus, it may be said, Quando justitia revertitur ad judicium, when
righteousness shall Psalm 94. 15.
return to judgment, when Christ the true righteousness shall come to
judgment, they (...) answer for it.

3. For the Accuser, he may be guilty of the breach of this Commandment three
How the Accuser may be guilty.
ways.

1. (...), by slandering, when he brings a false Accusation, as Haman, who
Esth. 3. 8.
slandered the Jews, that they were not observers of the Kings Laws, upon which
false accusation, the King gave temerarium judicium, rash judgment against the
Jews. 2. When he accuses any upon uncertain grounds, as those that accused S.
Paul, and Acts 24. 13.
alleged sundry (...) against him, which they could not prove, and yet he was
still detained (...), till (...) proof could be made. 3. By prevaricating,
(...); when there is collusion used in pleading, so that he which accuses
pleads faintly against another, being reconciled to him underhand. It is a
Metaphore taken from those that were ( vari) such as had crooked legs, bending
inward (...) the knees, the feet being (...) asunder, who by wearing long
garments down to their feet (as was the use of old (...) some Commonwealths)
might easily deceive those that looked upon them, the garment covering their
deformity, as if their knees had been as far asunder, as their feet. Hence
those that did contend, and strive together in public, and yet were friends
privily, were called pravaricatores, prevaricators; thus when a man seems to
accuse, and yet is friends with him whom he accuses, he prevaricates, and is a
mere mockery of the place of judgment. And as the Plantiffe himself, so he
that is Advocatus Actoris, the Advocate for the Plantiffe, is guilty in like
manner of prevarication, when he (...) the cause of the (...) whom he
represents, by weak proofs and grounds. We read in Ezra, that Ezra 4. 5.
there were Counselors about Artaxerxes, that made show of such as would
advise him for the public good, whereas they had bin hired and bribed against
the Jews, by their enemies, to hinder the building of the (...), which was not
for the good of Artaxerxes: and so he that is to represent another, and is to
advise for his good, and yet is corrupted to do the contrary, is (...) to be
blamed for prevaricating.
4. For the (...), or the party accused, he may be guilty three ways. How the
Defendant is guilty of the breach of this Commandment.


1. If being demanded or required to answer in due form of law, he use excuses,
or (...) to avoid the matter objected against him, though it be true, or which
is as old, if he seek to excuse (...) by accusing others. This was Adams fault
tergiversari, to use tergiversation. The question was, whether he had eaten or
psalm 141. 4.
Genesis 3.
no, he makes no direct answer, but lays the fault upon the Woman. The woman
which thou gave me, she geve me of the fruit, etc. Job therefore makes it
part of his (...), that he had not hid his sin, as Adam did, concealing
iniquity in his bosom. Job 31. 33.
Being lawfully commanded therefore to answer, in matters where there is
public fame and probable ground precedent, we must answer, for we must not
add (...) evil to another; to be evil is evil, and to seem good when a man is
evil, is evil also: and therefore he that being evil would seem good, by (...)
the truth, adds one evil to another.

But yet a man is not bound to accuse himself, when he is not lawfully
proceeded against, nor before a competent Judge: when the High Priest
interrogated Christ John 19. 9.
concerning his doctrine, he bids him ask those that heard him. If any could
accuse him, let him come forth, but he would not accuse himself: and when
Pilate asked Joh. 18. 20. 21.
him some questions, he would give him no answer, or no direct answer, because
his questions proceeded not ex publica infamia, nor ex semiplena probatione,
upon public fame, nor upon probable grounds, but were to make him accuse
himself: in such cases a man may not answer. And again in some (...), if there
be two things in the accusation, and both true, he may answer to the one, and
occultare partem veritatis, hide or conceal the other part, as S. Paul did when
he was accused, for perceiving that Acts 23. 6.
part were Sadduces, who denied the resurrection, and part (...), who held the
resurrection, he cried out, that he was a (...), and held the resurrection, and
for that was questioned, which was true, for that was one thing for which he
was called in question; but it was not that alone. So if a man have diverse
ways to defend himself, he may choose which he will; as he that has diverse
weapons, may use which he will for his own defense. But if according to due
form of Law he be proceeded against, he must answer as Achan did, when Joshua
urged him to confess the truth. Josh. 7. 19.


2. Whereas the benefit of appeal is granted, for a remedy of those that are
oppressed, if any shall use appeals merely to protract the cause, and avoid a
just sentence, this is a second fault in the Defendant; for this is to delay
(...), contrary to Jethro's advise, who would not have people wait long for
justice, but to be dispatched, that Ex. 18. 22. (...)
they might go home to their place in peace. 1. The Defendant offends, if when
sentence is given, he do not submit to it; Rom 13. 2.
for, Qui resistit, Dei ordinationi resistit, he that resists, resists the
ordinance of God.

5. For the witness, he may likewise (...) guilty diverse ways. How the
witness breaks this commandment.


1. If being lawfully required by a Superior, demanding his testimony, and
asking him nothing that is (...) to the matter in question, if he do not
declare all that Levit. 5. 1.
he knows; for the Law is (...), that a witness, if he (...) not utter (...)
he (...) seen and known shall bear his (...). 2. Though one be not required by
a Superior, yet if it be to (...) an Innocent man in danger, he is bound to
bear witness, and he (...), if he be silent. Solomon makes it no small sin not
to give testimony, for the preservation of an innocent person, If thou forbear
to deliver them that are drawn to death, and those that are ready to pro. 24.
11, 12
be slain; if thou (...), behold I knew it not, does not he that (...) the
heart consider, and shall not be render to every one according to his works.
But out of these cases, if one not be called to witness by a Superior, or if
an innocent person be not (...) by his silence, and if he be not examined about
other things which belong not to the matter in question, he is not (...) to
answer. 3. Besides these, Solomon intimates another way, whereby a witness may
offend, prove. 11. 21.
when he bears false witness to deliver the wicked; for though (...) hand, yet
shall not the wicked escape unpunished. The Greeks have a Proverb, Da (...)
jusjurandum, lend me an oath. This lending an oath is that which Solomon calls,
a joining of hand in hand, and he says plainly, that though they may escape
the hands of men, yet shall they not escape unpunished, that is, God will be
sure to punish them.
6. Sixthly and lastly, for the Advocate, he may offend two ways. How the
Advocate offends.


1. If he undertake an evil cause, knowing it so to be. This is a great sin.
God Exodus 23. 1, 3.
says (having first prohibited any to raise a false report) Put not thy hand
unto the wicked, to be an unrighteous witness: now he that pleads (...) a bad
cause, puts his hand to the wicked. And in the third verse, its added, Thou
shall not countenance a poor man in his cause, viz. if his cause be bad. If a
man might plead for any in a bad cause, surely it might be for a poor man, but
even for a poor man he must not. Jehu said to Jehosaphat, Will thou help the
wicked, and love them that hate the Lord? therefore is wrath upon thee from the
Lord. And the Apostle says, that not only the doers of evil things are worthy
of death, but also (...), they that take pleasure in them, or consent to them,
such are they that plead for them, they give their placet, as we use to do, at
congregations in the Universitie. Greeks used the same words; and gave their
suffrages, by (...), it pleases me, and therefore whosoever pleads for the
wicked, cries (...), I am pleased with it, he helps him, and is partaker of his
sin with him. 2. Another way is by the Wise man, when a man for defense of a
cause in difference, prove. 17. 23.
though it be good, perverts the Law, or receives a bribe. The wicked ((...)
he) takes a gift out of the bosom to wrest the ways of judgment. As it is
evil to join with the wicked to help an evil cause ( for he that says to the
wicked, thou art just, him prove. 24. 24.
shall the people curse) so to bolster any cause by wrong means, and thereby to
pervert the course of judgment, is wicked.
And because judgment is not only (...), on the bench, but also in (...), in
Of giving false testimony in Elections.
the place of consultation, therefore false witness or testimony must not be
given in elections, or in choice of men to places or preferments, for there
ought to be justice and truth in both, and he that gives his voice for one
unworthy, bears false witness, and goes against justice and truth; (...)
justice, as the Philosopher defines it well, is rectitudo in affectu, impressa
a recta ratione, a rectitude stamped upon the affections, by right reason, and
as electio dicit excellentiam, so excellentia dicit magis aut plus, as Election
or choice imports excellency in the party elected, so excellency imports the
best, or most eminent: now that in our choice the best is always to be chosen,
is the second rule in moral Philosophy, which he that follows not, goes against
the truth and so justice is broken.

CHAP. IIII.
Of false witnessing out of judgment. Four things to which the tongue may do
harm. The branches of this kind of false witnessing. 1. Contumelious
speaking. 2. Taunting. 3. Backbiting. Which is, 1. By words. 2. By letters. 3.
By deeds. 4. In all these a man may be a false witness. (...) he speak the
truth.

AND thus we have done with false testimony given in judgment. Now for that Of
false witnessing out of judgment.
which is out of judgment. When a man is out of judgment, he is not to say
with those in the Psalm, Ego sum Dominus linguae meae, my tongue is my own, I
may Psalm 12. 4.
speak what I will; for nemo est Dominus sui, nisi ad licita, no man is Lord of
his own, prove. 24. 28.
further then to employ it for a lawful use. Solomon has a strange speech, Be
not a witness against thy (...) without cause; which speech implies, that a
man being not called, may be a false witness against his neighbor, when there
is no cause. How can this be? In common ordinary talk, when a man speaks evil
of his neighbor, he bears false witness against him, though he be not before
any Judge. Therefore he advises to put far from us, proter vitatem oris, and
labiorum, a froward mouth, and perverse Prove. 4. 24.
lips, we must not breath out slanders against him, who it may be does not
think the least evil of us.

That we may understand this, we must know, that there are four things to which
the tongue may do harm. For 1. a man has favor or good esteem among men, this
is in the mind. 2. A good report, which consists in speaking well of him. 3.
Friendship with friends, etc. 4. A state or dignity, as a Superior. And as all
these may be hurt by the tongue; so may the faults of the tongue, extra
judicium, be distinguished.

Of the first and second Solomon speaks, when he says, A good name is (...) to
be Prove. 22. 1.
chosen then great riches, and loving favor rather then silver and gold. Of
the third Prove. 20. 6.
in another place he says, a faithful friend is an unknown treasure So the
vulgar Latin reads the words, which our Author follows.
. Against the fourth, we have an example in Rabshekah, who reproached and
blasphemed King Hezekiah, and in him God himself.

Against these, there are diverse faults of the tongue, which we are now to
Esaias 37. 23.
speak of.

1. Contumely and disgrace, which is against the (...) (credit and favor) and
is 1. Contumely.
when a man is present: such men as use these, the Apostle calls (...),
despightful, Romans 1. 30.
which disgrace a man to his face, by opprobrious speeches.

2. If it be per sales, oblique, glauncingly by jeasts, it is called
subsannatio, taunting, 2. Taunting.
and this is against the fourth, viz. against ones dignity. Those that are
laughed at are moriones, fools, the off-scourings of men, fit to be laughed at.
Now to make a man as one of them, to set him in that estate that he shall be
(...) at, is an impairing of his state and dignity and gives him a great wound.

4. This was Saul's reason why he would have his harnessebearer to kill him, he
1 Samuel 31 4
would rather be killed, then be mocked by the uncircumcised Philistims; for an
ingenuous nature counts only probrum to be delictum, reproach to be a crime,
other railings are to be neglected.

3. As two are when one is present, so there is a third, who hurts a good 3.
(...)
Name behind ones back. Obtrectator, a Backiter, he offends against the
second, 1. By words.
which is good Report, and the fourth, viz. Friendship. Plautus calls him Mus
nominis, a Mouse (that is the Gnawer or eater up) of ones good name. But Saint
Paul calls him by his true Name, Diabolus, the Devil, (...), in lingua, a
Devil in the Tongue, that is a false accuser or detractor; first he speaks
against 2 Timothy 3 3.
one to this man, then to another, then to a third, thereby to make him lose
some of his (...), and then they call him susurro, a talebearer, and indeed he
often so prevails that as the Wise man observed, he sowes discord and
dissension between Princes, and so between whole Realms.

This sin, when it is contra bonum aestimationis, against a man's credit and
estimation, 2 Samuel 16. 5, 6, 7.
and to his face, it is called Shimeis sin. If it be behind ones back, it is
called Hamans sin. Esth. 3. 8.
If it take away friendship, and bring alienation of (...), it is Ziba's sin;
for he 2 Samuel 16. 3.
informed David against Mephibosheth, to alienate David's affection (...) him.
If it be to the scorning and vilipending of a man, it may be called the sin of
the men of Judge. 8. 6.
Succoth, who slighted Gedeon, and we may read afterward, how he requited the
Princes of Succoth A heroical mind cannot endure this. David complains often,
that he was scorned by his friends and acquaintance, and that the very abjects
made jests of Psalm 69. 12.
Jer. 20. 10.
him; and so does Jeremy who was used in like manner.

This sin, as it may be by words, so by letters also; Sanballat sent a letter
to Nehemiah Nehem. 6. 6.
full of slanders against him. And as it may be in words, either directly, or
indirectly; 2. By Letters.
so it may be by writings, either directly, as in that of Sanballat; or
indirectly, as in Libels, whereof we have a resemblance in that which Jehoash
king of Israel sent 2 King. 14. 9.
to Amazia, concerning the Thistle and the Cedar, which was nothing else but a
scoff 3. By Actions.
of Jehoash against Amazia. And as it may be both in words and writings, so
also by John 19. 2.
outward acts, as when the Soldiers platted a crown of thorns upon our
Saviors head, this was a real scoffing of him.

Any of these, whether done directly, or indirectly come under the name of
(...), foolish talking, and (...), jesting, and such as use it, are called
(...), jesters, which is the common name given them of courtesy, when as indeed
they are (...), foolish talkers.

In all these kinds a man may be guilty of bearing false witness, though he
speak False witnessing though a man speak the truth.
the truth: for the truth ought to be spoken in love, as love delights in
truth, so the truth must be spoken in love (which is the affirmative part of
this Commandment.) And therefore though one speaks truth, yet if it be not in
love, he is a slanderer. 1 Cor. 13. 6.
Therefore Doeg, was Doeg, though he told the truth: it was true, that when
David Ephesians. 4. 15.
came to Nob to Abimelech, that Abimelech gave him bread, and the sword of
Goliath, 1 Samuel 22. 9, 10
all was true that he said, but yet he was a Doeg still; for as David said
truly, His tongue Psalm 52. 2.
did cut as a sharp razor, for it cut all the throats of the Priests. Some go
further, and cover their malice under a veyl of love; they are like those false
brethren the Apostle speaks of, that were unawares brought in, of whom S.
Jerome gives the reason Gal. 2. 4.
why they were so called, because they came in like those in the story of
Daniel, that came under the table, and eat the meat provided for the Idol: so
these men privily insinuate themselves into those they speak to, by pretending
a great deal of love and affection to the party they speak against. Their lips
swim with butter and oil, but their words are very swords. Such were they that
asked Christ, whether they Matthew. 22 16.
might pay tribute to Caesar or no: Magister bone, Good Master, say they, we
know thou speak the truth, (this is the oil:) but here is the sword, shall
we pay tribute to Caesar? If he answer one way, he offends the people, who
would be ready to stone him, if the other, he offends Caesar, and off goes his
head. Thus whether a talebearer speak to bring a man into danger, or to take
away his credit, His words (as the Wise man speak) are as wounds, and they go
down into the (...) parts of the belly. S. Bernard upon the Canticles,
describes such an one well; Vide magna praemitti suspiria, Bern sermon. 24 in
Cant.
you shall have him send forth great and deep sighs before, and he will speak,
(...), etcum quadam tarditate, dimissis superciliis, voce plangenti, etc. sic
egreditur maledictio, as if he were confounded and ashamed, and then with an
affected slownesse, casting down his countenance, with a whining voice, and
then comes out the cursed venom of his heart: you would think, it were rather
done dolenti animo, quam malitioso, with a mourning rather then a malicious
mind, he says, vehementer doleo, quia vehementer diligo, I am heartily sorrow
for him, because I heartily love him, and then he says, compertus jam est, it
is now known, otherwise I would never have spoken of it, but seeing it is
known, I must needs say, it is so; and thus he breaks out his cursed speeches.
This is one extreme.

CHAP. V.
Of reproof or fraternal correption, the virtue opposite to flattery. Of
flattery, which is 1. In things uncertain. 2. In things certain, and those
either good or evil. Of boasting and vaunting a man's self, and its extreme.

THe other extreme opposite to slandering and detraction, is flattery, of
which, Of admonition or fraternal correption
before we speak, we shall premise somewhat of the affirmative duties opposite
to it, which is, Fraterna correptio, fraternal admonition, or brotherly
reproof, opposed James 3. 1.
to flattery: and secondly, the giving a true report, opposed to detraction:
Because we are joined together by the law of love or charity; and for that as
S. James says, In many things we offend all: therefore God took order in his
law, that as we should not slander or speak evil of our brother, so we should
admonish and reprove him when he (...). Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy
heart. Thou shall in any wise Levit. 19. 17.
rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin to rest upon him. This is as much to
say, that 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14.
as the Heathen man said, we should cum opus est contristari amicum, when there
is Gal. 6. 1.
occasion, even to make sad the heart of our friend by reproof. If any be
disordered Tit. 1. 13.
by a bare admonition, if the offense be small, and without aggravating
circumstances, 1 Timothy 5. 20.
then to reprove him in the spirit of meekness; but if it be otherwise, to
reprove him Matthew. 18. 15.
sharply and roundly; if it be an open fault, then openly and before all; if
secret, then Acts 23. 16.
privately in the ear, with this caveat, except it redound to the damage and
detriment of another, for then it must be declared to the party whom it
concerns.

So we see as S. Augustine says, that there is a double truth.

1. Dulcis, quae fovet, a sweet truth, which cherishes when we do well. 2.
Amara, quae curat, a truth which is bitter, yet cures us when we have done
amiss.
And therefore the Apostle writes to the Corinths, Though I made you sorry, yet
I 2 Cor. 7. 8, 9.
repent it not, though the example of the person punished, made you sorry for a
(...): Rather I do now rejoice, not for the act of punishment inflicted upon
the offender, as for your amendment by that act. Thus we see reproof is a way
to bring men to repentance; and therefore we are to perform this duty, that
thereby we may bring men to repentance, and so having performed it, we shall
never repent us of it. And this is the reason of that speech, Non amo quenquam
nisi (...), I love not any till I have made him sad: which is to be thus
understood, that by making him sad, we bring him to repentance, and so we
testify our love to him.

There are some such as the Philosopher says, who having done evil, if a man
come to deal with them, he must either (...) veritatem, or prodere amicitiam,
betray the truth, or lose their friendship, they cannot abide this (...). But
though they be such, yet we must not fear openly to rebuke them; for as Solomon
says, Open rebuke is better then secret love; and vulnera diligentis, the
wounds of a friend, are better then oscula blandientis, the kisses of a
flatterer: as in Physic we know, Amarum salubre, a bitter thing whlosome, is
better then perniciosum dulce, an un wholesome thing, though sweet. This duty
must not be neglected, though we shall be sure to meet with such as the Prophet
Amos mentions, who will hate him that reproves them: For this was seen by the
Heathen, as appears by that speech; Veritas odium parit, truth brings forth
hatred.

There are tres optimae matres trium filiarum pessimarum, three very good
Mothers which have three most wicked Daughters; the first of which mothers is
Truth, quae parit odium, which brings forth Hatred, so there is matter optima,
and filia pessima, an exceeding good mother, and a most naughty daughter.
Nevertheless we must resolve Prove. 27. 5. 6.
to speak truth to our friend, though we make him sad; as Demaratus in
Herodotus, Amos 5. 10.
who speaking to Xerxes the King, began thus. Shall I speak truth, or what
Herodot. lib. 7.
will please you? If I speak truth, you will not like it, and yet Non poteris
uti me and amico and adulatore, I cannot be both a friend and a flatterer,
therefore I will speak truth, for though it be not to your liking, yet it may
be for your good.

The vice opposite to this duty of fraternal reproof, is flattery, which Hierom
calls Natale malum, our native evil, for natali ducimur malo philantiae, we are
all transported with (...) and inbred evil of self-love; and hence it is, as
Plutarch observed, that every one is (...), his own chief and greatest
flatterer. And because we love our selves, therefore we think we are good, and
that he that loves us does his duty, and is therefore good ipso facto in so
doing. And therefore he that speaks in commendation of what we do, we
thereupon think him to be a good man, (...) that he does but his duty, and for
this cause we love him. On the contrary, he that grieveth us, we think him to
be evil, and consequently hate him. This (...), this native evil, and that good
(...) which we have of our selves, makes us, (...) we do cito nobis (...),
(...) please our selves, if any good be spoken of us; as if any will say we are
(...), presently we believe him, and willingly hear him, for ubi propitia men's
est, where the mind is favorable, propitiae aures, the ears will stand wide
open to receive any thing that is said.

Nay further, as (...) says, when men will deny what the flatterer says, and
say it is not so with them, they deserve no such praise, yet etiam blanditiae
cum excluduntur placent, flatteries do please men, though they be not believed
or received. And hence it is, that a man having this good persuasion of
himself, is (...) to say, as those in Esaias, Prophecy not to us true things, but
prophecy pleasing things, such things Esaias 3. 10.
as we do love and like: and like those in Micah, of whom he says, He that
would Mich. 2. 11.
prophecy of such things, as they delighted in, as of wine or strong drink,
should be Prophet for that people. And hence it is, that as S. Hierom says,
Qui nescit adulari, he that cannot (...), nor apply himself to the humors of
others, is thought to be either superbus, or invidus, proud, or envious, all
which arises from this, that men like those that do sooth them up.

Now this vice of flattery is two fold, for it is either in things uncertain,
or certain.

1. In things uncertain, as when we commend a man before we be certain he
deserves it; this is (...) laus, (...) praise, when a man is praised at first
sight, or when he begins to do well, for some will then so highly commend him,
as to make him think he has done enough, and answered all expectation; whereas
it is 1 King. 20. 11
not the putting on of the armor, but the putting of it off, which shows what
praise a man deserves. It is not stadium, a part of the race well run, but the
whole race that deserves the Garland. Praeclarum stadium, sed metno Dolichus,
signifies a double stadium, or 16 furlongs.
dolichum, the entrance of the race is excellent, and I like it well, but I am
afraid of the length and continuance of it; many begin well, who fall short and
faint before they come to the goal. Therefore whilst things are uncertain, we
ought not to be liberal in commending, nor prodigal in our (...). 2. In things
certain, and those either evil or good.
1. In evil things, which are by God condemned, Laudatur male qui (...) ob
malum, or de malo, it is a very sorry commendation to be praised or cried up in
evil, Pro. 24. 24.
or for evil. He that says to the wicked thou art righteous, him shall the
people curse, nations shall (...) him And the Psalmist speaking of a wicked
man, says, That he speaks Psalm. 10. 3.
well of the covetous whom God (...). The Prophet Esaias denounces a woe Esaias 5.
20.
against all such, as call evil good, or good evil, that call light
darkness, and darkness light. (...) writes of Cambyses, that he having a
mind to an incestuous marriage, moved the question to those about him, (...) he
might marry such an one, they told him, that they could not well answer in
general, for that the action seemed not good, but they found this in
particular, that whatsoever the King would do, he might do it. This (...) was
abominable, and to be hated of all good men. The Ezekiel. 13. 10, 11.
Prophet compares such to those that build a wall with (...) mortar, which
cannot therefore stand: For as it follows, when the wall is fallen, it shall
be said unto them, where is the daubing where with ye have daubed it? These are
Caementarii (...), Verse 18.
the (...) daubers. And therefore at the 18 verse there is a woe denounced
against those that sow pillows under men's elbows, for he would have men that
are asleep in sin, to sleep with as little ease as may be, without pillows or
curtains, that so they may wake the sooner, but flatterers, by sowing pillows
(...) them, make them sleep the more secure.

2. In good things one may be guilty of flattery, by praising them above
measure; (...) brings men into an error of thinking otherwise then it is;
whereas the Apostle (...) not have any to think of him, above that which was in
him. Thus praise above a (...), is (...) sine (...), (...) beyond proportion;
this breeds in men a better (...) of themselves then they deserve; and whereas
they ought to strive and endeavor to go on, and to attain more perfection,
they stand still and rest in what they have attained. Such flatterers though
they pretend great love, yet usually there is no such affection in their heart:
and therefore Solomon says of (...), that (...) that (...) Prove. 27. 14.
his friend with a loud voice rising early in the morning, it shall be counted
a (...) to him. Yea, it may be sometime he has a (...) affection, he hates him
whom he slatters, and therefore the same Solomon says, Though he (...)
favorably, believe him Prove. 16. 25.
not, for there are seven (...) in his heart. (...) such men did truly love
those they praise, they would speak no more then truth of them, for love (...)
in truth, as 1 Cor. 13. (...).
truth ought to be in love. If the one be without the other, if either love be
without Ephesians. 4. 15.
truth, or truth without love, the law is broken.

Thus whether it be upon uncertainties that we praise men, or if upon (...),
yet in evil things, or if in good things, yet if it be too much, or too high,
or without affection or love, it is flattery in them all, and here (...).

The lips that utter such flatteries, the Psalmist (...), and wishes that such
men might be liplesse, and that they might be rooted (...), that (...) they
might not utter Psalm. 12. 3.
with their (...) that venenum quod habet (...) (as the Heathen man said) that
poison which is conveyed (...) smooth words.

It is true, there is a pleasing of men, which is lawful, sin being set aside,
and the truth preserved, and the heart first wrought upon truly to affect them
and desire their good. Thus s. Paul labored to become all things to all men;
but without these conditions, 1 Cor. 9. 22.
whosoever he be that sets himself to please men, cannot be the servant of Gal.
1. 10.
Christ.

To avoid this plague of flattery, we must not countenance such persons, nor
open (...) to them, lest we be like those spoken off by the Prophet, that make
falsehood Esaias 28. 15.
(...), and love to be well spoken off, rather then to deserve well: Or (...)
that of Menander (...), that he that flatters most shall fare best, when as the
Prophet speaks, they bend their tongue (...) a bow for lies, and take pains to
do Jer. 9. 3.
wickedly: we must rather pray with the Psalmist, Ne (...) caput Psalm. 141. 5.
meum, that his head may not be (...) with the oil of wicked men; that is, with
their words which are smooth as oil, that his senses may not be so bewitched
with their flatteries, that his heart might be perverted.

And as we must not suffer our selves to be flattered, so we must not flatter
others, but reprove them rather, for we may be assured, that if he (...) wise
whom we reprove, he will make use of it; (...) a wise man, and he will love
thee: If he do not, Prove. 9. 8.
the fault is his, we have done our duty: And though for the present he seem to
be offended, yet as the Wiseman says, He that rebukes a man, shall at last
find more favor, Prove. 28. 23.
then he that flattereth with his lips.

We have done with flattery, as it (...) others; we come now to that which they
Of (...) of a man's own self.
call actum reflexum, when a man by reflecting upon himself, does praise
himself. This is Jactantia, boasting or vaunting of ones self. As in the former
Commandment, a man may sin against himself, as we showed; so here he may break
this, by bearing (...) witness against himself; not only by suppressing the
truth in (...), Romans 1. 18.
inwardly, but also in daily and common talk, by glorying and vaunting of that
which is not in him. S. Paul says, it was not expedient for him to boast; and
therefore lest 2 Cor. 12. 1.
he should be thought so to do, though he spoke nothing but the truth, speaking
of his revelations, and the mysteries he heard when he was wrapped up into the
third Heaven, he speaks of it in the third person, as of another man; and lest
he should fall into this sin, he had one sent to buffet him, that he might not
be exalted above measure. John 18. 37.
Our Savior excepts not against their assertion that said, He bore witness of
himself; for ordinarily it is true, he that witnesses of himself must have
another witness, but Christ being truth it self, needed not any other
witness, for the truth may bear witness of it self: but otherwise, as the
Wiseman advises, Laudet te os alienum, Let another Prove. 27. (...).
man's mouth praise thee, and not thine own, lest we fall into Moabs sin, and
partake of the punishment threatened, Jer. 48. 29, 30.

And as this is every where to be avoided, so especially in this place when we
utter the word of God. The Prophet that tells lies is the tail of the people,
the most vile and abject of all others. God has no need of our lies, as Job
says: what we speak Esaias 9. 15.
from him, must not (...) (...), and nay, true and false, but only (...). The
Apostle would 2 Cor. 1. 19.
not (...) of any of those things which Christ had not wrought by him. It is
vain arrogance Romans 15. 16.
in men to names (...) they have never seen, or affirm that which they do not
know, especially in the Ministers of Christ.

And as it is a sin for a man to boast of what he has not, so also to take
that fault The extreme (...) to boasting
upon himself which he is not guilty of; as he, that when Saul had killed
himself, said that he had killed him, hoping for a reward. So also to deny any
thing of a 1 Samuel 31. 4.
man's self which is true, (...) be to his (...) or dispraise. S Gregory says,
this 2 Samuel 1. 10.
is Mendax humilitas, (...), a lying humility, and unadvised. And s. Augustine
says, He that utters an untruth of himself, out of modesty or humility,
though he had not sinned before, yet peccator (...) mentiendo, he sins now by
lying. Therefore S. Hieroms rule is, Ne ita caveatur arrogantia ut caveatur
veritas, not so to shun arrogance, as to deny the truth. Its true in the (...),
a man may affirm, minus de se, (...) of himself, because in majore est minus,
the greater does contain the less; but otherwise, where there is a necessity
of answering concerning himself, he must stand on the negative, not to deny any
truth of himself.

Again, on the other side, a man is not bound praedicare peccatum suum, to
(...) Esaias 3. 9.
his sin. It was the height of impiety in them that declared their sin as
Sodom: yet being Genesis 18. 15.
asked, where we are bound to answer, we must not deny our sin with Sarah,
though we are not bound always to speak all the truth of our selves, yet we
must (...) deny the truth or speak an untruth of our selves.

Having done with this actus reflexus, we come to that which is false witness
directly, Of Lies.
of which we spoke something before, viz. Mendacium, a lie.

These we have already spoken of, are (...) perniciosa, mendacia serpentis,
pernicious lies, the lies of the Serpent; whose first word was, Nequaquam
(...), ye shall in no wise dye. Besides these, there is a lie they call
Innocuum, a harmless lie, of which comes no hurt or loss. But s. Augustine
says, they that say so, that there is mendacium innocuum, an innocent lie, are
not innocui innocent themselves. And though men account nothing to be loss,
but loss of name, goods, life, and such like, yet there is no lie wherein
there is not loss of truth, which is more worth then all these.

CHAP. VI.
Of a rash lie, an officious lie, a merry lie. Four cases wherein a man seems
to speak contrary to the truth, but does not. Of Mendacium Facti, the Real Lie,
by simulation.

NOw a lie in this sense may be two ways. Mendacium temerarium, a rash lie.


1. To speak contra quam se res habet, otherwise then the thing is, though he
that speaks is persuaded in his mind that it is true; and such an one as S.
Augustine says, Non tam mendacii (...) temeritatis accusandus est, is not so
much guilty of a lie, as of (...) and temerity; such, as the same Father says,
should learn their Jude 10.
tongues to say (...), I know not: and not like those in S. Jude, to speak of
things they know not. 2. To speak contra quam se animus habet, otherwise then a
man thinks; and this The officious lie.
they divide into officiosum mendacium, the Midwives lie, an officious lie, and
(...), The merry lie.
the merry lie, or the scorners lie, mentioned in Hosea, They make the Princes
Exodus 1. 19.
glad with their lies.
Now for the former of these, the officious lie, which is for our neighbors
profit, (...). 7. 3.
S. Augustine confesses, that these mendacia compensativa did somewhat trouble
him. As if a man lying sick, his only son should dye, of which if I should tell
him, it would kill him. In this case says he, what shall I answer, if he
should ask me? I must either say, he is alive, or he is dead, or I cannot tell;
if I say he is alive, or I cannot tell, a lie is made; if I say he is dead, it
kills the father; so that on the one hand here is (...) mendacium, a saving lie,
on the other hand, here is Homicida veritas, a killing truth. What should a man
do in this case? He answers: When I am in this case, I cannot tell what to say,
and yet when I am out of it, me thinks I can answer well enough. For I see
Saint Paul says, Nihil possumus (...), We (...) do nothing 2 Cor. 13. 8.
against the truth. I see David says, (...) omnes qui (...) mendacium, Psa. 5.
6.
Thou shall destroy all those that speak lies: I see that God is truth; and I
see that as Christ is the truth, who is the first-begotten and only begotten
Son of God; so a lie is of the Devil, and that a liar is the firstborn of the
Devil: and I see that if I grant (...) mendacia, some lies to be lawful, I must
also grant aliqua (...), some sins to be lawful. And further, if I may lie to
save a man's life; or with the Priscillianists, to bring another to Christian
Religion, then a man may commit adultery to save ones life. I put the case to
stand thus; There is a woman so fondly enamored on a man, that except that
unlawful act be committed, she would dye, whether this may be (...) adulterium
or no? It is certain no man in the world would defend it. Therefore neither can
the other salubre (...) be good. So his conclusion is, that neither for
safeguard of bodily life, or for the soul, must a lie be spoken. And this (...)
has been generally held since by the Fathers, and by the most and best of late
Writers.

This is called the Midwives lie, but improperly; for I like not the racking of
places of Scripture, to make more faults in the Fathers and others then they
were guilty of. All the Midwives say, is, that the Hebrew women were so strong,
that they were delivered before the Midwife came, which is likely to be true of
many of them, as we see there are diverse such among us. That they spoke then,
may be said to be only occultatio veritatis, the concealing of some truth,
rather then the uttering of an untruth. This kind of lie may more fitly be
called Rahabs lie, Who hid the Spies, and yet said Hos. 2. 5.
they were gone: for in her, as S. Augustine says, there was rather virtutis
indoles, a good disposition, then (...) virtus, perfect (...), as appeared by
this act.

For that other which they call Jocosum, a merry lie; the Prophet makes it a
fault to Amerry Lie.
make the King merry with lies: and if a man may not speak the truth to please
men, as Hos. 7. 3.
the Apostle says, much less may he uttera a lie to please them. And though a
pernicious Gal. 1. 10.
lie be worse then this, yet as S. Aug. says, it is no good argument to say
this is good, because the other is worse, no more then it is to say, because
one man is worse then another, therefore the other is good. Therefore he
condemns all three as evil: and though these two last are without any great
fault, yet not without any sault.

But though we must in no case speak (...) to the truth, yet there are some
cases wherein we seem to go against, but do not.

1. When things are spoken in parabolical and figural speeches, as where in
Jothams Some cases wherein one may seem to speak (...) to truth, and yet does
not.
parable, the trees are said to go and choose a King. So when our Savior
taught by parables, such speeches are not lies, nor here prohibited: for what
in them is propounded, is not res, sed figura rei, not as a real truth, but
only as a figure of some thing that is true. This is lawful in speech, as
painting is lawful to represent things the better to the (...): and thus
hyperbolical speeches are lawful; because Judges 9. 8.
neither in the intention of the speaker, nor in the sense of the hearer, they
are contrary to the truth.

2. When part of the truth is concealed, but no untruth uttered. As when (...)
Genesis 20. 12.
told Abimelech that Sarah was his sister, which she was, according to (...)
Hebrew phrase, for she was his brothers daughter; but denied not that she was
his wife, but (...) that. so when Samuel went to anoint David King, and the
Elders 1 Samuel 16. 2. 5
of the City asked him what he came about, he told them he came to sacrifice to
the Lord, which was true, for that was one end of his coming, though he had
another end also, which he concealed.

3. When a question may have two senses or meanings, and the answer is true in
the one, but not in the other; a man may answer it in his own sense which is
true, though it be false in another sense. As when Christ was asked by (...),
John 18. 36.
Whether he were a King? he answered that he was, and that truly, viz. A
spiritual Genesis 27. 19.
King; though he had no temporal kingdom which was that that Pilate meant. So
Jacob might truly say to his father Isaac, that he was his eldest son, in one
sense, viz. because he bought his brothers birthright, though otherwise he
were not. So our SAVIOR expounds that prophecy of Malachy concerning Elias,
Mat. 11 14.
saying, that Elias was then come, meaning not Elias in his own person, but one
in the power and spirit of Elias.

4. When the thing is changed in circumstances, a man may (...) contrary to
what he said, and yet not be guilty of an untruth; the Angels said to Lot, they
Genesis 19. 2.
would not (...) in, but would lodge in the streets: s. Peter said, Christ
should not wash John (...). 8.
(...) Cor. 1. 16. 17
his (...), and s. (...) (...) to come to (...): and yet the Angels came and
lodged in Lots house; Peter suffered Christ to wash his feet, and S. Paul did
not come; yet none of them were guilty of a lie, because the circumstances were
changed. The Angels had not come in, if Lot had not importuned them, S. Peter
would not have had his feet washed, if he had not been better informed; and
Paul would have gone to Corinth if Satan had not hindered him. All these
speeches were to be understood (...) sic stantibus; but not if there were an
alteration in the circumstances (...) often change moral actions; besides that,
the promises of a good man in moral matters ought to be conditional. In these
(...) both the elder Church and (...) Schoolmen have resolved, there is nothing
against the truth.

Having spoken of (...), a lie in words we are now to proceed to (...).
mendacium (...), a (...) in our actions; for as S. Augustine says, Non refert
utrum A lie in our actions.
quis dicto (...) aut facto, it is all one to lie in our actions, and in our
words.

For truth is nothing else but an evennesse, or an equality, 1. Between the
thing in its nature, and the imagination we have of it in our heart; and if
they be even, then there is (...). 2. Between the conceit we have in our
minds, and the expression of it by our words or deeds. If the tongue and heart
agree, then there is (...) oris, truth in our speech; and if our actions agree
with both, then there is (...) facti, truth in our actions: for that Facta,
deeds or facts may be signs, as well as words, appears by that of our Savior,
when he says, that men shall (...). 7. 20.
be known by their fruits, that is, by the actions, as fignes of what is in
their (...). 12. 38.
hearts: and by that question of the Pharisees, who (...) of him a sign, that
is, some act to testify his greatness and power; as also for that, as good is
done to edification, and hurt to give offense by words or precepts; so good or
evil is done by fact or example: for which cause God has taken order, that
both by our deeds, and by our words, the truth should be confirmed; and that
there Of (...).
should not be Simulatio, dissimulation, which is the vice we here speak of,
when men make show by their actions of what they are not. For if the Factum,
the fact or deed, be not commensurate, or equal to the thought and heart, this
is simulation.

Yet as we said before, a man may conceal some part of the truth in words, and
is not bound to utter all he knows; so here in his actions, he is not bound to
signify or declare all his mind, but that only which without sin cannot be
kept close. God (...). 8. 2.
himself was the author of an ambushment to Joshua, when he made show of flying
before the men of (...): So Christ made as if he would have gone further, in
Luke 24. Luke 24. 28:
28. and did purpose so to have done, if their entreaty had not stayed him, as
appears Gal. 4. 20.
in the next Verse. So S. Paul wished, That (...) were with the Galatians,
having his voice (...), (that so they might not know him) to the end that he
might see and (...) them (...) better.

Here falls in, as a principal part of this simulation or counterfeyting, the
sin of Hypocrisy, which is an outward resemblance of Holiness and Religion,
when there is none in the heart; but because we have spoken of this before
(...). 1. Cap. ult.
, we shall pretermit it here.

CHAP. VII.
The second (...) branch, of the sin forbidden, viz, Vain speech. Three ends
of speech. 1. Edification. 2. Profit. 3. Grace and delight. Of the means
whereby this Commandment may be kept. Of Suspicion. Rules about it. 1. For the
manner.

WE come now to the second general branch of the sin prohibited, viz. Vain Of
vanity of speech.
speech, which the Prophet David joyneth with dissimulation, when he Psalm. 26.
4.
says, He (...) not kept company with vain persons, nor had fellowship with
the deceitful: For as in the seventh Commandment is prohibited not only
fornication, but also (...); so here is forbidden not only lying and (...),
but also vain and foolish speaking.

Our Savior in Mark 7. 22. sets down three heads of sin against this
Commandment. Mark 7. 22.
1. (...), slander. 2. (...), pride, the occasion of flattery and boasting: and
3. (...), foolishness, the root of vain speech: and in Matthew 12. Matthew. 12.
36.
he concludes, That of every idle word there must an account be given. So that
to the former sins already handled, we must also add (...), foolish talk,
which Saint Paul does not distinguish from (...), but makes them all one;
though the world-abusing terms, calls it Vrbanitas, Urbanity, such as is in
men full of pleasant conceits and witty jests; CHRIST calls such words (...),
idle words; and Job, Words of no value. The Prophet denounces a woe, Job 24.
25.
against them that draw iniquity with cords of vanity; and the prayer of Agur
was, Esaias 5. 18.
Remove from me vanity and lies. By which places we may gather, that vain and
Prove. 30. 8.
foolish words draw on lies, and all the Catalogue of sins forbidden in this
Commandment.

The Prophet David makes vain speech, an essential mark of a wicked man, Psalm.
144. 8.
(whose mouth talks of vanity, etc.) And the Prophet Esaias says, that in
vanity they Esaias 59. 4.
(...), there is the first step, then they proceed to lies, there is the second,
and then further, to corrupt judgment and justice. Therefore David glories in
this, that he Psalm. 26. 4.
(...) not accompanied vain men. And Solomon condemns vanity tossed to and fro
among Prove. 21. 6.
men. That is, when one asks a vain question, and another makes a vain answer,
and the third he gives a worse judgment. And Job reckons this amongst Job 31.
5.
his good deeds, That he had not walked in vanities, neither of speech nor
action.

Saint Chrysostom on Ephesians. 4. says, What Workman is there, that has any
tool, which is vain, and serves to no purpose; there is no Instrument but at
one time or other has its use, and the Workman knows what use to put it to.
And therefore in this ars animarum, the art of saving a man's soul, which is ars
artium, the art of all arts, no man ought to have any thing about him which is
in vain, or without some end and use, therefore the tongue must not be a vain
Instrument, or employed to vanity; and so he concludes, that Quicquidest
otiosum est criminosum, whatsoever is idle is criminous.

And for this cause it is, that the Apostle bids Titus avoid Foolish and idle
questions Tit. 3. 9.
about genealogies, and vain janglings about the Law, for which he uses no
other reason but this, that they are vain and unprofitable; for if a man will
draw the Apostles discourse into a syllogism, he must make this the major,
whatsoever is vain is to be avoided, but such foolish questions are vain, Ergo,
avoid them.

This sin we should be (...) careful to avoid, because that man is, as it is in
Job, Tanquam pullus onagri, Like the wild Ass colt, vain and foolish from his
birth; Job 11. 12.
and (...) as S. Peter says, we are brought up among men, in whom there is
(...) (...), vain conversation, so that we receive it by tradition; and
therefore it is one 1 Pet. 1. 18.
of those things which Christ came to redeem us from. For there is as Job
says, a forge Job 13. 4.
of vanities in man's heart, (ye all forge lies.) Hence the Apostle exhorts us,
Not to Ephesians. 4. 17.
walk as the Gentiles did, in the vanity of their minds; and the Psalmist, not
to lift up our hearts to vanity.

The Apostle tells us what this vain speech is, Ephesians. 4. 29. he says it is
(...), Ephesians. 4. 29.
corrupt communication; and in the same place he sets down what our speech
should Three ends of speech. 1. Edification. 2. Profit. 3. Grace and delight.

be, viz. It must either be 1. (...), to edification: or 2. (...) to profit: or
for (...), for grace to the hearer.

It is no doubt, but the Apostle as he was in his Epistles, which are verba
scripta, written words, so he was in his communication. Now his Epistles tend
chiefly to (...), to edification in Religion and Virtue; but when he advises
Timothy to drink a little wine for his stomach, this belongs not properly to
(...), to edification, 1 Timothy 5. 23.
but may be referred to (...), it was useful and profitable. And when he bids
him remember to bring his cloak, but especially the book and parchments, it
must be referred 2 Timothy 4. 13.
to the same head, to (...): for as S. Gregory says, Justa necessitas,
corporis necessitas, the necessity of the body, is a just necessity. And when
he tells him that Erastus 2 Timothy 4. 20.
was at Corinth, and Trophimus he had left at Miletum, this tended not only to
edification, but yet was useful, such things as may be of good use in common
life, may be fit matter of our speech.

For (...), (...), (...), and delight to the hearer, all his salutations may be
(...) Romans 16.
hither; for they have neither matter (...), nor any necessary use; but might
have been left out, as they are in some Epistles, but they are pleasing to
those he writes to; and to this may be referred that poudred speech which the
Apostle requires, which is that which is properly called urbanity, when our
speech is poudred, not as one says, atro sale momi, with Saltpeter, but
candido sale Mercurii, with Wit, which may delight and refresh the mind, being
wearied with grave and weighty affairs.

The Apostle writing to the Corinths says, I have not been troublesome to you;
have 2 Cor. 12. 13.
I wronged you or done you injury in this (...) I pray you forgive me this.
Here was no need to ask them forgiveness, for it was no injury to them that he
was not troublesome to them; but here was speech poudred with salt, here was
salt to make his speech profit, and pierce the more into their hearts, as the
Fathers observe, which it would not have done so much, if he had spoken
directly, or in plain terms. And yet this (...), grace and favor, may stand
well with edification too; and therefore the Apostle Phil. 3. 2. 3.
joins both together, Romans 12. 3. and writing to the Philippians, speaking of
those that urged circumcision, he uses this poudred speech, calling it (...),
concision, Beware Ephesians. 5. 4.
of the concision, for we are of the (...), circumcision (the true
circumcision) which worship God in spirit.

And as he would have (...) avoid all foolish and vain talking, so he exhorts
to use (...), thanksgiving, as opposite thereto. It was the error of the (...),
that because s. Paul would have no speech but thanksgiving, therefore to
whatsoever was spoken in common talk, their answer was, Laudate (...), Let
Christ be praised: But the elder Church understood it better, when they
expounded the words per (...) effecti, i. e. That we should speak something
that was thankworthy, or which deserved thanks; that is, (...) as tended to
edification, or some necessary use, or to grace and delight, and to procure
love and favor to him that speaks it.

That speech then which may be referred to some of these things, is good, and
to be allowed among Christians, but yet though these ends be all lawful, we
ought to aim at the best: and seeing that (...), edification, is the best end
of speech, therefore this we must chiefly affect. And for the last, though
these terrenae (...), these earthly petty consolations be lawful, yet that
rejoicing in Psulmis, Hymnis, etc. in Psalms and Hymns, and spiritual songs, is
better, and chiefly to be used, although the other may be lawful, and sometimes
expedient, especially for those that are Novices, and not come to a perfect age
in Christ. And thus we have done with the act of this sin, and the several
branches of it (...) in this Commandment.

We come now according to the former rules, to the means of keeping this
Commandment.

First, we must avoid groundless suspicions, which are the first cause of
(...) speeches The means of keeping this Commandment.
of others, and to that end we must labor for stability; for all men naturally
are as the Psalmist says, lighter then vanity it self, and therefore the
Apostle exhorts to be steadfast in mind, grounded in the truth. For if we be
not steadfast in mind, we shall be 1. To avoid suspicions.
apt to suspect evil of others without cause. Psalm. 62. 9.


This suspicion is one of the fruits of that concupiscence wherewith our nature
is 1 Cor. 15. 58.
(...), and though the first boiling of it, or rising up in our nature, cannot
be hindered, yet we must labor to suppress it when it is risen. The true and
proper use of it is for our own preservation and safety; and so in matters that
concern the health and safety of soul or body, there is the only lawful use of
it; for in these things it is better to be nimium timidus quam parum prudens, a
little too timid, rather then a little improvident. This we see in S. Paul's
practice, when the Mariners said, they Acts 27. 30.
would but cast out the anchor, he fearing they would have gone down into the
boat, and left them in the ship, he said, Unless these abide in the ship, ye
cannot be saved.

Now when such affections as are, given for our own good, are converted to the
hurt and prejudice of other, this is an abuse; yet in this case it is so common
in the world, that not the godly themselves are free from it, but there is a
difference between suspicions arising in them and in the wicked: When Christ
(...) to (...), what thou do, (...) quickly; presently suspicions arose in
the hearts of the Apostles; one thought, that (...) would have him to buy what
they needed against the feast; others, that it was about giving somewhat to the
poor. Suspicions will arise, but in evil men they are Gal. 4. 11.
positive, in good men privative. The Apostle had some fear and Suspicion of
the Galatians, which prevailed to the diminution of his good opinion of them,
but not to a positive judgment of the contrary. An other example of this
privative suspicion we have in Simon the Leper, against Christ; he suspected
him not to be a Prophet, Luke 7. 39.
because he admitted a sinful woman so near him, til Christ, by the Parable
propounded to him, made him alter his judgment, which he did presently; his
opinion of Christ began to lessen, but he came not so far as to conclude any
thing positively. The godly may have a diminution of their good opinion of
some, but this affirms nothing; they may suspend their good opinion, but they
do not admit or cherish those thoughts so as to come to a positive
determination, and to say it is so. But evil men, as first they suspect and
say, I always suspected him to be such an one, so they go further, and make e
suspicione judicium, a judgment upon a bare suspicion, (...) is as S. Hierome
says to make trabeme (...), a beam of a mote: and not only (...), but they
proceed further, to resolve in their mind what to do hereupon against the
party suspected, and sometime they proceed to act accordingly.

Now for a man to keep himself from rash judging upon suspicions, he must
consider two things.

1. That such thoughts and affections as arise in himself, the same he thinks
to arise Rules again Suspicions.
in others, and so such as we think others to be, such we are commonly our
selves, as if we be angry, when another speaks evil to us, we suspect, that if
we speak evil to any, he is angry with us. Cum ipse stultus sit, omnes stultos
putat, the fool thinks all others to be fools. If a man make himself the
measure of all things, he cannot but suspect evil of others, if he himself be
evil. 2. As a man's affections are, so are his suspicions: If he be ill affected
to any, every small suspicion makesa conclusion. When the mind of the
Disciples ran upon bread, the Leaven of the Pharisees was a Loaf, they
understood Christ of Loaves, when he Mark 8. 14.
Genesis 37. 8.
meant the Doctrine of the Pharisees. On the other side, Joseph's brethren were
ill affected to him, and then every dream did increase their (...). If
therefore we walk (...), and remove evil affections from us, and strive against
suspicions, there is good hope we may remove them; otherwise, we shall be apt
from suspicions to proceed Acts 28. 4.
to conclusions, as they did against Paul, when the Viper (...) upon his hand,
that concluded him to be a (...).
There are six things to be observed, to keep our suspicions from growing into
conclusions, and they may be reduced to two, for they concern either the
ground, or the object.

1. The ground whereupon they rise. Suspicions naturally rise from slender 1
The grounds of our suspicions
grounds; sometimes in good, as when the Disciples gathered from Christ's
answer, John 21. 23.
to S. Peter, that John should not die; some in evil, as when they concluded,
that because Peter was of Galilee, as his speech showed, therefore he was one
of Christ's Mark 14. 7.
Disciples; therefore every man must examine his grounds. 2 For the object.
2. The object, which is either God, or man.
1. About God. Men's suspicions will rise about many things which belong only 1
About God.
to God, which they will sit and scan, and draw conclusions from them. As,

1. The knowledge of the heart is Gods Prerogative, yet how common is it, for 1
Concerning the knowledge of the heart.
men to conclude upon a man's meaning, as if they knew his heart. Therefore
(...) upon that of the Apostle, Quis es tu, etc. who art thou that judge
another man's servant? says, My heart is none of your servant, only God must
judge it. Suspicion must never go to amans thoughts.

2. We must not raise suspicions upon the acts of Gods Providence, or draw
conclusions 2 The acts of his providence.
thereupon: as those that from (...), as Nazianzen calls, them, things (...)
befall all men alike, as prosperity and adversity gather false conclusions, as
if from Eccles 9. 2.
a man's affliction or adversity, one conclude him to be a greater sinner then
others; as those that saw the Viper on Paul's hand, and concluded him to be a
murderer. When as it is most certain that outward things happen alike to all,
as the Wise man speaks: and therefore says Nazianzen, (...); thus if a man be
born blind, John 9. 2.
either he or his parents have (...). Thus they concluded against Gods
Providence, that the children suffered for their parents sins. The fathers have
eaten sour grapes, and the Ezekiel. 18. (...).
childrens teeth are set on edge, when as his Providence is a great deep, which
cannot be searched out. So they in Malachy conclude, that it is in vain to
serve the Lord, because Mal. 3. 14.
there is sometimes no present visible reward. If John Baptist lose his head,
or S. Paul his life, some will say, this they have for the service of God.

3. About future things; men are apt to pronounce judgment, when as God only
3 About things future.
knows what shall come to pass. If one be cast down, or out of Gods savor, he
can never recover again; if men have once surfetted of the world, it is
impossible for them to awake, or edormire (...): but the Apostle teaches
otherwise, he would have us wait, if God will at any time give them repentance.
Multi sunt intus 2 Timothy 2. 25.
lupi (says S. (...)) multi foris oves, there are many wolves within, and many
sheep (for the present) without: and multi sunt rami inserti diffringendi, and
rami disstracti inserendi, there are many branches graffen in, which may be
broken off, and many broken off, which may be graffed in. We must not then
conclude in this manner, for Gods hand is (...) shortened, but his power is the
same still.

2. Concerning (...); wherein men judge amiss, either of the actions, or the
persons of others. 2 Concerning men, judging,


1. Of the actions, Men often judge amiss; and in this case, when a man does
Judicare 1 The action.
de re, without good ground, he hurts none but himself, and therefore we should
labor to know the truth of things before we judge them.

2. Of the person; men by judging amiss may wrong the person whom they judge,
hereby they make him contemptible and odious; as on the contrary, 2 The person.
when he is absolved, he gets credit. If I condemn him being an innocent, I do
an injury, not to him alone, but to others, I condemn the generation of the
just, as the Psalmist speaks; whereas, if I judge well of him, when he deserves
ill, this is but error in singularibus, and the (...) way, for the Apostle
says, that Charity is not suspicious, nor 2 Cor. 15. 5.
thinks evil.

2. If there be no determination, but a presupposing, the rule is, a man may
suppose 2 Concerning suppositions.
the worst for the prevention of evil; as if I am to cure a sin, it is better
to suppose it worse then it is, then to make it less then it is, lest I apply
too weak a plaster, which will not heal it. A gentle plaster may help a wound
or sore for a while, which after a while will break out again. The Evangelist
says of Christ, that though many believed on his name, yet he would not commit
himself to them, because he knew what is John 2. 24.
in man: but we must not, because we know not what is in man. It is good to
suppose the worst, for the prevention of sin.

Now further, in our determinations we are to consider, that either the case is
plain, 3 Concerring determination.
and then there is violenta suspicio, a violent suspicion, and here we may
conclude; or else it is doubtful, and may be taken in a good (...); for moralia
sortiuntur (...) fine, moral actions are distinguished by their ends: now in
this case it is dangerous to conclude against one in a doubtful case, for dubia
in meliorem partem interpretanda, doubtful things must be taken in the best
sense.

The last rule in this case is, that we must not be too hasty or rash in
Judgment, for praecipitatio noverca justitiae, rashness is the stepmother to
justice. God teaches the contrary by his own example, though he knew the matter
before, yet he proceeds judicially, Vbies Adam? Adam where art (...) and in the
case of Sodom, though Genesis 3. 9.
the cry of their sin was great, Descendam, says God, and videbo, I will go
down and see Genesis 18. 21.
whether they have done according to the cry. Though God needed no information,
yet he thus speaks for our example and imitation.

Now for the action, upon a suspicion; it is utterly unlawful to act against
any upon (...) Concerning the action.
a bare suspicion. David had a strong suspicion of Doeg, that he would tell
Saul, what 1 Samuel 22. 22.
Abimelech had done, yet it was not so strong, as to make him proceed to any
action thereupon; for if he had, he had kept him from carrying any tales to
Saul. These rules may help us against groundless suspicions against others.

Sundry other rules may be given, concerning our selves and our own actions, in
relation (...).
to the sins here prohibited, and already handled.

1. When we are to speak the truth of our selves, knowing our own
imperfections, 1 When we speak of our selves.
and that lingua est prodiga, the tongue is prodigal in a man's own praises, we
must do as S. Matthew did, who being to tell his own story, calls himself by
the worst Matthew. 9. 9.
name, Matthew the Publican, whereas the other Evangelists call him Matthew the
Luke 5. 27.
son of Alpheus or Levi, he leaves out also his own feast, which he made for
Christ, 29.
and mentions it not, though S. Luke sets it out: so the same S. Luke speaking
of S. Peter's denial mentions it gently, as that he said, Woman I know not the
man, and Luke 22. (...), (...).
Man I know him not: but in S. Marks Gospel, (which was thought by the
Primitive Church to be writtten by S. Peter) he says, that he began to curse
and swear that he knew him not. Thus he spares not his own credit in speaking
of himself.

2. For hearing such as speak evil of others, (...) we must give them an angry
look, 2 For hearing others speak evil.
for an angry (...) drives away a slanderer, as the North-winde does rain. And
secondly a deaf ear, we must stop our ears against them. It were a happy thing,
Prove. 25. 23.
as S. (...) says, if good men would be to the wicked, as the wicked are to
them, when they come to them, they show no liking to them, either by their
words or countenance, neither ought the other to show any to them; but our
unhappiness is, that we want that constancy and courage in good, which they
have in evil, and our ears are open to the Charmer.

3. We must not in our reports of any, augere rem, make the matter greater then
it is, 3 About increasing reports.
as (...), when but a dozen of bread, was given to David by Abimelech, he
reports that Abimelech gave him (...), as if he had been furnished with a great
deal. And the Spies that disheartened the people, by reporting the Canaanites to
be far stronger then they were, and not to be conquered; whereas the other
Spies told them the Numb. 13. 32.
truth, the land was strong indeed, but yet they should not fear (...).

4. Against flattery, this mellea stranguratio, this sweet and pleasant
choking, the 4 About flattery.
rule is, we shall avoid it our selves, if we forsake not the Law of God, for
they that forsake the Law, praise the wicked, etc. And against flattery by
others, that we Prove. 28. 4.
be not strangled with it; we must say contrary to Abab, He hated Michaiah,
because 1 King. 21. 8.
he did not prophecy good to him, he did not please him by flatteries. But we
must say, we hate the flatterer, because he speaks only placentia, pleasing
things. And again, 1 Cor. 11. 31. Romans 2. 1.
if we would judge our selves, as the Apostle exhorts, we should not hearken to
flatterers, when we see our own defects, we would say as he did, Vatem me
quoque dicunt, -- pastores -- sed non ego credulus illis, they would make me
this and that, but I believe them not.

5. How to behave our selves in reproaches. The Prophet directs us, Fear not
Esaias 51. 7.
their reproaches, nor be afraid of their rebukes. We must esteem the witness
within 5 About (...).
us, more then the outward witness of the world, and the witness above us,
more then both. But if reproach be fallen upon us, then we must remember these
rules.

1. Sometimes a man is reproached with a matter known, and of which he is
convicted; here, 1. he must take heed of frons meretricia, a whorish forehead.
If the word of God, and the censures of the Church will not prevail, it is not
their civil censures that will work any thing: and 2. he must not only have
the shame in his countenance, but also confusion inwardly, that he may be able
to say, This shame I willingly bear, only I wish, that I may amend my fault,
and recover the favor of God, and be in credit with his servants.

2. Sometimes a man is reproached for a thing not known, nor is he convicted of
it, yet he knows himself to be guilty; here he is not bound retegere peccatum,
to uncover his sin, nisi sine peccato tegere non potest, except without sin, he
cannot keep it close; yet he must confess it to God, and say with David, Tibi
soli peccavi, against Psalm 51. 4.
thee have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight, thou know of it,
though I cannot be convicted of it before men.

Now in this case, either a man has given some occasion, by carrying himself
so, as may give some suspicion of such a sin, though he never acted it, and
then, because he has offended in not avoiding all appearance of evil, he must
know God has by this means dealt lovingly with him, to make him more wary to
avoid all appearance of evil for the future, and to keep him from wandering and
pleasing imaginations of the sin in his heart, for it is sure, sin cannot be
long in the heart, before it will come into action.

3. Sometimes a man is charged with that, which he ever (...) in his heart, yet
in this case he may make use of an unjust reproach; for by this means, he may
be stirred up to prayer, to be still kept from that sin, which he may fall into
afterward, though as yet he be free from it, for many have fallen so; there he
should take this as a warning from God, to take heed that he fall not into the
just reproach, as Solomon Prove. 28. 14.
advises, Vereri opera sua, be afraid and jealous of himself; for, blessed is
the man that seareth always.

And in this case, it is the advice of the Fathers and Doctors, that when a man
falls into unjust reproach, by lies and slanders, he should examine himself,
whether he have not lied unto God, and so deserved this lying report from men,
whether he have not made many promises of amendment to God, in the day of his
affliction, which afterward he has forgotten; like the Israelites in
distress, who prayed the Judge. 10. 15.
Lord, that he would but deliver them that day, and then he should do as it
should please him; or as those in Hosea, that cried not with their hearts, when
they howled upon Hosea 7. 13.
their beds, but were like them in the Psalm, that lied with their mouths and
dissembled Psalm 78. 36.
with him in their hearts. This lying to God, when men make fair promises in
their sickness, or other distress, which they have no care to perform, may
justly cause God to give them over to the lying tongues of men: and for this
cause it is, as with them in Hosea, that vinea mentitur nobis, the floor and
the winepresse fails us; we shall have fair and forward springs, but God sends
such weather as shall deceive our hopes. And as it is said, that the house of
Achshib, should be a lie to the kings of Israel; so Micah 1. 14.
those that trust in men, for whose favor they are contented to lie and do
evil, hoping those men shall be pillars to support them, they shall find that
those they trusted in, shall prove a lie to them, they shall deceive them, and
find there is no help in them. And thus much for the means and rules for
observing this Commandment.

The last rule, according to our former method, requires, that we procure the
keeping The sixth rule for procuring the observation by others.
of it by others, and herein we have David's example, whose eyes were upon
veraces terrae, the faithful in the land; so effectually would he work, that no
deceitful person, nor any that tells lies should tarry in his sight. The one
should be his Companions, but the other should not come near him. And thus much
for this Psalm. 101. 6, 7
ninth Commandment.

THE EXPOSITION OF THE Tenth Commandment. Exodus 20. 17.
Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy Neighbors
wife.

CHAP. I.
Reasons against the dividing of this Commandment into two. The dependence of
it. The scope and end of it.

WE have formerly mentioned, Expos. Com. 1. Chap. 2.
That the Church of Rome together with the Lutherans, as they make the second
Commandment and the first but one, so to make up the number of ten, they divide
this into two; so that these words, Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors wife is
the ninth, and the rest that follows, is the tenth. And though they take herein
the Authority of Reasons against the dividing of this Commandment into two.
Saint Augustine, yet we choose rather to follow those that make it but one, as
most of the Fathers besides him do, and that for these Reasons.

1. Because it would be unreasonable to thrust two Precepts into one period,
and so to pronounce them with one breath; whereas every one of the rest is a
full sentence by it self; and therefore it is most agreeable to Reason, that
this should be so too.

2. Because to make two Laws for two lusts or Concupiscences, as they would do
here, is to make Laws for every particular, which is counted absurd in all
Laws, for Laws are made in general, and descend not to particulars; and it
would be most absurd in this Law of the Decalogue which is most compendious,
and therefore most general.

3. Because by this reason we might make more Commandments of this then two,
for, though two Concupiscences only be named, yet there are diverse others
here included, as the inward lusts against the fifth, the sixth, and the ninth,
which will fall under no Commandment, if they be not reduced hither, and if
they be, then they make so many precepts, as well as these two, which refer to
the seventh and eighth, which are here mentioned: for objectum determinat
propositionem, the object makes the proposition; and therefore, how many Lusts
there be, so many objects there are, and so many propositions, and by
consequence, so many Commandments: and if they say that the rest are forbidden
under these two, they must show how the rest, being of a different nature, can
be referred to these two, which if they cannot do, this is gratis dictum.

4. Because the Apostle Romans 7. 7. and 13. 9. without (...) of any particular
(...), (...) it down generally, Non (...), (...) shall not lust, and (...)
makes it but one Commandment.

5. The confent of the Hebrew Doctors about and since Christ's time, as
Josephus, Philo, Abenezra, and others, and most of the Fathers of the primitive
Church since Christ, as we showed before, are against this division of theirs.

6. In (...) the words are, Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors house, and
then, thou shall not covet thy Neighbors wife, etc. but in Deuteronomy the
last is placed first, Exodus 20. 17.
and the other after it; by which inverting the order of the words, God seems
expreslely Deuteronomy. 5. 21.
to prevent the dividing of this Commandment: besides, that in the ninth
Commandment (as they make it) should be forbidden, the Concupiscence against
the eighth, and in the tenth the Concupiscence against the seventh, ( thou
shall not covet thy Neighbors wife:) and withal the (...) against the eighth
in these words ( nor his man servant, nor his maid servant, nor his ox, nor his
ass, etc.) whereby there would be a manifest inverting the order of the
Commandments, and a disturbing of the sense, which one of their own Writers
acknowledges, ( Hessel) who says here is sensus (...), and such a Hyperbaton
or trajection, as is not to be found any where in the scripture besides: for
here is (by their division) first, a prohibiting of the Concupiscence against
the eighth Commandment, and then of that against the seventh, and then again of
that against the eighth.

7. In their Catechisms, when they come to expound this Commandment as two,
they are in such want of matter, when they come to lay forth the several
branches of them, that they are (...) to thrust both into one; thus they bring
in great lamenesse into the Law of God by this division, whereas his law is of
great extent, and very large.

The exposition of this Precept is to be taken out of Deuteronomie 5. 21. Thou
shall not covet thy Neighbors wife, neither shall thou covet thy Neighbors
house, his field, etc. and from the Prophets, Esaias 55. 7. Let the wicked
forsake his thoughts, etc. and Jeremy 18. 12. where, the doing after the
imagination of ones evil heart is forbidden: and in the Gospel, from our
Saviors exposition, against the false doctrine of the Pharisees, Mark 7. 15,
16, etc. showing, that what comes out of the heart defiles a (...): and from S.
Paul, Romans 7. 7. and Ephesians. 2. 3, 4. and such places where the matter of this
Commandment is handled.

The dependence of this Comamndment upon the rest, appears in this, that
without The dependence of this Commandment.
the observing of this, none of the rest can be kept; for, by giving this after
all the rest, God would teach us, how all the rest are to be understood, viz.
that not only the outward act is forbidden in them, but also the inward
purpose and intention of the heart, though we never proceed to the outward act;
so that this is the rule and measure for the understanding and so for the
observing of the rest, this is the hinge whereupon all the rest do turn; and
therefore S. Augustine says, Si quis (...) facere studeat, (...) maxim
faciat, he that would observe the rest must chiefly Prove. 4. 23.
look to the keeping of this, for this looks to the heart, out of which as
Solomon Esaias 54 5
says, proceed the yssues of life and death,: and therefore he advises, to
keep the heart Jam. 1. 14, 15.
with all diligence; supra (...) custodiam there is the Cockatrices (...)
hatched, as the Prophet speaks, and here is sin conceived, as S. James speaks;
which, when it is perfected by the act, brings forth death.

The scope and end of the Lawgiver in this, is twofold. The scope and end of
this commandment.


1. To show that he looks further then his (...), his Substitutes on earth
can do, and that his Law has a (...) above theirs; for though man's Law may
injicere vinculum, may bind the hands and the feet, it may put (...), a
stopple into the mouth, and it may condemn the purpose of the heart, quantum
(...) prehendere, (...) far as it can discover or take hold; for if one be
found cum telo with a weapon, or breaking into a house, though (...) be
hindered from the act of (...) or robbery, yet here is propositum prehensum,
the purpose discovered, and taken hold on, and therefore he is punished by man's
Law, but all humane Laws say, and it is an axiom in the Civil Law,
Cogitationes paenam nemo patiatur, for bare thoughts let no man suffer, and so
they let thoughts go free. But God takes order for the very thoughts, though
they do not appear by any overt act. And therefore Simon Magus is brought to
the bar, for (...), the thought of his heart, Pray (says he) if perhaps the
thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee. Acts 8. 22.


2. Propter Pharisaeos, for those that Pharisee like are conceited of their own
righteousness; that, as S. Augustine says, superbi peccatores, proud sinners,
who are not sanati, healed, may by this Law be convicti, convicted of their
need of a Physician; for though a man may in regard of the full consent of
heart, hold out, and justify himself in some things, and for some small time,
(though few attain to this) yet, when he comes to this Commandment, wherein the
partus imperfectus, the imperfect birth, (when there is no perfect consent, but
some pleasure and titillation only in the motion) is forbidden, this will make
him sweat, and cry out, as it is Romans 7. 0 wretched man, who shall deliver me
from the body of death, and so will make him see that he cannot acquit himself,
nor be a Christ or Savior to himself: but must fly out, and seek to another
without himself, as it is in the next words, I thank God through our Lord Jesus
Christ, etc.

For the consent of the heart is forbidden by the other Commandments, as they
are expounded by our Savior, who says, that if a man look upon a woman, hoc
animo, and hoc fine, with this purpose, and to this end, to lust after her,
that this concupiscence Hierome.
is Adultery; but here the intention and desire, though it have not plenum
consensum, full consent, but be only partus imperfectus, is attainted by this
Precept.

The distinction here is, that in the former Commandments, the intention of
evil is forbidden, etsi non consequaris, though it be not executed; here also,
etsi non prosequaris, even though it be not prosecuted or resolved upon, as
when the motion is entertained with some approbation or delight, though not
fully consented to. S. Augustine contra Julian. explains the matter thus: the
one is, Non concupisces, thou shall not lust, forbidden by this Commandment;
the other is, post concupiscentias tuas ne eas, follow not after thy lusts, as
it is in Ecclus. 18. 30. and he that has attained this latter (not to go after
his lusts) magnum fecit, says the same Father, has done much, sed non
perfecit, but has not done all, quia adhuc concupiscit, because he lusts still.

The Apostle distinguishes them thus, he calls the one peccatum regnans, sin
reigning in us, when we follow it in the lusts thereof; the other peccatum
inhabitans, sin dwelling in us, when it lusts in us, but has not got perfect
dominion: here it dwells as a private person, there it rules, and has got a
kingdom; for quando peccatum transivit in affectum cordis, and impetravit
sensum rationis, ut si adsit occasio, facere disponat, when sin has so far
prevailed both upon our affections, and upon our reason, that there wants only
an opportunity to act it, there it reigns. But when we have given some
entertainment to it in our minds, but are not resolved, so that there is a
(...), a reasoning within us; Faciam, aut non faciam? shall I do it, or shall I
not? when we have reasons pro etcontra, and are not fully resolved, there is
peccatum inhabitans, it dwells in us, and this is properly forbidden by this
Commandment. If we resolve once, faciam, I will do it, then it is factum, as
good as done before God, and may be referred also to the other Commandments, as
forbidden there.

CHAP. II.
The thing prohibited, Concupiscence which is two fold: 1. Arising from our
selves; 2. From the spirit of God. The first is either, 1. from nature, or 2.
from corruption of nature. Corrupt desires of two sorts: 1. vain and foolish;
2. hurtful or noisome. The danger of being given up to a man's own lusts.

THE subject or matter of this Commandment, is Concupiscence or lust, which The
Subject of this Commandment.
is here prohibited, which that we may the better understand, we must know,
that it is not every concupiscence which is here forbidden, for there is a
twofold Concupiscence twofold.
lust or Concupiscence.

1. There is a Concupiscence of our own, of which S. Peter speaks, There shall
1 Our own.
come men walking after their own lusts. 2 Psalm 3. 3.


2. There is a lust or concupiscence of the spirit, of which the Apostle says,
that it Gal. 5. 17.
lusts against the flesh: this is holy and good; for when our minds are
enlightened 2 Of the spirit.
by the Spirit of God, it stirs up in us good motions and desires, and does
strengthen 1 Pet 4. 1.
us to bring the same to effect, and withal it arms us (as S. Peter speaks)
against the opposition we meet with.

By this Concupiscence, evil motions, when they arise in the heart, are
checked, as Psalm. 42. 5, 11.
we see in the Psalmist; Why art thou cast down O my soul, and why art thou
disquieted within me? trust in the Lord, etc. This Concupiscence is not
condemned here, but as Rom 8.
it is in it self acceptable, so by helping our infirmities, it makes our
prayers acceptable with God, and so procuring audience, whereby we obtain our
desires of God, it increases in us love to God, and charity to men. This is not
therefore restrained by this Commandment, but the other, which is propria
(...), our own Concupiscence.

Now this Concupiscence of our own is of two sorts. 1. (...). 2. (...). The
first is Our own Concupiscence is two fold. 1 Natural. 2 From Corruption.

natural, the second is from the corruption of nature, which S. Peter calls
(...), the Concupiscence of corruption, or Corrupt Concupiscence. The first is
in all men by nature, as to desire meat when one is hungry, or drink when he is
thirsty: and this is not forbidden, for it was in Christ himself, who was free
from all sin; he was sometimes hungry, and desired meat; and sometimes weary
and desired rest, etc. But it is the 2 (...). 1. 4.
other, the corrupt lusts or desires which are forbidden in this place. This
Faculty of Colos. 3. 5.
desiring or lusting was at first given to the soul, to make it move toward
those objects Matthew. 21. 18.
which the mind propounds, aslevity or lightness is in some things, to make
John 4 6.
them move upwards, whereupon the Heathen called the mind (...), the eye of
the soul; and the desire or appetite (...), conatum, the motion or endeavor of
the soul after that which the eye discerns: but this desire or (...) being
corrupt, choaks the light of the mind, that it cannot direct to what is good;
for the faculties of the soul, being conjoined, do corrupt and infect one
another, as Ivy that cleaves to the oak, and draws away the sap, and makes it
to wither; and so the mind being blinded, the will cannot move toward that
which is good, and thus our desires become corrupt.

Out of this corrupt concupiscence spring up desires of two sorts, as they are
distinguished Corrupt desires of two sorts.
by S. Paul, some are (...), vain and foolish, others are (...), noisome 1 Timothy
6. 9.
and hurtful.

The first we may see in such men as the Apostle calls earthly minded, who
desire 1 Vain.
worldly things, not for natural ends only, but do transilire fines (...),
pass and (...) Col. 3. 1.
over the bounds of nature, desiring more then is necessary, for they still
desire (...) and more, and as the Psalmist speaks, when their riches increase,
do set their hearts (...) them, which as the precedent words imply, is folly
and vanity, ( O give not your selves unto vanity) such men do think, speak and
delight to discourse of nothing but (...), Psalm 62 10.
earthly things, and thus at length they corrupt themselves; so that as the
Prophet speaks, their silver is become dross, and their wine mixed with water,
when they Esaias 1. 22.
mingle their souls with earthly things, which are of an inferior and baser
condition then the soul. 2 (...).


The other desires which he calls hurtful, are those properly, between whom and
Gal. 5. 17.
the Spirit of God there is that opposition which the Apostle mentions.

And these do first hinder us from good things, which the Spirit suggests,
because there is (...) cordis, a foreskin grown over the heart, which shuts up
and closes the heart, when any good motion is offered, and leaves it open when
any evil would enter; and also (...) aurium, a foreskin drawn over the ears ( O
ye of uncircumcised Acts 7. 51.
hearts and ears) whereby the like effects are wrought, for it shuts the ears
against any thing that is good, and draws the covering aside for corrupt, or
unsavory communication to enter in; for which cause God is said in Job,
Revelare aurem, to Job 33. 16.
uncover the ear, when he reforms men effectually.

And 2. as they hinder us from receiving good, so they corrupt that good which
is already in us, like the dead fly in the box of ointment. Eccl. 10. 1.


And 3. they provoke to evil, or which is all one, ad ea ad (...) consequitur
malum, to such things as are not in themselves evil, but will (...) us in evil,
if we follow after them; (for malum, sive in Antecedente, sive in consequente,
malum est, evil, whether in the Antecedents, or in the consequents of it, is
(...), and to be avoided,) therefore the Apostle would not have us to be
brought under the power of 1 (...). 6. 12.
any thing, because the Devil does sometimes kindle such an earnest (...) and
appetite in a man after some lawful indifferent thing, that he will not forgo
it for any cause, and then the Devil will quickly find a condition to annex to
it, whereby he will draw a man to something simply unlawful, as he thought to
have done with Christ; when having showed him the Kingdoms of the World, and
the glory of them, wherewith he thought he had wrought upon his affections, he
presently seeks to (...) him to idolatry, (...) tibi dabo, etc. All these will
I give thee, if thou will Matthew. 4. (...)
fall down and worship me.

Thus the desires of our concupiscence in malo, in evil, are either as S.
Augustine says, per injustitiam, or adjustitiam, either to get things lawful
by evil means, or if by lawful means, yet for an evil end; and both these ways
of getting are justly condemned, even in the very desire of the heart.

This (...), and these desires proceeding from it, are expressed in Scripture
Ephesians. 4. 22.
by other words. Sometimes it is called the old man; sometimes sin dwelling in
Col. 3. 9.
us: sometimes, the law of sin, and the law of the members: sometimes, the
sting of Romans 7. 20. 23
1 Cor. 15. 55.
death: sometimes, the prick in the flesh: sometimes, the cleaving sin which
hangs so 2. Cor. 12. 7.
fast on: sometimes, the skirmishing sin which wars against the soul:
sometimes, virus Heb. 12. 1.
serpentis, the poison of the Serpent, which the Devil instild into our nature
at the 1 Pet. 2. 11.
first. The Schoolmen call it fomitem infixum, or fomitem peccati, that inbred
fuel Genesis 3. 7.
of sin. Others (...), the disorder, or irregularity of the faculties of the
soul: for whereas man had advanced his concupiscence above his reason, against
the order and will of God, and so made it chief; and for fulfilling his desire
hazarded the favor of God. Therefore as a just punishment, God has so ordered
in his wrath, that it The danger of being given up to a man's own Iusts.
should be stronger then reason; so that it cannot be brought under that
superior faculty though a man would. So that as God said by the Prophet (and
it is a fearful judgment) because Ephraim had made altars to sin, therefore
they should be to him to Hos. 8. 11.
sin: so here, because man would have his concupiscence superior, it shall
(...) be (...) do what he can. Thus God in great wrath sometimes deals with
men, as he did with the Israelites, They did eat and were full, and he gave
them their own desire, Psalm. 78. 30. and 81. 13.
they were not disappointed of their lust; and in another place, He gave them
up to their own hearts lusts, and to follow their own imaginations. Thus he
dealt with the Heathen Romans, as the Apostle says, after great disobedience,
and wilful sinning against Romans 1. 28.
the light of their own hearts; there follows this Illative, Ideo tradidit cos
deus, 1 Cor. 5. 5.
therefore God gave them up to their own desires, counsels, inventions, and 2
Cor. 2. 6.
imaginations.

This is a fearful thing to be thus given up to a man's own lust. It is much to
be delivered over to satan: Tradatur (...), was a high censure; yet tradatur
(...) had a return, he that was so given up, was regained. But when a man is
delivered up to himself, it is certain, that by ordinary means, he never
returns again: For this is that (...), that reprobate sense (as the Apostle
calls it) when God gives a man clean over, and withdrawing his grace, leaves him
in his own hands to final destruction: so that it is better to be delivered
over to the Devil, then to his own will. And thus we see how well we are to
think of our own will, and how dreadful a thing it is to be given over to it,
and not to have Gods spirit to maintain a perpetual conflict therewith.

CHAP. III.
How a man comes to be given up to his own desires. Thoughts of two sorts. 1.
Ascending from our own hearts. 2. Injected by the Devil. The manner how we come
to be infected: Six degrees in sin. 1. The receiving of the seed, 2. The
retaining of it. 3. The conception. 4. The forming of the parts. 5. The
quickening. 6. The travel or birth.

NOw for the means whereby a man comes to be thus endangered, it has been
partly handled already in the first Commandment, which in our duty to God,
answers to this, toward our Neighbor, and shall partly be now touched.

A man comes thus to be given up to his own desires, by degrees, when he gives
Zach. 8. 17.
way to civil imaginations against his Neighbor. Let no man imagine or think
evil in his heart (says the Prophet) against his Neighbor. We must not give
way to it at all, though we suffer it not to proceed to suppuration. There is
in every of us an evil imagination against our Neighbor to do them prejudice;
and this being in us, then there comes in a temptation, as the Apostle shows,
partly from the world, ( according to Ephesians. 2. 2. 3.
the course of the world) partly from the Devil, who then begins to strike and
to work and fashion the thought of the heart, to a perfect sin ( according to
the Prince of the power of this air.) Thus they both work upon our thoughts and
desires, to fulfill the desires of the flesh, as it is in the next verse.

So that here is a double cause to draw us to this. 1. Our concupiscence alone,
considered Thoughts ascending from the heart.
in it self, as it rises by it self, without any blowing or quickening of it
from without. 2. As it is employed and wrought by the World, or the Devil, or
both.

1. By it self alone, Christ speaks of (...), evil thoughts that proceed out of
Matthew. 15. 19.
Mark 7. 21.
the heart, and of thoughts that arise in the heart. There is a steam or vapor
that arises Luke 24. 38.
from our nature; for evil thoughts (...) arise up, or ascend from below, good
thoughts (...), descend or come from above; the one comes from our selves, the
James 1. 18.
other from God and his Spirit, for omne bonum desuper. Now the Devil knowing
this, takes occasion by those desires which he perceives by some outward sign
to arise within us, to assault us, by propounding worldly objects and (...),
and so makes use of the world to tempt us. Thus he dealt with Christ, he
forbear him till he was hungry, and had his (...): his natural desire of bread;
and then he comes (...). 4. 3.
to him, and offers him stones to be turned into bread; thinking by that means
(when 2 Kings 3. 14.
Christ had a natural appetite) to have been entertained, as Jehoram was for
Jehosaphats sake.

2. As there are cogitationes ascendentes, thoughts ascending into the heart,
so there 2. Thoughts injected by the Devil.
are another sort, cogitationes immissae, thoughts cast in by the Devil. Thus
the Devil Luke 22. 3.
entered into Judas, when he put those evil thoughts into his heart of betraying
his Acts 5. 3.
Master. So he filled the heart of Ananias and Saphira, to (...) to the Holy
Ghost, and to commit sacrilege. And as he sometimes does this immediately by
himself, so he sometimes makes use of the world, and os outward objects, to
cast evil thoughts into us. Thus the World and the Devil infect us from
without, when we infect our selves fast enough from within: For as Nazianzen
speaks, (...), the sparkle is within us, the flame is from the evil spirit,
which blows it up: so that though there were no Devil to tempt us, and though
we were in the Wilderness where no worldly objects could allure us, yet we
carry enough in our bosoms to corrupt our selves. Neither can we be safe
though we leave all the world behind us, so long as we (...) our own hearts
with us, says S. Basil.

Of these. The ascending thoughts within us, are (...), the other cogitationes
immissae, that are sent or injected into us, unless they infect us, or we give
way to them, are our crosses, not our sins: Nay, Demon tentando coronas nobis
fabricat, by resisting these motions and temptations of Satan, we win the
crown, and every temptation we resist, is a new flower to our Garland.

The manner how these thoughts come to infect us is thus. There are six degrees
The manner how we come to be infected with sin.
before we come to that full consent and purpose of heart which is prohibited
by the other Commandments.

In Genesis, when Eve was tempted, we see how the infection began. There is the
Genesis 3. 6.
fruit held out, the object to allure, and withal the three provocations by
which all sins are ushered in to the soul are there set down.

1. It was good to eat, here was apparentia bonis utilis, the allurement of
profit. 2. It was pleasant and delightful to the eye; here is apparentia boni
jucundi, the bait of pleasure. 3. It is said it was to be desired in regard of
knowledge. Here was apparentia (...) (...) John 2. 16.
and per se expetendi, there are these three mentioned by S. John, The lust of
the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life. 4. And in the next
verse before the Devil adds a fourth, (which may be reduced to the third)
Eritis sicut dii, Ye shall be like gods. The very lure of Pride, Excellency,
and a condition to be desired by man being chief of the (...). These being held
out, every one was paused upon by Eve (says the Scripture) she had respective
regard to them all, For the woman seeing that the (...) was good for meat, and
pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to get knowledge, she took of
the fruit thereof, and did eat. Out of which we may observe these seve al steps
and degrees, whereby sin enters into the soul.
1. The first by s. Paul is called (...), a turning back after Satan, or a
turning Six (...) in sin.
of the soul back, to look on the object. The first entertaining of it, aversio
a Deo, a turning of the soul from God, which when one does, he begins to
prostitute his soul 1 The receiving of the (...).
to the Devil.

2. The second they call allube scentium, when it likes them well, so that
sain they 1 Timothy 5. 15.
would have it. This (...) be sudden, (...) (...) it propassionem, answering to
the Gal. 4. 9.
Greek (...), which signifies, a light motion or passion upon the first sight;
whereas 2 The retaining of the seed.
that which more (...) impressed in us, is called (...), a passion, more (...)
Hier. in Mat.
or violent. Job compares him that has gone thus far, to one that has a
sweet poison Job 20. 13.
in his mouth, who because of the (...) that he feels, is loath to spit it out,
and would swallow it; but yet considering that it is poison he spits it out: or
if he do not let it go, nor yet dare swallow it, but keeps it under his tongue,
then of (...) it becomes (...), and this is retentio seminis, the keeping and
retaining of the (...), as the first was receptio seminis, the receiving of it:
And as in that there was aversio a Deo, a turning from God; so in this there is
conversio ad creaturam, a turning to the creature.

3. The third is consensus in delectationem, a consent to take delight in it.
For (as 3 The conception of sin.
before) there a double consent. 1 Consensus in (...), a consent to execute or
act the sin; and this may be forbidden in the other Commandments, and is that
which we called (when we expounded them) the Suppuration, or inward festering
of our hereditary wound. And 2. Consensus in delectationem, a consent in mind
only to take pleasure in it, by often rolling of it in the heart, wherein we
so far consent to it, as to delight in the thought of it, though as yet we have
no full purpose to act it, James 1. 15.
but only gaze and stare upon it, and this they call conceptionem (...), the
conceiving of sin.

4. The (...) is called Morosa delectatio, a delaying or lingering in the
thought of 4 The forming of the parts.
it; so that when a man has once consented so far as to take pleasure in it,
he will abide by it, and dwell in it; and this they call articulationem ftaeus,
the framing of all the parts in the womb of the soul, whereby it becomes
perfect, when every corner is sought into, and every circumstance weighed and
considered how the sin may be Number. 25. 1.
acted. Dum populus morabatur in Sittim, (...) est populus, when the people
(...) at Shittim, the people (...) commit (...) with the daughters of Moab.

5. There is aberratio cordis, the wandering of the soul after it, that is, when
the Prove. 18. 1.
thought is gone, and once past over, yet we resume it and call it back again,
and make 5 The quickening of it.
a covenant contrary to that of Jobs, That we will not suffer our eyes to look
from it, but Job 31. 1.
will still behold it; and not only so, but we also employ those (...) aditus
phantasmatum, those gates and passages to the fancy, the senses, to raise up
this delight in us Genesis 6. 5.
again, that we may continue in it. We read in Genesis of figmentun
cogitationum, when there is no real object, and yet a man will notwithstanding
frame or imagine a false object to convince the pleasure of a thought. So here
is a framing of imaginations to please the soul in such a sinful thought; when
besides occasions offered, a man procures to himself occasions outwardly, or
inwardly devises fancies to delight himself; this is peregrinatio in peccato,
and is commonly called, the quickening of sin when it begins to stir in the womb.

6. The last they call Nixum, the travel or birth: The Greek Fathers call it
(...), 6 The birth, and travel.
conatum, a laying hold on the occasion offered to act the sin formerly
resolved upon. It proceeds upon a syllogism thus, Si tanta voluptas in
cogitando, vel animo revolvendo, quid si potiar? if there be so much pleasure
in thinking of it, or revolving of it in my mind, what will there be if it be
actually performed? After (...) comes consensus rationis, the full consent of
the mind, and then we are out of this Commandment, for there wants nothing
but means and opportunity to act it. The conclusion is setdown in the heart,
Faciam, I will do it; and then, when occasion is (...), it is done, and so sin
is brought forth and perfected. And these are the six degrees of sin, although
iniquitas mentitur sibi, sin flattereth and lies to it self, persuading men,
they are not guilty, till they come to the last degree, the very act, when as
there is sin in all the rest.

CHAP. IV.
The ways whereby a man is tempted of his own lust. 1. There is a bait. 2. A
hook. The same ways used by the Devil and the World. The affirmative part of
this precept. Renewing the heart and mind. The necessity of this Renovation.
The means of Renovation.

NOw there are two ways mentioned by s. James, whereby a man is tempted by his
lust; he is either drawn by a kind of violence, or enticed by some allurement.
James 1. 14.
Every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust, and entised.
There is esca and uncus, a pretty enticing bait to allure, and a violent
pushing and haling Two ways whereby a man is tempted of his own lust. 1. By
the bait. 2 By the hook.

of the soul to enforce. For a man is drawn, either voluptate sensus, by the
pleasure of the sense, or else importunitate mentis, by the importunity of the
mind: Either sin gets within us, and tols us on till we be catched, or else it
assaults us in a boystrous manner, that we yield, and think we can do no other.
Against both these we must watch, lest we be like those in Hosea, They have
made ready their heart as an oven, Hos. 7. 5.
the Baker sleeps all the night, in the morning it burns like a flaming
fire. They are all hot as an oven, -- and there is none that calls upon me.

In the same order do the other two, the World and the Devil tempt us. There is
The same ways do the Devil and the World use in their temptations.
(...), and there is (...), the alluring and the drawing in them both.

The Devil is called in Scripture, the old Serpent, and the Apostle speaks of
(...) (...) a method of craftiness, and (...) a deceit, (cogging at dice)
whereby men are deceived. The Serpent we know is subtle by nature, but he is
an old serpent, who if he had any natural defect, might by custom and long
experience have supplied it. Again, the Apostle speaks of (...), the fetches
and wiles of the Devil. The 2 Cor. 2. 11.
Apostles were not ignorant of them, but another may fear, lest it be the
Devils method, and craft, by which he is allured, and that he is not wise
enough of himself to descry it.

2. He is called a roaring Lion. And under these two names ( a Serpent and a
Lion) all that is spoken of him in Scripture may be included. As he is a
Serpent for his subtilty, so for his strength, violence, and cruelty, he is
called a Lion, and a roaring Lion: Mat. 8. 32.
When he had leave given him, we see he made the swine run headlong with
violence 2 Cor. 7. 5.
into the Sea. And the Apostle tells us, that he torments extra pugnis, intra
terroribus, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 18.
with fightings without, and terrors within: and whereas the Apostle had a
good purpose of coming to the (...), to have confirmed their faith, Satan
(...) him. The Apostles had extraordinary knowledge to discern his fetches, and
power to oppose his violence, which we have not, and therefore we must stand
upon our watch the more diligently, and put on our spiritual armor, that we
may be able to oppose him. The extremity in violence, and the exceeding
subtilty in persuasion, will bewray whether the temptation come (...) our
selves within, or from the Devil without.

And as we say of him, so we may say of the World, it tempts sometimes by fair
means, using subtilty, offering pleasures, profits, preferments, etc. to allure
us. And if we will not be allured, there is a hook to draw us; instead of
profit, we shall have damage and loss; instead of pleasure, grief; and instead
of preferment, reproach and disgrace, thereby to prevail against us, and bear
us down. s. Augustine says, Aut amor male (...), or timor male humilians,
either love of the bait will inflame us, or fear of the hook will (...) us, to
draw us to evil, or to keep us from good. Thus we see all temptations to evil
may be reduced to these three heads; they come either from our own (...), or
from Satan, or the World, and all of them seek either to allure us by the
bait, or draw us by the hook.

We see the Negative part of this Commandment, in the words expressed. Now
because according to our (...) formerly delivered, the Affirmative is employed
in the Negative, we shall say something of the affirmative part.

The Affirmativepart. Or the thing required, is set down by the Apostle, when
The (...) part.
he exhorts us, To be renewed in the spirit of your minds, and to put on the
new The renewing of the heart and mind.
man which is renewed in knowledge after the image of him that created him, and
to become new creatures. We must labor, as the Apostle prayed, that our
spirit, soul, Ephesians. 4 23.
and body may be sanctified, and preserved blameless unto the coming of
Christ. We must Col. 3. 10.
(...) earthly members, our carnal lusts and affections, and crucify the old
man, Gal. 6. 15.
that so sin may not reign in our mortal bodies. Nor only must the mind be
renewed, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23.
Col. 3. 5.
but the will too, it must be brought into subjection to the will of God, that
we Romans 6.
may be able to say with David, Here am I, let God do with me, whatsoever he
(...); 2 Samuel 15. 25.
and with Christ, Not my will, but thy will be done. Our inward man is corrupt
in all Mat. 26. 39.
the faculties, the understanding is darkened, and the will is perverted. For as
in old Job 14. 4.
men there is caligo oculorum, (...) of sight, and infirmitas membrorum,
weakness 1 Cor. 5. 8. Ephesians. 2. 3.
in the members; so in this old man which we are to put off, there is (...)
mentis, and infirmitas spiritus, blindness of mind, and weakness of spirit,
which must be renewed.

Though (...) be in it self, (...), a transient act, yet after the act there is
something remains, which requires a necessity of Renovation: as 1. (...), the
guilt, which makes us unworthy of favor, and worthy of punishment. 2. Macula,
the stain, which renders us (...) and deformed: and 3. (...) seu morbus, the
wound or disease, which needs healing and binding up, and consists in a
pronenesse and (...) to the like acts.

Now though the guilt of sin past be taken away upon our repentance, yet the
stain and the scar remain (...) in part, and need daily renewing. And because a
new guilt may be contracted by new sins, therefore we have daily need of pardon
and remission.

The necessity of this inward renewing appears, 1. Because of the corruption
which The (...) of this renewing.
naturally lodges in the heart, and so pollutes the whole man, here is that
gall which imbitters all our actions, that leaven, which sowres the whole lump;
the leprosy Ezekiel. 6.
which defiles body and soul; fo that from the understanding which is the head,
to the affections which are the (...), all is full of sores. If the (...) be a
world of wickedness, James 3. 6.
what is the heart? If there be a beam in the eye, what is there in the heart?
Si trabes in (...), (...) in (...).

2. If it be not renewed, it is the most dangerous enemy we have. It is
deceitful Jer. 17. 9.
(...) all, says the Prophet; it can deceive us without Satan, but he can do
nothing without it; he must plow with our Heifer, it is more near to us then
Satan, a part of our selves: Resist the Devil and he will (...) from us; but
if we resist never so much, Luke 4. 13.
this deceiver will stick (...) to us. Satan tempts and leaves us for a
season, but this tempter never leaves us. This is like a treacherous person in
the City, which opens the gates and lets in the enemy, who otherwise by (...)
could not have entered.

3. It is the fountain of all our actions, none are accepted which come not
from a pure Mat. 5. 5.
Deuteronomy. 6. 6.
heart; if this be polluted, all our actions are abominable. Whatsoever an
unclean Joel 2. 12, 13.
person touched under the Law, was unclean. So whatsoever actions, though good
in Jer. 4. 3. 4.
themselves are performed, if the heart be not renewed and cleansed, they are
polluted Psalm. 73. 1.
by it. 24. 3. 4.


That we may be renewed in the spirit of our minds, we must use the means. The
meaus of Renovation.


1. We must wash our hearts with tears of repentance, as David after his great
Psalm. 51.
(...): and S. (...) after he had denied his Master. This potion of repentance
will purge out the (...) humors. It is true, the blood of Christ cleanses from
all sin, it 1 John 1. 7.
takes away the guilt, and the Spirit of God renews the heart, in respect of
the stain; (...) (says the Apostle) ye are sanctified in the name of the Lord
Jesus, and by 1 Cor. 6. 11.
the Spirit of our God; but neither Christ nor his Spirit will come and dwell
in an impure heart; if the heart be not prepared by repentance, we cannot apply
the blood of Christ to take away the guilt. There are preparatory works wrought
by the assistance of the Spirit, as sorrow and (...), before the Spirit comes
to dwell in us, and Christ stands at the door and knocks by preparatory acts of
grace, before he will Rev. 3. 20.
come in and sup with us.

2. We must avoid all occasions of sin; If our right eye offend us we must
pluck it Mat. 5. 29.
out; if our hand offend us we must cut it off; we must part with any thing
though never so dear to us, if it be an occasion of sin. We must shun and avoid
all evil company. Psalm 16. 3.
David says, that all his delight was in the saints, and such as did excel in
virtue; He 119.
was a companion of all that feared the name of God; as for the wicked, He
would not 101. 7.
suffer them to come into his sight, nay he would not make mention of them in
his lips. We must avoid idleness, David was idle when he was tempted to
uncleanness. Idleness is pulvinar Diaboli, the Devils bolster: an idle person
is a standing puddle, apt to putrify. This makes solum subactum, the soil fit
for Satan to sow his seed in; therefore it was good counsel, semper te
inveniat Diabolus occupatum, let Satan always find thee exercised.

3. We must watch over our outward senses, which are the windows by which (...)
objects are conveyed into the heart, and sinful lusts stird up in the soul:
look Genesis 3. 6.
not on the tree, (...) thou be taken with the pleasant show of the fruit. We
must pray Psalm. 119. 37.
with the Psalmist, That God would turn away our eyes from beholding vanity,
and (...) Job 31. 1.
1 Cor. 15. 33.
((...) Job did) with our eyes, not to look upon ensnaring objects: we must
stop Psalm 58. 5.
our ears against the charms of the Devil. The ear is apt to receive evil
speeches, which Mark. 4. 24.
it conveyes to the heart, and therefore we must take heed what we hear.

4. Principiis obsta, suppress the first motions of sin as soon as they arise
in the heart, this is to crush the Cockatrice in the egg, this is easy at
first, but difficult if we give way to them. Prava dum parva, though they seem
small, yet they are bad, and make way for worse: evil thoughts not resisted,
bring delight; delight breeds consent, consent action, action custom, and
custom necessity; we must therefore (...) Psalm 137. 9.
infantes, dash them to pieces while they be young, before they grow too
strong. We Gal. 1. 16.
must not once consult with flesh and blood, as the Apostle speaks: but as we
are careful to quench fire, or stop a breach of water at the first, lest if
they break out, it be too late; so we must stop sinful motions at the first,
before they gather strength, and so we be not able to resist them.

Colos. 3. 16.
5. The word of God has a specifical virtue to cleanse the heart. Let the word
of Psalm. 19. 9.
Christ, says the Apostle, dwell in you plentifully, or richly. The word of
the Lord, says Psalm 119. 9.
the Psalmist, is clean; and therefore he asks the question, wherewith shall a
young man cleanse his ways, and answers, by taking (...) according to thy word.

6. The heart must be weaned from the pleasures and delights of the world,
there must be (...) mentis, that we may say with David, I have behaved my self,
as Psalm 131. 2.
one that is weaned from his mothers breast. This must be by meditating of the
vanity, shortness, and insufficiency of all earthly pleasures, that as Abner
said to Joab, they bring bitterness at the last. Extrema gaudii luctus
occupat, these sweet waters end in the salt brackish sea; these short momentany
pleasures will be rewarded with endless Romans 8. 13.
torments. The rich man received in his life time good things, and Lazarus
evil, Luke 16. 25.
but now (says Abraham) Lazarus is comforted, and thou art tormented.

7. We must with the Apostle keep the body under, and bring it into subjection.
He 1 Cor. 9. 10.
that besieges an enemy will cut off provision from him. Those fleshly lusts
(which as S. Peter says) do war (...) the soul, will not be vanquished, if we
pamper the body, for by this means they are strengthened. Therefore we must
avoid all excess in meat or drink, and whatsoever may be a provocation or
encitement to our Concupiscence: Ezekiel. 16. 49.
Fullness of bread, and abundance of idleness, were the sins of Sodom: and
Prove. 23. 33.
Solomon gives counsel, not to tarry at the wine, his reason is, thy eyes will
behold strange women: we must take heed then of pampering the body, if we would
not have those lusts to grow in our heart. And if we have any way neglected our
duty herein, we must with the Apostle, take revenge upon our selves for our
(...), by some penal 2 Cor. 7. 11.
exercises, as fasting, watching, prayer, etc. both to show our true repentance
for our exorbitancy, and to keep the body, the better in subjection for the
future. And though this seem to be durus sermo, a hard thing to flesh and
blood: yet by (...) power of Christ and his spirit we shall be able to perform
it.

Thus if we keep our hearts with all diligence, as Solomon exhorts, and labor
for purity of heart, we shall be fitted for communion with God, (who is a God
of pure eyes) by faith here, and by clear (...) hereafter, Blessed are the pure
in heart, says Matthew. 5. 8.
Christ, for they shall see God.

FINIS.

