Animadversions UPON Mijn Here Fagels Letter CONCERNING OUR PENAL LAWS AND
TESTS; WITH REMARKS Upon that SUBJECT. Occasioned by the Publishing of that
LETTER.

Allowed to be Published

this 13th Day of July 1688.


LONDON: Printed by George Larkin at the Two Swans without Bishopsgate. 1688.

TO William Penn Esquire
BY these Papers which I send to be Perused by you, my Worthy Friend, you may
perceive I have (as you desired me) Considered the Contens of Mijn Here
Fagel's. Letter, concerning our Penal Laws and Tests, and Remarkt upon that
Subject, as Occasion was offered.

Before I had finished what I intended therein, The Solution of the Popular
Objection against the Repeal of the Penal Laws and Tests, was Published;
Therein the Task you imposed upon me, was so effectually Performed by the
Author, that you may well demand a Reason, why I did not upon sight of it
desist from any farther proceeding upon this Subject.

My Apology is, Tho that has Substantially prevented me, you did not formally
forbid me.

The Arguments of it are sufficient to fortify against any Fears Suggested
from future Parliaments, if Foundations be well laid in the next, for Liberty
of Conscience; and may serve (as is hinted in the Title Page) for an Answer to
this Letter of Mijn Here Fagel, as well as to any other Papers Published upon
this Subject. But yet I perceive there are, who adhere to the Opinion in Vogue
-- That we are more secure in our Religion and Liberties under our present Laws
for Oaths and Tests, then we can be by any other Provivision, if these be
Repealed: And they strengthen themselves herein, by what has, been declared by
this Letter of Mijn Here Fagel to Mr. James Stewart; and because the Author of
that Paper does not style it an Answer thereto in particular, it still remains
with some, as if it were unanswered.

I incline to think (and shall so do till I am otherwise convinced) No man will
attempt openly to Relpy upon those Arguments; But I cannot take Silence in this
case to be a sufficient Evidence of a Conviction; I have therefore steered
another course to break this Silence, by offering some things to be considered
upon the subject matter of Mijn Here Fagel's, Letter, as a Moot Case.

1. Whether contrary to their Highnesses declared Opinion, many Christians are
not subject to be very ill used, because they differ from the Public
Established Religion, if these Tests continue without any further Provision by
a New Law to secure them from such Usage?

2. Whether those Penal Laws and Tests are Effectual to Exclude Roman
Catholics from any share in the Government, Public Trusts, or Employments; Or
whether they have not been improved to a damage, rather then to any real
advantage to the Reformed Religion?

3. Whether Better, more Justifiable, and Suitable Security, both for our
Religion and Civil Rights, may not be obtained if His Majesty please to give
His Royal Assent, by Establishing the several matters proposed in His
Declaration for Indulgence, and some other Provisions to be made by a New Law,
then can be had or expected by continuing the Penal Laws and Tests as now they
are?

What I have written, tends to resolve these points for a Repeal of our Penal
Laws and Tests, If it meet not with better Arguments to the contrary then
hither to have been published. I have been the more large upon this Subject,
because I am of Opinion, (1) That no man can for the cause of Religion plead
any justifiable excuse for his not rendering Subjection to such as are his
Superiors in a Natural or Civil Station, in their lawful Commands. (2) That
the inflicting Temporal Penalties for such Errors in Religious Opinions as
cannot be Evinced by the Principles of Reason and Conscience, to be against the
common Light of Nature (tho they may be proved by Scripture to be against such
mysterious Truths as are proper only to the Christian Religion) is not to be
justified either by the general Law of Nature, or general Rules of Scripture.
(3) Though the point of Liberty of Conscience seems to be, yet I doubt it is
not really granted, but stands in some need to be more fully inculcated, That
each person who desires for himself to be free, and not coerced by Penal Laws
to Worship God contrary to his Conscience, may be disposed to allow the like
Liberty to every other Person who desires it, and is of years of discretion to
plead for it pon the like terms.

It is a true saying, Id verum quod Prius; Truth's Elder than Error: But Error
has trod upon the Heels of Truth, by Satan's Transforming himself into an Angel
of Light, and his Ministers being Transformed into Ministers of Righteousness;
so as that the most Upright, from the first Creation of Man upon the Earth,
throughout all succeeding Generations, have been so liable to Temptations, as
not always to consider by what Spirit they are Acted -- After the Fall of Man,
from that Original State of Vprightness wherein he was at first Created, Though
Internal Grace, through Faith of the Operation of the Spirit of Christ, for the
Hope of Redemption by the Promised Seed, first directed the proper use of
Religious External Forms, so as to render the Worshippers acceptable therein to
God; and in that Respect, Liberty of Conscience had the Precedence of
Persecution for Conscience: Yet through the Instigation of that Old Serpent,
(the Spirit of Antichrist) Persecution for Conscience, is as old as the Murder
of Abel. The Form of Godliness without the Power, (which then began to show it
self in Cain, who was of that Wicked one, and slew his Brother) has ever since
manifested it self in various Forms, like the Harlot in the Proverbs, Prove.
5.6. Gal. 4.29.
whose Ways are moveable, throughout all Ages in the World.

And this evil Persecuting Spirit crept, and still insinuates it self into the
visible Church; and into such among them, as have a Zeal for God, and for an
outside Form of Godliness, but not according to Knowledge. And this is so much
the more remarkable, because, although the Tract of Holy Scriptures discovers,
and often repeats the doleful Effects of this (formal, pretended Godly
Correction of an Erroneous, but really cruel) Persecution of an Upright
Conscience; Gen 4.8. Mat. 23.35. 1 John 3.11, 12, 13. Jude, verse 11.
and has preserved upon Record, from the Beginning to the Conclusion of Holy
Writ, the very Name of the first Bloody Transgressor of this sort, often
Repeated, that it might be rendered odious to all future Ages, especially under
the Gospel: Tet how often has it happened, (to the Evidence of the Divine Original,
and Verity of Scripture-Prophesies) that even such as read them, and pretend,
but do not attend to be guided by their Voice, have fulfilled them in
Condemning the Just? And whilst they speak, as in the Language of the Jews,
when they built the Tombs, and Garnished the Sepulchers of the Righteous; (if
they had lived in their Fathers Days, they would not have been Partakers with
them in the Blood of the Prophets,) even in the interim, are stupidly
regardless of the temper of their own Minds, then bent upon, and in the next
Opportunity, actually Persecuting the Righteous, so as to fill up the Measure
of their Fathers, and bring upon themselves the Blood of all the Prophets,
which was shed from the Foundation of the World. My Inducement to touch upon
these Points, is the Hopes I have conceived, that by His Majesty's Royal
Countenance and Authority, the destructive Instruments of this Inhumane
Persecuting Spirit may be taken out of the Way; so as that, although the
Malignity of it be as inourable as that of Babylon, mentioned by the Prophet
Jeremiah; Jer. 51.7; 8, 9. Mic. 3.3, 4.5.
yet its Rage shall be so fettered as no more to take away Peace from the
Earth; whereto the settling, and bounding of Religious and Civil Interests,
upon, and within their distinct proper Foundations and Limits, will greatly
Contribute.

I cannot say, as it is reported you have sometimes said, That if you thought,
what you advised and persuaded to, were not the safest way, you would reckon
your selves concerned to Act another Part: But I can freely say, If I were not
of that Mind, I would have chosen to be silent, and Acted no Part at all. But
being persuaded, that the modest Handling, thoroughly Penetrating, and free
Debating these Points, may produce such a Settlement amongst us, as is most
just and equal; and in that Respect, if it be once well laid, most likely to
remain unshaken to Perpetuity.

I have therefore written with an Intent, that what I write should be thoroughly
Scanned, with a Preparation of mind, to bear the Censures of such as have a
better discerning, and will discover wherein I have Erred: And in the first
Place, submit the whole to your Correction; and Disposal, as you think fit:
Wishing, that both you and my self, may so persevere in our mutual Endeavors
to do well, that in all our Greetings and Partings, we may (without
Transgressing our Lord's Rule) bid each other Heartily

Farewell.
ANIMADVERSIONS UPON Mijn Here Fagels Letter, CONCERNING OUR PENAL LAWS AND
TESTS.
I Have at the Instance of my worthy Friend for the Truth's sake, set some
Hours apart, seriously to Consider the substance of the Letter Written by Mijn
Here Fagel, to Mr. James Stuart, concerning our Penal Laws for Religious
Matters and Tests: And taking this Honorable Pensioner to be an Authentic
Testimony, of their Highnesses of Orange Declared Opinion, THAT NO CHRISTIAN
OUGHT TO BE PERSECVTED FOR HIS CONSCIENCE, OR TO BE ILL USED, BECAUSE HE
DIFFERS FROM THE PVBLICK AND ESTASTABLISHED RELIGION; I cannot but acknowledge
a great Satisfaction of Mind, to see such a concurrent Evidence born by their
Highnesses, to their Royal Father's Gracious Declavation, in a Point, which
next to the Blessed Gospel of Our LORD, I take to be of the highest Concern to
the Peace of Mankind; as tending to Introduce and Establish Concord and
Amicable Conversations, in Families, Neighbourhoods, Cities, Commonwealths and
Kingdoms, wherever it is Embraced and Heartily Pursued: For, although it may
be subject to different Apprehensions, (as all other Opinions are) in the
Interpretation, Limitation, or Extent of it; yet its natural Tendency is to
Abate, and (as Experience of its Usefulness does increase its Esteem) to
Eradicate that Antichristian and Inhumane Temper of Mind, which under a
pretense of Zeal for Religion, has provoked Men to be at Variance, Implacable
and Unmerciful one toward another; and instead thereof, to instill such
Christian-like Dispositions, as will incline to a Peaceable Behavior, such as
is becoming those, who have the Name of Christ (who is the Prince of Peace)
called upon them.

This Fundamental Maxim of their Highnesses, (though it be venerable for its
Antiquity, as well as its Intrinsic Virtue; for its as old as Christianity it
self) has not (as our Senses Testify) for a long time been Practiced, or
admitted amongst us, as a Plea, to prevent the Persecution or illusage of such
Christians, as differ from the National Established Religion; and in that
Respect, is but newly upon its Reviving: And therefore it highly concerns all,
who need or expect the Benefit of it, to take care, that they themselves be not
Instrumental to stifle it in its New Birth; for it requires a gentle and
prudent handling, and cannot be Introduced (as it has been thrust out) by Force
or violent Passions; but must be meekly dropped and instilled, by such Methods,
and suitable Demeanours, as may Commend it to, and Rivet it in the Minds and
Understandings of those, that have but lately Embraced it.

You see by the Sequel of this Lord's Letter, That neither their Highnesses,
nor this Noble Person (although Grounded and Principled in this peaceable
Opinion) do conceive it any ill Usage, for Dissenters from the public
Established Religion, to be kept out of Government, and all public Employment
and Trust: And therefore, if such, who in all other Respects, receive the
Benefit thereof, are denied that share of Power, Trust or Profit in public
Stations, which they think they ought also to enjoy in common with others; (as
any of them are qualified for it upon a civil Account, without any Religious
Test imposed) yet Christian Prudence will teach him that values Liberty of
Conscience, and the free, and peaceable Exercise of his Religion, by that
Esteem he ought to have of it, not to hazard the loss of it again, by an
Over-valuation of any Worldly Honor, Power or Profit, but to bear with
Contentation of Mind and manifest Cheerfulness, A Character (if imposed by the
Civil Government) of a Person not Capacitated for public Employment, because
of his Opinion in Religion, different from the Forms of Worship Established in
the Nation.

It is a high Favor and Obligation to Gratitude, That on the Dissenters
behalf, their Highnesses Declare, They do not only consent, as for the Papists
in His Majesty's Dominions, having as much Liberty as is allowed them by the
States in their Provinces; (scilicet, a full Liberty of Conscience) but
heartily approve of the Dissentexs having an entire Liberty, for the full
Exercise of their Religion, without any Trouble or Hinderance; so that none may
be able to give them tho loast Disturbance on that Account.

This Grace strictly binds the Dissenters to manifest their real Thankfulness
to their Highnesses, by a suitable Deportment, SO FAR AS IS CONSISTENT WITH
THEIR DVTY TO GOD AND THEIR KING; and with so much the greater Circumspection,
because their Highnesses ( Page 21.) do also Declare, They cannot agree to the
Repeal of the Tests, or any of those Penal Laws, by which the Roman Catholics
are shut out of both Houses of Parliament, and out of all public Employments,
Ecclesiastical, Civil and Military. And this Noble Person afterward, adds his
own Opinion to the same Purpose: ( Page 3.) And yet HE EVER WAS, AND STILL IS,
VERY MVCH AGAINST ALL THOSE WHO WOULD PERSECVTE ANY CHRISTIAN, BECAUSE HE
DIFFERS FROM THE PVBLICK AND ESTABLISHED RELIGION; AND HOPES BY THE GRACE OF
GOD, TO CONTINVE STILL IN THE SAME MIND.

And asks, Who would go about to persuade him, or any Man else, to endeavor to
move their Highnesses, whom God has Honored so far, as to make them the
Protectors of His Church, so approve of, or to consent to things so hurtful,
both to the Reformed Religion, and to the Public Safety.

His Majesty's Gracious Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, and those
Passages foregoing, with others of the like Nature in His Lordships Letter,
being compared and duly weighed, will plainly Demonstrate where the stress lies
in Reference to Dissenters; and how greatly it concerns them, that this Matter
be clearly Stated, to the Satisfaction both of His Majesty and their Highnesses.

THE KING OF HIS PRINCELY CARE AND AFFECTION UNTO ALL HIS LOVING SVBJECTS, THAT
THEY MAY LIVE AT EASE AND QVIET; AND FOR THE INCREASE OF TRADE AND
ENCOVRAGEMENT OF STRANGERS, THOUGHT FIT BY VERTVE OF HIS ROYAL PREROGATIVE, TO
ISSVE FORTH HIS DECLARATION OF INDVLGENCE; MAKING NO DOUBT OF THE CONCVRRENCE
OF HIS TWO HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT, WHEN HE SHOULD THINK IT CONVENIENT FOR THEM TO
MEET.

This Indulgence consists of two principal Parts, The one Relating to
Ecclesiastical Matters, and the Exercise of Religion in any manner whatsoever:
And the other, to Civil and Military Employments.

In the former Case, His Majesty having first Declared, That He would Protect
and Maintain all His Subjects of the Church of England, in the free Exercise of
their Religion, as by Law Established; (as shall be herein, after in the Words
of His Royal Declaration, expressed) afterward declares His Royal Will and
Pleasure.

That from henceforth, the Execution of all, and all manner of Penal Laws in
MATTERS ECCLESIASTICAL, for not coming to Church, or not Receiving the
Sacrament, or for any other Nonconformity to the Religion Established, or for
or by Reason of the Exercise of Religion in any manner whatsoever, be
immediately Suspended: And the further Execution of the said Penal Laws, And
every of them, is thereby Suspended.

In the latter Case. Forasmuch as he was desirous to have the Benefit of the
Service of all His Loving Subjects, which by the Law of Nature, is inseparably
Annexed to, and inherent in His Royal Person: And that none of His Subjects
might for the future be under any Discouragement or Disability, (who are
otherwise well inclined, and fit to serve His Majesty) by Reason of some Oaths
or Tests, that have been usually Administered on such Occasions; His Majesty did
thereby further Declare, That it was His Royal Will and Pleasure, That the
Oaths, commonly called the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance: And also, the
several Tests and Declarations mentioned in the Acts of Parliament, made in the
25th and 30th Years of the Reign of His late Royal Brother King Charles the
Second, should not at any Time thereafter, be Required to be Taken, Declared,
or Subscrired by any Person or Persons whatsoever, who was, or should be
employed in any Office or place of Trust, either Civil or Military, under His
Majesty, or in His Government. And further, That it was His Pleasure and
Intention, from Time to Time, thereafter to grant His Royal Dispensations under
His great Seal, to all His Loving Subjects, so to be employed, who should not
take the said Oaths, or Subscribe or Declare the said Tests or Declarations, in
the abovementioned Acts. and every of them.

My Lord Fagel tells us, That their Highnesses of Orange, if His Majesty shall
think fit further to desire their Concurrence in the Repealing the Penal Laws,
they are ready to give it; Provided always, that those Laws remain still in
their full Vigor, by which the Roman Catholics are shut out of both Houses of
Parliament, and all Public Employments, as has been beforementioned. But to
the Repeal of those Tests, and those other Penal Laws last mentioned, that tend
to the Security of the Protestant Religion, for the Reasons expressed in the
Letter, they cannot agree.

Some of the Dissenters upon their first sensible Experience of that great and
unexpected change of their Condition, effected by His Majesty's Gracious
Declaration of Indulgence, Enlarged from Imprisonment during Life, without
Conformity; discharged from Fines and Forfeitures, which they could never have
satisfied: At Liberty, not only to follow and attend upon their private
Callings, but to Exercise their Religion according to their Consciences,
without any Restraint or Disturbance, (so as they took special Care, that
nothing was Preached or Taught amongst them, which might any Ways tend to
Alienate the Hearts of His Majesty's Subjects from Him or His Government; and
that their Meetings and Assemblies, were Peaceably, Openly, and Publicly Held,
and all Persons freely admitted to them;) Reckoned themselves obliged in Duty
to God in the first place, for His Merciful Providence; To the King in the next
place, for His Gracious Pardon and Indulgence, to pay their Humble and Thankful
Acknowledgments: And this they did in their Public Assemblies, and also in
their Solemn Addresses to His Majesty.

Soon after, under an Umbrage of Kindness in a Printed Letter, (Entitled, A
Letter to a Dissenter) they were rebuked as guilty of Unreasonable
Thankfulness, and Pre-cautioned of the Hazzards to which they Exposed
themselves, by taking Liberty to Assemble publicly (the only Condition upon
which they were permitted to Assemble at all) before it was Granted, or
Confirmed by Parliament: But (this Rebuke and Pre-caution, notwithstanding) the
Generality of Dissenters and many others in Conjunction with them, pursued the
same Method in Addressing to the King; and many of them, therein assuring His
Majesty of their best Endeavors, for Choosing such Members for the next
Parliament, as would consent, that the Indulgence granted by His Majesty's
Gracious Declaration, should be Confirmed by a Statute Law.

If the Dissenters had not made these Acknowledgments, or should not pursue
what they have promised, His Majesty would have just Cause to be highly
offended; But because they have been driven to this Necessity by the Church of
England, and those in her Communion, by whom they have been always branded with
the Marks of Disloyalty, as if they were Universally Seditious, Riotous,
Rebellious; and all this, because some of them Regularly, others of them
Irregularly, in Conjunction with many more than themselves of the Church of
England, strove to Defend and Vindicate their own and others Liberties and
Privileges, as Subjects and Christians, of which the generality of the Church
of England, in Opposition to these Dissenters, and the rest of their own
Communion, would make a Surrender, and (as the Author of the Letter to a
Dissenter terms it) a Sacrifice to their Revenge. If the Dissenters had no
other Plea, but this inevitable Necessity to which they were Reduced, that they
must starve at present, to avoid a Forfeiture of their Subsistence in the next
Generation. It is to be hoped, that what they have done, and promised to do in
their Addresses to His Majesty, being duly weighed by my Lord Fagel, will be so
Represented, as that it may not be any Offense to their Highnesses.

Dissenters, though in such things as relate indifferently to them all, they
may all agree; yet in other things, they dissent one from another, as much as
from those who are no Dissenters, so called in Reference to the Established
Religion; and in that Coercion of Conscience, Subjection to Fines,
Imprisonments, and Universal Ruin, to which, by Statute-Laws as they now
stand, they were all Exposed. They are equally concerned in an Orderly, and
such a Way as is attainable with His Majesty's Approbation and Royal Assent, to
endeavor, that all those Laws may be either Totally, or in part Repealed; and
the rest so Explained, as that none of them may be Exposed to the Severity of
them for Conscience sake.

But although the Pressures under which the Dissenters were laid; are a
sufficient necessious Excuse, for what they have done, and further obliged
themselves to do, in their Humble and Thankful Addresses to the King: Yet for
His Lordships more entire Satisfaction that their Necessities have not driven
them to do any more, than what is agreeable with their Principles, in Relation
to Civil Government; and such Laws as are requisite for its Support, Dignity
and Safety, so far as I am capable of understanding their Reasons for so doing,
by a general Conversation amongst most sorts of them, for many Years past: I am
desirous they should be Communicated for a general Satisfaction; and more
particularly and especially, that his Lordship may know them, if he will
vouchsafe to read my Sentiments therein, who am an old Dissenter from the
Discipline, Service, and Statute Law, Worship and some Canons; but no Adversary
to the Doctrines in general, or Constitution of the Church of England.

His Lordship is pleased to say, (Page 4.) That it is certain, that there is no
Kingdom, Commonwealth, Constituted Body, or Assembly whatsoever, in which there
are not Laws made for the Safety thereof; and that Provide against all Attempts
whatsoever, that disturb their Peace, and that prescribe the Conditions and
Qualities that they judge necessary for all that shall bear Employments in that
Kingdom, State, or Corporation: And no man can pretend, that there is any
Injury done him, that he is not admitted to Employments, when he does not
satisfy the Conditions and Qualities Required.

And afterward, ( page 7.) Our Laws are Express, Excluding Roman Catholics by
Name, from all share in the Government, and from all Employments, either of the
Policy or Justice of our Country: It is true, I do not know of any express Law
that shuts them out of Military Employments; That had indeed been hard, since
in the first Formation of our State, they joined with us in defending our
Public Liberty, and did us Eminent Service during the Wars, therefore they
were not shut out from these Military Employments; for the public Safety was
no ways endangered by this; both, because their Numbers that served in our
Troops were not great, and because the States could easily prevent any
Inconvenience that might arise out of that, which could not have been done so
easily, if the Roman Catholics had been admitted to a share in the Government,
and in the Policy and Justice of our State.

And further, (page 8.) Since the matter that is now in Hand, Relates not to
the making of New Laws, but to the Total Repealing of those already made both
by King and Parliament: Their Highnesses do not see how it can be expected of
them, that they should Consent to such a Repeal, to which they have so just an
Aversion; as being a thing, that is contrary to the Laws and Customs of all
Christian States, whether. Protestants or Papists, who receive none to a share
in the Government, or public Employments, but those who Profess the Public
and Established Religion, and take Care to secure it against all Attempts
whatsoever. And a little before, Their Highnesses are Convinced in their
Consciences, that both the Protestant Religion, and the Safety of the Nation,
would be Exposed to most certain Dangers, if either the Tests, or those other
Penal Laws, of which I have made frequent mention, should be Repealed.

To several of these things, it is my intent, humbly to offer my Dissent: But I
desire to do it with all Deference to his Lordship, and humble Submission to
the Judgment and Determination of my Superiors, on whose Shoulders the weight
of Government, whether Legislative, or Executive, lies; and in whose Hands
respectively, are both the Right and Power of Disposing all public Employments.

Civil Government, is Ordained of God for the good of Mankind; Dominion is
founded in Nature, and so of Consequence, is Subjection to Superiors. The
Dissenters, who acknowledge the Scriptures to be the Word of God Revealed from
Heaven, and to contain, the standing general Rules of Faith, Worship and
Conversation, are therein taught, and readily admit, that every Soul ought to
be subject to the Higher Powers and to every Ordinance of Humane Creation; not
only for Wrath, but for Conscience sake, and the Lord's sake.

Every Independent Government, being Supreme over its own Subjects, is vested
with a Power to make and Execute such Laws, as are necessary, proper, and
adequate, for its own Support and Safety; and may justly require, not only a
Subjective, Passive, but an Active Obedience to be given by each particular
Subject, in all Lawful Things, as he is thereto Capacitated, and by Authority
Commanded.

No matter or thing whatsoever, openly Transacted, is Exempted from the
Cognizance or Judgment of such, as are supreme Governors, within their
Respective Dominions: And it is certain, as my Lord Fagel says, There is no
sort of Government, in which there are not Laws made for the Safety thereof,
and that Provide against all Attempts that disturb their Peace; And (de Facto)
Prescribe Conditions and Qualities as they judge necessary for all that shall
be employed therein.

But that all Conditions and Qualities are alike, necessary, equal and just, or
such as naturally tend to the Peace and Safety of the Government; and that no
man can pretend, that there is any Injury done him, that he is not admitted to
public Employments, when he does not satisfy the Conditions and Qualities
required: These things fall under farther Consideration.

If his Lordship had not declared the special Reasons, why their Highnesses,
and himself cannot consent to a Repeal of the Tests, and some Penal Laws; or
not mentioned the Laws of his own Country, nor declared, that the matter now in
Hand, relates not to the making of New Laws, but to the total Repealing of
those already made, both by King and Parliament. There had been no Occasion
given for such Remarks, as I shall now make upon these Branches of His Letter;

His Loadship very well knows, that as Governments are diverse in their Forms
and Constitutions, one from another, so also are their Laws and Customs.

Mr. Stuart's Mistake, gave Occasion to his Lordship to inform him aright,
concerning the Laws of his Country; and if his Lordship be mistaken,
concerning the Laws and Constitutions of Our Kingdom, there is the like
Occasion for a Right Information therein to be given to his Lordship, and all
others who concern themselves therein: And as he subjoyns the Reasons, why the
Roman Catholick's are not shut out of Military Employments, but are Excluded by
Name from all share in the Government, and from all Employments, either of the
Policy or Justice of their Country; so I may humbly offer to His Lordships
further Consideration, such Reasons as I think to be cogent, why no Dissenter,
Roman Catholic, nor Protestant, if Commanded and Authorized by the King, and
in all other Respects (not touching his Religion) duly qualified according to
Law, to Execute any Employment, Civil or Military, should be Excluded from
thence, purely, because his Religion or manner of Worship, is different from
that, which by Statute Law is Established to be the public Worship of the
Nation.

I doubt not but that forementioned Maxim which tends to, and is necessary for
the Maintenance of public Peace and equal Justice, and which is before
declared to be the Opinion of their Highnesses, is built upon the same
Foundation, which his Lordship declares to be the ground, why he is very much
against all those who would ( Page 3.) Persecute any Christian, because he
differs from the Public Established Religion. Scil. Because that Light, with
which Religion Illuminates Our Minds, is purely an Effect of God's Mercy to us,
and inclines to Pity, and Pray for those who Err, That God would bring them
into the Way of Truth, and to use all Gentle and Friendly Methods, for Reducing
them to it.

And his Lordship may very well say, That He could never Comprehend, (for I
think, it is not to be Comprehended by any man) how any that Profess themselves
Christians, and that may Enjoy their Religion freely and without any
Disturbance, can judge it lawful for them to go about to disturb the Quiet of
any Kingdom or State; or to Overturn Constitutions, that so they themselves may
be Admitted into Employments. And let me add to this; from the like Reasons of
State and Obligation of Religion, I can as little apprehend, how any that are
of the National Religion, and may enjoy both that, and all the public Benefits
of it freely, and without any Disturbance, can go about to disturb the Quiet of
this Kingdom; and to make, not only Religious, but our Civil Constitutions so
to jarr, and justle one against another, as to threaten the over turning of the
whole; That so under the Umbrage of Statute Laws (in some Respects incoherent,
if not with the Fundamental Law, yet with the present State and Management of
Public Affairs,) they themselves may be the only Persons capable of
Employments, Exclusive of those many Myriads in the Nation, who upon a Civil
Account may justly desire, that such Statute Laws may in an orderly Method, be
either in part, or in whole Repealed, or so Limited or Explained, as that they
may not for the future, be any more than others of His Majesty's Subjects,
entangled in, or subjected to a loss of their Civil Rights, for a good
Conscience toward God, or Obedience to the Commands of their King, in such
things as are in their own Nature, not only lawful, but necessary to be done.

It may be his Lordship has not taken such strict notice of the Nature of the
Government, Constitutions and different Qualities of the Respective kinds of
the Laws of England, as he has done of those of his own Country; all which are
necessary to be known, and well pondred before any Solid Judgment can be made
in Respect of such Proceedings, as have been and are like to be amongst us, in
the disposal and calling of Persons to Offices, Places of Trust, and Public
Employments.

His Lordship is pleased frequently in his Letter, to put a great Emphasis upon
such Laws as he would not have Repealed, in that they are made both by King and
Parliament; whereas, setting aside the subject matter, there is nothing more in
this, then what is requisite to every Statute that passes into a Law; some of
which have never been observed at all, but openly broken every day; and no man
ever Prosecuted for the breach of it: Others Prohibiting some sorts of Trades
and Merchandises, which have been Evaded, Neglected, or Counived at, or
Dispensed withal, upon diverse Occasions not needful to be mentioned: Nothing is
more frequent amongst us, then to have Statute Laws made in one Parliament, to
be Repealed in part, or in whole, by the next Succeeding, and sometimes in the
same Parliament, if of any Long Continuance, But on the other hand the Sages of
our Law, have in their Law Books delivered certain Fundamental Maxims, from
which we can never recede; as that, If a Statute Law should be made contrary to
Common Right, and the General Law of Nature, Reason or Scripture; such a Law
would be void of it self: And when Actions have been grounded upon a particular
Statute, which in the ordinary construction of words, did seem to Entrench upon
any Fundamental Maxims: Our Judges have given another Interpretation of such
Statutes, then the words in common construction would bear, rather then give
Judgment in any special case against such General and Fundamental Maxims.

The King's Prerogative, is part of the Common Law of England, and as this is
expressly saved in several Statutes; so it has been frequently Interpreted by
the Sages of our Law, to extend to the Dispensing with Suspending or Pardoning
of any Penalty incurred by a Statute Law, whereby no Subject can derive a
particular damage to himself; and wherein the Kings Power is not expressly
limited; And where the nature of the Offense is such as may be dispensed with
the King is not confined to Number, Place, or Time, for That the Law leaves
indefinitely to His Pleasure, that the Remedy may be proportionable to the
Occasion: And tho every Penal Statute is intended in some sense Pro Bono
Publico; yet it may not be Pro Bono Singulorum Populi. And in such cases, the
Offense is understood to be only to the King's damage in His Public Capacity
of Supreme Governor; and therefore wronging none but Himself, His Prerogative
may be Exercised as often and as largly as he is Graciously Pleased it shall be
in Acts of Mercy, Kindness, and Goodness to any of His Subjects who are
Obnoxious to Penalties by breach of Penal Laws, so as no other of His Subjects
be injured thereby in their particular Rights: And in many cases with a
Non-obstante in His Grant, to a Nonobstante in an Act of Parliament therein
Recited.

His Lordship is pleased to say, That it is contrary to the Laws and Customs of
all Christian States, whether Protestants or Papists, who recieve none to a
share in the Government, or to Public Employments, but those who profess the
Public and Established Religion, and that take care to secure it against all
Attempts whatsoever; But this must be taken with an Exception, as to Military
Employments in his Lordships Country, as he has expressed it; and also with an
Exception as to our Kingdom, which as Sr. Edward Coke Chief Justice has well
Observed, is divided, not only by the Seas, but by its own Laws from all the
rest of the World; for that they have no dependence upon any Foreign Law
whatsoever, no not upon the Civil Law; but are in such a manner Appropriated to
it self, as that no foreign Precedents are to be objected against it; And with
this special Exception in the very Act of Parliament, for the taking the
Parliamentary-Test in Relation to the the King's Majesty that now is, being
then Duke of York, and Heir Presumptive to the Crown, which in Right of
Succession to His Royal Brother, He now Enjoys, there is a Proviso made in
these words, Provided always, that nothing in this Act contained, shall extend
to His Royal Highness the Duke of York. (Provided) had been sufficient, and I
presume (always) will be construed only as Redundant. But as there is no
express Saving, so neither is there any express limitation of the King's
Prerogative in that Act.

I also conceive, That His Lordships Assertion ought to be taken with an
Explanation, or farther Exception of such Governments as by their Laws and
Constitutions admit of the Public Exercise of both Religions, Roman Catholic
and Reformed; and also of all such Imperial Dyets in Germany and Poland, as are
Constituted of of Princes and Palatinates, as well of one as of the other
Religion. And tho I have no other Exceptions to add in matter of Fact, as it is
limited to Christian States, yet among such as are of the Reformed Religion,
who acknowledge the Authority and Verity of the Holy Scripture. It may be
alleged that Ab Origin, it was no General Rule, Law, or Reason of State, in
Relation to Civil Government, That all who were admitted to Public Employment,
should be of one and the same Religion; I omit to instance those mean Examples
which may be given from thence to the Contrary: I shall mention only that of
the Babylonian and Persian Kings.

Nebuchadnezzar gave directions to the Master of his Eunuchs, to bring the
Choicest of the Isralites for Wisdom and Knowledge, to stand in the Kings
Palace; Daniel and his Brethren were brought, and stood before the King (tho
they neither were of, nor would take any care to secure the Kings Religion, or
the Public Worship of the Country.) And these and others of their Nation were
promoted by him: And the Succeeding Persian Monarchs in Places of Trust and
Public Employments, and obtained great Privileges in relation to their own
Religion, Nation, Country, and Principal City.

But it is to be observed, That tho, Liberty-of-Conscience, was rarely
Interdicted by any of the Great Monarchs before, or till the Age after our
Saviors manifestation in the Flesh; (so that to dissent from any Established
Religion was no impediment to a Secular Employment) yet an Antichristian Spirit
ever and anon discovered it self in such as had a form of Godliness, in their
Disturbing and Opposing the true Servants of God, in the Peaceable Enjoyment of
their Civil and Religious Liberties, upon the account of their dissent from
such Forms of Worship as by Custom or Tradition were commonly used. Reformation
according to the Revealed Will of God, has often been maligned, whereof we have
also diverse instances in Scripture, one I shall mention, because (tho it be a
digression.) it seems apt to our present purpose.

The Laws of the Medes and Persian were (as by a stated Maxim) esteemed
unalterable; Cyrus their King, as also his Successors, having experience of the
Wisdom and Fidelity of some of the Jews in their Captivity, not only placed
them in Public Employments, but granted them as a special Favor, the
Rebuilding of their City, and the Temple of God, and Restitution of His Worship
at Jerusalem, according to the Divine Law.

The Kings great Officers, and the Nations inhabiting in the Countries Adjacent
(tho they pretended to seek and do Sacrifice to the same God yet) being
Adversaries to the Jews Restitution and Reformation of Divine Worship, obtained
countermands to this Persian Kings decree, and even in the Reign of Cyrus,
hired Counselors to frustrate the Jews purposes, and by Royal Orders, obtained
contrary to the first Decree, Interrupted the Progress, and full
Accomplishment, thereof for many years after. And tho these King; had
Experience of the Fidelity of the Persons to whom these Favors were granted,
yet on Pretensions that the Grants would be to the Kings damage, and that the
Jews in general were (as some of them at certain seasons had showed themselves
to be) a Seditious People: They were prevented for a long time of the full
Enjoyment of the Privileges Granted.

In like manner, (so far as the parallel in a due construction will bear) If
the States of the United Netherlands had made such a Judgment Universally of
all that were of the Communion of the Church of Rome, That they were and would
be persidious to their Civil Governors of another Religion; And had for that
Reason in the first formation of their State, rejected those Roman Catholics
who joined with them in defending their Public Liberty; They never could have
had that Experience of their Fidelity and Eminent Service for which his
Lordship now applauds them.

It is not my part to speak any thing more concerning the English Roman
Catholics upon this ccasion, then only to refer to such of our Laws, as in
Ages past were made by them to Vindicate and Guard the Kings Prerogative, and
the Rights of his Subjects, against the Usurpations of the Bishop of Rome, and
Clergy of that Communion: But I conceive his Lordship (by observing the
different conduct of those of the Reformed Religion, where they have the
Government toward the Roman Catholics, from what the Roman Catholics is where
they have the Power, and reckon themselves safe toward those of the Reformed
Religion) has administered a fair occasion to His Majesty's Subjects of that
Communion, to manisest how far it consists with their Religion and Resolution,
(whether admitted into, or debarred from places of Trust and Public
Employments) indispensably to persist in their Obdience to the Sovereign
Majesty of this Kingdom, and Amicable and Peaceable Behavior toward all their
fellow Subjects of the Reformed Religion. And whether they will contribute
their assistance in their respective Capacities, for establishing and
preserving Liberty of Conscience, on such a Foundation as may secure all sorts
of Dissenters now, and herereafter from all Penalties and Coercion: For if by
any such Declaration it should appear we have English Roman Catholickt, like
unto those of the Netherlands; This might perhaps make way for some
distinctions to be made in future provisions, by Law (as heretofore has been
done) between some Roman Catholics and others, so as to avoid the general
condemnation of all who are of their Communion (as other parties have been to
the injury of many Thousands) by whole sale; and if it should ever hereafter
happen upon proof, That any of our English Roman Catholics should do Eminent
Service in defense of the Public Peace and Liberty; I make no doubt but the
consequence would extend farther, with respect unto such individual Persons,
then it did with the Papists in the Netherlands.

For greater Fidelity to the Public Interest could not be shown, then to
hazard their Lives, and Persevere in their Constancy with the Reformed
Protestants, in defense of their Civil Liberties, against Armies of their own
Religion, when any Act of Treachery (as the Princes of the Philistians said to
the King of Gath, concerning King David) might have Reconciled them to those of
their own Communion, 1 Samuel 27.4, 5.
perhaps with a secular Advantage to themselves, and Hazard, if not certain
Ruin of the Lives and Liberties of the Reformed Protestants: Certainly those
Individual Persons (if the Conditions of their Service were not before hand
expressly limited to a Military Station) might think they were hardly used, to
be excluded by Name for the sake of their Religion, from all share in the
Government and other public Employments, which they had been instrumental with
others to recover and defend.

There is one passage more in his Lordship's Letter, which will lead me to what
I have farther to add upon this occasion.

His Lordship says, He would gladly see one single good Reason, to move a
Protestant that fears God, and that is concerned for his Religion, to consent
to the Repealing of those Laws that have been Enacted by the Authority of the
King and Parliament, which have no other Tendency, but to the Security of the
Reformed Religion, and to the restraining of the Roman Catholics from a
capacity of overturning it: These Laws inflict neither Fines nor Punishments,
and do only Exclude the Roman Catholics from a share in the Government; who by
being in Employments must needs study to Increase their Party, and to gain to
it more Credit and Power, which by what we see every day, we must conclude,
will be extremely dangerous to the Reformed Religion, and must turn to its
great Prejudice.

I have before declared, I have been long reckoned among dissenting
Protestants, and do acknowledge it is my Duty (above all earthly things) to
Fear GOD, and to be concerned for my Religion. But I must beg his Lordships
patience and permission to enquire into the true meaning of this Passage before
I attempt to satisfy his Lordships desire. (1.) Because I cannot find any such
Law, as is effectual (our present State considered) to keep Reman Catholics
and no others out of Employments, or that do not either directly or of
necessary consequence, tend to the inflicting of Fines and Punishments on them,
or any other Dissenters if they resuse, or (without the qualifications
required) accept the execution of those employments. (2.) I premise, there may
be an Explaining, Qualisying or Repealing any Laws in part, without a general
or absolute Repeal of the whole Law: an instance of this kind we have in the
Reign of King James the First, in the Third year of His Reign, a Law was made
for some persons taking and subscribing the Oath commonly called the Oath of
Allegiance, in the form prescribed.

In the Seventh year of the same King, another Law was made, wherein notice is
taken of a just desence of the said Oath, against false and unsound Arguments,
undertaken and performed by the Kings Majesty, to the great contentment of all
his loving Subjects, notwithstanding the gainsaying of contentious
adversaries, and in this last Act it is said, That the form of the Oath tends
only to the Declaration of such duty, as every true and well-affected subject,
not only by bond of Allegiance, but also by the command of Almighty GOD, ought
to bare to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors. And Enacts. That every person
above the age of Eighteen years, therein mentioned, and intended, shall Make,
Take, and Receive a Corporal Oath upon the Evangelists according to the Tenor
and Effect of the said Oath set forth in the first mentioned Statute before
such persons as are in that Act expressed.

In the Kings Epistle to all Christian Monarchs, Free-Princes, and States
Prefixed to his Apology; his Majesty declares, That his Intent in that Oath, was
only to meddle with that due temporal obedience, which his Subjects owed to
him, and not to entrap, nor inthrall their Consciences; And in Answer to the
Popes Second Breve, That such as had taken this Oath, had sworn to no more than
their Natural Allegience.

The Kings Intent being thus declared, His Apology approved by Parliament, and
the Oath Explained, satisfied many, so as to take the said Oath, which
otherwise would have scrupled it.

Another instance we have in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth in the First year of
her Majesty's Reign, that Statute which prescribes and enjoins the taking of
the Oath called the Oath of Supremacy, by all the Clergy and Temporal Officers
(whereby they obliged themselves to assist and desend the Queens Highness, her
Heirs and Successors in all Jurisdictions united, and annexed to the Imperial
Crown of this Realm) does also among other things unite and annex to the Crown
all Jurisdictions, Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, which had before, or might
Lawfully be exercised for Reformation of all manner of Errors, Heresies and
Schisms.

This Act and Oath occasioned many seruples in the minds of her Majesty's
Subjects; for which cause, soon after the dissolution of this Parliament, and
about four years before the Calling of the next, her Majesty, besides the
dispensations which she gave to particular Persons upon special reasons)
published a Book commonly called the Queens Injunctions, wherein she was
graciously pleased, by her Power in Ecclesiastical Affairs, to declare such a
construction and sense of the words of this Oath (expressed in other words much
different) as gave Her Subjects in general, relief therein; and acquitted such
of them, as should in the sense she declared, take the said Oath, from all
manner of Penalties (which were very great) against such as should refuse to
take the same.

In the next succeeding Parliament, which was held in the Fifth year of her
Majesty's Reign, this Oath of Supremacy was enjoined to be taken, not only by
all such persons as were mentioned in the former Act, but also by every Member
of the Commons House of Parliament; and it was Enacted, That such as should
enter into the Parliament House without taking the said Oath, should be deemed
no Member thereof, and should suffer such pains and penalties, as if he had
presumed to sit in the same, whithout Election, Return, or Authority.

But it was also therein provided, That the said Oath should be taken and
expounded in such form, as was set forth in an Admonition annexed to the Queens
Majesty's Injunctions, published in the First year of her Majesty's Reign,
which was expressed in the Act, and referred to the said Injunctions, by which it
more plainly appeared, and in the Eighth year of her Majesty's Reign, in an Act
then made, it is recited, That the Queens Highness in Her Letters Patent to any
Archbishop, Bishop, or others for Confirming, Investing, and Consecrating of
any Person elected to the Office or Dignity of any Archbishop, or Bishop, had
not only used such Words and Sentences, as were accustomed to be used by King
Henry, and King Edward, her Majesty's Father and Brother, in their like Letters
Patents, made for such Causes, But also had used and put in her Majesty's said
Letters Patent, diverse other general Words and Sentences, whereby her
Highness, by her Supreme Power and Authority, had dispensed with all causes or
doubts of any imperfection or disability, that could, or might, in any wise be
objected against the same. And the same Statute declares, That all Acts and
Things done by any Person or Persons, by virtue of her Majesty's Letters
Patents, or Commission about any Consecration, Confirmation, or Investing of
any Person or Persons, elected to the Office or Dignity of any Archbishop or
Bishop, within this Realm, or any other her Majesty's Dominions, since the
beginning of Her Reign, should be judged, and deemed by Authority of that
Parliament, at, and from every of the several times of the doing thereof, good
and perfect to all respects and purposes; any matter or thing that could or
might be objected to the contrary thereof, in any wise notwithstanding; and
provides, that all tenders of the Oath of Supremacy before that Sessions, by
virtue of any Act made in the first Session of that Parliament, (which was
about three years before) and all refusals of the Oath so tendered by any
Archbishop or Bishop, should be void, and of none effect, or validity in the
Law; and, that no person or persons, should at any time afterward be impeached
or molested, in Body, Lands, Livings, or Goods, by occasion or mean of any such
Certificate, touching or concerning the refusal of the said Oath; and in the
preamble of this Act it is declared, That the State of the Clergy being one of
the greatest States of this Realm, it was thought convenient thereby, to touch
such Authorities as did allow and approve the making and consecrating of the
Archbishops and Bishops to be duly and orderly done according to Law.

By which proceedings it may appear, That the extent of the Oath of Supremacy,
as it might have been taken to be by the first Statute, was by the Queens
Admonitions explained, limited and restrained; Any deficiences which were or
might be construed to be in the second Act, or in such words and sentences as
were used by her Predecessors for Confirming, Investing, or Consecrating
Archbishops or Bishops, being one of the great States of this Realm, were by
general words and sentences in the Queens Letters Patent and Commissions,
supplied. All causes and doubts of any imperfection or disability, were by the
Queens Highness, Supreme Power and Authority, removed out of the way: and all
that was done pursuant thereunto, declared to be good and perfect, at, and from
the time of the doing thereof.

In the King's Apology before mentioned, his Majesty reflects upon the Pope,
for having in his Breve dealt both indiscreetly with his Majesty, and
injuriously with his own Catholics: With his Majesty, in not refuting
particularly, what special words he quarreled in that Oath; which if he had
done, It might have been, that for the fatherly care the King had, not to put
any of his subjects to a needless extremity, he might have been contented in
some sort to have reformed or interpreted those words: With his own Catholics,
for either, if the King had so done, they had been thereby fully eased in that
business; or at least, if he would not have condescended to have altered any
thing in the said Oath, yet would thereby some appearance, or shadow of excuse
have been left unto them for refusing the same, not as seeming thereby to
swerve from their Obedience, and Allegiance unto him; but only being staid from
taking the same upon the scrupulous tenderness of their Consciences, in regard
of those particular words.

Herein if the King does not assert his Prerogative to extend, to reforming the
words of an Oath Established by Law, for the ease of the Consciences of some of
his Subjects; yet his Majesty plainly intimates some regard is to be had to
those, who did not swerve from their obedience, but were only staid from taking
this Oath through scruples of Conscience.

In the Reign of King Edward the Sixth, Queen Elizabeth, King James the First,
King Charles the First, King Charles the Second, diverse Grants were made or
confirmed, and Toleration given to Strangers for exercise of Religion (in the
Principal Cities, and Towns of England; as London, Norwich, Canterbury, and
Southampton) in Forms different from the Act of Uniformity of worship, with a
Non obstante to that Act; And Charters in like manner, in the Reign of all or
some, of the three last Kings, to diverse of their own Subjects, for exercise of
Religion according to their Consciences in Foreign parts within their
Majesty's Dominions, with a dispensation as to Laws in force, relating to
Religion, and requiring Oaths of Obedience in the form prescribed by such Laws;
and though some of these Dissenters, who obtained these Grants, have contrary
to the common rules of Justice and Equity, inflicted temporal penalties upon
such of their brethren as have dissented from the forms of Worship, established
by their own municipal Laws, and have therein usurped a power over Conscience,
which they desired, and obtained by Grant from the King, might not be exercised
in reference to themselves; yet those Regal Grants, made to secure them from
the penalties which otherwise they might have incurred by their Nonconformity
to the General Laws in being, respecting Religion, Sacrament, and Oaths, (which
reached not only throughout the Realm of England, but all other their Majesty's
Dominions) have been continued and renewed, without ever being taken notice of
in Parliament, as an extention of the Kings Prerogative beyond the due bounds
of Law.

By all which instances it seems to me evident, that his present Majesty has
not by his Gracious Declaration of Indulgence, exercised his Prerogative in any
Case, or upon any other Grounds, than has been done before, by his Royal
Predecessors, respecting the nature of the things, but only in the degree, as
it is a more general extensive, and comprehensive Act of Grace, than any of
those special Grants, which have been made by his Progenitors, grounded upon
the most universal, and evident Maxims of Religion, and Civil Government, viz.
That his Majesty may have the benefit of the service of all his Loving
Subjects, which by the law of nature is inseparably annexed to, and inherent in
his Royal Person, without imposing upon any of them such Religious Tests, or
Oaths, as they cannot in Conscience to God submit to.

The present Laws, which require taking of the Sacrament, Oaths, or Tests: in
order to a residing in the Kings Courts, or presence, or executing offices, and
places of trust, declare the Reasons thereof to be in that of the Twenty Fifth
of the Late King, For preventing dangers, which may happen from Popish
Recusants, and quieting the minds of his Majesty's good Subjects. And in that
of the Thirtyeth year of his Reign. For that diverse good Laws had been made for
preventing the increase, and danger of Popery in this Kingdom, had not had the
desired effects by reason of the free access, which Popish Recusants had to his
Majesty's Court; and by reason of the liberty, which of late some of the
Recusants had, and took to sit and vote in Parliament, and for the safety of
his Majesty's Royal Person and Government.

I do not remember any Law passed in the five years interval, between the first
and last Test, which from the Subject matter of it, can be supposed to be
influenced, much less carried by any Roman Catholics, taking a liberty to sit
and vote in Parliament; nor that any Roman Catholics were in that time, or for
five years after the last Law, prosecuted to effect, so as to suffer the
penalties incurred by either of those Acts. If a due observance and execution
be the life of any Law; and if upon enquiry, it should be found, that this was
wanting; it may thence be inferred (if any Roman Catholics did within this time
reside in this Majesty's Court) that a Law of this nature, where the King will
not encourage, and much more, where he will stay the prosecution, is but as a
dead letter, and never like to attain its end in that respect.

And when all is done that can reasonably be thought of in this kind, it still
remains to be farther considered; whether the King in being, be not the sole
and proper judge of his own safety; and which of his Subjects shall have
liberty to reside in his Courts, and come and abide in his Royal presence. And
if after the passing these Acts, the Late King had, as his present Majesty has
required many of his dissenting Subjects, Roman Catholics or Protestants (who
could not in conscience take the Sacrament, Oaths, and Tests, in the form
prescribed) to attend his Person, and execute his Lawful commands with a Non
obstante to these Poenal Laws. I see not how they could have been justified in
refusing to obey such commands, nor if they therein do no more, than what they
are obliged to, by their true duty, and service of Allegiance; how it can
consist with reason and good conscience, that they should be prosecuted upon
these, or any such like Poenal Laws, for refusing to qualify themselves for
such duty and service in the sorms thereby prescribed, which are contrary to
their conscience, when the King is pleased to dissence with such Laws, and is
otherwise satisfied of their Fidelity.

There is one thing more which the Subject matter of the Oaths and Tests,
enjoined by these Laws, lead me to consider; I take the main drist of them, to
tend to a discrimination between the understanding and conscience of some men
from others, concerning the Religious Opinions, and Practice, therein to be
attested in reference to their being admitted into, or excluded from the Royal
presence, Public Trusts and Employments, and that the weight of these Laws,
lies principally in securing the Natural and Civil Rights of the Supreme
Governor and his Subjects, from being invaded by Recusants; and though the
security of the Protestant Religion might also be in the eye of our
Legislators, yet the keeping out false Doctrines, Superstition and Idolatry,
from corrupting our Religion, was not that which was especially considered in
framing these Laws and Tests.

For if it should be supposed, that these Laws (because they require Tests of a
Spiritual Nature, in order to admission into a Civil Employ) are capable of any
such Interpretation, as may lay the weight of any Persons being excluded from
such Places upon this, That they are Persons guilty of False Doctrines,
Idolatrous and Superstitious Practices, and therefore not fit for any Trust in
the Government, because the admission of such Persons into those Places, has a
tendency to corrupt the Reformed Religion.

Then it would also follow, That whoever is guilty of any other suchlike False
Doctrine, Idolatrous or Superstitious Practice, or of any open irreligious
Crimes, ranked with, and of as heinous a nature, and as destructive to all True
Religion, as These, are equally unfit for such Places: Which Opinion, if
followed, would require Tests of another kind, besides these now prescribed.

For the same revealed Doctrines and Rules, which instruct us in the Nature and
Use of the Sacrament, and other Holy Mysteries of the Christian Religion, do
also instruct us, and give warning, That none be deceived: neither Fornicators,
nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor Abusers of themselves with Mankind, nor
Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners (no more
than Idolaters) shall inherit the Kingdom of GOD.

The Spirit and Soul of the Christian Religion, which is pure and undefiled
before God, consists in the Exercise of Faith, Love, Hope, and suchlike Graces;
which do all tend to an internal Sanctity, and to a Manifestation of it self in
suitable acts of Piety, Charity, and Mercy: And unless such Tests be added, as
have a tendency to discriminate such as are Religious, from others who are
openly Profane, the testifying against one sort of False Doctrine or Idolatry
only, will no more Secure our Religion against the growth of Irreligion or
Profaneness (which is as bad as the worst Religious part of Popery) than if he
that served Malcham should be excluded, when he that served Belial might be
admitted.

But since this cannot be, neither is it required to be, in reference to Men's
enjoying their Natural and Civil Rights, it remains only to be considered, Why
any one sort of Idolatry or Superstition, should exclude any Person from
Public Employments, rather than another: And this may be (not from the nature
of the Worship, but) from the combination of the Worshippers against all
others, And if this can be separated, or other sufficient Caution provided, we
may be as Secure both in our Civil and Religious Liberties, when these Tests
are no more, as we were before they were made. And for the accomplishment of
this, nothing can have a more direct and natural tendency, than such a Repeal
or Qualifying of Poenal Laws and Tests, as may set such of the R. Catholics as
shall oblige themselves to be true to the Government and Interest of the
Nation, upon the same terms of Security for enjoyment of all their Civil
Rights, with the rest of their Fellow Subjects, notwithstanding their Dissent
in Religion.

It was the great Wisdom and Care of King James the First, as he declares in
his Apology, to distinguish such of his Subjects as were Papists, (and the Rule
will hold to every other sort of Christians) who (retaining to themselves their
religious Opinions) would acknowledge their Fidelity and Civil Obedience to
their Sovereign, from such others as would not so do: Wherein His Majesty
proposes a due regard to be had to the Consciences of His Subjects, in
reserence to their Religion, when they are required to acknowledge that Duty
which they owe to their Civil Sovereign. And this is so much the rather worthy
imitation, in Civil Constitutions, because it is after the Example of God, in
reference to Religious Constitutions; That no particular Persons may be
Condemned of such Crimes as are charged upon the Church in general Terms,
whereof they are Members, if so be they have kept, and can purge themselves
from the Crimes objected.

This appears plainly by such Transactions as relate to the Church, as well
under the Law as in the days of the Apostles, when many Corrupt Doctrines and
Practices were crept in amongst them. These Churches, and some particular
Persons in their Communion, were treated in different manner by the Prophets
and Apostles: And though the Churches in general, or the Ruling part of them,
have been severely reprehended, and threatened to be punished of God, (except
they repented) for teaching or permitting such Corrupt Doctrines and Practices,
yet such of their Communion, who kept themselves pure, have always been
distinguished from such as were Corrupt. For instance,

In the general Defection from the Purity of GOD's Worship, in the Reign of
King Jeroboam, some good thing is noted to be in his Son.

What greater Corruption, and Persecution of God's Servants, than in the Reign
of King Ahab? Yet even then Seven Thousand that had not bowed their Knee to
Baal, though kept so obscure, as to any open Witness bearing to the true
Worship of God, that the Prophet Elijah reckoned himself to be alone; and
Obadiah the Governor of the King's House signalized for his fear of GOD, and
secretly nourishing great numbers of his Prophets. The Last of the Prophets,
(as he is placed in the Scripture Records) before the Incarnation of Christ,
reproves the Priests, whose Lips should keep Knowledge for departing out of the
way, causing many to stumble at the Law, and corrupting the Covenant of Levi;
Judah and Israel, for committing abominations; yet takes notice, that there
were some who feared the Lord; and thought on His Name; for whom a Book of
Remembrance was written, that there might be a future discerning by men,
between the Righteous and the Wicked. In the days of our Savior upon Earth,
the Doctors of the Law, Scribes and Pharisees, had made void the Commands of
God by their Traditions, multiplying outward Coremonies under a show of
Sanctity, and being inwardly unclean, and full of Hypocrisy. The Question is
put among themselves, Which of the Rulers or Pharisees have believed on Him?
Yet upon a Scrutiny we find Joseph an honorable Counselor, Nicodemus a
Pharisee and Ruler, and many among the Chief Rulers, who believed on our
Lord-Among the Seven Churches of Asia, mentioned in the Apocalypse, the Church
of Thiatira is in goneral commended for her Charity, Service, Faith, Patience,
and Works. And the last to be more than the first; yet the Angel of that Church
is reproved for suffering salse Doctrines and Fornications to be taught and
committed amongst them. And such as did so, and all that committed Adultery
with them, are threatened by the Lord with great Tribulations, and Death, except
they repent. But the rest of her Communion, who did not know the depths of
Satan, which others Taught, had none other burden laid on them, but that which
they had to hold fast till the Lord came. And when Mystery Babylon the Great,
the Mother of Harlots, and Abominations of the Earth, is threatened with a
sudden approaching, and utter destruction, there is mention of a Voice from
Heaven, to God's People, saying, Come out of her my People, that ye be not
partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues.

If the state of the Seven Churches in Asia, when these Epistles were directed
to them respectively, be compared one with the other, great difference will
appear, as to their then present condition, for the better or the worse in the
Account of God. But there is no intimation of any Power given to the best of
these Churches, to Unchurch the worst, so long as the Lord by His
long-suffering Dispensations of Providence would continue them in the state of
a Christian Church, as to the outward form; much less may any private Person
presume by his Censures to Unchurch any Christian Church, which was right in
its first Constitution, because that some ordinances (which ought to be kept)
are therein wanting; or that many Corruptions (which ought to have been kept
out) are crept in amongst them.

Nor do I esteem it any disadvantage to the Truth, that the same name which was
once deservedly given to a Church, because Right in its Constitution should be
given also to such as continue in Succession, (though they vary in many points
of Doctrines) whilst they retain the same Essential form of a Church: Nor that
it includes any approbation of their Declension from the Truth, any more than
the terming of Jerusalem the Holy City, did so, when they had made void the Law
by their Traditions: And to all their other abominations had added a Conspiracy
with the Gentiles, to condemn and crucify our Savior. But on the contrary, it
may be a ground for Reproof, and a means of Conviction also, That any Persons
style themselves, or are styled by others, to be of such a Church as, according
to the Scripture-Records thereof, was originally right in its Doctrine and
Constitution, if in any thing they deviate from the Truth there once professed.

But that which is evident to our present purpose from all these instances, is,
That as on the one hand it is no excuse before GOD, for any Persons to follow
the Doctrines, Commands, or Examples of his Rulers in the Church, or the Church
in general, when they deviate in Doctrine or Practice from the ways of God. So
on the other hand no such universal Censure of any Church visible, can be
justified, which condemns every individual Member thereof, as guilty of the
Crimes objected in general against the Society, without leaving any room for
such of them as can, and are willing, to clear themselves from the Crimes
objected. And if the Crimes objected against the generality of such as are in
Communion with the Church of Rome, or any other Church or Sect of Christians
be, that they teach or receive such Doctrines as are inconsistent with their
Fidelity and Allegiance to their Civil Sovereigns. The Question to be
considered, is, Whether it be not more Just and Equal, after the Example of
King James the First, to use such methods (proper to the present season as he
did formerly) as may discriminate the Dutiful from the Disobedient in Civil
things, rather than any other methods which tend to Condemn all, without
distinction, for the faults of many? And if such a method were introduced, and
equal countenance given to all sorts of Christians, (as they may deserve it
from their Superiors) in their Civil Stations, leaving them to the liberty of
a voluntary Choice, as to their Religion and religious Communion, without any
coertion of Conscience by Temporal Penalties, this would probably be the
consequence: Either that they will all equally strive to merit the Favor of
their Sovereign, by their True Service and Duty of Natural Allegiance, or He
may at least the better discern which of them to put most confidence in, and
toward which to use the greater Caution; as Experience may manifest, That one
sort or other of them are, by the Doctrines Taught amongst them, rendered more
or less obsequious to His Lawful Commands.

From all these premises, although I have already in effect said, That I cannot
find any such Law, which neither directly inflicts, nor consequentially
subjects any Persons to Fines, or Punishments, for Conscience sake, which are
under our present Circumstances in any respect effectual to serve the Reformed
Religion from the Attempts of Papists; yet it rests, That I give his Lordship
all the satisfaction I can, why the Dissenters desire a new Law may be made,
that may either repeal, or otherwise limit, or qualify the present Laws for
Sacrament, Oaths, and Tests, in such manner, as neither themselves, nor any
others may have any just Cause to complain of any injury done to them, in their
Civil Rights for their Religions sake.

And I shall herein offer such things to be considered, as tend to demonstrate
that what is desired on the Dissenters behalf, is not only compatible with the
true Fear of God; but that which every Protestant of the Church of England (who
truly fears God, and admits this to be a true Doctrine, that no man may do Evil
that Good may come of it) is also concerned as well for the sake of his
Religion, as for his Civil Interest to join with them in, so as that they may
mutually agree to choose such Members to serve in the next succeeding
Parliament, as will (upon equal and just Terms of security to the common
interest of Religion, and Civil Government) give their Consents to the Repeal
or Alterations and Provisions desired.

First. For that those Laws which require the taking of the Sacrament-Oaths and
Tests, are rendered ineffectual, and useless for the present season, and likely
to continue so, during this Generation, as to the keeping of any Dissenter,
either Papist or Protestant, out of Employments, either Civil or Military:
Daily experience manifests this; for in every place of Dignity, Power, or
Trust, as in the KING's Household, among the Lords of the Treasury, in the
principal Courts of Justice, and in Military Commands, Roman Catholics are
placed. And in the greatest Corporations, among the Aldermen, Sheriffs, and
other Officers, both Roman Catholics, and Protestant Dissenters, by the King's
Commission, with a Non Obstante to these Laws; so that Roman Catholics, by
their refusal to take the Sacrament, Oaths and Tests, neither keep themselves
out, nor are kept out of any public employments; as my Lord Fagell seems to
suppose, as things stand at present. And his Lordship is too honorable a
Person, Page 5, 6.
and too wise a Politician to desire, or think, That the Reformed Religion
should; and will, be secured in the Age to come, by a multitude of Fines
forfeited in the present Age, by such persons executing public employments,
who are designed by a Statute Law to be disabled; but in fact are not, when the
King by His Prerogative, under His Great Seal, gives and grants them an Ability
and Capacity, to act with a Non Obstante to these Statutes; and His Pardon in
like manner to every one of them; as often as they will ask for it.

Second. If the Protestant Dissenters that are put into public Offices, should
have the Penalties hereafter levied upon them, they lose but what is saved to
them by the King's Bounty and Clemency.

For if the Poenal Laws had not been suspended by the King's Prerogative, they
would have been ruined by the Penalties and Imprisonments, to which these Laws
made them liable; and which were for a long time with severity put in Execution
against the generality of them: And though such of them as have read the
public Catechisms, and Liturgies published by the Papists, if brought by
process of Law before any Court of Justice; and required to declare, Whether
they did believe the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, as it is therein taught,
could with a safe Conscience have Answered on the Negative, yet that would not
have excused many of them, who must have suffered the same Penalties imposed
for not taking the Sacrament; and it might well have been reckoned highly
disingenious for such as have not been accustomed to take the Sacrament, as by
Statute Law is directed, voluntarily, and without any constraint, to have taken
both Sacrament and Test, when their so doing, could have no other Construction,
but to manifest thereby, That they distrusted the KING's Prerogative, in
preserving them from that Penalty. And in the mean while, to trust both their
Liberties and Estates in their public Assembling to Worship, and Worshipping
against Statute-Laws, under no other shelter, but the Wing of Prerogative. But
in regard the reviving the Execution of such Laws will cercertainly ruin them;
whether they be in, or out of public employments, no man can justly blame
them, if in gratitude to His Majesty, and for their own security for the
future, they endeavor by Repeal, or some other Legal Provision, to be
delivered from them.

Third. The Dissenters have no reason to trust to any Promises that are made
under the name of the Church of England, That they shall have Liberty of their
Public Worship, if these Laws be not Repealed: For when any Revolution shall
happen, no man can tell upon whom to affix these Promises, any more than those
of the like Nature; which besides the Royal Declaration, were generally made
under the same name, in order to that which succeeded, viz. His Late Majesty's
Peaceable Restoration; and even now, not long before His Present Majesty's
gracious Declaration, a Treatise was published, and is still mentioned in the
Catalogue affixed to the end of such Books, as sell in great numbers;
Entitled, The Vanity of all Pretensions to a Toleration, written by no mean
Person, or Persons, as is evident by the Style and Method, in which it is
written; so that if the Dissenters do not say it is the Doctrine, but feel it
is the Practice of the Church of England, to keep no such Promise with
Schismatics. All the Answer I can think of, will be, Either it was not the
Church of England that made the Promises; or if they did, They see Cause not to
perform it.

And so, for hereafter, if Persecution for Conscience be revived, it was not
the Church of England that repented of that Persecution before, or as now at
present: It was not the Church of England that persecuted, but such as the Late
King made Judges and Justices: Therefore to avoid all future Dangers to the
Dissenters on the one hand, and all Calumny and Equivocations under the Name of
the Church of England on the other hand, so as to beget a right Understanding,
and perfect Reconciling of the Church of England, and Protestant-Dissenters:
The only visible way is to have such to represent them in Parliament, as will
join in their humble supplications to the King: That the National Church by Law
Established, with all its Rights, may be Confirmed by a New Law (removing
Temporal Penalties for the Cause of Religion (which have been, and will be, the
occasions of Discord) out of the way) on such Terms as are proposed in His
Majesty's Declaration, and as may please the King in Parliament to grant it.

Fourth. For the same reason that His Lordship would rot have such Poenal Laws
and Tests repealed, as tend to secure the Resormed Religion (and keep Roman
Catholics out of public employments, which they have not done, nor can do).
It follows, where there are Laws and Tests, which tend to keep many Persons out
of public employments, who are every other way qualified for it (and if they
could be admitted, would by their Behavior, as well in their public Stations,
as by their general Conversation, not only secure, but greatly promote the
Reformed Religion); that there should be a Repeal in part, or such other
qualifying those Laws and Tests, as that such Persons may not for their
Conscientious Nonconformity to such Circumstances of Religion, as are thereby
required, be excluded from public Stations; and though their Highnesses
Concessions be very large on behalf of such Persons, yet this may extend to
such Laws, as his Lordship might not have in his Thoughts, when he writ his
Letter, viz. one made in the Thirteenth, and another in the Fourteenth Year of
the Reign of His Late Majesty, King CHARLES the Second; the First, for
Regnlating of Corporations, respecting Civil Offices; the Second, for
Uniformity of public Prayers, Administration of Sacraments, and other Rites
and Ceremonies, relating to the Clergy, Masters, and Fellows of Colleges, and
Schoolmasters: By one of these Laws great Change of Hands was made in Civil
Employments throughout all the Cities and Corporations in England; and by the
other of them, at least 1500 Ministers were deprived of their Benefices; many
of which, were sam'd abroad by their Works; and at home, for their profound
Learning; and exemplary Piety.

And how much these Alterations and Deprivations have tended to the Security of
the Reformed Religion; and left any sort of men, out of a capacity to hurt it,
such as have lived, and been of age and sobriety of Mind to discern in what
degree the Conversation of Multitudes have in Twenty five Years past, varied
from what they were Twenty five Years before, are best able to give a true
Relation.

Fifth, Because of that doleful experience which this Island has had, of the
ill consequence of all sorts of Religious Laws and Tests, with Temporal
Penalties annexed; By which for these 50 years past, at diverse Seasons each
different party of Protestants alternately as they have had power in their
hands, or countenance of Authority, have imposed upon such as differed from
them in forms of public Worship, principally upon this point, to thrust and
keep each other out of places of Trust, and public Employment, which has
visibly and sensibly done more hurt to the Reformed Religion, than all the
attempts of their Adversaries could otherwise have effected. This manifestly
calls upon them all to surcease from all such riged courses, which none of them
can now either in Conscience or Prudence defend, and by a joint concurrence to
endeavor a removal of all such occasions of offense out of the way, that it
may not be in the power of any, who wait for opportunities, under color of
Law, to set Protestants at variance amongst themselves; that they may bite,
devour, and be devoured by one another; and let not any apprehension, that such
a course at this Season will let in Papist amongst them, into Civil or Military
employments, cause them to neglect the present opportunity; for seeing the
continuance of these Religious Laws and Tests, with temporal Penalties annexed;
neither does, nor can keep them out: it is certainly more safe (if there were
no natural equity or right in the case, and much more since there is so) to let
them in under due cautions by a Stated Law, than to tempt them to get all the
power they can into their own hands by Arbitrary means, because they cannot be
secured by Law in the enjoyment of Civil Privileges, equally, and in common
with others.

Sixth, Because of that necessity we are under, of making one more experiment,
whether those of the Communion of the Church of England, Protestant Dissenters
and Roman Catholics, cannot live peaceably together, and maintain a good
correspondence in places of public trust and employments, notwithstanding
their different Sentiments in Religion. For his Majesty has actually mingled
and placed together some of each sort in many Commissions for public trusts
and employments; And if it be so, as my Lord Fagell asserts, That plain Reason,
as well as Experience, of all Ages, Page 6.
That Present, as well as the Past, shows, That it will be impossible for Roman
Catholics and Protestants, when they are mixed together in places of trust,
and public employments, to live together peaceably, or to maintain a good
correspondence together, they will be certainly always jealous one of another;
for the principles, and maxims of both Religions are so opposite to one
another, that in his opinion he does not see how it will be in the power of any
Prince, or King whatsoever, to keep down those suspicions and animosities which
will be apt to arise upon all occasions. This certainly calls for such a
necessary and timely provision to be made by a new Law, for prevention of such
Suspicion and Animosities, as cannot be expected from our present Religious
poenal Laws and Tests. In order thereto, His Majesty by his gracious and
prudent Conduct, in the Exercise of His Prerogative has laid the Foundation:
And that it may be perpetuated, doubts not of the concurrence of His Two Houses
of Parliament, to establish and confirm it by a Law: And herein His Majesty
proposes a Variation from the Laws and Customs of all such other States, as my
Lord Fagell mentioned, who receive none into a share in the Government, or to
public Employments, but those who profess the public and established
Religion. It is not material to enquire how the experience of all Ages has
manifested that to be impossible, which no State would ever admit to be tried;
but it is to our purpose to take notice, That where any considerable Party of
Men, have been born hard upon by the Laws and Government in their Civil Rights
for their Religions sake; their uneasiness therein, has inclined them to lay
hold of any occasion to free themselves from such Pressures; and as they
apprehended it did arise from the Religious Principles of such as oppressed them;
so they have fallen in, which such others, as by their professed Religious
Principles offered them ease; thus promoting Civil Contentions, under a show of
regard to Religion to the mutual Injury of each other contending Party, beyond
what the matter required, or can be justified by any Principles, or Maxims of
the Christian Religion: It is therefore much more plain Reason, since we are
providentially put upon this new Experiment, which we cannot avoid, that our
Statute-Laws be so formed, as may best Answer the natural and present
Constitution of our Civil Government, which is necessary to be done, and may be
done with Justice, Prudence and Safety, because we cannot shape the present
Constitution of our Civil Government, to the present form of all our Statute
Laws, for to attempt the reducing of any Civil Government, or Politic Body in
being, who have power in their hands, and a Legal Right to order things
necessary for their Ease and Safety, to such a scantling as to shape and square
their Actions by such former Satute-Laws, and Methods, as agree not with their
present Constitution, is altogether as irrational, as to attempt the clipping
and paring the Limbs of any Natural Body, to the proportion of an old-fashioned
strait Garment, which he has overgrown, rather than to shape him a new Garment
proportioned to his natural Growth.

Seventh. One grand promoter of those Discords, which for Fifty Years past,
have at several times happened in His Majesty's Kingdom of Great Britain, has
manifestly been Coercion of Conscience, incapacitating many for public Trusts
and Employments, and inflicting of Temporal Penalties for Nonconformity to
such Forms of Worship, and Religious Tests, as have been by Statute Laws and
Ordinances, imposed upon such as dissented from the National, Established
Worship; sometimes of one sort, other times of another, or upon all sorts of
Dissenters together. If any Chastisements, or Experience would teach us, we
have had sufficient of this sort of Instruction, to make us so wary for the
future, as not to run the hazard of any extreme Revolutions, but rather to
embrace the present Occasion offered, for rooting out all Inclinations to Civil
Dissentions, for different Apprehensions in the Mysterious Doctrines of
Christian Religion.

For though it be granted, That Religion ever was, and always ought to be
esteemed the chief interest of every Person; and that a chief part of the Civil
Sovereigns and Magistrates Work, is to guard, defend, and provide for it, so as
that no Person, who is sober, honest, and just in his Life and Conversation;
and acknowledges the Worship of GOD, according to his Conscience, and measure
of his Understanding, should be subjected to any temporal Loss or Penalties,
for the sake of his Religion: And though it be also acknowledged as a great
Blessing to any Nation, which has such Rulers, as will countenance, encourage,
and provide for such as are godly, and able to instruct others, in such
Doctrines, as are according to Godliness.

Yet it is withal to be considered, that Natural Religion, or Christian
Religion, (which is superadded to natural Religion that we may be thereby
instructed in, and better qualified for the discharge of our duty, whether in a
Public or Private Capacity toward God and all men) neither creates nor
dissolves any Title to an Earthly Possession, nor any Natural or Civil Order,
wherein one Person stands related to another, but leaves every man to use and
enjoy all that properly appertains to him on a Natural or Civil Account, in
that respective Station, either of Rule or Subjection, wherein, by the
providence of God, he is born or placed, and continued in the World.

No person is, Husband or Wife, Parent or Child, Master or Servant, Magistrate
or Subject, Landlord or Tenant, in virtue of his Religion; nor can any person
in a private capacity invent a plea under any specious pretense of conscience
to God, (be the Religion he professes true or false) to justify his
trespassing, or breaking in upon the natural or civil Rights of another,
because he differs from him in his Religious Opinions, or manner of Worshipping
God; but every such sort of pleading, would appear to the common sense and
reason of mankind, upon the first view, to be an intrusion, both upon the
sovereignty of God; and all Civil and Religious Order, and to have no other
tendency, but to turn all things into consusion.

Natural and Civil Government are of Divine Ordination; and so is also
Religion; but each of these are distinct from the other, in their foundation,
continuance, and use. They are both so ordained of God, that they may, and
ought to subsist together, and both thrive best when they retain themselves
within their distinct Spears and Order, without incroaching one upon the
other, only with this difference, that natural and civil Government may be
preserved where all other parts of Religion, except what relates to natural and
civil Order is rejected; but Christian Religion cannot be preserved in any
Society or Family, where Natural and Civil Government is destroyed; for the
preservation of Natural and Civil Order, is of the Essence of Christian
Religion.

And whatever may be pretended under color of Religion, so far as it has any
tendency, to disturb the Order of Nature, it is Vain and Irreligious.

Both these being of Divine Ordination: By the former, we are obliged to be
subject to such Laws and Rules, as are proper and necessary to the Support,
Safety, and Ornament of Natural and Civil Government; for without such Rule and
Subjection, no Family, or Civil. Society, whether they be Religious,
Irreligious, or mixed, can subsist: By the latter, That Sovereignty, which GOD
has originally, and always reserved to himself, in, and over every Soul that
is Born into the World, in reference to the acknowledgment and worship of
himself (according to the dictates of Natural Conscience; and that measure of
the understanding of the Divine Will, which he has Revealed, and in various
measures given to every Soul) is preserved, and thereby Religion is propagated
in Individuals.

Every particular Believer is a Member of that Mystical Body whereof the Lord
Christ is the Head, and owes an impartial Subjection to all his Lord's
Institutions, respecting either his private Devotions or public Assemblings.
But such may be the circumstances of a Man's Lise, or state of his Conscience,
as that he may not have an opportunity, or good ground, to Justify his joining
himself to any Public Assemblies. In this Case I leave it to every one to
answer it to God, and to such as may have an authority over him in the Church
of GOD; it not being my purpose to intermeddle in these things, any otherwise
than as I conceive they relate to Civil Government.

Civil Societies cannot be supported without a concord and mutual aid, either
in a Politic or Martial Station. And in this respect each Person is
accountable for his respective Charge, to his next Superior in degree; and all
to Him or Them in a politic Capacity or legal Constitution, who are Supreme;
for a Kingdom divided against is self cannot stand.

The Sovereignty of GOD, in matters of Religion, over All; and the Rule and
Sovereignty of One, or more, over others, in things of a Natural or Civil
Relation, being both of God's ordination, (though distinct in their respective
Foundations) the one in Grace, the other in Nature. Yet,

No Case can be reasonably supposed to set them at any such variance, one
against the other, as that they cannot by the Rules of Justice be reconciled;
for he that has ordained them both, is the God of Order, and has likewise
appointed suitable means, that both of them may concur with, and assist each
other. Natural and Civil Government, Religion, by Countenance, Maintenance, and
Protection; Religion Natural, and Civil Government by instruction; and so each
of them may accomplish their respective ends, for which they are ordained of
GOD.

And if this be granted, it will necessarily follow, That all those Discords
which are raised between them, are occasioned by such humane Usurpations upon
one, or the other of them, as are not according to God's Ordination. And of
such Usurpations of Natural, Civil, and Ecclesiastical Rulers, over the
Consciences of their respective Inferiors; and of Ecclesiastical Rulers over
the Consciences, and Civil Rights also, of their Superiors in a Civil
Relation, all sorts of men have too often, and too long felt the sad,
experience. Blessed of GOD may he be, who in this respect proposes himself to
be a Peacemaker, and to settle each Interest upon its proper Foundation. For
Natural, Civil, and Ecclesiastical Rulers, by the Ordination of GOD, are not a
Terror to any good Work, but are, and ought to be so, to all that is evil,
else their power would be given them in vain.

But the Exercise of the Power of Natural and Civil Rulers, in respect to
actions of a Civil and Moral Nature, are of one sort, and that of
Ecclesiastics of another. And (as before) each of these do best in their
distinct kinds, when they keep a due Decorum within their respective hounds.

No Natural or Civil Superior can justly pretend to an Authority from GOD, to
keep the Christian Religion out of his Family, City, or Kingdom; for if that
were so, the Master or Ruler, who is himself Irreligious, Idolatrous, or
Profane, might abridge all that are of his Family, or Subjects, of the means
of their Conversion and Salvation. The Parent or Master may, and ought to
instruct their Children and Servants in the Knowledge, Religious Fear, and
Worship of GOD. And if any Child or Childish Servant (who with respect to his
Age, and exercise of his Conscience and Understanding, is not sui Juris) refuse
to read any Divine Author, or to learn or repeat by Memory such Lessons, or to
attend upon any Religious Exercise, which the Father or Master appoints: Such
refusal requires a due Correction; for in such a Child or Servant (who
understands not how to distinguish between a Religious and Moral Act, nor what
it is to Worship GOD in Spirit and in Truth) it is an Immoral Disobedience, and
Breach upon the Natural and Civil Rule of the Parent or Master, as much as if
they had refused any necessary Labor; but when such a Child or Servant arrives
to such an Understanding, as to choose, or refuse any Article or Act of
Religion, as it agrees with, or is against his Conscience and Knowledge of the
Will of GOD, and manner of his Worship, in such a Case he ought not to be
coerced by any Temporal or Corporal Penalties, either by Parent or Master, to
act against his Conscience.

Civil Laws respecting such actions as purely relate to the Christian Religion,
if they be only Declaratory of what GOD commands or forbids, in reference to
His Worship, may be greatly Instrumental to promote true Piety, if no Temporal
Penalties be annexed, nor Civil Rights thereby invaded.

Temporal Penalties are proper Remedies to Correct the Disturbers of Civil
Order; Ecclesiastical Censures are a like proper Remedy to purge a Spiritual
Communion from Errors and Heresies, if no Writ, de Excommunicato Capiendo,
attend upon such Censures.

But as no Natural or Civil Rulers may compel any Person (who is of years of
Discretion to judge of his own Religious Actions, and therein with Faith and
Understanding to commit his Cause to GOD) by Temporal Penalties, to profess or
perform any Mysterious Doctrine or Worship, purely relating to the Christian
Religion, or to be of any Spiritual Communion: So neither may any Spiritual
Congregation enforce their Censures any farther, than to expel a disorderly
Person out of their Communion.

No man may be driven against his Understanding and Conscience, to go out of
his Worldly State into a Church. Nor may any man, who is expelled out of a
Church, be driven any farther than out of his Spiritual Communion, back again
into his Worldly Estate.

An Excommunicate Husband, Parent, or Master, does not by his Spiritual Faults
forfeit his Natural or Civil Rule over his Wife, Children, or Servants; though
the one be retained in their Spiritual Communion, and the other cast out, yet
the Communicants ought to discharge their Natural and Civil Duties of Obedience
to the Person Excommunicate; for no Natural or Civil Bonds are disunited merely
by a Disunion in Spiritual Communion.

This being a matter of voluntary choice, both as to his entrance into, and
continuance in such a Communion so long, and no longer, than he approves the
Terms, and observes the Rules of a Spiritual Nature, which are proper and
requisite for his Communion. The other is fixed by such natural and civil
Obligations, as are not submitted to his Choice at any time, until the
set-terms on which he stands so related, are by the like natural or civil
discharges fully accomplished or determined. And if these things consist with
Christian Religion, as it respects Spiritual Communion, and Domestic
Relations, much more ought they to be regarded, in reserence to Subjects Civil
Relation to their Sovereign Prince: For in the particular Case they only
respect the mainteuance of a natural or civil Peace and Concord, in a Domestic
State, for a season. Wherein the Public is no otherwise concerned, than to
correct (not spiritual, but) unnatural and uncivil Disorders, if any such
happen. But in the general Case, the Obligation of the Subject to the Civil
Obedience of his Sovereign, is of an Universal Influence, and perpetual
Continuance in Succession, whether they be, or continue to be of the same, or
different Opinions of Religion: Whence no man in particular can discharge
himself till Death puts an Issue to the Obligation.

Every open Immoral Act, Undutiful Behavior of any Person, toward such as are
his Superiors in a Natural or Civil Relation, Injurious Dealing with his
Neighbor, and whatever other Crimes are openly committed against the Light of
Nature, and common Reason of Mankind, fall naturally and necessarily under the
Civil Governor's Cognizance and Jurisdiction, to be corrected with Temporal
Penalties, as may be most conducing to the Security, Peace, and Welfare of the
Civil Government, being the immediate, Concern thereof. And all such things as
respect merely the Natural and Civil Rights of Men, are to be moderated and
judged by such as have the Government and Judgment of them, in right of their
Natural or Civil Stations; and if wrong Judgment proceed in any particular
Case, yet it may be submitted to A Privilege, which might be insisted on, may
be waved. A precept obeyed, without any offense to GOD; for Religion is no
otherwise concerned in Things of this Kind, than as it obliges to give due
obedience to the Higher Powers, and teaches to exercise self denial; so that a
quiet Submission, to an unequal Decree, may be not only without Sin; but well
pleasing to God; but in reference to Acts of Divine Worship, especially, such
as relate to the Doctrine and Duties of Christian Religion; they are to be
performed in Faith, and according to that measure of Faith and Knowledge, which
every Person, who performs any such part of Worship, has attained of the
revealed Will of the Invisible GOD, who is the Object of such Faith and Worship.

In this respect the Divine Rule, which is our Guide in Religion, directs us to
walk by it, Phil. 3.
according to our present Seize, till we arrive at a further degree of
Faith and Knowledge.

Opinions in Religion are subject to vary in one and the same Person, as he by
his own search and instruction from others is convinced of any Truth which he
before conceived to be an Error, or of any Error which he before embraced as a
Truth: And in this respect no Human Law, establishing a stated perpetual form
of Religious Worship (which does neither directly, nor of due consequence
relate to the Civil Rights of Sovereign or Subject, or to the general or
invariable Laws of Nature) can be the adequate Rule of every Man's Faith or
Religious Worship in a whole Nation, because, tho it should command what is
lawful in it self, yet if it be not apprehended to be so in the Mind and
Conscience of him who is required to Obey, it cannot be by him performed in
Faith, without which its impossible therein to please God: And if any Religious
Act, either for matter or manner, be forbidden by a Human Law (and not
forbidden by the Law of God, or common Reason of Mankind, respecting either
Divine Worship or necessary Human Policies) which is apprehended by a
particular Subject to be commanded of God; if he forbear to do it, because of
such a human Prohibition, that can be no excuse for him before God.

And as it is with him who is to Obey, so is it also with respect to the
Legislators who make those Religious Laws: The Divine Laws which respect the
essential parts of the Worship of God are in themselves invariable, and not to
be changed by any human Authority; but when any Persons who have the Sovereign
Power make any Laws respecting Religion, its presumed they are made according
to the present measure of the Legislators understanding of the Will of God
therein. And if we look back to what has happened in this kind among our
selves in former as well as in this last Age, we may find that the Mutations
herein made by Statute Laws and Ordinances, has demonstrated a change in the
Minds of our Legislators: every succeeding Variation carrying in it self an
evidence of an Error or Defect apprehended in the former Establishment.

The Rules relating to Christian Worship, which are given in the Scriptures are
Constant and Permanent, always one and same, and diverse of these do not only
admit and approve of great variety in several matters relating to the Worship
of God, but forbid the Rulers of the Church, or any Church in general to impose
an Uniformity upon the individual Members of their Communion. In the Church at
Rome, ( Re man's 14.) such as were Strong might dispute among themselves
doubtful or mysterious Foints in matters of Religion; but such as were Weak
were not to be summoned to, or determined by the Resolutions of the Strong; One
that was weak in Faith would eat Herbs, and drink no Wine, another that was
strong believed he might eat all things and drink Wine; each of these are left
to their Liberty, and forbid to impose their Latitude or Scruples one upon
another; one Man esteemed one Day above another, and regarded it to the Lord;
another Man esteemed every Day alike, and did not regard it to the Lord. And
the Rule in their Case is plain and positive, every Man was to be a Rule to
himself, to do therein or forbear as he was persuaded in his own Mind, for
whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin: They were all forbid to judge one another,
and every Man herein left to give an account of himself to God, and not to
Judge, set at Naught, or give an Offense to his Brother.

In the Church at Corinth (1 Cor. 14.) a Latitude was allowed to the respective
Members to Preach and Pray in different Languages and Forms, so as they were
each of them performed with the Spirit and Understanding, and (by
Interpretation to the Unlearned) all to Edification. The Church were not to
forbid any of their Members speaking with Tongues, but to see to it that all
things might be done to Edifying, Decently and in Order.

The Apostles Advice was in some Cases To abstain from Marriage, but not to
forbid Marrying. And his general Behavior among and toward the Jews in
observing some Rites in esteem with them in one manner among the Gentiles in
another manner quite different, becoming all things to all Men that he might
gain some; To them that were under the Law, as being under the Law himself; To
them that were without the Law, as being himself without the Law. And yet in
all this variety of his Behavior in Religious Matters, and Religious
Societies, and Conversation, not without a Law to God, but under a Law to
Christ. So that if any Church by its Cannons tie all the Members thereof under
pain of Censures to such an Unlformity in Worship, as tends to abridg any
individual Members thereof, that Liberty which is granted by the Apostle in any
of these Particulars they therein vary from the invariable Rules of our Lord;
and if the Churches or Ecclesiastical Rulers within themselves might not impose
any such terms of Communion as might destroy this Liberty, nor bring any of
their Members under any Ecclesiastical Censures or Judgments for taking a
liberty to Dissent from the rest, in not observing a Day to the Lord, when
others would do it, or for Worshipping in other Manner and Form then the
generality of the Church would do, (so as the Church were not thereby
interrupted in their public Worship) Certainly, by a Parity of Reason, this
Christian Liberty should not be infringed by any Human Laws inflicting temporal
Penalties for Nonconformity to the Days and Modes of Worship prescribed by
such Laws, when it is evident such Human Laws have been in process of time, and
may be again (from the Reasons before expressed) subject to such Mutations, as
to inflict Penalties for doing that at one time, as if it were in its self a
Crime, which at another time they command, under the like Penalty, to be done,
as if it were a positive and indispensable Duty; And the removing of all
temporal Penalties and Incapacities from such Religious Laws and Tests seems to
be so much the more reasonable, because it has always been and is granted on
all Hands, That the Natural and Civil Rights of a Supreme Governor are neither
more or less, whether his Conscience or Religion agree with or differ from the
Religion Established by Statute Laws within his Dominions, and the same reason
may hold, that such of his Subjects also, as differ from the Established
Religion, may notwithstanding their different Sentiments therein, be upon an
equal Foot with the rest of their fellow Subjects, as to the enjoyment of any
Civil Rights or Privileges; especially considering that it is not essentially
necessary to, nor under the immediate care or concern of the Civil Government,
that all their Subjects should be compelled by any temporal Penalties or
Disabilities to be of one and the same Religion, and that by other Cautions a
of Civil, and not of a Religious Nature, the Peace and Security of the Civil
Government may be sufficiently provided for.

IX. The contemplation of that series of Divine Providence, which has of late
Years been manifested amongst us, administers some ground for caution. That we
do not irregularly resist the effects of it, nor fret under it, so as to
transgress the general Laws of Government, by adhering too much to the Letter
of some Statute Laws, which agree not very well with the present state of it,
and may admit of an alteration without the breach of any Divine Law, if a
Liberty for every Man's exercise of his Religion, according to the Dictates of
his Conscience, (guided by common Reason, and the measure of his Understanding
of the Will of God therein) with Security to his Natural and Civil Rights, be
of more value in its self, then an Uniformity in any Mode of Worship, which is
not of choice or voluntary, but constrained by temporal Penalties; Then what
the King desires herein ought to be complied with for its own sake: And if too
much insisting on an outward Form of Godliness, under color of Law, or
exercise of Power, even to the profaning of the Sacred Mysteries to so mean a
use, as not only to keep, or turn Men out of civil Employments, but to make
them subscribe to the granting or denying a License to sell Ale, and so little
regarding the Power of Godliness, may be a just cause from above to make us
fear other Exercises then we have yet felt; it is high time for us to seek
after some other means to preserve our Religion and Civil Rights, then by
continuing such Laws in Force, as have given occasion, or have been made use of
to countenance such abuse of the Sacred Mysteries; And whatever our Fears may
justly suggest, as to future Events, it seems to be much more justifiable and
prudent to subscribe to, and also improve the present Occurrences of
Providence, by all such means as are agreeable with our present Duty to God and
the King, and equal right-doing to all Men, and thereby to seek and secure the
peaceable and fre-exercise and enjoyment of our Religious and Civil Rights in
such Methods as are proposed by his Majesty for this present Age (leaving the
Events in Ages to come, to the issues of the same Divine Providence which has
brought us to the state we are now under) then by resisting the present
Occurrences thereof, and contending to maintain a particular Interest, to the
prejudice of man others who are not wrapped up therein, (under color of some
present Laws not agreeing with the present state of our Government) to hazard
all our Settlement during this Age, upon a presumption we may in the Generation
to come obtain a better Settlement, which presumed better Settlement is so only
in esteem with relation to such Interests as may be therein comprehended
exclusive of many, and we know not, nor have any certainty how many or what
Interests shall be comprehended therein, or excluded thereout. For such as
acknowledge the Divine Providence, in bringing about the Changes in Government
which have already happened, and are visible amongst us, will be safe and quiet
(at least in their Consciences) in doing that which is indisputably lawful in
its self, if not a present indispensable Duty, and trusting to the same
Providence, as to future Events, whatever may happen. Then any can be who shall
be Instrumental to hinder our present Settlement in opposing such a Course as
is lawful in its self, and contending in such a manner as is manifestly
inexpedient for the present Season, (and very disputable at the least, whether
it be consistent with our present Duty to God, and to our Sovereign) in case
the immediate Consequences, or future Occurrences of such an opposition should
prove otherwise then they expect or desire.

X. Another Consideration arises from the terms of the last Test and tendency
of the Law by which it is Established. The Law is perpetual, and reaches not
only to the then present King and Queen, but to their Royal Successors Kings or
Queens of England. And if any Subject (to perpetuity) who should at any time
afterward be convict of Popish Recusancy come advisedly into, or remain in the
Presence of the King or Queens Majesty, or into the Court or House where they
or any of them Reside, he shall incur and suffer all the Pains, Penalties,
Forfeitures and Disabilities in that Act mentioned or contained, unless every
Person so Convict do respectively in the next Term after such his coming or
remaining take the Oaths, and make and subscribe the Declaration prescribed in
his Majesty's High-Court of Chancery: And if any Peer, or Member of the House
of Peers, or Member of the House of Commons, shall presume to do any thing
contrary to that Act, he shall be thenceforth deemed and adjudged a Popish
Recusant, convict to all intents and purposes whatsoever, And shall Forfeit and
Suffer as a Popish Recusant convict: This last Clause is somewhat unusal, for
it might have sufficed if a Protestant Peer or Member presumed to do any thing
contrary to that Act, that he should suffer like Penalties as a Popish
Recusant, without being deemed or judged a Popish Recusant Convict, for that
lays him under many more Penalties, besides those innumerated in that Act; but
that which relates to the Queens Majesty for the time being, is more observable
in reference to Her Servants and Attendants; for the Proviso which was proper
for the then present Queen, who is now the Queen Dowager, that nothing in the
Act should relate to any Person being a natural born Subject of the King of
Portugal, who should then or afterward be a Sworn Servant to the Queens
Majesty, not exceeding at any one time Nine in Number, is not so proper to Her
Royal Successor, Her present Majesty, nor will be to any other succeeding
Queen, if a Native of England, or of any other Kingdom except Portugal, to whom
this Act equally extends, who is not thereby permitted to have any one Man
Servant or Officer to attend Her Royal Person, except he be a Portuguize by
Birth, without being liable for such his Service, to all the Penalties of this
Act, if he perform not all the Conditions thereof.

It may be also observed, that the Test relates to the then present use in the
Church of Rome, and the Test being a solemn Attestation in the presence of God,
of the Attestants Belief concerning the matters to be testified and declared
requires in the nature of it some what more then a general Report or Tradition,
how the usage then was in the Church of Rome. And it is not impossible to
conceive that a Hundred Years hence, or at some Season or other, within less
then that time, the usage in the Church of Rome may be very different from what
they were then, as to the matters declared in the Test, to be Superstitious and
Idolatrous: Neither can it be so well comprehended as it should be in a solemn
Declaration of an Article of a Christians Belief in the presence of God, what
may be intended by the usage in the Church of Rome, whether universally of
every Member who is in Communion with the Church of Rome, (for it cannot be
supposed to be strictly tied to the Church in the City of Rome) or to the
generality of that Communion, wherein many Persons may be comprehended, who
will not altogether decline or separate their Communion from the Church of
Rome, though they do not Believe or Practice all these things as they are decreed
in the Councils of that Church, and may be ready to say, That though they adore
Saints in other manner then the Protestants do, yet they believe with the
Protestants, that Divine Adoration is due only to God. When in Discourse with a
Roman Catholic, of great Knowledge, in the Controversal Points of their
Religion, I alleged the Superstition and Inefficacy of their Praying to
Saints, in regard they were neither Omnipresent to hear all Prayers, nor
Omniscient to discern between the Sincerity and Hypocrisy of any that Prayed
to them. He gave me no satisfactory Answer, but returned upon me an Objection,
That those of the Communion of the Church of England prescribed something that
looked like it, in their daily Devotions, when they exhorted or called upon the
Souls and Spirits of just Men made Perfect, and Ananias, Azarias and Misael in
particular to praise the Lord. To which I could not make him any satisfactory
Reply, without granting more upon the first Point than I thought was consonant
to the Scriptures, which I take to be the Directory of the Christian Religion.
I write not this in any Case as pleading in excuse, or giving countenance to
any Superstitious or Idolatrous Practice, but to show how abstruce some terms
in the Test are to be precisely Interpreted and rightly understood, and that
because by how much the less perfectly any solemn Oath or Attestation is
understood by such as take it, by so much of less weight it will be upon the
Conscience to observe it; and if in process of time such a Law, being
perpetual, may become very improper in the general scope of it, and in some
respects is so now. The sooner it comes to be explained, altered or wholly laid
aside, so much the better; and if it be well weighed how this Law, and the Law
for the first Test also intrenches upon several Points of Royal Prerogative,
which in other Cases, both as to Laws of a Religious and of a Civil Nature, has
been heretofore rendered as a reason and just ground of their repeal. and how
these Laws have and do subject many Persons to temporal Penalties and
Disabilities as to the enjoyment of Civil Rights for their Conscientious
Dissent in Religious Opinions from the Church of England. It may appear very
just and reasonable, that these Laws should be again considered in the next
succeeding Parliament, and either Repealed, or otherwise so explained and
altered, That the Sovereign Prerogative, and the Subjects Civil Rights, may be
better provided for then they are by these Laws as they now remain.

XI. If together with the Repeal desired, the substance of the Kings
Declaration be entirely and in the same Law of Repeal enacted, which in the
first place is to maintain the Archbishops, Bishops, Clergy, and all other his
Subjects of the Church of England in the free exercise of their Religion, as by
Law Established, and in the quiet and full enjoyment of all their Possessions.
All such grand subversions of the present order of things Ecclesiastical, and
general change of Hands in things of a Civil Nature, as have heretofore
happened. upon the Successive Sovereigns differing from the Religion
Established in the Reign of his Predecessors, may not only for the Present, but
in all future Ages also be avoided; and the Mutations which in any gradual
course are likely to ensue such a Repeal, and provision at the same time made
either in Civil or Religious Concerns, will in all probability be less
Perceptible, and less Inconvenient, during this Generation then ever has been
experimented in the like Case, or can otherwise be reasonably expected upon
such a change in the Government as has now happened, especially if the Severities
for the cause of Religion, which have been for many Years exercised, and the
inconsistency of these Test Laws, made in the Reign of a Protestant King, as to
Attendances on the Person of the Sovereign, and the Qualifications required as
to all Civil and Military Offices upon the Succession of a King of the Roman
Catholic Religion to the Throne, be well considered.

XII. A Repeal of such Penal Laws and Tests, as are before mentioned, may, if
his Majesty please to give his Royal Assent, be recompensed by other Provisions
properly necessary to prevent future Mutations. In Establishing Corporations
upon a more sixth Foundation then they stand at present, by a previous Test, of
a civil Nature, to be taken by all Persons therein, and in all other Places and
Counties who are otherwise qualified to Elect, before they give their Votes in
any Election. By Clauses in the Indentures, before the Elected be returned, and
by every Person who shall be Elected to serve in Parliament, or put into any
Office or Place of Trust or Power, in framing Commissions for the exercise of
Judicatures, and many other things of like Nature which the Wisdom of a
Parliament may readily suggest.

For a Close, by reflecting upon the two main Points before mentioned, the one
claimed by his Majesty as inseperably annexed to, and inherent in his Royal
Person by the Law of Nature, TO HAVE THE BENEFIT OF THE SERVICE OF ALL HIS
LOVING SUBJECTS. The other granted by their Highnesses, THAT NO CHRISTIAN OUGHT
TO BE ILL USED, BECAUSE HE DIFFERS FROM THE PULICK AND ESTABLISHED RELIGION.
There is one thing more occurs which I shall offer to consideration, which
seems to me, taken singly (if there were no more to be alleged in this case) a
good reason why these Penal Laws, which require the taking of the Sacrament
Oaths and Tests, should be either in express terms repealed, or (which is
tantamount) by some new Law, so explained and limited as that the Penalties
and Disabilites may not be inevitable, but some way or other (by and consistent
with the discharge of a good Conscience toward God and the King) be avoided.
For as the case now stands, His Majesty being pleased to Nominate, Authorize
and Appoint many Persons who are Dissenters from the Established Religion, (and
in that regard cannot with a good Conscience take Sacraments, Oaths and Tests
in the manner they are enjoined) to execute several public Offices, and some
such Persons may also be Called or Elected to serve in Parliament. If any of
them do refuse to serve in any of these public Offices or Places of Trust,
they are by our Laws liable to be very ill used by Fines and Imprisonments, and
that justly too (as is presumed) because they refuse to Execute such Offices
and Places of Trust, as are not only Lawful but Necessary, and must be Executed
by them or some others: No Man can by our present Laws excuse himself (when he
is not legally privileged or exempted) from any Service to which he is
lawfully called by his own Default, that is by his not qualifying himself
according to the Directions of Law for the Execution of those Places, and if he
do accept and serve in those Places, without such a Qualfication (to which he
cannot in Conscience submit) he is obnoxious to as ill usage for Serving and
Acting in those Offices and Places of Trust as if he refused, so that until the
Law be otherwise declared, or some suiteable Provision in this case made by
some other Law. Such as are most conscientious and desirous to discharge that
respective Duty which they ow to God, their King, and their Country, in our
present Circumstances are more liable then any others to be very ill used; and
if this be well considered, that the King who has the sole Nomination and Power
to Authorize such Persons as he pleases to serve in places of highest
Judicature and Trust: And Electors, if they may have their free Choice, as by
Law they ought to have, will probably, in many places, choose such as are
Dissenters to serve in Parliament, when his Majesty shall please to send out
his Writs for that purpose. It ought to be shown, That as the Laws now are, the
King has no Power to Appoint or Command, and the Electors no Power to choose
such Persons to serve in Offices or Places of Trust, or otherwise, it is
requisite that these present Laws be Repealed, or so far altered and limited
that such as are Dissenters may be secured in their Consciences, Civil
Liberties and Properties either for serving without taking the Sacrament Oaths
and Tests, or for refusing to serve because they cannot take them; and
whosoever shall well weigh the apparent Inconveniences and ill Consequences
that are likely to follow on the one Hand, by any Person being permitted to
excuse himself from a hazardous or chargeable Office or Place of Trust, upon
pretense of Conscience, and the difficulty of contriving any such Law as shall
limit the Kings Prerogative and the Subjects Election, so as that the King
shall not command any of his Subjects to attend his Person, serve in
Parliament, or execute any public Office or Employment Civil or Military, but
such only as voluntarily have or will take the Sacrament, Oaths and Tests, and
so as the Penalty incurred shall fall upon the Persons who Elect any Man to
serve in Parliament, or to any such Office, in case the Person Elected will not
Voluntary take them in manner as by Law prescribed. And if it be considered on
the other Hand how justifiable and equal it is, and how we may be by other ways
secured against all Hazards, if these Penal Laws and Tests be Repealed. It may
appear more easy and safe to Repeal these Laws and Tests, then to contrive any
New Law consistent with the continuance of those Laws in force, which shall be
effectual to remedy the aforementioned and now unavoidable Inconveniences.

What his Lordship says, page 4, 5. That there is a great difference to be
observed in the Conduct of those of the Reformed Religion, where they have the
Government, toward Roman Catholick's, and of the Conduct of the Roman
Catholick's where they have the Government, toward such as are of the Reformed
Religion, connot be denied, and this may be a caution why no Protestant
Governors, of a Protestant Nation should voluntarily invite any Roman
Catholick's to take a share with them in their Government who cannot claim any
right in it, but this does not reach our Case at all. We are providentially
brought under the Government of a Sovereign Prince who is of the Roman
Catholic Religion, And he has many Subjects, of the same Religion, who by the
Laws of Nature claim according to their Quality and Numbers, an equal share
with others in the enjoyment of Civil Rights and Privileges; and under our
present Circumstances, it is equally as unjust and unsafe to press for the
execution of such Penal Laws against them for their Religions sake, as it would
be to press for the observance of Rules made in a common Case, when we fall
under such Emergenies as require the supersion of them. Besides as we have a
Prince of the Roman Catholic Religion, so we have also a Sovereign who in this
respect differs from and excels all others of that Religion; in that His
desires are to settle all things on such a Foundation, as may be a lasting
security to all his Subjects, so far as Sovereign Power, the wisdom of a
Parliament, subjects consent, and common interest of the whole can provide;
that none of them may suffer any damage in their civil Rights, for the sake of
their Religion, and that all civil Interests, notwithstanding their different
opinions in Religion, may be united in the common defense and Security of his
Majesty's, Kingdoms; a thing most desirable in its self, and most conducible to
the Safety, Welfare and Honor of the Nation, Other Neighboring Kings and
States may well be jealous of, and underhand endeavor what they can to prevent
such a Settlement but in contemplation that their Highnesses are in a
possibility of suceeding in the Throne, I see no reason why it should not be
esteemed their Interest to promote the settlement of his Majesty's Three
Kingdoms on suth a Foundation of Peace and Union as is designed by his Royal
and Gracious Declaration.

And if none of these things which I have written can prevail with his
Lordship, to move their Highnesses to give their Consent and Assistance upon
such due terms of caution, as are offered by his Majesty to the repeal of these
Penal Laws and Tests, which stand in the way of such a peaceable and lasting
Settlement, as is proposed and desired, yet I hope it may prevail with him so
to represent to their Highnesses such of the Dissenters as in their respective
Stations, endeavor the accomplishment thereof, as that their Highnesses may
not be offended thereat, Because what they have done and shall do herein. IS
OUT OF GRATITUDE AND DUTY TO HIS MAJESTY, OBEDIENCE TO THE GENERAL LAWS BOTH OF
NATURAL AND REVEALED RELIGION, AND LOVE TO THE PRINCIPLES AND PROSPERITY OF THE
REFORMED RELIGION. Which forbids every Man to do that to another, which he
would not have done to himself, and commands every Man to do his present duty
to God in the first place, and to his present Sovereign in the next place;
leaving the success and future events of their so doing to the Wise and
Gracious disposal of God, who judges amongst the Gods, sits upon the Floods
as King for ever, does Rule, and Will Overruled all things as for his own
Glory, so also for the good of them that sear him, and knows how to deliver the
Godly out of Tamptations: Into whose Hands it is better to commit the keeping
of our Souls in well-doing, with such hazards as attend the outward Man, then
for the preservation of the outward Man, to strain any Religious Opinion in
reference to civil Concerns in any such manner or measure as is inconsistent
with the general Laws of Religion and Nature, for whoever makes use of any such
method to preserve his civil Concerns, or defend or propagate his Religion, it
may be suspected he is either wrong in his Opinion, or takes a wrong course to
maintain it.

FINIS

