ANGLIAE TUTAMEN: OR, THE Safety of England.

Being an ACCOUNT OF THE Banks, Lotteries, Mines, Diving, Draining, Lifting,
and other Engines, and many pernicious Projects now on foot; tending to the
Destruction of Trade and Commerce, and the Impoverishing this REALM.

With Reflections thereon. Of great Import to all Sorts of People.

By a Person of Honor.

LONDON, Printed for the Author: And are to be Sold by John Whitlock, near
Stationers' Hall, 1695.

ANGLIAE TUTAMEN: OR, THE Safety of England.
THAT Commerce is the Soul of the Universe, and the Life of these Three
Sister-Islands, England, Scotland, and Ireland; in their Situation the happiest
in the World, renowned for the Courage of their Men, and secured by the
Strength of their Shipping, envied and feared by their Neighbors, is well
known to every Body; and therefore in the Preservation and Improvement of their
Commerce consists their greatest Safety and Glory: Commerce is the Fountain of
Wealth, the true Foundation of all real Greatness. Our Inland Trade also ought
to be provided for, and encouraged with all imaginable Care and Caution; ill
Practices and Abuses at home prevented or suppressed, as well as our Navigation
secured abroad.

Our chief Aim is to advance Honesty, now in its Declension, and to discourage
Knavery, now in Vogue and Practice, which has impudently assumed another Name,
foul Dealers calling themselves Shrewd Men, Long Heads, and Mercurialists; as
if Wisdom or Wit consisted in Sharping and Overreaching each other. It is pity
Cozening and Cheating should be in the Ascendent with Negotiators, seeing that
clear and round Dealing is so much an Honor to Man's Nature: The first, in the
end, proves fatal and destructive to all Commerce, both Foreign and Domestic:
The latter being found, after stanch Experience, to be the best Interest, and
truest Policy.

A fair and clear Discovery of many crafty Cheats, and villainous Knaveries,
will be of vast Advantage to the Public, in preserving each Individual from
the Rock on which so many have split, and been undone. This Treatise will serve
for a Buoy or Mark to the Nation, to beware how they are wheedled and drawn
into these pernicious Projects following, viz. Banks-National, Land, Money,
Paper or Notes, Orphans, etc. now on foot, and more preparing; Companies for
Mines of Gold, Silver, Copper, Tin, Lead, Iron, Antimony, Lapis Calaminaris,
etc. Coals, Salt-Rock, and other Engines innumerable; Diving of many sorts, to
fish up Wreck, Guns, Tackle, Treasure, Merchandise, etc. Dipping, Japanning,
Glass-Bottles, Venetian-Metal, Leather, Linen English, Scotch, New Jersey;
Paper White, Blue, English, Irish; Japann'd, Printed-Hangings, Pearl-fishing,
Saltpeter, Sword-Blades; Waters of the New River, Conduit, Thames, Hampstead,
Shadwell, etc. Wrecks, South Sea, Coasts of Spain, Portugal, France, England,
Scotland, Ireland, and Holland; Lifting-Engines, Drawing-Engines, of several
kinds, for Mears, Marshes, Inundations, Mines of all sorts, etc.
Lutestring-Company, Lotteries for Money or Merchandise; New Settlements in
Carolina, Pensilvania, and Tobago, and other Parts; Convex-Lights, and others;
Fisheries Royal and Private; Corporations or Companies of many kinds; Patents,
Leases, Grants, etc. With some few more Projects now in Agitation.

I shall not pretend to observe any strict Method in the Prosecution of this
Design, Order and Conduct being almost out of Fashion, at least among Men of
Business, though it yet remains in Force and Esteem amongst Soldiers and
Scholars; Martialists and Mercurialists always keep a Decorum, and, indeed,
retain a true Sense of Honor and Honesty, and have it always in their view;
whereas the Traders make no great Pretensions to either, having long since
abandoned both.

And although I did not mention the Bank of England, yet I shall dare to have
one fling at that, notwithstanding it is so strongly entrenched and fortified,
and so thinks it self secure against all Attempts of open Force, or private
Stratagem; Artifice will not do, but Argument may; and those that touch Men in
their most sensible Parts, their Pockets, usually make the deepest and most
durable Impression upon them.

This Bank was to the Amazement of our selves, as well as Astonishment of our
Enemies, (the French) completed in less time than could have been imagined;
and, if the fixed Sum had been double, it would have been all subscribed. We
shall applaud the Wisdom of our Senate in the Establishment of it, to answer
the Emergencies of the State, (now involved in a doubtful and difficult War,)
and we shall please our selves with a grateful Reflection on the Wealth of our
Kingdom, which appeared eminently great at that time; and the more, because a
Million-Lottery was also then on foot.

Yet even this glorious Bank, as much as it dazles our Eyes, has its real
Inconveniences, (and so, you may say, will all Humane Establishments have,) and
those very great ones too, not feigned or supposed, (for we speak without the
least Prejudice or Partiality) but substantial and true ones, and such as are
visible, and have been (and will be more and more every Day) found very
detrimental to Trade; it has given a mighty damp to Commerce, which is (as I
said before) the Life and Soul, the very Being of this Nation, by cutting off,
at one Blow, all Personal Securities, which was the main Help and Support of
the Trading-Part of this Realm. It must be confessed this Bank has its
Excellencies; for, besides what have been already mentioned, it has almost
crushed several sorts of Blood-suckers, mere Vermin, Usurers and Gripers,
Goldsmiths, Tally-Jobbers, Exchequer-Brokers, and Knavish Money-Scriveners, and
Pawn-Brokers, with their Twenty and Thirty per Cent. at their Girdles,
Procurations and Continuations, and the rest of that Fardel. The good Conduct
and fair Management of this Bank, by Men of the best Heads and fairest
Reputation, does in some Measure atone for some of the Defects.

It Is not to be thought this Bank, as much as they pretend to be for the
Public Good, will let their Money lie idly in their Chests, for which they pay
Three per Cent. or be contented with so small a Gain as one and a half or two
per Cent. but rather will fall upon Monopolies, engrocing of Merchandise,
clandestinely managed, and secretly carried on in other Men's Names, because
it is against the Letter of their Establishment, through which they will wade,
when Prospect of great Profit presents; and it being to be shared amongst
themselves, it is not to be expected they should (like lawless Robbers) fall
out, tell Tales, and impeach each other. By this means, I say, by the vast
Sums they have always ready by them, they will break in upon other Men's Trade
and Business, their Livelihood, nay, their very Property, being under
Regulations in Bodies Politic, fenced by Law. Hence Bankrupts and Destruction
of Families ensue, the merciless English Laws making no Provision (as in other
Countries) for those unhappy Persons, but Prison or Payment of Debts, to them
impossible. All Trade lying open, and in common, would be of more certain
Utility than enclosed and incorporated; which has been, and is, fatal to this
poor Kingdom, exhausted by many Methods, of which I shall treat in their proper
Place.

Alas! the great Dividends the Bank has already made, and is preparing to make,
and the hopeful and prosperous Condition (to use their own Words) their Affairs
are in, speak plainly, and tell all the World in honest English, that one Part
of the Nation preys upon the other; the mighty Gains that have arisen to them,
since their Establishment, being no less than Twenty per Cent. must be a Loss
somewhere, for it is all within our selves; and though Banks may very well be
compared to ravenous Birds, yet in this they exceed them, the Vultures
themselves not preying upon each other. We are all of one Nation, and if we
could extract Profits from Foreigners 'twould do well, but from one another,
enriches not the Public one jot; for Native Wealth, though fairly sprinkled
among the Individuals, and great in the whole, can never render a Kingdom or
State so Considerable at home, and formidable abroad, as Domestic Riches
augmented and improved by Foreign Commerce; though it is not Importation but
Exportation inriches a Nation; it is not what is consumed among our selves, nor
are Extravagants of such Advantage to a Commonwealth, as some weak People think
and affirm: I say, it is not what we eat, drink, or wear, or use otherways, at
home, either of our own, or Foreign Produce, that is beneficial to us, but the
sending abroad vast Quantities of home-made Cloths, Stuffs, Serges, Worsteds,
Camblets, Silks, Brocades, Linens of various sorts, Stockins of Silk, Worsted,
Yarn, and Cotton, Gloves of the same; Caps, Hats, Shoes, Boots, Saddles,
Bridles; and, in a word, all sort of English Manufactures, and bringing in the
Produce of other Countries in part, or Bullion, or Coin, or good Debts
remaining, it is this that turns to the best Account; therefore the West is much
better for us than the East India Trade; one wonderfully inriches, the other
mightily impoverishes us: The first by Employing thousands of Poor, and making
Multitudes of Rich much Wealthier; the the other by draining us of what we want
most, viz. Gold and Silver, which they send thither to a vast value, which in
time must make the East Indies the richest Spot in the World; very little or
none of our Manufactures go thither: And what have we in return for our Bullion
and Coin? but what we want not, but may very well be without: It Is only what
gratifies the Pride, Folly, and Luxury of the Age; which is always fondest of
what is dearest, and is fetched farthest; valuing things according to the Price
and Vogue, not Use and Service.

Besides, those Voiages murder our Seamen, (our chiefest Strength) hardly one
in five returning alive, or at least not found; nor can all the Benefits which
we are told arise by that Commerce, atone for the Damage we visibly sustain by
it; it is apparently the Interest of the Indian Princes to encourage and court
us to Trade with them, because we fetch their numberless Manufactures, painted
Toies, and brittle Earth, and pay our vital Blood for 'em, our Lives, our Gold
and Silver.

But one word more to the Bank of England, before I make an end of that Head:
Since their Establishment, there has been a sensible Decay and Declension of
our Inland Trade, known to the greatest Part of the Nation, and may be attested
by an Army of Witnesses, many of them, to their Sorrow, in the Temple, Alsatia,
and the Mint: And thus much may be said, without consulting any Oracle, if we
get happily out of this War, they will not be long lived, I mean, hardly ever
renew their Leases, never more be confirmed by Parliament, but the State-Debt
paid in, and they dissolved: They hoard up all the good, and pay out the bad
Money; they cause the Rise and Fall of Moneys at their Pleasure, which
occasions Difficulty and Incertainty in Trade: And this is so well known, that
it is past all Contest, or Contradiction.

And now for the National Land-Bank, which stands so high in Fame, and makes so
great a Noise in the World, is so Charming and Attractive, that Estates to a
very great value have been subscribed in the several Counties of England and
Wales, in a very short space, in much less time than was expected; besides,
vast Sums of Money, a Committee and Trustees being chosen, a Deed agreed on
and settled, a Company formed, Directors appointed, Officers elected, and all
Things disposed to put this wonderful Project in Execution, to raise Lands to
thirty Years Purchase, by reducing Money to three per Cent. the Profits to be
divided amongst the Subscribers. These Offers are plausible and specious,
varnished and gilded over, baited with mighty Hopes of prodigious Gains to all
that shall be concerned, to some, no doubt, there will be, viz. to the
Projectors, Managers, and Officers; but, it is such a Hotch-Potch and Medley,
such a Body, made up of such strange Members, subtle, politic and designing
Men, that all pretend the Good of the Re-publick only, when that of the
Re-private is chiefly intended: The first is proclaimed to tickle and draw in
the Easy and the Credulous; but the last designed from the very beginning; for
never did Projector yet aim at any thing so much as his own particular Profit
and Interest, though they always pretend the contrary. The fair Face and
Outside this Bank carries, wins abundance to the Belief of its Design to be
Good, but a little time will show the naked Truth, the Juggle and Imposture
will appear, and the Bank fall, to the ruin of many, who will be involved and
confounded in the Intricacy and Difficulty thereof; the secret and underhand
Intrigues carried on, to cajole and wheedle some to Subscribe, to encourage
others; large Promises made of greater than common Profits to such; some Men of
Quality, others of Business, all of Eminency, prevailed upon to Countenance the
Project, to give Life and Reputation to it: These Contrivances, I say, to
mention no more, give sufficient Cause of Jealousy and Suspicion, if there
were nothing else at the bottom; but the Snake lies close, and in its due time
will stir, hiss, bite and sting the greatest Part concerned.

The Injuries this, as well as other Banks, will inevitably bring upon the
Home-Trade of this Kingdom, and Foreign Commerce too, are so plain, and so
obvious, that 'twould be but time lost to say any thing more upon that Head:
All this and more poor England will find too true, and, I fear, too late. Each
petty Negotiator feels it already in his Business, and in his Credit, and is
sensible 'twill increase upon him more and more each Day he lives; and the more
Banks are established, the more Damage will Commerce receive in every Branch of
it. What I have said, and shall offer further in the following Pages, proceeds
from no other Sentiments than what arise from the Love of my Native Country,
whose Prosperity I wish more Passionately than my own, and for whose Sake and
Interest I now draw my Pen, being wholly unconcerned in Trade, or Banks, or
Projects of any kind whatsoever; and so, consequently, what I have already
delivered, or shall, is void of all sinister Design, private or particular Aim,
Revenge, or Resentment; and there are many Pretenders to Public Good, but no
such sincere Pursuers of it as my self.

The Money-Bank follows next, and made a great Noise at first, and filled apace
with Subscriptions; but now the last mentioned, and this (like two Whores,
being both of a Trade) cannot agree, but are continually pelting one another
with Reflections and Wipes, both in Writing and Print, in Letters and
Advertisements, and pretend to Predict the Condition and Fate of each other;
which, I believe, they may very well do, without consulting the Stars, or the
Pretenders to the Knowledge of their Influence; indeed they themselves may best
do it, knowing the false and slippery Foundations they are built upon, and the
undue Measures they take to support them, notwithstanding the substantial and
solid Security of terra Firma. This Bank is indeed more Self-interested and
Narrow-soul'd than the former, which is more diffusive in their Profits to
every individual Subscriber, who shall snack, whereas the Money here is to be
shared by the Lenders and Managers only. This Bank differs some small matter
from the other, but in its Tendency to the Destruction of Trade in general, is of
the same Malifick Nature.

The next that presents is of Paper, of Notes, or Bills of Credit, to pass to
and fro, from one to another, in lieu of Coin; it is said to be impracticable,
though the zealous Projector thinks it not so; nay, some say, unintelligible,
though he denies that also; and threatens if it will not go down here in England,
it shall travel to Denmark, or France; in the last of which Places, he is sure
it will be received and cherished, the Necessity of their Affairs will reduce
it speedily into Practice, and the great Soul of that Prince will soon find a
Reward for the Projector, suitable to the Greatness and Utility of this
wonderful Proposal, which will enable him to Conquer all his Neighbors, his
Paper holding out longer than their Money.

But good Nature, common Prudence, and love of the Country where he lives,
keeps the Projector from unbosoming this Secret to Foreign Powers, of which
this Kingdom is not (as he says) worthy, because they will not listen to their
true Interest, so heartily and cheerfully offered in this time of their
Exigency, involved in an expensive Foreign War; which, when it will end, no Man
now alive knows, or can make any tolerable Conjecture.

I have no Spleen against this Undertaking, in particular, having been courted
to be a Member, with offers of advantageous Terms, which I scorned and
rejected; but, I think, this would have a fatal Tendency, and confound rather
than benefit us: The chief Design of the Master of this inestimable Jewel
being, as I am fully satisfied, to have the Top-Conduct of the Affair, and,
besides, a mighty Salary, to have a round Sum for his Service: There is
Self-Interest and Advantage at the bottom of all these Designs. The Money-Banks
will all fall in upon Monopolies; though, I think, this may not, for Paper will
never pass so currently as Coin, without a National, I mean a Parliamentary
Security, which, I believe, will hardly ever be obtained.

The Orphans Bank, I think, is the next in succession, and in that we will keep
the right Line. The Pretenses were fair and plausible for the Establishment of
this Fund. Compassion and Tenderness to the Poor and the Distressed; indeed
thus far it has done Good, it has quickened that old Debt; which, though it
received new Birth from an Act of Parliament, yet it wanted Warmth, Heat and
Vigor, which it has gained by this means, and the Credit of that Debt is much
advanced by this Method; which is a real Good, and commands Applause: But yet
even at the bottom of this Charitable, and Pious Project, Self-Interest and
Private Profit lies securely entrenched, and that will be found at the foot of
all their Accounts, let them say what they please to the contrary. We shall
make the nimbler Transition over this, because it has not the shadow, but
substance of real Good; and merits our Praise rather than our Censure, if they
keep within due Bounds, without running upon Monopolies; to which they will be
mightily tempted, whenever they find themselves Masters of much Cash; and they
being many of 'em Merchants, will know how to lay it out to the best Advantage
for themselves. The Fate of this, as well as the preceding Banks, we shall
attend with Patience: They are but newly born, just come into the World, do not
show themselves in their proper Colors, or act by their own free Will, but
rather under the Tutorage and Protection of others. A little time will show us
the good or the Evil that waits upon them.

But now for the Embryo-Banks, which are begot, but not brought forth; (for
these Repositories are as fertile as the Womb, and by mingling Matters
procreate, and send forth their like,) what shall we say to them, that are not
yet shaped, or licked into form? They are much of the same Nature with the
rest, and will differ when they come into the World nomine tantum. I have been
amongst these latter Projectors, and find their Plots all tend the same way,
they are like the Authors of the present Age, they write but what was written
before, only give the Book a pleasant new Title, which goes a great way in the
Sale of it; the greatest part of the World being Soft and Silly, and taken with
Sound and Emptiness; the modern Men, I mean, the the other Set of Projectors all
hug themselves with the glorious Prospect of great Profit, arising from their
own dear Notions (as they call them, though they are borrowed, being but Grafts
or Cyans, young Sprouts from an old Tree;) the great Salaries, and the Lumps of
ready Money, hugely please them; the living in Committees at the Public
Expense, is no inconsiderable Matter, because it saves them so much in the
Pocket. These will be pernicious and destructive if ever they come abroad, and
therefore should be crushed, while an Egg only. If, like those Noble, Universal
(not National only) Banks of Venice, Amsterdam, Genoa, Paris, Hamburg, they
tended to the Promotion of Trade, and Security of Coin; they would merit an
Establishment: Such a one as the Bank of England (the best of them all, our
All) has obtained; but these are Mushroons, very insipid, without abundance of
good Pickle; they come out of Season, and will hardly be worth the Preserving.

The London-Bank, as one is to be called, which is now preparing for the Press,
that it may appear in Public as well as the rest; is of the same Leaven,
proposed to be managed by the Principal Magistrates and Chief Citizens, to give
Reputation and Encouragement to the Project: But in this the Projectors will
infallibly miscarry, because the Chamber-Conduct was so bad, and the City yet
remains without Credit upon that very score, the poor Orphans Sufferings are
still fresh in Memory; and we all very well know that it is very difficult,
nay, almost impossible to retrieve either Public or Private Reputation, when
sunk. Not to go so far back as the Reign of Charles the First, who rashly in a
strait seized some Thousands of Pounds, coining in the Tower, belonging to
private Hands; and though His Majesty immediately published a Proclamation, to
assure them they should have their Principal with Interest in a very short
time, which they really had, yet that unhappy Prince could never recover his
Credit, to be able to borrow any considerable Sum of his Subjects: The like
Fate befell his Son and Successor, Charles the Second, in the Exchequer
Business, nothing but Parliamentary-Faith could bring him in any Money after
that ill Accident; although, to do that King Right, he did his utmost to
satisfy the Bankers and their Creditors, and had put it into a good Method, if
his Brother James, when he came to the Crown, had not fallen in upon it, and
stopped its Currency; which gave a mighty damp to it; which, notwithstanding the
many struglings it has had since the Revolution, (as it is generally called,) it
has not been able to overeome.

I shall conclude this Topic of Banks, with a Disswasive to all People, of all
Ranks and Professions, and of both Sexes, to beware how they are drawn into
these Snares; they are pernicious Practices, and ought to be kicked out of the
Commonwealth. And, if what has been said be not sufficient to prevail upon
them, that have not yet been caught, to have a Care of themselves, as also on
those that are engaged, in time to draw off, before they have gone too far, and
thereby prevent the Misfortunes that will inevitably attend them; I say, if the
Arguments I have laid down, and enforced, together with the foul Practices I
have discovered, and exposed, be not of Weight enough to deterr them from
parting so tamely and foolishly with their Land, Money, and Credit, let them
proceed, and fall into the Net, spread for them, by crafty and designing Men.

The poor English Nation runs a madding after new Inventions, Whims, and
Projects: And this unhappy Ingredient my dear Countrymen have in their Temper,
they are Violent, and prosecute their Projects eagerly for a time, but, not
meeting with Success, they give over, and abandon all Hopes of ever doing any
Good, never reflecting upon their ill Management, or undue Methods.

What a Run of Lotteries have we had! That, like a Plague, have spread
themselves over the whole Kingdom, of the same Date, though, I believe, not
Duration with the Bank; every Body is sick of them; the Town was pleased at
first with the Novelty of the Project, but now glutted and nauseated. With what
haste they all flew to put in their Money we well remember; the mighty Hopes
they sed themselves with, each gaping for the highest Benefit; and what golden
Promises they made themselves, and how painfully they attended the coming up of
their bad Fortune we cannot forget; it was for a time the only News, and sole
Entertainment of the Town: They, poor Innocents, never considered the
Projector's Aim, no less than the Parson's Profit, One in Ten; or, the Royal
Deduction in Prize-Goods, of Ten per Cent. would satisfy them* and how foully
they were managed, every Body is now satisfied. But the Merchandize-Lotteries
were worse than the Money, though both pernicious to the People. Why do we thus
labor and toil, plot and contrive to Cheat one another? If we could Cheat the
Dutch, or the French, 'twould be something; but, to sharp one another, is a
very dull Story; and, I doubt, our Neighbors are too cunning for us; I think
they have been so hitherto: It Is pity the English should be so easy and so
weak. The old decayed Merchandise and Rubbish that was whipped off by means of
these Roguish Lotteries, was incredible in its Quantity; all sorts of Goods,
almost all sorts of Trades concerned; the People were tickled with the
Proposals of prodigious Profit, when the proposers intended it only for
themselves, making above Thirty per Cent. advance: And this out of the poor
Rogues Pockets that were thus wheedled. The general Complaints that have been
since made, of the many Abuses and Impositions in those Lotteries, are clear
Indications of their Baseness. And indeed the People have been so damnably
cheated of their Money, every manner of way, that, I think, they have no need
of Dissuasives to venture again, their own Sufferings are sufficient to
convince them it is their Interest to forbear.

The Companies for Mines of Gold, Silver, Copper, Tin, Lead, Iron, Antimony,
Lapis-Calaminaris, Coals, Salt-Common, etc. have made a great Noise in the
Town, and, indeed, throughout the whole Kingdom; to draw in People to join with
them, they have made use of several Tricks and Stratagems; first they pretend a
mighty Vein of Gold, Silver, or Copper, to be discovered in a Piece of Ground
of their knowledge, then they agree with the Lord, or Patentees, for a small
Yearly Rent, or a Part reserved (about a Fifteenth) to him, or them, to grant
them a Lease for Twenty one Years to dig that Land; which they immediately fall
to, and give out it is a very rich Mine; then they settle a Company under
Articles, divide it into Shares, usually 400, choose a Commit, a Clerk, and
Transfer-Book, and pretend to carry on this Work to the Benefit of the all the
Proprietors; who, at the beginning, purchase Shares at a low Rate, viz. Ten
Shillings, Twenty, or a Guinea, then all on a sudden they whip up the Shares to
Three, Five, Ten, nay, Fifteen Pounds a Share; then they fall to Stock-Jobbing,
which infallibly ruins these, and all other Projects; those principally
concerned, sell their Interest, draw off, and wholly quit the Affair, which, by
this and other means of underhand dealing, tricking and sharping one another,
falls to the Ground, and is abandoned by every Body. Nothing thrives, where
ever they admit Stock-Jobbing, it has spoiled more good and really useful
Designs and Inventions, than all the ill Accidents that have attended them
besides. To fetch Wealth out of the Bowels of the Earth, without doubt mightily
enriches a Nation, and to employ many Hands gives Bread to abundance of poor
laboring People, which is a good thing; and many Undertakers have got great
Estates by Copper, Tin, Iron, and Lead Ore's and Coals, and their Affairs
usually succeed, and turn to a very good Account, when managed by a few honest
diligent Men; for of great Use and Consumption are these Things in the State,
besides what are sent abroad: But these latter Years have produced a Knot of
Projectors that aim only at getting a little Money into their own Pockets, to
support their Necessities, which are pressing and pinching, without any regard
to the Good of the Company in which they are engaged, which causes a Rupture,
and destruction of the whole Design. It Is said, that Necessity is the Mother of
Invention, and that Poverty whets Men's Wits: Thus much I believe, That sharp
and narrow Fortunes put Men upon Plots and Contrivances how to overreach,
circumvent, draw in, and cheat one another, to support themselves, and wade
through a difficult and painful Life; but it is pity Honesty is so much
abandoned, which carries with it, in all Negotiations, whatsoever so much
Honor and real Esteem in the World; that it is established by a Proverb, and
yet almost left out of Practice.

The next Project we shall consider, is the Diving-Engines of diverse kinds, all
crept abroad since the taking up of the Duke of Albemarl's Wreck, (as it was
commonly called for distinction, and because he was concerned in it:) This
Wealth that was fetched out of the Sea (after several chargeable and fruitless
Attempts,) was trumpeted all over the World, and set Men's Heads at work to get
more; in order thereto, Patents were obtained from the Royal Fountains, for the
sole Fishing of Wrecks on the Coasts of America, Spain, Portugal, Ireland,
Scotland, England, etc. and Societies formed of Merchants and Gentlemen to
manage this Affair in several Kingdoms; and then came up Diving-Engines of
various make, some like a Bell, others a Tub, some like a complete Suit of
Armor of Copper, and Leather between the Joints, and Pipes to convey Wind, and
a Polyphemus Eye in the Forehead to give Light, and pretended mighty Feats,
staying under Water many Hours, and giving out by Public Shows, and Trials on
the Thames, the vast Utility of these Engines, although the foresaid Wreck was
cleared, and vast Quantities of Pieces of Eight taken up by naked Diverse, both
White and Black, without the least help or want of any such Engine; yet People
were taken with Noise, led by Fancy, and so hooked: Patents were also gained
for the sole Use of these Gimcracks, for Fourteen Years to come; and then about
making the Engines they went, and after several Alterations and Amendments,
which took up two or three Years, (and at last good for little,) they divided
the whole Project into Four, and afterward as many Hundred Shares, and
presented some to People of Note and Figure, to give Reputation to the Affair;
and these doughty Names were subscribed to play the Part of a Shooing-Horn, and
wheedle in the Easy; Treats and Money given to the Necessitous and Sharp, to
bring their Friends and Acquaintance to see the Engines, who were tickled in
the Ear with the vast Wealth of Gold and Silver that should be taken out of the
Sea with these Tools; and, being led by an avaricious Desire of growing. Rich
on a sudden, they come in and were engaged, paid down their Money, and had the
pleasure to see a Committee chosen, and Contributions of Ten Shillings or more
per Share advanced, and Expeditions sent forward to Scotland, Ireland, Scilly,
and the Land's End of England, and up and down upon our Coasts; and the mighty
Achievements they performed, was taking up a few Iron-Guns, Chiney-Backs, and
Ship's-Tackle, which answered not the End, nor Expenses, which increasing eat
up the Stock, and stopped the further Prosecution of the Affair: So these fine
Diving-Engines lie by the Walls, are at rest, and, for ought I know, may never
more disturb the World with their Noise and Nonsense. It Is strange when we
reflect what abundance of People have been drawn in and abused, of all
Qualities, Gentle and Simple, Wise and Otherwise; and really among 'em some Men
of imcomparable Parts and great Qualifications were caught, being allured with
the Hopes of gaining vast Riches by this means: And here Stock-Jobbing also
made its way, the certain Poison or Bane of all Projects though in themselves
never so good and useful; the Patentees got Money, and every Body else lost,
and so there was an end of that Matter.

Dipping, Japanning, Printed Hangings, Pearl-Fishing, making Sword-Blades,
Glass-Bottles, Venetian Metal, Leather, etc. come next: The first Projectors
and Inventors have really got Money, had their Ends, but no Body else that I
can hear of; and, while they continued in single Hands, or a few, they throve
and flourished, but when ever they fell to Stock-Jobbing, they certainly
dwindled away, and came to nothing. Some of these are Useful, and may be for
the Public Benefit, but most of 'em are mere Whims, and of little or no
Service to the World, though they all proclaim loudly their VVorth and
Goodness, and employ Agents to magnify their Inventions, and wheedle in
innocent and ignorant People; who, being charmed with the Novelty of the
Things, (though perhaps but revived, or borrowed from some Foreign Nation)
purchase Shares, and so are cheated of their Money; which is worse than
Highway Robbing, for they come up Face to Face and demand our Money, and often
fight for it before they get it, and sometimes die in the Attempt; I say, these
are open and declared Enemies, and so proclaimed by the State, but the the other
(by much the baser) come with sly Insinuations, and, under the Vizor and Mask
of Friendship, decoy in the honest well-meaning Man, and by painting over the
Proposals in lively Colors, tinctured with Gold (though lighter than the Leaf)
or Silver, impudently asserting the Impossibility of failing of making great
Advantages, obtain their cursed Designs, and so go on, playing the Knave; which
Title of Honor no Quack in the World bears with more Patience than
themselves: now, if these Things were managed fairly and heartily, and above
board, they would meet with far greater Encouragement: But it is said these
Wars have begat Poverty, and that has produced these Projects; the Crown has
been open-hearted, and readily granted Patents for the Encouragement of
Ingenuity; and more have been taken out within these Seven Years last past than
in Fifty, nay a Hundred before; I mean for trifling Engines and Whims. Oh, a
Patent gives a Reputation to it, and cullies in the Company: They had almost as
good purchase Land in Terra incognita, for they meet here with very slippery
Bargains; and, notwithstanding, the plain and apparent Breaches of Amity and
Civil Society by these means, yet these pernicious Practices, to sharp and
cheat one another of their Money and Goods are continued; and all this so
notorious and so very common, yet, I say, so easy and unwary are abundance of
People, that they are daily trapp'd: Projects, like Parents, beget their like,
and multiply wonderfully, Projects upon Projects, Lottery upon Lottery, Engine
upon Engine: If any one Man gets considerably by a happy and useful Invention,
abundance run immediately into it, and, in spite of the Patent, take with
little alteration a Copy, and then out come the Proposals in Print, the
Gazettes and Public Papers are crammed with Advertisements, the fourth Column
is entirely theirs: And thus they go on to spoil one another, to abuse others;
and so the Public suffers by their Folly and Knavery.

The English, Scotch, Irish, and other Linen Manufactures, if honestly and
fairly managed, would be of infinite Advantage to all those Places; and besides
the charitable dealing of Subsistence to the numerous Poor, would wonderfully
enrich all the Proprietors, and be also for the Public Interest; for the fewer
Foreign Commodities we consume among our selves, the more we save, and
consequently get; and if we could be so happy to bring 'em to Perfection fit
for Exportation, to supply Markets abroad, we should then pinch the Dutch, the
World's common Carriers, and universal Traders, for the more they, or any
Foreigners get from us, the poorer we are, and shall be. All due Encouragement
has been given to these great Undertakings, the present King and late Queen
permitted them to be honored with their Names, which gave a mighty Reputation
to them, their Fame rose, and their Credit increased, and abundance of People
of Condition were mingled, some led by Lucre, others by Love of their Country,
(though of them the fewest) pushed on the Business very vigorously, united and
incorporated themselves, chose a Governor and Officers, Inspectors and
Comptrollers, actually set at work Spinners, and other Workers, Weavers,
Whitsters, etc. and thought it would have produced great Profit, for the
Actions mounted apace, and in great probability of being higher, when all on a
sudden some greedy, mercenary, mean Spirits fell to Stock-Jobbing, and scared
the Easy and Timorous, and brought the Actions down, abundance sold off their
Shares, contented with their first Profits, which were considerable, rather
than to attend the hazard of making greater in a little time, or losing some of
the present, and so by degrees, the Reputation of this mighty Manufacture sunk
here, and, I understand, is in a bad Condition, and will hardly be able to hold
up its Head, much less to advance any further: The same Fate, is feared, may
attend the rest. Now this was really a good Design, and it is pity it had not
the good Fortune to flourish, they had brought Linen-Cloth to great Perfection,
and had some Dutch Hands, and some few Heads to assist them; I wish they had
had of the last: This was indeed a noble Undertaking, and merited well of the
Public. By the Assistance of the Dutch we have hugely improved our Lands in
the North-Parts of this Kingdom, by sowing vast quantities of Lin-Seed,
Rape-Seed, and others; and thence making Oils in great quantities, which we
export in abundance, and consume at home, in lieu of Foreign and dearer Oils,
to our double Advantage; for the less of the Foreign are imported, and the more
of our own exported, the greater is our Gain. The Profits that arise hence are
much more considerable to the Landlords and Tenants, than those of any Corn or
Grain whatsoever; and how much more we might advance our Lands by sowing Flax
and Hemp-Seeds, if our Linen-Manufactures succeeded as they might, is plain to
every common Understanding: But, I think, we are not destined to do our selves
and our Country Good. I am sorry that England is so barren of true Patriots, a
word so Great and Glorious, that the ancient Romans thought it a very great
Honor, and valued themselves very much upon being so called.

White, Blue, and Brown-Papers, made here in England, Ireland, and Scotland,
shall be examined next. This good Fortune we in England have had to improve
wonderfully in this Art, and though we cannot reach the French Perfection, yet
we come pretty near it, and make much finer Paper than ever, which in this our
Exigency, I mean the Prohibition of Commerce with France, is of very great
Service to us; but our Hands are dearer that are employed, we cannot work so
cheap as the French, because we must have Beef, Pudding, and strong Drink, our
People cannot live upon Onions, Turnips, and small Soupes; besides, our
Linen-Manufacture miscarrying, gives a damp to this honest and useful
Undertaking; and it is a thousand pities we cannot raise Paper to the French
Goodness, and lowness of Price, because 'twould tend so vastly to our
Advantage, in keeping us from laying out such vast Sums of Money with France,
for this Commodity alone, that instead of Importing it from thence, we might
Export it to other Countries; which would employ Thousands, and enrich
Hundreds. The Linen-Manufacture, on which it partly depends, and by which in
great measure it subsists, being so much sunk in its Reputation, that it is
feared it is at its last gasp, irretrievable, stops the growth of this, which
notwithstanding is flourishing, and kekps its Head above Water; vast quantities
of Paper are daily made here, and the Ragg-gatherers hard put to it to supply
us, though they bear a good Price, and has increased that Profession; that some
are starving, and others begging, who have assured me the scarcity of Rags is
great, and that the young diligent Collectors outdo the old, and go out in the
Nights to the Dung-hills and Laystalls to tumble them over for this
Merchandise, which at this time are mightily called for.

Waters of New-River, Thames, York-Buildings, London Bridge, Shadwell, Conduit,
Hampstead, etc. are Projections all worthy of great Encouragement, and so the
first has had, to the gaining of vast Estates by the Proprietors; though the
unhappy Gentleman that began the Work fell by it, and suffered extremely in his
Fortune, which ought to have been made up by the City that received such
Benefits by his Brains; a grateful People would have erected a Monument to his
fame; but we in England keep close to an old Adage, Every man for himself, and
God for us all. I think some Favors were shown the Descendents of this Great,
though unfortunate Undertaker, the Middleton's, who bear his Blood, and carry
his Name, were presented with some Shares. This and the Thames Water have
gained the Ascendent, and much Money has been got by the latter: They are kept
in good Hands, and the Stock-Jobbers, those Moles, those Underminers, and
Destroyers, not suffered to come amongst them, the Jack-Daws have been too hard
for the Rooks, (as those Gentlemen are called;) but now here are new
Conveyances of this useful Element, and humble Servant, Water, laid in the
Earth; the Conduit for the City of London, which is better Water and cheaper,
imposing no Fine, which the New River arbitrarily and unreasonably did, for
which it is meritoriously punished, and the Proprietors clipped in their Profits,
by the great fall of their Actions or Shares. The Hampstead also will supply
that End of the Town, Holborn, etc. nearest to which it lies; and the Terms are
fairer and easier, which lop off more from the New River; but this last, I
mean, Hampstead-Water unhappily passes through such Hands, that, in all
probability, it will come to nothing, or turn to very small Account; the
Stock-Jobbers have broke in, and, I am of Opinion, will break out, outright;
that is, ruin the Affair. These are really noble and commendable Undertakings,
not Whims, or Maggots, Chimera's, or Airy Notions, but real, solid, and
substantial Designs of serving the Public, and merit the Approbation of all
Men; but the Easy and Credulous must beware of being drawn in to purchase
Shares at too dear a Rate, and so be cosen'd of their Money, for the Credit of
all these Waterworks is extremely fallen, partly through ill Conduct, and some
later Discoveries, and newer Works.

Rock-Salt in this Rank leads the Van, deserves our Praise, and shall have it;
for that is so wonderfully improved by the Integrity of the Proprietors, and
their Prudent Management, that it is ready to come to a Dividend; they are
established in a Company, of Gentlemen and Traders, have built a Wharf at
Frodsome in Cheshire, have formed Correspondencies in London, and Ireland, and
Holland, whither they send great Quantities of this Commodity, which turns to a
very great Advantage.

Saltpeter shall be the next, but that has had a worse Fate; great Sums of
Money subscribed and paid in, large Refining-Houses built in four or five
several Places about this Town, Servants entertained, Directors and Clerks
appointed, Societies established, and a mighty Noise they made for a time, a
loud sounding Name, and of Quality, appeared at the Head of them, and
encouraged the Affair, abundance of Gentlemen and Traders concerned, all things
disposed in good Methods, a Foundation laid of future Profits, and those
extraordinary ones, and as durable as the present War, which called for their
Commodity, and brought it to bear a great Price: But of all these Companies,
not one, that I can hear of, has made any great Hand of this Matter; it must be
confessed the first Projectors have had Success, for they got by it, and then
slunk away; the ill Conduct, and Admission of Stock-Jobbers, together with some
unlucky Accidents falling in upon 'em, mightily discouraged the Business, and
stopped the Progress of it, their Fires are out, their Houses lie neglected, and
begin to molder away, their Union dissolved, and a necessaay Project (at this
time) lost; and Gunpowder, within this Month or five Weeks, partly by the
falling off of this, and the loss of five East India Ships, advanced from three
Pound ten Shillings to four Pound ten Shillings a Hundred, and how much higher
it may go I know not, for now the private Refiners, Gunpowder Makers, and
Ship-Chandlers have received Encouragement by the Miscarriage of these Men,
they will do their utmost to take their Advantage of it.

Draining Engines, of diverse sorts, have been lately made, to clear Coal, Lead,
Tin, and other Mines from Waters, which either soak in or spring up, to their
hindrance in their Working, damage and charge of the Proprietors; as also other
Engines for Draining of Flats, Levels, Mears, Inundations, Springs, etc. These
Projects might be of great Use and Benefit to the Public and Private too, for
the more Land we recover, and improve, the richer we grow; and that Soil which
is under Water, is lost to the Commonwealth, that Tyrant Element doing here no
manner of Good; the Earth is rich, being much of it Marl, the best of Land, and
we are so unhappy in England to have many Thousands of Acres thus covered with
Water, and which have been so, some, time out of mind, others but lately, all
recoverable, and drainable, if proper Methods were taken, and with the help of
these Engines (of which I have seen several) if fairly undertaken, and at much
easier Rates than by the bodily Labor of hired Men; which to feed with Bread,
and pay Wages, would prodigiously swell the Account, inflame the Reckoning, and
render the Charge excessive, insupportable, and discouraging. That these
Projectors have really done Service in the Mines, and effected what they
pretended to is manifest, having actually earned between three and four hundred
Pounds per Mensem; this I say is notorious to Thousands in Cornwall, and
Devonshire, who have been Witnesses to the Operation; and it is but just this
should be encouraged, for we intend not by this Discourse to expose or
discountenance Ingenuity, but quite the contrary, to support and advance it;
but, alas, good Inventions, and Schemes, have too often tacked to them
fraudulent Designs, of imposing upon unwary People, and engaging them in what
is very often injurious to their Purses; and, in plain English, commonly prove
palpable Cheats, which I am now laboring to prevent for the future, at least
as much as I can, by discovering the private Intrigues, secret Plots, and
underhand Dealings of the Principal Projectors of this Kingdom, more fully and
amply than any Body else can do; besides, nothing of this Kind was ever
attempted before, and therefore surely this will be the more grateful, seeing
that it preaches up their true Interest in this World, which most Folks pursue
more heartily and zealously than that of the the other; which being at some
distance, and matter of Faith, rather than Fact, they give themselves but
little trouble about.

Lutestrings, Alamodes, etc. Hats, of several sorts, in imitation of those made
in France, for no other can I call it, for they do not come up to their
Excellency, though wrought by Native French Men; where the Defect lies, is the
Difficulty to discover, some say the Water, others the Gum, some one thing,
some another; but this is certain, they are not of that Substance, Beauty, or
Durability with those imported from thence; though these Endeavors are
mightily to be commended and encouraged, as they are by a general wear of them,
(the Silks especially) throughout this Kingdom; Scotland and Ireland have the
French in some Plenty, because the Prohibition of Commerce is not observed with
the same strictness as here. These Companies have throve, and will, so long as
they keep the Stock-Jobbers from breaking in upon them, all is lost, inevitably
gone, if they come there.

Unequal Lights, and others, are useful Inventions, and ought to be more
regarded than they are, for the Housekeepers contribute but awkwardly toward
their Encouragement; for by that means the Proprietors set them at too great a
distance, so that they receive not each others Beams, but leave too great a
Vacuum; they might be improved also in their Light, which ought to be clearer,
and more diffusive, whereas these have Darks. Several have lost that have had
Shares, and few (that I hear of) have gained any thing considerable; there are
other Pretenders besides the first; which has balked the Business, for it is
our unhappiness in England (as I observed before) to invade each others
Invention, and by Trick and Artifice ruin many hopeful Undertakings.

New Settlements in Carolina, Pensilvania, Tobago, and other Places, make a
great Noise in the World. The first Planters fared but ill, having wasted their
Substance, without being able to reap the Benefit, laying only a Foundation for
the next comer, who may succeed better; and, in all probability, that
industrious People, who make up the Gross of those Colonies, (the Quakers, as
they are commonly called) will cultivate, and improve a mighty Tract of Land in
those Parts, to their future Advantage; though, I think, to the Injury of their
Native Country, which suffers now, and will more, by their absence; and, I
believe, it will be found impolitick to permit so many People to abandon this
happy Island, to Seat themselves in a Soil so remote; for, I think, it is
granted by all, That it is Number of Subjects, and not Extent of Territory,
makes up the Greatness of a Prince; and, if so, we visibly decline, for we are
very thin of People at this time, having been exhausted by the unnatural and
imprudent Persecutions in the late Reigns, and by the long knocking War in this
present. But, Thanks be to God, and our good Stars, our present Constitution,
like Clothes of the English make, sits easy on our Bodies, and Minds too; and
therefore it is pity but a stop were put to these American Travelers, who
having gone a great way toward their Establishment in those Places, are
willing to go through with it, for their own particular Interest, without any
Regard to that of Old England, who then ought to take Care of it self, and keep
those Subjects at home, who now have not Reason to retire, seeing they have
Liberty of Person and Persuasion, and Property too! So well secured both for
the present and the future.

Fisheries Royal, Greenland, Newfound Land, and others, are worthy our Care and
Application: The first has been long talked of, and some Steps made to bring it
about, but still one ill Accident or another fell in, and damped it; it is now
again on foot, I wish it good success: That 'twill be of infinite Advantage to
this Kingdom every Body knows, the Benefits are plain and obvious, and so well
received, and so often told, they need not be mentioned; our Sage Senate will
be ready to establish this, as they did the Greenland, which is like to
flourish, notwithstanding some Losses have already attended it. Indeed, I think
it highly unreasonable that the Dutch (whom I love as our Neighbors and
Allies) should come on our Coasts, and take our Fish, and cure them, and carry
them away, and Trade so prodigiously, with them as they do, to the vast
Advantage of their State, and to the enriching of so many particular People,
and to the employing so many thousand Hands, and filling more Bellies, breeding
up great Numbers of Seamen, which calls for our first Thoughts, and deserves
our most hearty Endeavors, they being our best Guard; and therefore should
have the greatest Encouragement; for our Walls of Oak would not defend us,
without their Hearts, all out as firm, stout and impenetrable. I shall say the
less on this Head, because so much has already been said by others, and
therefore shall conclude this Paragraph with a word or two more. We have now
got a KING after our own Hearts, a Prince whose Interest is ours, and who
esteems ours His, and who seems destined by Heaven to recover and establish the
ancient Honor and Esteem of the English Name and Nation, and who will join
with us, and assist us in all Things that may tend to the increase of our
Wealth and Reputation; He will make us Formidable abroad, and Happy at home;
his Victorious Arms will do the first, and his Wise Councils the last; He will
preserve and improve our Commerce, the best Support of his Government, and the
sweetest Flower in our Paradise; and though the Hollanders, who chiefly vie
with, and would rob us of this inestimable Jewel; I say, though they are his
Countrymen, yet we are his Subjects, he will cherish us and chastise them.

And now to conclude, for it is high time, having spun out this Pamphlet longer
than I intended, though I found Matter so flowing, that I could hardly give
over; just as I am winding up, and closing mine, I understand there are new
Books laid open for Annuities and Lotteries, with which last I thought the Town
had been tired; it seems one is fled to Chichester, for there (if full) it is to
be drawn. As for the Annuities, I find the Projectors by their Proposals intend
good Bargains for themselves; which, indeed is the chief Aim they all have:
These as well as the former Projects, which I have distinctly considered, will
have fatal and pernicious Consequences; for, in the bottom of most, there lies
a deep Deceit.

Pray let us Reflect on the vast Number of Projectors in and about this City,
how bare-bon'd they are, that is, how few of 'em are Rich? Therefore we may
conclude, these Aerie Gentlemen in some Measure resemble Witches, who do harm
(...) others, but seldom good to themselves: It is pity there is not a Register
of them, (as also of Lands, Houses, etc.) the poor Purchasers of Shares from
the first, and of Estates of the last, often meet with bad Bargains; and by
that means, viz. of a Register, they might escape the better, and save their
Money from being picked out of their Pockets, by these Camelions, who know no
end of Projects, for what they get by one, they lay out in another; so that
Poverty seems to be the constant Companion of Projectors as well as Poets.

FINIS.
There is lately published, SOlon Secundus: Or, some Defects in the English
Laws; with their Proper Remedies.

Sold by John Whitlock, near Stationers' Hall.


