AN ANSWER FROM THE COUNTRY, TO A LATE LETTER TO A DISSENTER, Upon Occasion of
His MAJESTY'S Late GRACIOUS Declaration of Indulgence.

By a Member of the Church of England.

LONDON, Printed for M. R. in the Year 1687:

AN ANSWER FROM THE COUNTRY, TO A Late Letter Writ to a Dissenter, etc.
SIR,
IT is the unhappy state of mankind, that the overweening Opinions, and
Sentiments, which by Education, or Custom, we have entertained, incline, and
warp our minds so to the maintaining of them; that we are as difficultly
altered, as the Tree is, which bended, when a young sappling, is rarely by any
Art made straight.

Besides this, the tempers of most Men's Souls are such, that they easily divide
into Parties, and being listed, as in a state of War, they study nothing more,
than to convince, or subdue all those who differ from them. Yea, we too
frequently find, that they make those the Object of their aversion or
abhorrence, who study to compose their eager tempers, or direct them to any
degree of humanity.

Hence it is, that when National limits are not sufficient causes of quarrels,
the ranks and degrees of Men, the City and Country, Fraternities, Neighborhood,
yea, Domestical Interests, crumble us, and cast us into various figures.

These Jars, and Hostilities, are fomented by Interest, Ambition, and all the
cross-grained passions of our Souls; and when Religion mixes with our humane
concerns, it sublimes all their corrosive spirits, and is the universal
dissolvent.

Every one is apt to think the fire of his own Altar the purest, and is not
content to have liberty to trim his own Household hearth, and warm himself at
his own Faggot, but endeavors, according to his power, to make all gainsayers
Victims and Sacrifices to his Deity; and when no Secular Interest moves them,
the pretended eager Charity to save their Souls, and the preventing, as they
call it, the spreading of that Infection, makes them mortify them in their
Estates, or send them to the Pesthouse, or cut them off as gangrened Members

Hence it is, that the Roman Catholic Church, the Church of England, and
Dissenters, according as they have had the favor of the Government, or could
exercise any Authority, have each of them punished, or suppressed the other, and
have been more or less severe, according as the Government (judging it to
conduce to secure the public peace,) was inclined to embrace that Religion, or
the desires of Churchmen were more or less pressing, to bring all to
Uniformity in Faith and Discipline.

Former Ages have experimented this way of proceeding, and it has been
accompanied with the loud cries of the suffering Parties, the decay of Trade,
the unpeopling of Countries, and Intestine Seditions and Rebellions. Our
unhappy Island has not wanted Instances of the ill effects of arming by Penal
Laws, Church Communities, one against the other; so that the Governing Parties,
under Religious Denomination, have produced almost as much mischief, as, in
Ancient times, the Wars betwixt the Houses of York and Lancaster occasioned;
and however oppressive the State-Church of England is reputed, yet I think it
will not be disowned, that when those called Dissenters got the Power in their
hands, they made greater Ravage and Depredations in Twenty years, upon the
Roman Catholics, and the Members of the Church of England, than had been
inflicted on themselves in an Age; witness the sequestring, decimating, and
seizing their Estates, Fining, Imprisoning, Banishing, and putting to Death of
so many, and selling the Lands of the Bishops, Deans, and Chapters.

Our Gracious King, revolving therefore in His Princely Mind the Fatalities
that have attended this Conduct, and the unfortunate and mischievous Results of
such proceedings, (the effects whereof he had felt Himself,) has, in His
profound Wisdom, resolved to try the most probable expedient, to still and
quiet these so long continued Animosities, Contrarieties, and Ferments of His
Subjects.

Some public notices of this He gave in the very beginning of His Reign, by
Prohibiting in His Courts, and discountenancing proceedings upon the Penal
Laws. But that I may discover the true steps the King made toward it, and the
foot upon which the late Indulgence stands, and prevent some Repetitions, I
should otherwise be necessiated to use in my Reply to your Letter; I shall
succinctly touch the Kings Progress, and the deportment of some Members of the
Church of England, and Dissenters, before, and since the Indulgence.

At the First Council the King held after his coming to the Crown, he expressed
the sense he had of the Church of Englands Loyalty, and gave us Assurances of
His Defense and Support of it.

This pleased the Dissenters, only so far, as it gave them hopes that the
Protestant Religion might be preserved; but they were afraid, lest the King
might remember their former promoting the Bill of Exclusion, and that thereby
they should not only continue under the lashes of the Church of Englands
Discipline, but of the Kings disfavour; and having yet the Idea's which had
been infused into them of a Popish Successor, and the D. of Monmouth giving
them an opportunity to make head under the specious pretense of preserving the
Protestant Religion, as many of them as were near the Scene of Action, and were
foolhardy, joined with him in that Rebellion; and the wishes for his success
were not wanting in most of that Party.

But that Rebellion being so speedily, and almost miraculously suppressed, they
fled to the Church of England for Protection, flocked to the Churches,
personated a Conformity, and so closely mixed, that they now seemed one Body,
and one Church.

Some leading Men of the Church of England, finding this great accession of
strength, and being desirous entirely to win the Dissenters over, thought it
expedient to let them see, how much they had been mistaken, in thinking them,
in the matter of Exclusion, to be going over to Rome, and being willing to wipe
off the Calumny the Dissenters had cast upon them, as being Papists in
Masquerade, they began instantly to show their utmost Zeal against the Kings
Religion.

When therefore, the King, pursuant to His Royal design, beforementioned,
required the taking off the Test and Penal Laws; many leading Men of the Church
of England set themselves to oppose the King in it, and from that day, the more
they found the King press it, the more they showed their reluctance. Suddenly,
several Ministers, able, or unable, to manage the dispute with the Church of
Rome, began to confirm their Auditors, in the Doctrine of the Protestant
Religion, and to insinuate the danger we were in to lose it, as soon as the
Test, and Penal Laws should be repealed; they murmured, and repined at every
favor shown to Roman Catholics, and none were so much applauded, as those who
lost their places, upon their denial to concur with the King in his demands.
They animated and encouraged one another to stand the shock, not thinking,
perhaps, they had to deal with a more resolved Prince, than some of His
Predecessors; nor apprehending, or not willing to see, what public benefit the
King designed to the body of His Subjects, by the Repeal; and in fine, began to
pursue all the methods of malcontents, finding this the only way to embarras
the King, hinder all His glorious designs for the public, and render useless
his eminent virtues, in not affording Him the opportunity of appearing like
Himself, or rendering His Reign glorious; because, they were unwilling, any
thing Great should be performed by a King, that was not of their Religion.

All this, His Majesty carefully observed, and being unwilling to act any
thing, but according to Justice, and the Laws of the Land, He wisely inquired
into the extent of His legal power. He knew he was by the Statutes declared
Supreme Head of the Church in His Dominions, had undoubted Prerogatives, He
might make use of, and a Dispensing Power; and so settled those by judicial
Proceedings.

The King having now asserted His Sovereignty, he thought it reasonable, to
manifest to all His Subjects, that it was not the ease only of the Roman
Catholics he aimed at, but that He intended His Clemency should be as
extensive as His Empire: First therefore, He published His General Pardon,
(excepting some few persons) and in the interim, showed His displeasure against
those who obstructed His great design of Repeal; and lastly, published this
Indulgence, wherein He laid open the paternal goodness, and benignity of His
Soul; the method, of enriching His people, and a foundation of their concord
during His Reign; and for succeeding Ages, by extirpating the causes of
Animosities, Heartburnings, Feuds, and Oppressions of His people, by any
prevailing Party; abridging them of nothing used in their Religious Worship,
but only, of the power of compelling any one to Conformity; and depriving every
party of that Authority, of magisterial imposing such distinguishing and
Excluding Tests, as incapacitated His Subjects to serve Him, and the
Government, according to their Allegiance, and every Free-Mans Liberty.

One would rationally have thought, that no party should have been wanting in
their Thanks for so great a Grace and Favor, so much the greater, in that it
was bestowed by a Prince, from whom no such largess of Royal Bounty was
expected; not the Church of England, since, in the body of the same Indulgence,
so liberal a Provision was made for it; not the Dissenters, who had the most
visible benefits; nor any else, who did not prefer the profits they had by the
Penal mulcts imposed, or the pleasure of inflicting punishments upon those who
were obnoxious to Ecclesiastical Censures, or the Laws for Uniformity.

There was then a Party of the Church of England, who, owning the Kings
Ecclesiastical Supremacy, and His Prerogative, looked upon this as an Act of
State, which the King might Exert at pleasure, for the public tranquillity of
His Dominions; and thought it their duty to be truly thankful, that the King
had so generously secured to them the Honors and Emoluments of the Church, and
entirely left them the Cathedrals, the Churches, and the profits annexed to
them.

Another, and a major part of the same Church, was vehementy moved by the
Declaration, murmured, that their former serives were slighted; that
Dissenters, who had unanimously opposed the Kings Succession, and been Rebels
as often as they had opportunity, were preferred before them; and suggested,
that this was designed to enlarge the Roman Catholic Church, and as a scourge
to them; and though they never publicly urged it, yet it is most manifest,
that the depriving them of the coercive power, (though all other parties were
as much disarmed of that, as They,) gratefully contributed to their reluctance.

The Conductors of their Affairs pitched upon two Expedients, as most effectual
to hinder the Kings reaping any benefits to the Roman Catholics by it. The one
was, to secure the Members of the Church of England, from a compliance, by
stiffly opposing the Repeal, and questioning the Dispensing Power: The second,
by dissuading Dissenters from separating from the common interest (as it is
called) of Protestants; or making any court to the King, in rendering any
Tribute of Thanks for His Royal Grace to them.

To Estab^ish this, consultations are had; leading Men among the Dissenters are
treated with, great promises are made, that Persecution against them shall
cease, if ever the Church of England return again to its former sunshine:
Pamphlets from Holland, and at home, aggravate the fear of Popery, and of the
destruction of the Church of England, and not only declaim against the
abrogating of all Penal Laws, but the Dispensing Power, likewise, as tending to
the shaking all other Laws, even those of Property; and this seems the design
of your Letter, writ smoother than Dr. Burne^s, or the Representation, but with
as little difference, as to design, as there is betwixt a Dagger in a wooden,
or silver Scabbard. Sir, I must own, that the politeness of the Style, the
sharpness, and plausibleness of the Arguments, will contribute more toward the
establishing such Men's minds, who have the greatest affection for the Church of
England, and equal aversion to the Church of Rome, than any thing Published
hitherto. But in my judgment, you have mixed so much Varnish, as a steady eye
may easily discover what need you had of it.

When we see a falling Star, we make no great remarks upon it, because it
happens so frequently, and how bright so ever it appeared, we find nothing upon
its fall, but a little jelly dropped from the Clouds. But when a Comet appears,
it excites the curiosity of the learned, to enquire into its motion, the
altitude of it; and by consulting by-past-times, and considering what events
happened when such appeared before, to make some Prognostics of its effects.

Your Letter is not to be looked upon as a shooting Star, or paper Kite, but a
blazing Star, therefore deserves a serious consideration; for whatever those,
formerly reputed meteors, did signify, yours most evidently denotes an unquiet
temper in those of your persuasion, a studious desire in them to estrange the
Hearts of Loyal Subjects from their Sovereign, a questioning His prerogative,
and a charging Him with overturning the Laws, and an intention to Rule
Arbitrarily. This fills peoples minds with doubts, suspicions and jealousies,
strows flax all over the Kingdom, ready to be set on fire; when you, by your
enflaming Eloquence, have prepared Undertakers. Therefore, I think it the duty
of all that Honor the King, and love their Country's peace, and tranquillity,
to examine the tendency, and prevent the evil effects of such an Apparition.

But to leave the Allegory, and consider the Letter: As it is a discourse
penned with Art and Elegance, and beautified with ornament of Language, it is
delightsom to be read; but when the scope of it is weighed, the factiousness of
it, under the smoothness of the periods, the unreasonable postulatums, the
fictitious suppositions, and the severe reflections upon the King and His
Government; it becomes honest Men to enquire into those poisonous drugs, that
are so artificially gilded, and provide Antidotes against them.

There are many Thousands of His Majesty's Subjects, both better able, and more
at leisure, and concerned to Animadvert upon your Letter; but upon the first
reading, I found many incentives to urge me to it, when I saw such
mis-interpretations of his Majesty's Honorable designs, his conduct so
calumniated, such dangerous innuendo's, such endeavors to poison the Members
of the Church of England in their Loyalty; the Arts to make them forfeit their
Reputations with His Majesty and the World, by alluring them to do every thing,
that made former Dissenters so abnoxious, and leading them in the same steps,
with which they had trod the stage so tragical to themselves, and the Kingdom.

What I have writ was the result of my thoughts, e're I had read any Answer,
except the first two that were made you, but by distance of place, and other
intervening accidents, which hinder the communicating of it has been stopped
hirherto; and if the opinion some have, that it may be yet useful to some that
may need repeated cautions and admonitions, to beware of being seduced by the
plausibleness of your Language, had not prevailed with me, I should have
totally suppressed it. Now that I may do you all possible right, I have
inserted the Letter entire, according to the different Paragraphs, and
subjoyned mine, and do freely yield, your Column is that of the composit order,
beautiful, though not strong, and I hope that mine may be more solid, like the
Dorick rather choosing to render my Answer, according to my Capacity,
(flattering my self at least in the good intention) sincere and useful than
florid or fallacious; desiring all along, when I mention the Church of Englands
severity, to be understood no ways, as censuring the Church as Author of those
Laws, nor questioning the prudence of the State in making Laws, which,
according to the temperament of the times, the security of the public peace,
and it may be the desire of Uniformity upon prudential grounds, our Kings
thought fit to Enact. But in this great revolution, when our King thinks fit to
try other measures, I humbly judge it the interest of all peaceable spirits,
and dutiful Subjects, calmly to weigh His Majesty's Reasons, and yield to the
Repeal of such Laws, as cannot now be put in execution; and may, in all human
probability, conduce much to the public tranquillity of the Nation. But I shall
take an opportunity to speak to this, after I have dispatched what I have to
say to your Letter; wherein I would not be understood to plead for the merits
of Dissenters, but to show that they have no reason to quit their right in the
Kings favor, tendered to them without their seeking, by any Arguments you have
brought; nor that the Members of the Church of England ought to be so much
disquieted, that it is granted to them, since the Dissenters thereby will be
without all excuse, if this make them not better Subjects. Nor think I, the
Church of England has reason to be so jealous of being overlaid by them, since
the constitution of the Government of the Church of England is better adapted
to the Monarchy, than either the Classical or Congregational way; and that the
Roman Catholics can so multiply as to balance both, in my judgment, is to be
reckoned among the portents of Nature, and I will sooner believe a grain of the
powder of projection can turn a Hundred pound of Lead to pure Gold, than that
this can be effected in one Age, without a Divine Miracle; which, when wrought,
none will be troubled at, that own an omnipotent Being, to whose guidance they
do submit themselves.

THE LETTER.
SIR,
SInce Addresses are in fashion, give me leave to make one to You. This is
neither the effect of Fear, Interest, or Resentment; therefore you may be sure
it is sincere: and for that Reason it may expect to be kindly received. Whether
it will have power enough to Convince, depends upon the Reasons, of which you
are to judge; and upon your preparation of Mind, to be persuaded by Truth,
whenever it appears to you. It ought not to be the less welcome, for coming
from a friendly Hand, one whose kindness to you is not lessened by difference
of Opinion, and who will not let his thoughts for the public be so tied or
confined to this or that sub-division of Protestants, as to stifle the Charity,
which, besides all other Arguments, is at this time become necessary to
preserve us.

(b) I am neither surprised nor provoked to see, that in the condition you were
put into by the Laws, and the ill circumstances you lay under, by having the
Exclusion and Rebellion laid to your Charge, you were desirous to make your
selves less uneasy and obnoxious to Authority. Men who are sore run to the
nearest Remedy with too much have, to consider all the Consequences: Grains of
allowance are to be given, where Nature gives such strong Influences. When to
Men under Sufferings it offers Ease, the present Pain will hardly allow time
to examine the Remedies; and the strongest reason can hardly gain a fair
Audience from our Mind, whilst so possessed, till the Smart is a little allayed.

(c) I do not know whether the Warmth that naturally belongs to New
Friendships, may not make it a harder Task for me to persuade you. It is like
telling Lovers, in the beginning of their Joys, that they will in a little time
have an End. Such an unwelcom Style does not easily find credit: but I will
suppose you are not so far gone in your new Passion, but that you will Hear
still; and therefore I am under the less discouragement, when I offer to your
Consideration two things.

(d) The first is, the cause you have to Suspect your New-Friends. The Second,
the Duty incumbent upon you, in Christianity and Prudence, not to hazard the
Public Safety, neither by desire of Ease, nor of Revenge.

(e) To the first, Consider that notwithstanding the smooth Language is now put
on to engage you, these New Friends did not make you their Choice, but their
Refuge: They have ever made their first Courtships to the Church of England,
and when they were rejected there, they made their Application to you in the
second place. The instances of this, might be given in all times. I do not
repeat them, because whatsoever's unnecessary, must be tedious, the Truth of
this Assertion being so plain, as not to admit a Dispute. You cannot thereforer
reasonably flatter your selves, that there is an Inclination to you. They never
pretended to allow you any Quarter, but to usher in Liberty for themselves
under that shelter. I refer you to Mr. Coleman's Letters, and to the Journals
of Parliament, where you may be convinced, if you can be so mistaken, as to
doubt; nay, at this very hour, they can hardly forbear, in the height of their
Courtship, to let fall hard words of you. So little is Nature to be restrained:
it will start out sometimes, disdaining to submit to the Usurpation of Art, and
Interest.

(f) This Alliance, between Liberty and Infallibility, is bringing together the
Two most contrary things that are in the World. The Church of Rome does not
only dislike the allowing Liberty, but by its Principles it cannot do it. Wine
is not more expressly forbidden to the Mahometans, than giving Heretics Liberty
to the Papists: They are no more able to make good their Vows to you, then Men
married before, and their Wives alive, can confirm their Contract with another.
The continuance of their kindness, would be a habit of sin, of which they are
to repent, and their Absolution is to be had upon no other terms, than their
promise to destroy you. You are therefore to be hugged now, only that you may
be the better squeezed at another time. There must be something extraordinary,
when the Church of Rome sets up Bills, and offers Plasters for tender
Consciences: By all that has hitherto appeared, her skill in Surgery lies
chiefly in a quick Hand, to cut off Limbs; but she is the worst at Healing, of
any that ever pretended to it.

(g) To come so quick from another extreme, is such an unnatural motion, that
you ought to be upon your Guard; the other day you were Sons of Belial, now you
are Angels of Light. This is a violent change, and it will be fit for you to
pause upon it, before you believe it: If your features are not altered, neither
is their opinion of you, what ever may be pretended. Do you believe less than
you did, that there is Idolatry in the Church of Rome? sure you do not. See
then, how they treat both in words and writing, those that entertain that
Opinion. Conclude from hence, how inconsistent their favor is with this single
Article, except they give you a Dispensation for this too, and by a Non
Obstante, secure you that they will not think the worse of you.

(h) Think a little how dangerous it is to build upon a Foundation of
Parodoxes. Popery now is the only friend to Liberty, and the known Enemy to
Persecution: The men of Taunton and Tiverton, are above all other Eminent for
Loyalty. The Quakers from being declared by the Papists not to be Christians,
are now made Favorites, and taken into their particular Protection; they are
on a sudden grown the most accomplished men of the Kingdom in good Breeding,
and give thanks with the best Grace in double refined Language. So that I
should not wonder, though a man of that Persuation: in spite of his Hat, I
should be Master of the Ceremonies. Not to say harsher words, these are such
very new things, that it is impossible not to suspend our Belief, till by a
little more Experience we may be informed whether they are Realities or
Apparitions: We have been under shameful mistakes if these Opinions are true;
but for the present, we are apt to be incredulous, except we could be
convinced, that the Priests words in this Case too, are able to make such a
sudden, and effectual Change; and that their Power is not limited to the
Sacrament, but that it extends to alter the nature of all other things, as
often as they are so disposed.

(i) Let me now speak of the Instruments of your Friendship, and then leave you
to judge, whether they do not afford matter of suspicion. No sharpness is to be
mingled where healing only is intended; so nothing will be said to expose
particular men, how strong soever the Temptation may be, or how clear the
Proofs to make it out. A word or two in general, for your better Caution, shall
suffiee: Suppose then, for Argument's sake, that the Mediators of this new
Alliance, should be such as have been formerly employed in Treaties of the same
kind, and there detected to have Acted by Order, and to have been Empowered to
give Encouragement and Rewards. Would not this be an Argument to suspect them?

(k) If they should plainly be under Engagements to one Side, their Arguments
to the other, ought to be received accordingly; their fair Pretenses are to be
looked upon as part of their Commission, which may not improbably give them a
Dispensation in the case of Truth, when it may bring Prejudice upon the Service
of those by whom they are employed.

(l) If there should be men who having formerly had Means and Authority to
persuade by Secular Arguments, have in pursuance of that Power, sprinkled Money
amongst the Dissenting Ministers; and if those very Men should now have the
same Authority, practice the same Methods, and Disburse, where they cannot
otherwise persuade: It seems to me rather an Evidence, than a Presumption of
the Deceit.

(m) If there should be Ministers amongst you, who by having fallen under
Temptations of this kind, are in some sort engaged to continue their Frailty,
by the awe they are in least it should be exposed: The Persuasions of these
Unfortunate Men must sure have the less force, and their Arguments, though
never so specious, are to be suspected, when they come from Men who have
Mortgaged themselves to severe Creditors that expect a rigorous observation of
the Contract, let it be never so unwarrantabe.

(n) If these, or any others should at this time Preach up Anger and Vengeance
against the Church of England: may it not, without Injustice, be Suspected,
that a thing so plainly out of season, springs rather from corruption than
mistake; and that those who act this choleric part, do not believe themselves,
but only pursue higher Directions, and endeavor to make good that part of the
contract which obliges them, upon a Forfeiture, to make use of their inflaming
Eloquence? They might apprehend their Wages would be retrenched, if they should
be Moderate: And therefore, whilst Violence is their Interest, those who have
not the same Arguments, have no reason to follow such a Partial Example

(o) If there should be men who by the load of their Crimes against the
Government, have been bowed down to comply with it against their Conscience:
who by incurring the want of a Pardon, have drawn upon themselves the necessity
of a Resignation: Such men are to be lamented, but not to be believed. Nay,
they themselves when they have discharged their Unwelcome Task, will be
inwardly glad that their forced Endeavors do not succeed, and are pleased when
men resist their Insinuations; which are far from being Voluntary or Sincere,
but are Squeezed out of them by the weight of their being so Obnoxious.

(p) If in the height of this great Dearness by comparing things, it should
happen, That at this instant, there is much a surer friendship with those who
are so far from allowing Liberty, that they allow no Living to a Protestant
under them. Let the Scene lie in what part of the World it will, the Argument
will come home, and sure it will afford sufficient ground to suspect. Apparent
Contradictions must strike us: neither Nature nor Reason can digest them;
Self-Flattery, and the desire to deceive our selves, to gratify a present
Appetite, with all their Power, which is Great, cannot get the better of such
broad Conviction, as some things carry along with them. Will you call these
vain and empty Suspicions? have you been at all times so void of Fears and
Jealousies as to justify your being so unreasonably Valiant, in having none
upon this occasion? Such an extraordinary Courage at this unseasonable time, to
say no more, is too dangerous a Virtue to be commended.

(q) If then for these and a thousand other Reasons, there is cause to suspect,
sure your new Friends are not to Dictate to you, or advise you; for instance,
The Addresses that fly abroad every Week, and Murder us with another to the
same; the first Draughts are made by those who are not very proper to be
Secretaries to the Protestant Religion; and it is your part only to Write them
out fairer again. Strange! that you who have been formerly so much against Set
forms, should now be content the Priests should Indite for you. The nature of
Thanks is an unavoidable consequence of being Pleased or Obliged; they grow in
the Heart, and from thence show themselves either in Looks, Speech, Writing, or
Action: No Man was ever thankful because he was bid to be so; but because he
had, or Thought he had some Reason for it. If then there is cause in this Case
to pay such extravagant acknowledgments, they will flow naturally, without
taking such pains to procure them; and it is unkindly done to tire all the
Posthorses with carrying Circular Letters to Solicit that which would be
done without any Trouble or Constraint: If it is really in it self such a
favor, what needs so many pressing men to be thankful, and with such eager
Circumstances, that where persuasion cannot delude, Threatenings are employed to
fright them into a compliance? Thanks must be Voluntary, not only
Unconstrained, but Vnsollicited, else they are either Trifles or Snares, they
either signify nothing, or a great deal more than is intended by those that
give them. If an Inference should be made, That whosoever Thanketh the King for
His Declaration, is by that engaged to justify it in point of Law; it is a
greater stride than, I presume, all those care to make who are persuaded to
Address: If it shall be supposed, that all the Thankers shall be the Repealers
of the TEST, when ever a Parliament shall meet. Such an expectation is better
prevented before, than disappointed afterward; and the surest way to avoid the
lying under such a scandal, is not to do any thing that may give a color to
the mistake: These bespoken Thanks are little less improper than Love Letters
that were Sollicitated by the Lady to whom they are to be Directed; so, that
besides the little ground there is to give them, the manner of getting them,
does extremely lessen their Value. It might be wished that you would have
suppressed your impatience, and have been content for the sake of Religion, to
enjoy it within your selves, without the Liberty of a public Exercise, till a
Parliament had allowed it: But since that could not be, and that the Artifices
of some amongst you have made use of the Well meant Zeal of the Generality to
draw them into this mistake; I am so far from blaming you with that sharpness
which, perhaps, the matter in strictness would bear, that I am ready to err on
the side of the more gentle construction.

(r) There is a great difference* between enjoying quietly the advantages of an
Act irregularly done by others, and the going about to support it against the
Laws in being; the Law is so Sacred, that no Trespass against it is to be
Defended; yet Frailties may in some measure be Excused, when they cannot be
Justified. The desire of enjoying a Liberty from which men have been so long
restrained, may be a Temptation that their Reason is not at all times able to
resist. If in such a case, some Objections are leapt over, indifferent men will
be more inclined to lament the Occasion, than to fall too hard upon the Fault,
whilst it is covered with the Apology of a good Intention; but where to rescue
your selves from the Severity of one Law, you give a blow to all the Laws, by
which your Religion and Liberty are to be protected; and instead of silently
receiving the benefit of this Indulgence, you set up for Advocates to support
it, you become voluntary Aggressors, and look like Counsel retained by the
Prerogative against your old friend Magna Charta, who has done nothing to
deserve her falling thus under your Displeasure.

(s) If the case then should be, that the Price expected from you for this
Liberty, is giving up your Right in the Laws, sure you will think twice, before
you go any further in such a losing Bargain. After giving Thanks for the breach
of one Law, you lose the Right of Complaining of the breach of all the rest;
you will not very well know how to defend your selves, when you are pressed;
and having given up the Question, when it was for your advantage, you cannot
recall it, when it shall be to your prejudice. If you will set up at one time a
Power to help you, which at another time by parity of Reason shall be made use
of to destroy you, you will neither be pitied, nor relieved against any
mischief you draw upon your selves, by being so unreasonably thankful. It is
like calling in Auxiliaries to help, who are strong enough to subdue you: in
such a case your complaints will come too late to be heard, and your sufferings
will raise mirth instead of Compassion.

(t) If you think, for your excuse, to expound your Thanks so as to restrain
them as to this particular case; Others, for their end, will extend them
further; and in these differing Interpretation, that which is backed by
Authority will be the most likely to prevail; especially when by the advantage
you have given them, they have in truth the better of the Argument, and that
the inferences from your own Concessions are very strong, and express against
you. This is so far from being a groundless Supposition, and there was a late
instance of it, the last Session of Parliament, in the House of Lords, where
the first Thanks, though things of course, were interpreted to be the
Approbation of the Kings whole Speech, and a Restraint never so much disliked;
and it was with difficulty obtained, not to be excluded from the liberty of
objecting to this mighty Prerogative of Dispensing, merely by this innocent and
usual piece of good Manners, by which no such thing could possibly be intended.

(u) This shows, that some bounds are to be put to your good Breeding, and
that the Constitution of England is too valuable a thing to be ventured upon a
Complement. Now that you have for some time enjoyed the benefit of the End, it
is time for you to look into the danger of the Means: The same Reason that made
you desirous to get Liberty, must make you Sollicitous to preserve it; so that
the next thought will naturally be, not to engage your self beyond Retreat, and
to agree so far with Principles of all Religions, as not to rely upon a
Deathbed Repentance.

(x) There are certain Periods of Time, which being once past, make all
Cautions ineffectual, and all Remedies desperate. Our Understandings are apt to
be hurried on by the first Heats; which, if not restrained in time, do not give
us leave to look back, till it is too late. Consider this in the case of your
Anger against the Church of England, and take warning by their Mistake in the
same kind, when after the late King's Restoration, they preserved so long the
bitter taste of your rough usage to them in other times, that it made them
forget their Interest, and sacrifice it to their Revenge.

(y) Either you will blame this Proceeding in them, and for that Reason not
follow it, or if you allow it, you have no reason to be offended with them; so
that you must either dismiss your Anger, or lose your Excuse; except you should
argue more partially than will be supposed of men of your Morality and
Understanding.

(z) If you had now to do with those rigid Prelates, who made it matter of
Conscience to give you the least Indulgence, but kept you at an uncharitable
distance, and even to your more reasonable Scruples continued stiff inexorable,
the Argument might be fairer on your side; but since the common Danger has so
laid open that Mistake, that all the former Haughtiness toward you is for ever
extinguished, and that it has turned the Spirit of Persecution, into a Spirit
of a Peace, Charity, and Condescension; shall this happy Change only affect the
Church of England? and are you so in love with Separation, as not to be moved
by his Example? It ought to be followed, were there no other reason than that
it is a Virtue; but when besides that, it is become necessary to your
preservation, it is impossible to fail the having its effect upon you.

(a) If it should be said that the Church of England is never Humble, but when
she is out of Power, and therefore loses the Right of being believed when she
pretends to it; the Answer is, first, it would be an uncharitable Objection,
and very much mistimed; an unseasonable Triumph, not only ungenerous, but
unsafe: So that in these Respects it cannot be urged, without Scandal, even
though it could be said with Truth. Secondly, This is not so in Fact, and the
Argument must fall, being built upon a false Foundation; for whatever may be
told you, at this very hour, and in the heat and glare of your present
Sunshine, the Church of England can in a Moment bring Clouds again; and turn
the Royal Thunder upon your Heads, blow you off the Stage with a Breath, if she
would give but a Smile for a kind Word; the least Glimpse of her Compliance,
would throw you back into the state of Suffering, and draw upon you all the
Arrears of Severity, which have accrued during the time of this kindness to
you, and yet the Church of England, with all her Faults, will not allow her
self to be rescued by such unjustifiable means, but chooses to bear the weight
of power, rather than lie under the burden of being Criminal.

(b) It cannot be said, that she is Vnprovoked; Books and Letters come out
every day, to call for Answers, yet she will not be stirred. From the supposed
Authors, and the style one would swear they were Undertakers, and had made a
Contract to fall out with the Church of England. There are Lashes in every
Address, Challanges to draw the Pen in every Pamphlet; In short, the fairest
occasions in the World given to quarrel; but she wisely distinguishes between
the Body of Dissenters, whom she will suppose to Act, as they do, with no ill
intent; and these small Skirmishes picked and sent out to picqueer, and to begin
a Fray amongst the Protestants, for the entertainment, as well as the advantage
of the Church of Rome.

(c) This conduct is so good, that it will be scandalous not to Applaud it. It
is not equal dealing, to blame our Adversaries for doing ills and not commend
them when they do well.

(d) To hate them because they persecuted, and not to be reconciled to be
reconciled to them when they are ready to suffer, rather than receive all the
Advantages, that can be gained by criminal compliance, is a Principle no sort
of Christians can own, since it would give an Objection to them never to be
answered.

(e) Think a little, who they were that promoted your former Persecutions, and
then consider how it will look to be angry with the Instruments, and at the
same time to make a League with the Authors of our Sufferings.

(f) Have you enough considered what will be expected from you? Are you ready
to stand in every Borough by Virtue of a Conge d'eslire, and instead of
Election, be satisfied if you are Returned?

(g) Will you in Parliament, justify the Dispensing Power, with all its
Consequences, and Repeal the Test, by which you will make way for the Repeal of
all the Laws, that were made to preserve your Religion, and to Enact others
that shall Destroy it?

(h) Are you disposed to change the Liberty of Debate, into the Merit of
Obedience, and to be made Instruments to Repeal or Enact Laws, when the Roman
Consistory, are Lords of the Articles.

(i) Are you so linked with your new Friends, as to reject any Indulgence a
Parliament shall offer you, if it shall not be so Comprehensive as to include
the Papists in it.

(k) Consider that the employed Conditions of our new Treaty are no less, then
that you are to do every thing you are desired, without examining, and that for
this pretended Liberty of Conscience, your real Freedom is to be Sacrificed:
Your former Faults hang like Chains still about you, you are let loose only
upon Bayl; the first Act of Noncompliance, sends you to Jayl again.

(l) You may see that the Papists themselves do not rely upon the Legality of
this Power, which you are to Justify, since the being so very earnest to get
it Established by a Law, and the doing such very hard things in order, as they
think to obtain it, is a clear Evidence, that they do not think that the single
power of the Crown is in this case a good Foundation; especially when this is
done under a Prince, so very tender of all the Rights of Sovereignty, that he
would think it a diminution to his Prerogative, where he conceives it strong
enough to go alone, to call in the Legislative help to strengthen and support
it.

(m) You have formerly blamed the Church of England, and not without reason,
for going so far as they did in their compliance; and yet as soon as they
stopped, you see they are not only Deserted, but Prosecuted: Conclude then from
this Example, that you must either break off your Friendship, or resolve to
have no Bounds in it. If they do not succeed in their Design, they will leave
you first; if they do, you must either leave them, when it will be too late for
your Safety, or else after the squeasines of startling at a Surplice, you must
be forced to swallow Transubstantiation.

(n) Remember that the other day, those of the Church of England were Trimmers
for enduring you, and now by a sudden Turn, you are become the Favorites; do
not deceive your selves, it is not the Nature of lasting Plants thus to shoot
up in the Night; you may look gay and green for a little time, but you want a
Root to give you a continuance. It is not so long since, as to be forgotten,
that the Maxim was, It is impossible for a Dissenter, not to be a REBEL.
Consider at this time in France, even the new Converts are so far from being
Employed, that they are Disarmed; their sudden Change makes them still to be
distrusted, notwithstanding that they are Reconciled: What are you to expect
from your dear Friends, to whom, when ever they shall think fit to throw you
off again, you have in other times given such Arguments for their excuse?

(o) Besides all this, you Act very unskilfully against your visible Interest,
if you throw away the Advantages, of which you can hardly fail in the next
probable Revolution. Things tend naturally to what you would have, if you would
let them alone, and not by an unseasonable Activity lose the Influences of your
good Star, which promises every thing that is prosperous.

(p) The Church of England convinced of its Error in being Severe to you; the
Parliament, whenever it meets, is sure to be Gentle to you; the next Heir
bred in the Country which you have so often Quoted for a Pattern of Indulgence;
a general Agreement of all thinking Men, that we must no more cut our selves
off from the Protestants abroad, but rather enlarge the Foundations upon which
we are to build our Desences against the Common Enemy; so that in truth, all
things seem to conspire to give you ease and satisfaction, if by too much have
to anticipate your good Fortune, you do not destroy it.

(q) The Protestants have but one Article of Humane Strength, to oppose the
Power which is now against them, and that is, not to lose the advantage of
their numbers, by being so unwary as to let themselves be divided.

(r) We all agree in our Duty to our Prince, our Octjections to his Belief, do
not hinder us from seeing his Virtues; and our not complying with his Religion,
has no effect upon our Allegiance; we are not to be Laughed out of our Passive
Obedience, and the Doctrine of Non-Resistance, though even those who perhaps
owe the best part of their Security to that Principle, are apt to make a Jest
on it.

(s) So that if we give no Advantage by the fatal Mistake of misapplying our
Anger, by the natural course of things, this Danger will pass away like a
shower of Hail; fair weather will succeed, as lowering as the Sky now looks,
and all by this plain and easy Receipt. Let us be still, quiet, and undivided,
firm at the same time to our Religion, our Loyalty, and our Laws, and so long
as we continue this Method, it is next to impossible, that the odds of two
hundred to one should lose the Bet; except the Church of Rome, which has been
so long barren of Miracles, should now in her declining Age, be brought to Bed
of One that would outdo the best she can brag of in her Legend.

(t) To conclude, the short Question will be, Whether you will join with those
who must in the end run the same Fate with you. If Protestants of all sorts in
their behavior to one another, have been to blame, they are upon the more
equal terms, and for that very reason it is fitter for them now to be
Reconciled. Our Disunion is not only a Reproach, but a danger to us; those who
believe in modern Miracles, have more Right, or at least more Excuse, to
neglect all Secular Cautions; but for us, it is as justifiable to have no
Religion, as wilfully to throw away the humane Means of preserving it.

THE REPLY.
SIR,
IT is a most undeniable truth, that fashionable Addresses are very little to
be regarded; and the temper of the Nation as little to be known by them, as we
can know Men to be of one inclination, because they were one sort of habit; but
when they flow from Gratitude, Duty, and Interest, and not from fear or
resentment, they are good symbols of unconstrainedness, and sincerity; and to
whom soever presented, ought to be kindly received.

I own not my self a Dissenter from the Church of England, and upon that score,
find not my self concerned in all that you write relating to them; but assure
you, I am one of those that have a propensity of mind, ready to receive any
impression of Reason, and who am so sensible, that a great part of the comforts
of humane Life, and Economy of Government is lost, to those who confine their
Charity, good Esteem and Candor to those, only of their own Opinion: That you
and I differ mostly, in that you confine your thoughts for the public, to the
subdivision of Protestants only; whereas I think, they ought to be enlarged
likewise to all Honorable Virtuous, and Loyal persons of other denominations;
and neither Fear or Resentment ought at this time, to make us swerve from that
Golden Rule, of doing to others, as we would have others do to us.

(b) It is true, that in small wounds, in the fleshy parts only, the
sympathetick way of Cure, and closing the wound in its own blood with bandage
of clean Linen, will serve; but where amputations and lacerations are such (as
Seclusion and Rebellion) sovereign, wound, salves are requisite. You allow your
Dissenter to act by natural instinct, as other Animals do that can lick
themselves whole, and you dress their wounds with so gentle a touch, as if you
were unconcerned whether they were cured, or not; and least they should
infandum renovare dolorem, reflect upon the fresh bleeding wounds, you give
them a dose of Opium: It is true, you blame the Patient for his precipitateness
in using the Remedies nearest at hand, without examining, not only the skill
and ability, but the good intention of the Surgeon, and the virtues of his
Remedies; but this is all Artifice, that you may get the Patient to commit
himself to your care, and that you might possess him with an Opinion, that none
else had the true method of healing, which is not fair practice, to decoy him
from using the certainest and most assured help this Island can afford.

(c) Here you change the Scene, and transform your Patient into a passionate
Wooer, who is fallen in love with a new Friend; and since you presume it will
be an hard task to make him quit his new Amors, for his late coy and scornful
Lady; you are contriving a Fascination, and would garnish his Bridal Feast with
a Mean Tekel, a Memento Mori, which shows (by your favor) an ill nature in
you, that will not allow a Dissenter the joy of his honey moon. In this, you are
like one that after vows, persuades to Enquires: But I hope e're I have gone
through with this discourse; you will acknowledge, though your Style is soft
and beautiful, yet there is a weakness in your Reasonings, will not easily
prevail with a true dissenter, who is not so far gone in his new passion, but
that he will hear, and answer too.

(d) Since you quit your exhortatory Preface, which was penned to obtain
Audience, and now will let us see your dexterity at Argument. I shall endeavor
to follow your method; owning you have chosen the fittest mediums, and if you
could make them as convincing as plaufible, (which is now to be examined) you
might expect many Proselites.

(e) The Kings Justice and Honor was as conspicuous as early, in his praises
of, and promises to the Church of England; and I believe, in the upshot, those
Politicians will be found the worst enemies to both, who made such ill
constructions of the Kings desire of the Repeal. So that whatever the Church of
England has, or can suffer, may be ascribed to their taking the matter by the
wrong handle. But it is most evident, Dissenters were then designed to have a
mutual share of Liberty, since the King granted, noli prosequi's, inhibitions,
and other relexations to them, as soon as he did to Roman Catholics. How
dutiful it was to reject the Kings Courtship, I leave to all un-interessed
persons to judge, and the more the Instances can be multiplied, the greater is
the demonstration of the Kings desire to preserve them in their Duty; and the
more faulty, those Men who filled peoples minds with the affrightments of the
Kings design to settle Popery, and destroy the Church of England, which they
knew morally impossible, and yet continue to make it the only Helmet Argument.
Those who fly to any for Refuge, had need use better Arguments than flattery:
whilst Dissenters were Rebels, they could expect no other Quarter than the Law
prescribed, if the King had not been most merciful; and it is most apparent, a
greater cause of the granting Indulgence, is to take away all occasions and
pretenses of Rebellion, rather, than singly to usher in Liberty to Roman
Catholics, by that Grace. Neither is it any new inclination in the King to
relieve Dissenters in Communion with the Roman Catholics, unless you will give
him the lie, who so publicly avows, that it has been ever his judgment, that
none ought to be Oppressed and Persecuted for matters of Religion; and I think
He ought to be believed as soon as any in His Kingdom. Therefore, if any Roman
Catholics at this time, let fall hard words against Dissenters, it can be
against none but such, who they have reason to suspect, do act by no public
spirit of preservation, for any but their own party; and by this show, that
they have not changed their Nature, by the favor that is afforded them.

(f) After all the search I can make, I neither find it to be an Article of
Faith in the Church of Rome, to deny Liberty to, nor that Faith is not to be
kept with Heretics; and if any Constitution, or Decree of a Council be found
to the contrary, that obliges not Catholics in point of Obedience. The
fallacy of your reasoning is easily detected, by pulling out one pin the whole
Machine flies in pieces. One cannot be a Member in Communion with the Church of
Rome, or any other constituted Church, (whether Fallible, or Infallible) who is
by that Church declared a Heretic; so that liberty of Communion, is only what
is inconsistent with the Church of Rome; but it no ways follows, that
Schismatics, or Heretics, in their sense, ought not to be tolerated to Live;
yea, enjoy their Worship, by the power of the Prince who grants that Indulgence
as Father of his Country: For it is no Church Membership that is required by
Tolleration. Suppose any Prince, (let the Scene be where it will,) that has in
his Kingdom great numbers of Subjects, of several persuasions in Religion; must
he unpeople his Kingdom of Two Hundred of his Subjects, for every single Man of
his own Religion, according to your Calculation? Do you judge in good earnest,
His Ghostly Father, or his Holy Father the Pope, will judge him to be in an
habit of sin for it, or enjoin him for a Penance, to make such a Carnage? no,
surely they will rather let the Tares grow among the Wheat; or if He do not
this, must he pull ruin upon Himself, and all those of His persuasion? How
Infallible soever the Church of Rome may judge it self, yet you must allow she
is not quite void of Sense, Prudence, and humane Policy, or will not in several
things yield to public good and necessity. You must suppose that Church to
oblige that King to a Barbarism, even impossible in it self to be effected,
e're you can make good any such conclusion from the Premises. Excommunication
is the highest, and most destructive Sentence, any Church can pronounce; and it
is to avoid Mutulations, Dismembring, Incisions, and Corrosives for Religion
our merciful King proposes this Repeal, since it has been by too sad
experience found, how Magistrates (Members of other Churches, besides that of
Rome) have been guilty of the same, whether with better Dexterity, Success, or
Authority, I now dispute not; but surely all this harangue, tends rather to
engage Dissenters, at any rate, to purchase that Sovereign Panacaea, which will
prevent Persecution from any hand, than to continue in a state of danger.

(g) Kings as well as others may Time matters, and the Indulgence of a Prince
makes no quicker a change in a Dissenter, than a Pardon does after the
Malefactor has his Irons on, or the Halter about his neck, or the poor Man
made instantly rich, by finding a Treasure. These motions are from extremes as
quick, and as surprising. Dissenters, while under the sense of continual
sufferings, might be instigated to Rebellion, and so be Sons of Belial; yet
this sacred Ray (if such mists as you are casting before them hinder not) may
well transform them to thankful and dutiful Subjects, which is all that is
expected. It is true, if the Dissenters Features be not changed, from having a
sower, sullen, murmuring, and repining Aspect, to that of chearfullness, and
gratitute; Roman Catholics have no reason to harbor a good Opinion of them:
Or if they be such Bigots, to charge all persons that are not of their
persuasion, with Idolatry, (as you know they have done to the Church of
England, even by that Churches own Argument,) they are to be instructed better,
but this hinders not the King to do them good, even against their deserts; and
I think it one of the greater Arguments, that you are a most Rigid Calvinist;
or Brownist, rather than a Church of England-Man, that make use of this
Article, and that you are a most undutiful Subject, that will brand your
Sovereign with being an Idolater. So that if there were no other Reason; for
that single inference, every Loyal Subject should be for Repealing the Test;
and be so far from dispensing with any Dissenter for broaching this Doctrine,
(which might tempt some judaizing Zealots to stone him) that non obstente, all
the Indulgence; they should be proceeded against as enemies to the Kings Crown
and Dignity; and that should be all you should get by ridiculing such words as
the Kings Prerogative impowers him to use.

(h) That self-preservation may cause agreement of several interests to disarm
a common Persecutor, is no Paradox; or that the men of Taunton and Tiverton
shall become Loyal, when the prime ground of their disloyalty is taken away;
nor that in this comprehensive liberty the Quakers (though no Christians with
some, who may object Antichristianity against others) should not be considered.
For in the Kings Indulgence the Subjects are not considered, as conforming to
Canons and Constitutions of Churches, but as obedient, grateful, or useful and
industrious. Surely in a populous maritine City, we wonder not; nor is it
thought inconvenient, that Turks, and Jews, Chinesses, Abyssines, Japanners, or
Persions, Italians, French, or Spaniards, or any other remote Nations, frequent
the Exchange, and exercise their several Religions, provided they enrich it by
Traffic; and it is a much pleasinger sight, than to see the streets thronged
with beggars in as differently patched Coats, sounding one uniform doleful note
of want, to cause pity and compassion. It is most true, that if a Popish
Successor were in reality such a one, as he was sometimes represented, we
should need to suspend our belief of his Clemency, and that we have been under
most shameful, and I may say of too many, even wilful mistakes, concerning our
Royal Sovereign, is a most demonstrable truth; and since He gives so many
Arguments, that it is not for the bringing in of Popery, but for the securing,
not only His Roman Catholics, but of all His other Subjects, from the lash of
Penal. Laws, that he grants this Indulgence; whereby all Industrious peaceable
Men, may follow their employments without being obnoxious to Fines,
Imprisonments, or Death, for want of Uniformity: It will not surely be the
Question, Whether the Priests words of Consecration, can Annihilate the
Sacramental Bread; but whether it be more Kingly, for our Sovereign to feed His
whole Family, or starve some, whilst others are too much pampered. It is not
the mystery of the Sacrament, so much troubles some, as it is, that a Roman
Catholic King should have more kindness for Protestant Dissenters, than those
who would be esteemed the zealousest for the Church of England, can afford them.

(i) Men's heads are much easilier laden with, then unladen of suspicions; how
light soever they be, they generally Ballast the Vessel; and where ever
jealousy enters, with it, crowd in Legions of evil Spirits. If one had as many
eyes as Pores, it would fit them all with destain'd Optic Glasses, or Prismes,
to give deceitful Colors to every Object. And that which is most troublesome,
in this passion, is, that it is with great difficulty mastered; especially when
it is heightened by Interest. You have a great dexterity to improve this, by
Affrightment, Calumny, and Detraction; which you couch in such General Terms,
as it is difficult to get a grasp of them. Therefore, I must pass by what is
Common place, and tell you, that a Secretary of the Cabals of the Usurpers, or
to the famous E. of Shaftsbury, could not have given a livelier Description of
the Employment of these Emissaries, than you have done; but you do wifely not
to expose persons, lest we should know who they are, that are employed on the
errand, which is only to alienate the Subjects Affections from their Sovereign,
and to excite the peoples jealousy. If any be employed that have been
detected, and are now sincere, they are fitter to discover the former methods,
for being wedges of the same wood, they are fittest for the work of pinning or
cleaving. But to hang a scandal in the Air like a Cloud, that none can know
where the shower may fall, is not done like a Gentleman of your Morality and
Understanding.

(k) This character of a Juggler is so drawn to the life, that one would swear
you were looking all the while in the Glass, while you used the Pencil.
Dissimulation is such a changling, that it is all Vizard-mask, with several
foyles seperable by sleight of hand; so that one may sooner find Faith in an
Affrican, than in such a shift-coat. But till you can prove such are
Commissionated to work Dissenters to comply with the King, all the Water runs
but by the Mill.

(l) That there are mercinary Men, is no such News, that need be told with such
cumlocution. Those that use such tools, will find them often need the whetting,
and they must be vain spend-thrifts, (which I think you cannot say of our
King;) that pour their Money into a bottomlels purse. Oats, Ignoramus Juries,
and pensionary witnesses, were more proper Cattle to be fed with such
Provinder, than Dissenting Ministers, if I be not mistaken in them. The King
neither needs, nor will ever employ such Instruments. He knows better how to
manage his Exchequer, than to waste it on such Hirelings, who sell their
Conscience and Service by inch of Candle.

(m) From Eyewitnesses, and Contributors themselves; I have heard, that
several Charities to Nonconformist Ministers, were put under their Preaching
Cushions; and I do not much wonder, that these Benevolences (which were as good
as Glebe and Tithe) enabled them to resist the Temptation of taking Benefices,
with the condition of renouncing the Covenant, etc. But that there should be
any among them now, who, for such filthy lucre, design to Morigage the
Protestant Religion, (which you must suppose, or nothing,) I shall never
believe upon your bare suggestion. In former times by keeping up the Schism,
they might hope for some favorable Revolution, whereby they might be capable
of liberal Maintenance; but that the Rigor of their Creditors shall drive them
to put on the Cowl or Scapular, or cooperate with those that design it, shall
be no Article of my Faith.

(n) It seems you were sensible of the weakness of this Medium, and now the
Dissenters must Preach the Gospel for envy. The forward Ministers amongst them
are much obliged to you, since it seems they are either Judas's to sell the
Cause for Silver, or must be branded with one of the Devils Characters,
Accusers of the Brethren; and whether you lessen their crimes in saying those
who act this Choleric part, believe not themselves; but therein sin against
their Consciences, and only pursue higher directions; I leave to others to
judge. What wages such may get here, they best know: But I think it must be a
severe punishment they may expect hereafter. May we not be more charitable to
judge, that such Men are so far from personating a Vengeance, and using fiery
Tongues and inflaming Eloquence, for that end. That they only express their
resentment against those, who in their Apprehensions have too severely
Persecuted them for Conscience Sake. Such a Plea may be as like to gain belief,
as your too groundless Accusation of them; for Indulgence, Charity, and
Moderation, are very consistent. The King desires all may enjoy their Religion
in peace, and hires none to keep up the strife by recrimination and violence,
nor designs by the taking away of Penal Laws, that one Subject should worry
another; and therein gives you, as well as Dissenters, a Gracious President and
Example to follow.

(o) Here, in my Opinion, you have exposed your friends something
disadvantagiously. It is an unfortunate thing for any to have combined against
the Government, since it requires much trial, e're their Repentance can be
believed. It is true, those that have had the Rickets, are found often to have
a good share of cunning and wit, but by their bowed Legs, or some other infirm
parts, especially in the region of their breast, they are easily distinguished
from those of more healthy Constitutions. The old Proverb is as often true, of
hasty Converts, as of Pardoned Persons, That save a Thief from the Gallows, and
he will be the first will do you a mischief. But God forbid all should be
censured for some Men's double-fac'd Villainies. Such Sycophants shall never find
me their Advocate; let every Herring hang by his own Tail. Let those who are
detected, forfeit their neck, or hang by it in the Pillory, e're I pity them.
But what I pray do those deserve, who never wore shackles, or were bowed down
e're they complied, and promise to their Prince strenuous endeavors for His
Service, and that they will not fail to hit the mark; and yet designedly shoot
short, or over.

(p) It is an unhappy state of Kings, that when they endeavor by good Methods,
the ease and profit of their Subjects; yet they must be traduced by the
insolent Pens of malevolent Subjects. Our Gracious King has afforded a safe
Retreat, and Liberal Contributions to the Reffugees, whom the great
neighboring Monarch has Exiled; and by His Royal Enterprise, to get the Penal
Laws Repealed, designs not only His Dominious to be free from all Persecution
for Religion, but to be a safe harbor for the Distressed; and is thereby taking
the most contrary measures to what that neighboring Prince has done. With
what effrontry therefore, can you charge the King, either with imitating His
example, or corresponding with him in that design? I Appeal to the fled
Protestants, whether they find not as good usage here, as any in their
condition do in other Countries? which, methinks carries conviction broad
enough, that you are a very evil Caluminator. It is true, there was a time,
when the belief of Ten Thousand Pilgrims and Black Bills, were endeavored to
be crammed down our throats; and some were such Cowards then, as to be frighted
with them. Must we therefore be always Imposed upon, and never return to our
senses again. The frequent discoveries of those Impostures, cannot but recruit
the most timorous Spirits, and restore them to some degree of valor, though it
will deserve no great Commendation as a Virtue, since the thick mist is so
exhaled, which made us take a crop of Thistles, for a Battalion of Pikes.

(q) Amongst a Hundred of your florid Sentences, I have not yet found one solid
Reason, why Dissenters should not act as they do in policy, or that they want
any Advice or Dictator, when they follow the conduct of their own Interest.
They need not go down to those some call Philistines, to whet their Weapons,
which are only praises and thanks; which the poorest Beggar, without any touch
of good breeding, knows how to pay for a small Alms. There was a time, when
Petitions, (the Elder Brothers of Addresses) being formed by the leading Men of
the Lower House, were posted into confiding Hands, to be sent back Ten, or
Twenty Thousand strong: Those tended to the strengthening the hands of the
Murderers of the King; and you would now stint a spirit of Obedience and
Thankfulness to our King, which springs and flows from content and obligation,
and may be easily discovered to be sincere, in all the Dissenters Speeches,
Writings, and Actions, and are so far from needing to be bid, that all your
Rhetoric cannot forbid them. Surely you think not their Thanks to spring like
Mushroms without root, and in a Night. And if you will not admit Dissenters
among the Tribe of thinking Animals, yet let them have the Reputation of
sensitive Plants, that shrink at a rough touch, and erect their Leaves by a
warmer Gleam: I see not therefore, why Dissenters, having the sense of former
sharp usage, should not perceive their ease, and whence it comes; and have no
reason to question their sincerity of thanks, since they are for a matter of
greatest import to them they ever received from the Crown, since they
sub-divided from the Church of England. Yet I believe, there has been more
Industry used to Disperse such Letters, as yours of Caution and Circumspection,
then ever there was for those Circular ones of three or four Bishops, and you
are the first Post that brings the News of any that were threatened to join with
them, or any affrightments used to cause a compliance, since they carry with
them all the tokens of Voluntariness, Vnconstrainedness, and Vnsolicitudeness,
that could be expected. Therefore, because in good earnest you think they will
signify a great deal, you are at all this pains. If that which Dissenters have
so earnestly desn'd, prayed, yea, fought for, can be called a Triste, you are
in the right. I never thought Addressors so little acquainted with the
Constitution of the Government, as to think their Addresses equal to Votes in
Parliament, or that they, with the Kings assent, constituted the Legislative;
though they may hope, such Votes out of the House, may beget others in it. I do
not think any one, that had a piece of Gold given him, would be so besotted to
refuse it, till he had consulted such a scrupulous Gentleman as you, whether it
were all just in weight and allay, or that the giver came honestly by it. I
suppose you are angry the Dissenters made not their Addresses in this form.

Great SIR,
WE would thank You for Your Gracious Declaration; but we know not, whether the
Law impowers You to grant it; we have heard indeed of Your Majesty's having the
excecutive part of the Laws in Your Royal Person, and the Dispencing Power; and
that You desire the Test and Penal Laws may be abolished by Act of Parliament.
But before we return You our Thanks for the ease You afford us, or that we can
resolve to give our Voices for such Repeal, we desire to consult our common
Lawyers, and our Elder Brethren the Church of England, and then we will give
You our Opinion; and we do this the rather, least you be mistaken in us. Sir,
we dare not encourage You to be kind to us; and we must stay our Addresses of
thanks, lest we give a Scandal to our Brethren or they hereafter punish us, for
this forwardness.


I fancy you have the vanity to hope that your Letter will prevail with some to
desist from Addresses, upon those motives; otherwise, what need was there for
you to be so urgent with them to suppress their impatience, and for the sake of
those, that are now Abhorrers, to stick close to the Act of Uniformity, till
the King die, (whom God long preserve to finish this great work;) in hopes a
Protestant Parliament, under a Protestant King, will grant them better Terms:
For I hope, by the word Parliament, you mean not the Two Houses, like those of
41, who Entitled them to the Supreme Power. It seems, if Dissenters hearken not
to you, though at present you are willing to make a gentle Construction, of the
well meant Zeal of some, in drawing others into the Mistake; yet you threaten
them with Sharpness and Satyr, because in strictness the matter will bear it,
if we believe you.

(r) It seems a Dissenter may feed fully, but must say no Grace, or cry
Roast-meat; would you have them pet like froward Children, because the
Benevolence was not offered first to them, or in the Circumstances they desire
it. It seems, they may privately thank God for putting it into the Kings Heart,
to grant them ease; yea, they may enjoy the Advantag e of it, but without
noise, lest some Dog catch the Morsel the Cat purs upon. Oh! a public owning,
and desire to have Indulgence Establlsh'd by Law, is to support an Act
irregularly done against the sacred Laws of the Land: This is such a Trespass,
as may no ways be defended; but to observe any rules of good manners or
dutifulness to the King, is a grievous fault. Methinks you ought to have
brought very undeniable Authorities, e're you had presumed to question the
judgment of the King, His Privy Council, and the Court of the King's Bench, as
to the Dispensing Power. But since you offer not one Syllable of Argument, I
shall remit you to Westminster Hall to defend the point and receive your doom.
You endeavor gent^y to stroke the Dissenters, that are under Temptation and
Frailties, which makes them, you say, leap over the Objections may be made, and
overlook the sad consequence of giving thanks, not only as an inlet to Popery,
but the giving a deadly blow to all the Laws, by which their Liberty and
Religion are to be protected. This is an heavy Sentence; whereby they are
judged to sell their Birthright for a morsel of Bread, or a mess of Pottage.
Let us therefore turn the Optic Glass, and you may more surely discover, that
the King designs no breach of Magna Charta, nor to retain any Council for the
Prerogative against it; but on the contrary, to have it confirmed in a much
larger extent, than ever it was by His Royal Predecessors: for it is most
certain, that all Penal Laws for Religion are so many infringments of it; and
if you would have Magna Charta inviolably kept, you know what Church is thereby
Established. Here therefore you quarrel with the King, for endeavoring to have
a Charter of Liberties Established, that will be a standard for all future
freedom, and enfranchisement of Conscience; and to infer, that the Subjects
yielding to this, will put them out of the protection of all the Laws that
secure their Liberties, is no less an ignorant than seditious Suggestion.

(s) We are a most happy people, in the security we have by Law to enjoy the
Liberties the Royal Predecessors of our most Gracious King has granted. But if
His Majecty effect His desire in this Repeal, He will be the Author of a
greater freedom to the Subjects, then they ever yet enjoyed; so that none, in
matters of Religion, shall be put upon ever Complaining against, or the giving
up the Question; since all pretenses of puttng it, will be thereby prevented.
By the operating power of such an Act, such a mutual assurance, and security
would be given, as it would be in no parties power to endeavor, or to desire to
mischief, or destroy another. I fancy indeed, some Apparators and Bailifs may
suffer a diminution of profit; and some men of vindicative spirits, may want
the assistance of sanguinary, and Penal Laws, to revenge themselves by: But the
benefit that will redound to the whole, will sufficiently compensate that loss.
The Kings of England will be the gainers, in that they will be no more
disquieted with Rebellions upon the account of Religion. The Parliaments will
be eased of the tiresom, disquieting, and unpleasing toil of making Laws, upon
every emergence to restrain some party or other from their way of Worship; and
imposing Tests and Oaths, according as prevailing Parties have power: and when
the intestine struggles of every party, to manacle, and put the shackles and
badges of slavery, upon each other, shall be taken away; the Legislative will
be at full liberty to attend soly the aggrandizing of our Kings, and restoring
them to the power and interest at home and abroad, of the gloriousest of their
Predecessors: And to make good Laws for the enriching of the body of the
people, and by perpetual harmony, unite the Subjects in the common band of Duty
and Allegiance to their Sovereign, and mutual love and endearment to one
another. The Roman Catholics would have no occasion to repine, since they
might freely enjoy their Religion, and the Church of England would be possessed
of the Dignities and Benefices they enjoy; and the Dissenters would be
satisfied, that they had the freedom of their Tabernacles and Conventicles, and
all the content of this would be heightened in the peaceable and durable
enjoyment of it; when it would be in no Parties power to invade the Liberties
of another. This is the right Scheme of His Majesty's generous design; and if
Dissenters fall not to their old work of stubbing up Episcopacy, root and
branch, it may most certainly continue. For the obedience of Roman Catholics
under a Protestant Government, we have the most near and complete instance in
the United Provinces, where they live with the free exercise of their Religion,
under a Bishop of their own, who is Treated according to his Character by the
States, to whom they impart their pleasure; and by his directions the Roman
Catholics obey. So, that when the King of France Invaded that Country, none
stood firmer than They did. These pay such an absolute Obedience, that if the
States, should for a time interdict them the use of their Religion, they would
yield to it. So that all you urge as consequences of the Repeal, vanishes upon
the very opening the Kings intentions; which, I dare venture my head, that I
have more truly declared, than You by all your smooth Oratory, have made out by
suspicions.

(t) Expounding of the sense, and meaning of Oaths, is generally granted
peculiarly to belong to the imposer; and if the taker satisfy his Conscience,
and perform all required in the taking of them; the Civil Power enquires no
further. But in the return of thanks, the receivers of the Benefit, are the
best Judges, in what sense they render them; and I know not how they are
concerned in any Inferences, unless of those that scruple their reality. It is
true, if Dissenters only dreamed of an happiness, they might consult you for
the Interpretations, but whilst their eyes are open, and they have the full
sense of repose and ease, they must beg you will spare your Divinations, being
resolved to rely upon the kindness and Authority of the Giver, and will never
be afraid of any Inferences, when it is so manifest, that His Majesty designs
common ease, and a perpetual settlement of it, by Act of Parliament, which they
think they have all the reason in the World to endeavor, may be effected in
His Majesty's Reign, who laid the Foundation of such a Temple of Concord, as
none of His Royal Predecessors ever did before. As to the ridiculing some Loyal
persons Zeal, to have had a favorable sense put upon the thanks returned for
the Kings Gracious Speech; if there had been more of the Members of both
Houses, who would have credited the Kings Royal desire to have been, just and
equitable, and reflected upon the true Reasons the King had to insist upon that
point; no doubt they might have had a kind return from the King, and such a
settlement of the Church of England, as they could have desired, and better
than they now may expect. Therefore, since by your Confession, so many never
intended to answer the Kings Speech with more than a bare Complement; I do not
think it was any such difficulty, to obtain liberty of objecting against the
Prerogative of Dispensing, which I suppose a great many more are now satisfied
in the legality of, and when there is occasion, both the Judges, and other
Members of the long Robe, will make clear by Law and Equity.

(u) Sure there are numerous parties of all persuasions, who know how to set a
right value on the Constitution of the English Government; but I will never
reckon these in the number, who are for such a stipulatory mixed Monarchy, as
our old Publicans asserted; who at first complementing the people, that the
Original of the Supreme Authority was in them, as soon as they had power,
assumed it to themselves, under the notion of Representation. To proceed, the
end of the Journey will never be reached, if the Traveller set down his rest in
the midway. The King has been the great Means and Author of this Liberty, and
I hope it is not that time of the day to Vote Him dangerous. The way to have
that preserved, which is granted by the King, is to study by all thankfulness
to preserve His Royal Favor, and to press forward to obtain its complete
Establishment, and never to sound a Retreat, till they obtain the full
enjoyment of the Praemium held out to them; which, if by flagging in the
pursuit, they shall only enjoy during His Majesty's Life, they will have cause
to repent at His Death, that they got it not better secured.

(x) Thanks for the Indulgence, and strenuous desires to have it
Parliamentarily Confirmed, is taking time by the fore-top, and striking while
the Iron is hot. The Temple of Janus was opened in Augustus Caesar's time, as a
certain sign that the Roman Empire was then at peace: Should not Dissenters
rejoice, even to some excess, that our Augustus has now opened it; whereby,
through our Vito, they may see what Intestine jars, what effusion of blood, the
Penal Laws have made; and from the other may have the most delightful Prospect
of large, and long lasting Freedom. By the Instances you bring of the
Non-Conformists rough usage of the Church of England, when they had the
fleecing of it, and the manner of its retaliation. I should think you ought to
have determined the usefulness, and necessity of embracing the Kings favor,
whereby, neither party might Tyranize over the other for the future; rather
then to decoy the Dissenter, by the soft word of mistake, as if either Party
did such mischief to other, by some Venial Inadvertency only, when all the
World knows, that the endeavors to secure their several Governments,
occasioned the sad galling of one another: Yet of the two, it is Demonstrable,
that the State Church of England Men were the favourablest.

(y) Here you think to put the Dissenters upon a Dilemma, that if they blame
the severe usage of the Church of England against them, they must not now
return it by being angry with them; or if they allow it they must not be
offended at what they did. What if Dissenters shall reply, that by too sad
experience they have found, that Persecution was ruinous to both, and that it
is neither Anger or Revenge against the Church of England, that makes them so
thankful to the King, and so desirous that all Tushes may be filed off, whereby
there may be no Tearing or Tyrannizing by any Party for Conscience; but for
ease-sake, these have reason to wish the Rod burnt that felt the last smart of
it; will not this Answer cut of the horned Argument?

(z) A Man not well skilled in your cunning, would judge you were owning all
this, when you disallow the Methods of the former Rigid Prelates, and would
make Dissenters believe, that the present Bishops and Clergy of the Church of
England, by the Sense of their former mistaken Rules, were content to lower
their haughtiness, and were ready to change the spirit of Persecution and
bitterness, for that of Charity and Condescension. But the Inference you make
is very contrary and falacious; viz. that because (if they believe you) the
present Conductors of the Church of England, are of an Uniting Temper;
therefore the Dissenters must so far rely upon their good nature, that they
must reject the offers of a most Gracious King, who endeavors to secure them
from present and future sufferings, and put it out of all peoples power, when
the next favorable revolation comes, to have recourse to former severeties.
Suppose the Dissenters say, that they may be justly jealous, that if a thousand
of the Church of England, in this juncture, gave them an assurance under their
Hands and Seals, that they should never be compelled under a Protestant King,
to Conformity, they durst not rely upon it, much less on such a single Voucher
as your self; what have you hitherto produced, to convince such unbelievers.

(a) Churchmen, of all Societies, may be subject to like passions as other
men, and I believe them not only humblest, but the charitablest, best natured,
and holiest too, when their power is not overgrown. But it does not therefore
follow, that the objecting the severity of the Church of England against
Dissenters, when cherished by a Prince of her Communion, is uncharitable and
ungenerous, much less, that it is mis-timed: For if the Members of that Church
did not endeavor to hinder the Repeal of those Laws, which only enable them to
reassume their Rods and Axes; Dissenters might hope their kindness was to be
relied upon. But since they see them so unwilling to part with their offensive
Arms; even at the desire of their Sovereign, they have just reason to think
they scandalize them not, in saying, they dare not as yet believe that they
intend them any good security that they will not call them to an
after-reckoning, or that they will afford them such an assurance of freedom, as
they may now have under the Kings broad Seal. But to pass on; I wonder not so
much at your denying the Church of England is never humble but when she wants
power, for you may mean another Church than other Mortals do; or by humble, you
may mean she least uses Church Censures, when the Magistrates Inflict the Laws
most severely; which Evasion you may, when pressed, fly to. But the reason you
give for it is more surprising; that she is even now meek and lowly, when she
has power to confound all Dissenters with a Breath. This indeed is a brisk
flourish; like a brave Leaders encouragement to his seemingly foiled Party;
that he has one stratagem yet, which will gain the absolute Victory, if they
will credit his Conduct. I pray Sir, for all this rattle in the Clouds, (which
is no more formidable than intelligible) give me leave to ask you, what this
Smile, this kind Word, this glimps of Compliance, should be, that can work such
wonders. There was a time, at, or before some Men were put to the Test, when a
compliance with the Kings desires of Repeal, would have continued several
Eminent Men in their Stations, and they would have felt many effects of His
Majesty's Royal Favor. But all that would have been as a reward of their
public splritedness, and concurrence with the King, in the truly Catholic
design of making all His Subjects easy as to their Religious Concerns. But it
looks like Presumption, yea, insolence in you, to assert, that when such have
lost the opportunity of preserving themselves in the Kings good Opinion, He
should take them into His Throne, and permit them to guide His Arm, to dart His
Thunder where they please. No, if they should offer all compliance, for the
future securing Roman Catholics, provided they might execute Penal Laws
against Dissenters, yet this would have no power to incline a Prince, so steady
to His Resolutions, and the public Declaration of His Judgment, to alter in
the least His Royal purpose, of granting Universal Liberty of Conscience, to
such as would live peaceably, and give no disturbance to the Civil Government.
Much less can those hope to prevail, who declare all Compliance with the Kings
desires so Criminal and Vnjustifiable, that they will rather choose to stand
mute, and be pressed to Death, in hopes to preserve their Estates for the next
Heir, then to quit their beloved Test.

(b) As to Provocation, while you write, you commit the fault you so severely
complain of. As to those Books, writ upon the subject of Religion; every one
may observe, that those, in defense of the Protestant Doctrine, have been
throngly cried about the streets, with the Emphasis of being Vindications of
the Church of England, and the Licenses of the Archbishop of Canterbury, or
Bishop of London; whereas, Roman Catholic Books, except some few Sermons of
the Fathers, have been dispersed without the pomp of a public Crier. Only some
Dissenters, concerned to give public Testimonies of their gratitude to the
King, have enlarged the Gazets, and set some Printing Presses on work. But that
any such Writers are Undertakers, or have made any Contracts with the Romanists
to begin a Fray among Protestants for the sport or advantage of the Church of
Rome, I see no shadow of Reason. Since the Interest they have to own the ease
they find by His Majesty's Indulgence, and the Opposition they find from some
Members of the Church of England to it, are sufficient Motives to them to write
and speak all they have hitherto done. And your entering the Lists with so many
fine devices on your Helm and Shield, and all over your whole Armor, cannot
but Excite many Combitants to engage so gaudy a Challenger.

(c) What you expect to be applauded or commended in this conduct, I cannot
tell! Persecution for Conscience you own to be ill, yet you would not have it
equal dealing to blame such who oppose the Repeal of such Laws, as only arm
Persecutors, which is dancing in a Circle.

(d) To hate the causers of our Torments, is very natural in those, who have
not learnt to pray for their Enemies; but for the Persecuted to court and love
the Persecutors, who judge it Criminal, and are ready to suffer themselves,
rather than yield up the wheels, racks, and strapado's, fetters and chains, and
the cruel instruments of Persecution, when the Supreme Magistrate forbids it,
is a Principle, neither Heathen or Christian can own: So that I will not
trouble my head to Divine what the Objection should be that you acquaint us not
with, and yet you say is un-answerable.

(e) I have heard it accounted as some solace, to have Companions in misery;
but never that any took delight in procuring Torments to others, that they
might have more stripes themselves. How the Papists should promote the Penal
Laws against Dissenters, is a Ridle: However, it is not dutifully done, to make
the Church of England the Lictors and Bedels of the Church of Rome; but some
will lose their Friend, e're they lose their Jest, or false Suggestion.

(f) This Paragraph ought to be accounted for at Westminster Hall. Before there
can be any sense made of it; it must be most scandalously supposed, that the
King is about to alter the Constitution of the Election of Knights and
Burgesses, and to design another, Praise God Barebone Parliament; then which,
no reflection can be more odious.

(g) Whenever the Dispensing Power is argued, I doubt not but many more
Members in Parliament will allow it, than did before the point had been so
cleared as now; and in duty we ought to believe the King, by the Repeal,
intends no more than what He expresses in His Royal Declaration,
notwithstanding the Indulgence to secure the Church of England in her rights
and possession of the Honors and Revenues, and Liberty both to it and
Dissenters; which being done, there will be no room for those unreasonable
Surmises.

(h) The great Talbots Name was long after his Death used to affright the
Children of France with. Is it fit that a serious Gentleman should judge all
Dissenters such Children, as to be affrighted with the Name of Roman
Consistory. Our Lawful Sovereign is the only Lord of the Articles, who will
propose the Question, and Obedience in this case may be more beneficial, than
to be always made Sacrifices by severe Penal Laws.

(i) Is it a Parliament of two Houses you mean, shall offer this Indulgence to
Dissenters? or would you have them stay to the next Ages? If the first, you
deserve the doom of a Traitor, since you must Exclude the King, unless Roman
Catholics be included; if the latter, you must fit the Dissenters with Iron
Shoes.

(k) You Write as if you were one of the Plenipotentiaries at a Treaty betwixt
Roman Catholics and Dissenters, and were well acquainted with the secret
Articles. All the World has judged Dissenters to have a great aversion to
implicit Faith and blind Obedience; but they must all be the most absolute
Resigners of their Reason and Religion, to the guidance of Roman Catholics: If
for this pretended Liberty of Conscience, as you call it, they must Sacrifice
their real Freedom. I believe rather that the weight and galling of their late
Chains, are so much felt, that they will be very unwilling to have them put on
again by some Members of the Church of England; and the confidence to be ever
freed from them, makes them so ready to embrace this Jayl-Delivery.

(l) To what degree soever either Roman Catholics or Dissenters may judge
valid the Dispensing Power; yet, that no ways should hinder them, from desiring
the Indulgence may be Established by Law, to perpetuate that favor which they,
at present, are only secure of during the Kings Life: And as all Gracious and
just Princes, desire their Honor and good Fame may long outlive them; so they
wish, that the benefits they intend for their people, may be extended to future
Ages. Therefore, however His Majesty may be satisfied in the rights of His
Sovereignty, yet for the tender regard of the future Repose of His Subjects: It
is a most Gracious Act in Him, to endeavor the concurrence of His Two Houses,
which by an impropriety of Speech you call the Legislative; when it is well
known, that without the Royal concurrence, the Two Houses are only the
Legispreparative.

(m) By those words, and not without Reason, you discover your self to have
been a Seclusionist; and yet want the candor of an ingenuous Dissenter, who is
not angry that those Members of the Church of England complied so far; since it
has given them the opportunity of experiencing the Kings surprising Clemency,
and condemning the groundless jealousy they had of Him, which prompted to that
Reluctance against His Rightful Succession; and the Dissenters have no reason
to be sorry, that these Members of the Church of England made no further
Progress after the King came to the Crown. Since that stop of theirs made the
Wheel move faster toward the Indulgence, the benefit whereof least they should
be in danger to lose, they will with all sedulity endeavor to promote, though
I presume, by no indirect means, but such as may be agreeable to the duty of
their Allegiance and Thankfulness, they owe to the King for it. Then the
scrupulous niceness concerning significant Ceremonies will cease, because none
will be obliged to use the Cope, Surplice, or long Cloak, but such as like
them; only I hope it will be always prohibited to Preach in Buff-coats, and
mingle Blood with their Oblations.

(n) Nothing is more common, than to find Names affixed according to peoples
fancies, and after a while one word serves for Description, Definition, and
Character. If Liberty of Conscience once be made practicable, and in the vogue,
Those discriminating Ciphers will be useless, and all Subjects will be
considered in their morality, or immorality, obedience, or disobedience, rather
than by the Cognizance of their Religion: It is no strange thing in Nature,
that by some influence of the Heavens, and aptness of Soil, some Plants may
shoot up more in a Night than others, backned by severe Frosts, do in a Month;
and why the rare Plant of Liberty in Religious Worship, may not be as perennial
as the Thistle of Persecution, I see no great Reason, if Cultivated with common
care. If the prospect of continual suffering, and the want of Christian
Liberty, made Dissenters Factious and Rebellious; it is to be presumed, that
the Fundimental Instigation being removed, the Witchcraft will no longer
prevail. It is the concernment of all Governments, to see that Men be true to
it e're they be trusted; and when Princes lay by their co-active Laws, it is
the interest of the Subjects to lay aside their Animosities, and when all
Parties quit their Firearms, and offensive Weapons, I see no reason to despair
of Harmony and Accord in the duty of Christians and Subjects; and thus being
linked in the common bond of freedom, I see no occasion to throw one another
off again.

(o) If things now tend naturally to the ease of Dissenters, they have reason
to be most thankful to the King, as the sole bestower of it; and I see no
Reason they should let go the Bird in hand, in hopes to catch another in the
Bush. I should think they acted with less circumspection than they have wonted
to do; if they slip the opportunity of that tender made them, in expectation of
enjoying any thing like it, when the Church of England shall be in a
flourishing condition. Besides, it may be a Question, whether a Toleration
after the pattern of the Low Countries, may not be more prejudicial to the
Church of England, than such one as may be now adjusted.

(p) Here you are very Magisterial, and have undertaken far more than your
Credit will go for. To say a Church is convinced of an Error, befits none but
the Prolocutor of a Convocation, when such a Vote was passed with a Nemine
Contradicente, and to ensure for a Parliaments Votes, is more than any Ten
Members of it can do. But I presume you speak by Figure here, that if
Dissenters will not join with Roman Catholics to be thankful for the
Indulgence, and will stick close to the Members of the Church of England that
oppose it; then the Parliament under a Protestant Successor, and a Convocation
will set such a value upon that service, that they will be gentile to them, and
establish some Bill of comprehension, which the Governors of the Church of
England, could never hitherto be brought to yield to. All this looks so like
decoy, that the Dissenter of the lowest form will perceive it. But what ever
they do, all thinking Men, must judge the design of this is to animate all
Protestants to weather out the point, and heighten their opposition to the
King, which in former times would have been styled Sedition. As to that
excellent Princess, I suppose you mean, few Princesses in Europe are known to
Excel Her in the Accomplishments of Body or Mind; and as Her Royal Father is
as Indulgent to Her Highness, as any Prince can be; so She is as Dutiful; and
whatever the King Establishes in His time for the public Good and Tranquillity
of His Kingdoms, if She overlive Him, I presume it may be Her desire, if not
Her Interest to ratify; and to what perfection soever His Majesty may bring
this Pantheon, there may still remain beautifying, and adorning for His
Successor, and room enough to enlarge the Foundations, and build stronger
Defenses against the common Enemy of Persecution, if this conspiring against a
work, which You own Dissenters need, and deserve, do not destroy it.

(q) In this Paragraph you are numbering the people, and examining Your
strength by the Muster-roll; and the head of those Powers you design to Oppose,
is manifestly the King, which is not very agreeable to the Church of Englands
Doctrine of Non-Resistance.

(r) Good words butter no Parsnips; if the Expressions of Duty were not tainted
and hollow, and in your Opinion His Majesty's Religion did not only shade, but
totally Eclipse His Virtues: Your Allegiance would not look, as it does, more
like a Submission than a Duty; nor would You adventure upon that Bravado, that
some own their best security to Passive Obedience, and the Doctrine of
Non-Resistance, which look very like bidding Roman Catholics beware least they
rouse a sleeping Lion: For I know not who they are that Laugh at the
commendable Doctrine of Non-Resistance; but when I see Men fomenting jealousies
against their Sovereign, ridiculing His Conduct, endeavoring to Represent Him
as acting against the Laws, assuming an Arbitrary Power, denying Him the
service of all His Subjects, and by all possible Arts, endeavor to withdraw
the Affections of the people from Him solely, because of His Religion; I cannot
judge such to be true practicers of that Doctrine.

(s) Here you give a touch of your Astrology, and it being customary for the
pretenders to that Art, to attempt by Horary Questions to know Diseases, and
after a while to set up for Empericks: So you give us a pretty Receipt to clear
a lowering Sky; the Sense of which is, for all Protestants to lie in of the
sullen, keep their beds, and there use some kind of reasonable Devotion, and
entertain their Visitants with discourses of their Loyalty, and their adhering
to the Laws, and it will be twenty to one but they will be freed from the
Hail-storm, and escape the danger of the Infectious Air. But lest any should
object that, Bed-zid Protestants are not like to keep out Popery, you have a
most Infallible Elixir in your Repository, which is, that neither the Church of
England, or Protestant Dissenters ought to be affrighted with any fear that the
Roman Catholic Religion can be Established by a Toleration (since the ods is
two hundred to one) without a greater Miracle than any we read of in any
Legend, especially in the old Age of a Church, which has been so long barren
of them. For shame therefore give over your false Alarums; amuse the Dissenters
no more to such circumspect standing upon their guard, to keep out Popery,
since in our days there is no feeding Five hundred with Five Loves and two
Fishes.

(t) The conclusion is agreeable to your premises, an Exhortation to an
Association a against the King, and all of His judgment in the matters of the
Test; and the motives to it are pretty odd, that since both Parties have been
too blame, in Persecuting one another, therefore they should be reconciled, and
combine in opposing the Indulgence, which is most likely to put an end to all
rancor and malice. One would have thought, that the Inference more naturally
should have been, that since they both had experienced the mischiefs of
Persecution, and neither of them bettered their condition by it, therefore,
they should both have joined in the promoting the general Indulgence, that
there might be no more strife among them, since they were Brethren; I am sure
this had more truly resolved the Question. But instead of this, you tell the
Dissenters, (without giving any Reason for it) that disunion is not only a
Reproach, but a danger to both. This I own to be true, if the Union you desire
were for the public good of both, but if the Union be to combine you and them
in equal undutifulness and ingratefulness to the King; if this Union be desired
to hinder the Kings Progress in His laudable purposes; if this Union be but to
while the business with a Shall I, Shall I, to tire the Kings Patience, and
disappoint His expectation, it will redound to both the Dissenters and your
Danger, if not Reproach. To persuade to such an Union as this, is the whole
drift of your discourse, and something you must mean more than Passive
Obedience, when you rivet the Nail you have all this while been driving in,
telling your Reader, that it is as unjustifiable to have no Religion, as
wilfully to throw away the means of preserving it. This looks like a second
sound to Horse; and you have a pretty slight in your Mouth, to persuade Roman
Catholics, (because you think them so credulous of Miracles) to neglect all
Cautions or means to preserve themselves, but to rely upon a Supernatural
Power: But those of your Principles must use the Humane Means of preserving it,
and of how many Battalions these must consist, though you have reason to
conceal the Intimation from the World; yet you give a sufficient Item, what may
be expected, and thereby caution the Government to have more Circumspection
over your Sayings and Actions.

Thus Sir, I have now finished my Observations upon your Letter; I shall
subjoyn something the subject matter induces me to offer to the consideration
of all Christian Dutiful Subjects, and then close the whole.

SIR,
I have hitherto followed the train you have lead me, and endeavored to give a
reasonable Answer to the most material parts of your Letter. What was bare
supposal, and groundless suspicion I have not much concerned my self with.
Those being but like the Feathering of unpiled Arrows, which help their flight,
but enforce them little to do harm, wherever they fall. Neither have I
attempted to reach the Towering Flights of your Oratory, which how Ornimental
soever, are but like mounting Bubbles, which break and vanish when at the
utmost stretch. Your affrightments, when well considered, are but like the
sparks in a Smiths-shop, which upon a brisk heat and stroke, fills all with
seeming liquid fire, yet it is as soon extinguished as the Iron cools, or the
laboring stroke cease. What was Seditious, and tending to instigate the
Subjects to jealousies and disloyal Opinions of their Sovereign, I have
endeavored to Disprove, and Repress. What was Calumny, I have gently wiped
off; unless when it was couched in such general Terms, as placed it beyond all
reach of the Spung. Rebels in open Hostility, are not so dangerous to a
Prince, and His Governmet, though the severest Punishments are inflicted on
them when mastered; as those are, who by sly Arts, Detraction, evil Surmises
and Constructions, render their Prince suspected of Ruling Arbitrarily, and
altering Religion and Laws; and thereby blast His Credit with His people: For
those are the Men that make the whole Reigns of Princes troublesome, and
unfortunate to Themselves and their Subjects. These List the Men, provide
Magazines and Arms, and prepare all things in readiness against the sound of
the Trumpet, and do not only Muster the Rebels, but they do, as much as in them
lies, to enfeeble or taint the Allegiance of the remainder.

You have contributed all you possibly can to effect these things, and exposed
your Letter as a Banner to invite to jealousies and fears, which are the very
Avant-couriers of Sedition and Rebellion; and this in you that pretend to be a
Son of the Church of England is so much the worse, in that you know how
strictly it enjoins Obedience to the Lawful Sovereign, and how much the
Doctrine of Non-Resistance has been taught and practiced by its Members.

If the Kings Intentions to settle the Roman Catholic Religion by force,
(which you surely cannot in good earnest believe practicable) were much more
apparent than it is: If the inevitable ruin of the Protestant Religion here,
should be the consequence of the Repeal; and if the exercise of His Prerogative
and Dispensing Power, were the certain ruin of all Men's Properties, you and
others who own no other Loyalty to their Sovereign, than what is consistent
with their supposed Interest, could not invent more provoking Reflections upon
the King, or mis-interpret His Actions worse than you do.

But how unreasonably undutiful is it in Subjects, and those who would be
reputed the zealousest for our Church, to charge the King with Intrigue and
Hypocrisy, or breach of promise; who of all Princes living detests mear tricks,
and to prevaricate with any: To whom Dissimulation is the odiousest of Vices,
and whose very Inbred, Natural, and Heroic courage, places Him as much above
all low Arts, as His Dignity does above His Subjects.

Besides all the un-answerable Arguments which have been produced, why the
taking off the Test and Penal Laws cannot work such a change in our Religion;
you may consider, that at the same time the Church of England may be Insured by
Laws of greatest caution. Furthermore we have most solemn and public promises,
That His Majesty will Protect and Maintain the Church of England in the free
exercise of its Religion, as by Law Established, and in the quiet and full
enjoyment of all Her Possessions, without any molestation or disturbance, which
He will inviolably observe; If by a stubborness, that shall be unpardonable in
the judgment of all Impartial Men, we forfeit not a Clemency so rarely to be
paralleled. To all which may be added, the universal aversion of the Nobility,
Gentry, and Commonality to the Roman Catholic Religion, occasioned even by the
deepest Impression that Education, Custom, and an Opinion of the Purity, and
Primativeness of it, has made.

If none of these Arguments will prevail with you to change your evil Opinion
of the Kings designs by the Repeal; consider deliberately, I pray you, how the
King must overthrow the very Foundation upon which the great Enterprise of
Universal Liberty, and consequently of all the Benefits to His people, by
enriching them, and keeping them in peace, and securing the Roman Catholics in
future times in any tolerable state, if He ever give way to invest any one
Church-Community with a Coercive Power.

But I know it is Objected, that if a Toleration only were intended, how comes
it to pass, that so many Loyal Members of the Church of England, even of those
who so courageously adhered to the Crown in its utmost danger, are now
displaced, and the Roman Catholics, or Dissenters, even such of the last, as
have most violently opposed His Majesty's Succession, are substituted in their
Rooms?

In answer to this, It is well known, that the number of Protestants of the
Church of England, Employed by the King in His Court, in His Council, in His
Courts of Judicature, in Camp, and all Places of public Employments, almost as
far exceed the Roman Catholics, as our Clergy do theirs; and yet we make so
hideous a noise at the Conferring Places and Honors upon some deserving and
Loyal Roman Catholics, and two or three Masters, and a few Fellows of Colleges
being Preferred; which are but the effects of common distributive Justice, and
consentaneous to the Paternal care of such a Prince, who would show some marks
of favor to those few of His own Religion, who are not now surely to be wholly
Excluded. Therefore, in my judgment, it shows a very ill Nature in those who
own His Majesty to be their Lawful King, and that He may at His Pleasure use
the service of which of His Subjects He pleases, to grudge His intermixing so
few of His own Religion with others.

Besides this, you cannot be ignorant, that it never was the practice of any
Prince, or Government, what Religion soever, to employ Subjects in Places of
Trust, who set themselves directly to oppose, what by prudent forecast for the
public good, they determined to Establish. Now since the King, for the Reasons
published in His Gracious Declaration, is so intent upon completing this great
work of General Freedom, and securing those of His own Religion, in common with
the rest. It cannot be thought reasonable, or expedient, that He should cherish
and countenance those, who so bitterly oppose him in it: Especially since it is
so apparent, that even such, who have shown great zeal for the support of the
Crown upon the Heads of their Protestant Sovereigns, now manifest, not only an
indifference, and coldness, but an unbecoming way wardness to the Kings
Service: In so much, that some decline sitting in Commission with Roman
Catholic Justices of the Peace, and others think it honorable to quit their
places, rather than to make one step toward the Repeal; so that even the
Badges and Livery of Loyalty are changed, from that to the King, to that of the
Church of England; and those who make the greatest complaint of hard usage,
have themselves turned the Tables.

As to Dissenters, it is their Interest to close with the Crown side for
Protection, and since they can derive this unlooked for favor from none but
the King, they should be the most ungrateful of Men, if with cheerfulness, and
sincerity, they did not pay all possible Acknowledgments to His Majesty's
Bounty for it. So that I do not wonder to hear them, with great Asseveration
say, it was not for a Commonwealth they fought, and were continually striving
against the stream, but it was to get the Weather-gage of Persecution: It was
to obtain this Liberty of Conscience, which they never could expect from former
Governments, that provoked them to commit such Heinous things they now are
ashamed of; and which, indeed they ought to Atone for in another manner than
they have hitherto done. They now declare, that if they might have had the
Tenth of that Liberty the Church of England now enjoys, under our Gracious
King, they would never have lifted up an hand, or opened a Mouth against the
late Kings of blessed Memories, and I think they are the rather to be believed,
because neither the Doctrine, nor the Ceremonies of the Church of Rome, are so
much declaimed against by them now, as those of the Church of England, which
they formerly reputed Idolatrous: They now think themselves justified in their
Espousing the Parliaments side, from whom they expected, and had Indulgence,
and please themselves to find another kind of non Addressors, and as zealous
persons to hinder the Repeal of Penal Laws, against their Sovereigns declared
desire, as they were formerly for it. Yet, though the Scene be thus changed, I
hope there are sufficient numbers of such, whom the Church of England will own
to be her Children, that will let no Dissenters out-goe them in Loyalty, and
Dutifulness to their Sovereign; and who are well assured, the King will have as
great regard to them, and our Church for their sakes; and as freely permit them
the enjoyment of the Exercise of their Religion and Benefices, as to any,
provided they will concur with Him in the Repeal, and be content to let their
Fellow Subjects, of different Persuasions, enjoy likewise their Liberty.

That the Members of the Church of England ought to yield this in common
prudence, and even for the Preservation of their own Religion, I think there
are many Reasons; especially this, that as yet the time is not clapsed, but
that when His Majesty convenes His Parliament, sufficient Security may be
obtained, that the Church of England shall enjoy all the King has promised;
and when, by the Wisdom of the Houses, such an Act is contrived, as will answer
the Kings desires of the Universal ease of His Subject, the Church of England
will feel as great effects of the Kings kindness, as she can expect, or desire;
and by the freedom all will enjoy, there will be no more contests; but who
shall approve themselves most dutiful and deserving of His Majesty's Clemency,
and Kindness. Upon such a closure, the Roman Catholics, and Dissenters will
freely yield to the mutual security of the Church of England, and that Church
will regain its Reputation of Loyalty, and confirm what you promise in her
name, of being kind to Dissenters, and a Protestant Prince succeeding, and
finding things thus Amicably Composed, will reap the benefit, as the whole
Kingdom will do, of this happy undertaking of the King.

But on the contrary, if the Majority of the Members of the Church of England
in Parliament, obstinately oppose the Kings desires, they will oblige His
Majesty to pursue other Methods, and it will give occasion to all such as are
no great well-wishers to our Church, to urge its uncharitableness; that rather
than it will permit the King to exercise His Prerogative, of being served with
all His Subjects, of what denomination soever He pleases to make use of, and
that Men of different Professions in Religion, may enjoy the favor of the
Kings Indulgence, they will put themselves out of His Royal Protection, and
absolve Him from His promise therein; and the upshot of all will be, that by
His Majesty's steady pursuit of this great work, which He firmly believes will
conduce so much to the universal good of His Subjects; In a few years, by such
sedulous countenancing all those, who will strenuously cooperate with Him to
effect it, the Dissenters will obtain the Majority of Voices in Parliament,
which if once effected, those Members of the Church of England, who have
Obstructed the Repeal, will be at the mercy of Dissenters; and if the King be
not their best Friend, may fall short of what they may now so effectually
obtain.

I shall conclude with a short Paraphrase upon the Words His Majesty, used to
His Privy Council March the 8th. 1686. concerning this Indulgence, in which the
substance of what need be said, in justifying the Kings granting it, are
clearly laid down.

First, His Majesty shows the practice of former Ages, and the success of them;
That although an Uniformity in the Religious Worship had been Endeavored to be
Established within this Kingdom, in the successive Reigns of Four of His
Majesty's Royal Predecessors, assisted by their respective Parliaments; yet it
has proved altogether ineffectual.

This is obvious to every one that reads the History of those times, and well
know to those that lived in the beginning of the Rebellion; for Dissenters were
then so increased, that they were numerous, and powerful enough to overthrow,
not only the Church of England, but the Monarchy that defended it. The Kings
Words are, That the Restraint upon the Consciences of Dissenters, in order
thereunto, viz. to Conformity, had been very prejudicial to this Nation, as was
sadly experienced in the horrid Rebellion, in the time of His Majesty's Royal
Father. The King then pitcheth upon the true and principal cause of all those
Calamities that befell the blessed Martyr, and were freshly commencing again in
the later time of His Majesty's Royal Brothers Reign, which are best expressed
in the Kings own Words, That the many Penal Laws made against Dissenters, in
all the foregoing Reigns, and especially in the time of the late King, had
rather increased than lessened them.

If therefore our Gracious King, out of an excess of love and Paternal care,
did not study the Universal benefit, ease, profit, and enriching of His people,
He might have pursued former Precedents: But as a Wise and Compassionate
Prince, He searches diligently for the true Causes; and while too many are
busying themselves in Traducing His zeal for His Religion, as if it were the
only concern of His Royal Cares. He Demonstrates to all His Subjects, how much
more sollicitous He is to find some better Method, whereby at once He may
Establish His Throne, and those of His Successors, in a stable peace and
security, and give Ease, Freedom, and Riches, to all His People, of what
Persuastion soever: Therefore declares, That nothing can more conduce to the
peace and quiet of His Kingdom, and the increase of the Numbers, as well as the
Trade of the Subjects, (wherein the greatness of a Prince does more consist,
than in the extent of His Teritories) than an entire Liberty of Conscience.
That His Majesty may likewise obviate all the great scruple such as you raise
as if He did this for any private ends; you have His Royal Word to the
contrary, when He tells all His Subjects, That it has been His Opinion, as
most suitable to the Principles of Christianity, that no Man should be
Persecuted for Conscience sake, which His Majesty thinks is not to be forced.
By this His Majesty shows, that He grounds not His judgment upon the
agreeableness, or ungreeableness of it to the interest of any Church; but as it
is suitable to the uery Principles of Christian Religion, and having by this
shown His Royal Intentions how to proceed upon that bottom, during His own
Reign, out of a well grounded Confidence, that it may be a rule and standard to
His Royal Successors, He closes all with this Maxim, That it can never be the
true Interest of a King of England, to endeavor to force Conscience.

Have not all Men from hence, and all His Majesty's Actions, reason to think,
there is a Clemency, Benignity, and tenderness in the King to His Subjects,
flowing in His Princely Blood from His Royal Ancestors, and peculiar to the
family, which His Religion can never alter; so that where the necessity of His
people, rather han His own safety, does not oblige Him to severity, We see
daily instances of a Mercifulness beyond all expectation, and even to the envy
of others, some of which have been very late: and if this difficulty of the
Repeal were once over, all His Subjects would know, that He would deserve the
Epethites of Just, Merciful, and Pacifick, as well as any of His Royal
Predecessors; having that personal Courage, and Fortitude, over and above what
is to be found in few Crowned Heads; so that satis est prostrasse, must be
owned by all His Majesty's ill-willers, as peculiar to His Generosity.

I should here have closed this Discourse, but that I find His Majesty's late
Speech to the LORD MAYOR and Aldermen of London, when they Presented Him with
their late Address, has occasioned a new Misrepresentation; because His
Majesty mentioned the advantages would redound to the Subjects by a general
Naturalization and public Register, which those who suck poison out of every
flower, censure as manifest tokens, that if these be effected, the growth of
Popery will be promoted, which they thus prove.

First, that Naturilization will open a door, to let in from foreign parts,
such sholes of Roman Catholics, that the Protestants shall soon be
out-numbered. Secondly, that a public Register will so discover all Men's
Estates, that the King may easily dispose of them, when the Laws of Property
shall be, as now we see Penal Laws are dispensed with.

As to the first of these malicious Insinuations, I desire all thinking Men to
consider, that it is a very known Maxim, that not only the power of any Prince,
but the Riches of every Kingdom consists in the multitude of the people well
Governed. Let us now therefore consider who they are, that are likeliest to
flock hither, if an Act of general Naturilization should pass. There are none
that leave their own Country, to Transplant themselves into another Soil, but
such as have a Prospect to live more at ease abroad, than in their own Country,
and such must be principally those, who retire to avoid Persecution for their
Religion, or are obnoxious to the Laws, for some notorious Trespasses against
them, or such who dare not show their Heads for Debt; or lastly, those who in
the way of Traffic think to better their Fortunes. For it is ridiculous to
imagine, that Roman Catholic Princes will unpeople their Countries, to send
Colonies abroad, unless it were to make War; and to such, I presume, no Law of
Naturilization will extend.

I suppose then, no Objections will be made to the incoming of Aliens, but such
as do it upon a Religious account. Let us therefore consider, who they are that
can flock hither, because they want the freedom of their Religion in their own
Countries? and surely in Europe we can find none, except they are Protestants,
that are in such a state under Catholic Princes; and it will be very difficult
to believe, they will fly Persecution at home, to turn Roman Catholics here.

Therefore it appears most manifest, that the only effect such a Law can have,
will be to bring from Poland, some parts of Germany, Denmark, Sweden, or
Holland, the French Refugees, since England is known to be a place of more
comfortable Retreat than those Countries are; and if such French, or any other
Aliens, were Dispersed, in some proportion, through the Kingdom, and not
suffered all to settle in the Populous City of London; there might be hopes,
that by their Industry, and Trades, as well as the consumption of the growth of
the Country, there would be advantage to the Kingdom by their numbers.

Thus I hope I have made it appear, how directly contrary an effect, to what is
suggested, would naturally follow upon a Bill of Naturalization, viz. the
increase of Protestants, if of any.

As to the public Register, it is notoriously known, how attempts have been
made in former Ages to have effected this, and it is so far from enabling any
Prince to invade thereby the Property of any Subject, that it is the greatest
security to them: For by such speedy Transferring Estates, as may be done by a
public Register, even Forfeitures to the Crown may be prevented, when every
one, in some few hours, may pass their Estates, Real, or Personal, into what
secure hands they please.

It is likewise obvious, how many frauds would be prevented by it, and how much
more plentiful Money would be, when none would be in danger of loosing either
Purchase or Lent-mony, by Pre-Engagements; since fewer shifts could be used, to
deceive any moderately circumspect person. The Proceedings likewise in
Lawsuits, would be less tedious and intricate, and yet many Hundreds of Clerks
would find Employment in Registring, in every County and Corporate Town; and
when money Men could have such such clear Security, not haunted with the Spirit
of Forgery, the middle sort of Traders, the Husbandman, Farmers, and all sort
of Men, who had honest occasions for ready Money, might be furnished without so
great scruple, which the doubtfulness of Security now occasions.

But these being matters to be Transacted in Parliament, need no further
discussing here: Only I thought it necessary to hint these things, that all
Ingenuous Men might see, how unreasonable some Men's suspicions are, and what
sinister Interpretations, Malice, and Envy, will make, of what is most
apparently designed for a quite different end.

In fine, Would we enjoy the free exercise of the Protestant Religion? We have
the Kings Sacred Promise for it; and upon the taking off the Penal Laws and
Test, we may have it firmly Established: Would Dissenters have Ease, they have
it freely granted without Terms. Would we enjoy all the advantages of Wealth,
Honor, Peace, Plenty, and the Benefits which a Gracious, Valiant, and Wise
Prince may afford Us? We may to the height of our Wishes have them; yielding
only, that our Fellow Subjects in general, and those of His Majesty's Religion
in particular, may be all alike freed from any Force put upon their Conscience
for matters of their Religion, at present, and for time to come; while in all
other Respects they approve themselves Dutiful Subjects.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 4. line 23. for reasonable read seasonable. P. 5. l. 23. for gratefully,
r. greatly. P. 7. l. 8. for hinder r. hindered. ibid. l. 39. dele of P. 9 l. 10.
for such (as Seclusion r. (such as Seclusion. P. 11. l. 16. for Communion r.
common* P. 16. l. 29. for cumlocution r. circumlocution.


