Animadversions ON KING JAMES HIS LETTER TO THE POPE: Published in the TRIAL of
THE Ld. Preston and Mr. Ashton.

LONDON, Printed and Sold by the Booksellers of London and Westminster. 1691.

Animadversions ON King JAMES His LETTER to the POPE.
LET Truth be never so evident, and Demonstration never so manifest, yet
Infidelity will too often keep its Ground, and some invincible Persuasions will
still persist in that incorrigible Obstinacy, that Right Reason shall have no
sway with them; and no proofs whatever shall evince their Rooted Errors. To
come to the particular Case in Relation to this Kingdom, perhaps it is not the
least part of our National shame that there are too many of us to this very Day
will never be induced to mis-construe the least Grain of the late King James
his Integrity to his Honor and Engagements for preserving the Protestant
Religion; that at least all the Measures taken before his Departure, that
looked a little too industrious for the propagation of the Romish Religion,
they will allow to be no more than a pardonable Zeal in him; and that the
Utmost of his Designs were no more than a favoring and countenancing of his
own Worship (a venial Frailty) in order to raise it above the Power of its
professed Enemies; That his whole Ambition aimed not at any farther Reach than
to gain it an absolute Toleration and Impunity by rescinding the Laws against
it; and that no other Anguis in Herba, no Usurpation against, or Subversion of
the Protestant Religion established, was ever meant or intended by him; his
whole Endeavors being no more than to give Popery those innocent Advances of
Freedom and Liberty, without the least-intended Assumption of any invasive or
compulsive Power whatsoever.

Nay, there are another sort amongst us, who though a little staggered at some
irregular Court-Heats in the last Reign, and cannot deny but they are convinced
('it is true) that over-perswaded by too many violent Zealots about him, he was a
little misled, and indeed was pushing something too far in some unjustifiable
Favors toward his own Romish Cause. However, if any such Trips, or such false
Steps were then made, nevertheless their inviolable Deference, and Adherence to
King James, inclining them to pardon small Royal Faults, gives them at present
so hearty a Good Wish for his Restoration to his Throne, as not in the least to
doubt, but his late Calamities befal'n him have most certainly quite changed
his Resolves; That the Miseries he has underwent, and the too visible
Repugnance of this Kingdom against all Invasions of Popery, (if ever God
Almighty blesses him by a Restoration) have and must past all Dispute have
broken all his old false Measures, (whatever they might have been,) and that
his late Wrack will for ever stand that warning Sea-mark, as never to venture
again into the like Danger, for fear of splitting again upon the same Rock; and
consequently there can be no farther occasion of either fearing or suspecting
him; and therefore they persuade themselves it is their Duty to be assistant to
their utmost power for his Return; and this, though the heartiest Potestants,
without the least shadow of dis-interesting their own Religion, they are in all
Conscience obliged to do; and which, their Confidence assures them, they shall
never repent when done; but stand confirmed in a full and perfect security of
the safety of their Religion and Liberties, from the accomplishment of so
sacred a Work as the re-mounting King James upon his Throne.

Now as there are but too many poor deluded Zealots for K. James that are to
this day either wilfully or (to speak more favorably) unhappily blinded by
these mistaken Opinions, perhaps there never appeared a more visible
Confutation of their Erroneous Credulity in Favor toward him, then in his
Letter to the Pope, annexed to, and Published with the Trials of the Lord
Preston and Mr. Ashton, etc. Upon which I shall make some few Remarks.

First, For the Authority and undeniable Truth of the Letter. It was found
written in Latin, entered upon Record in the Register taken at Dublin, bearing
Date, Dublin 26 th. of November. 1689. With a Marginal Note recorded likewise
in the same Register: That the Original Letter was all writ by K. James his own
Hand.

Here before we enter upon the Letter it self, it is to be observed what
affectation of Glory, what Triumph there is in a Romish Bigot, a true Son of
Mother Church, in the least Achievement for, or promotion of Her Darling Cause.

'Twas not enough belike, that such a Letter was written in Latin (the usual
Language of Addresses to the Pope) and no wonder, to gain it ampler Credence,
and give it the fairer stamp of Authority, all Originally writ by K. James his
own hand; and consequently (one would think) it had done its whole Work, by
being sent to, and received by the Pope. But at the same time, this Zealous
piece of Romish Service in King James, to His Fames Eternal Monument, must be
afterward Entered and Registered upon Record, on purpose to be transmitted to
Posterity, with that particular Justice done him of a peculiar Marginal Note,
that it was all writ with his own hand.

Most Holy Father,
WE did by the Earl of Melfort, Our Principal Secretary of State, signify to
Your Holiness the Joy we had in Your Promotion to the Sacred Chair. And those
Letters which Your Holiness did with Your own Hand write Us, were such
Testimonies of Fatherly Love, and of Your tender Compassion for what We suffer,
that they have lessened the Sense of Our Calamity, and have proved of real
Consolation to us. --


Remark.

Here we see the first part is His joyful Congratulation of His Holiness's
Promotion to the sacred Chair, which, though at first reading, may appear no
more than a customary Complement, as being dated 26 th. of November. 89. and
thereby written just upon the Popes Accession to the Papacy. However, as the
whole Outcry of the Romish Party, at the Pope's first Instauration, roared
high, and bellowed loud, with a confident assurance of a Frenchified Pope, to
no less than almost a public Abjuration of the little less than Heretical Pope
Innocent, his dead Predecessor, the Papists themselves (the French and English
ones at least) resolved if possible, even to Abdicate his hated Memory. Upon
this universal Presumption of the then new Popes Affections, undoubtedly the
transported K. James felt some part of their common Titillation; and this
Caress to his New-made Holiness, bore something of more than ordinary
Patheticks in it, to so hopeful and promising an Apostolic Successor. And the
Testimonies of Fatherly Love, and tender Compassion of King James his
sufferings expressed in the Pope's Letters to King James, under the
aforementioned Presumption of His Holiness's Inclinations, unquestionably
brought him the real consolation the Letter describes.

Letter,

-- The only source of all these Rebellions against Us is, That We embraced the
Catholic Faith; and do not disown, but that to spread the same, not only in
Our Three Kingdoms, but over all the dispersed Colonies of Our Subjects in
America, was Our Determination. --


Remark.

The only Source of these Rehellions against him (he says) is that he embraced
the Catholic Faith, etc. That I am afraid is a notorious Mistake; for his
embracing the Romish [Catholick] (as he calls it) Faith, was so far from
raising any thing like Rebellion against him; that not withstanding the Nations
Conviction of his adhereing to that Persuasion before his Accession to the
Crown, not only the throwing out of the Exclusion Bill, that so strenuously
asserted his Right, and opened his Access to the Throne; but likewise the
Universal Fealty, and indeed even Passionate tenderness toward him at his
Access to the Throne, notwithstanding his published Religion; sufficiently
demonstrate that a Rebellion against him, was farthest from the Principles or
thoughts of his truly Loyal and Protestant Subjects.

Indeed, when he plainly declares, and which the Nation too plainly saw, after
he once grew warm in the Imperial Seat, he resolved and determined to spread
his Religion, not only through his three Kingdoms, but likewise through his
Territories in the American World too* possibly a little abatement of that
first, Heat and Love toward him might lessen our fond Affections, at least in
that part of Mankind, that could in Conscience do no less than have some
reasonable Reluctance against the notorious Violation of what ought to be most
sacred, the repeated Vows and Protestations (the obligation of a Coronation
Oath not excepted) of his performing what was never intended; together with
some small Concern for a Religion and Liberty so near and so dear to them, at
that time under such undeniable Dangers of being undermined and supplanted.

But as great an abhorrence as all good People had of such sinister Designs so
apparently carried on against the English Rights and Liberties, and as much as
it might cool their Zeal for King James; how unjustly we are charged with
Rebellion against him, in any part of this happy Revolution, has been already
proved by larger and more learned Discourses on that Theme.

Letter.

-- To manifest this, there will need no other Proof then to see how lately we
have proceeded in this Kingdom; for as we have often beaten the Rebels in small
Parties, (which might have been one complete Victory, if they had not
obstinately declined to give Us Battle) so we have still turned all to the
advantage of Religion, and hope very soon to see it here firmly Established. --


Remark.

To manifest his Determination of establishing Popery in that Kingdom, he might
have pleaded a great deal further back for his Proofs then his late proceedings
there; for from the very beginning of his Reign, the Measures taken in that
Kingdom, have been so barefaced, as every Eye might see into; the barbarous
turning out of all Protestants there from all Trust either Civil or Military,
even to cashiering every private Heretic Sentinel, speaks but too plain.
Barbarous, I may very well call it, when with so much horrid and shameful
injustice and Rapine the Protestants were dispossessed of all Command and Trust,
(for what end is too plain) though their very Places were bought, and by the
Government allowed to be so, without the least restitution or satifaction
whatever made them: And the same Seizure that thought their Commands and Places
lawful Prize, brought the Heretical Money that paid for 'em under the same
Condemnation.

I am afraid his frequently beating the Rebels in small Parties, and his
assurance of his compleater Victory, if offered Battle, were only a Temporary
confidence in him; the said Assurance not always continuing; witness the
planting of Horses before hand, and his early, if not overhasty posting
Sea-ward before the Battle of the Boyne.

Letter.

-- Nor will it look hard, if aided by some Subsidies, to compass the same in
our other Dominions, as soon as by Gods Favor We shall be restored, seeing our
People do so ill bear the Usurpers Yoke, and so universally long for Our
Return* --


Remark. Here the Bolt's struck home; It Is not his loss of Three Kingdoms, not
all his at present defeated Designs, with all their attending Calamities,
wholly owing to no other Original, if once so blessed as to remount his Throne,
shall deter him from taking up the Old broken Cudgels, and venturing a second
wrestle though for a second Fall in so meritorious a Cause. Dethronement,
Abdication, nothing shall bar the continuance of his Fidelity to that (I dare
not say,) only sworn, but at least only binding Oath, the Romish Restoration.
And truly, not to enlarge upon this Topic, he has not only been always too
firm a Devote to France, but under his present Obligations to that Prince, (if
possibly, (as Heaven forbid,) restored to these Kingdoms,) so much a Dependant
on that Monarch that besides his natural Propensity of not easily forgiving
Injuries, and consequently not being over tender of lashing the Backs of a
Rebellious, (as he calls 'em,) Heretic Nation; yet even supposing a more then
Popish Miracle, his Abjuration of all forgotten Resentments against them, a
Beam of Mercy we must hardly look for, even in spite of himself, his Tenure
under France, his Royal Lieutenancy to the Great Louis, (the highest Post he
can hope for,) as the sad Sufferings of the poor inoffensive Heretics on the
other side the Herring-pond point to us, will tie him up to no extraordinary
Clemency to the more Capital ones on this side.

The latter part, viz. the Peoples uneasy bearing of the Usurpers Yoke, (as he
calls him,) and the Universallity of their longings for his own Return; perhaps
upon due Examination, whatever his Intelligence has been of their Inclinations,
possibly is not the first Mistake that poor Prince has been flattered into.

Letter.

-- It would promote this Work, if a general Peace were settled amongst the
Catholic Princes, or a Truce at least in case the Time be too short for the
other; for this would put an end to those Calamities begun in Germany, and
where the Heretics now lie gnawing in the very Bowels of the Church. --


Remark. This Paragraph pushes the Romish Zeal a little further than the
concern of his own Three Kingdoms, and his American Colonies; the poor
Indulgence of the Reformed Religion, is an Eyesore to him all the World over;
and he cannot forbear his extraordinary Devotion even beyond his own Dominions,
for rooting (as his own Secretary Coleman told us,) the pestilent Northern
Heresy from the Face of the Earth, as gnawing, to his no small Anguish, in the
very Bowels of the Church.

Letter.

-- But what need we speak on this subject, where the Things themselves are so
loud, and implore your Aid: The Apostolic Zeal of your Holiness must find out
Remedies fit for these Evils; and in full confidence thereof, we beseech God to
give Your Holiness a long and a happy Reign: And we being with all Love and
filial Observance prostrate at your Feet, do beg Your Apostolical Benediction.

Given at Our Castle at Dublin this 26th. of November. 1689. --

Remark. Thus ends this promising and imploring Epistle to the Pope. What ready
Performances he engages on his own part for the Romish Cause, We have but too
much Reason to believe, were, and are heartily intended; and will undoubtedly,
if Power be ever equal to good Will, be as heartily put in execution. The
implored Assistance on the other side to carry on this work, it is thought has
not been so zealously lent as desired; the Princes of the Empire, though of his
own Faith, nay the Pope himself, especially Innocent his Predecessor, not
thinking it worth their while to use their Mediation with their Catholic Sons,
either for patching up a Peace or a Truce with France, after such impardonable
Injuries received by them from that common Disturber of Europe, on so poor an
Account as the Re-establishing of a Prince so mixed and linked in the French
Interests, as he has scarce room left for their Pity; nor is it the meanest
Jewel in the Crown of our Great and truly Protestant Defender of the Faith, the
Glorious King William, to be the selected Darling of Mankind, to sit President
of the Great Council of Europe, chosen by those Princes of a contrary
Persuasion to be their Leading Worthy.

FINIS.

