Imprimatur,

GILB. IRONSIDE Vice-Cancel. Oxon.
November. 30. 1688.
AN ACCOUNT OF THE LATE PERSECUTION Of the PROTESTANTS in the VALLYS OF
Piemont; By the Duke of Savoy and the French King, In the Year 1686.

Never before Published.



OXFORD, Printed at the Theater for John Crosley, 1688.

TO THE READER.
IT is to be hoped the Gentlemen of the Church of Rome here at home, will give
over expecting we should fall in love, with either their Religion, or good
natures; if they allow us the liberty of reflecting on their ways of making
Converts abroad; and That they will, at length, be ashamed of their attempts,
against a Church; on which they could never yet fasten, the least color of
these deceits, and crueltys.

It Is very hard, and even contrary to the ingenuity of Human Nature; and more
to the principles of Christianity, to be unconcerned, at the sufferings of
those, who are not only men, as well as our selves; but members too of the same
mystical body.

Our Church enjoins us to pray for all those, who in this transitory life are
in trouble, sorrow, need, sickness, or any other adversity. But how shall we do
this, if we must take no notice, have no compassionate regards to those, who
suffer, on the sole account of a Religion, which they dare not relinquish, out
of terror of conscience; and unfeigned love of the truth?

Till those of the Church of Rome do sincerely abominate these principles, and
practices; they must not take it ill, if they be often put in mind; That these
usages of those, who differ from them in opinion, do unavoidably put a man on
choosing, to lie at the mercy of Turks and Heathens, (who tho equally zealous)
yet happily differ from them in this, That a man may live under them, tho he be
no Mohammedan.

An account of the Persecution of those in the Vallys of Piemont.
IT IS not our present design to give a large and particular relation of
whatever has happened on this occasion: seeing what we shall briefly declare,
will show; That there was never a more cruel and unjust persecution, than this
lately exercised on the inhabitants of the Vallys of Piemont; on the sole
account of their Religion.

The Churches of the Vallys of Piemont, or of the Vaudoises, as they were
commonly called, were the ancientest of all those, who drew their original from
the Apostles; whose doctrine they have ever taught and followed.

They had no need of Reformation; having never partaken of the errors and
Idolatrys wherewith the Romanists have infected the Christian Church. The
simplicity of their manners agreed so well with that of their doctrins, as has
forced their Enemies to confess; that this has especially contributed to their
preservation. They did not content themselves with a bare not entering into an
Idolatrous and superstitious communion; but took all proper occasions to
declare their abhorrence of it; with as great courage and freedom of mind, as
any of the ancient Reformers; who have all (on full enquiry) approved of their
doctrins; as very agreeable to the Apostolic simplicity.

It Is no marvel then, if these Churches, have been ever the object of the
Popish rage and fury: if Popes have published crusado's, and engaged several
Princes against them; if several famous Inquisitors have employed at all times
whatever their devilish malice could invent to exterminate these poor people;
and if the Council de propaganda fide, and extirpandis hoereticis have omitted
nothing for the obtaining their design. But here we cannot enough admire the
especial providence of God, in his particular protection of these Churches;
seeing maugre all these violent persecutions; the perfidiousness and treacherys
wherewith their Enemies have ever recompensed their fidelity; not withstanding
27 or 28 invasions, which their Religion has drawn on them; and the Massacres
which have so many times bathed the Vallys with the Blood of the Vaudoises; yet
has God still preserved them, by the continual turns of his providence.

All Historians, even those of the contrary party, are agreed, that these
Churches were in an immemorial possession of the exercise of their Religion,
before they were under the government of the Dukes, or Earls of Savoy; for it
was only in the year 1233, that Thomas Earl of Savoy became Master of the Town
of Pignerol and the Vallys of Piemont, under pretense the race of the Princes
of Piemont was extinct.

It is also certain, the Vaudoises submitted themselves to the Earls of Savoy
(whence his present Royal Highness is descended,) on condition of being
maintained in all their privileges. And in effect, it is on this foundation,
that these Earls being become Princes of Piemont, have maintained and confirmed
the Vaudois Churches, in the exercise of their Religion, and their other rights
and privileges. They have granted them for this end, from time to time,
several authentic concessions; especially in 1561, 1602, and 1603, which having
been verified and entered in the senate and chamber of Turin, in the year 1620
by means of a considerable sum of money, (which the Vaudoises had paid for
this purpose; as appears from the authentic act:) these concessions therefore
past into the form of an irrevocable deed, and perpetual and inviolable law;
whose execution was enjoined by several solemn decrees of the Dukes of Savoy,
from the years 1638, 1649, 1654, and 1655.

The Council de propaganda fide which is obliged by it is foundation, title, and
oath, to procure the ruin of those, she terms Heretics; observing with extreme
regret the calm which the Vaudoises enjoyed, by means of these patents; took
all possible measures to trouble it.

To this end the Council, which then consisted of the principal Ministers of
the Court of Savoy, taking advantage from the minority of Charles Emanuel Duke
of Savoy, caused to be published in the Month of January 1655 an order, which
obliged all the Inhabitants of the Vallys, to quit the plain in 3 days; and to
retire into the Mountains, on pain of death; could they not make it appear,
they were become Catholics.

The Vaudoises obeyed this order, as unjust and cruel as it was: but their
obedience, which took away all pretenses from their Enemies, could not preserve
them from that horrid Massacre in 1655, of which posterity will freely speak as
an action the most in human and perfidious, mentioned in any writing.

This Massacre was likely in all appearance, to have cut off all the Vaudoises;
but there were many of them, who escaping-out of the hands of these Butchers,
resolved to defend their lives. They executed then this resolution, with such
Vigor and Courage, that they put their executioners to flight, in several
rencounters; till the Protestant Princes and States became mediators in their
behalf.

These generous protectors having heard of this dreadful Massacre, were not
contented to open the Bowels of their charity and benificence; but interposed
earnestly for them with the Duke of Savoy by their intercessions. The Evangelic
Cantons amongst others, sent for this reason four Ambassadors to the Court of
Turin, who joined themselves to the envoy of France, who was to be arbitrator in
this affair for his Master; all which jointly solicited this matter, and
obtained for the Churches and inhabitants of the Vallys, the confirmation of
their privileges definitively and irrevocably, by a solemn patent which the
Duke of Savoy granted the 9th of August 1655, entered according to form in the
senate and chamber of Turin.

It may seem, that after a patent of this nature, which carrys the title and
character of a perpetual and inviolable law, given in the presence, and at the
intercession of the Ambassadors of France and Switzerland; and of which the
King of France had declared himself guarante; it would seem (I say) that the
Vaudoises should enjoy the fruits of a peace, purchased by the Blood of above
6000 of their Brethren; but all this could not preserve them from the violence
of their Enemies.

The Council for propagation violated this patent in the most essential points,
and persecuted the Vaudoises by diverse unjust and wrongful means. And they
offering only complaints against these persecutions, their Enemies took their
patience, for want of courage, and thinking they could oppress them without any
resistance, they brought in again amongst 'em the dismal effects of Fire and
Sword; and renewed in 1663 the miserys and violencys of 1655.

The Vaudoises knowing by experience, that the defense was their only means of
safety, were therefore forced to stand on their guard, which succeeded so well,
that they had procured their peace, and settled their affairs toward the end
of the year 1663.

Then it was, that the Evangelic Cantons, sent again Ambassadors to the Court
of Turin, to be mediators of the peace; which Ambassadors being joined, as the
preceding were, to the French resident at Turin, they procured again for the
Vaudoises a solemn, perpetual, and irrevocable patent in the Month of Feb.
1664. confirmative of the preceding, and entered according to form as before.

But this patent was not executed with greater sincerity than the former,
although the Duke had past his word to the Cantons of Switzerland in a letter of
the 28th of Feb. 1664. to make it be punctually observed.

It Is hardly possible to describe the turnings and windings, the shifts and
tricks which the Council for propagation made use of, to render this patent of
none effect to the Vaudoises. It Is sufficient to say, they could never have
defended themselves against such malicious inventions, had not God, in whose
hands are the hearts of Kings and Princes overruled that of Charles Emanuel
Duke of Savoy.

This Prince having nearly examined the conduct of the Vaudoises, found it was
without reason they were made so odious; and calling to mind the zeal they had
showed in his service in several occasions, especially in 1638 and 1640, when
they exposed themselves so vigorously in his defense against his Enemies, whilst
most of his Estates had revolted against him, he resolved to use them for the
future as subjects, which deserved his love, as well as his protection.

The war which he had with the Genoises in 1672. greatly confirmed him in his
good opinion of the Vaudoises. For they served him in it with such zeal and
courage, that this Prince thought it not enough, to give 'em public
commendations for their valor and fidelity, in a letter he wrote to them on
this occasion; but protected them as long as he lived.

Madam Royal his Widow, treated them after his example; not only with great
gentleness and favors, but engaged her self by a letter to the Switz Cantons
dated 28th. Jan. 1679. to maintain and protect the Vaudoises, in the full
exercise of their Religion, and their other privileges.

We have lightly touched on all these things, that we might not pass the bounds
prescribed. For besides that they serve to show, that the rights and
privileges of the Vaudoises were grounded on unmovable foundations; and that
their Enemies have ever violated the most solemn and authentic engagements, and
only exercised crueltys, injustices, and perfidiousnesses against them; They
likewise serve to justify the conduct, which the Vaudoises have observed to the
end; which is properly the subject of this relation.

The Vaudoises had flattered themselves, that under the government of the Duke
of Savoy now reigning, they might enjoy some hopes of tranquillity. They had
done him very considerable services in 1684. in the war against the Banditi of
Mondovi. And this Prince had given them authentic assurances of his
satisfaction, and good will toward them, in a letter he wrote to them on this
occasion; and the beginnings of his reign seemed to promise them for the
future, that in rendering to Caesar that which is Cesar's, they should have the
liberty of rendering to God what belonged to him. They fed themselves with these
hopes, when the Governor of the Vallys of Piemont published toward the end of
the year 1685 an order, forbidding all strangers to inhabit in these Vallys,
and to remain therein more than 3 days without his leave, and also the
inhabitants to entertain or lodge them under grievous penaltys.

The Vaudoises, had by this time bin informed of the violences offered in
France, to force the Protestants to change their Religion: They farther
understood that the King of France had canceled the edict of Nants, and they
well perceived this prohibition of sheltring their brethren might prove of
dangerous consequence to them. But they did not forsee the miserys which have
happened to them, because men do naturally love to flatter themselves, and their
Enemies used all endeavors, to remove out of their minds all the thoughts which
fear might inspire them with, to the end they might be taken unprovided.

They were in this condition, when his Royal Highness orders were proclaimed in
the Vallys, being the 31st of Jan. 1686. which strictly forbad the exercise of
their Religion on pain of death, and confiscation of their estates; enjoining
all their Churches to be demolished, and the banishment of all the Ministers;
that the Infants should be Baptized and brought up in the Popish Religion, on
penalty of their Fathers being sent to the Gallys, with many other particulars,
to the same purpose, as the King of France's declaration, which annul'd the
edict of Nants.

It Is impossible to describe the Vaudoises fears and griefs, at the news of so
surprising an order, so much more terrible than the former, as being to produce
such tragical effects. For the preceding tended only to bound them in more
narrow limits, and to deprive them of the right of inhabiting the plain, which
they had done time out of mind; but the order of the 31 of Jan. wholly took
from them all liberty of conscience, and exercise of their Religion.

They saw themselves immediately precipitated into a dreadful abyss of miserys,
without any remedy; and forced to behold either the light of the Gospel
extinguish't in the Vallys, which had there shined for so many ages, or the
renewing those cruel Massacres, which has sacrificed so many of their Brethren:
yet being persuaded this order was the effect of some misrepresentation of them
by their Enemies to his Highness, they betook themselves to their usual course of
supplications, and humble remonstrances; and presented four requests to the
Duke of Savoy, to obtain the revocation of this order. But gaining only some
time in the execution of it, they saw their misfortune was without remedy. And
they were more confirmed in the assurances of their miserys, when they
understood the King of France (who on politic reasons had always protected
them, and even declared himself the gardante of the patents aforementioned) had
not only obliged the Duke to issue forth this order; but that his most
Christian Majesty had caused his Troops to advance to Piemont to see it
executed.

Then it was, that the Vaudoises began to think of defending themselves from the
Invasions of these Foreigners, and not to dye like Beasts or fools.

In the mean time the Evangelic Cantons being informed of this order, and the
measures taken for it is execution, believed themselves no ways obliged to
forsake a people persecuted for mere Religion, and that they ought to appear on
this occasion as heretofore.

It was resolved then in an assembly held at Baden in the month of Feb. 1686.
to send again Ambassadors to the Duke of Savoy to intercede in the behalf of
the Vaudoises: who arrived at Turin in the beginning of March, and offered
their request, tending to the revocation of the order set forth in the 31 of
Jan. They showed, That the Evangelick Cantons were interessed in this affair,
not only as being of the same belief, as the Vaudoises; but for that the
Patents of 1655 and 1633. which this order annul'd, were the fruits of their
mediation; and they accompanied these their demands with several solid
Arguments.

The Court of Turin pretended not to answer their reasons, thinking it enough
to tell the Ambassadors, that the engagements of the Duke of Savoy, with the
King of France, were directly opposite to the success of their negotiation.
Which obliged the Ambassadors to remonstrate, in a memorial for this purpose,
That his Royal Highness's Predecessors having given their Royal word to several
States, and particularly to the Evangelick Cantons, for the executing the
Patents granted to the Vaudoises, he could not renounce such formal
engagements, because these Patents were not mere Tollerations, but perpetual
Concessions, and inviolable laws; and for as much also that they having been
granted at the request of several Princes, they be, according to the law of
Nations, lasting Monuments of public faith; in that the words of Princes
should be Sacred and inviolable.

They also showed, that several politic respects should induce the Duke of
Savoy to maintain the Vaudoises in their privileges: That it consisted not
with his justice and bounty to suffer his Countries to be filled with blood and
slaughter; by destroying a people, who implored his grace and Clemency; and who
had done nothing deserving these severities.

But neither the reasonings of the Ambassadors, nor their pressing
solicitations, nor the letters of intercession, which several Protestant
Princes wrote again in favor of these poor people, produced any effect. They
serving only to confirm the Ambassadors in their belief, of the engagements
wherein the Duke of Savoy had entered with the King of France, to destroy the
Protestant Religion.

All this while the Vaudoises were ignorant of what past in Turin. They knew
nothing of the Ambassadors being at Court, nor their Transactions; because care
was taken to stop two Messengers in their passage, who were to carry the news
into the Vallys. It Is true indeed they knew sometime after, by a common report,
that these Ambassadors were at Turin to demand the revocation of the order of
the 31 of January; but they could hear nothing certain, touching the effect of
their Negotiation. They durst not go themselves to Turin, since the time allowed
them was expired, and for that the Court had refused a safe conduct, which the
Ambassadors had desired for the deputies of the Vallys appearance, to solicit
their own affairs, as was practiced in former occasions.

However the Vaudoises had fortified themselves with some Retrenchments in their
Country, and stood on their guard, to hinder the entrance of the Troops, most
of which were already encamped, at the foot of the Vallys.

The Duke of Savoy returned answer to the Ambassadors proposals, by the
Marquess of St. Thomas, one of his Ministers of State; who has the management
of Foreign affairs; and who swore to them, that the Duke could not revoke this
order, he not being the master of this affair.

He also protested to them, as from the part of his Highness, that provided the
order was executed, the Duke would not refuse to enter into some expedients. He
also showed them that on their account, the Vaudoises should have leave to
depart the Country, and dispose of their estates.

The Ambassadors thinking the Vaudoises, having neither Officers nor Troops,
could not sustain a war, against two such powerful enemies, as the King of
France and the Duke of Savoy, who were united for their destruction; They
imagined then, that to avert the Tempest, with which these poor people were
threatened, they ought to solicit their departure, and disposal of Estates. But
forasmuch as before they could enter on this Negotiation, they must consult
those of the Vallys; the Ambassadors therefore got leave of the Court of Turin,
that they might take a Journey thither; for which purpose, they had a Letter
from the Duke, to the Governor of the Vallys.

The Ambassadors arrived there the 22 of March, and the next Morning caused an
Assembly of the people's Deputys, to be summoned, to whom they declared, what
they had done. In fine, they showed them, that in the condition they were in,
deprived of all hope of succor; they had no other part to take, but that of
leaving their Country; provided it could be obtained with the disposal of their
Estates; and if they would accept of this proposal, they would offer it as from
them.

The Vaudoises deputys greatly surpised, that they must expect no succor, in
an occasion wherein they hoped all the Protestant States would concern
themselves; answered the Ambassadors they were sensible they could not do better
than to follow their advice; but before they could resolve on an affair of this
importance, they must consult a general assembly.

In the mean time the Ambassadors returned to Turin, where they informed the
Marquess of St. Thomas of the success of their Journey, who assured them this
Negotiation was very agreeable to the Court. They afterward desired a
Passport to bring thither some of the inhabitants of the Vallys, with the
determinations of this Assembly. But this was refused them under two pretenses,
the first, that the Duke of Savoy would have no Vaudoise to be seen following
his Court; and the other was, that he would not have it thought, that what he
did, was out of any other respect than the gratifying the Ambassadors. They
were then obliged to send into the Vallys the Secretary of the Embassy, to
fetch these people's determinations.

The Secretary found the people assembled at Angrogne the 28 of March, being
much divided in their resolutions; for if on the one hand, they saw the
dreadful consequences of this War; so on the other the dangers and insuperable
difficulties in departing the Country; which supposing they could do, without
any danger, yet they could not, without great regret, leave their Estates and
Country, to travel to Foreign parts; where they must lead a vagrant and
uneasy life.

In fine they agreed to send a memorial to the Ambassadors, of the dangers and
difficulties, which hindered their passage; and to write them a Letter signed by
nine Divines, and eight of the Laity, in which having entreated them to reflect
on these obstacles, they declared, they would remit themselves to their prudence
and conduct.

On this Letter the Ambassadors endeavored to obtain leave for the Vaudoises,
to leave the States of Piemont, and to dispose of their goods; But the Duke of
Savoy, to whom the proposal was carried, sent word to them, that before he
could give a positive answer to what they desired, he expected the people of
the Vallys should send Deputys to him, with full power to make him those
submissions, which were due to him; and to beg leave of him to withdraw from
his States, as a favor which they implored of their Prince.

The Ambassadors might well be surpised at this alteration of the Scene;
having bin refused the safe conduct which they had a little before requested,
to bring the Vaudoise Deputys to Turin. They had binseveral times told, that
the grant of a Retreat to the Vaudoises should be wholly in consideration of
the Ambassadors. Whereas now, it must not be the Ambassadors, who demand the
leave, as a proposal coming from them; but it must on the contrary be the
Vaudoises, who make this request themselves.

This contrary course was not without some reason; For the Council of
propagation who managed this affair, had without doubt these two several
considerations; The one, that they would not have the Ambassadors named in the
permission of departure, that they might have less right to demand the
execution of the things promised to the Vaudoises; The other, that the
Vaudoises alone requesting this permission, as a grace, or favor, they might
impose on them such conditions, as they pleased; and lastly, that the Vaudoises
making the submissions which the Duke required, they must appear in the
condition of supplicants, and consequently lay down their arms, otherwise they
could not be received, as such.

But however it was, the Ambassadors being desirous to take away all pretense
from the Vaudoises Enemies, took the safe conduct, and sent it by the secretary
of the Embassy; who assembled the people for the naming their deputys. But as
on the one hand, there were several, who never designed to leave their Country;
so on the other, the sudden march of their Enemies, filled them with suspicions
and contrary opinions; so that the resolutions given into their Deputys, proved
quite different. For some were for requesting the permission of retiring from
the Country, and disposing of their estates; and others for petitioning, that
they might have the free exercise of their Religion, and enjoyment of their
other rights and privileges.

These Deputys being come to Turin, the Ambassadors thought it not fitting,
they should appear at Court thus divided; they sent them therefore back again
to the Vallys to be united, and labored in the mean while to get a farther
delay.

Their Enemies apprehended with great satisfaction the divisions, about leaving
the Country; and were so well persuaded this would be an infallible means to
ruin them; that they sent persons expressly amongst them, to keep up this
contrariety of determinations. It Is also to be presumed, they had devised this
expedient, touching the departure; as a means to disunite the Vaudoises.

To make then the greater advantage of the different resolutions of these
people, their Enemies altered again their design. They had lately before
declared, they expected first that the Vaudoises themselves should sue for leave
to depart, and to offer their submissions. The Vaudoises had not made these
submissions, nor presented their petition for a departure; there being several
amongst them, who never yet resolved to leave the Country; neither did the
Ambassadors solicit the permission of departure, but a delay, as appears from
a letter which they wrote to the Marquess of St. Thomas the 8 of April 1686.
However to complete the division of the Vaudoises; to destroy them with greater
ease, there suddenly issued out, unknown to the Ambassadors, an edict of the
9th of the same Month of April, which granted to the Vaudoises a pardon and
leave to retire out of the Countries of Piemont. But to the end we may the
better judge of the design of the Council of propagation, here is a copy of this
edict translated out of Italian.

The Divine Providence in setting Princes over the people has put into the
hands of the former, the distribution of rewards and punishments, that the hope
of the first, may encourage the good; and the fear of the latter restrain the
wicked. Nothing but vengeance ought to fall from us on the heads of the people
of the Vallys of Lucerna, who are of the pretended reformed Religion; seeing
it is apparent, they have not only obstinately disobeyed our order of the 31 of
Jan. last, but moreover hardened themselves in their crime, and fallen into the
excesses of an enormous and execrable Rebellion. Yet our natural clemency,
surpassing their crime; and not contenting our selves with the Fatherly
forbearance, with which we have for so long time expected, in vain, their
repentance; we would also leave it again to their own will; who have hitherto
bin wickedly resolved, the choice of an happy or miserable condition, and open
to 'em again the door of our mercy, in the manner following, whereto if they do
not submit, by a ready obedience, they must impute to their obstinacy the
punnishments they shall incurr, without remission, from our provoked patience.

And therefore in confirmation first of our declaration of the 31 of Jan. last,
we have by virtue also of these presents, of our own certain knowledge, full
power and absolute authority, and by the advice of our Council, commanded all
our subjects of the Vallys of Lucerna, making profession of the Reformed
Religion, to lay down their arms, and return to their habitations, in the term
hereafter prescribed.

We also command them to make no more assemblys, and public meetings, on any
account whatever; to the end, that according to our intention, the judges may
have free passage, and the Father missionarys, and other religious persons, may
return to the Churches, whence they have bin driven.

And it being unreasonable, that the Religious missionarys, Catholics and
Catholickis'd, should suffer by any damages they have received, by those of
the pretended reformed Religion; we therefore command and strictly charge, that
the necessary sums to indemnise them, shall be indistinctly levied from the
goods and estates of the said pretended reformed; as it shall be summarily
adjusted, before Mr. Mouroux Superintendant of the Courts of justice in the
Vallys. Yet declaring, that in case those of the pretended reformed Religion
shall make it appear, that these damages have bin occasioned by some
particular persons, they shall have remedy and amends from the aforesaid
particular.

And to show our said subjects, how great our clemency is toward them, we
permit those who intend to leave our Countries, to do it within the term, and
according to the conditions hereafter prescribed.

But forasmuch as their maliciousness; has too plainly showed it self, by their
past demeanor; and that several may conceal their wicked designs, under a false
color of obedience, we reserve, besides those who shall leave our Countries, of
their own will, to enjoin it to others, as we think fitting; and according as
we shall find it expedient to secure the peace to those, who shall stay behind;
to whom we shall prescribe the rules they are to observe for the future.

And as a greater proof of our favor, we grant, as well to those who shall of
their own will retire, as those who shall depart by our orders, to carry with
them their goods and effects, and to sell them if they think fit, however in
the manner hereafter prescribed,

The same shall extend to foreigners, and such as are born of them, who shall
conform themselves to the last article contained in the declaration of the 31 of
Jan. above cited.

The aforesaid sale of goods must be made to Catholics and Catholicis'd
persons; but because there may not perhaps be found Chapmen in the term
hereafter prescribed, and we not intending that the Religionarys, who shall
depart our Countries, shall lose the benefit of our present concession, they may
therefore choose five or six persons, to whom they may make over their Estates,
and who may remain by our License in Lucerna in all liberty, for three Months,
to treat and bargain with any one, and sell the Estates of such as are gone;
who shall have leave to prescribe in their letters of Attorney, the rate at
which they value their goods, and to have all due returns made them, without
fraud or delay; the superintendancy of which affair shall be committed to our
chief Justice Mr. Mouroux.

Those who would retire, shall be obliged to repair respectively to the places,
and at the time hereafter specified, to be ready to depart, without Arms, by
the way which shall be denoted to them; either through Savoy, or the Vale of
Aoste. For this effect a Passport and Letter of safe conduct shall be granted
them, to prevent all ill usage, and hindrances in our Dominions. And for as
much as being in great numbers, they may be exposed to several inconveniences
in the way, and places, through which they shall pass with their luggage; they
shall therefore consist of three companies. The first which shall be those of
the Valley of Lucerna, must repair to the Tower, to set forth immediately the day
after the Term here below mentioned, to wit on the 21 of this Month of April.
The second Company shall consist of those of the Valley of Angrogne, St.
Bartholomy, Rocheplate and Prurustin who shall part the day following, to wit
the 22d of this Month; and the third and last Company consisting of those of
the Vale of St. Martin and Peirouse, shall repair to Miradol and part the third
day, to wit the 23d of this Month.

The Term in which our said Subjects of the pretended Reformed Religion,
inhabitants of the Vallys of Lucerna, shall be obliged to lay down their Arms,
in the manner expressed in the first Article of the present declaration, is eight
days after it is publication, in the Vale of Lucerna; and which they must not
fail to obey, if they expect to reap the fruits of our Clemency, whose motions
we follow, as well as those of paternal affection, with which we regard our
said Subjects, notwithstanding the enormity of their crimes. And expecting
punctual observance of the above particulars; we grant favor, pardon,
remission, abolition, and an ample forgiveness, to our said Subjects, for all
excesses, failings, crimes, and other delinquencies, which they may have
committed, since the publication of this our order of the 31 of January last,
as well in general, as in particular, in such manner, as they shall never be
called in question for them, under what pretense soever; strictly charging all
Justices, Counselors and others, not to give them any Molestation. But if they
render themselves unworthy of these favors, by not observing what is before
mentioned; it will then be of too pernicious example, to withold any longer the
chastisement they have deserved; having bin so lavish to them of our favors;
and expected so long their Repentance; we shall then make use of the means
which God bas put into our hands, to reduce the obstinate to their duty, and
make them feel the punishment due to their insolences.

Given at Turin the 9th of April 1686.

This edict was published in the Vallys, on the 11th of April, the same day the
Ambassadors wrote a Letter to some of the Vaudoises, to know their resolutions.
They in the mean time presented a very earnest Memorial to the Marquess of St.
Thomas, to obtain some assurance, that the Troops should not enter into the
Vallys, and to procure the Vaudoises some more favorable conditions, than those
in the edict.

But the Court of Turin gave them to understand, that there was nothing to be
done for the Vaudoises, till such time as they had laid down their Arms, of
which the Ambassadors gave advice to the Deputys of the Vallys, which had bin
at Turin, by a Letter of the 13 instant, which they wrote them on this occasion.

On the 14th the Commons called a general Assembly at Rocheplate, in which
having examined the terms and conditions of the edict, they judged that their
enemies had nothing farther from their intentions, than to let them have the
benefit of the pretended pass, and that this edict was but a snare to entangle
them, the more easily to work their destruction. They resolved then, not to
accept it; to follow the example of their Fathers, and to remit the events to
God's providence. So that this Edict which was only given for the dividing
them, had a direct contrary effect, and turned to the uniting them, in the same
particular judgment.

The chief reasons which hindered them from accepting this Edict were first,
that seeing it enjoined the perfect execution of the declaration of the 31 of
Jan. which commands all the Churches to be demolisht in eight days time,
because the edict expressly says, that if in eight days they perform not what
it contains, they are deprived of the favors and benefits which it offers them.
To perform then the commands contained in the Edict, the Vaudoises themselves
must demolish their own Churches or their enemies for them. The Vaudoises could
never bring themselves to the doing this, with their own hands, they must then
have Soldiers sent them, who under pretense of this demolition, would have
infallibly fallen on them. Secondly, had they bin permitted to depart fairly,
why was not the execution of the order of the 31 of Jan. suspended, till such
time as they could possibly get away? why should they be obliged to demolish
their Churches in the eight days time allowed them to prepare themselves to
leave for ever their Country? What is this for, but to render their escape
impossible. Thirdly, this Edict commands they should lay down their Arms, and
lay open their Countries to Popish Priests, and other Emissarys. Now it is plain,
that in laying down their Arms, they must lie at the mercy of their Enemies and
at the fury of the Soldiers, who would not have failed entering in upon them, to
hinder their escape; and torment them till such time as they had changed their
Religion, as they have done in France. And their dreadful apprehensions had too
certain grounds, seeing they had no assurance given them, That the Troops
should not come down into the Vallys. Fourthly, the Vaudoises are also obliged
to depart in three separate Companys, and to render themselves in such places,
where the Soldiers being encamped, they could not fail of having their throats
cut. Fifthly, The permission which the same Edict gives the Vaudoises of
selling their goods, was to them of no use. For besides that Sale could not be
made, till after their departure, to Catholics, and that too by Popish
Officers, so also out of the money raised from the Sale of the same goods must
be indemnis'd, the Friars, the Missionarys, the Ancient, the Modern, and the
future Catholics for the damages and interests which they might pretend to,
and which they would not fail to make to amount to above the value of the
estates sold. Sixthly, the Edict imports, that besides those who shall leave
the Vallys of their own free will, the Prince reserves to himself the power of
banishing such as he shall think good, to secure the peace of those who shall
remain; which supposes not only that the conditions of the Edict were so
disadvantagious, that there must be several Vaudoises, who would not accept of
them, nor move thence: but moreover that the departure it self was to be looked
on, not as a favor, but as a punishment to be imposed on several Vaudoises,
seeing they reserved the power of bannishing those, who were willing to remain.
Seventhly, the Ambassadors were not named in the Edict, and the Vaudoises had
no security for the faithful performance of the things therein contained. They
had then reason to be in a great distrust; but the costly experiences which
they had had in several occasions of the perfidiousness of their Enemies, and
particularly in this, wherein were violated all the laws of justice, made their
suspicion but too well grounded.

In fine, the Duke of Savoy having declared, that he was not the Master of this
affair, by reason of the engagements he lay under to the King of France, it was
not to be presumed that his most Christian Majesty, who had interess'd himself
in the business, would be more kind to the Vaudoises, than he had bin to his
own subjects.

The Vaudoises sent then their determinations to the Ambassadors, who used all
possible means to procure them more certain and advantageous conditions, than
those contained in the Edict, but neither their reasons or solicitations could
obtain any thing for them. They were continually told, that as long as the
Vaudoises were in arms, there could be nothing granted them, or any positive
promises made. So that the Vaudoises being persuaded, that the design of
disarming them, was to destroy them with less difficulty, could by no means
assent to so foolish proposals, and therefore persisted in the resolution of
defending themselves, in case of invasion.

There happened a passage which served greatly to confirm them in this
resolution. For 2 or 3 days after the publication of the Edict Mr. Tholozan,
Mr. Gautier, Mr. Gavante, Mr. Cabriol, and ten or twelve others of the
inhabitants of the Vallys, came to the Intendant to acquaint him, that they and
their familys designed to be gone out of the estates of Piemont, conformably to
the Edict; and therefore requested of him pass-ports, which he refused them, on
pretense they must stay to go out with the rest.

And farther, there being several, who refused to yield to the solicitations
he made them, for the changing their Religion, he caused 'em to be put in
Prison, where they have many of 'em perished. There needed no more to show they
intended, not to let them leave the Country, or tarry behind without turning
Papists.

However the Vaudoises having read a letter from the Ambassadors, assembled
themselves again at Rocheplate, on the 19th of April, where they found it
necessary to stand on their own defense. It was also decreed in this assembly,
that all the Ministers should preach, and administer the Sacrament, the Sunday
following, which was Easter day.

Some of this Valley changed their minds, without communicating their purposes
to the rest. And the directors of the Church of Villeseche, wrote to the
Ambassadors, which were then at Turin, on the point of their departure, a
letter dated the 20th of April, in which they declared, they would obey the
Edict, and on this account entreated them, to procure them a passport and some
time to prepare themselves.

One of the Ambassadors took the pains to go to the Camp, to make this request,
but it was refused him, under pretense that the time was expired. For it was
always too soon or too late.

In the mean time, the Duke of Savoy came to the Camp some days after the
publication of the Edict, to discourage the Vaudoises by his presence, and to
oblige them to submit to the conditions imposed on them. He had made a review
of his troops, and those of France; who were encampt near the plain, at the
foot of the Alps. His army consisted of the troops of his household, of all his
forces, both horse and foot, of the militia of Mondovi, Barjes, Bagnols, and a
great number of free Booters. And the French army consisted of several
Regiments of horse and Dragoons, of 7 or 8 Batalions of foot which had past the
Mounts, and part of the garrison of Pignerol and Casal. He had moreover set all
things in order, to attack the Vaudoises, as soon as the limited time should be
expired, having appointed his army to force the Valley of Lucerna, and the
commonalty of Angrogne: and the French army to attack the Vallys of St. Martin
and Peirouse.

The Vaudoises on their side, had taken some care to defend themselves. They
only held one part of the Valley of Lucerna. For the Town which gives the name
to this Valley, and several other considerable places was in the Enemies hands.
The Commonalty of Angrogne, to which several give the name of a Valley, by
reason of it is great extent, was not wholly in the hands of the Vaudoises. They
were Masters in the Valley of Peirouse, only of some places which depend on the
states of Piemont; for this Valley is divided between the French King and the
Duke of Savoy; but they held all the Valley of St. Martin, which is stronger
than any of the rest by it is situation.

They had fortified themselves in each of these Vallys, by several Retrenchments
of Wood and Stone; Being about 2500 men able to bear Arms, having chosen their
Officers from the most considerable Persons of their own Country, there being
no Foreigners amongst them, and they thus expected the Enemy with great
resolution. But as on one hand they had no regulated Troops, nor experienced
Officers, and on the other, there were several Vardoises who had bin corrupted
or fallen off from their resolutions, during the Negotiation, so it is not to be
marvel'd at, if they took not all necessary precautions. One of the greatest
faults they committed was their undertaking to keep all their Posts. For had
they abandoned those at the farthest distance, and retired into the
Retrenchments, within the Mountains, there is no likelihood they could have bin
attackt with any success.

The 22 of April being the day appointed for the Onset, the French Army
commanded by Catinat Governor of Casal, marched two hours before day by
Torchlight, against the Vallys of Peirouse and St Martin, keeping along the
River of Cluson, being the French King's Country.

Catinat drew out a Detachement of Foot, commanded by Ville-Vielle a Lieutenant
Colonel, who having past over the River on a Bridge, entered into the valley of
Peirouse Piemontoise. He possessed himself of St. Germain, a Village which the
Vaudoises had forsaken, and came and insulted over a Retrenchment, not far off,
wherein there were 200 men.

The Vaudoises, after some resistance, quitted this Post; and betook themselves
to another, which lay more advantagiously. In the mean time, a new Detachment
of Horse and Dragoons, having in like manner past the River, came to the
assistance of the Infantry, who had began the fight. They did all they could to
gain the Vaudoises Retrenchment which they thought no hard task, seeing they
were six to one; but they found here such vigorous defense, that having lost a
great many men, they Retrenched themselves within Pistol shot. Both partys held
continual firing for 10 hours, but in fine, the Vaudoises issued out from their
Trenches, with their Swords in their hands surprising the French, who did not
expect such a bold action, and drove them into the plain beyond Cluson, where
by good hap, they found a Bridge, which saved them from drowning.

There were in this Rencounter, above 500 French killed, and wounded; and
amongst the rest, several Officers of note; and the Vaudoises, on their side,
lost but two men, and had some few wounded. The relation, which the contrary
party has wrote, on this subject, entitled an account of the war against the
Religionarys called Barbets, agrees touching the great loss, the French made;
saying the Vaudoises fought so desperately, as forced the French to an
unhandsome retreat beyond Cluson. In this defeat, Ville-Vielle betook himself
to the Church of St. Germain, with 70 Soldiers, and some Officers; who being
summoned to surrender himself on terms of good Quarter, he refused, and showed
great resolution, though several of his people were killed.

The Vaudoises had certainly forced him to yield, had not the approaches of the
Night, and the weariness of that day's exercise induced them to give over.
Having therefore left a guard at the Church door, the rest went to seek some
refreshments. Ville-Vielle was carried off at break of day, by the assistance
of some Troops, which the Governor of Pignerol had sent secretly in the night.
The Vaudoises then returned to their Retrenchments, expecting to be again
attackt, but the Enemy, although recruited by fresh forces, contented themselves
with Encamping about Pistol shot distance, without firing on either side, for
two days together.

Whilst things thus past in Peirouse, the body of the French King's Army
advanced from Cluson, to the Fort of Peirouse. When Catinat drew out a
Retrenchment of Horse, commanded by Melac, which having past over the River, on
two Bridges, went wheeling about to gain the high grounds, which separate the
Valley of St. Martin by a Village named Rioclaret. But those who commanded in
this Valley, not expecting to be attackt after their offers of compliance with
the terms of the Edict; especially considering the day, denoted for their
departure out of this Valley, was not come. They therefore had not put themselves
into a condition of defense, neither did they make any resistance; whereupon
they chose to lay down their Arms and to implore the pity and compassions of
the Victors. But the French, being enraged, at what had past, at St. Germains,
contented not themselves with burning, ravishing and plundering, but Massacred,
without distinction of age and sex with unheard of fury, all those, whom flight
could not save from their cruelty. Catinat having ravaged all the Country of
Rioclaret, in the most barbarous manner imaginable, left some Troops in the
Vale of St. Martin, and traverst with the main body of the Army, the Mountains,
which separate this Valley, from that of Peirouse; and went and encampt, without
finding any resistance, in the valley of Peirouse; where the Soldiers Massacred
all those, who fell into their hands; without sparing men, women, or children.
In the mean time the Detachment, which Melac commanded, having encampt one
night on the risings of the Valley of St. Martin, entered through several parts
into this Valley, directed by the Vaudoises, who were so wicked to lead them,
through unknown ways, to all others, but only the inhabitants of the Country.

He left in all places, where he past, the marks of an unheard of fury; and
went and joined himself to the rest of the Army, which lay encampt at Pramol.
We shall not give here a particular account of the crueltys exercised, in these
occasions, and several others; but content our selves in reciting in the sequel
of this relation, some instances, which may make us judge of the rest.

We must of necessity, break off the relation, of what the French did in
Peirouse; seeing there happened such things in the Vallys of Lucerna, and
Angrogne, which should be first taken notice of.

The Duke of Savoy's Army being come to the plain of St. John the 22 of April,
were drawn out into several bodies which attackt diverse Retrenchments, which
the Vaudoises had in the Vallys of Lucerna and Angrogne. The Vaudoises not
being able to withstand the Enemy's Cannon, in such places, which likewise lay
open to the Horse, were forced after some resistance to abandon part of these
Retrenchments, and to betake themselves to a Fort, more advantagiously situated,
near Angrogne, to the number of 500 men.

The Enemy having burnt all the houses which they came near, they afterward
assaulted the Fort of the Vaudoises, who defended themselves so vigorously, with
shot and stones, against this great body, that they kept their post all that
day, with the loss only of five men. Whereas the Enemy lost 300, although defended
by an advantageous retrenchment.

The Vaudoises fearing they could not keep this fort, because the army
continually grew bigger, betook themselves to another, at 200 paces distance,
that was better situated; where they expected the army with great courage,
which advanced to assault them, when advice was sent them, that the Vale of St.
Martin had surrendered, and that the French was coming on them behind; for to
this Valley, there is an easy passage from Lucerna and Angrogne.

This news obliged the Vaudoises, to enter into composition, with Don Gabriel
of Savoy, Uncle and General of the Duke of Savoy's army, and with the rest of
the other Officers, who on notice of his Royal Highness's will and pleasure,
positively promised, as well from him, as from themselves, that the Vaudoises
should receive a full pardon, and be remitted to the terms of the order of the
9th of April, provided they stood to his mercy. But the Vaudoises making some
scruples at the confiding on this promise; Don Gabriel, who had notice of it,
sent them a letter, writ and signed with his own hand in his Royal Highness's
name, and in these words.

Lay down immediately your arms, and throw your selves on his Royal Highness's
mercy, in doing which, assure your selves, he grants you pardon; and that no
violence shall be offered to your selves, your wives, or children.

An assurance of this nature, one would think, should be sufficient, for the
securing the Vaudoises lives and libertys. For besides that this promise was
made in the name, and on the part of the Duke, it must have seemed no less
valid, had it only came from Don Gabriel, and other Chief Officers.

The Vaudoises then laid down their arms, in relyance on this promise, and went
most of them to surrender themselves to their Enemies; hoping they should be
immediately released. But all those who put themselves into their hands, were
made prisoners, and led to the Town of Lucerna, under pretense, they were to be
brought to his Royal Highness, to make their submissions.

The Enemies also seized on all the posts, which the Vaudoises had held in
Angrogne. They contented not themselves with sacking, plundering, and burning
the houses of these poor people; they moreover put to the sword a great number
of Vaudoises of both sexes, Old and Young. They Ravished several Women and
Virgins, and committed, in fine, such brutish actions, as strike with horror
all persons, endued with any sense of humanity. Yet there were several
Vaudoises, who after this composition, slipped privately out of their hands,
unwilling to deliver themselves to the mercy of such barbarous wretches, before
they knew what would become of their companions, who had yielded themselves.
Seeing then on one hand, that the army exercised horrid crueltys, wherever it
past; and on the other, that they detained all those who surrendered themselves,
they therefore hid themselves in the woods, and sent a request to Don Gabriel by
one Bartholomew Fraschie, to entreat him to release their brethren, detained
contrary to promise; and to forbear those acts of hostility, which were carried
on with such barbarous cruelty. Don Gabriel made no answer to this humble
request: but some Officers told Fraschie, that the Vaudoises were carried to
Lucerna, only to beg pardon of his Royal Highness, and that after this, they
should be releast.

In the mean time the Marquess de Parelle gained the rising ground of the
Vallys of Angrogne, with a detachement from the army, who finding no
resistance, made up to the most considerable sort of the Vaudoises, and in
which they had most of their cattle. The Marquess gave the Vaudoises to
understand, that the peace being made, by the capitulation of Angrogne, it was
their fault, they enjoyed not the fruits of it. He assured them, for this
effect, on the word of a man of honor, that if they would put themselves into
his hands, neither they nor their wives or children, should be harmed; and that
they might carry with them, whatever they pleased, without any fear of it is
being taken from them. That nothing would be required of them, but to make
their submissions. And that as for those, who would become Catholics, they
might return in all safety to their familys and Estates, and as to the rest,
who were willing to leave the Country, they should have free liberty to depart,
according to the order of the 9th of April.

These Vaudoises then surrendered themselves again on the faith of these
promises, which were no better observed, than the others. For the Enemies were
no sooner entered into the fort, but not only whatever the Vaudoises there had,
was delivered up to the Rapin of the Soldiers, and Banditi of Mondovi, their
capital Enemies, who enriched themselves with their spoils: but these poor
people, the greatest part of which were ancient Men, Women, and Children, were
made Prisoners, with some Ministers, who were amongst them; and conducted with
such fury, that those whose age, or other infirmitys permitted not to travel
fast enough to the Soldiers minds, were slain with their Swords, or thrown down
from Rocks.

To return to the French, whom we have left at Pramol, in the Valley of
Peirouse, they behaved themselves after the same manner, as the troops of the
Duke had done at Angrogne, and in the Vale of Lucerna. They had encampt
themselves in a part of the common of Pramol; called the Rua; which is about
half an hour's march from another place, termed Pieumian, where a party of
those of Pramol, St. Germain, Prarustin and Rocheplate had retired, to the
number of 1500 persons, Men, Women, and Children. The French might easily from
their quarter come down to St. Germain, and fall on the 200 Vaudoises, who had
so valiantly defended themselves, and had resettled themselves in their trenches.
But having notice of the loss of the Valley of St. Martin, and the Enemies march,
they thereupon left this retrenchment, for fear of being attackt behind, and
went to their brethren in Pieumian.

Whilst they deliberated on the course they should take to defend themselves,
against the French, who were preparing to invade them; some Inhabitants of the
Vallys, being suborned and won over to the Enemy, came and told them, that the
Vallys of Angrogne and Lucerna had submitted to the will of their Prince, who
had taken 'em into favor, and granted them the terms of the order issued out
the 9th of April. They also told them, it was in their power, to end a war,
the burden of which they were not able to sustain alone, and to procure for
themselves an advantageous and lasting peace. Which news having taken from the
Vaudoises part of their resolution; they sent Deputys with a Drum, to the
French General, to treat of peace. Who told them, that the intention of his
Royal Highness was to pardon them, and positively promised them from his part
and his own their lives and liberties, with leave to return with all security
to their houses, provided they laid down their Arms immediately. And the Deputys
telling him they feared lest the French enraged at what had past, at St.
Germain, would take vengeance, on the Vaudoises, when they had nothing to
defend themselves: he made them great protestations and oaths, that supposing
their whole Army should pass by their doors, they would not offer the least
violence.

This composition being made, Catinat retained one of the Deputys with him, and
sent the others to give advice to the Vaudoises, to oblige all those who had
dispersed themselves, to repair the next morning being the 25 of April at
Pieumian; that every man might return to his house on notice of the peace.
Whilst the Vaudoises assembled at Pieumian the scattered familys, Catinat gave
an account of this Capitulation to Don Gabriel, who sent him over night a
messenger, who passing by Pieumian, assured the Vaudoises he brought good
tidings of peace, and the next morning in his return, he told them it was
concluded. They were so well persuaded of the truth of it, that the day before
they had laid down their Arms according to the conditions of the treaty,
entirely confiding in Catinat's promise: They waited in this condition for news
from Pieumian, when there arrived one named St. Peter, one of the French King's
Captains of the Garrison in the Fort of Peirouse, followed with several
Dragoons. Which Captain was well known by the Vaudoises, and immediately
reiterated to them the assurances of the peace; but presently caused the men to
go together apart, in a certain place, and the women and children in another.

The French Troops being at the same time arrived, told the men, they had order
to conduct them to their houses, and made them pass along through them four in
a rank. These poor people having bin constrained to leave their Wives and
Daughters exposed to the Soldiers discretion, were led not to their houses, as
they had bin told, but to Don Gabriel, who was encampt on the Mountain of La
Vacherie, and who caused them to be carried prisoners to Lucerna.

In the mean time, the women suffered whatever the fury, and brutish inhumanity
of the Soldiers could devise against them. For these Barbarians, contented not
themselves with taking from them their money, but violated their Chastity, with
such Circumstances, as are a shame to nature; and killed many of them in their
resistance of their filthy attempts. Catinat was not present, at what past at
Pieumian. He left the ordering of this affair to some Officers, to keep out of
hearing the just reproaches, and complaints of the Vaudoises; or else that he
might not be the Spectator of so many Villainous actions. But however it is
certain, that excepting some women, who were killed, and such as fled away from
the persecution of these Monsters, and saved themselves in the neighboring
Woods, in danger of the Guns, that were shot at them, to stop them; all the
rest, were dragged into diverse prisons, with great cruelty.

It will be needless, to use here many arguments to show, that the Enemies of
the Vaudoises, have violated in these rencounters, the most Sacred and
inviolable obligations. The relation of what is past, suffices, to clear this
truth; seeing it clearly justifys, That the Vaudoises have bin the victims of
their Enemies perfidiousness. And it is in vain to think to excuse this breach of
promise, under pretense the Vaudoises were rebellious Subjects, who had taken
arms against their lawful Prince; for it will be easy to show, that they cannot
be accused of rebellion; seeing they only made use of a natural defense,
against the unjust oppressions of the Congregation of propagation, and their
other Enemies. But the present question is not, whether the Vaudoises could
justly do what they did; but touching the performance of the promises, which
have bin made them; notwithstanding this their pretended rebellion; seeing
their surrender of themselves, was grounded on the faith of these promises. So
that it is certain the violation of an obligation of this nature, can have no
other color, than the authority of this maxim, That faith is not to be kept
with Heretics. It Is also certain, That Kings and Princes are especially
obliged to condemn this vile maxim, in that they be the representatives of a
being, who never failed of being faithful to his promises, and who has ever
punished perfidiousness, either in the person of those who have bin guilty of
it, or in their descendants.

It Is also in vain to allege, that when the Vaudoises surrendered themselves,
they had only promise of life; for it is plain they were promised likewise their
liberty. But had the promise extended no farther than life, can it be affirmed
they kept their word, when they made them all perish under the weight of an
intolerable misery, and the hardest captivity as ever was.

The Valley of Peirouse being reduced as the rest by the Capitulation of
Pieumian, one part of the French Army left this Valley, and went and joined Don
Gabriel at the Vacherie; Then it was that on all sides they hunted, and caught,
these poor Vaudoises, who were dragged to several Prisons, under pretense of
being led before his Royal Highness, to entreat his pardon. But that which
seems most deplorable, was their refusal to hear the complaints, and tears, of
familys, who implored the favor of suffering together. For they separated the
Fathers from their Children, and the Husband from the Wife, to deprive them of
the means of comforting and strengthening one another. They violated the ties of
nature and consanguinity, that they might be less able to bear the temptations,
and other miserys, they provided for them. They designed, that those who could
resist the sufferings, and miserys of a rigorous prison; should be overcome by
the restless longings, to be with their relations. There were several young
people of both Sexes, who were dispersed, and placed in several particular
houses in Piemont; but this was not from a motive of equity, but to make them
change their Religion, and to keep them from coming near their Parents.

Yet there were then a great number of Vaudoises, who had not delivered up
themselves, nor were as yet taken; For those of Villars, Boby, and some other
places, in the Valley of Lucerna, would not consent to the composition, as did
the rest, that they might keep themselves free. Many of those of Angrogne had
joined themselves to these, having observed how the Enemies kept their word. And
several of the Vaudoises of the vale of St. Martin, had searched for shelter,
and hiding places, in Woods and Rocks, to escape the barbarity of the French
fury; who gave no quarter. The enemies resolved to be masters of these
Vaudoises, by force or fraud; as they had bin of the rest. For this effect,
whilst part of the Duke of Savoy's Army, was employed against those, who were
still in arms, in the Valley of Lucerna; the French returned to that of St.
Martin, with the Marquess Parelle; who was well known to the Vaudoises, and the
better able to persuade them. He knew by experience, that craft was a more
likely means to succeed, than open force. He made use then of some Vaudoises,
who had yielded themselves, and in whom the people consided; causing them to
march at the head of the army, with pistols at their throats, who were forced
not only to be guides to the French; to discover the Vaudoises, in the secret
places of their retreat, but moreover to write several notes, to exhort their
Brethren, to throw themselves on the clemency of their Prince; whose favor was
offered, to all those, who would accept it. And because the usage of those who
had already surrendered themselves, might discredit this solicitation; it was
added in several of these notes, that the prisoners would be soon set at
liberty. On the credit then of these notes, many of these poor people delivered
up themselves, for several days, as relying too on the assurances, which the
Marquess Parelle, and the other Officers gave them, of his Royal Highness's
pardon.

Several others were Massacred, or taken by the Soldiers; but both those who
surrendered themselves, and those who were taken, had both the same destiny; and
were equally led away prisoners, into diverse prisons and castles.

Whilst thus craft or cruelty wasted the Valley of St. Martin of it is
inhabitants; let us see what past in the Valley of Lucerna. The Vaudoises here,
held amongst others, two strong places; the one called Jaimet, and the other
Chamruma, above the Castle into which one part of those who had escaped out of
Angrogne had fled. These two places sheltred Villars, wherein there were above
a Thousand Persons, as well Old as Young. A detachement of the Duke of Savoy's
army, assisted by the Banditi of Mondovi, came and attackt these two places;
where the Vaudoises defended themselves, for a whole day with an extraordinary
courage. They killed a great number of Soldiers, and considerable Officers,
amongst which was the Commander of the Banditi. They had only six men killed, and
as many wounded. The Enemies were extraordinarily tired and intended a retreat:
but for as much as they might be pursued easily, and defeated in retreating,
they there upon be thought themselves of this stratagem.

Several Officers having laid down their arms, and laid by their hats, drew
near at night, near the trenches of Chamruma, with an hankerchief at the end of
their sticks; and desired a parley, to make proposals of peace. They showed a
paper, and told the Vaudoises, they came from receiving letters, that peace was
concluded, in all the Vallys; that his Royal Highness had granted a general
pardon to all his subjects, and that it was their fault, who were still in
arms, that they were not comprehended in it. They added they had order to cease
all acts of hostility, and exhorted the Vaudoises to do the same, and to accept
the grace his Royal Highness offered them, of which the Podestat, there
present, could give them assurance. Which person being well known by the
Vaudoises, having adjoined his protestations to those of the other Officers,
and altogether having promised them, with the greatest earnestness, their lives
and libertys; provided they withdrew; the Vaudoises of Chamruma trusting to
these promises, left the place to the Enemies and retired, being persuaded of
the certainty of the peace. There were several of Angrogne, who came to the
Castle to enjoy the fruits of this peace, but they were immediately seized on,
and conveyed away. This credulity of the Vaudoises, took from 'em a favorable
opportunity, of overthrowing their Enemies; for they might, without any danger,
or trouble, vanquish troops, who had wasted all their warlike ammunition.

The Enemies, who pretended they had marched away, only to make the Vaudoises
leave their post, which was a very advantageous place, having received some
recruits, immediately returned and possessed themselves of it. Those who were at
Jaimet, and had not entered into composition, were then obliged to Abandon
theirs, because it was commanded by the other, and to betake themselves to the
mountains of Villars. The Enemies marched after them, and encampt at Bonnet, on
the avenues of Villars and Boby; where they remained two days without
attempting any thing against the Vaudoises, who might be about 4 or 500 men.
The Officers of the Army, employed this time, in offering them proposals of
peace, attended with specious promises; provided they surrendered themselves, and
terrible threatenings, if they stood on their defense.

The Vaudoises replied to these proposals, that they desired nothing more; but
that which was offered them, was more to be dreaded than war, seeing it was not
to be purchased, but by the loss of their liberty. That not withstanding the
peace promised to those of Chamruma, and on the faith of which they had
delivered up their post, yet were they imprisoned, who had surrendered
themselves, and that the example of their Brethren taught them plain enough,
what they must expect, if they relied on these assurances. Yet did not this
hinder, but a great number of the Vaudoises delivered themselves to the Enemy,
in that they swore to 'em, that those who had yielded themselves should soon be
set at liberty to return to their houses; having been carried to his Royal
Highness only to ask his mercy, but these were also lead away captive, and used
in no better sort than the rest.

One would marvel at the easiness, wherewith the Vaudoises suffered themselves
to be deceived so often. But it is to be observed, there were several, who did
not believe any defense could avail, after so many persons and places
surrender. Others feared lest their opposition, should prove more than ordinary
prejudicial to their Wives, and Children who were in prison. And the most part,
could not imagine, their Enemies could be cruel enough, to starve in prison such
as delivered themselves up to their mercy. They hoped however they should be set
at liberty, after some months imprisonment.

But the rest of the other Vaudoises, being much weakened, quitted Villars, on
which the Enemy seized; who ceased molesting them till May 4; when the troops
being reinforced, attacked Boby, where the Vaudoises were retired; but they
were vigorously beaten back by an 150 Vaudoises; who were in the mountain of
Subjusque, and who without the loss of one Man, killed some Officers, and a great
many common Soldiers. Eight days after the French army joined that of the Duke
of Savoy. The Enemies then made their last effort to be Masters of Boby, but the
Vaudoises defended themselves so well, that after a fight, which lasted the
whole day, they constrained the army to retire, and to encamp at Serre de la
Sarsena, with the loss of many Men.

The next morning, the Marquess de Parrelle, who came from the Valley of St.
Martin, with a great detachement, past over the ridge of Julien, which is an
Alpe which was thought inaccessible, and prepared himself to attack the
Vaudoises behind. Which obliged the Vaudoises to quit Boby, and to betake
themselves to the Woods and Rocks. The Marquess de Parelle, and the Count de
Brichantan having possessed themselves of these posts, which the Vaudoises had now
forsaken, sent several Persons to them in their retreats, to exhort them to
surrender, and to accept of a pardon; and several of these poor people being
pressed with misery and hunger, surrendered themselves to these offers, and became
captives by their own credulity. Others yielded to the Governor of Mirebouc, on
assurance from him of their lives and libertys; but they also paid for their
trust in his word, by a rigorous imprisonment. There were several, who had
betaken themselves to the Mountain of Vandelin, and who fought for some time
with great courage and success. Yet they at last too suffered themselves to be
over-perswaded by the Count de la Roche, Governor of the Vallys, on promise
which he made them of their lives and libertys. He assured them, by a note,
writ with his own hand, they should return to their houses; but they had no
sooner forsaken their places of retreat, but they were clapped up in Prison, and
the note taken from them which he had given them.

The Enemies of the Vaudoises, having by the means before related, taken away the
lives of an infinite number of Persons, and deprived above 12000 of them of
their libertys, and carried away, and dispersed above 2000 Children, thought
they had now done their work. They carried on then their unjust practices to
the end, and caused all the Vaudoises Estates to be confiscated.

And thus were the Vallys of Piemont depopulated of their ancient Inhabitants,
and the light of the Gospel extinguished in a Country, where it had shined for
so many ages. Thus did perfidiousness, and violence, triumph over the
simplicity of the Vaudoises, which the Council de propagatione, and their other
Enemies have executed to their utter extirpation. But to the end we may know
thoroughly, with what spirit their persecutors have been animated, we may here
see some of the barbarous acts and crueltys, which they have exercised in these
occasions.

Although we design to speak only of those, which have been practiced, after the
compositions; yet we may relate some of the barbaritys, with which the French
signalis'd their entrance, into the Valley of St. Martin; not only because they
transcend the bounds, which Christians ought to set to their Victorys; but
moreover, because they have been committed on Persons, who offered no
resistance. We may then here mention the Murders of so many Old Men, Women,
and Children, who were then the Victims of the Soldiers cruelty; the
inexpressible lamentations of those poor Women and Maidens, who after the abuse
of their Bodies, were constrained to travel all night, at the head of the army,
to serve for guides to the French; and the monstrous and diabolical actions of
these furious Soldiers, who glutted their filthy lusts, on the same Bodies, they
came from depriving of life. But we shall set aside the description of these
things, to speak of some instances of crueltys and violences exercised after
the surrender of the Vallys.

The Soldiers made several Massacres at Angrogne, not here to be instanced,
lest it should put us on a long relation of particulars. There were several
Women and Maidens violated, on the account of whose modesty, we shall conceal
their names, some of them being yet alive. They would likewise have violated
Marguerit Maraude, who was but 14 years of age; and because James Maraude her
Father, and Margaret Maraude her Ant opposed themselves, to these violences;
they were cruelly murdered. Susanna Olviette, and Margaret Baline striving to
save their chastity, lost their lives by the hands of these Barbarians. Joseph
David having been wounded at Angrogne, was carried by the Soldiers into a
neighboring house, where they burnt him. Four Women and three Children of
Prarustin were killed in a hole of a Rock, where they had hid themselves. The
Mother of Daniel Fourneron aged 80 years, was thrown down from a precipice in
coming from the pre' de Tour, because she could not go fast enough. At Pieumian
the Soldiers slew the Wife of James Fourneron and Magdalen Roche, because they
did not readily enough deliver the money they had. Mary Romain a Young and
Beautiful Damosel, promised in Marriage to James Griot, was killed for
endeavoring to save her Chastity. Another Virgin to secure here is, having cast
her self into a River, was there shot to Death. Several Women and Maidens, who
are yet alive, were dragged by the hair of their heads into neighboring houses,
where they were Ravished with horrible circumstances; one through despair,
throwing her self out of a Window, Honoree Jayer, a young Child, having been
found among the women, was shot to death. A great number of women and maidens
running away into woods, fell by the Musket-bullets, shot after them to stop
them. The Marquess Parelle, and several Vaudoises, which he made to march
before him, to serve for guides; passing by Pieumian, to go into the Valley of
St. Martin, found the bodies of several little children, cut in pieces; several
naked women, slain with blows, some of which had Stones thrust into their
privitys. They also saw several Soldiers, who carried in their hats, the marks
of an horrible cruelty, and a devilish impudicity, at which the Marquess
Parelle was scandalis'd.

In the Vale of St. Martin there were six men, twenty women, and some children,
who went and surrendered themselves in the Town of Peirouse, on promise made
them, they should have no harm done them; but they were no sooner come, but
these six men, were shot in the presence of their wives. John Ribet of Macel
having bin taken, he had his Arms and Legs burnt to oblige him to change his
Religion; but God gave him the grace, to obtain the Crown of Martyrdom, in
suffering constantly the death, which these executioners gave him. They
likewise inhumanly put to death Bartholomew Ribet, James Brues, and his son.
They fastened one poor infirm man to an horse's tail, whom they dragged about,
till he expired. They hanged up a poor blind woman at her own door. They found
a woman at the point of being delivered, and performed two murders at one
Blow, in taking away her life, and that of the child in her womb. They pursued
two young women, from a place called the Colet, to another named Boniot, where
overtaking them, they violated them, and afterward both shot them and hewed
them in pieces.

Four women having fallen at the same time into the hands of these Barbarians,
met with the same misfortune, only with this difference, that before they were
violated and massacred, they saw their childrens throats cut, in a place called
the Fountains. They opened the bodies of a mother and her child, and tore out
the bowels, which they caused to be burnt. They slew a great many children in
the same place, because they were sick, and were not able to follow them to the
prisons, where they would have secured them. Twenty two persons, who had for a
long time layn hid in Woods, and most of which were women and children, were
found by these murderers on the Mountain of Pelue, and thrown off into
dreadful Abysses; being miserably shattered and torn by the edges of
sharp-pointed Flints, on which the entrails of these poor wretches were seen to
hang, a long time after.

In the vale of Lucerna, Susannah the wife of Daniel Violin, Katherina the wife
of James Negrin, Anne Malanote, and her daughter were stabbed in the throats
with Bayonets. Some Soldiers having used all their endeavors to flea Daniel
Pellene alive, and seeing they could not get the skin over his shoulders, they
laid him on the ground, and placed a great stone on his belly, and made him
thus expire. Daniel Brumerol lost his life with a cord, with which they fastened
and straightened with a dreadful violence his head to his belly and privitys. Anne
and Magdalen Vittories, and several others were burnt; the wise of Daniel Monin
was slain with a Sword, with which her head was cleaved asunder. Anne Bastianne
was thrown down from high Rocks into a dreadful bottom. David Moudon had also
his head cleaved asunder with the blow of a Sword. Margaret Salvajot having bin
stripped naked, had several blows of a dagger struck into her body, but she
suffered not only a cruel death, in her own person; seeing that before she
dyed, these wretches had so bruised the head of her daughter but 7 months old
against rocky places, that the brains came out in the mother's sight. They cut
in pieces Mary Salvajot; and poignarded Mary Durand for resisting the attempts,
made on her chastity. They cut the throat of Mrs. Bertrand, the Minister's
mother, who was 80 years of age, and lay bedrid. A young maiden of Boby was
fastened naked on her back on a Mule, and thus exposed; and led openly through
all the Town of Lucerna. Amongst a great number of Vaudoises which were hanged
in Boby, there was one named Anthony Malanot, on whom the Soldiers discharged
their Guns several times after he was dead, making their mark those parts of
his body, which modesty puts on scrupling the mention.

The Soldiers having found a woman, named Jaimonate in a cavern of a Rock, on
the Collier's Mount, they led her to the Marquess de Bavil, Colonel to the
Regiment of Savoy, who asked her how long she had layn in that place, and how
she sustained her self; she answered she had there hid her self 8 days, and
lived on the milk which a Goat she had taken along with her had yielded her.
They would have afterward obliged her to tell them where the Vaudoises were,
who hid themselves in Rocks; and protesting she knew nothing in that particular,
the Soldiers, after having given her a kind of torture, in fastening and then
straitning her fingers with matches to make her confess, tied her neck and
heels, and in this posture threw her down from an high Rock; but being stopped in
the way, They with stones so bruised her, that her bowels came out, and at
length beat her quite off, in the presence of the Marquess de Bavil. A youth of
the Vallys, named David Magnot, whom this Marquess had a fancy to, and had kept
to wait on him, having since gotten away, was an eyewitness of this horrid
action. Daniel Moudon, one of the Elders of the Church of Roras, having bin the
spectator of the death of John, and James Moudon his two children, (whose heads
the Soldiers cut off) after he had seen the body of the wife of John ripped up
from the Navil, and her daughter's brains beat out, who was not above 6 weeks
old, and the two children of James cut in pieces, (one of which was 4 years
old, and the other 14 months,) was constrained by these Monsters, to carry
cross his shoulders the heads of his two sons, and to march barefoot 2 hours
journey, near Lucerna, where he was hanged in the midst of these two heads,
which were fastened to a Gibbet.

There would be no end in reciting particular instances of these kinds of
crueltys. Neither shall we insist on the pitious death of so many Ancient and
infirm people of all ages and both Sexes, who perished through cold and hunger,
as well in Woods as holes in the Rocks. We here pass over an infinite number of
prisoners, who were hanged, without any formality of justice, on the arms of
Trees; and in Towns and Villages, amongst which was Paul Megle an infirm young
man, who was carried out of his bed to execution.

What we have related may suffice, I think, to show how far extended the fury
of the Vaudoises Enemies. We shall only then add here the death of Mr. Leidet,
which is equally worthy of pity and admiration. He was Minister of Prabz in
the vale of St. Martin, who had escaped at the Surrender of the Vallys, and hid
himself for some time in the holes of Rocks. He was taken by a Detachment of
Soldiers, and carried away to Lucerna, into the Palace of the Marquess of
Angrogne, where was then the Duke of Savoy. He was put into prison in a Tower
of this Palace, and one of his feet locked into a kind of Stocks: where he long
remained in this condition with bread and water, not being able to lie down. It
was said he was taken with his arms in his hands, but this appearing to be a
false accusation, as it was afterward justified, by those who took him, he was
left several months in Prison, without having any judgment past on him, and
several Judges excused themselves from meddling with him. Yet in the mean time no
day past, in which he was not exposed to the persecutions of the Monks and
Popish Priests, with whom he earnestly disputed, touching his Religion, and
always confounded them. They brought him one day two Bibles, in which he showed
them so clearly the truth of his belief, that they left him, and shamefully
withdrew, after a dispute which held four hours, They often put him in mind of
his approaching death to affright him, and told him several times, there was no
ways of escaping it, but by turning Roman Catholic. But he received the news of
his death with great tranquillity. He answered them, that tho he well knew,
they could not justly put him to death, seeing he was not taken with his arms
in his hands, and that moreover the Duke of Savoy had promised pardon to all
his Subjects, Yet was he ready to suffer, what they might lay upon him,
esteeming himself very happy, if he might suffer death for the name of Christ.
He strengthened by his example and exhortations the prisoners, which were with
him, some of which had leave to come to him. In fine the Monks and Friars,
being enraged at his zeal and constancy, found at length Judges compliant
enough to condemn him to dye.

The day whereon he was executed, the Recorder Salvay pronounced sentence on
him, in the presence of several Monks, which he heard read with admirable
resignation, not showing the least trouble or alteration in his countenance.
The Monks left him not all that day, although he desired them, several times, to
let him be in private, that he might the better pray to God; but they would not
give over troubling him, but forced him into disputes with them, as believing
he was not now in a condition to defend himself against them, but he disengaged
himself with such smartness and presence of mind, that they were all astonished
at it. Yet this hindered them not from returning the next morning, to have the
satisfaction of tormenting him, to the end of his life. He said when he was
going out of the Prison, that this was a day of double deliverance for him,
seeing his body would soon be freed, not only, from it is corporal prison, but
his soul translated into immortal joy and felicity. He went to the place of
execution with inexpressible cheerfulness and resolution, both despising life,
which the Monks offered him, and death, which was now before his eyes. He made
a long and affectionate Prayer, at the foot of the Scaffold, with which those
who stood by, were sensibly touched. He uttered these words on the Ladder, My
God into thy hands I commend my Spirit, and dyed so edifying a death, that the
Friars themselves, who would not leave him, were forced to acknowledge, he dyed
like a Righteous person.

There only then remained in the Vallys some Inhabitants, who preferring death
before servitude, would not hearken to the proposals of peace. Some of these
were in the Valley of St. Martin; and although the one knew not the design of
the others, because the Army lying encampt between these two vallys, they could
have no Communication: Yet they were all of the same mind, and took both a
resolution worthy of immortal praise. They remained a long time hid and
dispersed in the Mountains, to prevent falling into the Enemies hands, who went
every day out in small partys to surprise them. One cannot sufficiently admire
the constancy, with which they endured, all the wearynesses, and miserys, to
which they lay exposed; being often glad to feed on grass, and the dogs, and
other beasts which came to prey on the Vaudoises dead bodies; which lay unburied
in the fields. But the French and Banditi of Mondovi being retired, they were
not so strictly pursued by the Duke of Savoy's Army, which remained alone in
the Vallys. Then it was, that those who were in the valley of Lucerna began to
come out of their hiding places, to seek for food to sustain their languishing
Spirits. There were not in this valley above 42 men, besides some women and
children, when they were all together met, yet they made several attempts in
the plain, always loading themselves with provision and other necessarys, and
worsted in several rencounters diverse of the Enemies detachments, and killed and
put to flight a great number of the Savoyards, who were come to inhabit in the
Vallys, and in fine performed, for several months, such gallant actions, that
they put the Enemies under contribution, and forced them to furnish them with
provisions, for some time; to hinder them from making their inroads into the
plain.

We shall not now make a particular relation of these geuerous attempts, lest
we engage in a long discourse, but content our selves with saying, that the
Court of Turin, having in vain attempted by force, to exterminate them from the
Vallys, sent them pass-ports, in good form, under hand, and hostages, for
greater surety of their retreat; though those who carried these proposals to the
Vaudoises, would by no means allow they acted by the Court of Turin's order.
They affirmed on the Contrary, that what they did, was of their own motion, and
at the desire of some other Persons, who undertook to obtain these pass-ports,
and deliver them hostages. But it is certain, an affair of this nature, could
not be carried on, without a more than bare connivance from the Court of Turin.
For besides, that no particular Person, dared to have undertaken, of his own
head, such a business; the pass-ports which were dispatched, did afterward
fully show, that all was done by the Court's order.

However the Vaudoises at first refused to hearken to this proposal, whether
they thought they ought not to put any confidence in the promises made them, or
whether resolving to perish themselves, but they would deliver their Brethren
out of Captivity, Death being more sweet to 'em than life, whilst they groaned
in their chains. A while after, this proposal was renewed, and several
considerations were offered to oblige them to an acceptance. They were told
that the Duke of Savoy had declared, that as long as they were in arms, the
Prisoners should not be released, and they were positively promised, that
as soon as ever they were departed, their Brethren should be set at liberty.

So that the Vaudoises, considering on the one hand, that Winter came on, and
that they must expect no succors; and on the other, that their resistance,
might furnish their Enemies, with a pretense, for the detaining of the Captives;
they thereupon determind to depart their Country. It was then agreed and
resolved, they should leave the Vallys, and depart with their Wives and
Children, arms and baggage, in two troops or companys, having their charges
defrayed; and they conducted, as far as Switzerland, at two several times, by
one of his Royal Highness's Captains, with sufficient pass-ports.

That for the greater security of the first troop, which should set out,
hostages should be left in the Vallys, in the hands of the second; who should
keep them, till such time, as they had heard, that the first company was
arrived; and then this Captain should deliver into their hands an Officer of
his Relations, for an hostage, till such time, the second troop or company
should be arrived.

This treaty was faithfully executed, for those two companys happily got out of
the Country into a place of surety, with their arms and baggage, under the
conduct of this Captain. We must not forget one remarkable circumstance; which
is, that the Vaudoises would never consent to leave the Country, till such
time, as their kindred, who were in Prison, were released, and sent to them;
whence it must be concluded, that this treaty, was managed by the Court of
Turin; seeing these Captives, could not be released, but by it is order.

The Vaudoises, who were in the Vale of St. Martin, did almost the same things,
as those had done in the Valley of Lucerna. For although they were reduced, at
last, but to 25 Men, and some Women and Children, yet they defended themselves,
with such vigor and resolution, that they also procured themselves passes, to
retire to Switzerland, with their Wives and Children, arms, and baggage.

We have already said, that those in one Valley, knew not what past in the
other, because the army cut off all communication. Could they have joined, or
heard of each other, no doubt they had made a more advantageous composition,
and perhaps delivered their Brethren out of their captivity. For if the Court
of Turin were willing to keep an Army in the Vallys, to hinder the attempts of
the Vaudoises; or designed to People this Country with Savoyards; who would be
far from inhabiting there, as long as there were these People in Arms; there is
likelihood, that to get rid of them, they would have consented to the
deliverance of the Prisoners.

Whilst these Vaudoises retired into Switzerland, by means of their own Valor,
which procured 'em both hostages and letters of safe conduct, the Evangelic
Cantons did all they could, for the deliverance of the Captives. They had wrote
several times fruitlesly to the Court of Turin on this occasion. But their zeal
and charity being never wearied, they therefore convocated an assembly at Arau
in the Month of September 1686, in which 'twas resolved to demand again the
releasment of the Prisoners: they sent for this effect two Deputys to the Count
de Govon, the Duke of Savoy's resident, at Lucerna in Switzerland; and having
showed him the reasons, which engaged the Evangelic Cantons to interess
themselves in behalf of the Vaudoises, they entered into a treaty with him in
the beginning of October, with the consent of their superiors. Which treaty
obliges the Duke of Savoy to permit all the Prisoners to come into Switzerland,
and to Cloth them, and defray the charge of their Journey till they came on the
frontiers; where the Evangelic Cantons would take care of them, and conduct
them into the heart of their Country; To the end they might not be in a
condition, to return to Piemont. When this treaty was made, it was without
doubt, unknown at Lucerna, that the Vaudoises we now spoke off, were already
retired; for there is an article, which says, that the Duke should give them
pass-ports in good form, to enable them to depart safely, and freely, which
would not have been inserted in this treaty, had what had past, on their
account, been known. However the Cantons immediately ratified this treaty, which
the Duke did not, till some time after in a letter, he wrote, on this occasion,
in which he directs the course, which the Prisoners were to take, over
Mountains, then inaccessible, and through the Country of Valay, which depends,
neither on the Duke of Savoy, nor the Switzers, and through which there could be
no entrance, without negotiating with the Bishop of Sion, to whom it belongs.
It Is apparent, 'twas designed to raise obstacles against the performance of
this treaty, otherwise they would not have marked out the way into other
Countries, than those of Savoy, where the Roads lie more commodious to go into
Switzerland. The Evangelic Cantons complained of this, to the Count de Govon,
about which having writ to the Court of Turin, the Duke at length gave order,
they should pass through Savoy, to the Canton of Berne, and caused the Prison
doors to be set open: but this was not before the midst of Winter, and in so
rigorous a season, that according to all appearances, those who had escaped the
hardships in the Prisons, must perish in their way.

It will be very difficult to represent all the miserys and calamitys, which
the Captives have endured, during nine Months imprisonment. Yet there are exact
memorials of what has past, in each particular Prison, which is matter enough
for a particular history. But we shall content our selves, with giving some
general representations of the miserys they have suffered. They were carried
then into Prison, at diverse times; and as fast as they surrendered themselves, or
were taken. They were dispersed to the number of twelve Thousand Men Women and
Children into 14 Prisons, or Castles of the states of Piemont; and were more or
less severely used, according to the humor of those, who were the keepers of
the Prisons; but it is certain they were every where exposed to great hardships,
and sufferings. Their allowance in every Prison, was but bread and water,
neither had they enough of that; in some Prisons they had very black bread
allowed 'em, which had no substance, and such as was kneaded with filthy water,
that run down the kennels, and in which was found all manner of nastyness. In
other places they had stinking water given them, and such as could not be
drank, but by those, who were ready to perish with thirst. They were obliged in
some places, to go and fetch water out of horse-ponds, and wherein were dogs
thrown, at the same time they took it. In certain places they were not suffered
to draw water out of wells; that being judged too good for them. In other
places they were permitted to have water only, at certain hours, out of which
they were not to have any; which has occasioned several sick Persons to expire
through need of a glass all of water to refresh them. They were forced all of 'em
to lie on bricks, with which the floors are paved in Piemont, without straw; or
if they had any given them, in some places; it was either such as was so short,
that it was mere dust, or else such as was musty. They were so straightened, and
penned up in some Prisons, that they could not stir without great difficulty,
and when they dyed, which every day happened, the apartments were filled up with
others, that they might have no more ease. The stifling heat of the summer, and
the filthy corruption with which the Chambers were infected, by reason of the
sick, had engendered such a great quantity of lice, that the Prisoners could
have no rest, either night or day. They were also troubled with great worms,
which gnawed their skins. There were several sick people, who may be said to
have been the worms food in their life time. For these poor people, not being
able to rise up, they were so gnawed with them, that their skin, being already
rotted, fell off from their flesh in small pieces; and in this miserable and
languishing condition, did they lie, till their deaths had put an end to all
their sufferings. They did not only endure all the inconveniencys of an
excessive heat, but moreover those of a severe cold; seeing that in the midst
of Winter, they had never any fire given them, nor any clothes to warm them,
although they were in high rooms, the greatest part of which lay exposed (without
windows) to the weather. They never had any light allowed 'em in the Winter or
Summer, to relieve the sadness of their conditions in the dark nights, and to
help the sick amongst them, several of which have perished for want of succor.
A great many Women have also dyed in Childbirth, for want of help in the
night; and their loss has been followed with that of their Children, who have
received death, at the instant, wherein they should have obtained life. Sick
people have bin severed from the sound, and laid in open places, exposed to the
injurys of the Air, the winds and storms. But this cruelty, has bin in some
sort, a kindness; seeing it has brought them to the end of their miserys, in
the end of their lives. In other prisons, there have bin several children sick
of the small Pox, laid in wet yards, and under the spouts, to have the water
fall on them. They were not contented in not assisting the sick themselves, they
also hindered charitable people, from bringing them broth, and other
necessarys. When the prisoners, have dared to complain of the little charity
showed them, they have bin laden with injurys, threats, and blows. They were
told that instead of showing them compassion, they should be used like dogs,
till they were all dead. There was scarcely any prisoner, who was not burdened
with some distemper. There have bin so many sick, that no less than 75 have bin
counted to lie ill at one time in a Room. There have bin taken out of the
prisons a great many young children, notwithstanding the tears and
supplications of both them and their Parents. In fine the prisoners have
underwent such hardships, that it is scarce credible, there should be so much
cruelty, amongst those who bear the Christian name; were it not well known, to
what point the Enemies of the Vaudoises have extended their fury. But we cannot
doubt of the excess of their rage, when it is notorious that above eight
thousand of these poor creatures have expired, under the weight of this cruel
slavery.

Yet as if it was not enough, that their bodies were thus afflicted, they have
bin moreover persecuted in their souls. For the Monks and Friars have used all
possible means to make them change their Religion. But God had endued them with
the grace of persevering to the end, and there were few who fell under the
burden of the temptation. Those who turned were not used so severely as the
rest, but were notwithstanding detained in captivity.

The prisoners were in this piteous condition, when the Duke of Savoy, caused
to be published in the prisons the order, which permitted them to go forth, and
retire into Switzerland. This publication was not made every where in the same
manner, nor at the same time; but successively, and according as the prisoners
were set at liberty. Yet it was read in most of the prisons by an Officer of
Justice, who causing the prisoners to come before him, declared to them that
all those who would depart out of the States of Piemont, to go into
Switzerland, might do it, and even those who had promised to change their
Religion; because the promises which had bin made in prison, were to be
considered, as forced, and consequently void. He added they were at liberty
either to go or stay, if they became Catholics. Yet the prisoners had not all
the liberty of choice which they pretended was granted them. For the Monks and
Officers of the Prisons, who were present at this publication, endeavored to
avert the effect of it. Sometimes they were told that the rigor of the season,
and the cruelty of the Soldiers which conducted them would destroy a great part
of them in the way. Other times, they were flattered with the hopes of
returning into their own houses, if they would abjure their Religion. But these
considerations not being able to prevail on them, they were many times
grieveously beaten, as it happened in the Prisons of Ast where the Governor
gave them a thousand blows, with a Cane, in the presence of the Auditor
Leonardy. They were shut up in Dungeons, and in the most noysom, and filthy
parts of the Castles of Queirasque and others. In fine, there were so many
obstacles, laid before them, that some fall under the temptation, and yielded
to a change of Religion. But instead of resetling them in their houses, they
were lead (as it were) into captivity into the Province of Verceil, the least
grateful, and most barren place in all the Duke's Dominions. We must not omit
some Circumstances, which are considerable enough, the one, that several young
children, as well those who were brought up in prison, as others who were
dispersed over Piemont, having known that liberty was granted the prisoners,
pressed earnestly to go with their Fathers and Mothers, but this could not be
obtained; the other, that the permission of departure, was not published, in the
Prisons of Lucerna, but only fixed up at the place, to the end the prisoners
might not have the advantage of it; and in fine the prisoners who were in the
Dungeons of Ast and their familys, which were in the Citadel of Turin, had not
the benefit of this Declaration.

Soon after this publication, the Vaudoises were made to set forth in several
Troops or Companys, which were conducted to Geneva by the Duke's Officers and
Soldiers. It was promised by this treaty made with the Count de Govon, that the
Captives should be clothed, and yet there were nothing given them, but some
ragged old coats and breeches; but it was not only in this point, that the
Treaty was not executed, it was violated in several others, of greater
importance. For besides the crueltys which were exercised on several Companys,
they were bereaved of a great many of their children, in their journey. There
happened two things amongst others, from which one may judge of the rest. The one
regards the prisoners which were at Mondovi, who about Christmas were told,
there was an order the Contents of which was, that if they did not immediately
depart, this liberty would be revoked the next morning.

These miserable poor creatures were all in a sick and languishing condition.
Yet did they choose to be gone immediately without any convoy, and to expose
themselves to eminent danger, rather than to groan any longer, under this cruel
Captivity. They set out then in a night, the most cold and incommodious
imaginable, and traveled 4 or 5 Leagues without resting on Snow or Ice, but
with that misfortune, that there were above 150 who fell by the way and dyed;
their brethren not being able to give them any assistance.

The other respects the prisoners which were at Forsan. There were a company of
these poor Captives, who having layn at Novalaise, at the foot of Mount Senis,
perceived the next morning, at their setting out, that a great storm was rising
on this Mountain. Some of this company showed the storm to the Officer, who
conducted them; and entreated him to stay till it was past, and not to expose
them to apparent danger, and to have pity on so many persons, most of which
were without any strength or spirit; they also told him, that if he would be so
charitable to them, they should ask him for no bread; choosing rather to abide
without any nourishment, than to throw themselves into this danger. But this
Officer had the cruelty to make them travel immediately, and to Sacrifice a part
of them to his barbarity. For there were fourscore and six who perished on the
Mountain by the storm. These were Ancient infirm people, women and small
children, who had not strength to resist the severity of the weather, and whom
their friends were forced to leave, as a prey to the wild Beasts. This Officer
not suffering them to pay them any charitable Office. The following Companys,
and several Merchants, who past soon after over this Mountain, saw the bodies of
these poor creatures, stretched out on the Snow; the mothers having still their
children in their arms.

The Evangelic Cantons, having bin informed of the taking away of the children,
from their parents, and other bad usages of the Vaudoises, in their way;
thought themselves still obliged in charity, to endeavor their relief. They sent
Deputys for this end to the Court of Turin, as well to favor the journey of the
several Companys, who were not then arrived at Geneva, as to demand the
restitution of the children, taken up in the way, and other young people of
both Sexes, who were dispersed in Piemont, at the surrender of the Vallys. And
receiving at the same time a Letter from the Count de Govon, by which they were
informed, that his Master had referred for some time the deliverance of the
Ministers, and would not release some prisoners, who had bin taken with their
Arms in their hands, and were condemned to work all their lives on his Royal
Highness's fortifications. The Evangelic Cantons therefore commanded their
Deputys to demand the liberty of the Ministers, and all other prisoners,
according to the treaty made with the Count de Govon. But before we speak of
the success of this Negotiation, we must see in what condition the Vaudoises
were, when they arrived at Geneva.

They came thither at several times, and in several Companys, which in all made
not above 2500 persons; but they were all in so bad and deplorable a condition,
that it is not possible to express it. There were several of these poor people
who dropped down dead at the Town gates; and who met with the end of their lives,
in the beginning of their liberty. Others were so dispirited with sickness and
grief, that they were expected every moment to expire, in the arms of those who
had the charity to sustain them. Others were so frozen with cold, that they had
not the power to speak; some staggered under the weight of their distempers and
wearyness, others were deprived of the use of their limbs, and could not hold
out their hands to receive the assistance which was offered them. The greatest
part of them were naked, and without shoes, in fine, both one and the other
carried such marks of an excessive suffering and extreme misery, that the
hardest heart must needs be grieved at it.

The Companys staying some time at Geneva, to rest and refresh themselves,
before they parted for Switzerland; those who were first arrived, went out to
meet those who came next, to inform themselves touching the condition of their
relations, of whom they had not heard, since the troubles in the Vallys. A
Father demanded news of his child, a child what was become of his Father, an
husband of his wife, a wife enquired after her husband, and every one
endeavored to learn what was become of his friend; but this being commonly in
vain, seeing most part of them were dead in prison, this occasioned such a sad
and lamentable Spectacle, that all the beholders melted into tears, whilst
these poor people oppressed and overwhelmed with excess of their grief, were not
able to weep and bemoan themselves.

But if it be difficult fully to represent the misery of these poor Peoples
condition, it is no less hard a task to express the abundant Charity, those of
Geneva showed in these occasions. The Inhabitants strove so fast to meet these
piteous objects to bring them into their houses, that the Magistrate was obliged
to forbid the peoples going out of the Town, to avoid the inconveniencys which
this hurry caused. Every one strove who should have the most of these sick and
distressed Persons, to have the more occasion for the exercise of their
charity. They were tended not only with the same care, as their own Children,
but moreover as Persons which brought peace and a blessing into their familys.
There has been an extraordinary care taken of the sick, of which several have
dyed at Geneva; and some of which, do still carry the marks which the worms
have made in their bodies. All the Vaudoises, who needed clothes, have been
furnished, either by those who lodged them, or out of the Italian stock, the
mannagers of which have showed from the beginning, to the end, the marks of a
tender compassion and ardent charity.

But it was not only in Geneva, where the Vaudoises were so kindly entertained,
they met with the same compassion in Switzerland, where the Evangelic Cantons
received them, in the most generous and Christian manner imaginable. And it is
not only in respect of the Vaudoises, but also of the other Protestants, that
one may say, that the Country of Switzerland is an assured port of divine
appointment, for the reception of those, who are exposed on the waves of
Persecution.

The Deputys then of the Evangelic Cantons being arrived at Turin, demanded the
liberty of the Ministers, and other Prisoners, and the restitution of the
Children, as well of those who were taken away from their Parents, in their
Journey, as of those who were dispersed in Piemont, at the time of the surrender
of the Vallys. They showed that in respect of the Ministers, there could be no
lawful pretense to detain them, not only because they were comprehended in the
treaty, made with the Count de Govon; but moreover because they were the
principal objects of the Switzers intercession; besides that it is very just to
remit the pastors to their flocks, to comfort and encourage them under their
sufferings. As to the Prisoners, condemned, for all their life time, to work on
the fortifications, they likewise showed, they were not to be distinguished from
the rest, under pretense they are more faulty. For 1st. the treaty makes no
exception to their prejudice: and says that all the Prisoners in general shall
be released. 2dly. The Count de Govon has himself declared in a letter, which
he has wrote on this subject, on the part of the Duke his Master; that they
pretended not to retain any Prisoners. 3dly. That seeing his Royal Highness was
willing to grant safe conducts to those who were actually armed, on greater
reason, liberty should be granted to the Prisoners in question, to depart; who
have been always considered, as far less criminal. And as to the little
Children, they showed, that as well those ought to be released, who had been
taken away in their passage, as them who had been dispersed in Piemont, because
both one and the other were retained contrary to the engagements of the treaty.
But neither the solicitations nor arguments of these Deputys, produced any
effect, they only served to procure the restitution of some of the Children,
which were carried away in the passage. For the surplus are still in the states
of Piemont. It Is true that the Court of Turin has promised to deliver the
Ministers but would not fix the time. As yet they are dispersed, with their
familys which consist of forty seven Persons, into three Prisons or Castles,
where they be strictly kept, and exposed to several incomodiousnesses and
miserys, without any appearance of their libertys.

And thus you have an abridgement of what has past that is most considerable on
the occasion of the dissipation of the Churches and Inhabitants of the Vallys
of Piemont. There needs no more to show, there was never any persecution more
unjust and violent. As to these poor People themselves, they hope that all the
Reformed states, will look with an eye of pity on their sufferings, and have
some feeling of their griefs. They are the remains of those Mother Churches,
that can claim the greatest and purest antiquity, who from the bottom of their
Alps had enlightened a great part of the Universe. But they are such sad
remnants, and those reduced into so small a number, and such a deplorable
condition, that we cannot behold either their diminution, or their misery,
without being pierced with extreme sorrow. They implore then the protection of
Kings and Princes, and Protestant states, and in fine of all true Christians.
They entreat them by the remembrance of what Christ has done and suffered for
them, to give ear to the sorrowful cries of the oppressed, and to continue their
charitable exhibitions to a remnant, whom God has delivered from both a
corporal and spiritual bondage. By which means they shall be enabled to pray
without ceasing for their Benefactors, that God would reward their charity with
uninterrupted peace, health and plenty, in this life, and with immortal glory,
in the world to come.

His Royal Highness of Savoy's letter to the Inhabitants of the Vallys.

To our most dear and faithful subjects of the Vallys of Lucerna, Peirouse, St.
Martin and parts of Prarustin, of St. Bartholomew, and Rocheplate. The Duke of
Savoy Prince of Piemont, King of Cyprus etc.

Most Dear and faithful Subjects.
HAving taken very kindly the zeal and readiness wherewith you have provided us
Men; who have served us to our entire satisfaction in the occasions which we
have had with the Genoises; we are therefore willing to give you this present
testimony of it, assuring you we shall not lose the remembrance of it, that you
may find in all necessitys the benefits of our Royal Protection, as you shall
more particularly understand from the Count and Intendant Boccaria, whom we
have commanded to declare more fully to you our thoughts in this matter, and
who is to take an account of the Officers and Soldiers, who were killed or
remain Prisoners, to make to us a report of them; that we may not be ignorant
of their condition. In the mean time these presents will serve you for an
assured testimony of our satisfaction, and Prayers to God to defend you from
all evil.

From Turin the 5th of November 1678. signed. C. Emanuel.


To the Commonaltys of the Vallys of Lucerna, St. Martin, Peirouse, Prarustin,
St. Bartholomew, and Rocheplate.

The copy of a letter written to the Count Boccaria by his Royal Highness.

My Lord and most Dear, etc.
THE Men whom the Commonaltys of the Vallys of Lucerna etc. have so well served
us, that being willing to testify to them our satisfaction, we therefore have
directed to you the letter subjoined to this, that you may deliver it to them,
and may more fully express to 'em the good will we bear them. Requiring you
likewise to assure them, that when ever their needs require, we shall have a
particular regard to their affection, and at the same time do you take a note
of the Officers and Soldiers who were killed or taken Prisoners to make a report
to us thereof, that we may take order accordingly. Thus remitting to your care,
whatever more is necessary to signify our satisfaction and pleasure in their
zeal and readyness, we beseech God to preserve you.

At Turin the 5th of November 1672. signed C. Emanuel.


To the Count Am. Boccaria Councellor of State and superintendant General of
the Vallys.

The order of Don Gabriel of Savoy in favor of the Inhabitants of the Vallys.

Don Gabriel of Savoy, Marquess of Rive, General of his R. Highness's Army both
of Horse and Foot.

The Officers here below mentioned of the Vallys of Lucerna, having given such
proofs of their zeal for his Royal Highness's service, in all occasions, which
have offered, especially in the commotions of this Province; That we think our
selves obliged to give them this testimony; to the end that in other exigencys,
wherein his Royal Highness's service shall be concerned, they may be encoraged
to continue these proofs of their zeal. And therefore by virtue of the
authority which we have from his Royal Highness, we permit the below-mention'd
to wear and carry Arms, provided they make no ill use of them. And we command
all those depending on our orders of General, that they neither give nor permit
to be given them any trouble for so doing, this being his Royal Highness's will
and pleasure.

Given at Mondovi the 29th of Sept. 1681.

FINIS.

