ANIMADVERSIONS UPON THE SPEECH OF WILLIAM (LATE) Viscount Stafford, ON THE
SCAFFOLD ON TOWER HILL, Immediately before his Execution, upon Wednesday,
December, 1680.

Plainly laying open the FALACY of all HIS ASSEVERATIONS OF HIS INNOCENCE.

Published to prevent the deceiving of Protestants.

The Second Edition with Additions.

London, Printed for Richard Baldwin in Ball Court near the Black Bull in the
Old Bailey, MDCLXXXI.

THE PREFACE.
THere having been such a multitude of these Speeches Printed and published (my
self having seen no fewer then four several sorts, viz. Two in a half sheet,
one in a whole sheet, and one in two sheets,) and the Vulgar being so apt to be
deceived, it was thought highly necessary to send abroad some Animadversions
upon them. How they are done, I leave others to Judge, and satisfy my self
with the honesty of my intentions, which were the undeceiving of those who so
easily believed dying men's words without considering their principles;

That the Church of Rome allows those of her Communion to say what is false,
yea to Swear what is false, and this when they say and Swear to others, that
they do nei- speak nor swear falsely, nor use any Equivocation or Mental
Reservation. I have fully proved in the following Papers from their own
approved Authors.

I have also proved that they allow the denying what it most true, and
assenting what is most false, with the most dreadful and solemnest Oaths and
Imprecations, and that they may without any scruple endeavor to deceive others
by the use of such falsness as at other times, so even when they are dying.

It will be needless here to give any account of his deportment upon the
Scaffold, there being a Paper published relating all the circumstances of it,
only two or three Passages out of that Paper we will take leave to transcribe:
After his Speech which he read out of a Paper, and after Prayer in English and
Lat in standing up he spoke these words, I beseech thee God, not to avenge my
Innocent Blood upon any man in the whole Kingdom, no not against those who by
their Perjuries have brought me here; for I profess before Almighty God, that I
never combined against the Kings life, nor any bodies else, but whatever I did
was only to procure Liberty, for the Protestant Dissenters and the Romish*
Religion: And as for the Duke of York, I do here declare upon my Salvation, I
know of no Design that he ever had against the King, but has ever behaved
himself as a Loving Loyal Brother ought to do; so now upon my Salvation I have
said true all that I have said; I pray God bless the King and bless you all,
especially the Kings Loyal Subjects, for I know you have a good and Gracious
King, as ever Reigned, God forgive me my sins, I forgive all the world, even
those Fellows that brought me here, and I pray God send them no worse
Punishment then to tell the Truth, and so God bless you all. Then a Minister
telling him he had disowned the Indulgences of the Romish Church, he
passionately replied, I do say that the Church of Rome allows no Indulgences
for Murder, Lying, etc. And whatever I have said is true, and being asked if he
had received no Absolution, answered, I have received none at all.

I shall not stuff this Preface with any Animadversions on these Passages,
having done it on the like in the Book it self, to which I refer the Reader,
and then if unprejudiced leave him to judge whether any Credit is to be given
to the Dying words of this sort of men.

ADVERTISEMENT.
There is published a Large Broadside engraven on a Copper Plate, entitled,
The popish Damnable plot against our Religion, and Liberties, in several of its
Branches, lively delineated, with an account of the manner of the Excecution of
William Late Viscount Stafford, in Tower Hill, price 4d. sold by Richard
Baldwin, in the Old Bailey.

ANIMADVERSIONS ON THE LAST SPEECH OF William Viscount Stafford WHO WAS
BEHEADED ON TOWER HILL, FOR HIGH TREASON In Conspiring the Death of the King,
etc. on Wednesday, December 29th. 1680.
DYing men's words are generally much regarded: and Protestants who make
Conscience of their own words, and count it a Horrid Crime to speak otherwise
than they think when they are dying, may be ready to take the measures of
others by themselves, and to Judge those guiltless, who when they are dying,
assert their Innocence with the highest asseverations: But they will find very
great reason to alter their opinion, if they take but due notice how very clear
the Evidence was by which this miserable Lord was cast, and if withal they do
but fully understand the Popish Principles, which destroy all confidence in
their words living and dying.

Fully to convince Protestants, my design shall be to prove that by the common
Doctrine received amongst them, they are furnished with expedients, whereby
they may deny what is most true, and affirm what is most notoriously false, and
that with the most solmn Oaths or dreadfullest Imprecations, and yet neither
lie nor be forsworn, nor any way sin in the least degree, and this they may do
even when dying, Their main artifice is that which they call, Mental
Equivocation, because of a double sense in some proposition partly expressed and
partly referv'd in their minds, so that a thing may be true in their own sense
by virtue of this Mental Reservation, but false in the sense of all that hear
it. The use of this is allowed by all sorts of Papists, and perticularly the
Jesuits, it is an Art more dear to them, and oftener used by them then any
other fraudulent art whatever, because this fraud is more easy, less
discernable, and the advantage of it admirable, and therefore no wonder that
they do not decline it at Trials in Courts of Judicature. No nor when they are
dying and approaching the Tribunial of the Great Judge, tho truth and sincerity
is then, if every, necessary. But this our Poor deceased Lord has more
pertinent instances of those of his Principles and Circumstances to encourage
him with Oaths and Asseverations to assert a falsehood and deny the Truth.

To instance in their Practices, Father Garnet, Whitebreads Predecessor in
Office and Practices, and one concerned in the Gunpowder Plot was notoriously
guilty herein, for he denied that, by solemn Oaths and Impretations before the
Lords Commissioners, which was afterward proved upon him, and his only Plea
for himself was this Doctrine of Equivocation.

So likewise Tresham another of the Powder Plotters said, that Garnet was privy
to the Treason, but afterward just before his death took it upon his Salvation
that he had accused Garnet wrongfully, and that he had not seen him of sixteen
years before, and so dyed: But this his Protestation and Oath was soon after
proved notoriously false, yea Garnet himself confessed that within sixteen
years he had seen him many times, whereupon being asked what be thought of
Treshams dying Oath and Protestation, he answered Possibly Tresham meant to
Equivocate.

And this very Doctrine of Equivocation was justified by Garnet in a Manuscript
left by him, which was communicated by King James, to the famous Causabon.

Both the stories before named may be found at large in the History of the
Gunpowder Treason, and in the Proceedings against those Traitors.

By this we see, that these things have been practiced of old, and justified by
their Teachers as lawful even at the hour of death, therefore we need not be
surpised to find any Papist using this art in his Last Speech.

But their Principles are further considerable, of which take some Account.

First by their Doctrine, they may lawfuly say what is false making use of a
mental Reservation, and tho it be a gross untruth in it self as expressed, and
they know it to be so, and use it with an intent to deceive others, yet they do
not reckon it to be a lie, and consequently no sin, and so need not fear using
it when going out of the world. This is affirmed in distinct Treatises of this
subject by Father Parsons, Naver, Sanche and others.

And here let the World be Judge what regard is due to the words of those, tho
they be the words of dying men, whose Doctrine assures the most guilty persons
in the world, that if they persist in a false defense of their innocence, even
unto death, yet by this method they teach them it will be no lie at all, nor
any sin.

This may be enough to satisfy us concerning the expressions whereby this Lord
disclaims his guilt which are not a few, as in the first Paragraph of his
Speech, I do most truly in the presence of the Eternal, Omnipotent, and
All-knowing God, protest upon my Salvation, that I am as Innocent as it is
possible for any Man to be, so much as in a thought of the Crimes laid to my
charge. [The old canting expression, as Innocent as the Child unborn, is here
varied.] In the third Paragraph, Since my long imprisonment I have considered
often what could be the Original cause of my being thus accused, since I knew
my self not culpable, so much as in a thought; and I cannot believe it to be
upon any other Account then my being of the Church of Rome, In the forth
Paragraph: To my great and unspeakable grief I have offended God in many things
by many great Offenses; but, I give him most humble thanks, not in any of those
Crimes of which I was accused. In the sixth Paragraph. And if I had known of
any Treason, and should thus deny it, as I do now upon my Salvation at this
time, I should have no hope of Salvation. In the eleventh Paragraph. I do now
upon my Death and Salvation aver that I never spoke one word either unto Oats
or Turbervil, or, to my knowledge, ever saw them until my Trial, any for
Dugdale I never spoke to him of any thing but about a Footboy, or Footman, or
Footrace, and never was then alone with him. In the twelfth and thirteenth
Paragraphs. I hope I have made it appear that I have some Conscience, for if I
had none certainly I would have saved my life by acknowledging my self guilty;
which I could have done, tho I know I am not in the least guilty, and I having
some Conscience make very ill use of it; for I throw my self into Eternal pain
by thus plainly and constantly denying thus at my Death, the knowledge of what I
am accused of, in the least I have said thus much in discharge of my
Conscience, and do aver upon my Salvation what I have said to be really true.
And in the very last Paragraph. I do with my last Breath truly assert my
Innocence, and hope the Omnipotent All-seeing, Just God will deal with me
accordingly. Let the Reader judge how true these Protestations of his Innocence
are like to be, after he has considered the fairness of his Trial, the
clearness and fullness of the Evidence against him, and their Doctrines, which
thus allow them to go out of the world with Lies in their mouths.

Secondly, They maintain that when they may lawfully speak what is false, they
may lawfully swear it; thus Father Parsons, Lessins Sanchez, and Jo. Sanctius.

This is their Doctrine, whereby it is evident, that if a Person be Accused and
Condemned for a Design to murder his Prince, though he design it as much as
any Assassinate ever did, yet he may not only deny it, and yet not Lie, by
virtue of a Mental Equivocation, but though he be as guilty as any Person that
ever was condemned in the World, yet he may assert his Innocence with Oaths;
and notwithstanding, by this Art he may free himself from all Guilt of Perjury,
and all other Sin. And this quite destroys their Credit as to all their
Asseverations and Oaths, how many and horrid soever they be, when they think
themselves concerned to Equivocate.

He that would be believed against such Evidence as convicted this Lord had
need be a Man of more than ordinary Credit. But Men of his Lordships Principles
are quite broke as to this, for their Credit is blasted by their Doctrine.

Thirdly, They may use such Mental Reserves or Equivocations, when they are
urged by others not to use any, or when themselves profess and swear they use
none; So De Secund. Bonacina Sanchez, and Fa. Parsons in his Treatise of
Equivocations, approved by Garnet and Blackwell: One passage whereof I will
here give you. If (says he) the Incompetent Judge shall further ask, whether
you do not Equivocate, you may answer no, but with another. Equivocation: if
again suspecting you he urges, whether this third time you do not Equivocate,
then the third time also say no, but with another secret Equivocation; and so
as often as he shall ask the like, likewise by Equivocating say you do not
Equivocate.

Fourthly, By their Doctrine they may Lawfully use such Mental Reserve or
Equivocation, which in their Account makes their Speaking or Swearing falsely to
be innocent. Thus Fillincius says, That Equivocation in Rigor is no Lie nor
Perjury. So Toleno, Equivocation may be used, especially when it is expedient
to conceal a thing. So Bonacina, It is not (says he) unlawful to Equivocate as
often as any Inconvenience or Injury is like to befall us by speaking Plainly.

Can therefore any Persons be more highly concerned to keep any thing secret,
than these Men are to conceal the Plot; both for the dangerous Consequences of
the Discoveny, and the Advantage of concealing it? They cannot more effectually
promote the Plot, than by persuading us there is none; and somaking us the more
secure, they think hereby to stagger weak minded Protostants, who cannot think
that any Christian dares go out of the World with a Lie in his Mouth. They
think also hereby to weaken the Credit of the Witnesses, and to disparage the
Justice of the Nation. And Lastly, his Lordship, and the rest of the Plotters,
executed before him, may think to die as Martyrs in the Account of the Papists,
and as Innocent in the Judgment of many others. But on the other hand, if his
Lordship, or those executed before him had been so ingenuous to have confessed
what they knew of this Hellish Plot, they had broke the Neck of their own
Design, which seems dearer to them than their Lives, or any other Concerns;
they had encouraged others of the Conspirators to have followed their Leaders
herein* and so the Plot had been wholly dissected, and Popery it self in danger
to be rendered odious to the whole Christian World, and for ever hereafter to be
abhorred and renounced by all that own the Christian Name, as utterly repugnant
to Christianity, and to be abhorred by Mankind as that which bids Defiance to
Humanity it self.

Having thus sufficiently answered those Passages in his Speech that assert his
Innocence, come we next to his false Commendation, and Character of their
Church. In the third Paragraph (says he) I have no reason to be ashamed of my
Religion, for it teaches nothing but the right worship of God, Obedience to
the King, and due Subordination to the Temporal Laws of the Kingdom. And I do
submit to all Articles of Faith believed and taught in the Catholic Church,
believing them to be most consonant with the Word of God. And whereas it has
so much and often been objected, that the Church holds that Sovereign Princes
Excommunicated by the Pope, may by their Subjects be Deposed and Murdered as to
the Murder of Princes. I have been taught as a matter of Faith, in the
Catholic Faith, that such Doctrine is Diabolical, Horrid and Detestable; and
contrary to the Law of God^ Nature and Nations and as such from my heart I
renounce and abominate it. As for the Doctrine of Deposing of Princes, I know
some Divines of the Catholic Church hold it but as Able and Learned as they
have writ against it: but it was not pretended to be the Doctrine of the
Church; that is any Point of Catholic Faith. Wherefore I do here in my
Conscience declare, that it is my True and Real Judgment that the same Doctrine
of Deposing Kings is contrary to the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom,
Injurious to Sovereign Power; and consequently would be in me, or any other of
His Majesty's Subjects, Impious and Damnable. That their Church teaches the
contrary to the right Worship of God, and Obedience to Kings is very easy to
prove: But it is a Work that has been so often done already, that here we
shall wave it. To come then to the nice Point, viz. the King-killing Doctrine.
This is a Charge upon them of so horrid a nature, that I do not wonder that
they all use their utmost endeavors to persuade the World that they hold no
such Doctrine. That Mariana held it, Gavan himself owned: Sanctarelius his Book
was a little more favorable to Kings than Mariana's, and yet this was printed
at Rome, and approved by Mutius Vi^ellescus the General of the Jesuits.
Ribadinera, Scribanius under the name of Bonarscius, Becanus, Oresterus, do
partly praise and partly defend Mariana. And wherein does Emanuel S^ come short
of Mariana in that particular, or Becanus in his English Controvorsies; which
are approved of, not only by diverse Bishops, but by the Provincial Jesuits of
Portugal and Germany: Yea, a whole University approves of it. To which add Fa.
Campian, who may be in stead of all; he declares, That all the Jesuits spread
far and wide through the whole World have entered into a League to (...) they
despair of effecting it so long as one Jesuit remains in the World. In Epist.
ad Conc^l. Reg. Angl. p. 22.

The Church of Rome does declare, that the Pope has power to depose Kings,
especially for Heresy. This is not only the Opinion of all sorts of their
Authors, but is especially determined by their Popes, and the Decrees of
General Councils. They do also declare, that Kings being Deposed, any one may
kill them, at least by the Pope's Order. For this we have the declared Sense of
the whole Body of the Jesuits in France, [than whom; (...) Society in any part
of the World were more favorable to Kings,] in an Apology for their Doctrine
on this Subject to Henry the Fourth; yet there they declare in the words (...)
to the Doctrine of Aquanis (...); and others* That a (...) Authority, may be
killed by any one. Now there is none of them who have the use of Reason will
deny, but a King deposed by the Pope is such a Tyrant, a mere Usurper, without
such a just Title; and therefore they cannot deny but it is their Doctrine^^
That a King Deposed by the Pope may be killed by any one.

In the Seventh and Sixteenth Paragraphs he prays for the King, acknowledging
him His Lawful King and Sovereign, and denying that any Power on Earth can
Legally allow him, or any Body else to lift up a Hand against his Lega^
^uthority, and then Praying for him, that he may enjoy all Happiness in this
World, and the World to come, He would undoubtedly have it thought, that he had
no design to kill the King, who can pray for his prosperous Reign. But it need
not seem strange that any of them should Equivocate in their way of Praying.
since their Church allows of plain Lies in their public Liturgies, which
diverse of their own Authors express themselves sensible of.

To give one instance of this in F^. Garnet, he composed some Prayers for the
good Success of the Powder Plot, which he used amongst his Party; and being
charged with it* answered like such a Jesuit: He said, He made not those
Prayers with that meaning that the thing might fall out according to the mind
of the Conspirators, but rather cross to their desires; that so the Safety of
King and Kingdom might be provided for. So that when he prayed for the Ruin of
the King and Kingdom, his meaning was that they might be preserved and prosper.
So when any of this sort of Men, I mean Romish Zealots, pray for the King's
prosperous Reign. why may not their meaning be his utter Destruction? For this
is altogether as likely as the other.

One thing is observable, that in his Prayer for the King he twice comes in
with the word Legal. So in the sixth Paragraph. He would discover if he knew of
an Illegal Dangerous Plot. But the Question will here be, what he means by
Legal and Illegal. By their Principles, if the King be Excommunicated, his
Authority is not Legal, and therefore the Plot against him not Illegal. This
Artifice, though the thing be false in it self, yet it may be innocently
asserted by him.

His Temper at Death was none of the most Christianlike, for he could not
forbear [though he pretendedly forgave them] villifying the Witnesses against
him, by calling them Perjured Fellows: But what better can be expected from
such Men. And he seems designedly to intimate that his Trial was Illegal by
this subtle Insinuation: I shall say little to my Trial; and whether it were
all according to the known Law, I am too much a Party to say much of it: If it
were not so, God forgive him or them that were the Cause of it. Certainly never
Man had a more Honorable, Just and Legal Trial, and consequently less Cause
for such a Malicious Insinuation.

To conclude, We have great reason to believe that this Speech was contrived
for the promoting of their grand Plot, upon which, as a true Be-Jesuited
Zealot, his Heart was so much set [the Catholic Interest being so deeply
concerned in it,] that the thoughts of Death could not divert him. Now, if we
are found so Weak and Fragile as to believe these fraudulent Expressions of
this Lord, and others that were Executed before him, against so much Rational
Evidence, then their Work* is, in a manner done; and they will do more at their
Deaths by putting out; our Eyes, than they could in all their Lives. We cannot
in Justice, Reason or Charity believe them against Such Evidence, who think
they may Lawfully deceive us when dying, and apprehend it to be the great
Interest of their Cause so to do.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for R. Baldwin, near the Bull, in the Old Baly. 1680.


