ANOTHER OUTCRY OF THE Innocent and Oppressed.

BEING A true Account of the unjust and illegal proceedings of Richard
Rainsford and Roger Norwich, and others; against Thomas Allen, Francis Child,
Richard Coe, and William Line, being such as are called QUAKERS, at the GENERAL
Quarter Sessions Holden at the CASTLE In NORTHAMPTON ON The 12. and 13 days of
the 10th. month 1665. where Rich. Rainsford sat in Judgment, AND When Richard
Rainsford saw that the Plague was somewhat ceased, (as Pharaoh did Exodus
9.34.) he hardened his heart, and those called Justices that joined with him,
so their hearts were hardened that they attempted the second time unjustly to
pass Sentence to Transport the Servants of the Lord to the Island of Barbados.

Printed in the Year 1665.

Another Outcry of the Innocent and Oppressed, etc.
UPon the 13. day of the 10th. Month in the Afternoon, when the other business
of the Country was ended, the Prisoners were brought from the Goal where they
had been kept near five Months, and being come were set to the Bar, Richard
Raynsford who was Judge, commanded the Jailer to take off their Hates, which
was done, then one of the Prisoners named Thomas Allen, said unto them, if ye
were men of Wisdom and understanding, ye would not seem to take notice of such
a beggarly Rudiment as the Hat; whereat some of them laughed like Children in a
Play; but the Court being silent again, the Judge commanded the Clerk to read
the Indictment, which was done, the substance of it was, that the Prisoners
being formerly taken, at an unlawful assembly, Meeting, or Conventicle at the
House of Thomas Allen in Dingly, together with diverse Malefactors, to the
number of 30. persons, or above, and being thereof twice lawfully convicted
before Obrian Cockain, Lord Viscount Cullaine, Roger Norwich Baronet, and Lewis
Palmer Esquire, and being since that taken again at the same place, and
committed to Prison by the said Roger Norwich, and Lewis Palmer, as disturbers
of the public peace, stood lawfully indicted for the same, etc. much more of
falsehood and lies was added unto it, as it is ordinarily known to them that are
acquainted with their Practice; nevertheless, the Judge spoke to Thom. Allen,
Are you guilty of this Indictment or not? to which he answered, The Indictment
I find is false, and may have as many lies in it as lines; at which the Judge
seemed angry, saying, Lies, lies! the Prisoner answered, A lie is a lie, and
how should I otherwise express it: then the Judge said again, Well, are you
guilty or not? then the Prisoner answered, I am not guilty of what is contained
in the Indictment. Then the Judge called Francis Child, Art thou guilty or not
guilty? To which he answered, I have something to say before I plead to that; I
am very glad the Lord has found me worthy at this day to bear witness to his
truth against a hard hearted and cruel Generation; I desire we may be removed
from our strict Imprisonment to work for our bread, for I believe we might find
more mercy amongst the Turks.

The Judge said again, are you guilty or not of this Indictment?

Pris. I am not guilty, for there are many lies in it, therefore I fear you
not, do your work that you may have your wages, for the Lord has yet more
Arrows to shoot at you.


Judge called to William Line, saying, are you guilty or not guilty?


Prisoner. I am not guilty, I have been but twice convicted by your Law.


Judge. What have you to say for your self?


Pri. I am a Laboring man and have a Wife and five Children, and if you take
me from my labor it may go hard with them.


Richard Coe being demanded the same as the other by the Judge, he answered,
that he was not guilty.

Then a sort of poor Country men, whom they had prepared on purpose for their
service, were called and sworn to this effect, that they should well and truly
try betwixt the King and the Prisoners at the Bar, according to the Evidence;
exceptions were made against some of them by the Prisoners, knowing them to be
men as were not capable of doing such a service, telling the Court that by a
Law lately made they might not serve, having not Land of such a value; but one
Randolph a known enemy to the truth of God, executing the Clerks Office, said,
they may serve your turn; and would not allow of our exceptions, but proceeded
to the examination of Witnesses that were brought in against us, which being
done, Thomas Allen having the Act there, read and showed to the Court and Jury
a Proviso in it, in these words following, Provided always that no person
shall be punished for any offense against this Act, unless such Offenders be
prosecuted for the same within three Months after the Offense committed.
Nevertheless, the Judge refused to allow us the benefit of the Law in that
particular, although we had been in Prison near five Months, and had so much
exceeded the limit of the Act, and pleaded against us, saying, the Sessions was
adjourned because of the Sickness, and upon that account the day upon which
they should have been kept, and this, are both one day; which were more then
two Months after: then Thomas Allen answered, Nay, they are two days besides
many days betwixt: nevertheless the Judge knowing they had a Jury upon whom
they could set their own stamp as easily as upon a lump of Clay, stood opposite
to the thing, although allowed and approved by several others upon the like
occasion; then the Judge said, you are such as will not be subject to the
King's Laws: to which Thomas Allen answered, art thou a man siting in Judgment
and have no more to say against us, the very Rabble in the Streets can say as
much as that; but tell us if thou can what Laws of the Nation there are
which we are not more subject to then you your selves, save only those which
concern the Worship of God, which King and Parliament have nothing at all to do
with, for what power and authority is that which will dare to take upon them to
prescribe a way for God's Worship? I say, this is Antichrist, the highest
presumption in all the earth: then the Judge said, do not you prescribe a way:
the Prisoner answered, nay, we prescribe none. Then the Judge spoke to the Jury
to go forth.

Thomas Allen said, what need they to go forth, are we not clearly acquitted by
the Act? to which the Judge would give no Answer; the Jury standing still in
the Court, Randolph the Clerk told them they must go forth; then they begun to
go away, but Thomas Allen called them to stay a while, which they did, then he
spoke to them in these words, Friends, I would have you to take notice of the
great Judgments of God which have come upon this Nation since these cruel Laws
were made and put in execution against us, you know we had some years agone a
great and tempestuous wind by which many Trees were torn up by the Roots, and
Houses laid on heaps; after that a strange infectious disease fell among
Horses, such a one as has not usually been heard of, whereby many hundreds
died in several places, to the great damage of Husbandmen and others; after
that a great rot of Sheep for two years together, by which many men were
ruined, whose substance consisted principally in those Cattle; and now of late
a sore Judgment of the Plague, such as never was in the memory of man, in so
much that the Plagues of England has been well nigh equal to the Plagues of
Egypt; and besides all these, the trade and prosperity of the Nation is so much
decayed, that things never looked with such a face in England as they do at
this day. But whiles he was thus speaking to them, they were commanded to go
forth, so they went and stayed a pretty while, and at their coming in, it was
asked whether or no they were agreed upon their verdict? they answered, yes;
then the Clerk asked them* who should speak for them? but they being men
altogether unacquainted with such a service, made no Answer; then it was asked
again if the Foreman should speak for them? they said, Yes; then said the
Clerk, how do you find them? the Foreman said Guilty twice; well then said the
Clerk, you find them guilty? the Foreman said, Yes; upon this the Clerk
recorded them all guilty, and the Judge passed sentence upon them, to be
Transported unto Barbados, and no more. The business being done, some of the
Jurymen told the Prisoners that things were not rightly done according to their
agreement, for the agreement was to acquit them; whereupon the Prisoners asked
them why they did not speak when they see such a gross miscarriage in the
Court? their answer was, they feared if they should have spoken, the Judge
would have laid them by the heels.

Here all may see the gross malicious wickedness and corruption both of Richard
Raynsford Judge, and Randolph that was Clerk.

First, in denying the Prisoners the benefit of the Law, which others have had
at several times in the like case, and have been acquitted thereupon without any
other proceedings.

Secondly, in trying them by a Jury not allowed nor approved by the Law.

Thirdly, in not allowing the Prisoners their exception made against them, nor
their lawful reasons why.

Lastly, in perverting the Judgment and verdict of the Jury, and passing
sentence thereupon.

Oh thou County of Northampton who art placed upon the middle and top of the
Nation, whose Waters falls from the East, West, North and South, into the
Ocean, thou have in this work of persecution exceeded all the Counties of this
Nation, thou were the first that in all the South of England (eleven years ago)
imprisoned the true Prophets of the Lord, whom the Lord had raised in the North
Country, William Dewsberry, John Whitehead. Thomas Stubs, and Thomas Coodaire,
with many more; the Devil has had his chief Inland Garrison in the midst of
thee, and his Instruments has continually to this day cast into thy Prison the
servants of the Lord, and they have there borne their faithful Testimonies for
the Lords truth, and no wickeder cruel Goalers has been found in England then
has been there to this day; and the Priests there has put to their strength
at all times to drive on the Magistrates to persecute, and never had they one
more at their command then Judge Raynsford is for them at this day; who has
been the alone Magistrate that has caused Persecution of the Lords People, and
to execute the cruel and unmerciful Act in banishing of them. John Whitfield
Priest of Bugbrook, and one Richard Harris and Thomas Hog, the Priests of
Keslinberry and Farthingston, are they which ride upon the back of the Beast to
make him be the executioners of their bloody intents; these Priests have cast
into the Prison this last year diverse of the Lords people, because they could
not for Conscience sake pay them Tithes at the beginning of Harvest, and when
they were in Prison, they carried away the poor peoples Grain, in some places
above half that grew upon their Land; and some asked them why they did so? they
answered that they might take what they would, there was no Law for the Quakers
now; and still keeps their bodies in Prison to this day. Thus O County of
Northampton thou will one day be even a shame to the Nation; but this we say in
honor of those Magistrates that have been true suffering Royalists, not one of
them that formerly suffered for the late King, but has and does show
themselves like men in their places, and will have no hand in Persecution, but
those that have been Turncoats of the Amalekitest breed, they are the men that
drive on the Devils work of Persecution in this Country; for they having never
done no good for their King before: Now they think there is no other way to
merit and get into the favor of the King, but by persecuting of the people of
the Lord, and at last they will prove the greatest enemies to the King in the
Nation, and a hissing unto all people. In this County was the first bloodshed
in the beginning of the late War that was shed in England, and at Nasby the
late King upon the very top of England, had his last and total overthrow; upon
the top of this Nation John Lambert was taken, and had his great and last
overthrow; four years ago the Lord sent a Rain in May that drowned a Town
called Weedon, and other Towns on the top of England to the damage of many
thousands of pounds, and never did no hurt in places where it went lower; and
now this last Visitation this year no less then 16. Towns were visited with the
Plague, and yet they repent not of their wickedness, but still go on to provoke
the Lord.

The Cause of the Innocent spread before the Lord, and the unjust Proceedings
of the Rulers against them, before all People.
Luke 18.7. Now shall not God avenge his Elect which cry day and night unto
him, yea though he suffers long for them, I tell you he will avenge them
quickly. Therefore all ye Rulers of this Nation of England that have set your
selves in battle ray with all your might and power against the Lord and against
his seed, that according to what his true Prophet Jeremiah declared, the Lord
has raised in this Northern Island, which he has said must dwell in their own
Land, you through the envy and wickedness that rules in your hearts seeks to
murder, banish, imprison, persecute, and to root out, and to destroy this seed
whom the Lord has raised, and that he has blessed and will bless now,
henceforth and for evermore.

Now that your wickedness may appear even to your own veiw, and that you may be
ashamed for that which you have done, and are a doing against the Lord and
against his people here amongst you; I would have you to consider what the Lord
has done for you ye Rulers of England, remember, were you not in a low
condition not many years since, and was it then in your hearts to do to us as
now you have done, if the Lord would but restore you into your power and places
again? if you were at that time so resolved to do, your tongues and declaration
did not at that time declare the same thing, but it was promised that none
should suffer for his Religion, in case he lived peaceably in the Nation, and
these promises were not by force forced from you, but it was done freely by
you, and it was the Lord that made the terms with you, and not man, and after
that time the Lord gave your enemies into your hands, and without your Sword or
Bow, or the valor of your men of War, the Lord brought you again into your
possession, and the Lord performed what he had decreed, as concerning your
Restoration; and it had been well for you and this Nation if you had performed
what you had promised to the Lord in the behalf of his people; but to this day
the Lords people has and does grievously suffer under your power, who has
lived peaceably under you, and has never at any time molested your Authority,
neither have they ever made any plot or Conspiracies against you or your
Authority, nor never joined with any that did, to this day, and yet ye have
made us the only mark that ye shoot at, contrary to what ye have promised unto
us; and before the Righteous God we have spread our innocent cause and
sufferings, and he has heard our cry, and now he is arisen to plead our Cause,
and woe and misery and destruction will assuredly be the portion of all those
that are found fighting against him, as you are at this day.

Hear O ye Rulers of England the Lords controversy against you, you have
contrary to your promises abused, persecuted, imprisoned his servants, and you
have made an unrighteous Law to banish them forth of the Land, and you have put
in execution this your unnatural Law, and are still putting it into execution,
you have hardened your hearts far beyond Pharaoh, and your cruelty toward the
Lords people has far exceeded his toward Israel, he never imprisoned the
Israelites, neither did he ever shut them up that they might not labor for
their livelihood, but you have shut up thousands of the Lords people in Prisons
and Dungeons, and there they are at this day, and by that means they cannot
labor with their hands to get bread for themselves and their families, and yet
you are so cruel that you force your taxes from them: O cruelty far exceeding
Egipts bondage; and Pharaoh's sin was, he would not have had Israel gone from
him out of his Country, when the Lord sent for them by Moses; but your sin is
this, you have made a Law to force the Lords people out of their Native
Country, where the Lord has raised them, and placed them; therefore as you
have exceeded them in cruelty, toward the Lords people, so will the Lord
multiply his Plagues upon you as upon Egypt, until you be made to let Israel
alone to Worship the Lord, as his good Spirit shall lead and direct them; and
notwithstanding you have thus rebelled against the Lord, and abused his
servants ever since the Lord has restored you into power, yet has the Lords
mercy been showed toward you, and his good spirit has a long time striven
with you, and the Lords servants whom you call Quakers have at all times been
faithful unto you, and they have told you the mind of the Lord, and what would
come upon you in case you went on with your wicked work of persecution of the
Innocent, but to this day you have regarded them not, but have persecuted and
abused them, both Rulers, Priests, and People, and you have dealt far worse and
cruel with them then Pharaoh did by Moses and Aaron, and now the Lords wrath is
kindled against you, and there is like to be no remedy, for you have hardened
your hearts against the Lord, and you have not believed his Prophets, therefore
you cannot prosper; thy Judges O England have perverted the Law, and by that
means has made many widows and fatherless Children, and their cry has entered
into the ears of the Lord of Hosts, who now will surely plead their Cause, and
will reward into thy bosom for the wrong thou have done unto his Chosen, and as
thou have (notwithstanding thy warnings) hardened thy heart against the Lord and
his people, so now has he given thee up to hardness of heart, the greatest of
all Judgments, and the nearest to destruction, and thou have shut thy eyes
against the light, and would neither see nor hear, nor take notice of the
mighty works of the Lord that he has made manifest in thee, and now great is
the darkness that has covered thee; John saw in the Revelation three unclean
Spirits like Frogs come out of the mouth of the Dragon, Beast and false
Prophets, and they have come unto thee to stir thee up to battle against the
great day of God Almighty, and to two of these thou have lent thy ear, and took
their Council, O how has thy false Prophets deceived thee, and persuaded thee
to carry on thy work of persecution, and banishing the righteous out of thy
Land, and though the Lord appeared in his Judgments against thee ever since the
very week that thou begins to banish his servants, yet have they not given
over, but both in Cities and Countries they have made it their work to preach
to the People that the Plague would not cease, but did increase because the
Rulers had not banished the Quakers forth of the Land, and so Judge Rainsford
said this Sessions in open Court that the Reason was that Gods Judgments were
so in the Nation because they had not removed the Quakers out of the Land; but
he and other Judges and Rulers being blind, cannot or will not see what is the
cause, no more then Pharaoh could when the Lord struck off his Chariot Wheels
when he was pursuing Israel into the Sea. For ye Judges and Rulers, if that is
the cause that Gods Judgments are so upon the Nation, then why did you not make
more have to remove Gods Judgment; have not you seen how the Lord has fought
against you ever since you have gone about this cursed work of Persecution, and
especially of banishing the Lords people, have you ever prospered since you
have begun in any thing that ever you have put your hands unto, how has the
Lord fought against you; will all his four Elements, as Winds, Fire, and
Waters, and those creatures that have fed upon the Earth, how have they been
corrupted and brought to nothing, to the impoverishing of thy Inhabitants, how
has thy Trading decayed both in Cities and Countries, so that the peoples
hearts even now begins to fail them, and these going before to forewarn thee,
but thou taking no notice of them, how has the Lord smote thee lately in thy
Cities with the Plague, and laid thousands upon heaps in a short space, but
this thy Rulers have taken little notice of neither; and now the Lord has much
taken this Judgment of the Plague off on thee, once more to try thee if thou
will let his people go free, but being taken off, thy Rulers begins again to
harden their hearts, and already make have to go on with their cursed work of
sentencing the people of the Lord in this County of Northampton to Banishment,
as is seen by Richard Rainsford this Sessions, who said the cause was why he
did not do it at Michaelmas Sessions was, because of the Plague which that time
was hot in the Country, but now he is the first in the Nation that is heard of
that begins this wicked work, as Pharaoh did when the Plague was taken off, but
it cannot be but taken notice of, that though the Plague had ceased in London
many weeks before, yet that week that this wicked Judge began his cursed work
to sentence the innocent again, that very week the Lord made an increase of the
Plague again in the Chief City, to let him and all other wicked Rulers know
that their work of persecution is the cause of the Lords sending and continuing
of his Judgments upon this Land, and it had been well if the Rulers in this
Nation after they had so grievously sinned against the Lord in persecuting of
his people, and by that work had caused Gods Judgments to be poured down upon
them, and if they had repented of their evil works, and with David had been
willing to have fallen into the hands of the Lord, it might have been that the
Lord would have been merciful unto them, and the Lords wrath might have been
appeased toward them and the Land, but they have and do still rebel against
the Lord, and say in their hearts still, We know not the Lord, and who is the
Lord that we should obey him? and will do what they can to drive on their
Chariots, (though the Lord has struck off their Wheels) to the pursuing of
Israel, and think because they (...) taken their flight and have run with the
swiftest from this (...) that the Lord has no other that can take hold on
them, (...) Lord has other Plagues in store for such Persecuters as (...)
cease nor repent, as he had for Pharaoh after he had escaped (...) plague of
smiting the firstborn in Egypt, and if you go on with (...) work still, of
persecuting, imprisoning, and banishing Gods pe^ you shall surely find that
made good upon you, which the (...) of the Lord George Bishop writ unto the
King and both Hou^ (...) Parliament the last year the 25th. of the 9th. month
1664. (...) words were these, Meddle not with my People, because of them (...)
science to me, and banish them not of this Nation, because of their (...)
science, for if you do, I will send my Plagues upon you, and y^ (...) know that
I am the Lord. And surely in a large measure this ^^^phesie is fulfilled upon
this Nation ever since the Rulers have ^^nished the Lords people, and if you go
on it will be fulfilled (...) you to the uttermost, Therefore, O England,
believe no^ (...) thy false Prophets who cries peace unto thee, and says it
sh^^^ (...) well with thee, though thou still goes on with thy cursed wo^^
(...) persecution, for those who are thy best friends and cannot (...) thee,
sees thee to be in a sad condition by reason of thy sin, an^ (...) thy
surfeting thy self with the abundance of Gods mercies w^ he bestowed upon thee
five years ago, and ever since thou has^ (...) falling into a Consumption, and
now thou art become so feeb^^ (...) Nation of England, as not able to help thy
self, and excep^ (...) Lord by his power restore thee (which he will not if
tho^ persists in the wicked work of persecution) thou will assur^ come to ruin
and destruction.

THE END.

