AN ACCOUNT OF THE Manner of the Behavior OF THE Prisoners who received
Sentence of Death, On Saturday the First of September, 1688. at the
Sessions House in the OLD-BAILEY: Of which Charles O Bryan and Daniel Carey
were Executed at Tyburn on Friday the 7th of September, 1688. With a Relation
of their several Facts for which they were Condemned, and what happened at the
Place of EXECUTION.
It Is frequently observed, and much to be deplored, that the many fatal
Examples of this kind have not their Effects on hardened Sinners, (such as have
sold themselves, as we may properly term it, to do Wickedness in restraining
them from following the footsteps of those that have suffered; neither, on the
other hand, does the interposing Mercy of a Gracious Prince, in saving the
Lives of many from untimely Deaths, forfeited to Justice by the Crimes they
have committed, work so sensibly upon these kind of Criminals, as to deter them
from proceeding in dishonest ways, and breaking those Laws that ought to be the
Rule and Boundary of their Actions, and by which they should square the course
of their Lives, so as to live honestly in such Vocations or Callings, etc. as
God has appointed or enabled them to subsist in and by. However, that we may
not be wanting to forwarn such as are still encouraging themselves in the
progress of Iniquity, we think it highly convenient to give a Relation of the
Condemnation, manner of Behavior, and Sufferings, etc. of the Persons who
received Sentence at the Sessions holden at the Sessions House in the
Old-Bailey the First of this instant September, 1688. as also for the further
satisfaction of those that are inquisitive after the Account that is ordinarily
given upon the Execution of the Prisoners suffering at Tyburn, etc. Which
Impartial Relation, Reader, take as follows:

At the Sessions holden for London and Middlesex, on the 31st of August, and
the 1st of September, in the close of the said Sessions these Persons received
Sentence of Death, viz.

John Prisley, for the Murder of Roger Page, late Master of the Spotted Dog in
Goodmans fields in the Parish of White-Chappel, on the 6th of August, by giving
him a mortal Wound on the left-side of the Belly, upon a Quarrel happening
between the Deceased, and one Thomas Yerard and Thomas Dawson not yet taken,
whose part the Prisoner (accidentally coming by) took, and gave the Deceased
the Wound, as it appeared in Court, without any manner of provocation. When,
after Sentence of Death received, as in case of Wilful Murder, (it being so
found by the Jury) he was remanded back to Newgate, after having in vain begged
Transportation, and pleaded he was a Young Man, in the prime of his Years and
Strength, etc. Where being arrived, he betook himself to as much Retirement as
possible the place would afford; and, upon the serious advice given him that he
ought not to flatter himself with hopes of long Life, became very pensive, not
only praying by himself, but desiring the Prayers of such as came to visit him;
imploring God's Mercy, and desiring that the innocent Blood that had been shed
might not be laid to his charge; saying he had been well educated, and born of
considerable Parents, but had not cordially hearkened to those good
Instructions they had given him, rather following his own Imaginations; for
which, and other sins, he believed God had brought this Punishment upon him.
And much in the same temper, as far as could be perceived by those that visited
him and attended upon him, he continued, diligently enquiring after his future
Safety.

John George received Sentence in the close of the Sessions, as the former, for
breaking the House of one Richard Higgens of the Parish of Acton in the County
of Middlesex, and taking Goods and Moneys belonging to the said Higgens and one
Edward Stephens, to the value of 10 l. on tho 17th of August last; pleading
only, that he bought the Goods in the Street, though it appeared upon Evidence in
Court he was found in the House, and there apprehended. But being returned to
Newgate, to expect the Execution of the Sentence, he (though concluded to be an
old Ostender) began much to relent, and consider his Eternal Estate, as little
hoping or expecting long to continue in this World, much listening to those
that came in charity to visit him and his Fellow-Convicts, seeming desirous to
be instructed, and confessing that giving himself up to bad Company, he had (to
supply his Wants, occasioned by extravagant Expenses) proceeded to take
unlawful Courses: but he hoped, if he might be spared, so to order the future
business of his Life, as to make (in some measure) amends for the Injury he had
done to sundry Persons, whom he forbore to name; but that, if it was his hard
hap to fall by an untimely Death, he hoped God would have Mercy upon his poor
Soul, and not suffer That to miscarry; desiring often the Prayers of all good
People, that by their Supplications on his behalf God would give him a true
sense of his sins, and dispose his heart to sincere Repentance; and so
continued at times to pray in public, and by himself in private, as much as
the convenience of the place would admit.

Daniel Carey had Sentence of Death for the Wilful Murdering of Richard Welding
on the 17th of July last upon Tower Hill, by giving him a Wound under the left
Breast of five Inches, whereof the said Welding then, or in a very short time
after, died. And though in Court he alleged the Witnesses were mistaken in the
Man, and that there being others there, they might give the Wound
abovementioned; alleging likewise his Youth and Innocence: Yet in his
retirement he appeared much afflicted and concerned at what had happened;
hoping, and earnestly desiring, that God would not lay Blood to his Charge; and
much bewailed his misfortune for being present at this disastrous Accident,
giving himself up very attentively to hear the Exhortations of such pious
Divines and others as came to counsel him for his Immortal Welfare, and
advising all by his Example to keep out of Quarrellings, and brangling matters
of that nature, thereby to prevent their falling into the like misfortune;
hoping however, though he had lived a dissolute Life, that now his unfeigned
Repentance might find place for Mercy, etc.

Charles O Bryan and William Godard received Sentence of Death for a Felony and
Burglary, in breaking the House of Edward Weeks of Cony-Hatch in the County of
Middlesex in the Nightime, and taking thence Goods and Money to the value of
30 l. in which Exploit one Jones (who was likewise with them in the Robbery)
received a mortal Wound, of which he died in Moors-Court in St. Martins in the
Fields, they bringing him off at that time wounded, etc. And although upon Trial
they denied the Fact; yet being returned to Newgate, with little hopes of being
reprieved, though they had earnestly implored Transportation, a sense of their
misspent Lives appeared in their melancholy Deportment and Behavior, much
Dejectedness, etc. and made them, in spite of some little resolution they
strove to put upon it, to consider the nearness of their approaching Ends, as
standing condemned by Law, etc. obliging them to a desire of Repentance and
Forgiveness of those sins that had brought them even upon the brink of a
shameful Death, and earnestly attending the Exhortations of such as gave Them
and their Fellow-Convicts serious Advice.

John Pidgley was sentenced with the rest for stealing two Gueldings, value 14
l. on the 27th of July last, out of the Grounds of Edward Spear at Hammersmith,
which he sold to one John Gerrard, who was tried with him, but acquitted. He,
as the rest, being returned to Newgate, found the sense of approaching Death
struck terror upon his Conscience, and greatly afflict him, insomuch that he
became altogether restless and uneasy, till he had somewhat allayed his
laboring mind by addressing himself to such as came to administer spiritual
Consolation to ease his Oppressions, etc. He confessed himself a very vile
Sinner, and that by giving himself up to Lewd Company he had been drawn into
many evil Practices, continuing very Penitent.

Thus far having proceeded to give an Account of the particular Behaviors of
these condemned Criminals, as far as was observed during their respite, we now
pass to what was more general, viz. Upon their being returned to Newgate after
Sentence, the next morning several persons uisited them, in order to prepare
their minds for a sincere Repentance, laboring earnestly to make them sensible
of the great Crimes they had committed, and the danger they were in not only to
lose a Temporal Life, as forfeited to the Justice of the Nation for the breach
of the known Laws, but that which is Eternal, unless God's Anger by a speedy
Repentance might be turned away, and his Mercy plead with his Justice on their
behalf; laying before them how heinous a thing Sin is in the sight of God,
especially Sins of such a Dye and Complexion as they stood notoriously guilty
of: To which they most of them gave very serious attention, wishing, and
heartily desiring, that Prayers might be put up for them, that God in his
infinite Mercy would be pleased to have mercy upon their poor Souls, and give
them a true sense of the wretched State and Condition wherein they were.

Thus being somewhat prepared for Holy Exercise, they retired to Prayers, and
afterward, in the Sermons preached on that Occasion, so many as were present
were further exhorted to a serious Repentance, and highly to improve the little
time they had, or could expect, on this side the Grave, by endeavoring to
break the stoniness of their hearts, and show themselves thoroughly sensible, by
an unfeigned acknowledgment of their Crimes, whereby they had offended God and
Man in the highest Nature, some of them being of a Crimson Dye, as having
dipped their hands in innocent Blood, and others in a manner no less heinous:
Wherefore great Sins required great Repentance; and that such stains of Guilt
could not be washed out without a thorough breaking and humbling under a true
sense of them; and that they ought to employ all their power and strength to
cry to God, who is the God of Mercies and Forgiveness, where the Sinner is
truly penitent, and takes shame to himself. And further they were showed the
Nature of their Sins in sundry respects, and earnestly exhorted not to delay
Repentance, by flattering themselves with hopes of a longer Life, of which they
were so uncertain: Or, if it so fell out that they might be spared through the
King's great Clemency and Goodness, yet however it was high time for them to
turn from the evil of their ways, and become new Creatures, lest by continuing
in a course of sinning a greater Evil should suddenly overtake them, or to this
effect. And then proceeded to give them hopes of Salvation in the many gracious
and favorable Promises made in the Gospel to penitent Sinners, though turning
late from the paths of Iniquity, if the Repentance proved sincere and
unfeigned, etc.

The following days they were frequently visited, and supported under their
Agony and Afflictions with cordial Advice, and seasonable Admonitions, to which
they seemed to give extraordinary attention, with promise of observance and
amendment. And now, whilst these good Offices continued, and nothing but Death
could be expected, seeing they were already Dead in Law, and nothing but the
Execution of the Sentence remained to pass them from this World into Eternity:
His Majesty's interposing Mercy stepped between, so that several of them were
by his gracious Clemency Reprieved, of which having notice, they seemed much
overjoyed, that by the Goodness of their Compassionate Prince they were raised
in a manner from Death (in the thoughts of which they were altogether swallowed
up) to the prospect of a longer Life: however Three, viz. Daniel Carey, Charles
O Bryan, and John Prisley, whose Crimes rendered them less fit Objects of such
Clemency and Forbearance, on Friday-morning, after they had been prayed with in
the Prison, and exhorted in this their great Extremity to lay hold on Christ by
Faith, and wholly rely on God's Mercy through the Merits of their Blessed
Savior, etc. were put into the Cart, and carried to Tyburn, the place of
Execution; where being arrived, after the usual Ceremony, two ( viz. OF Bryan
and Carey) were Executed according to Sentence; but Prisley obtained a
Reprieve, and was brought back to Newgate.

WITH ALLOWANCE.
LONDON, Printed by D. Mallet, next Door to the Sign of the Star between
Fleet-bridge and Bridewell-bridge. 1688.


