The Princess Anne of Denmark's LETTER To the Queen.
MADAM,
I Beg your pardon if I am so deeply affected with the surprising News of the
Princes being gone, as not to be able to see You, but to leave this Paper to
Express my humble Duty to the King and your Self; and to let You know that I am
gone to absent my self to avoid the Kings displeasure, which I am not able to
bear either against the Prince or my self: and I shall stay at so great a
distance, as not to return before I hear the happy News of a Reconcilement: And
as I am confident the Prince did not leave the King with any other design than
to use all possible means for his Preservation; so I hope You will do me the
Justice to believe that I am incapable of following him for any other end.
Never was any one in such an unhappy Condition, so divided between Duty and
Affection to a Father, and a Husband and therefore. I know not what to do but
to follow one to preserve the other. I see the general falling off of the
Nobility and Gentry, who avow to have no other end than to prevail with the
King to secure their Religion, which they saw so much in danger by the Violent
Counsels of the Priests; who to promote their own Religion, did not care to
what dangers they exposed the King: I am fully persuaded that the Prince of
Orange designs the Kings safety and preservation, and hope all things may be
composed without more bloodshed, by the Calling a Parliament: God grant a happy
end to these Troubles, that the Kings Reign may be prosperous, and that I may
shortly meet You in perfect peace and safety; till when let me beg You to
continue the same favorable Opinion that you have hitherto had of,

Your most Obedient Daughter and Servant, ANNE.


