ANIMADVERSIONS on a Postscript to the Defense of Dr. Sherlock, against the
Calm Discourse of the Sober Enquirer: As also on the Letter to a Friend
concerning that Postscript.
BEFORE I begin them, I shall take a little notice of the several Characters
which seem to distinguish each Author.

THe Doctor, or Dean, or Defender, (no matter which I name, for they Three are
One) wants nothing to make him a good Writer, but a good Cause, and says as
much for a bad, as any Man can; nay, and when the Nature of the Cause will bear
no more, he makes it good with Magisterial Grace and big Assurance. He has
always Logic enough by him, to prove a Trinity of Faculties, Relations, Modes,
to be only a Trinity of Names; and a Trinity of Essences or Natures, to be a
Trinity of Gods. All that can be said of him is, that he takes no care of
himself, but sacrifices his own Hypothesis, to make sure work with that of his
Adversary.

His Adversary the Enquirer, steps forth from the Press, at his first
Appearance in the Cause, with all the winning Civility, and good Nature in the
World. He will not be so rude as to say, that his Hypothesis is the certain
Truth of the Matter; only he hopes that his gentle Reader will be so courteous,
as to grant it possible.

The Dean would do the Enquirer a singular Favor, to let him be now and then
of his Opinion; but that being not granted, put him a little out of temper; yet
he quickly recovers himself, and when he has cut the Dean with a bitter
Sarcasm, p. 42. he gives him in a healing Parenthesis, an Anonydinous
Contradistinction.

In short, this is the Case between the Dean and the Enquirer: The one deals
rude and heavy Blows; the other neatly offers dangerous Thrusts. You may fancy
them engaging like AEneas and Mezentius in Virgil, who maintain the Fight,

Hic gladio fidens, hic acer and arduus hasta. In the first Page of the
Postscript, I meet with these words, -- I do not intend to examine the Book,
nor approve or disprove it; and yet he examined the Book, and that not
carelessly neither. I have again and again considered those Words, and perhaps
at last have spelt the just Sense and Meaning of 'em, and yet but part of 'em;
for why he should disown intending to examine the Book, that I cannot account
for, nor perhaps himself. When he avows he did not intend to approve the Book,
he avows that which is Grammatically and Literaily true; it never came into his
Head, to set his Seal to any thing of Mr. H -- w's drawing up. And when he
says, he did not intend to disapprove it, that is Rhetorically and Figuratively
true: for by the Figure called Apophasis, a Man denies to do or say that which
he says most emphatically, and does most industriously. Having now said thus
much, why may not I be allowed to guess at the Reason, why the Dean professed,
that he intended not to approve or disapprove Mr. H's Book: possibly it might
be this; He can patiently endure any Hypothesis, to make good the Trinunity,
except it be such a saucy one, as sets it self up in competition with his, and
would impudently take place of it. Now better the Article be lost, than that
the Man, who slights the Dean's Undertaking, should save it, or that the Church
should be beholden for preserving her Faith entire, to the Wit and Learning of
a pitiful Dissenter.

The Postscript affirms, that tho the Enquirer does not in every particular
say, what the Dean says, yet he says what will justify the Dean against the
heavy Charge of Tritheism. The Postseript makes good this Affirmation thus, --
What the Dean says of Three distinct, eternal, infinite Minds, that Mr. H. says
as plainly, and in more obnoxious Terms. What a lamentable Argument is this?
Will Mr. H's broad Tritheistical Discourse evince that Mr. Dean has not made
just such another? Will Clodius's Lewdness absolve all the wild Gallants in
Rome? He that sets up three Gods, and thereby shows what little Reverence he
has for the one true God, though he may chance to find others, who preach and
print as perversely as himself, is nevertheless a Tritheist; their running into
the same wicked Error, will not at all excuse him. Again, it is to be noted,
that the Dean in charging Mr. H. to have used more obnoxious Terms than
himself, [he means more liable to be understood, as implying three Gods] does
grant that he himself has used obnoxious Terms; Terms implying three Gods; then
is he more to be blamed than Mr. H -- w: because, though he be an unlucky
Tritheist, yet does not seem to know it; but the Dean professes to know the bad
Consequence of his obnoxious Terms, and yet is not ashamed to use them.

The Dean has briefly and fairly recounted what Manner of Representation Mr. H.
has given of a Trinity in the Godhead, which may be yet more briefly set down
thus; -- God can unite two Spirits in as close an Union as Soul and Body, which
after their Union shall remain distinguished by their own individual Essences,
and distinct by their singular Essences; and if he can thus unite Two, then
Three; and if Three, then it must be granted possible, that Three eternal
uncreated Spirits may be united in the Godhead, retaining their several
Distinctions, notwithstanding the close and numerical Union. Further, -- the
Union of the Divine and Humane Nature in one Person, is not more conceivable,
nor possible, than the Union of three distinct Essences, or individual Natures
in the Godhead.

Now is Mr. Dean, in the Malice of his Heart, for sending Mr. H -- w to Dr. S
-- th, to know of him if this be not Tritheism: But for my part, if I were to
die for it, I could find no Difference between them. Three distinct Minds or
Spirits, and Three distinct Essences or Natures, with all the Perfections of
the Godhead in all and every of them, can be no less than three Gods. Yet the
Dean is pleased to say [looking upon Mr. H. as a convicted Tritheist, without a
word to offer for his Hypothesis] that the Animadverter charges him (the Dean)
with Tritheism only by consequence. Bless us! how would he be charged? He has
had the Luck hitherto, and I hope will have the Wit hereafter, to forbear the
asserting in plain Terms, that there be Three Gods; but his Hypothesis plainly
implies it, and Mr. H -- w's does no more: and Dr. S -- th has proved his
Charge against the Former. No, no, says the Dean, for three distinct Minds are
not three distinct Substances or Essences. No! What are they then? Why, they
are three distinct thinking Beings: Defense of Dr. Sher. Notion, p. 86. This
Dean may advance what Notions he pleases, and never stand in fear of any
Arguments which can be brought against him; for as Mr. Bays in the Rehearsal,
out-wrote all his envious Brethren, by the help of a Drama Common-place-Book,
so he with the help of an Ecclesiastical-Polity Common-place-Book, when he has
advanced foolish and inconsistent Notions, shall easily reconcile himself to
himself, and make good that Conclusion which best suits his present Purpose; or
when the worst comes to the worst, puzzle the Cause, save his Honor, [which is
all he cares for] and hide his Nonsense.

The Rules of that wonderful Book, are said to be these.

The first Regula fiduciae, or the Rule of Assurance. This Rule directs him,
first, in causa simplici, as thus: If the Importunity of Heretics forces us to
find Names for that, to which nothing in Nature answers, if they will not give
us leave, we must take leave to use such Names as we can find: Def. p. 14.
2dly; It impowers him to cut off the dangerous Horns of a merciless Dilemma,
with a Fore-stroak the one, with a Back-stroak the other; as thus: If a saucy
Adversary charges him with Self-contradiction, he tells him, that it is
impossible to know what a Contradiction is: and when himself charges a
Transubstantiating Blockhead with Self-contradiction, then it is possible to
know what a Contradiction is. Vindic. of Trin. p. 4.

His Second Rule is Regula consortii, or the Rule of Company; it may be called
Regula recriminationis: this Rule may have two Intentions; both which he
follows with this one Resolution, not to be damned alone, give him Company and
it is another thing: Hence you have him frequently returning Railing for
Railing, and he can hardly forbear in open-words the base Language of
grinning-Dog to Dr. S -- th; Def. p. 39. He does give it him by Rhetorical
Insinuation; and when he has made his Adversaries Opinion appear as absurd as
his own, he thinks himself safe; for why may not he have the luck to be thought
in the Right, when they that oppose him cannot mend the Matter? Thus when Dr. S
-- th tells him, that Three distinct Minds are Three distinct Substances: he
replies, that according to the received Definition of a Person, [which is,
Substantia individua naturae rationatis] Three Persons are Three distinct
Substances; and let the Doctor bring off Three Persons, he will do as much for
Three Minds: Def. p. 89. And thus he disputes, and is too hard for all that own
the Athanasian-Creed, and explain the Mystery otherwise than he does: If (says
he) every distinct Person in the Trinity, be not a distinct infinite eternal
Mind, there is an end of the Dean's Notion; but then there will be an end of a
Trinity of Divine Persons also, and we shall have nothing left but a Trinity of
Modes, Postures, Names. Def. p. 8.

His Third Rule is Regula personae, or the Rule of Disguise: By this Rule he
winds and turns things as he pleases; shows how things are true, and how false;
and how neither true nor false. For example; when he had never a good material
Image of the Trinity, nothing but a faint Resemblance or two of it; he says
that the proper and natural Signification of Words cannot reach the Mystery; a
Theological Use of words perhaps may represent it; Def. p. 13. and to prove the
Trinity, they must be forced to use improper Words in unnatural Significations:
for, says he, the Names of Distinction in ordinary use, not only distinguish,
but divide and separate their Subjects; but in the Trinity, the word Person is
used in the Sense of Distinction, and not of Separation, i. e. in a senseless
Sense, in a Sense whereof we have no Idea, in an impossible Sense, or to speak
fully, in the Dean's Sense. A Trinunity, in the proper Signification of Words,
is a Figment; in the improper, an Article of Faith. But now for un' coup Maltre
to disguise all, perhaps it is nor Figment, nor Article of Faith; for in his
Vindicat. of the Trinit. p. 4. he confesses, that he neither understands, nor
comprehends the thing whereof he speaks: and if he don't, no Body else does,
that is certain; so then it is to no purpose to dispute the Controversy, but it is
direct madness to fault his Explication.

His Fourth Rule, is Regula Meiosios, or the Rule of Extenuation, and lessening
the Matter, when it looks gross, and like an overgrown Monster. Thus he pleads,
that his new Divinity may not disgust his Reader: Custom indeed has not made
the Form of his Expressions Orthodox, but they have no Heretical Sense in them.
Again, Tho the living Image is the same Man with the Prototype; yet it is no
mortal Sin against Logic, and common Sense, to say that a Man, and his living
Image, are two distinct Men. Def. p. 31.

His Fifth Rule, is Regula Suppositorum, or the Rule of putting Cases; not such
as the Gentlemen of the Timple put, which have happened, and may do so again,
but of putting Cases which never did, never can happen. This is a singular
Rule, and of infinite use: for let him coin a Notion, like which there is
nothing in all Nature, such as the natural Unity of mutual Consciousness; why,
it is but supposing an impossible Case, and the airy Notion is as easily
conveyed to your Mind as you could wish. Def. p. 33. O the wonderful Virtue of
an impossible Case supposed, to convey the true meaning of an incomprehensible
Mystery to the Mind of a Man! Again thus, He supposes a Man, with a living
substantial perfect Image of himself; which living substantial perfect Image of
himself, is but the very same Man as himself; tho sometimes perhaps they may be
two Men, i. e. when they don't agree. Dif. p. 31. Once more, He supposes a
Beast to be a Person; not that he thought the Expression proper, but only by
way of Allusion, and Accommodation, the better to represent the Union of Two
Natures into One Person, which are Two Persons, or something as like Two
Persons, as their Natures will permit them, when they subsist apart. Def. p.
46. What if I should put an idle Case, Had I this Man's Deanery, could not I
talk as wisely?

His Sixth Rule, is Regula Tenebrarum, or the Rule of darkning the Matter. Thus
having often granted, that the whole Divine Essence was in the Father, and in
the Son, and in the Holy Ghost; to prevent the Consequence, that then there are
Three Divine Essences, he carefully distinguishes and tells his Reader, that
the whole Divine Essence subsists thrice, not by multiplying, but by repeating
it self. There Is a Vail thrown over the Matter now; and where is the Man that
has that Eagle's, or Epidaurian Serpent's Eye as to pierce through it? But
after all, I could wish, that he had forbore this Distinction, for hence may
arise a knotty Question, which may give Posterity much trouble, viz. Whether a
Sinner that repeats his Injustice, Intemperance, and Lying, may be said to
multiply his Iniquities? or whether all is but one Fault, subsisting often by
frequent repetition?

He has many darkning Dictinctions, some in common with his Trinitarian Friends
and Enemies, such as Creation, Generation, Procession; other peculiar to
himself, such as it is one thing to consider a Person distinctly and by himself,
another to consider him separately and apart: but for a thick cloudy one, you
shall not meet with one more serviceable than this, The Divine Nature is one
individual Nature, but not one single Nature. Def. p. 18.

I come now to his last Rule, which indeed and in truth, is no Rule; but he
uses it so frequently, one might imagine it was his main Rule: consider it
separately, and apart from the rest, and it is plain that it is no Rule of his;
but consider it distinctly, and you will find that it is a Rule to him, ay, and
that more proper words could not have been thought on to represent it, for it
is called Regula obliviscentiae, or the Rule of Forgetfulness. By this Rule,
without blushing, he tells Dr. S -- th, that three distinct Minds, are three
distinct thinking Beings, not three distinct Substances; Def. p. 89. tho p. 19.
he had disputed against the Being of but one single Divine Nature in the
Godhead, quoted and consented with Victorinus Aser, that it is not lawful to say
there is but one Substance. Thus also, p. 26. he says, that he does professedly
teach, that each of the three Persons has entirely all the Perfections of the
Divine Nature, Divine Wisdom, Power and Goodness; and therefore each of them is
an eternal infinite Mind, distinct from each other: tho he had said, p. 26.
that neither the Son, nor Holy Ghost, was an absolute, complete, independent
God; and yet one would think, the Person that has all the Perfections of the
Godhead, should be a perfect God. 'Twere easy to give more Instances of his
practice of the Rule of Forgetfulness; but I will not forestal Dr. S -- th, I
only take leave to observe, that it is a very shameful Practice, and not to be
endured in any Man but the Dean; but in him it may be endured, because he can
shade it by the Rule of Darkness, Rule the Sixth; or alter the Looks of it, by
the Rule of Disguise, Rule the Third; or throw the disgrace of it upon his
Adversaries, by the Rule of Company, or Recrimination, Rule the Second; or
prove it no shameful Practice, by the Rule of putting Cases, Rule the Fifth; or
take off from the Odiousness of it, by the Rule of Extenuation, Rule the
Fourth: and if none of all these help him in his Distress, he has his first
Rule, the Rule of Assurance, which is, (...); by which he will outface the
Matter, in re mala, animo si utare bono, juvat, ut nihil supra. But after all
these helpful Rules of his Ecclesiastical-Polity Commonplace-Book, as a Friend,
I would advise him to consider, whether he be concerned in that of St. Paul to
Timothy; If any Man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome Words, even
the Words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the Doctrine which is according to
Godliness: He is proud, knowing nothing, but doting about Questions and strifes
of Words, whereof comes Envy, Strife, Railings, evil Surmisings. (...). Upon
the word (...), Strife of Words, Erasmus notes, quod Interpres Graecus dixerit
(...), which, but for the tried and known Loyalty and Orthodoxy of the Dean, I
would render seditious Reasonings.

To return from this long Digression, if such it be; for though it is off from
the Postscript, yet not altogether beside the Matter. The Dean justly and truly
observes, that Mr. H -- w's Three Spirits, and Essences, and Individual
Natures, which make up the Unity of the Godhead, as he has represented it, do
not seem to be Infinite: for, that which Three become by being united, not any
one of them can be supposed to be, considered by himself: If each cannot be
considered by himself, then the Three cannot be distinguished; if each can be
considered by himself, each must be considered as not wholly the same with all
the Three in Union. But the Dean forgetfully, and untruly says, that he allows
but One Divine Essence, and One individual Nature; for, [not to take notice of
that pitiful Nonsense, One Divine Nature repeated in Three Persons without
Multiplication] P. 91. of his Self-Defence, he has these express words, The
Dean knows no Divine Substance, or Essence, distinct from the three Divine
Persons, but that the Essence makes the Person. What he means by the Essence
makes the Person, I do not well know; but it is most manifest, that if a Divine
Essence, and a Divine Person, be the same without distinction, that then there
are as many Essences as Persons, and Persons as Essences, nor more nor less. In
my mind, Three Divine Essences, are too many by two; he had better lose two
Persons, than be overstor'd with Divine Essences; for one Divine Essence, and
one Divine Person, is enough for any truly honest and religious Man.

When the Dean declares, that to own Three Esserces, and Three individual
Natures in the Godhead, without making Three Gods, seems to have some
Difficulty: methinks he seems to fear, Difficulty: methinks he seems to fear,
that the same may be said of his Three Minds. But as I have above noted, Three
single Essences he can admit of, and they will go for Three individual
Essences, with any Man that has a thinking Mind, and no mysterious By-cause to
serve.

Mr. H -- w having said, in his Sober Enquiry, that the Dean's Hypothesis left
out the very Nexus, that should unite the Three Persons, and that mutual
Consciousness between Two or Three Spirits, will not constitute them one Thing.
The Dean answers him with studied Respect to his Rule of Disguise; Mutual
Consciousness (says he) is not a Mutual Inspection, or Insight into one
another, but a feeling each other in themselves. But for my part, I hate a
Disguise; and therefore I will make as bold with him, as he with the
Unitarians; and if he will not give me leave, I will take leave to pull it off.

Mutual Consciousness (says he) is not a Mutual Perspection, or Insight into
another, but a Feeling each other in themselves. Now I will prove, that it is
both a Seeing, and Feeling, nay, and a knowing too each other in themselves.
Def. p. 73. Persons essentially one by Mutual Consciousness, do see, and know,
and feel each other in themselves, as every single individual Mind seels its
own Thoughts and Passions. If the Dean will except against this Author, there is
an End of my Argument; but, I think, he has more Veneration for him than so.
Now by this which I have here observed, I do see, and feel, and know, that the
Dean's study is not to frame an Answer to his Adversary's Objection, agreeable
to his first Explanation of his barbarous Terms; but to say what is necessary
to be said, for the putting by a pressing unmannerly Objection, whether it
agree with his Explanation or not. And then again it is worth noting, he is
pleased to call, a Feeling each other in themselves, (by which he defines
Mutual Consciousness) an internal vital Sensation. Now Sensation will take in
Seeing, as well as Feeling; and then Mutual Consciousness, if he keeps to the
letter, will be Knowing each other in themselves. In short, Seeing, Feeling,
Knowing each other in themselves, are Forms of expressing, which he uses
promiscuously; not very Orthodox indeed, but there is no Heretical Sense under
them; no Sense at all that I know of: but as he complements Dr. S -- th, they
are Gipsy-Cant. Hold, I cry him Mercy, for Gypsies understand one another's
Gibberish. His not very Orthodox Expressions, may perhaps be better called
Rosycrucian Cant; for that mysterious Order of Philosophers, are the only
Persons that I know of, besides our gross Tritheists, who use Words without any
intelligible meaning.

Mutual Consciousness, is really nothing but a shamesul Instance of the Dean's
Faculty in putting impossible Cases, which it were not difficult to expose; but
his way is, to ease his Adversary of that Labor, and do it himself. His
Self-Consciousness refutes his Mutual Consciousness, i.e. if he has desin'd
them aright; for how should he, that by Self-Consciousness feels himself to be
himself, by Mutual-Consciousness, feel himself to be some Body else? It is
true, an intelligible Sense of these words may be given: As thus, I am
conscious to my self of what I think, say, or do; and what is known to me and
my Friend, of that we two are mutually conscious: But the Dean never
understands words in their proper and natural signification, is never
contented, till he has made them signify, what no Body can understand, nor he
declare without talking backward and forward, so shamefully, that were it not
for fear of his Vindictive Spirit, every Man would do as Dr. S -- th has done,
i. e. show him his Picture, I had almost said, his living and substantial Image.

But he is sure that Mr. H -- w can never form any Notion of the Union of
Spiritual Essences, without Mutual Consciousness. It must be his Prejudice then
that hinders him, for Spiritual Essences may be united by Consent; but that is
not the Union he intends, he intends an Essential Union, and that is an
Essential Contradiction, and Substantial Nonsense.

The Dean fairly recounts, that Mr. H -- w represents the Unity of the Godhead,
by the Union of Soul and Body, which make one Man; and by the Union of the
Divine and Humane Nature, which are said to make one Christ. Now he criticizes,
and affirms these to be Personal Unions, [meaning Unions of diverse things,
which make one Person] but cannot be the Unity of the Godhead, in which there
is a Trinity of distinct Persons. I know no inconvenience of allowing according
to common Acceptance, that Soul and Body make up one thing, called Man; nor
know I what Mr. H -- w can get by it, for neither of the two singly is Man; or
if each of them singly is so, together they must make up a double Man: Which
was the Fancy of the silly Indian in John Dreyden's Play.

I killed a double Man, the one half lay
Upon the Ground, the other ran away.
But the Dean rejects these Unions, (he says) because they are not the Unions
of distinct Persons. But that is not fair, for he himself has confessed, once
and again, that there is nothing in Nature like Three Persons in One Godhead:
And I must take leave to tell him, that if there were, Mr. H -- w is as like to
find it as he: But since there is not, they must even both be content with such
faint Resemblances as they can get. As for the Union of two Natures, I have a
better Reason for rejecting than the Dean by much, it is building Mystery upon
Mystery, and proving one Dream by the help of another.

Mr. H -- w's Unity of the Godhead is such, and no other, than the Dean speaks
it; such an Union of Three Spiritual Beings, and Individual Natures, as
together [which is fairly called, by Composition] constitute the Godhead.
Against this Notion, he says some things weakly; those the Letter takes notice
of, and perhaps I may also spend my Verdict on them there: other things he says
well, and with sound Reason, but in them he is most unlucky; for instead of
Three Spiritual Beings, Three Individual Natures, read Three Minds, or Persons;
and his Arguments conclude equally against his own Hypothesis. In short, what
he says well, comes to this; If all Three are but One God, then not any One by
himself is that One God: and this he says Mr. H -- w has owned, p. 47. and I
think his words come near it, which are these; When you predicate Godhead of
any One of the Persons, you express an inadequate Conception of God. But to
prove himself a sounder Trinitarian, he says that he owns, and that none are
Orthodox Christians but they who own so too, that the Father has the whole
entire Divinity in himself, that the same subsists in the Son, the same in the
Holy Ghost; that each by himself in the most proper adequate Conception, is
true and perfect God, tho all Three are but One and the same God; which does
plainly and undeniably prove, that the Dean, and all his Orthodox Christians do
believe, that the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are One and Three, in one and
the same respect. For that Godhead, which by them is predicated of every of the
Three separately, that very Godhead is predicated of the whole Three conjunctly.

The Dean says, that Mr. H -- w's Notion of the Unity of the Godhead, is such,
that neither the Scriptures, nor the Ancient Church know any thing of it. I am
of the Mind, that the Scriptures know as much of the Hypothesis of one of them,
as of that of the other: and as for the Ancient Church, who can tell what he
means by it? the Fathers beyond the acknowledged Rules of good Life, neither
agree with one another, nor any one with himself; but I guess his Ancient
Church to be made up of those particular Doctors whom he judges to have talked
his Way, though I will not swear but they may have dropped a word or two in favor
of Mr. H -- w's Divine Composition.

Where any late Socinian Writers have declared themselves willing to compound
this Dispute of a Trinity of Divine Persons, for the Three Attributes of Power,
Wisdom and Goodness, I know not. I beg the Dean's pardon if I wrong him, when I
believe he wrongs them: for I observe that they have noted that there are other
as essential Attributes of God, as the Three mentioned, viz. Truth, and
Justice, and so the Mystery will consist of five Parts; and that is two more
than it did, when it had two too-many. And then if any of the Trinitarians make
but an Attribute of the H. Ghost, yet they all do and must allow Jesus Christ
to be a Person, and they all do affirm him to be one, and the same God with the
Father, which I am very sure the Socinians will by no means agree to. Indeed
when the Trinitarians explain the Trinity, by calling God as the Creator,
Father; as the Redeemer, Son; as Sanctifier, the Holy Ghost; the Socinians say,
for Peace sake they can endure this; but then they also say, it is a harsh Way
of speaking, and in my Judgment, off from the Question: for suppose that some
Trinitarians could part with the personal Deity of the Holy Ghost, yet they are
all pertinaciously zealous for this impossible Piece of the Mystery, that Jesus
Christ is one and the same God with his eternal Father; and then, though they
may perhaps sometimes think good to shelter themselves under the Prosession of
One God, for various Reasons variously denominated, yet they cannot compound
the Controversy about Three Persons, for Three Attributes. Jesus Christ is a
Person, and I think they all make him one in the Trinity; and they may as well
make three Persons to be one God as two, and as well some other number as three.

The Dean egregiously mistakes one thing, viz. that the Socinians are afraid of
the Hypothesis of Three Divine Persons, each of which is God: but I will assure
him it is no such thing; though they are ashamed of it, it is so infinitely
absurd, and manifestly impossible, they need not be afraid of it; for Reason
will never recommend it, only Persecution may fright them from examining it,
who were bred up to it.

On Mr. H -- w's Letter in reply to the Postscript.
Nec quenquam jam far potest Caesarve priorem, Pompeiusve parem. --
Could Caesar and Pompey have agreed to share Empire between them, they might
have managed Rome, and the World as they pleased: but Pompey proud of his early
Fame, and long Prosperity, would needs be uppermost, while Caesar's Success
against the Gauls prompted him to endure no Superior: so they divided their
Interests; the Event was, Caesar was too hard for Pompey by his Valor, Brutus
and Cassius by their Treachery too hard for Caesar.

Would Mr. H -- w, and Dean Sherlock agree to share the Honor of explaining
the mysterious Doctrine of the Trinity between them, it would be a great stroke
toward persuading Churchmen and Dissenters to Orthodox Tritheism; but as
ill-luck will have it, to the Prejudice of every Diotrephes, whether of Church
or Tabernacle, the Dean is pertinacious for his Hypothesis, there must be Three
distinct Minds in one Numerical Godhead, or no Trinity: and Mr. H -- w, that
could be contented to have his Scheme admitted as possible, cannot endure to
have it set by, as Heresy. So they expose one another to the scoffing Railery
of Theists, and Atheists, to the Scandal of weak, and to the Contempt of wise
and good Men. This appears on the Dean's part from what I have said in my
Examination of his Postscript, and will appear from what I have to say on Mr. H
-- w's Letter. Mr. H -- w reduces the Dispute between him and the Dean, to
these two Heads: 1. Whether the Enquirer has said more than the Dean, or more
than is defensible of the Distinction of the sacred Three in the Godhead. 2.
Whether the Dean has said so much as the Enquirer, or so much as was requisite
of their Union. Of the first, I affirm they have both said more than is
defensible: there is indeed some Difference in the Sound of their Terms, but
their Sense on both Sides is equally Absurd and Tritheistical.

Three Minds and Spirits, Three Essences and individual Natures; if every of
them is supposed to have all Divine Perfections, every of them is supposed to
be a True God, and all of them to be Three Gods. One and the same is the
Hypothesis of these two angry Writers, only varigated with different Terms of
Art. They catch, and cavil at one another, for some little By-sayings or
Omissions, but return not one wise word to the plain Arguments wherewith they
condemn one another for Tritheists.

They are mutually self-conscious of their Pagan Error, and that suppresses the
Pride of their Hearts: so when they fain would raise their Voices to a
triumphal Jo, all they can reach is, I will vindicate Three Minds from being
Three Gods, as well as you Three Natures; and I will assert Three Natures to be
but One God, as well as you Three Minds. Before I read Mr. H -- w's Letter, I
could not have imagined that he would have rivall'd his insolent Adversary in
this weak Absurdity; but I see an indefensible Cause will shame a Man of
excellent Parts, and high Provocation put a calm Enquirer beside his Temper:
For thus, p. the 7th, Mr. H -- w, denying the Charge of having expressly said,
and extenuating his having implied, that the sacred Three are Three distinct
Substances, is content with this sorry Reply; -- There is somewhat more
considerable in the Notion of Substance, according whereto, if the Dean can
make a shift to avoid the having of any inconvenient thing proved upon him by
consequence, I hope the Enquirer may find a Way to escape as well.

Mr. H -- w never rose above hoping well of his Hypothesis: here he seems to
despair, and the mysterious Article may go where it will, if his Honor be but
as safe as the Dean's: Indeed it is a reasonable Desire to escape but as well
as the Dean, and it is ill luck if he does not; yet I believe he is not like to
escape much better neither.

The Dean in his Self-defence takes the Confidence to affirm, that he allows
but one Divine Essence, one Individual Nature in the Godhead: Mr. H -- w is
content to intimate, that he believes the Dean has said the contrary in his
Vindication; I am sure on it, and shall make bold to point to one notorious
Place, it is p. 47. there he teaches, that the Divine Persons are substantial
Beings; and that if each Person be God, each Person has a real Being, a real
Nature and Essence of his own. This is enough a conscience: Three distinct
Persons with each his real Nature, must needs make Three real Natures; and if
each Person is God, each Nature is God [for it is the intelligent Nature which
constitutes the Person] and then there be three Natures, which three Natures
are three Gods.

To the Dean professing to own but one Divine Essence, Mr. H -- w slightly
objects, that the contrary appears from his Hypermetaphyfical Fancy, upon that
Passage; -- The Son is the express Image of his Father: for the Dean descants
that the Image, and the Prototype must be distinct, and two in number; and he
illustrates it, by the Similitude of the Man, and his living Image, which must
needs make two Men, if there be such a thing as a living Image of a Man; and if
there be not, who can help it? it is no fault of his: And after all, may not an
impossible Supposition (to use Mr. H -- w's Phrase), though it does not come to
the Matter, yet serve to free our Minds, and disentangle them from being under
a necessity to conceive things to be, after such a manner, as will be found to
differ nothing from Socinian Heresy? But enough of the Dean's nauseous
Nonsensical Meraphysicks.

Mr. H -- w spares the Dean upon his Distinction between one individual Nature,
and one single Nature, only throws him one Pun to confound him; if the Divine
Nature be not a single Nature, it must be a double, a triple, etc. and then
concludes fairly, that the Dean has asserted Three Divine Natures, unless all
ordinary forms of Speech must be abandoned and forsaken: and I will be bound to
dispute this Cause with either of them; ay, and let them change the ordinary
forms of Speech, (of which the one is as guilty as the other) provided they
will define their new Forms, and in their Discourse keep to their own
Definitions.

As Mr. H -- w tells the Dean, if the Divine Nature is not a single, then it is
a double, etc. so I tell him, if the Divine Nature is not simple, it is
compound, and so the Dean and he may shake Hands. But Mr. H -- w desires it may
be noted, that there is this great Difference between him and the Dean: The
Dean speaks positively, dogmatically and proudly; whereas he (Mr. H.) does but
suppose what he says as possible, not certain [the two last words had been
better omitted]; and by the way, for him to endeavor to prove his Hypothesis
possible, is to suppose it uncertain. Well, it is granted, there is such a sort
of Difference between him and the Dean; Mr. H -- w has a Passion for the
Article, Mr. Dean for his Exposition of it: Mr. H -- w does what he can to make
out the Matter, he would give any thing it were made out; ay, though it were by
his Adversary, he hopes it will be made out, though he is afraid not by
himself: but the Dean positively affirms, that the Doctrine is plainly true
after his particular Manner; and he ridicules all his Brethren, who, being
equally concerned for it, would take up with any lower sort of Trinity than a
Trinity of Three distinct Minds.

P. 13. Mr. H -- w comes to examine, whether the Dean has said as much for the
salving the Unity of the Godhead, as himself, the Enquirer: and he rightly
notes, all that the Dean has said is Mutual-consciousness; but what he supposes
against its Sufficiency to salve the Unity of the Godhead, is as weak as the
Dean could wish.

Three intelligent Persons (as Mr. H. argues) must be pre-united before they
can have vital Perception of one another's Sensations: But the Dean supposes
the Three Persons in the Trinity eternally united, and eternally
Self-conscious; that indeed is as wild a Supposal, as a Visionair can make: but
the Dean is used to suppose impossible things, and Mr. H. not used to argue
well against them.

Mutual-consciousness will never come up to do service, and credit the
Trinitarians common Dream of Essential Union: for should we suppose that Three
distinct, intelligent Spirits are conscious to one another's Thoughts, yet they
will still remain Three distinct intelligent Spirits, and not one intelligent
Spirit: their Knowledge of one another, and perfect Harmony, will come to no
more than a Socinian Unity, an Unity of Agreement, a knowing and willing the
same things: and so far as I see, the Doctor's Hypothesis is not pure from
Heresy, for all his Three Gods.

P. 16. Mr. H -- comes to consider over again his own way of maintaining the
Unity of the Godhead, and to defend it against the Dean: but first he premises,
what I must reflect upon; he says, the Dean's Temper of Mind, in what he writes
p. 105, etc. is such, that no Man, whose Mind is not in the same Disorder, will
apprehend any thing in it, but such Heat as dwells in Darkness, i. e. devilish
Heat. Mr. H -- w's Calmness is not so senslesly dull, as to oblige him to die
in the Dean's Debt: This was a rude Stroke; but in the next Line he stabs him
with a clean and artificial Sarcasm. The Dean had gracefully began his Letter
thus; True, Divine Wisdom rests not on an ill-natured and perverse Spirit; I
understand it, (says H -- w) while the ill Fit lasts: So Joab hugged Abner,
when he smote him under the fifth Rib: This was enough a Conscience, Mr. H --
needed not have wondered that the Dean could write that excellent Saying
without Self-reflection. So Ovid spoiled Omnia pontus erat, with deerant quoque
littora Ponto.

P. 17. Mr. H -- w speaks thus: The thing to be revenged is, that the Enquirer
did freely speak his Thoughts, wherein he judged the Dean's Hypothesis
defective; his not taking notice of what he reckoned naturally Antecedent, and
fundamental to Mutual Consciousness; a most intimate, natural, necessary,
eternal Union of the Sacred Three. Now it is true, that it is not safe to make
too bold with the Dean or his Hypothesis; nemo illum impune. But if a Man shall
find fault with him, who takes as little Care as the Dean, to write nothing
amiss, he must expect to be ill used; and to say the truth, he deserves it.

But what is that which the Dean should have taken notice of, and did not? Why,
the intimate, natural, necessary, eternal Union of the Sacred Three. Now I am
of the mind, that the Dean looks upon his Mutual Consciousness, as the
intimate, natural, necessary, eternal Union: according to him the Sacred Three
ever were, and could not but be thus united; and therefore they might again
shake Hands, if there were nothing but the Philosophy of the Mystery between
them: But since they will not be Friends, I that am a stander by will see fair
Play.

It seems the Dean had objected, that the Enquirer represents the Unity of the
Godhead, by the Union of Soul and Body, and by the Union of the Divine and
Humane Nature, etc. Mr. H -- w confesses he partly does so, but more fully by
the supposed Union of Three created Spirits. Now if ever Mer, that pretended to
Reason, discoursed more senselesly than both the one and the other of these
Disputants, they shall burn me for an Heretic. They both confess, that there is
no exact Representation, no perfect Example of any such Union in Nature; and
yet they will be representing it, over and over again; sometimes by a Tree and
its Branches, sometimes by the Sun and its Light, sometimes by a Mind and its
Faculties, sometimes by Body and Soul: and that nothing may be wanting in them
toward; the representation of it, they represent it at length by that which is
not; an Essential Union of a Divine and Humane Nature, and by a supposed Union
of Three distinct created Spirits.

The Dean, as I have above noted, has told us that the proper and natural
Signification of Words, will not reach the Mystery: Then if he were not very
much at leisure, he would not make words about it; for his Readers must judge of
what he writes, by the proper and natural signification of his words, or be
content to be ignorant of his meaning; for he has not, and I guess will not,
publish an English Glossary, to settle his improper, unnatural signification of
Words; which he calls also Theological Signification, as being content to let
words go for what they used to do, except in Church Matters and Mysteries.

And Mr. H -- w has once and again cautioned us to forbear determining what is,
or is not in God, beyond what God has plainly told us in his Word, or made our
own Faculties plainly tell us: Yet does this Man labor to persuade us, that
Three Persons, Three Natures may be in God, tho nor God, nor our Faculties have
plainly told us so, by suppositions of things, which he himself thinks only
possible, dares not say are Actual and Real; and if they were not only
Possible, but Actual and Real, are yet confessedly below the Matter, not able
to represent it, much less to prove it. But after all, his grand Supposition is
as impossible as any of the Dean's, who allows himself to suppose what neither
is, nor can be, when Reason fails him to credit his Fancies; for a Spirit, and
a Spirit, and a Spirit, every one distinct, cannot possibly become but one
Spirit, if he means by Spirit the same thing all along; but if he takes the
Subject, in this Enunciation, in the proper and natural signification of the
Word, and the Predicate in the improper, unnatural, Theological Signification,
then I confess Three may be as few, One may be as many as he pleases. I have
heard, in Table-talk, (I cannot say have read) that the late famous Dr. More,
makes it part of the Definition of Religion, that it be competently obscure;
let Mr. H -- w and the Dean alone for making good this part of the Definition;
if they have not (by their Spirits and Minds, Self and Mutual Conscious, by
their Three, distinct, without separation; their One, individual, without
singularity; by their Essences and Natures, coexistent in one Essence or
Nature, while each of the Coexistents is that self-same One, which all of the
Coexistents are together, by their State of Real and Vital Union, with
continuing Distinction;) made it obscure enough, then I know not, what those
words plain and obscure mean. I am persuaded that neither of these Writers can
flatter himself so far, as to imagine that his printed Hypothesis, has gained
one Proselyte, or confirmed one wavering Trinitarian; I can assure them, they
have both scandalized and lost several through Trutarians; and I have Reason to
think, that the Unitarian late Tracts, would not have been half so much
inquired after, if the Trinitarian Writers, by their absurd and contradictious
Explications, had not shocked and unsettled the Minds of many honest
Christians, who were bred up to the Article, and out of Reverence to Authority,
took it upon trust, without any manner of examination.

P. 19. The Dean professes, that, as far as he can understand, no other Union
will satisfy the Enquirer, but such an Union of Three Spiritual Beings, and
Individual Natures, as by their Composition constitute the God head, as the
Composition of Soul and Body does the Man. Mr. H. resents this as a wilful
Injury, and says, the Dean has a cross Understanding, (which may be true, but
not for what Mr. H -- w complains of) for he assures his Reader, that he has
peremptorily denied all Composition in the Godhead; and it is true, he has, in
terminis, denied Composition in the Godhead: But then again it is as true, he
has in plain Synonimous words affirmed the very thing. Both Mr. H -- and the
Dean have afferted that to be in the Godhead, which Composition does properly
and naturally signify: but according to what it does improperly, unnaturally,
and theologically signify, they have both denied Composition in the Godhead; so
that neither the one nor the other of them is an Heretic, but in a proper and
natural true way of speaking.

But now behold an odd Scene: While the Dean objects those very Opinions as
Errors to Mr. H --, which the Dean has after his own way himself professed: Mr.
H -- summons all his Art, to deny the Charge which he is not willing to deny,
and to defend the Doctrine which he is not willing to own: Of which I will give
Instance, when I have first set the Matter even between them, concerning
Simplicity and Composition. Mr. H -- has disputed earnestly against the
Universal, Absolute, Omnimodous Simplicity of the Divine Nature. Against it
also has the Dean strenuously reasoned, and it is manifest that Three
Self-consciously distinct, Mutual-consciously united Minds, are as far from
Omnimodous Simplicity, have as much of Composition, as Three distinct Natures
eternally, vitally united. The plain Truth, which with abundance of Theological
Stuff, these Learned Barterers disguise, is this God's Simplicity, is his
Singularity, his Unity of Essence, or Nature. If there be more Essences than
One in the Godhead, then the Godhead is not Simple but Compound: But if God is
but One Essence, or Nature, then he is sum Simplex; which I would English,
truly Simple, or Single, or One: but that one Thing, or Person, should be more
Simple, Single, One, than another; that is a by-whim of Mr. H -- w's a good
Mantling for a ridiculous 'Scutcheon. It does not contradict the Simplicity,
Singularity, Unity of any Being, that it has several Excellences, and diverse
Powers of acting. Mr. H -- w's talk of Simplicity, which excludes Modes, is
pure Banter and Amusement: The Simplicity, and Singularity of his own Person is
still the same, notwithstanding the different Figures which he makes, when he
is preaching a plain, honest, useful Sermon, at Pinners Hall; and when he is
penning and publishing calm Discourses, and vindictive Vindication Letters. The
Dean objects, that Mr. H -- w will not endure Wisdom, Power, and Goodness, to
be the same thing in God. Mr. H -- w thinks himself civil, for not giving him
the Lie: He makes bold to tell him, it is not fairly said; and here it is that
he uses his Art in denying and admitting the Charge; so that it is impossible
for the Reader to find out his Sense of the Matter. As an Argument, that it was
not fairly said by the Dean, he declares, that he only intimated, we are not
instructed in Scripture, to conceive Power, Wisdom, Goodness in the Abstract,
to be the same thing; and that our Difficulty is great to apprehend them
undistinguishable. Now I note, that if it be difficult to apprehend them
undistinguishable, then he seems to judge them really undistinguishable, tho
it is difficult to apprehend them so. But the Dean knowing Mr. H -- w able to
see through a Difficulty, ought not to have charged him, with holding them to
be diverse Things; but then presently after, this forgetful Man, says, it is a
great Weakness of understanding to define them alike. If they cannot be defined
alike, then they are really distinguishable; and if he thinks them truly
defined, when they are desin'd differently, then he cannot possibly apprehend
them undistinguishable; and then the Dean has dealt fairly, and the cross
understanding is Mr. H -- w's.

The Dean urges that Mr. H -- by his distinction of Power, Wisdom, and Goodness
prepared his way to make a natural Trinity in Unity of them: In truth, any Man
might have guessed so as well as the Dean; But the Enquirer tells us, his
Discourse was never intended to terminate in such a Trinity, tho it seems
plausible, or not absurd. It is a great Fall from possible to not absurd; and
then, that it only seems not absurd, is another great Fall. Why did Mr. H --
concern himself with such an Hypothesis, an Hypothesis of so ill a Nature? Why,
he did it to disentangle Men's Minds from an apprehended necessity of conceiving
the Three Attributes to be One and the same Thing. A Proposition that only
seems, only not absurd, is no very fine Argument to disentangle Men's Minds from
Error: but, to let that pass; who are they that apprehend a Necessity of
conceiving the Three Attributes to be One and the same Thing? Not the
Unitarians, he knows it, none that ever wrote; for he challenges the Dean to
name that Writer, that does not distinguish them, at least ratione ratiocinata,
in contradistinction to ratiocinate: let him no more than preface his Discourse
with this natural Trinity in Unity, unless he designs to disentangle the Dean's
Mind with it; and if so, let him make his best on it. Upon his Success, I will
promise him Egregiam laudem, magnum and memorabile nomen; He cannot get much
more by freeing the Doctrine of the Trinity, from the Difficulties in which it
is entangled.

P. 26. Mr. H -- w teaches that the Son is from the Father by necessary eternal
Promanation, the Holy Spirit from Father and Son; and that the Three most
celebrated Attributes, [though I know not why Truth and Justice should not be
celebrated as much as they] are necessary Emanations, con-natural to their
Original.

Now all this must be taken in the unnatural, improper, theological Meaning of
the Words; which what it is, none but the Sons of Art know, and it is against
their Rule to make it common. But from the proper natural Meaning of the Words,
the Wit of Man cannot make out an intelligible agreeable Proposition. If Mr. H.
thinks otherwise, let him try, and define what Promanation is, what Emanation,
what Procession, etc. if he has any Idea in his Mind of what those Words
signify, he may desine them: if he has no such Idea, then let him confess
himself beholding to the Dean, who teaches a puzzled Trinitarian, to rest his
Terms upon a Theological Bottom. But methinks the People are very hardly used,
when they are required to believe Mysteries, which will endure no Explanation,
but in Words that are to be taken in a Sense which neither they can find out,
nor will their Teachers tell them. But I recall my self, I think the People are
not put to such hard Terms of Communion, but Preachers only; nay, whether they
are or no, I am not positively certain, for Assent and Consint, may be as well
interpreted cum grano salis in this Matter, as it is generally in some other;
and as for the damnatory Clause at the End of one odd Creed, very few are of
that strong Stomach, and Unchristian Temper, as not to be sick and ashamed of
it.

In the three next Leaves I meet with nothing but barbarous Stuff about
Composition between the two Antagonists. On which all I shall note, is, that
the Dean puts a word or two out of joint, which is no great matter in such a
perplexed Dispute; and Mr. H. falls upon that, and thence takes occasion to
overlook the Intention and Force of his Adversary's Argument.

Mr. H. p. 33. brings in the Dean disputing against the Hypothesis of Three
distinct Essences, Natures, Minds, Spirits, necessarily and eternally united in
the Divine Being, after this manner; -- God is eternal, and unmade; but
whatever has Three such Essences in it, must have a Maker. Mr. H. is the less
concerned for this Argument, because it does the Dean's Business as well as
his; but concerned for the Cause more than the Dean, and therefore he will rub
it off as well as he can; and so he defies the Dean to prove, that there is any
Inconsistency between a Thing's having Three distinct Essences naturally and
necessarily united in it, and its being eternal and unmade. To this the Dean
might answer, [whether consonant to his Hypothesis or no, that troubles not me,
nor perhaps, when he comes to answer, will it affect him] Be it granted, that
the Terms naturally and necessarily united are not inconsistent with those
other, eternal and unmade: for Wisdom, Power and Goodness, [I will add] Justice
and Truth, are naturally and necessarily united in God, and also eternal and
unmade; but then Three distinct Essences cannot be naturally and necessarily
united, and yet eternal and unmade: because the Maker of all things is one
Essence, one single Essence, and cannot possibly consist of Three distinct
Essences, which is Composition; and that appears, because the Three distinct
Essences must either be supposed every of them God, in an adequate Sense, or
only in an unadequate Sense. Three distinct Essences, each of which is God, in
an adequate Sense, are without Contradiction, Three Gods: and Three distinct
Essences, two of which are God only in an inadequate Sense, are in a just and
true Sense, less than God; and what is less than God, cannot be essentially
united to him, but does depend upon him, and was made by him. If there can be
such Things as Three distinct Essences naturally and necessarily united, they
must then, as the Dean said, have a Maker, and must differ in Union, from what
they were in Distinction, as the Whole does from a Part, or else must be one
and three, three and one, in one and the same respect.

P. 34, and 35. Mr. H. strives not to understand the Dean, which he ought not
to do, because the Dean is so often not to be understood, let who will strive to
understand him; but Mr. H. is to be excused, because that which he is not
willing to understand, he is not able to answer. In short, all that I shall
here offer, is, if Mr. H. determines that every of the Three Persons in his
Trinity, are adequately, completely, fully, perfectly God, then it is plain,
that his Trinity is a Trinity not of Persons only, but of Gods also; and if he
determines that no one by himself, but all Three together are perfect God, then
his Three Persons and Natures, are no better nor worse but the Parts of a
Composition as the Dean calls them; and finite Parts [as all things must be
called, whereof no one is perfect God] will never make an infinite Composition:
which Truth, though very obvious, came not into my Mind till I read a Paper of
that great Man's, the Author of the Considerations.

P. 36. Mr. H. will not admit that the Three Persons are of a different Kind,
or Nature, but that they differ only in Number; that is, as much as to say,
that they are all Three eternal, which in terminis was too absurd for the Zeal
of the Author of the Athanasian Creed, [so I must call it, for Athan. has Sins
enough of his own to account for.]

Mr. H. is now pleased to mend an Argument of the Dean's, and then it runs
thus; Though we have a natural Notion of an eternal Being, we have no Notion of
Three eternal Essences which necessarily co-exist in an eternal Union. To this
he replies; -- Does he (the Dean) mean, that we are to disbelieve every thing
of God, whereof we have not a natural Notion? No, no, no, it is enough, good
Mr. H. enough for him to mean, that we are not required by God, nor ought to be
by Man, to believe any thing whereof we have not a natural Notion. But Mr. H.
pleads, that his Notion is most favored by Divine Revelation: And is that all?
with what Conscience then can he affirm the Article to be Fundamental, and
necessary to be believed, when the most that he can say for it is, That his
Notion thereof is most favored by Divine Revelation? Nay, and at the same
time, other Expositors are as ready to pretend, that the Scripture favors
their Exposition more than Mr. H's. Let me be allowed one short Digression; --
I dare venture my Life on it, that the Unitarians shall unanimously come into
the Acknowledgment of the Doctrine of Three Persons in One God, if but a
Majority of Churchmen and Dissenters shall agree upon the Signification of the
Terms, and publish that one Sense of the Article, which they (the Majority)
dare profess to believe: but if a Majority of them are not like to come to such
an Agreement, and perhaps not the Tithe of them are, then let them either
Christianly indulge the Unitarians in their contrary Persuasion, or Honestly
tell the World, that they hold it necessary to Salvation to believe Words, the
true and certain Sense of which they judge cannot certainly be determined.

But Mr. H. intimates, that against his Hypothesis, favored by Scripture,
there is no evident natural Notion: What says the Dean to this? why he argues
to this purpose; If there be Three Spiritual Beings, of distinct Natures in the
Godhead, no One of them can be absolutely perfect and infinite; because they
are not the same, and no One of them is the whole. Here now is an evident
natural Notion against his Hypothesis: to which he replies, 1st. By way of
Concession; that it is an Argument of some Strength: But, 2dly, it resolves it
self into the Notion of Infinity, about which he spoke his Sense to Dr. Wallis;
and it is worth the while to know what that Sense was, viz. That he will not
move, nor meddle with any Controversy about the Infinity of the Three supposed
Substances, or Spirits in the Godhead; i. e. he spoke his Sense of it, by
declaring he would say nothing about it; he spoke his Sense, by his Silence.
3dly, To the Dean, he now begins to speak his Sense, by saying something; what
that is shall be considered.

The first thing he offers is, from his old Topic of entangling his Adversary
with as puzzling Difficulties as himself is entangled by him; -- he can give
any Man as much Trouble about the Infinity of quantitative Extention, as the
Dean can give him about the Infinity of Three distinct Beings, which are but
one Infinite Being. Well! for once suppose it: but then I ask, why, why should
any Man be required to believe that, which (to use his Phrase) gives him so
much Trouble; and after all his Trouble, he cannot make to appear indisputably
possible? 2. The Infinity of quantitative Extention is an unjustifiable Phrase;
for as Cudworth will tell him, p. 643, 644. Body or Matter is indesinite; you
cannot conceive it so great, but you may conceive it greater; but it is not
positively and actually infinite, as God is, his Power, etc. is so great, that
it cannot be conceived greater. 3. Though we have not an adequate and fully
commensurate Knowledge of the Nature of Matter, yet we are certain that
contradictory Affirmations concerning it, cannot be both true; and so we are
also certain, that contradictory Affirmations concerning the Nature of the
Godhead, cannot be both true. 4. Mr. H's Hypothesis does suppose contradictory
Affirmations; for it supposes Three perfect Beings, each of which is God; and
that these Three perfect Beings are but One perfect Being, and but One God; and
against this the Dean argues well.

The second thing he offers is, that he thinks it demonstrable that One
Infinite can never be from another by voluntary Production; by necessary
Emanation he supposes it may. I note; If one Infinite can be from another, (by
what Way soever) then there may be more Infinites than One; and further,
necessary Emanation is a Theological Phrase, by which, nor Mr. H. nor any
Trinitarian else, can tell us what is to be understood.

I will not say that necessary Emanation is Gipsy Cant, as the Dean pronounces
of some Words of Doctor S -- th, not understanding his own gross Raillery; for
Gipsy Cant is intelligible Stuff under uncouth Terms, which is more than the
Dean meant to allow to Dr. S -- th's words; but I think I may truly call
necessary Emanation perfect Banter; for it is an Amusing Phrase, that will not
endure to be explained, and will only serve to satisfy an implicit Believer,
who can be contented that something is said for the Article without considering
whether it be intelligible, or only empty words, Noise and no more.

Necessary Emanation, though a Christian Theological Phrase, is really very
Heathenish Stuff. What Emanation ordinarily signifies, that we know; but
relating to the Godhead, it seems it must signify something else; so the Blood
that flows from one of Homer's wounded Deities is not (...), but (...): they
eat like Mortals, but their Food is not good Flesh and Fish, but Ambrosia; they
drink too, but not Burgundy, but Nectar. There is a Difference also 'twixt
their Gate and ours; for Statius tells us, they fetch greater Steps than we, or
as Heliodorus Aethiop. l. 3. they fetch no Steps at all, but sweep along:
Aeneas knew his Mother from a common Mortal Gipsy by that Token.

I am willing to allow the Enquirer, the Character of a Calm and Modest Man,
notwithstanding that he, now and then, lets his Adversary know, he is no Stoic.
He appears very desirous to be thought Modest; Nay, even when he is desending
his Hypothesis with the best Arguments his Wit can devise, he has something of
the Pyrrhonian Skeptic in him. He will not considently determine, nor
positively say, things are so and so, as he has set them: but Zeal to a Cause
will, one time or other, show its governing Power; witness p. 39. where he
adventures to affirm, that we are plainly told by the Divine Oracles of a
Sacred Three, that are each of them God. Whereas the Holy Ghost is no where
called God, the Son but in a few places; and in those few, the Scope of the
Writer suggests to us the Reason of that Appellation, viz. the Dignity and
Power bestowed on him by the Father. For which reason also Moses, Solomon, and
others are dignified with the same honorable Appellation.

Plainly told of Three, that are each of them God] (...)! How hard a thing is
it, when a Man is engaged, (...), to serve a Cause, to make a Conscience of
what he affirms? We are indeed, as he truly notes, plainly told of Three, and
some things are spoken of each, which cannot be truly spoken of all; but this
only proves, that the Three cannot be essentially the same; so that if any One
of them be truly God, the other two must be Creatures. Mr. H -- is strangely
rash to affirm, that the Scripture plainly tells us of Three distinct Persons,
each of which is God; for had that been true, this Controversy had never been.

It is, as Mr. H. judges, easier to count Three, than to determine of
Infiniteness: But then how bold is he, to determine of the One as he does, and
how unlucky is he in counting the other? for he determines that each of the
Three distinct Persons are the Infinite God, [sometimes perhaps he uses abating
Expressions]; and he counts God the Father, God the Son, God the Holy Ghost,
for One God.

The Dean had argued, that if all Three Persons by Composition are but one God,
neither of them, by himself, is true and perfect God. Which invidious
Consequence he charges Mr. H -- to have owned. Mr. H -- replies, that this is
most untruly said, and that for his part, he denies both Antecedent, and
Consequent too. If Mr. H -- can indulge himself to deny in one place, what he
has affirmed in another, he shall always have something to say for himself,
whatsoever is said against him: but the Dean's Charge was honest, for Calm
Disc. p. 47. Mr. H -- writes thus: Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, being supposed
necessarily existent in this united State, they cannot but be God. Instead now
of Composition, put in the word together, in the Dean's Argument, and then
surely Mr. H -- will not be so hardy as to deny the Antecedent; and still the
Consequence holds, witness the good Man's next words: When you predieate
Godhead, or the Name of God, of any One of them, you express an inadequate
Conception of God. And pray, what is that, but a half Conception of God, a
Conception short of what God is? Indeed Mr. H -- did put in another Epither,
and with that his Phrase sounds thus: A true, but inadequate Conception. But
that is a Contradiction in Terms, for a true Conception of a thing, is an
adequate full Conception of it, and an inadequate Conception is not a true One.

What follows, p. 41, and 42. is nothing but a senseless Stir concerning a
Similitude of the Trinity, which they both have used, and both confessed
nothing to the purpose. Mr. H -- says, He brought the Union of Soul and Body,
not to illustrate Personal Union, but Essential; and yet his Business was to
prove it possible, that Three Persons might become one God. So then by his
Confession, when he was to prove his Point, he talked off from the Matter, as
many a fluent Orator has done, that he might not lose, but puzzle the Cause,
and so save it.

P. 42. Mr. H -- plays upon the Dean with scoffing Sarcasms: But to his
Argument returns nothing but plain dull Falsehood, or rather Theological Banter.

1st. He says, that the Dean (to make out something against him) foists in a
Supposition, which never came into any Man's Head, but a Socinian's, and his
own. This is by a Rhetorical Hendiadis to call him a Socinian, as if the Dean
had wrote his Vindication of the Trinity to no purpose: But herein Mr. H --
does him manifest wrong, for on my Conscience, he is no Socinian now, whatever
he may have been formerly. But Mr. H -- has a Plaster for the Wound which that
Imputation gives: He said what he said [if we will believe him]
contradistinguishing the Dean to the Socinians, that so it might appear more
strange that the Dean should foist in a Socinian Supposition. Thus the Dean is
excused from being a Socinian, and to mend the Matter, set out for a Man of no
Conscience; who being, in truth, an Anti-Socinian, yet argues against Mr. H --,
by virtue of a Socinian Supposition, and that foisted in too, Mr. H -- will not
bate him a jot of being a Foister. I see the Calm Enquirer is no Angel, for he
brings against the Dean a railing Accusation, which is more than Michael did
against the Devil, a worse Creature than Dr. Sherlock by a great deal.

Come we now to the Supposition it self, said to be foisted, If God be a
Person, he can be but One. Now this Socinian Supposition, or Argument, or
whatever it be, does not look like a very unreasonable One; and if the Dean
should be ashamed of it, because it is said to be Socinian, he may for the same
Reason be ashamed of the most unexceptionable things which he ever wrote. But
where is the Foisting? If Mr. H. did not say that God was a Person, may not the
Dean suppose it, and argue from it? Dares Mr. H. deny it? Indeed he dares, but
with as empty, metaphysical Pretense, as can be imagined. The Name of God (says
he) is the Name of the Essence, not the distinguishing Name of a Person. This
is perfect Theological Banter, empty Words, to which he cannot fix an
intelligible Meaning: But if Person signify an intelligent Being, as both these
Antagonists admit, then the Essence, and Person of God, cannot be
distinguished, but are of the same Import; then the Name of God is the Name of
that Person, or Intelligent Being, which is God. And if God be but one God,
then there is but one Person, or Intelligent Being, which is God.

Mr. H. pursues his Reasoning thus: If Three Intelligent Natures be united in
one Deity, each will be Persons, [he should have said a Person] and each will
be God, and all will be one God. I grant it, for, Dato uno absurdo sequuntur
mill. Let me try my skill: If Three Intelligent Natures may be united in One,
then Two may be so united, and then the Dean will be Mr. H. and Mr. H. the
Dean, each will be a Trinitarian, and both will be one Trinitarian: The truth
is, nor Three, nor Two Intelligent Natures can be united into One the same
Intelligent Nature. Nor can Mr. H. and the Dean be united into the same Man;
they come indeed close up to one another, and are together by the Ears, but
they can never be united into One.

Mr. H. thinks it makes for him, tho I know not which way, that he has, as
Divines commonly do, styled the Father Fons Trinitatis. What is the Theological
Sense of that Phrase, I am not able to say; the plain Sense is, that a Trinity
of Gods flow from the Father, and Three and One makes Four, unless some other
Mystery forbid.

To avoid the Dean's rallying his Hypothesis, Mr. H. refers to what he has
plainly said of the Order of Priority, and Posteriority. Calm Dis. p. 48.

But not a word has he there said, more than that his Hypothesis preserves the
Order of Priority and Posteriority, not of Time, but of Nature.

Priority and Posteriority, with respect to Time or Dignity, is intelligible;
but Priority of Nature, is a bantering Theological Term, incapable of
Definition.

After this Mr. H. says several things, pinching enough against the Dean, but
to save himself not a Syllable.

I am weary of censuring his weak Defense, and mean to take notice of but one
Error more, but that is a notorious one. P. 48. he says, That necessity of
Existence, common to the Sacred Three, will prove each of them to be God; and
the same belonging to the Three, in the Order of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
i. e. in the Order of Nature beforementioned, proves them necessarily to be
one God.

That necessity of Existence, proves the necessarily existent Being to be God,
is most certain; for that being which does necessarily exist, has always
existed: And that Being which has always existed, had its Being from no other.
From that Being, which has its Being from no other, all other Beings must have
their Being, with all the Powers and Faculties which relate to it: So that the
Self-existent Being must needs be God, the Great Creator. But now, that
necessary Existence can belong to Three distinct Beings, let it be in what
Order it will, that is utterly impossible: for if Three distinct Beings exist
necessarily, then such Three have always existed: If they have always existed,
they have done so, with equal or unequal Power.

Of Three that exist with equal Power, no one has Infinite Power. Three, whose
Power is Finite, have what they have from another. Beings that have what they
have from another, do not necessarily exist.

Of Three that exist with unequal Power, the two that have less than Infinite
Power, have, what they have, from another, and therefore do not necessarily
exist. But if necessary Existence could belong to Three, would that prove the
Three to be but One? Then Contraries shall prove one another, and both Parts of
a Contradiction be true at the same time: If necessary Existence can prove
Three distinct Beings to be but One, it may as well prove One to be None. But
Mr. H. lays some stress upon Self-Existence's belonging to Three in the Order
of Nature.

What is this Order of Nature, that can work such a Miracle? Let Us consider. By
belonging to the Three, in the Order of Nature, he must mean belonging to them
altogether, or belonging to them one after another, or not belonging to them at
all: If he means belonging to them altogether, then his Order of Nature, is
close Order; and proves the Three are One, because they share and share like,
in necessary Existence: if he means belonging to them one after another, then
his Order of Nature is loose Order, and proves that the Three are One because
they take their Turns in possessing necessary Existence: if he means not
belonging to them at all, then his Order of Nature is no Order, [which I guess
is what it will come to] and proves that the Three are One necessary Existent,
because no One of them does necessarily exist.

Not to take my leave abruptly of these Trinitarian Antagonists, Mr. H. and
Dean Sherlock, two Learned Men, but who are not content to know concerning God
what plain Reason, and clear Revelation tells them; but, prying further into
his Nature, pretend that they discover Three Minds, Three Spirits, the One of
which is not the other; Three Natures, Three Essences, distinct from one
another: I shall offer a Poetical Story. --

They say that Pentheus having a Mind to discover the secret Rites of Bacchus,
got up into a high Tree which overlooked the shady Vale, where the mad Crew
were sacrificing; but they discovered him, and the angry God struck him with
Madness: Unhappy Pentheus's Madness was of that Sort, that all things appeared
double to him; he thought he saw two Suns, and two Thebes; so that, as he was
making toward the one, of a sudden the other appeared to him, and obliged him
to change his course toward that: Thus poor deluded Man was he carried up and
down, to and fro, but never could recover his Town of Thebes.

A Learned and Noble Mythologist applies this instructive Fable, to the Reproof
of those Men who dream of Mysteries, and by their admirable Skill in Philosophy
nicely expound them. Vain Philosophy is the tall Tree which they climb to pry
into the Divine Nature; sober Men note their Folly and despise them, and God
gives them up to the Delusions of their vain Minds, while they distinguish
between the Light of Nature and Divine Light, and oppose them one against the
other: These are the two Suns, and the two Thebes, which draw them now one way,
now another, and make them of uncertain Judgments, always wavering. Now this is
their Hypothesis, now that; now they are confident of it, and now they doubt;
now they mend it, and by and by unmend it again. Hine fit [says my Author] ut
nesciant quo se vertant, sed de summa rerum incerti, and fluctuantes, tantum
subitis mentis impulsibus, in singulis circumagantur.

FINIS.
BOOKS lately printed for the Unitarians.
Brief History of the Unitarians, in Four Letters. Second Edition. Defense of
the Brief History, against Dr. Sherlock. The Acts of Athanasius, with Notes on
his Creed: and Observations on Dr. Sherlock's Vindication of the Blessed
Trinity. Some Thoughts on Dr. Sherlock's Vindication. Impartial Account of the
Word Mystery, as it is taken in the Holy Scripture. Letter of Resolution
concerning the Trinity. Two Letters touching the Trinity and Incarnation. The
Trinitarian Scheme of Religion, with Notes thereupon: which Notes contain also
the Unitarian Scheme. Observations on Four Letters of Dr. J. Wallis. Accurate
Examination of the principal Texts, alleged for the Doctrines of the Divinity
of our Savior, and the Satisfaction. In answer to Mr. Milbourn. Reflections on
Two Discourses by Monsieur Lamoth, concerning the Divinity of our Savior.
Considerations on the Explications of the Trinity by Dr. Wallis, Dr. Sherlock,
Dr. S -- th, Dr. Cudworth, and Mr. Hooker. Considerations on the Explications
of the Doctrine of the Trinity. Occasioned by Four Sermons preached by his
Grace the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury. A Sermon preached by the Lord-Bishop
of Worcester. A Discourse by the Lord-Bishop of Salisbury. A Sheet by a very
Learned Hand, containing Twenty eight Propositions. A Treatise by an Eminent
Dissenting Minister, being A Calm Discourse concerning the Possibility of a
Trinity, And a Book in answer to the Animadversions on Dr. Sherlock's
Vindication of the Trinity.

