I Do appoint Benjamin Took to Print these Proceedings, and Order that no
other Person presume to Print the same.

Geo. Jefferys.

THE ACCOUNT Of the manner of EXECUTING A Writ of Inquiry OF DAMAGES: BETWEEN
HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS JAMES Duke of York, etc. AND TITUS OTES.

Which was executed at the Bar of the Court of KINGS BENCH at WESTMINSTER, on
Wednesday the 19th. of June, 1684. in the presence of the High Sheriff of
Middlesex.

LONDON: Printed for Benj. Took at the Ship in S. Paul's Church Yard, 1684.

THE ACCOUNT Of the manner of EXECUTING A Writ of Inquiry OF DAMAGES: BETWEEN
HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS JAMES Duke of York, etc. AND TITUS OTES. Die Mercurii 18.
Junii, An. Dom. 1684. B. R. Dux Ebor. versus Otes.
HIS Royal Highness the Duke of York having brought an Action against Titus
Otes, grounded upon the Statute de Scandalis Magnatum, for very Slanderous and
Opprobrious Words, the Defendant suffered Judgment to go against him by
default, and thereupon a Writ of Inquiry was taken out, directed to the Sheriff
of the County of Middlesex to enquire by a Jury of that County, what Damages
the Plaintiff had sustained hereby, and upon a Motion made at the Court of
Kings Bench, a day was given to the Defendant to show cause why that Writ of
Inquiry should not be executed at the Bar of that Court, which he not doing, it
was ordered that it should be executed at the Bar on this day, and that the
High Sheriff should appear and attend the execution of the Writ in person.
Accordingly this day Sir Peter Daniel Knight, and Samuel Dashwood, Esquire, the
present Sheriff of the County of Middlesex, came into this Court, and being
placed at the Table at the Judges feet, were during the Execution of the Writ,
covered. Mr. Tho. Rous the present Undersheriff managed it, and proceeded in
this manner.

Mr. Undersheriff. Crier, call Sr. Charles Lee.


Crier. Vous avez Sr. Charles Lee.


Who was sworn thus, Mr. Undersheriff. You shall well and truly enquire of
Damages between the most illustrious Prince JAMES Duke of York and Albany
Plaintiff, and Titus Otes Defendant, and therein a true Verdict give according
to your Evidence. So help you God.


The rest were sworn thus, Mr. Undersheriff. Sir William Hill, Sir Richard
Downton, and Sir John Berry; the same Oath your Foreman has for his part
taken, you and every of you for your parts shall well and truly keep. So help
you God.


Mr. Undersheriff. Thomas Harriott, Thomas Row, and Walter Brydall; the same
Oath, etc. Edward Guise, Thomas Done, and William Wood; the same Oath, etc,
John Sharp, and Nehemiah Arnold; the same Oath, etc.


Will you please to have any more than twelve sworn?

L. C. J. How many do you use to have? Pray swear an odd Number as you used to
do.


Mr. Undersheriff. Then I will swear three more, and that will be just fifteen.

Francis Stephens, Nicolas Bagster, and John Kirk. The same Oath, etc.


The Names of them that were upon the Inquiry.
Sir Charles Lee, Knight. Sir William Hill, Knight. Sir Richard Downton,
Knight. Sir John Berry, Knight. Thomas Harryot, Esquire. Thomas Row, Esquire.
Walter Brydal, Esquire, Edward Guise, Esquire. Thomas Done, Esquire. William
Wood, Esquire. John Sharp, Esquire. Nehemiah Arnold, Esquire. Francis Stevens,
Esquire. Nicolas Baxter, Esquire. John Kirk, Gentleman.
Mr. Undersheriff. Gentlemen you that are sworn hear the Kings Writ.


L. C. J. Ay, road it to them.


Mr. Undersheriff. CHARLES the Second by the Grace of God, of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, etc. to the Sheriff
of Middlesex Greeting; Whereas the most Illustrious Prince JAMES Duke of York
and Albany, one of the Nobles and Peers of England, our most dear and only
Brother, who as well etc. lately in our Court before Us at Westminster by Bill
without our Writ impleaded Titus Otes, then in the Custody of the Marshal of
our Marshalsea, before us being: For that whereas in a Statute made in the
Parliament of Richard the Second, late King of England after the Conquest, held
at Gloucester in the Second Year of his Reign, amongst other things. It is
ordained and strictly prohibited, that from thence none should be so hardy to
devise, tell or relate of the Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons and other Nobles
and great Men of England, nor of the Chancellor, Treasurer, or Clerk of the
Privy Seal, Steward of the King's Household, Justices of the one or of the other
Bench, nor of other great Officers of the Kingdom aforesaid, any false News,
Lies, or any such false things, whereby Scandal or Discord within the said
Kingdom might arise; and whosoever should do this, should incur and have the
Penalty otherwise thereon ordained by the Statute of Westminster the first, as
in the Statute aforesaid is more fully contained. And whereas the fourth day of
December in the Five and Thirtieth Year of our Reign, and long before the
yearly Rents, Issues and Profits arising, or due and payable for or by reason
of the General Post Office within this Kingdom of Emgland, for the carriage of
Letters, before were erected and yet are established upon the said most
Ilustrious Prince JAMES Duke of York and Albany. The aforesaid Titus Otes the
Statute aforesaid not considering, but the good Name, State, Credit, Dignity,
and Honor of the said JAMES Duke of York and Albany, our Brother, devising and
maliciously intending to hurt and detract and Him the said JAMES Duke of York
and Albany, our Brother, into the great displeasure and hatred of Us and of the
Peers of this Kingdom of England, and also diverse other venerable Persons our
Subjects, to bring out his mere Malice and Envy had and forethought the
aforesaid fourth day of December, in the Year of our Reign the five and
Thirtieth, at the Parish of S. Martin in the Fields in the County of Middlesex
aforesaid, upon a certain discourse then had aed moved by and between the
aforesaid Titus Otes and diverse of our Liege People, of and concerning the
aforesaid JAMES Duke of York and Albany, our Brother, and of and concerning a
certain Letter in the hand of the aforesaid Titus Otes at that time, being
diverse false News and horrible Lies of the aforesaid JAMES Duke of York and
Albany, our Brother at that time, and yet being of the Peers and Nobles of this
Kingdom, in the presence and hearing of diverse venerable Persons, publicly,
falsely, maliciously, and scandalously said and related, and with a loud voice
published in these English words following, viz. This Letter (the Letter
aforesaid, so in the hands of the aforesaid Titus Otes as is beforesaid being,
meaning) cost me (the said Titus Otes meaning) ninepence, and might have been
brought for a penny, I (himself the aforesaid Titus Otes meaning) know no body
is the better for it, but that Traitor JAMES Duke of York (the aforesaid JAMES
Duke of York and Albany our only Brother meaning) And the aforesaid Titus
further devising and maliciously intending the aforesaid JAMES Duke of York and
Albany our Brother into the hatred of us, and of the Peers of this Kingdom of
England, and also of diverse other venerable Persons, and our Subjects to bring;
out of his mere malice and envy, had and forethought, the fourth day of
December the year abovesaid, at the Parish of S. Martin in the Fields
aforesaid, in the County of Middlesex aforesaid, upon a certain other discourse
then had and moved by and between the aforesaid Titus Otes and several of our
Liege People, of and concerning the aforesaid JAMES Duke of York and Albany,
our Brother, and of and concerning a certain Letter in the hands of the
aforesaid Titus Otes at that time being, diverse other false News and horrible
Lies of the aforesaid JAMES Duke of York and Albany, our Brother at that time,
and yet being one of the Nobles and Peers of this Kingdom of England, and our
only Brother, in the presence and hearing of several venerable Persons,
publicly, falsely, maliciously and scandalously said, related and with a loud
voice published, viz. This Letter (the aforesaid Letter so in the hands of the
aforesaid Titus Otes, as is before said being meaning) cost me (the aforesaid
Titus Otes meaning) nine pence, and might have been afforded for a Penny, I
(himself the aforesaid Titus Otes meaning) know no body is the better for it,
but that Traitor JAMES Duke of York (the aforesaid JAMES Duke of York our only
Brother meaning) And afterward, to wit, the fifth day of December in the
thirty fifth Year abovesaid; the aforesaid Titus Otes further devising and
maliciously intending the said JAMES Duke of York and Albany our Brother to
scandalize, and into the further displeasure and hatred of us, and of the Great
Men of this Kingdom of England, out of his mere malice and envy, had and
forethought, at the Parish of S. Martin in the Fields aforesaid, in the County
of Middlesex aforesaid, the said fifth day of December, in the Year abovesaid,
upon certain other Discourse of the said JAMES Duke of York and Albany, diverse
false News and horrible Lies of the aforesaid JAMES Duke of York and Albany,
publicly, falsely, and maliciously said, related, and with a loud voice
published, to wit, that the Letter in the hands of the aforesaid Titus at that
time being, cost him the aforesaid Titus nine pence, but might have been
brought for one penny, and that he knew no body to be the better for it but
that Traitor JAMES Duke of York. And the aforesaid Titus Otes further
contriving and maliciously intending the aforesaid JAMES Duke of York and
Albany, our only Brother, into the further displeasure and hatred of us, and of
the Great Men of this Kingdom of England, and also of diverse other venerable
Persons, and our Subjects, to bring out of his mere malice and envy, had and
forethought the sixth day of December, in the five and Thirtieth Year above
said, at the Parish of S. Martin in the Fields aforesaid, in the County of
Middlesex aforesaid, upon a certain discourse at that time had and moved by and
between the aforesaid Titus Otes and several of our liege People, of and
concerning the aforesaid JAMES Duke of York and Albany, our Brother, diverse
other false News and horrible Lies of the aforesaid JAMES Duke our only
Brother, at that time, and yet being one of the Nobles and Peers of this
Kingdom of England, in the presence and hearing of diverse venerable Persons,
publicly, falsely, maliciously and scandalously said, related, and with a loud
voice published in these english words following, to wit, The Duke of York (the
aforesaid JAMES Duke of York and Albany our only Brother meaning) is a Traitor.
And the aforesaid Titus Otes further contriving, and maliciously intending the
said JAMES Duke of York our Brother, into the hatred of us, and of the great
Men of this Kingdom of England, and also of diverse other venerable Persons, and
our Subjects, to bring out of his mere malice and envy, had and forethought the
aforesaid Sixth day of December the Year abovesaid, at the Parish of S. Martin
in the Fields, in the County of Middlesex aforesaid, upon certain other
discourse at that time had and moved by and between the aforesaid Titus Otes
and diverse of our liege People, of and concerning the aforesaid JAMES Duke of
York and Albany our only Brother, diverse other false News and horrible Lies of
the aforesaid JAMES Duke of York and Albany our only Brother, and at that time
and yet being one of the Nobles and Peers of this Kingdom of England, in the
presence and hearing of diverse venerable Persons, publicly, falsely, and
maliciously said, related, and with a loud voice published; to wit, That the
said Duke of York was a Traitor. By reason whereof the said JAMES Duke of York
and Albany our only Brother, in his Reputation, Honor and Dignity is very much
hurt and scandalized. And the said JAMES Duke of York and Albany, the Grace,
good Opinion and Esteem which we and others the great Men of this Kingdom of
England before toward him JAMES Duke of York and Albany did bear, utterly
lost, and diverse Rumors and Scandals between very many Nobles and Peers of this
Kingdom of England, and other our Subjects, by the occasions aforesaid, within
this Kingdom of England, are arisen and divulged, and great Scandals and
Discords by occasion of the Premises between him the aforesaid JAMES Duke of
York and Albany, and diverse Nobles and great Men, and other Subjects of this
Kingdom of England are arisen; and daily more and more in the like may arise,
to the great disturbance of the Peace and public Tranquillity of this Kingdom
of England, and in contempt of us and our Government of this Kingdom of
England, and to the great Scandal and Grievance of him JAMES Duke of York and
Albany, to the Damage of him the said JAMES Duke of York and Albany, our most
dear Brother, a hundred Thousand pounds: As he then said, and thereupon in our
Court before us it was so proceeded, That the aforesaid JAMES Duke of York and
Albany our only Brother his damages against the said Titus Otes by occasion of
the Premises ought to recover: but because it is not known to our Court before
us, what damages the aforesaid JAMES Duke of York and Albany our Brother has
sustained, as well by occasion of the Premises, as for his costs and charges
by him about his Suit in this behalf expended. Therefore We command you, that
by the Oaths of good and lawful Men of your Bailiwick, you diligently enquire
what Damages the aforesaid JAMES Duke of York and Albany has sustained, as
well by occasion of the Premises, as for his costs and charges, by him about
his Suit in this behalf expended, and the Inquisition which thereupon you shall
take, you shall have before Us at Westminster on Wednesday next after three
Weeks of the Holy Trinity, under your Seal and the Seals of them by whose Oath
you take that Inquisition, distinctly and openly you send, and this Writ. Test
Sr. George Jefferys, Knight and Baronet, at Westminster the Thirtieth day of
May, in the Year of our Reign the Six and Thirtieth. Ri. Swift. Henley.


You are to enquire what Damages his ROYAL HIGHNESS the Plaintiff has
sustained, by means of the Premises; As also, what Costs he has been at in
this Suit.

Mr. Hanses. May it please your Lordship, you Mr. Sheriffs, and Gentlemen of
the Jury, His Royal Highness the Duke of YORK is Plaintiff, and Litus Otes is
the Defendant; And this is in an Action of Trespass and Contempt, grounded upon
the Statute of SCANDALUM MAGNATUM, wherein his Royal Highness sets forth, That
whereas such a Statute was made, prohibiting the Slandering the Great Men and
Peers of the Kingdom, and the Plaintiff being the KING's Only Brother, and a
Peer, the Defendant upon a Discourse between him the Defendant and some other
Persons, about a Letter that the Defendant had then in his Hands, Publicly,
Falsely, and with an intent to scandalize the Plaintiff, spoke these English
words:

This Letter (meaning the Letter then in the Defendant's Hands) cost Me
(meaning the Defendant) Nine-pence, and might have been brought for a Penny; I
(meaning the Defendant) know no Body is the better for it, but that Traitor
JAMES Duke of YORK, meaning the Plaintiff.

Gentlemen, This is not all, the Declaration goes on further, and says, That
the Defendant intending further to scandalize the Plaintiff, the Sixth of
December in the Thirty fifth Year of this King, upon a Discourse had and moved
by and between him the Defendant and some other Persons, in the presence of
diverse venerable Persons, said these words of the Plaintiff:

The Duke of YORK (meaning the Plaintiff) is a Traitor; And this is laid to the
Plaintiff's damage of One hundred thousand Pounds: The Defendant has not
pleaded, and the Plaintiff has signed his Judgment; and now you, Gentlemen, are
to enquire of the Damages.


Mr. At. Genesis You observe, Gentlemen, the Words are acknowledged by the
Defendant's default, and not pleading; so that they were spoken, is owned by
him, and you are to enquire only of the Damages: And, I think, there will need
nothing to be said for the Aggravation of them, they are Words of the highest
Nature, in respect of Slander and Scandal, that can be spoken or thought of,
Accusing Him of Treason. We shall only call you some Witnesses to prove this
way of Discourse to be his constant habit in all places, and among all persons
and Company, inveighing against the Government, and particularly against his
Royal Highness the Plaintiff; and then you will, I know, give such Damages, as
may be fit to repair the Plaintiff's Honor.


Mr. Sol. Genesis We will call some Witnesses, to give you an Account how he uses
to treat the Plaintiff in all Companies, and we shall begin with Mr. Smith. And
the truth is, the proving of the Words, will demonstrate the Malice of them;
and the Manner and Circumstances of speaking, will make them appear to be such,
as need nothing to be said for their Aggravation at all: Swear Mr. James Smith.


Mr. UnderSheriff. The Evidence that you shall give to the Sheriffs and the
Jury sworn about the Matter in Question, shall be the Truth, the whole Truth,
and nothing but the Truth.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Mr. Smith, pray will you tell the Court and the Jury, what you
have heard the Defendant Otes say of his Royal Highness.


Mr. Smith. At the last Westminster Parliament, as I was sitting in a
Coffee-house, I saw Mr. Otes, he had a Letter in his hand, and he said, This
Letter cost me Nine-pence, it might have been brought for a Penny; I know no
Body that is the better for it but a Traitor, to the best of my remembrance he
said, the Duke of York.


Mr. At. Genesis Swear Mr. Penniston Whaley (which was done) what Words did you
hear Mr. Otes say of his Royal Highness?


Mr. Whaley. The time was either the Easter or Whitsontide after Sir Thomas
Gascoigne's Trial.


Mr. Sol. Genesis What were the Words you then heard him say?


Mr. Whaley. It was at the Bishop of Ely's Table at Ely House. I had received
the Sacrament at the Chapel there that day, and so had the Doctor too; it was
upon Easter Day or Whitsunday, I suppose, because I never used to receive the
Sacrament here in Town but one of those two times; and Dr. Otes and I were
sitting there, and some Discourse happened about Sir Thomas Gascoigne's Trial,
and he fell very foul upon the Jury, and said, They were a Company of
profligate Villains (or some such expression as he was wont to use) and said,
He would have them Attainted. Then said I to him, Doctor, you are a good Man at
a matter of Fact, but, I doubt, you are not so at a matter of Law. Upon that,
we came to some high Words about that and other things, and, among the rest of
the Discourse, he said, The Duke of YORK was a Traitor. Upon that, I said to
him, Doctor, you lie under a great Error in that, I suppose, by mistaking a
Statute made against Popery; says he, No matter for that, I say he is a
Traitor. Then there were some other Discourses happened afterward, and I began
to reply, and growing both of us pretty warm, the Doctor called to his two Men,
his Mirmydons, that used to be always with him, and follow him up and down:
said I to him, Nay, Doctor, you need not call your Men to your Assistance,
there is no Body here will hurt you: Do you think the Bishop of Ely's Table is
not a Protection good enough for any Body that comes here?


Lord Chief Justice. Where was this Sir, pray do you say.


Mr. Whaley. At the Bishop of Ely's Table.


Lord Chief Justice. Was the Bishop there then?


Mr. Whaley. He was at the Table, but at a great distance from us, the Doctor
and I sat at the lower end of the Table. Afterward I begged the Bishop of
Ely's pardon, for being so hot and loud at his Table; says the Bishop to me, I
thank you kindly for it, none of us dare talk with him.


Lord Chief Justice. And this you say was at Dinner, after the Sacrament was
over.


Mr. Whaley. Yes, it was so.


Mr. North. Then swear Edward Johnson (which was done.)


Mr. At. Genesis Mr. Johnson, pray will you give the Court and Jury an account
what Discourse you have heard from the Defendant, Mr. Otes, against the
Plaintiff.


Mr. Johnson. Upon the Three and twentieth of August, 1680. I met Dr. Otes, and
said, Good morrow Doctor, all things will go well now --


Lord Chief Justice. You mean him they call Dr. Otes, I suppose.


Mr. Johnson. Yes, they used to call him so; said I, Good morrow Doctor, all
things will go well now, for there is a Parliament to meet in a little time.
No, said he, not till YORK is either Banished or Hanged; but of the two,
Hanging is the fittest for him. Said I, do not talk so Doctor: Says he, I speak
nothing but what is true; he has a good Brother, but he takes all the courses
in the world to undo Him: And then the Doctor and my Lord Howard went away
together.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Swear Randall Bowring (which was done.)


What have you heard Mr. Otes say of the Duke of YORK?

Mr. Bowring. About the middle of October, 1679. there were several persons at
Dinner with the Doctor.


Lord Chief Justice. What Doctor, prithee?


Mr. Bowring. Mr. Otes.


Lord Chief Justice. Mr. Otes we know very well, but we do not so well know who
this Doctor is.


Mr. Bowring. They used to call him Doctor, or I should not have taken upon me
to give him the Title.


Lord Chief Justice. Well, go on: There were several persons at Dinner with
him, and what then?


Mr. Bowring. There happened some discourse concerning his Royal Highness.


Lord Chief Justice. Where was this?


Mr. Bowring. At his Lodgings at Whitehall: And a Gentleman that was there,
said, In case his Royal Highness were a Papist, how should we be secured that
in case he come to the Succession of the Crown, he would not bring in Popery
among us? Then the Doctor replied, I would not have you trouble your self about
that, for he shall be hanged before that time.


Mr. At. Genesis What have you heard him say any where else, at Foster-lane, or
any other place?


Mr. Bowring. After the Sermon he had preached there at Foster-lane Church, the
Churchwardens, and some of the Parish, invited him into the Vestry to drink a
Glass of Wine.


Lord Chief Justice. What? he made as if he would preach there?


Mr. Bowring. He did preach there, and then the Churchwardens invited him to
Dinner; but then he asked them, If ever any of them had dined with JAMES Duke
of YORK at any of the Feasts of the City where the Duke used to come sometimes?
To which they none of them answering a word, he replied, He would not dine with
any Man that had eat with the Devil: And so would not go to dine with them, but
went and dined at a private Brasiers by London-wall.


Lord Chief Justice. An excellent Gospel-Preacher upon my word.


Mr. At. Genesis What Brasier was that?


Mr. Bowring. Truly I do not well know his Name.


Mr. At. Genesis Where did he live?


Mr. Bowring. By London-wall.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Then swear Mr. Fairfax.

(Which was done.) Pray, Sir, tell my Lord and the Jury, what Words you have
heard this Man speak of his ROYAL HIGHNESS.


Mr. Fairfax. May it please your Lordship, in August 1679. I happened to come
into the Company of Otes the Defendant, upon the account of an Election that
was to be of Parliament Men for Grinstead in Sussex, by the means of one
Aukland; Otes was to go down thither in my Lord Wharton's Coach, and then we
came first to be acquainted, and afterward we frequently did eat together, and
became very well acquainted. And in my Lord Scrogg's time, when he was Chief
Justice, there was some Presentment intended to be brought in by the Grand Jury
here at the Term, against his Royal Highness for being a Papist, and not coming
to Church, and this Otes was the main Prosecutor of it. He was used often to
come up to me, and speak to me when he met me; and I was about that time
walking in the Court that was built up here for the Trial of the Lords in the
Tower, it was after that Grand Jury were dismissed, which was done a day or two
before they used to be dismissed in the ordinary course, and walking there I met
Otes, and said I to him, Doctor, Now you are Nonsuited, what will you do now?
Oh says he, we will do well enough; there will be a Sessions after the Term,
and there we will at him again; and we will have no more regard for him, than
if he were a Scavenger of Kent-street: And upon that he was called away from
me, and he went away.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Swear Mr. Philips.


(Which was done.) Mr. At. Genesis Come, Mr. Philips, will you acquaint my Lord
and the Jury, what you have heard Otes say of the Duke of YORK?


Mr. Philips. In or about January (78.) may it please your Lordship, I was in
the company of one Deacon at Otes's Lodgings at Whitehall, where Mr. Otes said,
He hoped to see your or our Master JAMES (meaning the Duke of YORK his Royal
Highness I suppose) at the Bar of the House of Commons; and it would be no
disparagement to him to appear there, for there were better men Members of that
House than he was.


Lord Chief Justice. Pray what was the occasion of this Discourse?


Mr. Philips. Truly it was a Discourse of his own; he ran it on, we talked but
little to him.


Lord Chief Justice. Who did he apply himself to in that Discourse?


Mr. Philips. To us two, Mr. Deacon and I.


Lord Chief Justice. How came he to mention your Master JAMES, had you any
relation to the Service of his Royal Highness?


Mr. Philips. No, my Lord, we had not; but he said either our Master, or your
Master: he run on in such kind of Discourse as he used to do.


Lord Chief Justice. But do you think he intended his Royal Highness, when he
named your Master JAMES?


Mr. Philips. I could not imagine he did mean any Body else.


Mr. At. Genesis Then swear William Ashlock.


(Which was done.) Pray will you acquaint my Lord and the Jury, what words you
have heard him speak of his ROYAL HIGHNESS.

Mr. Ashlock. May it please your Lordship, in Easter Term, 1682. Dr. Otes.


Mr. At. Genesis Mr. Otes you mean.


Mr. Ashlock. Mr. Otes went out one morning with Dolben and Robin Nichols, two
of his men, from his Lodgings at Whitehall, and while he was dressing, he said
he went out in order to draw up a Bill of Indictment against the Duke of YORK;
but he did not do it, because he was otherwise advised by some persons, as I
heard. Then at Michaelmas, 1682. when he was going to dress him, I held the
Basin to him to wash, as he commonly had two or three every day to wait upon
him to dress him, there came in a Gentleman that came newly out of Sussex, I
cannot remember his Name: He asked him how all Friends did in Sussex, and then
fell a talking about the Election of Sheriffs, and abusing them that were then
chosen, and reflected very much upon Sir John Moor, and called him Rogue, and
said he deserved to be hanged up as an Example. And afterward, he said the
City of London was fired by the Duke of YORK's Order, and Sir Thomas Bludworth
had a hand in it; and the Forces at Black Heath were to have plundered the
City, and killed all the honest Protestant Dissenters in London: And this he
would prove* if ever they had a Parliament to their mind that should sit. At
another time there was one Starkey, Henry Starkey that was concerned in
Colledge's business at Oxford, and one Mr. Paschall, and, I think, Capt. Clare,
and some others that used to keep him Company, and Mr. Otes stepped up on a
sudden, and said, The Duke of YORK was a Son of a Whore, and he should live to
see him hanged; and if they could but get a Parliament to their mind, they
would soon send the Duke and all his Gang out of England, for he must never
expect to succeed to the Crown.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Pray who did he say was to head the Forces at Black Heath that
you talk of were to plunder the City?


Mr. Ashlock. The Duke of YORK, and London was fired by his Order; and this he
would prove, if they could but get a Parliament to their mind: And he said,
They should take away the Post Office from the Duke of YORK, and give it to the
Duke of Monmouth.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Then call Capt. Cresset, and swear him.


(Which was done.) Mr. At. Genesis Capt. Cresset, Pray do you remember what
Discourse you had with Otes, when the Duke went into Flanders, what he said of
his Royal Highness?


Capt. Cresset. It was the last time the Duke went into Scotland with her Royal
Highness, I think it was in October 1680. I was commanded over Night to wait at
the Duke's Lodgings, till a Paper should be delivered me by my Lord Rochester;
I stayed there till Twelve a Clock at Night, and not seeing my Lord come out, I
went away, and came early the next Morning. And when the Duke and Duchess went
to take water at the Privy-Stairs, I came down through the Guard-Chamber, and
Dr. Otes was in the Gallery that leads betwixt that and the Gate; when he saw
me, I bid him, Good Morrow Doctor, or he bid me, Good Morrow; one of the two, I
cannot exactly tell which: Says he to me, You will never leave, till you have
lost your Reputation. Why, what is the matter now, Doctor, said I, I hope my
Reputation is not hung upon so slender a Thread, as to be lost for my going any
where? Says he, You have been with JAMES: Who do you mean by JAMES, said I?
YORK, says he. Surely, said I, it might have been the Duke of YORK, or his
Royal Highness: No, said he, he is a Rascal, a Papist, and a Traitor, and I
hope to live to see him hanged. Truly Doctor, said I, now let me give you a
little advice to govern your Tongue and your Passions, I assure you they will
do neither you nor your Cause good; it may do you a great deal of hurt in time,
if you do not take care.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Call Sir William Jennings.


Mr. At. Genesis Truly, my Lord, I think we need call no more, though we have
multitudes of them, it is his daily Discourse.


Lord Chief Justice. Call whom you will Mr. Attorney; for though it be the last
day of the Term, and it is an unusual thing to have a Jury at the Bar on that
day, and more unusual to have them to execute a Writ of Enquiry here, yet in
regard of the Greatness of the Person that is concerned, and the extraordinary
Nature of the Cause, We have ordered it thus, That all the World may see how
his ROYAL HIGHNESS has been abused and scandalized by this Person.


Mr. At. Genesis The Defendant, my Lord, has been a person pretty much talked of
too.


Lord Chief Justice. Yes, truly it is done with regard to him too; for he has
been an eminent Man in his Way.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Then swear Sir William Jennings.


(Which was done.) Mr. At. Genesis Now, Sir William Jennings, speak out, you hear
the Question, What have you heard Otes say of the Duke of YORK?


Sir William Jennings. My Lord, at the time of the Sitting of the Parliament at
Oxford, I was in a Tavern there with Mr. Cranfeild, one of the King's
Gentlemen-Ushers, who seeing Mr. Otes going along by the Room, invites him to
drink a Glass of Wine, there were a matter of some Eight or Nine at the Table;
there was a little partition Curtain, it being a long Room, and there was some
Company beyond that Curtain, and some Body in that Company named JAMES Duke of
YORK, and the KING's Health being drunk at our Table, Mr. Cranfeild began a
Health to the DUKE: Says Mr. Otes, Do not you drink YORK' s Health. Why should
we not, says Mr. Cranfield, and a Gentleman or two more in the Company: Why,
says he, he has ruined the Nation; and if the Devil has a place in Hell more
hot than others, I hope he will bestow it upon him. Several words past between
Mr. Cranfeild and him upon it, and the KING was told of it presently.


Mr. At. Genesis Swear Justice Warcup.


(Which was done.) Pray tell what you know of this Man's discoursing concerning
the Duke.

Mr. Warcup. My Lord, I went into the Company where Sir William Jennings was
that he spoke last of, and being desired to drink a Glass of Wine with them, I
did so, and they told me what Dr. Otes had said there.


Lord Chief Justice. Mr. Otes, Titus Otes you mean.


Mr. Warcup. Yes, my Lord, the Room had a Partition by a Hanging or Curtain,
and I was first in the other Company beyond the Partition, and there some Body
began a Health to his Royal Highness the Duke of YORK; this Health went round,
and Otes was, it seems, in the next Room, and heard this Health I suppose: when
I came into Sir William Jennings Company, Otes was gone; the Company there told
me what Otes had said, as Sir William Jennings has declared, they all agreed
those to be the words, That he had ruined or betrayed the Nation; and if the
Devil had a hotter place in Hell than other, he hoped he would bestow it upon
him. I met Otes afterward, and asked him why he would speak such irreverent
words of the DUKE? His Answer was, He was a Traitor, and was in the Plot; and
he told me, I was a Yorkist, and he would remember me for it.


Mr. At. Genesis Did not that afright you, Mr. Warcup, to have him threaten you
so?


Mr. Warcup. I had then an Impeachment against me, and truly I think I might
well be afraid.


Lord Chief Justice. You say he owned the Words they told you of.


Mr. Warcup. They did all agree those to be the Words; and I met him
afterward, and asked him why he would speak so Irreverently of the Duke,
considering he was the King's Brother, and as virtuous a Prince as trod upon
the Earth: Says he, He is a Traitor, and in the Plot; and you are a Yorkist,
and I will remember you for it.


Mr. Sol. Genesis We shall only call one more, to show in what mind he continues
to be, even since this Action brought. Swear Mr. Charles Chapman.


(Which was done.) Pray, Sir, Tell what you know.

Mr. Chapman. My Lord, I met Mr. Swift, the Duke of YORK's Attorney, when he
was going over, as he told me, to demand a Plea of the Defendant Mr. Otes, and
he desired me to go along with him, I did so; and when we came to him, Mr.
Swift told Otes the Rules were out, and desired to know what he intended to do,
whether he would plead or no. Otes asked him, If he were the Duke's Attorney?
He answered him, Yes: Says he, I do not value the Duke, nor his Attorney
neither, I will plead as I shall see cause according to Law; I declare I
neither love the Duke, nor fear him: And so turned his back, and was going
away, and comes up again, and says to him, It may be I may be in for One
hundred thousand Pounds here, but if ever a Parliament sit, I do not question
but to have some Body else in my place. Mr. Swift asked him to explain himself
who he meant, says he, Do you come to Trapan me? and away he went.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, we have now done, if the Jury please to consider of it.


Lord Chief Justice. Is there any Body here for Mr. Otes, to offer any thing to
lessen the Damages?

(To which No Body answered.) Then, Gentlemen of the Jury, your Business now is
to enquire what Damages you think fit to assess to his ROYAL HIIGHNESS, by
reason of the speaking of the Words mentioned in the Declaration, there being
in this Action Judgment by Default obtained by his ROYAL HIGHNESS; and you have
nothing now to do, but only to assess to the Plaintiff such Damages as you
shall think fit.

Now, Gentlemen, though the acknowledgment of this Judgment (for so it is in
effect, it being by Default) be a sufficient Confession of the Words being
spoken as they are laid in the Declaration, yet they have given you Proof of
the very Words.

The Declaration is in an Action grounded upon the Statute De SCANDALIS
MAGNATUM, taking notice that His Royal Highness is a great Peer of this
Kingdom, and His Majesty's only Brother; and that Oats the Defendant knowing
him to be so, to bring him under Reproach and Calumny, and to cause Discord to
arise between the King and him, and between him and other Great Men, did speak
the words laid in the Declaration which you have heard read, and which are
these.

The first are, This Letter (Oats having a Letter in his Hand) cost Me
Nine-pence, and might have been brought for a Penny; I know no Body is the
better for it, but that Traitor JAMES Duke of YORK. This is laid over again
with a very little variation, This Letter cost Me Nine-pence, and might have
been afforded for a Penny; I know no Body is the better for it, but that
Traitor JAMES Duke of YORK: which are words of the same Sound, and to the same
purpose with the former; they differ only in some minute Circumstances a word
or so, but import the same thing.

The next words are these, The Duke of YORK is a Traitor; and these words too
are laid two several ways, differing but in very small Circumstances ( Is a
Traitor, and Was a Traitor) the Substance of the words is the same.

Now I say, Gentlemen, Though it is not your Business to enquire whether or no
Oats spoke these words, for by letting Judgment go against him by Default, he
does in Law confess the words, but you are to enquire what Damages may be fit
to be given to the Plaintiff by reason of these words; yet in as much as this
Case is a Case of an extraordinary Nature, Weight and Moment, having relation
to so great a Prince, His Royal Highness the King's only Brother, requires this
extraordinary Solemnity, it having not been usual heretofore, that is to have
Writs of Enquiry executed at the Bar. But the Occasion is extraordinary, such
as has not happened before this Age, this Corrupt Age, this Profligate Age
wherein we live, and wherein common ordinary Fellows, the mere Scum and
Scoundrels of the Factious Party, have taken a Liberty to reproach and
calumniate Magistracy and Government, and the greatest Personages concerned in
it, not sparing even Majesty it self, nor Him, who is next in Degree to His
Sacred Person, His only Dear and Royal Brother. And therefore as the Case is
extraordinary in its Nature, so ought the Example of it to be made as Public
as can be in order to satisfy all People what a sort of Fellow this Defendant
is, who has been so much adored and looked upon with an Eye of Admiration,
courted with so wonderful an Affection, and so, I had almost said, Hosanna'd
among People that have been Factious and Tumultuous to the Government.

Such as he, ought to be made Public Examples of; and therefore the King's
Counsel have desired that this Cause might be canvased here at the Bar, and the
Defendant as he has made himself Eminent for some particular Qualifications,
might be made a Public Example for this Offense.

Thus this Writ comes to be executed here. Now though the Words laid in this
Declaration are words that do import in themselves so much Scandal and
Reproach, so much Malice and Venom, that they need no Aggravation besides
themselves, and his suffering it to go by Default shows they are no way to be
extenuated, but are thereby acknowledged. Yet however to satisfy all People
that desire or have any inclination to be satisfied, that this Prosecution is
highly reasonable, nay absolutely Necessary; they come here and give you an
Account that these in the Declaration are but a small Part of the Scandalous
and Malicious words that the Defendant uses concerning the Plaintiff. And
indeed it does plainly appear, that the Malice of the Defendant is attended
with all the most Unchristian and Uncharitable as well as Disloyal and
Disobedient Circumstances that any thing can be, with design to Traduce and
Disparage a Subject so Loyal, and a Person so Great and Illustrious as His
Royal Highness.

As to the first words, you have the first Witness Mr. Smith, and he gives you
this Account, He was in a Coffee-House where he met the Defendant Oats; and
the Defendant in a Vainglorious huffing sort of manner, takes occasion though
none was offered him by any thing spoken to him by any Body, but only on set
purpose to express his Malice and Venom against the Plaintiff. He takes up a
Letter that it seems came to him by the Post, and to gratify his own malicious
Inclination, and to give it vent, he Proclaims, This Letter cost Me Nine-pence,
it might have been brought or afforded for a Penny; and I know no Body is the
better for it, but that Traitor JAMES Duke of YORK.

So you see, Gentlemen, he takes hold of every little Occasion, if he can but
happen upon an Opportunity, such as this was in an open Coffee-House, to reek
his Malice upon His Royal Highness. And sure there can be no greater imputation
of Scandal brought upon any Man than this upon the Plaintiff. That the first
and greatest Subject of the King of England's should be taxed with the greatest
Crime in the Law, Disloyalty and Treason to his Sovereign. And so at once not
only charge him with being Perfidious to his only Brother, against that
Affection which by Nature he is obliged to pay him, and which all that know any
thing, cannot but observe to have always been extraordinary; but also touches
that which is much dearer to him than his Life, his Honor, by charging him with
the foulest of Crimes, Treason and breach of his Allegiance, which as a Subject
he owes to his Sovereign. And thus besides the Defendant's Confession by this
Judgment you have the very words proved that are in the Declaration.

The next Witness is one Mr. Whaley, and he gives you an Account of another
Passage which I cannot but take notice of by the way, to show you what a
wonderful Christian Temper this Man is endued with. Mr. Whaley says, That being
at the Bishop of Ely's House upon a Public Festival either of Easter or
Whitsontide (and he is sure it was one of those two, Because, says he, I never
use to receive the Sacrament in London, but upon one of those two days; and
therefore I take it upon me to say it was one of those two days that I heard
these words) Oats having it seems received the Holy Sacrament at the Bishop of
Ely's Chapel with Mr. Whaley that day. When a Body would have thought that if
Mr. Oats would have been believed to be so Hearty and Pious a Protestant as he
pretends to be, he should have remembered that he ought, according to the
Protestant Doctrine, to have left behind him at his approach to the Altar, all
Malice and Rancour, and ill Will and Hatred to every Body: But you see what
kind of Deportment his was.

For after such time as he had been at the Sacrament, he takes occasion without
any Provocation to fall foul immediately upon his Royal Highness, giving him
the Name of a Profligate Wretch; and then particularly he comes to say, The
Duke of YORK was a Traitor. This Gentleman being concerned, as every Honest and
Loyal Man ought to be, and I hope every good Subject is, and ever will be, to
hear so great a Prince, the King's only Brother, so traduced and vilified,
reproved him for it; but so far was he from taking the Correction due to his
Extravagant Tongue in a becoming manner, that he presently (as the Gentleman
Phraseth it) calls for his Myrmidons, two Fellows that he had along with him to
come to him, upon which the Gentleman was pleased to say to him, Nay, Good Mr.
Oats, you need not be in so very much fear of your self as to call for your
Men, no Body here intends you any harm. Nay certainly, Mr. Oats did apprehend
himself to be secure from all manner of Correction, or he would never have been
so Impudent to speak such words.

But you will no doubt take notice, as all Men cannot but do, of what an
excellent Gospel Spirit, what a delicate Christian temper the Man is of, after
the receiving the Sacrament, that very Morning to come and belch out such
extravagant words of Calumny and Reproach.

And it seems this Person had obtained to make such a wonderful Figure in the
World, that every Body was afraid to speak to him; for you hear what the
Witness says when he came to beg the Bishop of Ely's Pardon for being so loud
and hot at his Table, the Bishop gave him Thanks for it, and told him, None of
us dare speak to him. Such a Considerable Man has he been that he might rail
against the King, and the Duke, and the Government without Control. He was got
into such a Post that no body durst meddle with him, but he must have liberty
to say any thing of any Body. To what an height of Corruption were we grown,
that we could suffer such a Fellow's Insolence, at which no man living that has
any spark of Modesty or Loyalty left in him, but must Blush and Tremble.

Then they produce to you one Mr. Johnson, who gives you an Account, that after
some Discourse between him and the Defendant Oats, about the Duke of YORK, he
immediately told Johnson, That the DUKE was either to be Hanged or Banished; it
seems he was so Ill a Man in his Eye, but of the two, Hanging was the fitter
for him. So the Dr. shows what a wonderful Kindness and Affection he has for
the Duke, and what thoughts he has of his great Deser^s.

Mr. Bowring is the next Witness, and he comes and tells you, That the Dr.
could not be prevailed with to Dine with the Gentlemen of the Parish of Foster
Lane, because some of them had dined with the Duke, which he calls Dining with
the Devil. It seems he made as though he would Preach there to them, he got up
into the Pulpit and took a Text, and pretended to Preach, and if he would have
Preached according to the Duty of a Church of England Divine, he was by that to
have Preached not only Obedience and Submission to Authority, but Respect to
Superiors, and Charity among all Subjects toward one another; and if he did
Preach it, it was worse in him not to Practice it. But you see after he had
performed his painful laborious Preachment, after he had taken such a wonderful
deal of Pains, as no doubt he did in instructing his Auditors, what his
Language is in answer to a Civil Invitation to Dinner by the Churchwardens.
Have any of you Dined with YORK at the City Feasts? as they not answering, but
being silently amazed at the impertinent Impudence of the Question, why truly
he would not Dine with those that had dined with the Devil. It seems his Royal
Highness had been pleased to Honor some Societies of Loyal Men in the City of
London with his Company at some Entertainments they made, and that is a great
Offense to the Defendant; and as for those that had received that Royal Favor
from His Highness, he takes notice of them as such whom he would neither Eat
nor Drink with, for truly they had eaten and drunk with the Devil; but
immediately the Doctor in his great Zeal and wonderful concern for the
Protestant Reliligion, broke up from the Company, would neither Eat nor Drink
with them, but chose rather to Dine at a private Brasier's by London-Wall; a
properer place in good truth for him, than any such Conversation they offered
him.

Then further to show what mean Thoughts he had of the Plaintiff, Mr. Fairfax
he comes and testifies, That there being some talk of a Presentment or
Indictment against the Duke of YORK by the Grand Jury here, but that meeting
with a Disappointment, he met Oats, and asked him, What he would do, for, says
he, now you are Nonsuited? that is, you have happened not to obtain the End
that you designed, Oh, says Oats, No matter for that, that is all one, we will
at him next Sessions; and for my part, I will have no more regard to him than I
would to a Scavenger. Nay, and because they should see the very utmost of his
Malice, and the low Thoughts he had of his Royal Highness, as if it had not
been Malicious enough to have compared him to a Scavenger of London or
Westminster, no, that was a Station too honorable for him in his Thoughts, but
he must necessarily be compared to a Scavenger of Kent-street; which we all
know to be one of the meanest, filthiest, and most beggarly parts of the Town.

The next piece of Evidence is, that which is given by one Mr. Philips, and
when he came to him, he began to have some Reflections about the House of
Commons and the Duke; and truly he did not doubt but he should see him at the
Bar of the House of Commons; and it would be no Disparagement to him to come
there, for there were a great many Members there that were as good Men or
better than he. And even by this Fancy of his he would fain degrade His Royal
Highness; for in Case he had him in no other Consideration but as a Peer, he
should know that no Peer of this Realm can be forced by any Vote or Order of
the House of Commons to come to their Bar. But he had a mind to take off his
very Privilege of Peerage, and it would be no lessening of his Greatness, since
that House had in it many Members better Men than the Duke himself. I presume
he meant some particular Friends of his own in that House.

The next Man is one Mr. Ashlock, and he tells you, That because he would
engage all People into an hatred of the Duke's Person, he must as a thing of
the greatest Consequence in order to it, make it be believed, that the Duke had
a great hand and concern in the Dismal Fire of London in Sixty Six, that
thereby he might make him obnoxious to the Rancour and Malice of all that
suffered in that dreadful Calamity. And with what handsome Expression he clothes
it? He fired the City of London, he is the Son of a Whore, and we will have him
hanged or sent out of England for it, whenever a Parliament meets.

So that here is not only a Personal Reflection, and Malicious Indignity done to
His Royal Highness, but carries in it a great Reflection upon His Sacred Majesty
himself in his Relations, and he is not contented only to belch out his Venom
and Malice against those that are alive, but even against those that are Dead
too. For you see it is a most foul Imputation and Slander against Her late
Majesty the Queen Mother to our Sovereign and His Brother, by calling him the
Son of a Whore; which is an Expression of that Impudent and Insolent Nature, as
is not fit to be mentioned in a Civil Government.

These things I think my self obliged to take Notice of for Example's sake, and
to induce all People to consider to what a height of Corruption we were grown
when such Scoundrel Fellows as this dare to take such base words into his
Mouth, of the Royal Family.

Then comes Captain Cressett, and he gives you an Account, That when His Royal
Highness and the Duchess were going last to Scotland, as the Captain returned
from the Duke's Lodgings, he met with the Defendant, who fell upon him, What,
you have been with JAMES? it seems he was one of his intimate Acquaintance, and
very Familiar he was with his Name. Indeed a Man would have thought, if in Case
he had spoke as one man ought to speak of another, that he had been speaking of
one of his Myrmidons, and it would have been a very hard matter to have known
who else he meant by that familiar Appellation. Says the Captain, What James?
Why YORK; and he was very kind that he gave him that Addition to let him know
what JAMES he meant; But when the Captain chid him, and told him, Sure you
might either say the Duke of York, or His Royal Highness, then immediately
instead of that, he flies out, He is a Papist, he is a Traitor, and I hope to
live to see him Hanged, and you will go near to lose your Reputation if you go
so often thither.

So that I perceive, if he will not be advised by this Gentleman, he should
lose all his Credit; and yet I presume it is wonderfully for the Advantage of
Mr. Cressett to lose the Credit he could get by any Characters or Commendations
such an one as he could give him.

Then Captain Cressett kindly advised him to take Care of injuring his Party by
his Passion, and his Indecent Behavior, and told him, it would turn to his
Prejudice at last. And truly now I think, if all his Party were in his
Condition, and made to smart for the Lavishness of their Tongues, I think it
were a good Accomplishment of his Prophecy, and if we were rid of them, we
should be more at Peace. And we may without offense hope to see that sooner,
than what the Defendant says he hoped to see.

The next is Sir William Jennings, who tells you of a Passage at the Parliament
at Oxford, which shows his wonderful Gospel and Christian temper. When a
Company of Gentlemen were met together to Drink a Glass of Wine, and were
wishing Health and Long Life to His Sacred Majesty, His Royal Highness, and the
Royal Family, he would not be contented to refuse the Glass, but to show how
wonderful a Christian Spirit he was of, and to evidence his true Protestant
Charity (and by his Carriage who was one of the Heads of the Faction, we may
guess at the Temper of all the Party) he cries out, He has ruined the Nation,
and if there be any hotter place in Hell than other, I hope the Devil will
preserve it for him.

I presume his great Conversation with him he spoke of, has given him some
Intelligence there is in Hell some hotter places than others, and who they are
reserved for. But Gentlemen, I speak not this that I think any thing that is
thus proved by the by, does in the least aggravate the Damages, for the Words
in the Declaration are as bad as bad can be; but to let you see the disposition
of this Man that has been so much admired and courted.

After him comes Mr. Warcup, who tells you, he was not in the Room with Oats
when the last words were spoken, but coming in immediately after, they all told
him the same words, and he afterward meeting with Oats, and reproving him for
his indecent Behavior and Expression, instead of any remorse concern that he
had upon him, by reason of his having spoken such words, he does still add to
it, The DUKE of YORK is a Traitor, he is in the Plot; and because you take his
part you are a Yorkist, and we will be even with you for it at one time or
another. So he threatens him only for asking him why he behaved himself in such
an indecent manner toward His Royal Highness.

The last Witness Mr. Chapman, is produced to show what Mind he continues in.
After all this is past, and a body would have thought he might by this time
have been brought to some Consideration and Submission to Authority; yet you
see how the Man is. The Witness tells you since the beginning of this Term, the
Declaration being delivered and by the Course of the Court he ought to Plead
within such a time, the Attorney goes to him for a Plea in order to make his
Defense if he could in the Action now before you, but he lets Judgment go by
Default; and so far is he from repenting of what he had formerly done, that he
persists in it, and tells him, Are you the DUKE's Attorney? Yes. Well, I care
not a farthing for the DUKE nor his Attorney neither; it may be I may be in
here for 100000 l. (and that I believe is one of the truest things he ever
spoke in his Life) but suppose I be, I do not doubt but when a Parliament meets
a time will come when some other People may come in my place. But truly since
he has declared his Hopes, I think it may not be amiss for us to declare ours
too; and for my part, to say I hope I shall never see such a Parliament.


Mr. Undersheriff. Lay your Heads together Gentlemen, and consider of your
Verdict.


They did so standing at the Bar. Mr. Undersheriff. Are you all agreed of your
Verdict?


Omnes. Yes.


Mr. Undersheriff. Who shall say for you?


Omnes. Foreman.


Mr. Undersheriff. What Damages do you find?


Sir Charles Lee. Full Damages, an Hundred Thousand Pounds.


Mr. Undersheriff. What Costs?


Sir Charles Lee. Twenty Shillings.


Which Verdict being Recorded in an Inquisition indented, taken under the Hands
of all the Jury, was afterward annexed as the Return to the Writ of Inquiry.

FINIS.

