Animadversions upon that Proclamation of September 13. 1692. Entitled, For
the better discovery of Seditious Libellers.
THE Observation is as true as it is common; That when any Breach or Alteration
has been made upon the Ancient and well Constituted Government of this Kingdom
which does reside in an Uinnterrupted Hereditary and Lineal Succession; This
being Established and Confirmed by all the Statute and Common Laws, authentic
Records and Right Precedents) either by wrong Invasion upon, and forcible
Dispossession of it, or by subtle Intrusion or stepping in between, Hereupon
the Tongues and Pens of People have been more open and enlarged than at other
Times of righteous Settlement. The Reason whereof is so obvious, that there is
no need to assign it; Because here is occasion given for it, but there is none
then. For an Example hereof we need go no further back, than the Reign of
Oliver Cromwell, and that eighteen Years of Confusion and Bloodshed which was
then. What an exceeding deal of Work was for the Press in those days? When any
Great and unusual thing is done in the World, if People should hold their
peace, the Stones would immediately cry out (according to that Rhretorical form
of Speech) importing that the most dull and silent of Mankind must be affected
with, and talk thereof. And though through the Evil and Depravation of our
Nature, they do more consent unto, and are carried away with a corrupt and
wrong Thing, especially where it gets Riches and Power, and the Multitude on
its side; Yet the World was never so universally bad, That every without one
exception should be led away with the Spreading, Prevailing, and contagious
Error; But some have all along kept and preserved themselves in their
Integrity, free and sound from the Disease and Corruption of the Times.

There have been a Remant, and a few (as this is always the Lot and Portion of
the Right and better Side) in whom has appeared outwords of Truth, and
Prnciples of Righteousness and Honesty. So it will be (notwithstanding the
utmost Opposition and Persecution) as long as God has a Church in the World;
Unless all Men should be transformed into wild Beasts or Devils; that is, until
they come to lose all the Seeds and Tinctures of Reason and Religion, and they
are made up of nothing but Violence and Evil. (Here it must be acknowledged
that Pride, Revenge, Envy, Discontent, and the several Ingredients of Sin and
Passion will be apt to creep in, and also intermingle with the Right side) so
that if there should not be a word spoken or written; Yet as long as there is a
Real and Essential Difference between Good and Evil, Truth and Falsehood, Right
and Wrong (which is so far ingrasted into the Nature of Men, that it cannot be
utterly rooted out) Every one that has but common understanding would discern
the one from the other.

It has been the constant Method, that when Iniquity has been set up on High,
and it has intruded and Usurpt it self upon the Rightful Authority, They have
also plai^^ered, and flourished it over with Goodly words: But when on the
other side Words of Truth do come forth, which make to see through, or under
the Foundation thereof, and this does it more and more, that the untempered
Mortar of the ^ther can no longer Palliate, or make it up again; Then the last
Resort is to Gag the Mouth, Tie up the Hand, and Imprison the Body, to prevent
and hinder all going forth of such True and right Words: For every one that
does Evil, hates the Light, neither comes to the Light, lest his Deeds should
bereproved, John 3. Ver. 20. Or as it is in the Margin there, discovered. Here
if the upright in Heart (God being on their side, whilst they act and labor
for him) would strive against these Devises of the Workers of Iniquity, their
Foundation would be discovered, and at length fall, and be consumed. Surely
their turning of things upside down shall be esteemed as Potters Clay; which,
though they can or do fashion to this or that purpose, according to their own
Will; yet it may be all broken into pieces, or dissolved into Dirt.

Here it comes to pass, That the greatest Fool calls Fool first; for they do
first throw out that Reproach of Sedition and Rebel on falsely upon others to
ward off, and turn away that true imputation of both; which, as they are
secretly and inwardly Conscious of, so it may be justly fastened upon
themselves. Let them call it what they will, Defense of the Parliament and
Liberties of England, Preservation of Religion, etc. It was six Years plain
down Rebellion foregoing, that brought King Charles the First to the Block; And
so notwithstanding it has been term.^Deliverance (I believe they will not find
it so at long run:) It was plain invading this Realm by a For^^gn Prince,
bearing Arms, raising Tumults, (all which in Ipsissimis verbis, was contrary to
that Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, which his Subjects had before token)
which caused our King to be Deposed. At which juncture of Time almost every
Sermon from the Pulpit, and Paper from the Press ^as a false, Infamous, and
Scandalous Libel: For as the Chief Justice Coke had long since Remarke^^ that
Libelling is the forerunner of Rebellion, so it did exactly prove; for,
whereas the King had Emitted forth his Declaration for Liberty of Conscience;
That all people might worship God according to their several Opinion and
Persuasions, and they might Preach all God's Word with this necessary Caution;
Provided than there nothing should be delivered to alienate the Hearts of his
Subjects, from Him or His Government; so as to make them withdraw. or cast off
their Allegiance; for to do that, or to despise and falsify a solemn Oath,
there is not one Sentence in all the Old and New Testament, which can be truly
alleged to justify that: Because such like a thing has been done in former
Generations, and in other Countries, therefore that it was lawfully done, is a
fallacious and wrong Conclusion: But our People did abuse the favor of their
King unto Evil surmisings and Rebellious Practices, as if He had granted this
Universal Liberty only to bring in Popery: But supposing that should be granted
(which perhaps was not so) for this is the most forcible way of Reasoning, when
admitting his Objection, we can certainly confute, if not convince, and
actually bring over the Adversary; Yet God, who causes Light to shine out of
Darkness would have Established this to them, and to their Generations for ever
more upon a righteous sure Foundation, what ever designs might lie hid in the
Heart: All one as the Reformation was somewhat brought on, and furthered by the
Lust and Revenge of Henry the VIII. By which may be seen that there is no such
thing as Pure, Undefiled Religion among the Princes of this World: And tho now
they have the same Liberty nevertheless, Yet God will judge whether it was not
granted by the Political Methods of Iniquity (which must do somewhat to oblige
all Parties, and all sides, lest the seeming or called Godly should reprove it,
as the Universally Righteous will nevertheless) as it is now retained by the
Sinful silence of the first Sort, and by their Consenting with the Deeds of
them. All the Churches are to know that the Almighty God could, and as he is
Holy and True, so he would preserve, increase, and add to their Numbers, if
they did not overp^ss the Deeds of the Wicked; yet they prosper. Jer. 5. Ver.
28. For they imagine that hereby they continue this their Privilege, and
therefore they have omitted. Mar. 23.23. (from whence it appears, that omission
of Duty is a Sin, and that Christ will enter into Judgment for the same) to
speak forth all God's word against all manner of Sin and Transgression in all
people from the greatest of them to the least of them. for so indeed it ought
to be spoken forth and declared.

But such is the untoward Nature of Men, who are weary of the best things, if
they have them long, and they are desirous of Novelty and Variety, though it be
unlawful, That as they will do ten times more in Loans and Gifts to an unjust
Possessor, than to a rightful King; Even so the Religious also will hide their
Eyes from the breach of almost all the other Commandments of God, as if the
whole of Religion, and what he required of Man was to provide against, and keep
out Popery. People are kept hoodwinkt or deluded with false Notions, or rather
they do take up with half the thing, not understanding it thoroughly and wholly.
Thus it is both as to serious and common Matters.

Suppose we give an instance in this Iast; When the French were moving upon the
Waters the Summer before the Date hereof, It was given out throughout all this
Nation, to make the people more unanimous in Opposition of them, That they came
to spoil and make a Conquest over this Country. They did not then come so near,
as to send out their Declarations, and make their pretenses known: But if they
had, and declared accordingly, That they came only to restore the deprived
King; and that they did covet and design no more, but barely to effect this;
and they would be contented only with the Charge of the Expedition paid, with
some moderate Gratuities to the Sold ers and Seamen, and henceforward these
Nations should abide by one another in Unity, peace and Concord: If the usual
Consultation, Treaty and Security was had hereupon, The people of England might
credit and fully rely on these their so far seeming, reasonable and just
demands, all one as they did take the P. of O's Word to let him come in, when
he had before declared, that he did not intend to make a Conquest over them.
Indeed there is somewhat more to be considered in the disparity of the Numbers
and Power which the one has, over what the other had; But the Word and promise
of the Princes and Potentates of the Earth are much alike, that there is no
sure Trust or Reliance to be given to any of them. They were wont to speak in
old time saying, Thou shall surely ask counsel at Abel, and so they ended the
Matter. 2 Samuel 20. Ver. 18. As we are allowed, yea, and commanded to search the
Scriptures, so any one at his leisure may read the four following Verses, as
they he open in the Bible. I am one of them that are pea^eable and faithful in
England. It seems hard and unequal to me, that a whole Nation should be
endangered to be ruined and swallowed up by Strangers and Foreigners for the
Ambition and Contention of two Men: Whereas Right might be done in a peaceable
and prudent way (without their Aid or violent Int^rposure and Meddling) upon the
terms of universal Forgiveness, not one man excepted. But if one is so stiff as
not to grant that; as I suppose he would with all his Heart be glad to be
readmitted in upon those mild and equitable Conditions, which will make him
both revered and loved; for it is neither Duty, nor yet Wisdom to speak or
behave ones self proudly in the day of distress. They are Adversarie^ to the
King. 2 Samuel 19. Ver. 22. and hinder his Restoration, who dictate otherwise,
notwithstanding their ignorant Zeal, and vain Talk for him; And if the
Offenders are afraid to trust to this, as W^^kedness and Guilt is Timorous and
Suspicious, it being what is natural and usual, that they who have transgressee
without a Cause should be also f^arful without a Cause, that is, without a True
Cause) Then let all those that are indeed Criminals stand by themselves; for
there is no reason why others who as yet are not so, should make themselves
criminal also in defending them. And let him come singly to punish them, whilst
all others stand persectly Neuter, and disinterested as to that Cause, only in
defense of their Country to stop the Incursion and Spoil of strangers and
Robbers. The right understanding and acting a^cording to this Truth would go a
great way toward the bringing and settling Peace again in our Borders. And
though people now say the Righteous and Loyal party would bring the French in,
Yet herein they say falsely, for if ever the French should come in (which, though
at present unlikely, and that Word according to the Divine Method in Psalm. 89.
throughout, and Jer. 37. 10 seems to be falsified at first, to exercise the
more our Faith therein nevertheless, Yet nothing is impossible with God, who
knows which Side will have the worst of the War at long run) Yet not we, but
themselves would cause this breaking in of Foreigners and Strangers; For the
original Cause, and first Occasion is to be looked back into. Who invited
another to come in, when all things were quiet, before he moved upon the
Waters? To disturb quiet Things that is properly Sedition, as Rebellion is the
breaking out into the open Act of Hostility. And then they did drive their King
out to seek his Bread in that Neigh^our Country, where he supposed that he
might sooner have it; And because he enought himself not safe among the
Children of them, who Murdered his Father; therefore He was forced ^o take
Sanctuary among Stranger. Here he should rather have abode quiet, and not
sought to have Recovered his Kingdom again by blood and Force of Arms. But yet
he did, and does still betake himself to those Methods which is usual for
Sovereign Princes when they have been Dispossessed to do in like Cases. Which
same Plea and Saying, tho it may seem a little allowable in Fore Humane, Yet it
will in no wise excuse or justify him at the Bar of God ^or the Blood that
has been spilt on this Occasion. However they are much more inexcusable, who
first Rebelled against him, and do still endeavor to keep him out with the
Price of Blood, and with the loss of so many thousand ^en's Lives, than Himself
is, who seeks after this manner to be Re-instated again. They, are Sinners and
Trangresors on both sides, Though his Rebellious Subject^ are the greater.

From hence came those Wars and Fightings among us, So that after the way which
they barely accuse others of Sedition and Rebellion, Themselves in very deed
have been proved guilty of the same.

In the very same manner it may be Answered, as to what they call False,
Infamous and Scandalous Libels: A Libel signifies a little Book. Here again
they are before hand to term it so in these 3 Epithets, which herein are true,
Proper, and Opposite: Because in what they call such Libels their own False,
infamous and Scandalous Doings are spoken and treated of: So that this Reproach
offered by them must also cease, for it is truly turned upon themselves; and it
does not justly belong to the Authors of such Writings, but to themselves the
Actors of such things. Wherein they have Erred, and a^e Deceived, and they do
still go aside from the Way of Truth; whereby they are become a Shame and
In^amy even to Turks, and to the other Nations, and they have made the Name of
Protestantism to slink. Genesis 34.30. among the Superstitious Inhabitants of this
and other Lands, whilst they have given occasion to both to say, Tuese are the
Dis^ipl^s of Jesur Christ, the Prince ^f Peace, and they call themselves of the
Pure, Res^^ned Religion, who break and sa^ifie their O^^^s. dis^^nour and
dispbey their Parents, they kill and murder one another. I do hereby enter my
Protestation against th^se Deeds of such Nuncupative Protestants. They are
become a Scandal, and Rock of Offense, not so much to them who ca^s themselves
so, but to all Real and Universal Christians, such who have respect unto all
the Commandments, and not keep some, and neglect others, as the manner of many
is.

Every Libel (see Coke's Reports, Le case de Libellis famosis) is to the
Scandal of the Governments, and to the Breach of the Peace. But when there is
an Actual breach of the Peace already in this, and more especially in the
Neighbor Nations; which has so been for these four Years, Those Words of
Truth and Soberness, which do exhort to fill and compose these troubled Waves (
-- Pr^stat m^tes componere fluctus) and which show us the only good and right
way, how it may be all retrieved and healed, and made up again without the
farther Less of so much as one Man's Lie mo^e viz. By changing this New and
wr^ng Constitution into the Ancient and Rightful Government; This does in us
wise break the Peace, but would Establish it; Nor yet does it widen, but it
would repair the Breach: Only there it Strength and Will wanting to make it
close and keep together. But then indeed it is a scandal to the present
Governor (for Governor and Government are two distinct things; in that
sometimes they take upon them to Govern, who ^ave no Right, so to do) that
themselves should not be governed by the Law of God: That they should so long
live, and act in the breach of sundry of God' Commandments; whereby they are in
real danger of future Condemnation, and of going away into everlasting
Punishment; That Q^e would admire (unless they were deluded and deceived by
Satan, who holds them Captive at his Will, and it is to be ^ear'd, that after
all the Warning which has been given, they will at last fall into the hands of
this Roaring Lion ^ho they can give sleep to their Eyes, and slumber to their
Eyelids day after day, and nig^t after night, as they do, until they thoroughly
amend their ways, and their Doings, and unti they thoroughly, execu^e Judgment
between a Man and his Neighbor. Jer. 7. Ver 5. Lest they should Sleep the
Sleep of Death and their Souls should be ^athere^ with the Sinners and
Transgressors of former Generations. By these Words, That ye ^hroughly execute
judgment between a Man and his Neighbor, is, or may be understood according to
the Meaning and Requiring of the Spirit of God at his Day (for the H^ly Ghost
in the Penning and Giving forth or the Scriptures has provided and ordained
them for a Law to all Persons, Times and Places, Generations and Countries).
That they do righten (See the Marginal Reading of lsi^ ^. Ver. 17) Adjust and
Determine the Matter between King James and the Prince of Orange according to
the instruct on or Wisdom justice judgment and Equity. Prove. ^. Ver. 3. But
until they do this, How can they have any peace in their Consciences, unless
they did act in the Deceivableness or Unrighteousness, and had im^ibed in
strong Delu^ions? But the Knowledge of the Truth would break this inward
stupidity, in which sense it does break the peace within, which is the most
tronolesome kind of any; nevertheless it is better so broken than kept. And as
the same Truth does ba^ely recite, reprove, and discover their scandalous
Doings, and as it does lay open their Falsehood and Hypocrisy, They do thus
conceive Enmity against, and utter Error concerning it. Whatever the^ now do to
prevent and hinder the goings forth of His Eternal Truth (because by the
publication thereof some few. Thoughts of their Hearts are revealed) Herein
they do provoke the Lord to iealousy. Are they stronger than be? Or how canth^y
help when the Dead, small and great shall stand before God, That themselves
shall not ap^ear also? And then all the Thoughts of all their Hearts will be
Revealed; all the Words of every Tongue will be Declared, and all the Deeds of
their past Life will be manifested and judged.

As to the Reward promised by the Workers of Iniquity, I have several times
thought (as I have heard or read that Portion of Scripture; When thou saw a
Thief, then thou consentest with him: Psalm. 50. Ver. 18., That as there are
three sons of Thefts and Robberies, so they do use the like Methods: There is a
little Degree, a middle Sine, and the greatest of all. The first Sort is, when
a Pocket is picked, or any thing taken away privily, or when two or three or
half a dozen do Rob upon the Highway. These are Liberal and Bountiful to
Oslers, Tapsters and Innkeepers, and the others will bribe it off to prevent
their own Discovery; what they do easily come by, they d^ as frankly part
withal. The middl^ Size is, when a hundred or two do Rob together in a Company,
as in some parts of Italy, the Deserts of Arabia, and Sea Pirates. These do not
fee altogether so much because they do depend upon their Numbers, outward
Strength and Force; and their Designs are open and Barefaced to take violently
away. But as the yrate told Alexander; The greatest Robbery of all is, When
Kings and Gen^rals with their Arm^es co s^oil and disposs^ss whole Countries;
Or when they do take a whole Kingdom or Principality away at once. Of this
there are two sorts; either open Hostility, which seems fairest, because then
Others can stand upon their Guard and Defense: The other is by the Close,
Hidden and Hypocritical Methods of Usurpation. Like the turnings and windings
of a River, which we know not presently whither it ends; Or like the glidings
and insinuations of a Snake or Serpent, which may seem smooth or tickle at
first, but the end thereof is deadly. They commonly go this way to work, and
srue themselves in, ^hen they cannot accomplish it by the other. But in the
first sort of this great Violence or Robbery, They have some specious Reasons
to Color it over, Though at last they are forced to resort to the French King's
Mott^ upon his great Guns; Rati^ Vltima Regum; In which thing Another has
exactly imitated, and is like unto him; for though they seem to be at so great
Enmity and Opposition, yet they do both agree and concern in the same Violent
and Unrighteous Action; as appears by that ^nsc^^^^on which as I have heard,
was on the Cannon, that went over for the Reducing of Ireland; which was in the
^utch Language to this Signification; I have got it, and I will maintain it:
Most opposite Word! an^ exactly agreeable to such a King, who is a King for
that Woman's Reason, because He is so, and only because He is in possession of a
Kingdom.

This Proclamation (which gives occasion for these Remarks) in the Gazette is
put in an opposite Column to that for Highway men and Robbers on purpose (as I
suppose) to make Libellers more odious. But I do believe that God the Judge of
all men will rather judge themsolves (by whose pretended Authority it is
Emitted forth) to be of this sort, sooner than he will pronounce whom they call
Libellers to be wicked Offenders; For in the mean while they do use the same
Methods with Highway men and Robbers; for as these Fee Inn Keepers; Oslers and
Tapsters to hold their peace, so do they give forth the Wages of iniquity to
the several Balaams among us; That, whilst themselves have forsaken the R^g^t
way; and are gone astray, they may not be rebuked for their Iniquity. The
Prophets wake my People Err. That bite with their Teeth, and cry Peace, and He
that puts not into their Mouth, They even prepare War against them: Mic 3.
Ver. 5. But seeing they are still fed, and Bread is put into their Mouths,
These D^gs are Dumb. Isa. 56.10. as others are through fear and sloth whose
Bread has been taken away. However rough or harsh this may seem, it is the
very Parase of the Holy Ghost speaking on this wise, not our of Invidiousness
or abusiveness of Expression, but to set forth the nature of this their Sin of
Omission, with the aggravation thereof in the sight of God. And thus they stop
the several Mouths, by giving a Livelihood or Preferment, which the Receivers
consent unto for to get or keep the same. And then again exactly after the same
Method of Highway men and Robbers, where Gifts and fair Means will nor do,
There they proceed to a Pistol or Sab, so do these to Punishment and Severity.
One may arford to let good Bargains, where he has Dispossessed the right
Owner, and be very Liberal of that which is not their own, but another Man's:
But he that will Judas-like do any thing against the Word of God, and his
Righteousness, Though it here covenanted for Twenty or Fifty pieces of Silver
(watch perhaps the Informer may be yet baulked of, notwit^standing such
particular directions are here specified for the certain and speedy Payment
thereof) may also meet with Judas his Doom; It would be good for him, if he had
never been born: It would be better for him if he had never touched or meddled
with such Money, which is the reward of Iniquity; The Consequence where of will
be Persecution and Oppression, if it be not the worst kind of direct Murder it
self: This should make honest People have more care, and engage them to a yet
greater Faithfulness; as to whom ten or a hundred times as much would not be a
prevailing Temptation to commit the Sins of Treachery and Unfaithfulness.

Another t^ing may be observed among Highway men and Robbers; That they are
commonly very Unanimous, and they do but s^ldom fall out; for it they should,
then all the Gang would be in danger to be broken and ruined; This same is the
very Reason, why there has been such an universal ^onsent, Harmony and
Agreement among the great Multitude of the Workers of Iniquity. There has been
no such Clashing in their Parliamentary Consultations, nor confronting the Head
thereof as in the Reign of former Rightful Kings; for indeed if it should be
once so, This new erected Babel would end Anger to fall, or at least it would
not go forward as now it does: For a rightful Government like an Oak well and
deeprooted does bear Wind^s and Storms, will stand amidst, and against the
Strivings and Divisions of the People; But a Constitution of Man's devising and
Wisdom is like a Reed shaken with the Wind, which every Puff of contrary breath
does make to stagger, and it many Trees of the Wood should move against it,
This would soon blow it quite away, or at lost it would fall, and great would
be the Fall thereof.

As Counterf^it Gold does often shine and glister more than true, so Fiction
and Falsehood does more Ape and Imitate what is true and real, than perhaps this
does exert it self forth: In like manner it is when the Wicked are joined hand
in hand (who hall not go unpunished as to the future, however they escape now)
and they have got the Government lodged in them ho it be wrong, Yet
nevertheless they will keep their hands inure, and they will punctually,
formally and continually practice the several acts of Administration thereof
from time to time; for as the Life of a Law is in the Execution of it, so their
ill-gotten Power (improperly called Authority, because this Word supposes what
is lawful, which theirs is not) is kept up merely by Use and Exercise thereof.
As by taking the Royal Title, Signet and Arms, and by doing the several Regal
Acts, Interlining their Name; into the Public Est: blished Liturgy, so that
Prayers are said daily for them throughout the Realm, Co^ferring imaginary
Titles of Honor, m^king seeming Laws, and a Multiplicity of them, whereby is
shown forth a secret Consciousness, as if they were not altogether so Valid;
Appointing, Judges, and the Courts of Judiia^ure go on, and are held in their
Names: And then there must be Imprisonment and Punishment of Offenders, yea,
and Executions for Treason, as if they were real Kings: For when an Intruder or
Usurper steps up, He has his Throne baked, and cemented with Blood, whereby he
does imagine, that he makes it more sure and fast unto himself, not so much
from the Conglutinating Nature thereof, but by the Victory, which with his vast
Multitude, He does get over the single Opposers: So that in all likelihood this
Proclamation will be put into a vigorous and constant Execution; If they do not
get it confirmed into what is called an Act of Parliament at this their next
meeting together) There was some ^ssay and Endeavor toward this in that their
Sessions o Nov. 4. 1692. in a Bill which was going forwards in the Lower House,
Entitled, For the better Prservation of Their Majesty's Pers^ns and
Government, which same Bill proved Abortive, and was rejected, or othewise it
will be as a nine days wonder, and vanish off again as mere Talk and waste
Paper. But as I once heard Dr. Patrick, the now Usurpt Bishop of E^y (as he was
expounding the Tin Commandments in his then Parish Church at Covent Garden
(make a true Observation; That when Authority does once begin to Command
unlawful things, it does thereupon grow and become weak and ridiculous. This he
spoke a tittle before the late Revolution, when there was a real Auth^r^ty. So
when that (which has now the Name thereof) does emit such kind of Edicts; though
with their Armed Men and Multitudes, and by their diligent Execution thereof
(for wrong is commonly more busy and active than right) They will take care,
that it shall not hereupon become weaker; Yet there will not much heed and
obedience be given to it from the Hearts and Conscience of Men; because for
want of Lawfulness both in the Imposers, and also in the Matter it self, It
has not much; or rather no Obligation at all upon the Heart and Conscience.

POSTSCRIPT.
For my part I do not Vindicate all the Errors and Unjust Illegal Act. of the
last Reign, as it is commonly called and understood, Though I do affirm
Constantly, That all of them put together (taking in also the whole and utmost
that Malice could inv^nt, and Falsehood Calumniate) will in no wise tantamount
to justify a deprivation. There is a wide difference be^ween Boasting and
Reallity, between Self Commendation, and the Matter as indeed it is. Herein the
present Rulers do wisely, if they do avoid that Severity, which was the
miscarriage and overthrow of their immediate Predecessor. They do well herein
for the Merciful shall obtain Mercy; as themselves indeed have much need thereof
from the hands of God for their Transgression of so many of his Commandments.
But he knows not much in the Nature of Things, who does not also understand,
That for them, whose Title is Precarious, and merely beholden to the Love and
good Will; It is neither Prudent nor Safe for such to ex^rcise Cruelty; This
being deservedly odious to Mankind, as the contrary Virtue of Mercy is loved,
and of good report: As on the one hand, It is pity that Godness should be
abused and trampled upon, Soun the other, We are not to be deladed with fair
Words, and fine Phrases. Among the several Writers concerning publi^k Affairs
(as there has been subject matter enough) it should considered Quo Anim^, and
out of what principle they do it: Whether it be Zell for, and Conscience
toward God, or vain Humor, which their own several Books and Words will show
forth and manifest. I do in no wise Apologize, or make a Defense for every
Scribler: If any has written indeed fal^ly, scurrilously, and mere abus^ively
against the present Governors, the Law is open that such may proceeded
against, and also by the Word and judgment of God (which requiers to speak evil
of no. Man, to be no Brawlers) if such should suffer, they would suffer as evil
Doers.

Finished October 4. 1692,

