An ACCOUNT of the late odious Conspiracy against the Reputation of Sir
Humphrey Edwin, Knight. by a malicious Indictment of Perjury.
Together with his CASE, and a short Account of the TRIAL thereupon, before the
Right Honorable Sir JOHN HOLT Knight. Lord Chief Justice of England; At
Westminster the 13th of February, 1691.
THIS Narrative shall be the shorter, because it is now by diverse Circumstances
become manifest, That there was a malicious De(...)t the odious Scandal of
Perjury upon Si^ Humphrey Edwin, hoping thereby to render him incapable of
serving in Parliament for the Borough of Chippenham in Wiltshire, for which
his Petition was depending, and also un^it for the Office of Alderman of the
City of London; Sir ^^zil Firebrass having obtained an undue Return to
Parliament, for the said Town of Chippenham, and actually sitting ^^^^eupon in
Parliament, and fearing to be ejected by the said Sir Humphrey, as afterward
he was: And several Person^ (...)n confidence of Success in the malicious
Design) having solicited for the Election of the said Sir Bazil to be Alderman
of London in the room of the said Sir Humphrey.

The occasion taken for the malicious Prosecution, on pretense of Perjury, was
from an Answer of Sir Humphrey Edwin's in Chancery, to a Bill of Mr. Matthew
Johnson's: And the true State of the Controversy between them is as follows.

John Hall Esquire about March 1687/8, being indebted several thousand Pounds to
Sir Humphrey Edwin, offered him diverse Securities for the same, and amongst the
rest a Lease in Yorkshire which he had contracted for with the Trustees of the
Queen Dowager, in the Name of Matthew Johnson Esquire paying two hundred and sixty
Pounds Fine, Sir Humphrey accepting thereof, and going with the said Mr. Hall
to Mr. Johnson's Chambers in the Temple; The said Johnson acquainted them he
had made some Proceedings therein already for Mr. Hall, and had used his own
Name in trust for him therein. And he said that he had disbursed about twelve
Pounds, which would be lost if the Contract was to be new entered in Sir
Humphrey's Name, he therefore proposed to proceed to perfect the Lease in his
own Name, saying that when he had finished it, he would Assign it over to Sir
Humphrey, as Mr. Hall then directed. Thereupon Sir Humphrey empolyed him as a
Trustee, and gave him a Note for the 260 l. Fine that was to be paid to the
Queen Dowager's Treasurer. And also gave him the said Mr. Johnson Five Guineas
for a Fee, desiring him to hasten the Dispatch of the Writings.

The Lease being finished, Mr. Johnson assigned part of the Tenements contained
in the Lease to one Mr. Knowlesly and Mr. Shepherd that were Tenants thereof,
and who were to pay for the same above 300 l. and he promised Sir Humphrey that
as soon as Mr. Knowlesly returned the Money out of Yorkshire, it should be
paid to him. And Mr. Johnson then drew an Assignment of all the Remainder of
the Lease from himself and Mr. Hall, to Sir Humphrey, which Mr. Hall Sealed and
Executed at a Tavern with other Writings, Mr. Hall giving Sir Humphrey a
Receipt for 300 l. on the back of the Deed, as the Consideration thereof. And
Mr. Johnson being only a Trustee, the Consideration mentioned in the Deed to
him was only five Shillings, and the Deeds of Assignment were drawn by Mr.
Johnson himself. But he failing to come and Seal at the Tavern where Mr. Hall
Sealed, Sir Humphrey called in a Day or two at his Chambers for the said
Assignment, and some other Writings: And then, and never before, Mr. Johnson
alleged a Debt due to him from Mr. Hall of 250 l. which he pretended was to be
paid out of the said Lease, so he refused then to Seal. But upon Sir Humphrey's
Application to Mr. Hall, Mr. Hall satisfied Mr. Johnson, promising to clear all
Accounts with him. And then Mr. Johnson promised, and soon after Sealed the
said Assignment. And Sir Humphrey a Day or two after his Sealing gave him
twelve Guineas, besides the aforesaid five Guineas, for his Fees, Care, Pains,
and Dispatch in the said Business. At which time, they being both going into
the Country and taking leave one of another, Mr. Johnson called his Clerk
Francis Sambrook to them, and bid him look out and deliver Sir Humphrey Edwin
his Writings whenever he called or sent for them.

But when Sir Humphrey called for the said Deeds, though Mr. Sambrook delivered
them to him, and with him examined them, and saw Sir Humphrey give them to his
Servant and send him to Sir Francis Winington's for one of the principal Deeds
that was found to be wanting: And Mr. Sambrook had also received two Guineas
for his Pains, and 5 l. odd Moneys for engrossing the Writings, yet when Sir
Humphrey's Servant was ready to go away with the said Deeds, the said Mr.
Sambrook then pretended that he had Directions from his Master to demand 250 l.
of Sir Humphrey for Mr. Hall's Debt, and to detain the Writings unless Sir
Humphrey gave a Note for that Money. But he could not believe Mr. Johnson gave
any such private Orders, quite contrary to his Trust, and Promise, and Orders
openly given to Sambrook; so Sir Humphrey's Servant would not deliver back the
Writings which his Master had paid for, and given him, but carried them home,

When Mr. Johnson returned out of the Country, Sir Humphrey demanded of (...)
the aforesaid three hundred Pounds, which he had promised should be returned
out of Yorkshire. And Mr. Johnson set up (...) Pretense that Sir Humphrey ought
to have paid him Mr. Hall's Debt of 250 l. before he had his Writings. And
thereupon cross Bills in Chancery were preferred by Sir Humphrey and Mr.
Johnson And upon a Pretense that Sir Humphrey had not truly answered Mr.
Johnson's Bill, the Malice of some Conspirators picked out several Passages,
which they hoped to falsify by some Witnesses; and thereupon took the
Confidence to devise this Indictment of Perjury, which Mr. Johnson has often
protested to have been done without his Desire or Privity.

The pretended Falsehoods in Sir Humphrey's Answer, alleged in the Indictment,
were as follows, viz.

1. That the said Sir Humphrey Edwin deposed in his Answer, That Francis
Sambrook, Mr. Johnson's Clerk, delivered the said Deeds or Assignments to the
said Edwin.

2. That the said Sir Humphrey denied that he ever agreed or promised to pay
the said Matthew Johnson, the said 250 l. in question, or any part thereof.

3. That Sir Humphrey denies that the said Assignment was Sealed and Delivered
by the said Matthew Johnson as an Escroll, and upon Condition to be void, if
the said 250 l. were not paid to the said Matthew Johnson in a Week, or a short
time after.

4. That the said Sir Humphrey denies, That he said Deeds were to remain in the
Hands of the said (...) ^ambrook, in trust for the said Matthew Johnson, until
Payment thereof.

5. That the said Sir Humphrey denied, That he had any Intention to defraud the
said Matthew Johnson, of the said 250 l. or to get the said Writings from the
said Sambrook by any Fraud, in the absence of the said Matthew Johnson, or used
any such Force in the obtaining, detaining or carrying away of the same, as by
the said Bill is charged.

This Matter coming to trial, there appeared for Counsel against Sir Humphrey,
Sir John Tremaine, Sir Thomas Powis, Sir Bartholomew Shower, Mr. Holt, and Mr.
Harcorte, one of the City-Pleaders. But no Persons appeared publicly to own
the Prosecution, they being afraid or ashamed thereof, Mr. Johnson having often
positively denied any Concern therein, but was by Subpena produced as a
Witness: Only it appeared openly the whole Day, and during the Trial, that the
said Sir Bazil Firebrass was very busy with the Counsel and Sollicitors against
Sir Humphrey, and to abet and countenance the said Prosecution, and to send for
a Witness that was at first absent.

The Witnesses produced to prove the pretended Perjuries, were Mr. Matthew
Johnson and his two Clerks, Francis and Jeremy Sambrook.

1. All the said Witnesses denied that they knew of any Promise made by Sir
Humphrey to pay to the said Matthew Johnson, the said two hundred and fifty
Pounds, or any Part thereof.

2. They all denied, that they heard or knew that the Deed of Assignment
alleged, to have been sealed as an Escroll, was delivered by the said Matthew
Johnson as an Escroll, and on Condition to be void, if two hundred and fifty
Pounds was not paid to him.

3. The said Witnesses confessed, that they could not depose that the Deeds
were to remain in the Hands of Francis Sambrook for the use of Matthew Johnson,
until two hundred and fifty Pounds was paid him by Sir Humphrey Edwin.

The Falsehood and Malice of the Indictment in these chief Points, were so
manifest, that when the Counsel against Sir Humphrey came to open their
Evidence, they confessed to the Court, that they had no Proof of three of ^^^^r
pretended Points of Perjury assigned in the Indict^^^^* yet they insisted upon
Francis Sambrook's Testimo(...) said, as they urged, that he did not deliver
the w(...) and secondly, That Sir Humphrey did take and carry (...) ^way by
force from his Master's Chamber: But the exp(...) ^ords of the said Francis
Sambrook were as follows.

That after (...) Master, Johnson was gone into the Country, Sir Humphery Edwin
and his Clerk, Mr. Tolson, came to him at his Maste(...) ^hambers in the
Temple, and Sir Humphrey going into an (...)r-Chamber, there wrote a Letter,
and just as he was ^^ming out of the Chamber with the Letter, he called his
Man, and bid him take the Bag with his Writings, which Sir Humphrey knew lay in
an Inner-Study; and he supposing that Sir Humphrey had wrote a Note for two
hundred and fifty Pounds, he did not hinder Mr. Tolson from taking the
Writings. But when he found it was a Letter to a Brother of his in Hereford,
whither he the said Sambrook was going, and not a Note for two hundred and
fifty Pounds, he desired to have the Writings again, for that ^^s Master
ordered him not to part with them without two hundred and fifty Pounds, or a
Note for it: But Sir Humphrey would not deliver them, saying, He would save him
(...), and his Man went away with the (...) Writings.

But it will hereafter appear, that Francis Sambrook concealed several
Particulars, and gave not the full Testimony of the truth of this Matter as he
ought to have done.

The Evidence being given by Mr. Johnson and his two Clerks, against Sir
Humphrey Edwin: Sir Humphrey's Counsel were Sir Creswel Levins, Sir Francis
Winington, Mr. Dar^el, Mr. Bennet and Mr. Hungerford. It was opened by Sir
Creswel, That it was a malicious Indictment, without the least Color or Shadow
for Perjury: That it was rather a Cause of Heat, Sir Humphrey having at that
time a Petition depending in the House of Commons against Sir Bazil Firebrass,
which being appointed to be heard by the Committee of Elections the 23 day of
November last, it was several days before the said Hearing, industriously
spread up and down the House of Commons and elsewhere, That an Indictment of
Perjury was found against Sir Humphrey, although the Indictment was not found
and brought into Court until the 28th day of November, which was 5 days after
the Hearing by the said Committee, thereby to prejudice his Election. That Sir
Humphrey Edwin agreed with Mr. Hall for this Lease, and paid the Queen Dowager
two hundred and sixty Pounds for it. That Mr. Johnson was only Sir Humphrey's
Trustee (...)n his own desire, pretending thereby to save Time and Sir Humphrey
twelve Pounds; that Sir Humphrey paid Mr. Johnson seventeen Guineas for his
Pains, and Mr. Johnson ordered his Clerk to deliver the Writings to Sir
Humphrey, or whom he sent for them; that he never promi^^d to pay Mr. Johnson
two hundred and fifty Pounds, or any part of it; that they should prove it was
declared by some honorable Members of Parliament, that if Sir Humphrey would
not withdraw his Petition against Sir Bazil Firebrass there would be an
Indictment of Perjury brought in against Sir Humphrey: That several days before
the Bill was found, a certain Alderman of London, living in Fleetstreet,
offered a public News-Writer Money to put it into his News-Letter, That an
Indictment of Perjury was found against Sir Humphrey Edwin.

The W^^nesses that were examined on the behalf of Sir Humphrey Edwin, were
only John Hall Esquire and Mr. John Tolson.

John Hall Esquire gave in evidence, that he had so good an Opinion of Sir Humphrey
Edwin, that he resolved to put all he had into his Hands for his Security, and
among other things, the Yorkshire Lease in question: That it was about the Year
1687, when he did first acquaint Sir Humphrey that he had agreed with the
Trustees of the Queen Dowager for the Yorkshire Lease, paying two hundred and
sixty Pounds fine; and that if he pleased, he should have it as a Security,
paying the two hundred and sixty Pounds fine. Sir Humphrey accepted it, and
went with him to Mr. Johnson's Chamber, and he acquainted him of their
Agreement: Mr. Johnson answered, he had already made some Proceedings therein
to take the said Lease in his own Name, upon which he had expended about twelve
Pounds; that if he should now begin again, and take it out in Sir Humphrey's
Name, all that Money would be lost: and therefore proposed, to save time, that
he might take the said Lease in his own Name, which would save Sir Humphrey
twelve Pounds; and that he would afterward assign it to Sir Humphrey. All
which Sir Humphrey did consent to, and gave Mr. Johnson a Note to pay the two
hundred and sixty Pounds fine to Queen Dowager.

My Lord Chief Justice asked Mr. Hall, if Sir Humphrey was to have the Benefit
of the said Lease, and if it was only taken in Mr. Johnson's Name, to save 12
l.? Mr. Hall replied, Yes it was. And Mr. Hall being further asked, who was to
pay Mr. Johnson his 250 l. and whether Sir Hump^^ey was not to pay him? Mr.
Hall replied, that he himself was to pay him the 250 l. and not Sir Humphrey
Edwin; for it was his own Debt, and he promised to pay Mr. Johnson in a short
time.

And Sir H^mphrey going afterward to Mr. Johnson, he told him he would not
seal the Yorkshire Lease until Mr. Hall had paid him two hundred and fifty
Pounds. Sir Humphrey told him, he would not have any thing to do with Mr.
Hall's Debt; and bid him give him his Money back again, which he had paid the
Queen Dowager for the Fine. So Mr. Johnson gave him a Note for the two hundred
and sixty Pounds. But he going with Sir Humphrey the next day to Mr. Johnson's,
and being concerned that he should obstruct the sealing of the Lease to Sir
Humphrey, and he promising to pay Mr. Johnson what he owed him in a short time,
Mr. Johnson said to Sir Humphrey, Give me my Note of two hundred and sixty
Pounds, and I will seal. Whereupon, Sir Humphrey gave Mr. Johnson his Note of
260 l. and they were all pleased, and parted satisfied. -- Mr. Hall was again
asked, if this Lease was not a Security to Mr. Johnson, and how he did intend
to satisfy him? Mr. Hall answered, Mr. Johnson did show him a Writing under his
Hand, which he had forgot, wherein he was to have this Lease, and the Equity of
Redemption of the Manor of Westminster, for security of what he owed him. --
But he desired Mr. Johnson, that he would not hinder the executing of the said
Deeds to Sir Hamphrey ^^^^n, and he would pay him very suddenly. That he had
had long Dealings with Mr. Johnson, and did presume (...) his Kindness. And Mr.
Johnson promised to assign the (...) case to Sir Humphrey.

The Lord Chief Justice was please^ (...) himself, That this is a strange
Indictment; and had th^^ Issue been brought to be tried there, it would have
been doubtful who should have paid the 250 l.

Mr. Tolson being called by the Counsel to speak to the sealing of the
Writings; and beginning to speak thereunto, the Lord Chief Justice bid him
speak what he knew about taking away the Writings. -- Mr. Tolson declared, That
he went with Sir Humphrey Edwin for his Writings to Mr. Johnson's Chamber; That
when they came to the bottom of the Stairs, Sir Humphrey sent hi^ up to see if
Mr. Francis Sambrook was in the Chamber; and he came and told Sir Humphrey, he
was; so they went up together: Sir Humphrey asked Mr. Sambrook, if he had got
his Writings ready; and after a little time, he went and fetched them, and
delivered them to Sir Humphrey; and he looked them over, and examined them with
Mr. Sambrook: and Sir Humphrey missing the Grand Deed from the Queen Dowager
for the Lands in Yorkshire, Mr. Sambrook told him, it was with Sir Francis
Winington. He was then sent for it; but Sir Francis not being in his Chamber,
he came back and told them, he could not have it, Sir Francis not being within.
And Mr. Tolson also declared, That Sir Humphrey wrote the Letter (which Mr.
Sambrook had before mentioned) at Mr. Sambrook's Request, he before having
acquainted Sir Humphrey, that he was going down to Hereford; the said Letter
being writ, in behalf of Mr. Sambrook, to Sir Humphrey's Brother in Hereford,
to entertain him kindly, for which Mr. Sambrook thanked Sir Humphrey. And that
Mr. Sambrook afterward gave Sir Humphrey a Bill for engrossing several
Writings; and Sir Humphrey paid him about five Pounds, or five Guineas, he knew
not which. And going on, he was stopped; and,

The Lord Chief Justice said, Here are Circumstances alleged to show the Truth
of what is testified; The Writings examined, -- one of the Deeds wanting, and
Money paid for engrossing the Deeds: Where is this Person that swore just now,
and mentioned none of them? Francis Sambrook came again into Court, and
confessed, as Mr. Tolson had deposed, that the Deeds were examined, and the
Grand Deed was at Sir Francis Winington's Chamber, where he had left it by
Mistake; and Sir Francis not being within, he afterward got it. And he
confessed that he did receive five Guineas of Sir Humphrey for engrossing the
Deeds.

The Lord Chief Justice appearing displeased that none of these Circumstances
were mentioned or owned before by Francis Sambrook, he put himself back out of
the Court in a Heat.

The Lord Chief Justice seeming to be displeased at the Indictment, did not
desire to hear more of the Matter, or any more Witnesses for Sir Humphrey
Edwin, he having several times expressed his dislike of the Proceedings. -- And
the Earl of Berkly testifying much for the Reputation of Sir Humphrey; and then
some of the Counsel against Sir Humphrey said, that they did not question Sir
Humphrey's Reputation. But the Lord Chief Justice was pleased to answer, What!
not question his Reputation, and yet indict him of Perjury?

My Lord therefore shortly summed up what was deposed on both Sides. And the
Jury being together a very little time, acquitted Sir Humphrey Edwin of the
said Indictment.

If the Court had not been so satisfied, that it was declared that there was no
pretense for the Indictment, Sir Humphrey had Witnesses ready in Court to have
proved the truth of the whole Case, as it is before stated, and of all the
Matters beforementioned, that were alleged by his Counsel in his Defense.

There were Witnesses to prove,

1. That Mr. Johnson desired that the Lease from the Queen Dowager might be
taken in his Name, in Trust for Sir Humphrey, to save Charges.

2. That Sir Humphrey paid the Fine to the Queen Dowager for the Lease.

3. That Sir Humphrey gave Mr. Johnson five Guineas, and twelve Guineas for his
Pains in the Business, and his Clerk two Guineas.

4. That the Consideration of Mr. Johnson's assigning, was expressed to be no
more than five Shillings, by his own Hand.

5. That Mr. Johnson, after he had tried to have drawn Sir Humphrey to have
paid Mr. Hall's Debt to him of 250 l. out of the said Lease, did then promise
to perfect the Deed, and was content with Mr. Hall's Promise to pay him the
Money due from him.

And it was proved by the Witnesses sworn, that Mr. Johnson sealed, and freely
delivered the Deeds to the Use of Sir Humphrey. This and much more would have
been testified, which would have been great Aggravations of the Malice of those
that formed the Indictment against Sir Humphrey.

6. His Witnesses were also ready to have proved that some of the Conspirators
against his Reputation, did industriously publish, That an Indictment of
Perjury was found against him, whilst it was only designed, and not found: And
that Money was offered to a News-writer, to have it inserted in his News-Paper,
to pass into all the Kingdom. And,

7. That two Members of Parliament came to a Gentlewoman in the Pell-Mell, and
desired her to go to Sir Humphrey Edwin, and advise him ^o withdraw his
Petition in Parliament against Sir Bazil Firebrass his sitting there, for that
if he did not, there would be an Indictment preferred against him for Perjury.
And they doubted not of a Jury that would find it, saying, that he might avoid
it, if he pleased to withdraw his Petition for his Election, or Words to that
effect.

But the Court seemed to think it a loss of Time to hear more Witnesses for Sir
Humphrey, since there was no cause nor color for the Indictment. Therefore he
would not tire out the Court with needless Evidences, but reserve some of the
Witnesses until he shall (...) find out the vile Conspiracy against him, that
he may recover his Damages.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed in the Year. 1692.


