AN ANSWER TO THE DECLARATION Of the Pretended ASSEMBLY at DVNDEE; AND TO A
PRINTED PAPER, INTITVLED, The PROTESTATION given in by the Dissenting Brethren
to the GENERAL ASSEMBLY, July 21. 1652. Reviewed and refuted, etc.

In which ANSWER are set down Ten Steps of their defection who follow the way
of the Public Resolutions.

Together with OBSERVATIONS upon some of the Acts of the P. Assemblies at
Dundee and Edinburgh, and some PAPERS concerning the endeavors of the
PROTESTERS for Union with their Brethren, who differ from them in Judgment.

Printed in Anno 1653.

GOOD READER,
BE pleased to understand, that when that Paper, Entitled The Protestation
given in by the dissenting Brethren to the Genesis Assembly July 21. 1652.
Reviewed and refuted, etc. came abroad in Print, there were differing thoughts
about it, amongst these who are concerned to answer it. Some said that it was
not worth an answer, others knowing that it did indeed more abound with
calumnies and reproaches then with arguments, yet, did judge it fit to he
answered, because in this corrupt age calumnies pass for truths among the
generality of people without any serious disquisition and examination. Within
very few days after that Paper was published, an Answer was drawn by one who
favors the Cause of the Protesters, and was by him intended presently for
the Press; But there it was delayed, and upon good grounds the Review of the
Vindication of the pretended Assembly at St. Andrews and Dundee had the
precedence in the Press: for the validity of the Protestation lately made at
Edinburgh does much depend upon the nullity of that Assembly, which was
asserted and well proved in that Review; And the Writer of that Paper (I mean
the Review of the Protestation made at Edinburgh, to which the Answer was
intended) did so hyperbolically commend that Vindication of the Assembly at St.
Andrews and Dundee as a Nervous Piece, not yet answered, nor easily answerable,
beside diverse other expressions about it, and did so often refer unto it in
his Review, that it was easy to perceive that no answer would be accounted
satisfactory, if that Vindication were not first answered and published that
sober and judicious men might see whether there was so great cause of boasting
of that Vindication or not, and to give such Public provocations in Print,
calling for an Answer to it; beside that, there was information that a course
was taken by some of those that maintain the Public Resolutions for Printing
the Vindication of that Assembly at London, which was very true for it was
Printed there in the year 1652. After the Review of the Vindication was
Printed; this Answer was a while stopped at the Press for want of license to
Print it, and as some things which were in the Copy which was at first intended
for the Press were left out, so other things emergent were added. The Reviewer
of the Protestation does in the beginning of his Paper refer to a Declaration
made at the pretended Assembly at Dundee, which you will find to be first
answered here; and because it abounds with reproaches and mis-informations,
therefore there was a necessity to insist the more largely in matters of fact.
You have next the steps of their defection who follow the way of the Public^ R
solutions, and then the Answer to the Review of the Protestation, and lastly
some things about the Union endeavored by the Protesters, together with
observations upon some Acts of the said pretended Assemblies; In all which you
have their own Papers, that it may be seen that no wrong is done to their
cause, in repeating their Reasons and Arguments except it be done by
themselves. I desire not to prejudice the Reader by a Preface, only this much
I would say further, that whereas this Reviewer boastes that the gray headed
and aged men for the most part are on their side, to which there is enough
answered in this Treatise; Yet I would have it remembered that the same
Argument is used by Eliphaz the Temanite against Job. chap. 15. v. 9, 10. What
know thou that we know not? What understandest thou which is not in us? With
us are both the gray headed, and very aged men, much elder then thy father. But
this is better considered by Elihu, Job 32.7.8, 9. I said days should speak,
and multitude of years should teach wisdom: But there is a spirit in man, and
the Inspiration of the Almighty gives them understanding, great men are not
always wise, neither do the aged understand judgment. Farewell good Reader,
read and consider, and the Lord give thee understanding in all things so I rest,

Thine in the LORD JESUS.

The PROTESTATION Reviewed and refuted: Briefly showing the insufficiency of
the Reasons thereof, and consequently the justice of the Assemblies sentence
condemning it.
HOw well this Reviewer and Refuter has performed what this his Title seems to
promise against the Protestation, and for the sentence of the Assembly
condemning it, will appear to these to whom the Lord gives an hearing ear, and
a seeing eye, by comparing what is said in defense of the Protestation in
Answer to this Review. Therefore beseeching the LORD who is no respecter of
persons, to make what is here said unsavourie or acceptable unto the Reader, as
it contributes for destruction or edification, for darkening or clearing of the
truth in this hour of temptation, and day of blasphemy and rebuke. I come to
the matter it self.

REVIEW of the PROTESTATION.
AMongst the many sad judgments wherewith the holy blessed God is pleased to
exercise this sinful Land, staining the pride of all our glory, there is none
more terrible, then that he threatens to remove our Candlestick.

DEFENSE of the PROTESTATION.
ALbeit the Generation of the righteous in the Land, who are instructed with a
strong hand, are preserved in hope, that the thoughts of the Lord toward this
poor Church, are thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give us an expected
end, yet that there be many things which threaten that most dreadful judgment
of removing the Candlestick, he that run^ may read, the shadows of the evening
are grown long, and the wild beasts are come out of their dens, our
Battlements are broken down, and the Adversary has stretched forth his hand
upon all our pleasant things: we see not ou^ signs, there is no more any
Prophet, neither is there amongst us that knows how long, the Lord is become
as a stranger, and as a way faring man in the Land, that turns aside to tarry
for a night: he has covered himself with a cloud in his anger, and prayer is
restrained before him; the anger of the Lord has divided us, and he seems no
more to regard us. But that which is most dreadful in it self, and does most
imbitter so sad a condition, is, that we have fallen from our first love; we
have forgotten the Lord, and dealt falsely in his Covenant, our hearts are
turned back, and our steps have declined from his way; we have forsaken the
fountain of living waters, and dug unto our selves broken cisterns that can
hold no water; We have walked in the way of Egypt, to drink the waters of
Sihor; and in the ways of Assyria, to drink the waters of the river, the
enemies of the Lord have been entrusted and stayed upon, their interests owned
and promoted, holiness and piety despised and trodden under foot, the godly
persecuted and reproached, the hearts of the wicked made glad, and their hands
strengthened; the hearts of the righteous made sad, and their hands weakened,
the Work of Reformation in purging of scandalous and profane Officers and
Members out of the House of God, evil spoken of for what is past, and a
foundation laid to obstruct it for the time to come; yea, to persecute and cast
out such who shall oppose and bear testimony against these things; and yet
after we have done all these things, and have gadded about so much to change our
way, have trimmed our way to seek love, and also taught the wicked ones our
ways, we wipe our mouth, and say, We are innocent. And that notwithstanding
all that is come upon us, we have not forgotten the Lord, nor dealt falsely in
his Covenant; and we cannot bear these who discover our iniquity, and make
known our sins unto us. If there be any who desiring to keep their integrity,
and to adhere to their former principles, bear testimony against the Lands back
sliding and defection against our Princes and Prophets, and People in their
late transactions with the enemies of Reformation, and haters of the people of
God, and of the power of godliness, these are the burden of many, and are for
signs and wonders who are spoken against; even these are they whom this
Reviewer and Ref^ter calls deceivers and persecuters, and miserable comforters,
who in the day of Sions calamity stand afar off from her, and persecute her
whom the Lord has smitten, and talk to the grief of these whom he has
wounded, and who in her adversity gather themselves together, in the place of
cordials bringing corosives. The Protesters against whom he throws these
reproaches, acknowledge themselves to be men compassed about with many
infirmities, and that for their fins also wrath is upon the Land: But if they
have done this thing, and if this iniquity be in their hands wherewith they are
here charged, let their honor be laid in the dust, and their glory turned into
shame; I think they may and will, in trembling and humble fear, commit their
Cause unto the righteous Judge of the World, who will make every man's works
manifest, is it to stand a far off from Zion, or not to comfort her, or to
deceive her, or to persecute her, not to be consenting to the whordoms and
backslidings of her children? And to tell them, that they have perverted their
way, and have forgotten the Lord their God, and to say to her Prophets, that
they do not discover her iniquity, to turn away her captivity, and that they,
even they have caused the Lords people to err: some of them built a wall, and
many strive to uphold it, and daub it with untempered mortar; I mean, that some
of them gave counsel concerning the employing and entrusting the Malignant
Party, and that many adhere thereto; and for strengthening these wretched
foundations, have corrupted and perverted the National Assemblies of this
Church in the free and lawful constitution thereof; that they have made sad
the hearts of the righteous, whom the Lord has not made sad, and strengthened
the hands of the wicked, that he should not return from his wicked way, that
they thrust with the side and shoulder, and push the diseased with their horns,
to scatter them abroad, that they decree unrighteous decrees, and write
grievous things against their brethren, which they have prescribed. Our bruise
is sore, and our wound is uncurable, for the Lord has wounded us with the
wound of an Enemy, with the chastisements of a cruel one, for the multitude of
our iniquities, because our sins were increased: Therefore is it no time to
cover our transgressions as Adam, by hiding our iniquity in our bosom, nor to
daub with untempered mortar, nor slightly to heal the daughter of our people,
but to give glory to the God of Israel, by taking shame to our selves, and
confessing wherein we have trespassed against him; and it is the best service
that can be done to Zion, to show her sons and her daughters in this day of her
calamity, why the Lord contends with her. Such corrosives from friends, are
better then the cordialls of flatterers; when the righteous smites it is a
kindness, and when he reproves, it is an excellent oil which breaks not the
head. Surely this is the Lord and his Sai^ts; yea, the Interpreters one of a
thousand their paved way of being comfortable to these whom GOD has smitten,
to discover their work and the transgression wherein they have exceeded, that
they may open their ear to discipline, and remember whence they are fallen, and
repent, and do their first works, lest if they obey not, they perish by the
sword, and die without knowledge; or he come against them quickly, and remove
their candlestick out of his place, Levit. 26.40.41. Job 34.29, 30, 31, 32, 33.
Job 36.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Rev. 2.4, 5.

PROTESTATION Reviewed.
I Shall be loath to trace that too too ordinary by-path of judging any man's
eternal estate by his temporal out-breakings, or his heart and intentions by
the outside of h s actions, yet I hink I may safely say, That that Assembly at
St. Andrews and Dundee, although despised of Men, was owned of GOD, and that he
guided their Pens, as all along in their Procedor, so particularly in their
Warning and Declaration, and these word thereof, what ever has been the
intention of these who have been instrumental in making of this rent from
Public Counsels and Actings, yet the work it self, and the spirit that has
been stirring in it, has been and yet is most effectual for carrying on of the
design of the adversaries of our cause; Which they prove by seven Steps of
their Progress.

PROTESTATION Defended.
TO judge of any man's everlasting estate by his temporal outbreakings, or his
intentions by the outside of h s actions, as it is to encroach upon things
secret which belong unto God, and to walk uncharitably toward men, so it is
not the path which the Proteste s have trodden, and it is but a groundles
insinuation to suggest it of them, they know, and do acknowledge, that many of
the Lords Precious Ones before their effectual calling are amongst the worst of
out-breakers, and that some of them even after they are made partakers of the
Grace of God, fall into grievous sins; yet do not these things bar them, or cut
them off from the mercy of God, whose election is according to Grace; and
therefore the Protesters have not denied the Testimony of gracious men to not a
few of these whose hand (alas for it!) is deep in the provocation; they know
also how to distinguish, and have distinguished betwixt the condition of the
work, and the intention of the worker, and think charitably of the one, whilst
they condemn the other: yet these things hinder them not to discern betwixt the
righteous and the wicked; him that serves God, and him that serves him not: the
Lord has taught us that false Prophets may be known by their fruits, and that
men do not gather grapes of thorns, nor figs of thistles, Matthew. 7.16.20. The
transgression of the wicked says within mine heart, that there is no fear of
God before his eyes, Psa. 36.1. As I dare not judge of any man's everlasting
estate, but leave it unto him with whom the books are; so have I not so learned
Christ as some men would have it, to put no difference amongst the Professors
of the Gospel, but to call them all godly though estranged from the life of God
through the ignorance that is in them, and walking contrary to the Gospel. That
the Assembly at S. Andrews and Dundee was owned of God, and that He all along
in their procedor did guide their Pens, as my soul cannot away with that
assertion to subscribe to it, so I fear it is more then the Lord will allow any
man to say. 1. Because that Assembly did say, a confederacy to these concerning
whom the Lord spoke to his Prophet with a strong hand, and instructed him that
he should not say, A confederacy to them, Isa. 8.11, 12. And therefore,
although they did associat themselves, yet they did fall and fall together,
Isa. 31.3. The sad dispensation of their ruin being in the beginning thereof at
Innerkithen in Providence trysted with the beginning of that Assembly, and
afterward more fully accomplished and perfected at other places, as they, and
their Comm ssion went on in ratifying of these Resolutions, and censuring the
opposers of the same, and issuing Warnings and Declarations in reference to
these things. 2. Because that Assembly was so far from rejoicing the hearts, or
approving themselves unto the consciences of most of the godly in the Land, or
from leaving this seal and impression upon their hearts that they had the image
and authority of Jesus Christ, and did proceed according to the Law and the
Testimony, and employ their power unto edification and promoting of godliness;
that upon the contrary they did exceedingly sadden their spirits and leave a
deep and strong conviction thereupon, that they did add unto the Lands
provocation and increase wrath, and that in most of all their actings they did
walk not unto edification, but unto destruct on. 3. Because their actings did
rejoice the hearts and strengthen the hands of these in the Land who were void
of Grace and of the knowledge of Jesus Christ, and adversaries to the Cause and
People of God, and mockers and haters of Piety and Godliness. Was not that
Assembly countenanced and pleaded for? and is it not to this day countenanced
and pleaded for by all the generation of malignant and profane persons
throughout the Land? And sure, if it had been so much countenanced and owned of
God, it is not like that it should have been so endeared to these who have so
much opposed his friends and interest in Scotland these many years past. 4
Because that Assembly at Dundee did for no other cause, but for protesting
against their wrong Constitution, and the ratifying of these Resolutions,
censure and pronounce the sentences of Deposition and Suspension against sundry
godly men who have obtained mercy of the Lord to be followers of his Cause
since the beginning of the late Reformation, and whose Ministry has been sealed
of the Lord upon the hearts of not a few of his People. 5. Because they did by
their Acts lay a foundation for censuring all Ministers, Elders, Expectants,
Students and Professors whatsoever, who refuse to acknowledge the constitution
of that Assembly and oppose the Acts thereof; which as it makes way for the
casting out of many able and godly Professors from being Church Members (for it
is well known how many there be of the godly in the Land both Ministers, Elders,
and Professors, who cannot be consenting to submit to these things, but do hold
themselves bound in their stations to bear testimony against them) Now, to cast
out and persecute all these, or to lay a foundation fordoing of it, whether it
be to be owned and guided of God, and to do things to edification; or if it be
not rather to be deserted of the Lord, to establish iniquity by a Law, and to
decree unrighteous Decrees, and write grievous things against their Brethren
which they have prescribed, I leave it to those who are taught of God, to
consider. As to that passage in the Warning and Declaration of that Assembly
(so much magnified and cried up by the Author of this Review) it was, and it is
the intention of the Protesters, through the Lords assistance (though with much
weakness) to oppose the design and work of the Adversaries on both hands, and
to tread the middle path, the good old way, without declining to the right hand
or to the left, upon which account it was that they could not condescend to
employ and associat with, and entrust one adversary for opposing another,
knowing such courses to be condemned of God in his holy Word, and to have
proven bitter often heretofore unto this Nation, and for this cause did
solemnly engage, that we should do no more so: Therefore have they always
owned, and strictly adhered to the Covenant and Cause, and former Principles of
the reforming party in this Land, set down in their Public Papers; and that
they might not partake of other men's sins, did not concur with, but bear
testimony against the carnal counsels of men's own hearts, because of which the
Sword did abide in our Cities, and consume our branches, and devour them, Hos.
11.6. and the spirit that has been stirring in them in these actings (I trust)
is no other then the good Spirit of God, the Spirit of truth and holiness, the
voice behind them that speaks in the ears of the Lords People, This is the way,
walk ye in it, when they turn to the right hand, and when they turn to the left
hand, Isa. 30.21. In order to this passage of the Warning at Dundee, I wish the
first penner thereof, and the Gentleman who now has cited it, and all others,
to consider these few things: 1. That not long ago there was a time that some
of the best and most precious of these who now charge the Protesters with these
harsh imputations of having a spirit stirring in their work that has been, and
is most effectual for carrying on of the design of the Adversaries of our Canse
were liable no less then the Protestors now are to the same Imputations from
these by whom they now are cried up and commended, and with whom they now join
issue in casting them upon their Brethren. It concerns them to think whence
these changes are, and whether they have given diligent heed to that word of
exhortation that says, Let them come to thee, but go not thou to them. 2. That
the Protesters have studied to take hold of every opportunity to declare and
make known their approbation of, and adherence unto the Work of Reformation,
and to bear testimony against all injuries done thereunto, and encroachments
made thereupon, and have endeavored to the utmost of their power to prevent
and remedy the same. 3. That the Authors and Abettors of the Public
Resolutions, have now met several times in their Assemblies and Commissions,
yet to this day have we had no word of testimony from them against these
adversaries of our Cause, with the promoting of whose design they do so much
charge the Protesters, but their spirit and zeal has been spent another way.
As to what they have done at their late Assembly with closed doors, none being
present but themselves, that cannot be looked on as a testimony to the Cause of
Christ, and at the best it will amount to no higher, then the profession of
Nicodemus in private. Why have they not made it a testimony indeed, and
appointed some of their number to present, own and avow it, before some of
these against whom they testify, as the Protesters did seasonably and with the
first opportunity? Or why did they remove all others out of their meeting? Were
they afraid that some should have born witness and testified what they had
done? If they looked on themselves as an Assembly of this Kirk, they cannot be
ignorant that the transactions of General Assemblies ought and use to be
public, and especially their testimonies. Or why did they not communicate the
same to Synods, Presbyteries and Congregations, but let it ly in the dark to
this day. If they desire to be accounted faithful, they would either give a
more distinct and certain sound concerning these adversaries, or else speak
less against the Protesters, lest they bewray more passion then piety, and
more of the zeal of themselves, then of the true zeal of God. 4. Where has
that spirit lodged which this last year past has been most effectual for
carrying on the design of the adversaries, whether among the Protesters, or
amongst the Authors and Abettors of the Public Resolutions, let themselves
speak.

But because he is pleased from that Warning and Declaration of the Assembly at
Dundee, to mention seven steps of progress, whereby they labor to prove what
they do assert in the former passage acted by him; therefore seeing that
Declaration (which is fraughted with much ill-grounded charity to Malignants,
and with a great deal of causeless prejudice and mistaken zeal against many of
the precious and godly in the Land) begins again to be dug up out of its
grave, wherein sad dispensations of Providence did once seem to bury it before
it could be heard speak in many of the Congregations of the Land, therefore
though he do insist on the last Step. yet for truths sake, and for clearing of
these who are traduced without cause, I shall speak shortly to all the seven.

The DECLARATION at Dundee.
THe first step is expressed thus: The credulity of some, believing the
hypocritical pretenses of this now prevailing faction of Sectaries, mixed
apparently with the crafty design of others would not so much as admit the
suspicion of this enemies purpose to invade us, and thereupon did resist and
retard the lifting of an Army for the defense of the Cause and Kingdom, until
the Enemy was very near our Borders, and had emitted a Declaration of their
resolution to invade us, so that all means of defense was like to be utterly
marred.

DEFENSE.
TWo things are charged here upon the Protesters and their adherents, as the
principle of their actings, credulity in some, and design in others. As to the
first, it is indeed ordinary to gracious men to be credulous of these who have
the show of godliness, until they see them deny the power thereof, and I think
this fault (if it be a fault) may be easily pardoned by these who allow so
large charity to Malignants upon bare and naked Professions now and then, when
they come before the Judicatories of the Kirk, notwithstanding of their many
former breaches and relapses, and known dissimulatio, and contrary cariages in
the tenor of their speeches and actings but what ever be these men's credulity,
yet seeing they walked in the simplicity of their hearts, the Lord has to this
day kept them out of snares, and given them, as to the main of their
carriage, to keep the straight way, declining extremes on both hands. As to the
second, to wit, a crafty design in others, it is alleged to be apparently
so, but no evidence is brought of that, neither can any evidence be brought of
it, it being a mere alleadgeance, without all ground of truth, such things have
been spoken, and written, and preached by some now for a good while past, it is
now high time since it has been so often called for, for their own credits
sake to bring some proof of what they say; I beseech the Author if these words,
and of all such expressions, as before the Lord, and as they would not wrong
themselves nor their brethren, nor delude and do injury to others, by filling
their hearts with thoughts of jealousy and rancour against innocent men, if
they know any thing of this kind, to bring it forth; and if they know nothing
to forbear such reproaches, which though for the present they be bitter to these
whom they asperse, yet in the end the shame will return upon the heads of these
who have broached and vented them; It nay be remembered, that reproaches of this
kind were cast upon the most eminent and faithful, in the year 1648, by the
Authors of the unlawful Engagement, because of their opposing thereof, and
bearing testimony against the same; but passing these, I come to that which is
alleged to be their work, and that was, that they did resist and retard the
lifting of an Army for defense of the Cause and Kingdom, for clearing and
confuting of which, it would be remembered, that as in resolving and
condescending upon the Instructions given to the Commissioners of this Kingdom
for Treating with the King, there were some who too much favoring the
Malignant party, would have had it put in Instruction, that this Kingdom would
engage in a War against England, for restoring the King to his Throne, upon
condition of his giving satisfaction in the Demands propounded to him, which
when they could not obtain, their next endeavor was, that the transaction at
Bredah might be so carried, as that the King and his Party might have some
probable assurance of this, and therefore was the first invitation given to the
King there, contrived in such words and expressions, as seemed to import the
same; which being sent home to this Kingdom, was censured and corrected by the
Parl. (...) new Instructions sent back to Holland, containing the express
demands of this Kingdom to the King, and the form of the Invitation given him
upon satisfaction in terminis to these demands; which form of Invitation and
Declaration made therewith did exclude all engagement to make war upon England,
yet was there a Party in the Land, and some in the Parliament, whose designs
and endeavors did still tend to engage us in a War against England. On the
other hand there was cause to fear an Invasion from England, by reason of the
preparations made the former year by those in power in that Nation, upon the
report of an Agreement betwixt the King and Commissioners sent from this
Kingdom to Holland, in the year 1649. The great difficulty was, how to steer
an even course in reference to both these extremes, both to prevent a sinful
Invasion from this Land upon England, and from England upon this Nation. The
Parliament having seriously pondered both the dangers, took this course; They
sent to their Commissioners then in Holland, renewed Instructions, together
with a Declaration, wherein they made known their dissatisfaction with several
things in the Treaty, in which the Commissioners had varied from their
Instructions, particularly they declared, that nothing agreed on should import
an obligation to make War against England, and gave express direction that
none of the Malignant Party should be permitted to come to Scotland; and this
Instruction was forthwith turned into a Law, and published in Print by
Proclamation at the Market Cross of Edinburgh: And the Earl of Calendar who
had adventured to come from Holland to Scotland, upon hopes of the approbation
of that Treaty, was presently commanded to go aboard a ship within twenty four
hours, and forthwith to depart the Kingdom, under the pain of imprisonment, and
the fine of a hundred thousand merks. These Instructions and the Declaration of
the Parliament, were delivered to the Commissioners in Holland, before the King
came away, together also with Letters to the same purpose from the Commission
of the Kirk to their Commissioners. To prevent the danger of an Invasion from
England, the Parliament did (without so much as the least question or objection
made to the contrary by any Member thereof) renew the Acts of Posture and
Leavie which were made the year preceding, for putting the Kingdom in
readiness in case of Invasion, and upon the 22. of June 1650. they wrote
Letters directed to Mr. Lenthall, Speaker of the House of Commons, the Lord
Fairfax then Lord General, Lieut. General Cromwell, Major General Lambert,
and the Governor of New Castle, in which Lettes they show, that as in their
Letter of the 6. March 1649. they did both acknowledge their obligation, and
did declare their resolution to observe the rule of remonstrating first the
breaches of Peace, of craving just reparation, of using all fair means of
giving a preceding Warning of three months before any engagement of these
Kingdoms in War, so they do again renew the same, and do solemnly profess,
that they do it in the sincerity of their hearts, not out of any policy to
catch advantages for any other end or design, but merely for their own
defense, which they do account abundantly sufficient to remove all grounds of
jealousies and mis-reports of their intentions, and to take away all pretense
of necessity of the marching of Forces for defense of the Borders of England.
And being informed of a resolution in England to send an Army to invade this
Kingdom, they desired to know whether these who have the present power in
England do acknowledge themselves obliged, or by their answer will oblige
themselves and declare their resolutions to observe the foresaid way and order
upon their part to us, and plainly and clearly to declare whether their Forces
do march for defense or offense, for keeping only within the Borders of
England, or coming within ours: which way of proceaor in clearing each other,
and dealing plainly, is not only agreeable to particular Treaties, and to the
many Bonds and Declarations past betwixt these Kingdoms, but also to the Law of
God, and practice of his people in his Word, and to the Common Law and practice
even of Heathen Nations, much more of Christian covenanted Kingdoms, etc. When
the Forces appointed to be raised for defense of the Kingdom, together with the
old standing Forces that were before on foot, were to be formed and drawn
together in a Body, there were some differences in Parliament; one was, Whether
the Malignant Party, and persons grossly scandalous should be excluded from
the Army, or not? There were none in Parliament that had the countenance to
plead for it directly; our constant Principles being known to be so express
against it, and the Kirk having so often pressed upon the Parliament by many
Petitions, Remonstrances, and Declarations, the purging of their Forces, but
diverse would have had the Act for making up the Army to pass, without
appointing any Committee, having power to remove such from the Army Another
difference was, Whether the Committee of Estates should have power to command
the Army to invade England (as was done in the year 1648) or if there should be
a limitation of their power only to stand for the defense of the Land within
our Borders. In this question likewise there were none that pleaded expressly
for such a power in the Committee, but they opposed the limitation. Some time
was spent in conference and debate about these, but they were so few in
Parliament that were either against the exclusion or limitation, that when the
sense of the Parliament came to be known, their number was no ways
considerable, so that what is here represented by the Authors of that
Declaration against the Protesters, as the first step of declining, is in
effect an evidence of their own declining from the former principles of State
and Kirk, for both were then unanimous for exclusion of the Malignant Party and
grossly scandalous persons from the Army, and against the invading of England,
which were the two questions in Parliament that did retard for some days the
bringing forth the new levied Forces; for so soon as these two questions were
ended, it was evidently seen there were none more forward in Parliament and
Committees to hasten them to the fields, then these who are unsatisfied with
the late ^uolick Resolutions; and there was together at Leith, before the
English Army marched into Scotland, so considerable a number of Horse and Foot,
that they were double the number of the English. Surely no other thing but the
change of principles, or groundless prejudice could lead men to quarrel thus
for want of an Army to defend the Land, the great number whereof made the
stro^e at Dumbar the more unexpected, doleful and dreadful. This is the truth
concerning what is laid to the charge of that faithful Parliament which met at
Edinburgh in the year 1650, and whose endeavors to prevent extremes were
answered with disappointment on both hands, which I trust does sufficiently
answer what is said anent the first step.

DECLARATION.
THe second step is set down thus: When the Enemy had invaded us, and an Arms
was raised, under pretense of purging the Forces, and keeping the Kings
Interest under due subordination to God, courses were taken, as after-actings
made manifest, tending to the dividing of the Army, perplexing and discouraging
the spirits of these who labored to be faithful both to God and their King,
and humoring of, and yielding to the untimous and dangerous motions of such who
were under suspicion of too much affection to the Enemy, and that not without
cause, as is now too too evident.

DEFENSE.
I Confess it is to me matter of sorrow and astonishment to hear these words.
Was not the purging of the Army from such of the Engagers as had not approven
themselves in their repentance, a duty that all of us were solemnly engaged
unto before the Lord? Had not the General Assemblies of this Kirk, and their
Commissions before that time, given in above twenty several Petitions,
Warnings and Remonstrances to the Parliament and Committee of Estates for that
end? Had they not issued Declarations and Warnings to all the Land concerning
the necessity of that duty, as we desired to prosper and be blessed of God? And
had not all the Congregation, of the Land kept several Fasts and Humiliatious
by then appointment in order thereunto? Had not the Parliament and Committee of
Estates made Acts, and appointed Commissions there-anent, and taken the persons
to whom Commission was given, solemnly engaged and swor^ to go faithfully about
it, as they would be answerable unto God; and after all these things (in which
many of the leading men of that Assembly at S. Andrews and Dundes were
concurring and consenting) to hear the endeavors of purging of the Army, so
reflected upon and spoken against; what is this but to proclaim against
themselves, that either they did then dissemble, or else that now they are
repenting of the thing which they did then concur in and were consenting to as
a duty, but what ever be their thoughts of it, as these whom they now speak
against did in the simplicity of their hearts then endeavor it, so do they
still own it as a duty, and are sorry to hear it otherwise spoken of,
especially by these who profess love to Reformation. And I do as much wonder
of that which they speak of the Kings Interest, seeing nothing was done in
reference thereto, but the declaring of the due subordination thereof unto
God's, and that they would not otherwise own him and his quarrel, but in that
subordination, and that they meaned to fight upon the same state of quarrel
upon which they had done these twelve years past, which was not done by any
particular persons or party, but jointly and unanimously both by the Committee
of Estates, and Commission of the Kirk, none dissenting, and was homologated by
the whole Officers of the Army in a supplication to the Committee of Estates,
and so far as did then appear, generally followed in their stations and
capacity. This, together with the leaving that Declaration of the Commission of
the Kirk, anent the subordination of the Kings Interest, out of the Act of the
Assembly at Dundee, which ratifieth the proceedings of the Commission, speaks
what spirit stirred in the Assembly when these things were penned and approven;
but (say they) under pretense of these things, courses were taken fordividing
of the Army, and yet they do not tell what these courses were at that time, but
labor to find the evidence of them in after actings, they did wisely to wrap
up in generals, without condescending upon any particular, lest they should
have therein been found out, but their generals are as easily denied, as
affirmed. What is meaned by after-actings, requires explication, and somewhat
over: If he can make this much out of the actings at Hamilton, which were their
rast field-actings. I shall wonder at his wit, to say nothing of his
conscience. Who these faithful ones to God and the King are, whose spirits
they did so much labor to perplex and discourage, I do not know. I do as
little know what were these untimous and dangerous motions, wherein such as
were under suspicion of too much affection to the Enemy, were humoured in, and
yielded unto. It may be remembered that as a great part of the Army was much
weighted in their spirits, with the carriage of these, especially some of chief
note, who did obstruct the purging of the Army, and gave countenance and
encouragement to such as were, or should have been removed out of the Army; so
the whole Army Officers and Soldiers, and the Committee of Estates were much
perplexed, discouraged, and dis-satisfied with the slackness, shiftings, and
delays, and solitary counsels and courses of chief men in the Army, who had
the leading of the Forces, and for most part did do therein, and dispose thereof
as seemed best to themselves, without taking much notice either of the
Committee of Estates or Officers of the Army; and none was more perplexed,
discouraged, and dis-satisfied with this way, then some of these who had a
chief hand in penning this Declaration, in so much that having once spoken
therein, they got so unsatisfying an answer, that with much discontent they did
declare, they meaned never to speak again in that matter. And it may be also
remembered, that the untimous and dangerous motions of which they speak, were so
far from being thought so when they were proponed, that it was the grief of
many in the Army and Committee of Estates, yea and of Assembly-men too, who are
supposed to be skilled in these things, that they were not entertained and
hearkened unto, the truth is, never any motion of that kind made by any of
these whom they call of suspected affection, from the day that our Army came
together, until the day that it was routed, was hearkened unto, unless they
instance the in-fall at Mussteburgh, but only the half of that motion was
followed for the Party which was appointed by the unanimous resolution of the
Officers to make good their retreat, who made the in-fall, was not sent, which,
whether it was faithfulness to God and the King, and to their Brethren, much
of whose blood was shed, their own hearts who did it can best judge, as best
knowing what were the inducements that moved them not to make the resolution of
the Officers concerning the sending of that Party effectual. Other motions were
made by these suspected men also, as to have fallen on at Goger and at Dumbar,
to set behind the Enemy, and not before them, but were not hearkened to. It is
well known who made the motion to draw the Army down the hill on Monday
morning, and carried it by plurality of voices in a Co^ncell of War, which
appoi^ted it to be put presently in execution; yet upon a new conceit, without
advice of the Officers, he delayed all that day till five at night that it was
dark, and then he brought it down, contrary to the advice of the Officers. I
trust they will not deny that this was a dangerous motion, and they cannot say,
that any of these suspected men had a hand therein. Concerning the last words
of that second step, let it be this day examined and considered, what has been
the carriage of these suspected men, and of their unsuspected men the Malignant
Party, and it will at least be found very evident, that this Reviewer his
suspicion is calculated to a wrong Meridian.

DECLARATION.
THe third step is in these words: When after that sad stroke at Dumbar, the
Lords dispensation did call for ways of union and healing, i^stead of these,
subtle courses were taken to engage a great part of the well-affected in the
West, to separate from the Forces of the Kingdom, whereby instead of joint
concurring for acting against the Enemy, jealousies were begotten, and so far
increased, that there was no small danger feared, lest the one part of our
Forces should have fallen upon the other.

DEFENSE.
THe plainest things, and which are acted with the greatest simplicity and
integrity, are often branded with the name of subtle devices, by maintainers
of an ill cause, who no sooner depart from their former principles, but they
give to their opposers the very name, which (were the^r eyes opened of the Lord
to see their own ways) they should take to themselves. What subtle device
could there be here? The Committee of Estates hearing before the defeat at
Dumbar, that Forces were leving in the North of England, which were to come
into Scotland by the way of Carlisle, they wrote Letters to the Western Shires
to meet and correspond among themselves, and to be in readiness for their own
defense. This put them in some forwardness to rise in Arms, when they heard of
the defeat, which being on the third of Sept. the Gentlemen of the Committees
met upon the fifth, and had some of their number at Sterlin upon the sixth, who
made offer to raise speedily a double proportion of the ordinary Levy, which
was well accepted by the Committee of Estates, and Commission of the Kirk, and
Letters of encouragement written from both, which are yet extant, and the
Committee of Estates sent such Officers to conduct these Forces, as they knew
to be most acceptable to the Western Shires. The Forces were raised by
authority of the Committee of Estates, and were obedient to their Orders sent
from time to time under the Lord Chancellours hand, which yet remain
uncancelled, to witness against such calumnies: And there was never any
command sent to them to come and join with the rest of the Forces, until
agreement was made by the State with the Malignant Party, and then Colonel
Montgomerie was appointed to march toward them with some Forces under his
command to require their conjunction, but before he came the length of Sterlin,
Major General Lambert with a strong Body of horse had come to Hamilton, where
he was fought against by the Western Forces, (though they were far inferior in
number) and many were killed of the Enemy on the place, but with the loss of
the Day, and dissipation of the Western. Forces, which put an end to many
groundless jealousies.

DECLARATION.
THe fourth step they set it down in these words, And to heighten differences
yet more and more under fair pretenses of exonering their own consciences, and
obtaining more clearness in the quarrel against the enemy, many whose
intentions were honest were abused and drawn in the snare of a Remonstrance,
whereby the owning of the Kings just Interest agreed unto by the General
Assembly and the Parliament was expressly laid aside, and his removal from the
exercise of his Royal Power and Government, advised to the Committee of
Estates, the authority of the Committee of Estates much weakened, and a way of
holding up a constant division from State and Kirk therein molded.

DEFENSE.
IT is strange that these who maintain the Public Resolutions, should judge it
want of charity to account some men Malignants, notwithstanding their actions
do evidently declare it, and yet do think it no breach of charity in themselves
to judge other men's hearts and thoughts, contrary to their declared intentions,
and whole tenor of their actions. If these men pretend to exoner their
consciences, and seek more clearness in the state of the quarrel, when yet
they did intend no such thing, but their real purpose was, to advance the
Adversaries Cause; Surely it was a grievous and intolerable provocation before
the Lord, which he will find out, that he may take vengeance of such
hypocritical inventions and gross dissimulation; but if their hearts were
straight before him in all these things (of which they have a witness in
Heaven, a Record in their own breasts, and their actions in adventuring their
lives against the Enemy as a testimony before the world) they do them wrong who
speak so of them, which is the more piercing, because it proceeds from some of
these who were once as their guide, their acquaintance with whom they took
sweet counsel together in the Work of God, and walked into the house of God in
company, and yet do now allow them less charity, and give them less trust in
their solemn and public Professions in these things that relate to their
consciences and the public Work, then they do to the greatest Malignants in
the Land, and the bloody murderers who followed James Grahame: for they will
have these upon their verbal professions to be accounted true penitents, and
are filled with ind^gnation against any who speak or write otherwise of them;
but to mend the matter, and that they may not provoke too many of their old
friends at once, they tell us, that the intentions of many who were honest,
were abused and drawn in the snare. They would do a great favor to the whole
Land, especially to simple ones, if they would be pleased once to condescend by
name and surname, upon the subtle ensnaring men that do abuse others, that
they might be known and avoided. For these who were at the compiling of that
Remonstrance, I know many of them to be men of great and good parts, but I know
none of them that are very skillful in drawing circles in the dark, and
conjuring other men unawares within the compass thereof; they are open
ingenuous men, whose hearts and designs have always been read in their
professions and expressions, and these whom they call the abused and ensnared
ones, are more intelligent and discerning men, then to be easily deceived; they
are many of them eminent for grace and abilities, and such as have approved
themselves in special trusts and employments relating to the Cause and
Kingdom. It is true that since the presenting of that Remonstrance, some of
them did slip in a day of temptation, by passing from the same; but it is as
true, that it is the matter of their humiliation for which they mourn before
God, and some of them so much, that hardly can they be comforted. It is to me a
great confirmation of the Remonstrance, that it was approved and accepted by
the Lord as a necessary duty, that gracious men, who by the tentations of the
time, and the persuasions of some whose judgments they respected, being drawn
into a snare at Sterline to disclaim the Remonstrance, they were within very
few days after, so challenged in conscience, that they had no peace of mind
till they acknowledged their fault, and resolved to walk softly all their years
in the bitterness of soul. The first thing that they challenge in the
Remonstrance is, That the owning of the Kings just Interest, agreed unto by the
General Assembly and the Parliament, was expressly laid aside, and his
removal from the exercise of his Royal Power and Government advised to the
Committee of Estates; but in this they do not deal fairly, not only because
they leave out the Reasons upon which this is offered to be considered by the
Committee, which are very weighty and important; but also because they omit to
tell, that the Gentlemen, Ministers, and Forces of the West, had no other
meaning in the Remonstrance as to the Kings Interest, then what was expressed
in the Declaration at the West Kirk of the 12. August, in the year 1650. In
which the Committee of Estates, the Commission of the Kirk, and the Army, did
unanimously join in their several stations and capacities; in testimony
whereof they were willing, and did often offer accordingly to clear and explain
the same, if so be the Commission should forbear to give any sense upon it, and
let un-byassed men judge if it was unseasonable to remonstrate this, upon the
Kings deserting the Councels of State and Kirk, and joining with the Malignant
Party, contrary to the Covenant and Treaty. The next thing challenged is, That
the authority of the Committee of Estates is thereby weakened; but it is not
told how, belike it is meaned because of the freedom that is therein used, in
laying before them the sins and mis-carriages of sundry of these who were then
in place and power, but the discovering and taking with of sin, does not weaken
but strengthen authority; that which has provoked the Lord to dash our
Judicatories in pieces, and to bring them to nothing, is, Because they have
refused to take with their guiltiness, and to humble themselves under the
mighty hand of God. If the freedom that was used in the Remonstrance, in
reference to Members of the Committee of Estates offend any, these four things
would be remembered: 1. That what is therein represented, is known and
undeniable truth. 2. That the Lord was calling thereto by his most dreadful
strokes. 3. That many were hardening and hab^tuating themselves in sin. 4. That
the men who spoke, were about to lay down their lives, and therefore took
liberty to speak all their hearts, that they might exoner themselves, and leave
it as their testimony with others. The third is, that a way of holding up a
constant division from State and Kirk is therein molded, but nothing is said
to make out this; and though some of the Remonstrators be judged and called
subtle and designing men. yet as they did intend no such thing, so do I doubt
exceed^ngly if they be so quick-sighted as to see the strength of this
inference that is made upon it; for my part, I see it not, and am content to be
^gnorant of it, until it shall be discovered unto me.

DECLARATION.
THe fifth step is, When notwithstanding of this perilous practice, all means
of union of Forces, and healing of the breach was endeavored by Church and
State, yet union could not be had, except upon such conditions as the State and
Church could neither in honor nor in conscience grant; whereby and through the
dissipation of these Forces which aahered to the Remonstrance at Hamilton, the
State and Church were necessitated either to render all up to the present rage
of a perfidious and prevalent Enemy, or to make use of such as had been
formerly received to repentance for their sinful courses, and admit others to
repentance, from whom satisfaction might be gotten, agreeable to the Rules of
the General Assembly, that all togother might be employed for the just and
necessary defense of the Cause and Kingdom, their natural interest,
obligations and solemn^ ties by Covenant calling for the same.

DEFENSE.
LEt it be considered what these conditions were which the Church and State
could neither in honor nor conscience grant. As for the Kings exercising of
his power, the Remonstrators did declare, that they had in humility propounded
their judgment and the reasons thereof unto the Committee of Estates; but it
was in their power to hearken unto them, and to do so, yea or no, as they
thought fit, and that if they should not be pleased, still to debar the King
from the exercise of his power, as he had been formerly, they would not refuse
to live peaceably under him, as the Magistrate of the Land, only two things they
did desire in order to their uniting with the Forces of the Kingdom: 1. That
the quarrel upon which they fought, might be stated as in the Declaration of
the 13. of Aug. 1650. 2. That there might be one to command the Forces,
qualified according to the solemn Engagement unto duties, to wit, of a
blameless and Christian conversation, and of known integrity and constant
affection to the Cause of God; both which conditions were refused. Now, I would
fain know a reason why these things might not be condescended unto in honor and
conscience. Was it less honor or conscience to state the quarrel in November
1650. according to the foresaid Declaration, then it-was to state it in August.
immediately preceding? Had any thing occurred in order to the King for altering
the state of the quarrel, and making it more favorable as to him, or rather,
was there not something to the contrary, to wit, his deserting of the
Judicatories, giving of Commissions to the Malignants, and joining with them?
Or was it contrary to honor and conscience to satisfy them in the other? Or
did not both honor and conscience bind them to it? As to the employing of the
Malignant Party, there is so much said in a particular Treatise to demonstrate
the sinfulness of it, as also that there was no necessity for it, that I shall
not now insist upon it, only I desire that to be taken notice of, which they
say of making use of such as had been formerly received to repentance for their
sinful courses, and admitting others to repentance from whom satisfaction
might be gotten, agreeable to the Rules of the General Assembly, that all
together might be employed. Which words import, that as they did require
repentance in all these who were formerly excluded, and were now to be
employed; so also that care was taken to receive none but such as satisfied
according to the Rules of the General Assembly, both which are spoken gratis,
and without ground. The first, because in answer to the Quere, and in the
Warning penned for the strengthening of it (which two were the foundations of
employing these men) there is no word of repentance, or satisfaction as
necessary requisites in these who were to be employed in the defense of the
Kingdom, and of the Cause, but the exceptions in the Answer exclude only
excommunicated persons forefaulted, notoriously profane, or flagitious, and
such as have been from the beginning, and continue still, or are at this time
obstinate and professed enemies and opposers of the Covenant and Cause of GOD;
and most, if not all the Arguments in the Warning run for employing all men who
are Subjects without any such qualification. The last because the order
prescribed by the Genesis Assembly was not kept in receiving of them: That Order
(as is evident from the Act of the Assembly 49. concerning the receiving of
Engagers) is, That because many heretofore have made show and profession of
their Repentance, who were not convinced of their guiltiness, nor humbled for
the same, but did thereafter return with the dog to the vomit, and with the
sow to the puddle, unto the mocking of GOD, and the exceeding great reproach
and detriment of his Cause: Therefore for the better determining the truth and
sincerity of the repentance of those who desire to be admitted to the Covenant
and Communion, It is appointed and ordained, that none of those persons who are
debarred from the Covenant and Communion shall be admitted and received thereto,
but such as after exact trial shall be found for some competent time, before or
after the offer of their repentance, according to the discretion of the
respective Judicatories, to have in their ordinary conversations given real
testimony of their dislike of the late unlawful Engagement, and of the courses
and ways of Malignants, and of their sorrow for their accession to the same,
and to live soberly, righteously and godly; and if any shall be found, who
after the defeating of the Engagers, have uttered any malignant speeches
tending to the approbation of the late unlawful Engagement, or the bloodshed
within the Kingdom for promoving of the ends of the said Engagement, or any
other projects or practices within or without the Kingdom, prejudicial to
Religion and the Covenant, or tending to the reproach of the Ministry, or the
Civil Government of the Kingdom; or who have unnecessarily or ordinarily
conversed with malignants and disaffected persons, or who have had hand in, or
accession to, or compliance with, or have any ways countenanced or promoved
any malignant design, prejudicial to Religion and the Covenant, that these,
notwithstanding their profession of repentance be not suddenly received, but a
competent time, according to the discretion of the Judicatory be assigned to
them for trial of the evidence of their repentance, according to the
qualifications abovementioned.

Now let Consciences speak, whether this order in receiving these men was
observed yea, or not; yea, it was so far from it, that they were received
without such evidences in a very rash and precipitant way, unto the most
manifest mocking of Repentance that has been heard or seen in any Church in
the world, many of them flouting and jeering at the Judicatories of the Kirk,
and one at another, and making sports of their Confessions amongst their
companions, and giving as much evidence of their malignancy and prophanity and
hating of godliness in their speeches and carriage as of before: Did not the
Commission make such have to receive these who had broken out in Rebellion, and
risen in Arms against the Cause and Kingdom after Dumbar, that notwithstanding
they had once by an Act remitted them all for censure to the Genesis Assembly, and
intimated the same to Presbyteries, that they might not be admitted to the
renewing of the Covenant or Communion, till the Assembly should judge of their
case; yet they did after the Answer to the Quere make a new Act for receiving
them, to the great offense of the godly, and exposing of their own Authority to
contempt and reproach.

DECLARATION.
THe 6. Step is set down thus, Notwithstanding some men had thus occasioned the
making up of our Forces as they now are, yet not only did they themselves
refuse to join with them, but opposed by all means possible the raising of the
Army according to Public Resolutions, what by preaching, what by writing, what
by branding ho^^st men (many of whom did bear the burden and hea^ of the day
when others were not) with the odious imputations of backsliding,
Covenant Breaking, and what not? Public Fasts were separated from and
contemned, Factions drawn amongst the People; in a word, no means were left
unessayed to make Public Resolutions in order to the raising of the Army
ineffectual, without holding forth any possible or probable means for the
relief of the Kingdom: All which (what ever have been the intentions of men) do
of their own nature contribute no less effectually to the delivering up of all
to the will of the Enemy without stroke of sword, then if it had been purposely
intended.

DEFENSE.
PRejudice stretches far to reach a blow. Albeit it is here asserted that some
men did by all means possible oppose the raising of the Army, according to the
Public Resolutions, and that they left no means unessayed to make these
Resolutions ineffectual for raising of the Army, yet they must be the men who
thus occasioned the making up of the Army as it was: How this should be I do
not well know, unless it was by an Antiperistasis, as heat sometimes occasions
cold, and cold, heat; or, as the preaching of the Gospel occasions war upon the
earth. It is like enough that the Testimony which was born against that way did
instate men's corruptions and make them more violent and headstrong in the
prosecution of the same. But their meaning happily is, That these men did
oppose the union of the Forces, or would not suffer others to rise for the
defense of the Kingdom and Cause, and so put the Committee of Estates upon a
necessity of employing of these. To joining of the Forces we have spoke before,
and showed upon what terms they were willing to have joined, and that there
never came to them any Order or Command from the State for conjunction, and for
the other, until there was stumbling blocks put in their way by the Public
Resolutions; they were so far from hindering any, against whom there was not
just exception, that they were willing to employ themselves to the utmost in
defense of the Cause and Kingdom, and gave abundant proof thereof from the time
they first took up Arms until the month of December, that the Lord was pleased
in his wi^e dispensation to break them at Hamilton. The Public Resolutions
being contrary to the Word of God, and to the Covenant, and to the Actings and
Proceedings of both Kirk and State in the Cause these many years past, and
involving so sudden and gross a change both of Principles and Practice, gave
occasion to many gracious ones throughout the Land to stumble, and to many
Ministers to bear Testimony against them both by preaching, and by writing
their minds to the Commission of the Kirk, and to others of their Brethren as
they had opportunity: Upon which occasion also it was that many were
necessitated to withdraw from such Fasts as did involve an approbation of these
Resolutions; and what was in all this but duty? May not, yea, ought not the
servants of God, Ministers and People bear testimony against declining and
backsliding, and study to keep their own garments pure, and refuse to say a
confederacy to wicked men in the Interests and Cause of God. It is a shrewd
insinuation that is made of their drawing factions amongst the People, as if
they had stirred the People to sedition, or to tumults: The utmost length which
Ministers went, was to hold forth the sinfulness of that course, how contrary
it was to our former Principles, how it would help to hasten on more wrath; or
if it did seem to prosper, how dangerous it would prove to the Cause and People
of God by setting up of such as had been, and still were adversaries to both,
and the greatest length which People went, was, To profess their dislike
thereof, and without tumult or faction to withdraw, or in a sober and modest
way to refuse to concur, because they had no clearness nor satisfaction in
their consciences concerning these Resolutions; withal, they did clearly
declare their judgments against the Invasion, and for the defense of the Cause
and their Country, and their readiness to concur in all lawful means, according
to the Word and former Principles for that end. If any who had been formerly
honest, and born any part of the burden and heat of the day, were branded as
back-sliders, it was not so much by Dissenters from the Public Resolutions, as
by the multitude of that generation with whom they did associat, I mean the
Malignants who did not spare openly and every where to say. That these honest
men were now come to them; as for others, though they cannot so vindicate
themselves as to say that there is none amongst them who does at any time speak
rashly or unadvisedly with his lips, yet the Lord knows it was the grief of
their hearts that honest men should have fallen from their integrity; and
though they could not choose but bear Testimony against their sin, yet they did
it as afflicted in spirit, keeping reverence, respect, and affection unto the
men themselves, and had the iniquity been private, they would most willingly
have covered the shame thereof, but it was public and such as did relate to
the public Cause, and wherein their con^ent and concurrence was desired, and
therefore they were forced to speak, and not to suffer sin upon themselves nor
upon their Brethren. There is yet one thing remains, That whilst no means were
left unes^ayed for making of Public Resolutions ineffectual that no possible
nor probable mean was holden forth for the relief of the Kingdom; if it be
meant as to the time when these Resolutions were first taken by the Commissions
Answer to the Parliaments Quaere, there could nothing of that kind be then
holden forth by such a are dissatisfied with these Resolutions, because few or
none of them were present, advertisments not being so much as sent to many of
them, and the time being so short that others could not come upon the
advertisments which were sent to them. The advertisment came to Sterline upon
the Tuesday to be dispatched unto all the Presbyteries in the West, that their
Commissioners might keep at Perth upon the Thursday immediately following,
which day could not probably be but past before the advertisment came at most
of them, it being in the depth of the winter-season when the day was at the
shortest, and by such bearers as was not fixed, or sent of purpose, but by such
as were occasionally going to those places for other business; yea, suppose the
utmost diligence imaginable had been used, it had not been possible to send
these Advertisments from Sterlin to the Commissioners of these Presbyteries in
the West, in so short a time, and these Commissioners thereupon to have kept
the Diet at Perth, as any who knows the distance of these places, will easily
acknowledge, it being above forty miles betwixt Perth and Glasgow, which is
the nearest of the Presbyteries of the West, the rest of them being a good deal
more remote, some of them three or fourscore miles: And if it be meant, that
after the taking of these Resolutions, no possible nor probable mean was holden
forth by these who did object against them, it was to no purpose then to do it,
the Authors and Abetters of them being so zealous for them that they would
admit of no objection to the contrary, much less be content to wave these
Resolutions, and go to a calm and peaceable enquiry about other possible or
probable means of defense; and yet, as before the taking of these Resolutions,
the possibility and probability of other means had been often holden forth, so
was it also holden forth after the taking of these Resolutions. To say nothing
of Treaty and Conference (which was moved by some, but peremptorily and
bitterly rejected by others) the possibility and probability of getting an
Army, without employing and entrusting of the Malignant party, was holden
forth, and they who did assert otherwise, did a great deal of wrong to the
Kingdom and Kirk of Scotland, and make them too much malignant. It is true,
they were considerable for number, power and policy, who were and ought to
have been excluded; yet were there as many besides as might have been means
competent, in rational prudence, for defense of the Kingdom and Cause,
especially in a Nation covenanted with God, which ought to be tender in all
their ways, and to stay themselves, not upon Horses and Chariots, but upon the
Name of the Lord. After the setting down of all these things, they are pleased
to assert, That they do of their own nature contribute no less effectually to
the delivering up of all to the will of the En^m^e, without stroke of sword,
then if it had been purposely intended. As no evil cause can of it self produce
any good effect; so neither can any good cause of it self produce an evil
effect; good and evil being contrary in their natures, and the one not natively
arising out of the other: What was done in these, was duty and good in it self,
and therefore had no connection in it self with any evil thing that is charged
upon it: when I read this charge^ I remembered the challenge of the Pripets of
Jud^h against the Prophet Jeremiah, That he weakened the hands of the men of
war that remained in the City, and the hands of all the People; and that he
sought not the welfare of the People, but their hurt; Jer. 38.4.

DECLARATION.
THe last step is set down in this answer to the Protestation; but because it
is u^hered in with a large Preface that is not mentioned in this Answer,
therefore I shall speak somewhat also to that, the words are these: 7
Notwithstanding of all which in^olencies, The Commission of the last General
Assembly carried themselves with much clemency to wards their chief opposers,
not only forbearing to censure them, though it was within the bounds of their
Commission so to have done, but also lest their own Presbyteries should have
proceeded to severity to censure, they appointed to ci^e them to the General
Assembly, that after calm debating of the matter, and liberty given them to
propound the grounds of their dis-satisfaction to the full, they might either
receive satisfaction, or otherwise such courses for healing might be taken, as
the General Assembly in their tenderness towar^s piety, and these who are
pious, and in zeal to the distressed Cause and Kingdom, should think fit; but
they unwilling to have their opinions brought to the touchstone of the Word of
God, and solid reason in a free Genesis Assembly, did content themselves to have
protested against the Act of the Genesis Assembly, approving the proceedings of
the Commission of the Kirk, if so be after debating on both hands, such an Act
should have been made: but before the main point of difference was so much as
once debated, far less any conclusion past upon it, some of them did protest
against the determination of the Assembly in that particular, as if they had
stood in no need of further information from the debates of learned and
gracious men which were to be had upon it in the face of the General Assembly
and others of them by an unparallelled practice (except that of the perfidious
Prelates at the General Assembly at Glasgow, who mind the over throw of all
Assemblies for ever) did absolutely decline the authority of the General
Assembly, protesting against it as null, etc.

DEFENSE.
IT is in the first place denied, That the Commission of the General Assembly
had any power at all to censure any of these who did oppose these public
Resolutions, because their power as it was only in things committed unto them
by the Assembly, so were they to walk in the administration thereof, and to
exercise the same according to the Acts and Constitutions of this Kirk; but
there was then no Act nor Constitution of this Kirk appointing the opposers of
such Resolutions to be censured, that Vindication so much cried up in this
Review, does acknowledge, that these Resolutions were indeterminati juris, or
things not then determined in Law by any Act or Constitution of this Kirk, and
therefore seems to yield, that the Commission had no power to censure the
opposers of them; yea, there are many Acts and Constitutions of this Kirk, as
has been often showed, expressly condemning these Resolutions, and ordaining
and appointing Ministers under the pain of censures, not to be silent, but to
bear testimony against the same, as will appear to any who shall be at the
pains to read the Acts, Warnings and Declarations of Assemblyes, especially
since the late Reformation^ What their clemency was in the exercise of that
presumed power, is holden forth in the Answer to the Vindication of the
Assembly at St. Andrews and Dundee, in which is showed from their own Records,
that they did not only emit and send abroad Warnings to be read amongst the
People, wherein they did apply most of the Characters of the old Malignants to
such as were unsatisfied with, and did bear testimony against these
Resolutions; but also did declare them to deserve censure by the Civil
Magistrate, and stirred up the Magistrate to inflict that deserved censure, and
made Acts and sent to all the Presbyteries, requi^ing and appointing them to
censure the opposers of these Resolutions within their bounds; and as to the
citing them to the General Assembly, lest their own Presbyteries should have
proceeded against them. I confess it would almost stir a patient spirit to
hear such things asserted. If they did not intend that Presbyteries should
censure them, why did they long before that time make an Act, and send it to
Presbyteries, requiring and appointing them to censure them without any
limitation of the censure, as to the point of severitie. 2 Was there so much as
a title of that reason in their Act, for summoning of them to the Assembly, or
for forbearing to proceed in the Processes of any whom they were begun to
process. 3 It is more notourly known, then can be gotten warrantably denied,
That that citation was not in order to that end, but that they might be
secluded from being Commissioners to the Assembly, or sitting therein as Judges
of the Public Resolutions. 4. There were but few P^esbyterie^ who had then
^ome that length, as to proceed to any censure against such; and many
Presbyteries were of the judgment, that such as were for the Public
Resolutions; deserved to be censured, and not the opposers of these
Resolutions; yet that Order for citation was sent to all the Presbyteries in
the Land. (...) The cure seems as evil if not worse then the disease, to cite
them before the Assembly, was to put them on the Stage before the Supreme and
must Public Judicatory in the Land^, as guilty and worthy to be de^^^red in
the most Public way of they could expect nothing but severitie of their
Presbyteries, i^ many of which they had many of the same mind with themselves,
(yea, in many the plurality was of their judgment) what could they expect in
the Assembly, from which almost all such were excluded by the Letter and Act of
the Commission prelimiting Elections. The Assemblies proceedings did make it
manifest what courtesy they found there, some of them being actually censured
with Suspension^, and others with Deposition; and a foundation laid, and Acts
made for censuring all of them. 6. It was strange that they should be cited to
the Assembly to receive satisfaction, when the Assembly had not yet concluded,
that what they did hold, was wrong, and contrary to truth and sound doctrine;
sure the Commission having no former Act of any former Assembly approving of
these Resolutions, as is acknowledged by the Author of that Vindication; they
did fish too far before the net to cite men to the Assembly, to receive
satisfaction thereanent. This favors too much of pains taken and endeavors
used, to prelimit the Assembly, and model it after their own mind. That some
did protest against the approving of the Proceedings, of the Commission of the
Kirk before the Assembly did make any Act ratifying the same, was not from any
unwillingnesse to have their proceedings tried by the touchstone of the Word,
or to receive light from any gracious and godly in that Meeting; but upon
persuasion that these Resolutions were contrary to the Word, and that the far
greater part of the Members of that Meeting, had upon the matter go^e very far
to declare themselves as to the approving of these things before the try all.
of them, because it being objected against these Members of the Assembly, who
were Members of the Commission, that they had carried on a course of defection
and it being offered to verify the same, and thereupon desired that these
Commissioners might not be admitted to sit as Members in the Assembly, till
that matter were tried, it was refused, and notwithstanding of the except on
timeously propounded and offered to be instructed, they were before the taking
try all thereof; allowed to sit, which was in effect to reject the exception,
either as irrelevat in Law, or as false in fact, and so to approve them before
try all; yea, they were admitted to ^i^^s Judges in their own cause; for the
Protestation being particularly founded on the sinfulness and unwarrantableness
of their proceedings, yet they were allowed to sit as Judges, and to condemn
the Protestation as destructive to the Government and Liberties of this Kirk,
and censurable with the highest censure thereof. Upon the 23 of July 1651.
notwithstanding their proceedings were not approven till the day after, which
was the 24.

That others of them did absolutely decline the authority of that Assembly, and
protest against it as null, was a practice that has many commendable and
praiseworthy parallels in this Church; and therefore they do speak more from
their own spirit then from the spirit of truth, who cry out, that it has no
para^el, but that of the perfidious Prelates. The Declinatours of the ^relats
against the Assembly at Glasgow 1638. as any who pleases to read the same will
find, that it does strike at the root of Presbyteriall Government and General
Assemblies, in regard of the essentials of their constitution; but the
Protestation does acknowledge and plead for the Government, and for the due
liberty and freedom, and right constitution of Assemblies, according to the
ru^e of the Word of God, and Acts of this Kirk, and does only bear testimony
against, and decline that Assembly, because of unwarrantable prelimiting of the
Elections, admitting of persons under scandal before trying o^ them, admitting
of the same men to be both Judges and Parties want of fr^^ access and recesse,
absence of many Commissioners, want of freedom in voicing, denying to hear what
was offered for, holding forth of light, whereby ^t appears that there is
little conscience and ingenuitie, and less charity in making of that parallel.
But the History and Acts of our Church do furnish us many just and true
parallels of this practice in the carriage of the faithful witnesses of our
Lord, in our own and our fathers days, who have stood to plead for the
Doctrine, Government, Worship and Discipline of this Kirk: I shall only name a
few: The first is in the year 1597. at which time the Commissioners of the
General Assembly having contrary to the trust committed to them in these
intervalls betwixt Assemblies, petitioned and obtained from the King and
Estates of the Kingdom, that Ministers should sit in Parliament as the third
Estate (which was the foundation of our P^ela^i^) their proceedings in that
Petition, and the thing relating thereto being approven in the Assembly by the
prevalling influence of the King, and these Commissioners, notwithstanding of
the reasons propounded against the same by sundry of the Ministe^ie, M. John
Davidson a most worthy and pious Minister of this Church, endued with the
spirit of Prophecy in many things, and as anti-prelaticall, and truly tender
of Presbyteriall Government, and of the authority of Assemblies, as any this
Church has brought forth, did solemnly protest against that Assembly, as not
free and lawful; to which Protestation Mr. David Cal^erwood a ^t^e^uous
maintainer of the Government of this Church, and a constant adversary to
Prelates, and an unsuspect witness in this present controversy, declares in his
Story, his own adherence and the adherence of many of the most sincere Pastors
and Professors of this Kirk, as seeing the beginning, and fearing the grouth of
that defection. Likeas he did often from that experience, express his fears,
and thereupon his opinion against putting too much power in the hands of a
Commission, and prognosticated a defection to ensue thereupon, whenever the
King and the Court should have influence upon the leading men thereof,
concerning which he has not been mistaken. 2. Did not many worthy Pastors and
Professors of this Church, protest against the corrupt Assemblies, annulled by
the Assembly at Glasgow, sundry of which Protestations are to be seen in the
Book, called, The course of Conformity. Let our Predecessors Supplications,
Reasons, Admonitions, Protestations presented to the Parliament 1617 and 1621,
be considered, wherein they assert the Assemblies then controverted, to be
unlawfully constituted, and to be but pretended Assemblies, though no authority
had declared the same. See also the Observations Printed 1635, with the
grievances given in by the Ministers to the Parliament 1633, It is here well
said, that the safety of Religion depends not upon Assemblies of whatsomever
kind, but upon the liberty of free and right constitute Assemblies, a^ in the
Commonweal, he were not to be thought a faithful Patriot who would not stand as
much for the liberty of a Parliament, as his own possessions, because the
safety of all other liberties stands in the preservation of that main
Liberty. 3. did not these whose spirits the Lord stirred up to appear against
the Prelates, and to set on foot the Work of Reformation in the year 16^7.
expressly declare their adherence to all these Protestations made by their
Fathers and Predecessors, declaring the nullity of these corrupt Assemblies,
and thereby establishing the Declinatours against the same before the Assembly
at Glasgow, which practice was as strangely looked upon, and as much spoken
against then, as the practice of the Prot^sters in the year 1651. 4. Our
National Covenant does both mention and allow these Protestations against that
whole course of Defection; whence it appears that that practice at D^^dee has
many, both very worthy Precedents and Parallels; and that to protest against
corrupt Assemblies (such as that was) has been so far from being looked upon
by discerring faithful and godly men in this Kirk, as the throwing down of the
hedge of Discipline, and making way for every beast of the forest to break in,
as this Reviewer alleges, that they have used it as one of the best means
for preventing and remedying of these evils, and so it is indeed, because as it
is well observed, and truly Asserted in the great Act of the Assembly,
concerning the by gone evils of this Church, and the Remedies thereof, that the
keeeping or authorizing of corrupt General Assemblies has been one of the
main causes of our evils; by these it was that the Prelates, and all the train
of superstitious Ceremonies did enter, and having had such worthy precedents,
in opposing of such and such doolful and dear bought experiences of the wrong
they have done to this poor Church, there is the greater reason to take heed to
stand fast in the liberty wherewith CHRIST has made us free, and not to be
again entangled with the yoke of bondage of corrupt Assemblies.

It is added, that the grounds of that Protestation at St. Andrews are
frivolous and false, and such as makes the Authority of all the Assemblies of
this Kirk since the begun Reformation to be called into question upon the same
or the like pretenses; and for making out this, the Author of this Refutation
remits his Readers to a piece, Entitled, A Vindication of the late General
Assembly which he does here commend as modest, solid, and judicious, and
afterward, as a pl^ce not yet answered, nor easily answerable. It were a great
deal more convincing and commendable to demonstrate the grounds of that
Protestation to be false and frivolous then to call them so, and do no more:
That Vindication has indeed in it more modesty and solidity and judgment and
nerves then this Refutation and Review; as we acknowledge a difference betwixt
the men from whom these proceeded, so also betwixt their writings, yet if even
indifferent men be not mistaken, it wants much of that modest, that had been
suitable, and that solidity and judgment and nerves are in it: As to the
Vindicating of the freedom and authority of that Assembly, and showing the
frivolousnesse and falsehood of the grounds of the Protestation against the
same, may appear by reading and pondering of the Review of that Vindication, in
which the strength and truth of the grounds of the Protestation are
convincingly established and clea^ed, and the many great mistakes of the Author
of that Vindication, both in matters of judgment and matters of fact are
discovered, and the Protesters eased of the burden of many heavy things laid
upon them. I might say more for that Review, but it needs not my
commendation: I suppose it shall not want that from Adversaries. As to that
which this Refuter says of the devils design of division; I shall easily grant
that division amongst Brethren is an evil thing, in which the devil has
indeed a design, and an active hand, but that subtle serpent sometimes gains
by Union as well as by division, and therefore is Satan as loath to be divided
against Satan as he is desire^us to divid^ the Children of God amongst
themselves, and when he gets a multitude going in a wrong way, he can as much
plead for Union and Peace, and against division as any. As it has been the
grief of the Protesters souls to see their Brethren divide from their former
good and sound Principles, so did they, and do hold themselves bound to adhere
and cleave thereto, though never so many should forsake them therein, and cry
out upon them because they will not follow^ multitude to do evil. There is in
the same place a despightfull exageration of the giving in, and publishing of
the Protestation against the last Assembly at Edinburgh, as an Act of Satan's in
which he did add violence to despite, etc. It is not good to meet reproach
with reproach; I shall only say that what the Protesters did therein, they did
it with sad hearts, and not till a necessity of duty did constrain them
there^nto, because of a most wilful and peremptory refusal of any Conference
in order to Union and peace, before the assuming of the power of an Assembly,
notwithstanding that the same was most earnestly desired, and much pressed, not
only by the Protesters themselves, but also by some of the most judicious
godly and eminent men of that Meeting, and after that it was clearly holden
forth to have been agreeable to the practice of former Assemblies, and that it
could have brought no apparent prejudice to the cause of these who were most
zealous for the sitting of the Assembly, unless it was to have put them to the
charges of staying some few days longer in the Town. It is well he
acknowledges that it was done by men who were eminent in our Assemblies. It
seems when a testimony to their eminency in Assemblies can contribute for the
agg^avation of the supposed offense, his heart can give it unto them, but when
the denying can make for weakening their cause he can studiously depresse them,
and study so far to undervalue them, as that men should account them nothing,
as he does in the 12. page of his Pamphlet. It is indeed true, that not a few
of these who had hand in that Protestation have been in our Assemblies, and
upon the account of this mercy among others, they did hold themselves the more
bound to plead for the freedom of Assemblies, and to bear testimony against
the corrupt ones at St. Andrews and Edinburgh. That it was done in the City of
our solemnities, and in the face of the Assembly, was because, where the
carcass is, thither will the Eagles resort; the tre^passe was there, and so
behoved the t^st^mony be there also. That it was put to the Press albeit I see
not the fault in so doing, they against whom it was given in, having now
constituted themselves, and being sitting openly and avowedly in an Assembly,
yet I am confident there was no resolution taken, nor order given by the
Meeting of the Protesters for so doing; But private Copies were taken, and who
was obliged to hinder such as pleased to cause print it; when some of the
number heard that it was in Printing, they desired and endeavored that it
might be stopped, till they should see the issue of the conference, that then
was betwixt some few of both sides; the Copies were not published till the next
day after, that conference was broken off, and business as to that time
rendered in all appearance hopeless as to an agreement, because the Assembly
had not passed an Act for ratifying the proceedings of the Commissioners
appointed by the Assembly at Dundee, which did include the Public Refolutions,
and had also signified what length they meaned to go in order to the
differences betwixt us and them, which was only to take censures off these
Brethren who had been censured by the Assembly at Dundee because of their
Protesting, and to declare that others involved therein, and in the
Protestation against the Assembly at Edinburgh should not be censured,
providing that they would judicially under their hands pass from these
Protestations, and engage themselver to forbear meddling in the grounds of these
differences, by Preaching, Writing, or otherwise, which did import a standing
of all these Acts at Dundee concerning the Public Resolutions, and the
opposers of the same, and a passing from, and revoking of all the Testimonies
given against the Lands backsliding, and an engagement to forbear for ever
hereafter; to say that Kirk or State had sinned in these Resolutions, and these
were the bowels of Christian Condescendence, of which this Member of that
Assembly at Edinburgh speaks, the sum whereof is a pardon upon Repentance, or
rather an hire upon Compliance, a forebearing to afflict and persecute any
more, providing that we will abandone the Truth, and call good evil, and evil
good; but we dare not be accessory to the receiving such wages of
unrighteousness, let us rather suffer then sin, and lie under, or be put under
censures with a good Conscience, then be freed from them with an evil
conscience.

I have now answered what is said, against the Protesters, in that Declatation
of the pretended Assembly at Durdee, which this Reviewer and Refuter mentions
with so great commendation and applause; And seeing these who have declined
from their former Principles, have made it their work to endeavor to discover
steps of defection in those who have wnitessed and protested against the
Defection that has been in this Land; which was the usual way of the Prelates
against Non-conformists in former times. I shall, for making a clear discovery,
go nearer to the springhead and rise of our differences, then this Reviewer
and his friends of the pretended Assembly have done, who would shroud
themselves in some particular windings and turnings of affeirs, by which they
would amuse simple understandings, but they keep a great distance from the
fountain and beginning of our divisions, and are loath to remember where we were
once, and wherefore we parted: Therefore I shall shortly set forth some few
steps of the late Defection and declinings from our former principles, and let
indifferent men judge who have been the Authors, and are to this day the
Abetters thereof. Since the time that the Lord began a work of Reformation, in
the year 1637. there has been a constant harmony amongst the Lords People, and
in all Proceedings, Declarations, and Public Actings of State and Kirk, great
unanimity against the Malignant party and their Interests: And though in the
year 1648. the State declined, yet the Kirk, and body of zealous Professors in
the Land, remained steadfast in their principles; and after the defeat of the
Forces that went into England, the whole Land did for their further
confirmation in the Lords ways, enter into a solemn Acknowledgment of sins,
and Engagement to duties; at the renewing of the Covenant, which was about the
end of that year. In the year 1649. there was great concord betwixt Kirk and
State, both adhering to their Principles, and the Lord wonderfully blessed
their Councels and Forces; as also in the beginning of the year 1650. And
whatever secret underhand dealings there were for the promoting the Malignant
Interest and Conjunction with that party, yet it was little known to the far
greater part in Judicatories of State and Kirk, who (I am confident) went on in
the simplicity of their hearts in their proceedings, studiously desirous to
avoid the splitting on the rock of Malignancy, as well as the rock on the other
hand.

The first visible step of deelining that was taken notice of by the generality
of zealous Professors in the Land, was that transaction made at Bredah with the
King, by the Commissioners of State and Kirk, expressly contrary to their
Instructions: and notwithstanding both State and Kirk did unanimously signify
their great dis-satisfaction therewith, and declared against the said agreement
in ma^y particulars, especially in reference to Malignant Interests and
designs, and conjunction with that Party; all which was made known to the said
Commissioners by Letters and Declarations from State and Kirk, which were
delivered unto them before the Kings coming from Holland, yet without so much
as acquainting the King therewith, they brought him on shipboard, and alongs
with him, the chief of the Scottish and English Malignants, known enemies to
the Cause and Work of Reformation. (I do not charge all the Commissioners as
equally sharers in the guilt of that sad transaction, for which the Land suff
reth and lamenteth to this day, I know that such of them as had least hand
therein, have been most ready to acknowledge their offense; and that these who
were most guilty, do stand for their own justification, which aggravates their
sin both before God and men) as to that which was done afterward, sad
experience has taught us, that it was but a pitiful after-game they made in
their second Treaty, while the King was at Sea, immediately before his landing
in Scotland, and it was so far from being a remedy, as it has proved an
inlet to further transgression and misery.

The second step of defection was, That these Commissioners when they were come
home, being desirous to maintain their own credit, dealt not faithfully in
giving a true account of their proceedings to the Parliament and General
Assembly, but concealed many things of consequence, and smoothed and varn shed
their report of Proceedings with fair generals, whereby both the Parliament
and General Assembly were deceived, and induced to allow and ratify their
Proceedings.

The third step was, That when after Dumbar, the King had given Commission to
the Malignant Party to rise in Arms, and upon their rising had deserted the
Councels of State and Kirk, and gone away to join with that Party, the State
did sond for the King, and forthwith admit him to have the chief hand and
Government in all their Councels and managing of Affairs, from which upon
weighty considerarions he had been still debarred formerly by the State, upon
advice with the Kirk, and not many days after his return, matters were so
conveyed, as an agreement was made with these wicked and bloody re^ells; and
not only their present rebellion and band into which they had entered among
themselves, but all their former transgressions were passed over by the State,
and in that transaction also, there was a foundation laid for employment of
them in places of trust. It is true, that the Commission of the Church gave
some testimony against these proceedings, the consciences of diverse of that
Meeting being then oftended with so gross declining, but afterward through the
great opposition they met with, were much blunted.

The fourth step was, That as the Kirk and State began to grow in their favor
and respects toward the Malignant Party, this new friendship begat an
alienation of their hearts from honest and faithful men who gave testimony
against these corruptions; for usually conjunction with Gods enemies is
attended with persecution of his friends; and therefore the Western Forces
being dissipated, and great hopes conceived of the assistance of the Malignant
Party, both State and Kirk did condemn the Testimony given by the Gentlemen,
Officers, and Ministers in the West, in their Remonstrance to the Committee of
Estates; notwithstaning that in a Meeting of the Commission of the Kirk at
Sterline, that Remonstrance was cleared and vindicated, and all objections
against it were so fully answered by Members of the Commission, as the chief
oppofites thereof, had no more to say against it, but were silent;
notwithstanding also that some of the Gentlemen gave in a Supplication to the
Commission, wherein they desired, that before any censures pasted thereupon,
these that were concerned therein might be allowed a due hearing, and that a
convenient diet might be appointed, at which they were very hopeful to remove
all mistakes, and clear it from all sinister interpretations.

The fifth step was, That some leading men of the Commission did conveen ex
raordinarily a small number of the Commission of the Kirk, few above a Quorum,
to make an answer to the Parliaments Quaere, viz. What persons ought to be
employed in Arms for defense of the Kingdom, and slighted sending of timeous
advertisement to such as they knew would oppose their design of bringing in
the Malignant Party, to be Guardians of the Cause and Kingdom, which formerly
they had endeavored to destroy, and with great haste and precipitation,
concluded an answer to that Quaere, and laid a foundation for present
conjunction with the Malignant Party, contrary to the Word of God, and to the
Covenant, and to our known principles clearly expressed in Acts and
Declarations of this Kirk.

They did not rest here, but in the sixth place they put forth exhortations and
Watnings, wherein they threatened all these who are unsatisfied with, or do
oppose the Public Resolutions with punishments and censures to be inflicted by
Judicatories, Civil and Ecclesiastic, respectively; Yea, they proceed
further, to apply against such the Characters of Malignants, and to stir up the
Civil Magistrate against them, and Presbyteries to censure them, and the Act
which the Commission had made for referring the Malignants that had risen in
Arms, to the next General Assembly: and in the mean while suspending them from
the Sacrament, was by themselves revoked, and in their stead faithful
Ministers of unquestioned integrity, who were unsatisfied in conscience with
such Malignant proceedings, were appointed to be cited to the Assembly.

Neither was all this enough, but in the seventh place there must be yet a
nearer and full conjunction with the Malignant Party, they were already
advanced to chief places of trust in the Army; but the Acts of Classes made
against James Grahame late Earl of Monirose his bloody Accomplices and Associats,
must be repealed and broken, and the Malignant Party advanced to the chief
places of trust in the Land, Civil as well as Military; and in effect, to have
the whole sway in Court, Parliament and Army. In this both Kirk and State did
concur. It is true, that the Commission of the Kirk did in that transaction,
require a Band of Lawborrows to be taken of the Malignants before their
admission to sit in Parliament, obliging them not to endeavor the repealing
former Acts made for Religion, and that they should not revenge themselves upon
any for opposing or censuring them for their Malignant courses; but all the
former Bands given by them for keeping the peace, were discharged, and all the
penaities of them; and now all the certification and pain required in case they
should fail, was, that they should be declared Malignants, and lose their
places; a pretty fancy indeed to declare them Malignants. And who should
declare it? The Act of Parliament says, It must be first found by the
Parliament, Committees of Estates, or Kings Privy Council, that they have
contraveened this Band, and the far greatest part of them were known Malignants
in all their ways. No sooner was the Malignant Party admitted to Parliament,
but forthwith all who would not concur for promoting the Public Resolutions,
were declared Enemies, their persons ordained to be imprisoned, and their
estates confiscated, and in this they answered the expectation of the
Commission of the Kirk, published in their Warning March 1651. wherein they
foretold, that no doubt civil punishment would be inflicted by the Civil
Magistrate.

The eight step was, That the Commission of the Kirk, a subordinate
Judicatorie, limited in their proceedings to the Acts of former General
Assemblies, did take upon them to prelimit the elections of the ensuing
General Assembly, by laying a foundation for debarring all such as had opposed
their Resolutions (which the Author of the Vindication so much cried up in this
Pamphlet grants to be contraversi juris, and that they have not for their
warrant the president and practice of any former Assembly) and for constituting
the Assembly of men that were of their judgment, and had practiced these
Novations by them introduced, which is a preparative of so dangerous
consequence, that being admitted, we cannot expect hereafter right constituted
Assemblies, nor look that the purity and power of Religion shall be long
continued among us; but the subordinat Judicatory being permitted in the
Intervall betwixt Assemblies, to make rules for constituting the en^uing
General Assembly, we may ere long be led back to Prelacy and Popery.

The ninth step is, That election of Commissioners being made generally in
Presbyteries according to these prelimitations, and they being met at St.
Andrews; did refuse the peaceable Overture made to them by these brethren who
were unsatisfied with the Public Resolutions, did admit persons under
scandal, to sit as Judges, after exception made publicly against them; yea,
did admit them to be both Judges and Party, and did according to the designed
prelimitation, exclude faithful and godly men, for their opposition to the
Public Resolutions; all which and much more is fully cleared in the Review of
the Vindication of that Assembly.

The tenth step is, That the said pretended Assembly thus corruptly
constituted, did ratify and approve all the Public Resolutions, censure godly
and faithful Ministers for their witnessing against these corruptions, and
enact against the generality of zealous Professors within the Land, that all
who did oppose, or after conference did not acquiesce in their determinations,
should be proceeded against with the censures of the Kirk, and the Commission
of that Assembly met at Forfar 22 August, did in their printed Warning,
denounce the heavy curse of God against all that did not concur in their
Public Resolutions, and appoint the same to be read in all Congregations on
the Lords day, which if well considered, I suppose may be a parallel to the
tyranny and usurpation of the Prelates, and in some respects above the same; for
they did not enjoin the practice of the five Articles of Perth, under pain of
censures and curses for diverse years after they were concluded in that
pretended Assembly.

I shall now proceed in answering this Reviewer, who has collected the sum
of the Observations made in their Assembly upon their reading of the
Protestation, and has borrowed some things from the Author of the Vindication.
Beside these, I find nothing in him but frothy words and reproaches. He says,
he will pass the Representation, and also wave the Propositions, because
satisfactorily answered by the Assembly: wherein he is greatly mistaken, for
diverse of them are not answered at all, and others of them only with
equivocations, for which let this one instance serve for the present, to wit,
because we conceive their late proceedings relating to the Public Resolutions,
have obstructed and shaken the Work of Reformation, we desired that they would
give assurance that they approve of the Acts of uncontraverted Assemblies,
concerning receiving of Penitents. In their answer they leave out the word
uncontraverted, and so include their late Assemblies Acts, which are the things
we complain of. As for the Representation, he should have considered what
himself says in that same page, that in some cases a Protestation is lawful;
how can he then judge this Protestation unlawful, which is grounded upon the
refusal of the just desires made in that Representation without considering
the same, but he may not stay, therefore he makes long steps that he may come
soon at the Protestation, his words are these, I shall God willing grapple with
them in their arsenall of the Protestation it self; yet shrrtly glanceing only
at some principal things, Quid dignum tanto tulit hic promissor hiatu. I shall
not trouble my self with his vain boastings, but proceed to try what strength
is in his Arguments.

PROTESTATION Reviewed.
Where I begin with the Tittle. A Protestation which was gaven in against the
Supreme Representative of this Kirk. Although I do not deny but that Gener all
Assemblies, may err, and the Godly be so put to it as to have no remedy left
them in Law but to protest, yet except the case be clear and sure, this course
is one of the highest contempts of Ecclesiastic Authority; The last refuge for
removing of seanda^s, being Mat. 18.17. Tell the Church, after which nothing
remains, but it he neglect to hear the Church let him be as a Heathen or a
Publican; I trust whatsoever glosses others put on the words, there is no
difference betwixt our Brethren and us about the Exposition of them; and hence
appears the equity of that Act and practice of our Assemblies, inflicting the
hig hest censures on such, and reason, since they in the highest measure
neglect to hear the Church; neither is there now any ulterior, or superior
Judicatory to go to: But what if she (...) not, and whether she do or not,
wherein have these men shown their respect to their Mother, who what in them
lies (but blessed be the LORD it lies not) would discover her nakedness, when
others then Brethren are to behold it? Let them take heed if this be not a main
step to separation (which in words they seem to abhor) when as they Protest and
Profess they will not hear us, so they would cast on us a kind of necessity to
hold them as Heathens and Publicans; but to prevent this they have found a way
of their own, and as (if they had not been of us) they are gone out from us,
and setting up to do their own business without us, as they seem to intimate in
the last page of their printed Paper after the Protestation, contrary to the
very Fundamentals of the Discipline of our Kirk, which is and ever has been
professed to be by Presbyteries, Synods, and National Assemblies duly
subordinate one to another, all which their course overturneth, while they walk
in another way to make the matters of their Propositions practicable as they
say: But besides that, a Protestation is at best (except in the case of pungent
necessity) in its nature odious, it is so much worse in our Kirk, where we are
tied by the strictest Bonds both of the National and Solemn League and
Covenant, against all divisive motions and courses; and I pray I what it this
other then a divisive motion, and that of the deepest dye, for them to separate
themselves, and joining together make a party, when the Supreme Judicatories of
Kirk and State were going on in their continued Actings in the day of great
danger and distress? They may be pleased to remember their own Actings and
speeches when: GOD honored them to be sitting in the Supreme Judicatories; how
far short came the intended divisive Supplication in Anno 1648. of this course
they are now on; nay, the very cross Petition in Anno 1642. both which some of
them (I say some, for most of them are but of Yesterday, and had then no place
in our Judicatoies) showed so much zeal against.

PROTESTATION defended.
IF the Reviewer does mean by the beginning of this Paragraph, which is darkly
and ambiguously expressed, that an Assembly may be wrong in the constitution,
and so no more to be an Assembly then a painted manus a man (as the Author of
the Vindication so much cried up, does in that case yield) and that the godly
in such a case have no remedy lef^ them in Law, but to Protest against its
constitution and Proceedings. Then he grants all that the Protesters desire,
for the subsumption and application falls within his exception, the case
being to their consciences clem and fure: But if he does suppose that there can
be no unfree unlawful Assembly in the constitution thereof, and that the
Remedy of Protestation is only to be used against wrong acts, then he speaks
against Experience, and the known practice of the faithful servants of GOD in
this Kirk; I have given several Presidents of this before, and the Acts of the
Assembly 1638. and 1639. against the six corrupt Assemblies, do clearly
demonstrete the same. Is it not as lawful, and more necessary to Protest
against a wrong Authority or usurpation as against wrong act of a true
Authority? For the first is far more dangerous to the Kirk every way then the
second; He makes it one of the highest contempts of Ecclesiastic Authority, to
protest when the case is not clear and sure, but he forgets to consider how
great a transgression it is before the LORD, and how injurious to his Work and
people, to usurp the Supreme Authority of the Kirk over all the Judicatoties
thereof, to decree unrighteous decrees, and tyrannize over consciences: the sad
consequences of such a course cannot be soon reckoned. As to that he argneth
from Mat. 18.17. Tell the Church. I answer, That the same Commandments of GOD
that enjoin acknowledging of, and obedience to free and lawful General
Assemblies in the LORD, do per negationem contrarit, according to the general
rule of interpretation of Commands set down in our large Catechism, require
the not acknowledging, or keeping unfree and unlawful General Aslemblies; for
where a dory is commanded, the contrary sin is forbidden, and so the command to
hear the true Church requreth our not hearing a false or non-Church, within
which an unfree, unlawful, and corrupt Assembly does fall; and therefore it is
neither to be told nor heard, but to be declared, Protested against, and
discovered in the nullities and corruptions thereof, as the Assemblies 1638 and
1639 have well judged. He alleges an Act and practice of our Assemblies, but
he neither mentions the Act nor Assembly where such a thing is to be found.
There was never any Act made in this Church against declining of Assemblies as
unfree or unlawful or corrupt, the Act which he hinteth at upon misinformation
(but as it seems has never read) does speak nothing of declining an
Assembly; because of its constitution good or bad, but against appealing from
the Kirk Judicatory in an Ecclesiastic cause to the Civil Magistrate, as is
well known to all that have perused the Acts of Assemblies. It is respect to
true-Authority to decline usurpation, and it is a contempt, yea, in effect a
Declinator of true-Ecclesiastick Authority to acknowledge unlawful intruders
upon the same. It is not to the present case, to tell us that Divines say
reverence is due^o the Church when she erreth; the question is, whether the two
late Assemblies be a lawful Representative, yea, or no, and not about an
Assembly lawfully constitute, and erring in their Proceedings: The learned
Review of the Council of Tront, and the gravamina contra Concilium tridentinum
made use of by the Gene all Assembly at Glasgow against the Bishops declinatur,
do fully show the judgment of Protestant Divines, for delining and Protesting
against an Assembly not lawfully and rightly constituted. But what if she err
not, says he: I answer, that is sufficiently cleared in several Treatises,
which have been long since dispersed in Writing, and have come to the hands of
many of the contrary judgment, but have never yet been answered by any of
them; there is so little doubt amongst she most part of zealous Professors
anent the sinfulness of the Public Resolutions, as I need not here to dispute
it. But (says he) whether She err or not, wherein have these men shown their
respect and reverence to their Mother. I Reply, that reverence to their true
Mother makes them disclaim such Step-Mothers; and I desire to hear it proved
by good reason, what more right pretended Assemblies have to call themselves
the Mother of all the People of GOD in this Church, then the Prelates had to
call themselves our Spiritual Fathers: For that which be says, the Protesters
would discover her nakedness, when others then Brethren are to behold it: I
shall give the same answer to it which was given to the like callumny, by our
Protesting fore-bathers, in their Supplication to the Parliament 1621. recorded
in the course of conformity; their words are these: The reasons whereby we are
uphold in our course and Pratestations and just defense against the oppositions
intended, are all made patent to the eyes of the World, no ways to lay open
the nakedness of our Mother to the scandal of the enemy, or justly to offend
any otherwise minded, but that the multitude of our Professors be not tainted
with the venom of maliciousness, contrary to the sincere Milk which they have
received, etc. In the next place he bids us take heed if this be not a main
step to separation, that we refuse to hear them as the lawful Representative
Church: But we must take heed in the first place to another thing, viz. Not to
separate from known and received Principles. The Declaration of the Assembly
1647 says, that next to the changing of Principles, the changing of parties,
the assisting of these whom we should suppress, and persecuting these whom we
should assist; the joining with these against whom the Covenant was made, and
against these for whom it was made, is the great breach of Coveuant, and
separation from the Covenanted union which is held forth in the words of the
Covenant, obliging us not to be divided and withdrawn from that blessed Union
and conjunction by making defection to the contrary part, etc. The National
Covenant descriveth these to be the Church of Scotland who agree with our first
Reformers, in Doctrine, etc. The declaration of this Kirk made in 1648 says,
that out Union in the Covenant with GOD, his Cause and People, stands in
keeping the Principles thereof, and separation stands in defection therefrom.
It is Declared by the Assembly that year, a Principle of our Cause, and
necessary for security of Religion, that the Malignant Party be esteemed
enemies to the Cause of GOD, and that association with them is contrary to the
Word of GOD, and to the Covenant; so does the Assembly 1649 in the Act against
Engagers. Now I say, that these who are for the Public Resolutions have
changed some of their Principles, and also changed their party, for they have
joined with the Malignant party, and acts and censures for persecuting these
with whom they were joined before; where then lies the guilt of Division? and
who made the first-steps to separation? a Dee foedere and Ecclefia pristina
Scoticana; with whomsoever these things are found, let them be accounted
separatists indeed. As for hearing them, and conferting with them in an extra
judicial way, the Protesters have never declined it; but the hearing which
they require, is to be acknowledged as the lawful Representative of this Kirk,
and to be obeyed accordingly; and the Reviewer intimates, that there is a
necessity of holding the Protesters as Heathens and Publicans, but that they
have found out away of their own to prevent it. An hard sentence indeed to
excommunicate them all: What Exclamations of rigor had there been if such an
expression had dropped from the Pen of a Protester? I shall say no more to it,
but that this Reviewer has a zeal of God, but not according to knowledge, He
says, the Protesters have gone out from them, and set up to do their own
business alone, and overturn the Fundamentals of the Discipline of this Kirk;
but he has no better proof then the last page of that Paper wherein the
Protestation was printed, which was no deed of the Meeting, ^or did I ever hear
that any Member of the Meeting does own the Writing of that page. But what is
the crime he thus aggr^geth? The Propositions given in to the part ^nded
Assembly were such as they could make no just exception against them, and when
they refused to grant the Protesters desires, what fault was there for Brethren
to recommend it one to a other (...) their stations, to endeavor to put in
execution. Acts of u^ contraverted Assemblies; yea, what they have done in
order thereunto, was agreeable to the customs of this Kirk, and commendable in
this corrupt and troubled estate thereof.

He is much mistaken when he says, a Protestation is in its nature odious, and
it argues small knowledge of the state of the Kirk of Scotland in former
times, to say it is worse in this Kirk then elsewhere; It is the mean which the
Lord has blessed in the hands of our Fathers, and our own to preserve the
Cause of God, and his Kirk in times of Defection, as the Paper sent by the
Clerk of the Assembly, and Procurator for the Kirk to their Meeting at St.
Audrews does sufficiently manifest. I desire this Reviewer may be pleased, to
take a look of the Narrative of the solemn League and Covenant, and National
Covenant, where he will find Protestations reckoned as a mean for preservation
of Religion, and so Protestation is no divisive way, but a lawful endeavor to
which we are tied by Covenant; and in the 6. Article, what we are not able our
selves to suppress or overcome, we are bound to reveal and make known, that it
may be timely prevented on removed: If he had considered well, it had been more
for his advantage to have spared the mentioning the crosse-Petition in 1642.
and divisive Supplication in Anno 1648 both these were in favors of the
Malignant Party and their Interest, and the Protestation which he so much
inveigheth against, is against the Malignants and their Interest, so it was
very agreeable to the Protesters Principles to be zealous against these
Supplications. But I readiiy believe what this Reviewer professes to be his
judgment, viz. That the Protestation is to him a greater crime then the cross
Petition, or divisive Supplication, for most of these who now show themselves
hot Zealots against the Protestation were of a cold temper, when the cross
Petition and divisive Supplication were considered in Church Judicatories. He
says most of the Protesters are but of Yesterday; he might have said as much
of all men, and spoken truly, but if he plead earnestly for age upon his side,
I do yield him this much, that many of these who are for the Public
Resolutions are of that age that they entered into the Ministry in the time of
the Prelates, and did swear conformity unto the Articles of Perth, and
implicit obedience to their ordinary, and the like cannot be said of the
Protesters, for either they were sufferers under the Prelates, or else they
entered not into the Ministry till the Lord had in his gracious Providence
opened a door by the Reformation.

PROTESTATION Reviewed.
ANd thus passing the Title of it, we come to the matter, wherefollowing their
own footsteps, we begin with the Narrative which they begin with, asserting,
that its well known to diverse of our number what peaceable endeavors they have
used without success, in order to the removing of the differences among us: to
which I reply, that even by the permission of their own phrase, most part of
the Assembly might, yea did not know any such thing, but were confidently
persuaded, if any such endeavors were usea, the luck of success did, and does
lie solely and sadly upon the Protesters themselves; when this was Publicly
debated in the Assembly, there was none found that knew any thing in that
kind, except that which was done in the latter end of the last year, which let
the world judge how peaceable an endeavor it was, and whence it came that it
wanted success? Thus it was: They meeting then in Edinburgh, without Order,
after a little pause, did constitute themselves in to an Ecclesiastical
Judicatory, wherein Magesterially they defined things so prejuaicial to us, as
not only obstructed all peace but also sounded the alarm to a new conflict, by
emitting a Paper wherein they peremptorily conclude, among the chief causes of
Gods contraversy with the land, the Public Resolutions and preceding Assem.
to have a special place: And having thus fast locked the door of peace to mock
the world, if it did naught else, they sent some of their number to St. Andrews
to essay if they could draw off 3 or 4 there, and others to Glasgow for the
like intent, making account (which some of them spared not to profess) that if
they could get five or six of our most eminent men off, they cared not for
therest of the Ministry, professing also at that conference, and others of
them in an open Synod, that they would never unite with the most part of the
Ministry of Scotland, and suitable to these ends was their carriage at St
Andrews, as is clear in the Relation of the Paper thereanent, which Paper
though Public enough, we have never yet heard contradicted by any.

PROTESTATION Defended.
THat most part of the Assembly did not know any such thing, is more then will
be easily believed by these who know the progress of the differences; were
most part of the Assembly ignorant that Conference was desired by the Synod of
Glasgow and others, when the Commission was carrying on the Public
Resolutions, long before the Assembly at St. Andrews? were they ignorant that
in St. Andrews before the constitution of that Assembly, the Protesters did
most earnestly Petition and endeavor an adjournment before they Protested as
they did at their late Assembly in Edinburgh, earnestly desire a Conference
before Constitution, but neither in the one nor in the other could they obtain
satisfaction.

That which he calls a Meeting at Edinburgh, was a Meeting of the
Commissioners of the General Assembly 1650. and as great a number of them as
was of these who (slighting the advertisement of others that were joined with
them in Commission) did answer the Parliaments Quere, and laid the foundation
of conjunction with the Malignant Party, beside there were at this Meeting many
other Godly Ministers, and Professors from several parts in the Country
conveened, to search, consider, and after Prayer and Conference to agree on the
Causes of the Lords controversy against the Land; and being convinced in their
judgments that the treaty with the King in Holland, the Public Resolutions;
and corrupt Conssitution and proceedings of the Assembly at St. Andrews and
Dundee were amongst the parts of the Lands defection, and Causes of Gods wrath,
they did in conscience of their duty acknowledge the same and their own
accession to these transgressions, and some did confess with grief, that they
had been chief in the trespass; the grounds and reasons of their conviction are
expressed in that Paper by him mentioned, which this Reviewer might have
refuted, if he had been able, or otherwise quarrelled less with it; he does
wrong himself as well as the Protesters, when he says, that they magisterially
defined things, and peremptorily concluded them: for the title of the Paper
shows, that they only do soberly propound things to others, as their advice.
He would make this a locking of the door of peace, but considers not how that
long before this, those that are for the Public Resolutions, had contrary to
the Word of God and Acts of this Kirk, constitute themselves into an Assembly,
approven the public Resolutions, condemned the Remonstrance and Protestation,
censured some with deposition, and made severe Acts against all that differed
from their way; that was not only to lock the door, but fasten it with bolts
and bars. Then he makes his own construction of the Protesters, sending some
of their number to St. Andrews and Glasgow, and affirms the end to be only to
gain five or six of their number, and to make it seem true which he alleges,
he sets down two speeches uttered by some of the Protesters; but so far as I
have learned, there was no such language as he expresses. The Protesters do
upon no occasion deny, that they make a difference betwixt some, who in former
times have been faithful, but of late were engaged for the public
resolutions, through the straits of the time and strong tentations, and betwixt
others that have always been promoters of a Malignant Interest; they do
likewise deservedly esteem more of some leading men of the first sort, then of
others of them, and their desire and endeavor to draw off some chief leading
men, was to make way to draw off others, of whom also they do well esteem; yet
as is to be feared, were too much swayed by example of these whom they know to
have more learning and piety then themselves: and if a judgment may be given of
the thoughts of the hearts of many of the last sort, who maintain the public
resolutions, from their speeches and actions, they are as desirous to be rid of
these chief leading men from amongst them, as the Protesters are desirous to
receive them. For that Paper anent the Conference at S. Andrews, which he
says, is public enough, but not contradicted by any; It is the first time for
ought I know, that any of the Protesters have heard of it, and until it be in
more hands then these of his judgment, it may meet with no contradiction, and
yet well deserve it.

PROTESTATION Reviewed.
AS for any of their endeavors they are inter occulta de quibus non judicat
Ecclesia; But I shall desire it to be considered on the contrary, how the
preceding Assembly at Dundee appointed, that Synods and Presbyteries should
deal with them, to give them satisfaction ere they proceeded to censure; the
public Commission could do nothing of that kind, being by the troubles of the
time impeded to sit, yet were not such of them as could most conveniently
correspond, altogether defective in this, though pressed with either part of a
doleful dilemma: for if they should act in the capacity of a Commission, the
Protesters would not have conferred; and out of that capacity, their actings
(besides, that it could not have been obligatorie to others) had been a silent
quitting, if not betraying of their trust; But providence offered opportunity
thus: In the beginning of this year, some brethren from several parts of the
Conntrey, being sensible of the then imminent snare and danger, resolved by
common consent to come to Edinburgh about the 12 of February, at which time
they heard there was to be a great meeting of our dissenting brethren, where
they resolved to deal with them, that there might be a common Warning emitted
by consent of all the Judicatories of the Kirk, concerning things which we
doubted not were agreed to on all hands: accordingly they dealt with such of
them as were in Town, by the mediation of the Ministers of Edinburgh, by whom
they sent to them materials of a Declaration, desiring them to change or add
as they should think fit for the purpose, but they refused to join, to the
great grief of those who did mediate, pretending they would first have a
conference about differences, which was nothing else but to disappoint the
matter, the danger being so near, that a Meeting for such a conference could
not be conveened, and the danger prevented.

PROTESTATION Defended.
IT has been already showed, that before their Act at Dundee, they had emitted
Warnings and Declarations against such as concurred not with them, as enemies
to Religion, King and Kingdom, st^rred up the Civil Magistrate to inflict
punishment, and required Presbyteries to censure opposers within their bounds;
and that Act which he mentions, leaves no latitude to Synods and
Presbyteries to forbear censure, except in the case of obedience to the Act
anent the Public Resolutions, though upon debate the major part of a
Presbytery should have been convinced of the evil of that course, yet the Act
gives no power to recede. The Committee of Estates in 1648. did profess in
general terms, to offerall possible satisfaction and security for Religion, to
which the General Assembly July 25. answers, that they see no possibility of
securing Religion, so long as that unlawful Engagement was carried on, which
may be well applied to the present case. That dilemma of his is but a weak
device, neutro cornu pungit, the Protesters never did refuse to confer with
them, let them frame as many capacities to themselves as they pleased, only
they refused to acknowledge them a Judicatory, and upon protestation, they did
confer with these who accounted themselves clothed with the power of their
late Assembly at Edinburgh. And on the other hand their acting out of that
capacity had contributed as much to the intended end, which was by conference
to hold forth ^ghtanent the matters in controversy. Neither was there any need
of authority to oblige others who entrusted them, for their power was limited,
and they are not warranted to depart from-one iota of the Public Resolutions;
so in that case they could not oblige: Nor is he able to make it appear, that
it had been a betraying of their trust to confer with these who refuse to
acknowledge their authority, otherwise he shall condemn the practice of their
late Assembly at Edinburgh; for though they would not confer until they had
constituted themselves into an Assembly; yet then they conferred; but the
capacity he speaks of, was not acknowledged, but Protested against, I know that
there be such questions amongst States, to stick upon the niceties and
punctilioes of their Titles, and the acknowledgement of their power; but these
are too stately things; for Ministers of the Gospel, it is more suitable to use
Christian condescendence, then to be puffed up with the pomp of pretended or
real authority, and therefore as I see not the strength of this Dilemma, so I
see no reason why their late Assembly at Edinburgh refused to read a Letter
from the Protesters, because they wanted their Titles indorsed on the back of
the Letter. As to the relation he makes in this Paragraphe, it is greatly
perverted. If his ordinary discourse be suitable to the language of this
Pamphlet, it would give ground enough to adjudge him to have lost the benefit
of his frank law, and never to be admitted to be a witness for truth
hereafter. The true state of that matter is this: The Protesters who had
seasonably given a testimony before in a Letter sent to the General of the
English Forces, and a duplicat presented to the General Major in Edinburgh,
thought it their duty to meet again about that time, especially to prevent the
imminent dangers to Religion, and having stayed about fourteen days together,
and done what became them in their stations, and also advised the Ministers of
Edinburgh to give a free testimony and faithful warning to their people upon
the Lords day, concerning the present snares and dangers to Religion, which was
done accordingly; the Meeting dissolved. Some Brethren who are for the Public
Resolutions were in the Town, and had several diets of meeting at the same
time when such of the Protesters as were in Town did meet, upon what occasion
they did meet, was not known, but it was conceived to be for strengthening one
another hands anent the Public Resolutions; and I am sure there was no
message sent to the Protesters at their meetings by the Ministers of Edinburgh,
though they were present at the last diet of their meeting, nor yet by any
other, only upon enquiry at these of the Protesters who dwelt in the Town; I
find that some days after the Meeting was ended, some of the Ministers of
Edinburgh came to one of them, (whether sent from any other or not, was not
made known) and said, That there was a motion amongst some brethren that are
for the Public Resolutions then in Town, about the Protesters, and their
joining together in a Public Warning against the English. And his answer was,
that if they had any such intention or desire, he wondered why they did not
propound it to the Meeting of the Protesters while they were in Town, and that
he could not say any thing in a matter of that consequence without the rest,
especially seeing he was not one of these who were entrusted by the meeting to
confer with these brethren about matters in difference; and that seeing these
who were appointed would be ready to confer whenever Mr. Blair, or Mr.
Dickson desired, he thought that it was best to propose it at such a
Conference; When his own private judgment was pressed, he answered, That they
knew neither he, nor any of the Protesters, had scruple to give testimony
against the English Proceedings, for they had already done it both by word and
writing. As for this motion of joining in a Testimony with those who were for
the Public Resolutions, it was new to him and deserved second thoughts, and he
desired to know if those who were for the Public Resolutions, would join with
the Protesters in the Testimonies which they had given already; and if in the
testimonies to be given they would testify alike against both hands, according
to the good old rule and practice of this Kirk, and for his own part he could
not see, if they st^l maintained the principles of the Public Resolutions, how
they could abide by a Testimony, but did leave to themselves a latitude to join
with any party whatsoever; and some of the Gentry had expressed this to be as
good a warrant for their actings in the year 1651. as in 1650. and therefore if
they would not join with the Protesters in their Testimonies against the
English, nor in new Testimonies against both hands, he would have a great doubt
of joining with them: but this (he said) was only from, and for himself up his
first thoughts, he knew not what might be his second thoughts upon conference
with others; and as for sending to him materials of a Declaration, desiring the
Protesters to change, or add, as they should think fit for the purpose, there
was never any such thing presented to him, or any other of the Protesters, nor
will he find any Ministers in Edinburgh to bear him witness in this particular.
It seems that this Reviewer is accustomed to be very liberal in his language
(to say no worse) and that his neighbors allow him the liberty to do so,
otherwise he would have expected to meet with contradiction, and taken better
heed to his Relation. Concerning that which he would insinuat, of the
forwardness of those of his judgment to give such a Testimony, why then did
they not (as the Protesters had done) give a Testimony alone by themselves, but
they returned home without doing any thing, though the danger was so near, as
he says; nor did they any thing to that purpose on their subsequent Meetings;
and for what they did at their late Assembly, I have spoken to it before.

PROTESTATION Reviewed.
THis past the Synods in April, being invited by that of Fife, by their
acceptance of their Overture, showed their affection to such a peace with their
Brethren, as might not trouble their peace with God; and for that effect did
commissionate some of their Members to come to Edinburgh to a Meeting in May
last: but that is the next thing they complain, and challenge us of. First, for
neglecting to give them timous advertisement, when yet the very first motion of
that Meeting in all our Judicatories, was in their prejence, who (if they had
been of such a peaceable temper as they talk of) would, no doubt, have made
such an invitation welcome, and embraced the occasion. As for particular
advertisement to them separately, The Delegats of the Synod of Fife entrusted
therewith, used all possible diligence, a fortnight before that Meeting,
dispatching their Missives (which for ought that is known) did not miscarry;
yea, upon their diligence, we found at that Meeting, some from Rosse, and
others from Dumfries, places of very remote distance, both South and North: and
it is credibly informed, that some of their chief leading men wrote both to
Aberdeen and Galloway, desiring their Accomplices, not to keep that Meeting.
Secondly, they complain, That not so much as some few days of delay could be
obtained by those few of their number which were then present, whereby they
might give advertisement to others. The truth is, in respect of their paucity,
they required at leaest a fortnights delay (although they had probably a
pre-indicted meeting, reasonable frequent, in that same place the very week
following, and others of them were in Town then, did appear to us, and some of
them went out of Town immediately before our Meeting) and so long a time could
not be given; not only because our Brethren, having come hastily from their
several owellings, were not able to attend so long, and once suffered to
scatter, could not conveniently be gathered again; but especially because
having offered unto them a free General Assembly (the of old acknowledged
proper remedy of all Ecclesiastical diseases) where many of our selves might
again be present, it was plain, that nothing to any good effect could be done
till then; and Providence happily casting that occasion in their hands, that
they might appoint and determine of the place of the ensuing Assembly, they
could not suffer the same to slip, which could not be shunned, for lack of
timous advertisement to the Presbyteries, if it were not then concluded. And so
(which they perceived, those they spoke with, directly aimed at) let the Kirk
in this difficult time, be shaken loose of her possession, of that her
dear-bought freedom, which Mr. Welsh, Mr. Forbes, and other precious men, that
now rest, adventured their lives, and suffered banishment, to preserve; as was
gravely pressed home by Mr. Blair upon them, in the Conference; and to which
they could not sure they did not, give so much as a seeming satisfactory
answer. Thirdly, they say in the printed Paper, That a desire of Reconciliation
was presented, but peremptorily, the electing, and sending Commissioners to
keep the day, indicted by the Meeting of Dundee, was concluded: I know no
opposition betwixt those two, as I conceive any good sense in the former, the
one being the end, and the other a mean to it. Besides, I know no desire of
Reconciliation presented to them, except the Paper of the Offer of a free
Assembly, as the proper remedy of our distractions. But in the Autograph, it is
pretended, not presented; and so they most uncharitably assert, We pretended a
desire of Reconciliation, but had concluded another thing. It is so well known
in the Country, whether it be We, or they, that use to act so, that I shall
only need to speak to the purpose. Our desire of peace was real, the
obstruction of it was from them, and we had been very foolish and censurable,
if ever the Lord should bless us with another Assembly, for not walking
answerable to our trust in relation to this, if we had not designed the place
thereof.

PROTESTATION Defended.
THe Answer which he gives anent neglecting to give timous advertisement of
their Meeting in May last, is, That the motion of that Meeting in all
Judicatories, was in the Protesters presence, and if they had been of a
peaceable temper, they had made the invitation welcome: This, I believe, is the
best Answer he can give; but he might as well have given no Answer at all. For
first, Letters were only written to some Presbyteries and Synods, and not to
all, and there was not one word spoken of such a thing in many Presbyteries, or
in their Synods. (2.) In these Presbyteries or Synods to which Letters came,
the motion or overture does expressly exclude dissenters from the Public
Resolutions, from any advise or consent in appointing that Diet, and is only
directed to such as are for the Public Resolutions, who are desired to return
their acceptance of the Overture to the Delegats of the Synod of Fife, against
the 28 of April, to the end, that upon their receiving of the Answer of Synods
and Presbyteries, to which they had written, they might, if they thought fit,
advertise the dissenters from the Public Resolutions to keep that Diet, May
12. but in that Letter there was no invitation for them to come, but rather an
intimation not to come till they were advertised concerning the Resolutions of
the Delegats of Fife, upon the return from Synods and Presbyteries. (3) I say,
the business was purposely so contrived, as to make Conference for
Reconciliation the pretense, but another thing was intended, viz. That the
Commission of the pretended Assembly at Dundee might meet to determine the place
of the Assembly ensuing, which had been left in the Indiction under the
uncertainty of an Alternative. That Conference for Reconciliation was
pretended, the Letter of the Synod of Fife, and discourse of their Meeting May
12. does evidence, and this Reviewer asserteth it. That the same was not
intended, does appear from this, that a competent time is allowed to acquaint
Synods, and where they were not sitting, to acquaint Presbyteries which were
for the Public Resolutions; but where Synods and Presbyteries were against the
Public Resolutions, no Letters were sent to such; but after these that are for
the Public Resolutions are acquainted, and have returned their Answers against
the 28 of April, the Letter of the Synod of Fife appoints these Answers to be
considered before any Invitation be given to the Dissenters from the Public
Resolutions; and it is no secret that it was agreed amongst them, that some men
of good estimation amongst the Protestors should not at all be invited nor
conferred with: Now some time must be allowed for them to consider the Returns,
and some time to make their Dispatches to all places within the Kingdom, and
some time for these to whom the Letters were directed, to communicate the same
to the rest of the number within their bounds: and some time must be allowed to
ride to Edinburgh; all which was not possible within the space of thirteen
days, from the 28 of April, to the 12 of May: for instance, no Letters were
written to the Synod of Glasgow, where many of the Protesters live; nor from
the Synod of Fife, or their Delegats; but one Brother of that Synod writes a
private Letter to another Brother in Glasgow, and seven or eight days of the
time were elapsed before the Letter came to his hands, whereby it came to pass
that some Presbyteries were not at all advertised, and others, when it was no
time to go to that Meeting, 12 of May: the like happened in other parts of the
Country, and indeed it could not be otherwise in places more remote from the
Synod of Fife (it may be remembered that the same art was used by slighting
Advertisements when they gave their Answer to the Parliaments Quire) Further, I
desire it may be considered, what this Reviewer says himself page 9. viz. when
a fortnight is d^sired to conveen the Protesters, he answers, That it was
plair, that nothing to any good effect could be done, till the Meeting of their
Assembly. With these things I desire the Answer of their Commission, dated
November 26. 1652. may be compared; which says in express words, That the time
of the Genesis Assembly was near approaching that they behoved to meet in that
capacity (to wit, of a Commission) for determining the place of the Assembly
ensuing, which had been left in the indiction under the uncertainty of an
alternative, by reason of the time: all which laid together, do sufficiently
show that the matter was purposely so contrived. Next, he says, that some from
Rosle, and others from Dumfreis were there upon their diligence; but unless he
say, some of the Dessenters from the Public Resolutions, residing in these
parts, were there upon advertisement sent from the Delegats of Fife, after the
28 of April, he speaks not to the purpose; for such as were for the Public
Resolutions might easily be there, for they had a competent time, and if any of
the Dessenters from the Public Resolutions were chosen by Synods or
Presbyteries, which at most was but one or two, they might conveniently be
there also, or perhaps some might be there occasionally: but none of these will
prove his point. That some of the chief leading men of the Protesters, wrote to
Galloway and Aberdeen, desiring their Accomplices not to keep that Meeting: For
ought I have learned, there was no such thing; and if he can, let him instance
the persons, in the mean time I give this instance to the contrary, That some
of the Protesters were there from Aberdeen, being chosen by the Synod. He
grants that which the Protestation alleges, That the few Protesters that were
there, required a fortnights delay, in respect of their paucity, that they
might send advertisements to others, but says, That probably they had a
preindicted Meeting, reasonably frequent, in that same place the week
following. But herein he is much mistaken, they had no pre-indicted Meeting,
but those few Protesters who were in Edinburgh, supposing that their reasonable
request, for a fortnights delay, could not be denied, (if there was any real
desire of peace, concerning which they had charity, till it appeared otherwise)
and did write Letters to all their Brethren that were not far distant from
Edinburgh to have unto that Meeting with all diligence, which they did
accordingly; and this shows their readiness to have come in upon
advertisement, but when they came in, the Brethren that are for the Public
Resolutions, had indicted the place of their ensuing Assembly, and so having
done the business for which they came, were gone from Edinburgh before the
Protesters were conveened. That two or three were in Town, and did not appear,
and some of them went out of Town, is little to the business, their lawful
occasions might divert them, and some of them were not called to the Meeting,
yea, in effect rather desired to be absent; but they came when they were
advertised. It is a poor subterfuge he makes for not granting a fortnights
delay, to say, they could not attend so long or being scattered, they could not
be conveniently gathered again: Either of these might have been done, if they
had been of such a peaceable temper as they talk of (as he is pleased in this
Section to say of the Protesters.) But he comes nearer to the truth and says,
It was plain, that nothing could be done, till the meeting of their Assembly:
And so he may well say, considering that themselves had resolved nothing should
be done till then. Afterward he alleges, There would not have been time to
advertise Presbyteries anent the place of their Assembly: But suppose the
desire of the Protesters had been granted, there was abundance of time, there
being about ten weeks betwixt the 12 of May, and the Diet of their Assembly the
21 of July, and so all the hazards he mentions might even in his own way have
been prevented. But what if it had been so, that they had not determined the
place? I cannot consent to what he says, That the Kirk would have been shaken
loose of her possession. Does he know, or has he forgotten what was maintained
by the Covenanted Protesters in 1638. and the Act of the Assembly at Glasgow,
December. 26. 1638? or the Act of the Assembly at Edinburgh, Aug. 17. 1639. which
was made after so much debate about that distinction of yearly and occasional
Assemblies, both in the Treaty at the Birks, and in that Assembly, the Act 27
of August 1647. and the Act of Parliament 1592. and the fourth, and sixth Act
of Parliament 1640. anent yearly General Assemblies, expressly distinguished
from occasional Assemblies, of which sort of Assemblies only the necessity is
first to be remonstrated to the Civil Magistrate, and even these may be kept in
case he refuse, by the intrinsecal power received from Christ as often as it is
necessary for the good of the Church, as the Act of Assembly August 27 bears:
so there is no question, in jure, against this K^rks privilege of holding Genesis
Assemblies once in the year, without any address to the Magistrate. What if
they had been violently stopped at that time from meeting, would they judge the
Kirk to be so shaken loose of her possession, as she might not thereafter
conveen with the first opportunity, and keep yearly General Assemblies without
address to the Civil Magistrate, because the adjournment was not kept: I
hope they will not say so, not make the Kirks privileges less then Christ
has appointed, and the State has acknowledged there is no limitation in the
Acts of Parliament, or clause irritant in reference to keeping of adjournments:
If the Right and Possession of the Church did hang on so ticklish a pin, the
corrupt Assembly at St. Andrews has much shaken and endangered the same, for
the possession of corrupt Assemblies does not maintain the right of free
lawful General Assemblies, this alleadgance of theirs is but a fair flourish
to persuade people to think well of their way, and of the necessity of their
refusing Conference with their Brethren before Constitution. As to that he
says of Mr. Welsh and others; Their endeavors were not to sit and make Acts
approving of the Defection of the time, and obligatory of the whole Church as
now is done, and that which they were mainly condemned to death for, and
suffered banishment, was for declining the King and his Council from being
judges in Ecclesiastical matters in prima instantia; but the Commission which
sat at Perth and their Assembly at Dundee did subject the Doctrine of the
Ministers of Jesus Christ to the immediate cognizance and censure of the Civil
Magistrate in the case of the Ministers of Sterline. There be two sorts of
Ministers engaged for the Public Resolutions as has been touched before, one
of these was never ready to act for Assemblies when they were rightly
constituted, much less to suffer for them. As for the other sort, I do hope
when the Lord shall afford the opportunity of having Assemblies rightly
constituted as formerly, they shall not adhere to the present corrupt
constitution; nor do I think their persuasion is such concerning the Public
Resolutions, when they are free of temptations, as they durst adventure to
suffer for the same as Mr. Welsh and other precious men did for the undoubted
right, Freedom and Privilege of this Kirk under the persecution of King James
who would not acknowledge either right or possession of Assembles, but
maintained that their Meeting and dissolving ought to depend on his pleasure,
and that they could decree nothing without his consent or ratification, yet
setting aside the Public Resolutions which is the grounds of the difference
betwixt them and the Protesters; I do in charity judge, that many of them would
suffer for the right and freedom of the Kirk. In the end of this Section he
would fain quible on the PRINTERS escape, in Printing presented for pretended,
though he grants that in the Autograph it is pretended; his zeal leads him to
quarrel with any that have the least hand about the Protestation, even with the
PRINTERS Boy, though in some Printed Copies the fault be corrected; but I say
no more, for it is wearisome to trifle the time in answering all that he says.

PROTESTATION Reviewed.
IN the next room, they mention their Paper given in with the Propositions
(wherein they say they have concurrence of the Generality of the godly of the
Land) and did entreat for a Conference, which was denied; the Commissioners
proceeding to assume the power, and Constitute themselves in a General
Assembly: lest any should think, that in assuming the power, and Constituting
themselves into a General Assembly, they did some new and uncouth thing, as
those who challenge them did the last year, in Constituting themselves a
Commission of the Kirk; be it known to all men, they did no other thing, nor in
no other way, then all the Assemblies since the last Reformation have been in
constant practice of: And how necessary it was, in this staggering time, not to
change in the least, will be assented unto by every ingenuous man, nor know I
any reason why they should complain: For those to whom the Paper was given were
not in a capacity to give an answer, till they were first Constitute in an
Assembly (yea none but an Assembly could satisfactorily answer their demands,
as is evident to, and will be acknowledged by the Judicious Reader) which was
no sooner done then they went effectually about it; But on the contrary the
Protesters would not so much as wait till then, but presently gave in their
Protestation. We will not now speak of that other Paper, yet cannot pass that
arrogant Tittle of the generality of the godly, which they assume to themselves
and their abettors: We will not mention of whom they learned this, and whom in
many other things they too much resemble: But we shall refer the Reader to
that most faithful and timeous Warning and Declaration of the late Assembly at
Dundee, and the third admonition and charge of the second part thereof.

PROTESTATION Defended.
HE affirms that they did nothing in constituting their Assembly, then was
done in all the Assemblies since the Reformation; but if he had understood well
the History of Proceedings in this Kirk, he should have said they did no other
thing then was done in the six unlawful Assemblies immediately proceeding the
last Reformation (which the Review of the Vindication of the Assembly at St.
Andrews and Dundee does clearly manifest, and that they have Constituted
themselves in a way contrary to the strain and tenor of the Acts of this Kirk
anent Constitution of Assemblies from our first Reformation and if that at St
Andrews was no lawful Assembly of this Kirk, then the Commission of the Genesis
Assem. 1650 is still in force, and needed not a new Constitution, the
Commission being ordained to endure in the intervall, until the next free
lawful General Assembly, and though one half of the Members appointed on that
Commission by the General Assembly 1650 have contrary to express limitations
in their Commission agreed on the Public Resolutions, and contrary to the
established Order of this Kirk, procured an unlawful Assembly to Ratify their
Proceedings, yet there is twice the number of a Quorum of the Members of that
Commission which have never assented to, nor concurred in these Public
Resolutions. The desire of the Protesters to that Meeting at Edinburgh, for not
Constituting of themselves, and for entertaining of a Conference, was showed by
him who has the trust of the Registers of the Kirk, and most knowledge
thereof, to be agreeable to diverse practices even of lawful Assemblies in this
Kirk, as in the year 1568, 1569, 1578, 1586, 1591, 1597. which was done at the
desire of Mr. Blair, and the particulars offered to be instructed. The Writer
of this Review may remember what sharp returns Mr. Blair met with because of
his Repeating and pressing these things when the Protesters did remove. As to
that he says that they were not in a capacity to answer the Representation of
the Protesters until they were Constituted, I assert, they were only in a
capacity to answer before Constitution, and not after it; for questions about
constitution must precede, and not follow after constitution; therefore it was
necessary to protest presently against their wrong Constitution, and it was
either a weak answer which many of their Assembly gave that adjournment, or a
few days would annull all their Commissions, their being no such limitation or
provision in their Commissions nor any Act of this Kirk to that purpose; but if
the Conference had been granted for the ends desired, and blessed of the LORD
with an agreement in the matter of the Propositions, there had been no great
difficulty to have accorded anent Assemblies in time coming. The generality of
the Godly was not mentioned in the Papers of the Protesters, without a previous
report of godly Ministers and Professors from several parts of the Land,
though he says he will not mention of whom the Protesters learned this, and
whom in many other things they resemble, yet the Protesters are not ashamed of
these to whom they were Disciples in this expression, and many other things of
necessary use in the present debates, whosoever shall peruse the Papers of this
Kirk in the year 1638 and 1648 may be abundantly satisfied that the Protesters
follow the ways and words of these who have gone before them in the Work of
Reformation. The fifth Argument against the unlawful Engagement, is founded
upon the same ground and expression. It is very like they had offended as much
if the Protesters had used the words made use of in the like case by our
Predecessors against the course of Defection, which are the equivalent hereof,
viz. The greatest part of the most zealous Professors in the Land, no question
that was thought by many of that corrupt age as arrogant a Tittle to be assumed
by the Protesters of these days against the corruptions of that time, as this
Reviewer thinks the Tittle of the generality of the godly to be, when it is used
by the present Protesters. The singular testimony which he gives to the
Warning and Declaration at Dundee speaks, That he has a singular estimation
thereof in his heart, above many former Warnings and Declarations of this Kirk;
I desire to know if he can with so full a mouth, and hearty applause give such
an encomium to the Declaration in the year 1648 against the unlawful
Engagement, let any indifferent man read and compare them, whether contrary
spirits do not speak in these two Declarations. As to the passage cited by him
in that Warning, I Answer, That the Protesters are very far from suchways and
opinions as the Members of this Kirk are exhorted in that Warning to be ware
of; Neither their Profession nor practice does hold forth any such thing, as
that they would have a Kirk made up of such persons only, as do evidence their
Regeneration; they desire to beware of that extreme upon the one hand; but they
desire also to beware of another extreme upon the other; to wit, That a Kirk
may lawfully according to the Word of God, be made up of known obstinate
Enemies to the LORD and his Work; and that notorious bloody Rebels who hate to
be Reformed may be admitted to all the Ordinances of Christ in the Church, and
preferred in the State to chief employments, and entrusted with the defense and
preservation of the Lords Interests and People, notwithstanding they have been
and still remain wicked enemies to, and persecuters of the same; there is a
middle way betwixt these two extremes which the Protesters do hold according to
the Word of God, and the received Doctrine of this Kirk for near an hundred
years, and especially since the late Reformation, to which rule the Protesters
do adhere, and do hold it their duty to endeavor that they may be observed and
practiced as well as they are professed, it being one of the crying and most
provoking sins of this Land, to make fair Professions but to fall in the
Practice.

PROTESTATION Reviewed.
Where they affirm it their burden, and that they have no delight to be
con^esting with any who profess themselves to be maintainers of the Government
of this Church; it is wished their Works were consonant to their words, and
made them credible to all on-lookers: Certainly however they may please
themselves, this is not the ordinary opinion that most men have of them.

PROTESTATION Defended.
What opinion most men have of the Protesters is not much to their
disadvantage, if the greater number within the Land be admitted judges to Pious
men and true P^ety, I fear all that arrive beyond a mere formality, shall be
condemned for Hypocrites. I would not appeal to the generality of the Land in
the matter of judging what is right and wrong in jure, betw^xt those that are
for the Public Rosolutions and the Protestets; but I d^re freely hazard to the
vote of the major parton the Land the matter of fact which is the thing in
contest betwixt these that are for the Public Resolutions and the Protesters;
that is to say, whether the Assembly at Dundee and Edinburgh be keeping their
former Principles, yea, or not? If you will ask any, even of the Malignant
party (at least all that ever I could speak with my self, or hear of from any
other) they will tell you the Kirk was wrong before, but now is become right
since the King came to Scotland, and these who are most grossly profane and
wicked in all the Land are now become great Zealots, and stout patriots for the
late Assemblies, though before they were haters of all Kirk Judicatories.

PROTESTATION Reviewed.
NExt they speak of a party of insufficient, scandalous, and il-affected
Ministers etc. complying with the times, expressing their dis-affection to the
Work of Reformation, as they found opportunity, as in the time of James Graham,
and the unlawful Engagement, who got greater advantage by the Public Actings
for bringing in of Malignants to places of trust: And who perceiving they wore
not able to endure trial and purging, began the last year to lift up their
heads, and being encouraged by the Acts and Censures of Dundee, have so
strengthened themselves, as to carry on Public Determinations to their own
ends from whom (say they) what can be expected, but to favor every evil
course, to persecute such as seek the Lord in sincerity, suppress the power of
Godliness, and open the door of the Ministry to such as for insufficiency,
scandals, or dis-affection, have been justly deposed, in regard whereof, they
think there is too great cause to make use of the Prophets words, Jer. 23.14,
15. There be many things here deserve animadversion.

I. Although we deny not, but that in every Order there may be some out of
Order, as Judas among the Apostles, and Saul among the Prophets, yet know we
not of any such party as they speak of, nor did so much as any person of that
kind sooner appear among us, then according to the measure of his offense, he
found the severity of Discipline. It would be seriously considered, whether or
not by this Party, they mean the Body of the Ministry represented at Dundee,
whom thus they would cast an odium upon; but what favor the Party that was
truly such as they describe, found at that venerable Assembly, let their Acts
and Declarations speak; which Declaration of theirs mentions another Party,
that has (alas) too long lurked among us and under specious pretexts brought
their design to that pass we now see. These men should (according to the common
rule) first have purged themselves, and taken this beam out of their own eye.

PROTESTATION Defended.
I Wish the corrupt party amongst the Ministry were as thin sown, as he would
insinuat, by telling there was a Ju^at among the Apostles, and a Saul among the
Prophets. But the many Acts of Assembly, for purging the Ministry by ordinary
Judicatories; and because of their negligence, the Commissions appointed for
Visitation, and the great work they had where they came, Visitations in other
parts of the Land, (where as much, if not more work of that kind was to be
expected) being interrupted by the troubles of the time, and other impediments,
the gross ignorance not only of the People, but even of the Elders in many
Congregations, where their present Ministers have been living amongst them,
some twenty, some thirty years, and have not so much as taken pains to instruct
them in the necessary grounds of Religion, together with the neglect of
Discipline during that time, and yet such suffered to remain in the Ministry,
the scandals of many Ministers for drunkenness and other common vices,
together with their godless carriage at home and abroad, are more then abundant
proof of what is alleged in the Protestation. And though this Reviewer is
pleased to say, they knew not of any such Party, yet alas it is more palpable
to the mourners in Zion, then that they need any further proof thereof, then to
be conversant amongst many of them but a very few days, and I know that some
who concur with the late Assemblies, will not deny it, but I trust do make
conscience to mourn for it in secret before the Lord. The Protestation does not
speak of the Body of the Ministry, but a corrupt Party which had too great
influence at the Assembly in Dundee. Whereas he referret his Readers to the
Acts made at Dundee, to know what favor the Party that was truly such, found
there, no such Acts are ordinarily to be seen, I am sure, but such as are made
against the Protesters and the Dissenters from the Public Resolutions are to
be readily found in all hands. If the thing he means, be the slight Act made
against the divisive Supplication, what has followed thereupon for execution
less ur more? If he mean that the Supplications of Ministers formerly deposed
for gross faults, were not granted, he may remember the Politic argument used
at Dundee, and renewed at Edinburgh upon the same occasion, viz. That it was
good to abstain from present reponing them, because of the odium it would bring
upon them, and for that Declaration he yet again mentions, I have told him it
has been answered.

PROTESTATION Reviewed.
IT is true indeed, and I trust the Kirk of this Nation has no reason to
repent, that she still has some, who (during the prevailing of the Prelates)
were carried down with the tide of the times, even to give subscriptions
according to the then way of entry, and being weighted therewith, do comfort
themselves with Paul, that God will be merciful unto them in that which they
did ignorantly. But for those horrid Oaths they speak of, nothing is known but
the common subscription: and if ought concern the Kirk to know more, it should
neither have been so long concealed by those who appropriat to themselves the
title of the Godly, nor now revealed at such a time, and in such a way. As for
their subscriptions, they were generally known, yet notwithstanding thereof
were the subscribers even at first invited to the Covenant, and some of them
with the first appeared against the Service Book, and many of them have not to
this day fallen from their steadfastness, neither were all that have fallen of
that number. But for further and full clearing of this, I offer these things:
1. Some of the prime of their number, are also, if not more grossly guilty of
the ill, then any of ours. 2. There are of our number ten for one of theirs,
who in that hour and power of darkness, bare the heat and hard of the day. 3.
Scarce twenty of them are yet of six years standing in the Ministry, and but
about five only of them were Ministers, when the National Covenant was
sucscribed. 4. And generally all the old Ministers, and those that were
admitted before the Episcopal encroachments, are for the Assembly. 5. And
lastly, would we speak of those that suffered under the Prelates, the Assembly
will be found to have three for it, where one is against it.

PROTESTATION Defended.
What the Writer of this Paper does mean by the common subscription, I do not
well know, if by common he mean that, to which most of the Conformists did
subscribe, I say, that was an horrid oath, as does appear from the Records of
their subscriptions. If by common he mean the lesser oath, and account the
matter of that oath common; I shall set down the true Copy both of the greater
and lesser Oath the Conformists did subscribe, and let the Reader judge, if the
least of the two may not be accounted horrid enough for a Minister of Jesus
Christ to swear at his entry to such an holy Calling: the greater Oath sweateth
to practice all the corruptions of the time, and implicit obedience for what
should be after concluded, under the pain of deprivation, infamy and perjury.
The lesser Oath swears solemnly to the practice of the corruptions of the
time, and particularly for Episcopacy, and the five Articles of Perth, and what
should be lawfully concluded thereafter by the Church, as then constituted of
Archbishops, Bishops, etc. under the pain of deposition and perjury. The
Protestation does acknowledge, that the Lord was graciously pleased to give
repentance to not a-few who were involved in that defection; and concerning
that which he says, that it should neither have been so long concealed, nor
now revealed at such a time, and in such a way. It is not long since it was
made known to these who have joined in the Protestation, neither had it been
revealed now, unless men since their seeming to repent thereof at the taking
of the National Covenant, had by their after-carriage discovered their
hypocrisy and rottenness of their way: beside, it has only been revealed in
the general, and the Protesters have not published their names. Their
subscriptions (says he) were generally known, I grant their conformity was
known, but not their subscriptions, at least, that it was to an Oath, and so
horrid an Oath. I do verily suppose, and not without ground, that some who have
subscribed, as aforesaid, have forgotten that the Oath was so gross, otherwise
why would they deny it, when the subscription is in Record under their hand? He
says, some of them appeared with the first against the Service Book, I think
few but semi-Papists or Atheists would have willingly embraced that Book,
though fear might prevail with some for compliance, but how few of them
appeared at first against Episcopacy, and the five Articles of Perth, to which
they had sworn? He offers five things to clear the matter further, but two of
them are coiucident. As to the first, for any thing I know or can learn, he can
instance but one of the number of Protesters who complied with the Prelates,
which has be^n matter of humiliation, and a mean sanctified of the Lord to fit
him the more for opposing these and the like corruptions; he has now for
fifteen years given large proof of the sincerity of his repentance, and has
been very useful in his station, for promoting the Work of Reformation, beyond
others, of whom more was expected. And as for the number of those that stand
for the Public Resolutions who subscribed Oaths, or at least practiced the
corruptions of that time, he will find their number no smaller then some
hundreds. The second thing which he propones to consideration is coincident
with the fifth, for who did bear the heat and hard of the day in that hour and
power of darkness, but these who suffered under the Prelates; yet in the second
he says, that these of their number were ten for one with these that are
Protesters; but upon better consideration in the fifth he falls down to three
for one, and though he had said only that their number which suffered under
the Prelates was equal to the number of Protesters that suffered, he should
upon a just computation, have found difficulty to make it good; but because he
is accustomed to speak big words, I shall pass this as a brag to beguile simple
Readers, though I think I might say, the sufferings of the Protesters were
greater; but blessed be the Lord for the faithfulness of all that suffered. As
to the third, I do so far differ from him in my computation, and (I suppose) I
know the Protesters near as well as he, that I can scarcely find twenty of them
under six years standing in the Ministry, which then concurred in the
Protestation, though blessed be the Lord their number increases. If he can
help my memory in two or three that will be the most, he says, that about five
of them only were Ministers when the National Covenant was subscribed, which
is about fifteen years since, I can find him about five times five, who were
then Ministers, that join in the Protestation; and there be diverse more who
are unsatisfied with the Public Resolutions, though they adhere not to the
Protestation. And what great advantage is this, I pray you, that he so
earnestly hunts after? Whether is it more commendation for several of the
Protesters that were ready to have entered into the Ministry, to forbear to
enter, by subscribing to such sinful Oaths; or for many of these that are for
the Public Resolutions, that they entered by such a corrupt way, and so were
Ministers when the National Covenant was subscribed? would this argument have
any weight with judicious men against Mr. George Gillespies testimonies for the
Cause of God, because he entered not into the Ministry till after the
Reformation began. 4. He says, that generally all the old Ministers and these
that were admitted before the Episcopal encroachments, are for the Assembly.
The defection began in 1597. and upon King James his entry to England, (which
is about fifty years since) the Episcopal encroachments began, and all
opposers of the defection were discountenanced, and such as were for it,
favored and encouraged by the King, State, Bishops, and corrupt Assemblies:
for my own part, I know few that can be of that standing in the Ministry, but
I know some who have been about that time in the room of the Ministry, who are
not long since deposed for insufficiency and scandals, and like enough there
be more of that sort. Let this Reviewer do the worst he can to cast aspersions
and reproaches upon the Protesters, I do believe that in no time of the
defection of the Assemblies of this Kirk, there can be produced so great a
number of faithful witnesses that adventured to give in Protestations against
the corruptions of the time; and these on either hand also. This is to me a
token for good unto the Land from the Lord, to whom alone the praise is due.

The greater Oath.
WE (...) by their presents, solemnly swear, and faithfully promise to observe
and fulfill the Articles and Conditions following; they are to say,

1. That we shall be leill and true to our most gracious Sovereign the Kings
Majesty and his Highness successors, and to our power shall maintain his
Highness right and prerogative in Causes Ecclesiastic.

2. That we shall be obedient to our Ordinary the Archbishop and to all other
our Superiors in the Church, speak of them reverendly, and in all our private
and Public Prayers, commend them and their Estate to Gods merciful
protection.

3. That we shall in all places by conferences, and where we have occasion in
public preaching, maintain the present Government of the Church and
Jurisdiction Episcopal, and shall by reading be careful to inform our selves
of the true and lawful grounds thereof, to the end we may stand for the same
against the adversaries opposers of the same.

4. That we shall be diligent to our power in the duties of our Calling by
residence with our flock, and not divert therefrom without license of our
Ordinary the Archbishop.

5. That we shall study to advance the Estate of the Church in general, and
particularly the estate of the Church of (...) whereto we are to be admitted
and received, in all the profits and commodities that possibly we can.

And lastly, that we shall live peaceable Ministers in the Church, subjecting
our selves to the orders that therein are, or shall be established; and by all
means that we can use, procure others to the due reverence of the same; which
thing if we shall contraveen (as God forbid) we are content upon trial and
cognition taken by our said Ordinary, without all reclamation or gainsaying, to
be deprived of our Ministry, and be reputed and held infamous and perjured
persons for ever. Subscribed with our hands at

The lesser Oath.
I (...) now to be admitted to the holy function of the Ministry, do
faithfully promise, and by my great Oath solemnly swear, That I shall be
obedient to all the Acts and Constitutions of the Church, made and agreed upon
in the by past General Assemblies, or that hereafter shall be lawfully
concluded, and particularly to the Acts concluded at Perth in the General
Assembly which was kept there in the month of August 1618. And if I shall fail
in the performance of this my Oath and Promise, I am content that upon the
trial thereof I be deposed as perjured and unworthy to bear any Function in
the Kirk. In witness whereof I have subscribed their presents with my hand.

PROTESTATION Reviewed.
AS for any who by word or deed at any time appeared against the late
Reformation, they still found so little patrociny from those who are now
Assembly-Men, that I am sure, if we should serve the Protesters with the like
measure, for transgressions of the like nature, and perhaps greater, they would
cry out of cruelty and persecution. As for the Epithets they give that Party: I
confess, ill enough cannot be done to, let be spoke, of men who are truly such
as they describe: But we desiderate here both charity and prudence; at such a
time, and in such a way, to s^ing filth upon the faces of their Brethren; and
that (for ought yet seen or known) most unjustly.

PROTESTATION Defended.
IF these who appeared against Reformation by word or deed had found so little
patrociny with the late Assembly-men, many of them had been small friends to
themselves, as is too well known, not only to their nearest neighbors, but to
these that live at a good distance from them. And why did the Moderator of
their late Assembly tell them, that the deposed Ministers both thought and
said, they had many good friends amongst them? The Protesters were never
accounted guilty of that fault, and himself afterward challenges them for
being of a rigid purging humor, so I know not what transgressions of the like
nature he has to charge them with. He grants in his fourth Observation, that
the epithets may be applied if the Party were such as is described, when he
shall seriously consider what has been said for evidence thereof, he may
perhaps change his judgment about them, or at least, not defend them so
confidently.

PROTESTATION Reviewed.
THat the Public Actings were for bringing in of the Malignant party, to
places of power and trust, and bearing down such as had been straight in the
Cause, stirring up the Civil Magistrate against them, and subjecting the
liberty of the Word in the mouth of Christ's Ambassadors, for reproof of sin, to
the immediate judicial cognizance, restraint and censure of the Civil
Magistrate, will appear a mass of malicious reproaches, by shortly setting
down the true stories related to: But I must first tell that the odicus term
Malignant does not appertain to them, who having satisfied for their offenses
of that kind, according to the Order prescribed by these men's own assent and
advice, keep themselves free from new out breakings of that abjured iniquity;
And if we walk not according to this rule, many of them will be forced to hear,
what for the present I purpose not to speak. And next add, That all the birds
of their feather were not so straight in the Cause, as they would seem to
insinuate here: And on the other part, some, whom they term Malignants here,
have given unquestioned evidence of their affestion to, and are still suffering
for that Cause. Now, the Stories related to, are these two; The one so well
known, that we need no more but remember how, when, and upon what pinch of
necessity, (which themselves know how it came) the Commission of the Kirk being
enquired by the State, who might be employed for the necessary defense of the
Country at such a time: The Commission of the Kirk gave that Answer, which
their duty to GOD, their Mother-Kirk, Native Country, and the Protestant
Interest, extorted from them, and which all Nations and Incorporations
whatsoever, will, and do allow and practice in such a case. But, that People
may rightly judge of it, for it is ordinarily misrepresented, we desire them
to get, and ponder the Commissions own Papers. The other Story is shortly (in
so far as it is most material) thus; It being represented by the Committee of
Estates, to the Commission of the Kirk, what hazard the Garrison of Sterlin was
in, by their Ministers there preaching, and otherways dealing, they withal
signified how they behoved to take some course for securing the same the
Commission desired their Lordships, that they would not meddle with the matter,
till they had first dealt with them, and returned their report of the Issue,
which being assented to, the Commission wrote for them to St. Andrews, where
they met with them; and when by conference they would not receive satisfaction,
began to entreat them first to give assurance that they would not obstruct the
Levies, but this they refused: Thereafter, that they would be pleased (for Peace
sake) to with draw for a season from Sterlin, and they would provide their
places; but this they also refused, although Mr. Blair then (apparently a
dying) did gravely obtest them, hoth for the one and the other; which being
represented to the Committee of Estates, and they thereafter informed, how
those Ministers continued in their former practice, they wrote for them once,
and again to come to Perth; But ere they came the most part of the Committee
being removed to the North) they who remained desired them to stay at Perth or
Dundee, till the rest should return, against which they protested in very high
terms, as encroaching upon the Ministry, etc. By the time the rest returned the
Parliament did sit, who desired the Judgment of the Commission, whether or not
the Committee of Estates had made any encroachment upon the Ministry and
Government of this Kirk, by detaining these Ministers and give their advice
what course the Parliament should take in relation to them, for securing the
Garrison of Sterlin; the sum of the Answer thereto was, The Brethren might
lawfully protest, that nothing be done prejudicial to the Liberties of the
Kirk; but that they did not see that the Committee of Estates had eneroached
thereon, by that which they had done; and that they could give no advice to
their Lordships, the securing of a Garrison being a thing not competent to
them. After which, some of those Ministers friends entreated some of the
Commission, to deal with the Parliament, to let their Brethren go home,
undertaking for them, that they should not further offend; which the Brethren
of the Commission did, engaging themselves to be answerable for their carriage;
whereupon they were presently dismissed. This being the true Story, let any
judge of the truth of the former Calumnies.

PROTESTATATION Defended.
TWo things he denies, and says they are malicious reproaches: The first is,
the in-bringing of the Malignant party to places of power and trust; one while
he pleads their repentance, and would have them to be no Malignants that have
made a fashion of repentance, without any evidences, yea there were contrary
evidences in their speeches and actions: and there while he pleads necessity for
it, and says, the Protesters know how it came; which is true indeed, though
not perhaps in his sense: They too well know from sad experience, how that
necessity was plotted and contrived at the Hague and Bredah in Holland, and how
the design was driven on in Court, State and Kirk in Scotland, all other
necessities were but pretended; and what necessity is that, which should make a
People, confederated with God in a solemn Covenant, to give up the Lords
Covenanted Interests and People, to the power of his and their Anti-Covenanted
Enemies, whose hands have been, more then once, imbrued in their blood. Then he
refers to the Commissions Papers, for further satisfaction; but these have
been sufficiently answered by former Papers, to which no Reply has been given.
I find in the Commissions large Paper, in answer to the King and Parliament,
concerning the Ministers of Sterlin, this Defense of their Answer to the
Parliaments Quaere, which is brought forth by them, with confident words as an
undeniable Argument Either the Malignants will satisfy, or not satisfy; if
they satisfy, then they must be admitted to the Covenant and Ordinances, and
if to these, then they may be admitted to fight for Religion, King and Country
etc. If they satisfy not, then they are to be Excommunicated; and by the
Public Resolutions Excommunicated persons are excepted from being employed.
The Vindication of their Assembly has another Answer, that the Public
Resolutions were indeterminati juris, as to any former Assembly. Where first I
desire it to be observed, how one Defense interferreth with another. What a sad
business is berk? some few Members of the Commission without advertisment sent
to others, do, at the desire of the State, determine a matter of Doctrine with
great precipitation; contrary to received and known principles: and then they
strain their wits to devise several sorts of Arguments to maintain the same.
(1) What a strange conversion is here of Thousands all on a sudden, following
upon an Act of Parliament? bestowing places, though just now, many of them were
in Arms against Religion and their Country, and others on their way to join
with them. The State first nominates Malignant Officers, and then they come to
make a bare show of repentance before the Commission of the Kirk, and they
accept it. (2) Observe, that it is not true which is alleged for defense of
the Commission, that they prescribed good Rules, but the State transgressed
them; for according to the Commissions dilemma, brought to maintain their
Resolutions, the State did not transgress the limits prescribed when they
nominated persons not yet Excommunicated, for says the Commission, If they
satisfy not, they are to be Excommunicated, and so are excluded; and to say
the truth, the State could not think that the Commission judged any to be
obstinate enemies, or notoriously flagitious, who neither were Excommunicated,
nor under process of Excommunication; and so the Commissioners of the Kirk were
chief in the Transgression, for they did not Excommunicate any one Malignant in
Scotland, but shortly after their Answer did relax from Excommunication a chief
Malignant, who had been Excommunicated a little before their Answer, for being
a Ringleader of a present Rebellion. (3) How contrary is that to former
Principles, to reason from men's being admitted to Repentance, to their
Employment in Places of Trust (for that is the thing complained of in the
Protestation, and answered by this Reviewer) the Acts of Assembly 1648. 1649.
and 1650. and Declarations of the Commissions of the Kirk, speak expressly
against employing of Malignants, notwithstanding any outward satisfaction: Is
not the solemn Acknowledgment of our great sin, in employing Malignants, made
particularly in relation to the employing those who had given satisfaction to
the Kirk? for none were employed in places of power and authority but such as
had first satisfied the Kirk. Does not the Assembly 1649. expressly distinguish
betwixt Admission of Malignants to Repentance, and their Admission to Trust;
which, even in Kirk Sessions, is discharged without express warrant of
Assembly? And then (4) As to their Repentance. How few of the great multitudes
admitted, were received, according to the Order prescribed in the General
Assembly at Glasgow, and the General Assembly 1649? Upon Evidences, it was in
the judgment of many judicious and pious men, the very Cape-stone of that
Defection, that the Lords Ordinances were made to serve the corrupt ends and
designs of men, and the mocking of Repentance, made a patent way to Trust and
Preferment: What better was it, then if the Priests of old had admitted Lepers
into the Lords House, and then to excuse themselves, had pronounced them all to
be clean when the Leprosy had sprung up and spread in their bald-head; that
certainly should be accounted a double guilt. As for those, which he says, are
free from new out-breakings, all that I know of that kind will hardly exceed
(that which we could only call) a perfect number, their Repentance is very
rare; it is too manifest that many of them have, according to their mutable
principles, gone from one extreme to another. For his boasts of what he can
speak, of any of the Protesters, they fear him not, only let him speak no more
hereafter then he can make good; which is the best way to bring himself into
credit again.

The other thing which he denies in this place, is, The subjecting of the
liberty of the Word in the mouth of Christ's Ambassadors, to the immediate
judicial cognizance, restraint and censure of the Civil Magistrate. This is so
fully cleared in the Review of the Vindication, as I need, say nothing in
answer to the Relation here made, only I observe this difference betwixt the
Vindication and this Reviewer, that the Vindication denies that the Magistrate
confined the Ministers of Sterlin, being starred up thereunto by the
Commissioners of the Assembly; and the Writer of this Paper, to avoid the
inference that may be made upon the Magistrates judging them in prima
instantia, says, That the Magistrate did conveen them upon a Representation
made by the Commissioners to the Committee of Estates, but he knows that the
Commission of the Kirk had passed no judgment against these Ministers, nor
indeed could they, walking within the bounds of their Commission; yet did they
approve the Proceedings of the State, without so much as hearing the Defense of
these Ministers, though present in the same town where they were sitting.

PROTESTATION Reviewed.
AS for their purging humor, which, time, with these sad dispensations, might
have purged out of them; but belike it will never leave them. We grant indeed,
the Kirk should be careful to purge out the old Leaven. All our Question is,
anent the manner how: And I shall desire them in the fear of God, to consider
whether their practice in this has been in every thing squared to the Apostles
Rules, 1 Timothy 5.19. Tit. 3.10. Gal. 6.1. Jud. 22.23. And whether or not they
made it a politic screw, to wind themselves into all places of power and
Authority, Civil and Ecclesiastical, and a mean of revenge, exercing it
uncharitably and unseasonably.

PROTESTATION Defended.
HOw offensive must this needs be both in the ears of God and good men, that
one who pretends to be a Patron of an Assembly of the Kirk, should so publicly
and scornfully reproach that necessary and covenanted duty which the Assemblies
of the Kirk and their Commission, in their Declarations, Warnings, and
Remonstrances, above the number of Twenty, have pressed upon the Parliament and
Committee of Estates, from the Word of God and our Covenants, as they would
avoid the Lords eternal wrath on themselves, and a curse upon the Land, and
still challenged them as negligent and defective; in all which the men of most
deserved estimation in their Assemblies had a very great hand. The Causes of
Humiliation presented to the State before Dumbar, at Leith, and the Causes
after Dumbar at Sterlin, show and acknowledge, the notpurging the Judicatories
and Armies, according to our Vows and Professions to be a great cause of the
Lords wrath upon the Land; afterward he would seem not altogether to condemn
the duty, and would state the disterence upon the manner, and by the words he
speaks and texts hinteth, he seems to desiderat justice, prudence, charity, and
what not? It would please such a Master far better to sit idle then to work;
but such, to whose hearts the Lord has made the language of His Words to
speak, though they do readly acknowledge a great mixture of humane infirmities
in their performance of all duties, yet they are so far from thoughts of
repenting what they have done in that matter, as they desire to mourn before
the Lord that the work of purging has been so much slighted in all
Judicatories both Ecclesiastical and Civil: Sometime he undervalues the
Protesters as a company of young men of small account, and at other times he
holds them forth as men who had a great sway in Judicatories of Kirk and State.
He says, Purging was made a politic screw, to wind into Power and Authority
in Kirk and State. To which I answer in his own words, That such heinous
accusations must not be taken upon trust, when nothing is said to make them
appear; especially when they are spoken by a person who takes more pleasure to
reproach then to reason. I am sure if it was before acceptable in Judicatories
to speak for purging, it is now more acceptable to speak against it, and I
think I may in the fear of the Lord, desire good men who were very industrious
and zealous for purging the House of God, the Judicatories and Armies, and now
are engaged in the way of the Public Resolutions, to consider the boldness of
this man (whom they do well enough know) and either to take with the thing he
charges upon their former actings, and to let the world know that then they
were wrong, but now are right, together with the Reasons of their change, or
else to be sensible of their lifting up the head of such men, by declining to
their way, and to remember whence they are fallen, and to repent.

PROTESTASION Reviewed.
AS for any power in any to carry Public Determinations to any wrong ends, we
can, and do bless God, the contrary is known to be true, and all the Assemblies
Determinations speak the same language to the whole world; yea, I hope to their
consciences also, when the heat of their passions is a little allayed.

PROTESTATION Defended.
THe Acts made in their Assembly at Dundee and at Edinburgh against faithful
Ministers, Elders and Expectants, (from which some of best esteem dissented) do
evidence, That Public Determinations are carried to wrong ends; which made a
worthy Brother, (a Member of the late Assembly at Edinburgh) gravely to tell
them when these Acts and Overtures passed, That the words of the Prophet Micah
against the Prophets in his days, might be applied to them, chap. 3. ver. 5.
They bite with their teeth, and cry, Peace. He says, That the Assemblies
Determinations speak the same language; their late Assembly at Edinburgh speaks
the same language with that of Dundee, but neither of them speak the language
of former Assemblies since our Reformation, as the Papers sent to them from the
Keeper of the Registers of the Assembly (which they refused to read) do fully
show. Their language is the same with that of the Parliament and Committee of
Estates 1648. pleading for the Unlawful Engagement: It does also well agree
with the Kings Declarations, and the Oxfordian Doctors Arguments from the light
of Nature and practice of Nations, for employing Papists to defend his Person
and the Protestant Religion, as their Arguments are for bringing in Malignants
to defend the work of Reformation, and the Protesters language is the same with
the Declaration and Answer of the Commission of the Kirk and General Assembly
1648. and the Reply made in the year 1642. whereby it does appear whose word is
yea and nay, 2 Cor. 1.17, 19. and who walks in the same steps, and in the same
spirit, 2 Cor. 12.18. and who build again what they destroyed, and make
themselves transgressors; and who condemn themselves in that which they allow.
Romans 14.23.

PROTESEATION Reviewed.
FOr the following words, which are of the stamp with the former, I shall only
add, 1. What measure every one that comes not up their full length may expect
of them, if their former actings had not sufficiently cleared their present
expressions put out of al doubt. 2. It is not one of the characteristical
properties of the Godly, to be often assuning that Title. 3. Such heinous
accusations must not be taken upon trust, when naught is said to make them
appear. 4. I believe, the Assembly knows of none received to the Ministry,
but according to the Public Order, and when ought shall appear to the
contrary, will take such course therewith as in justice accords.

PROTESTATION Defended.
TO the first I answer, that he does well to grant, that the present
expressions and former actings of the Protesters do agree, the like cannot be
said of all that are for the Public Resolutions, though it be too true of many
of them, the Protesters are indeed for purging out all insufficient, scandalous
and il-affected; but that is very far from judging such as come not up the full
length that they desire; he knows what measure faithful Ministers and
Professors got in their Acts at Dundee, and he may remember his own intimation
page 5. of a necessity to hold them as Heathens and Publicans. To the second. I
say, that they do neither often assume, nor at all appropriat (as he says
elsewhere) the title of Godly to themselves, the subscribers of the Protestation
are speaking of others to whom these of best account in their Assemblies, will
not deny the testimony of godliness; and yet when they are reproached and
condemned, they may even concerning themselves, use some freedom in their
Vindication, for which there be diverse examples in Scripture. To the third,
seeing that Assembly to which the Protestation was presented, account
themselves a Judicatory, why did they not acknowledge the relevancie of the
grounds, and then they might have desired the Protesters to prove them, wherein
if they had failed, the Assembly had the greater advantage, but they were loath
to put the business upon that issue. To the fourth, I desire him to consider
what Mr. John Knox said to the Council of England, when they challenged him
for doing contrary to the Public order, his reason was (said he) because their
Public order was contrary to Christ's order: And so is their Public order at
Dundee contray to the first good old constant order of this Kirk, established
according to the Word of God, which was to be very watchful in admission of
Ministers, as appears by Mr. Knox his last Letter to the General Assembly, a
little before his death. But does not the Writer of this Paper know, that some
deposed Ministers are admitted contrary to public Order of the Assembly 1649,
and 1650, in several places, and particularly within the Synod of Tividale and
Mers? I believe he is not ignorant of it, and however, I am sure a great part,
if not the most part of the Assembly did know it: and the whole Assembly might
have known it, if they did examine Synod-Books and their Proceedings.

PROTESTATION Reviewed.
FOr their allusion to the Prophets words, I shall desire themseriously to read
them again, and perpend if in conscience they be applicable to the present
points of differences. Next, they tell us, it shall be their purpose to maintain
the Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government of this Kirk, and particularly
the National Assemblies, so long as they are preserved from corruption in the
constitution thereof: But many need better Arguments to persuade them of this,
then their bare Profession or practice this year and the last; Of which we may
well say, what ever be the purpose of men, it is evidently the aim of the devil
to ruin General Assemblies, and so to raze the walls of our Jerusalem; And
they would do well to consider if, and how far they have been isntrumental to
drive on that design.

PROTESTATION Defended.
THe Prophets words were well considered before they were set down in the
Protestation, and they are very applicable to the Party of which the Protesters
speak. It is known to the World what some of the Protesters have done for
maintenance of the Government of this Kirk; I may say of them all without any
boast, that they have done more for it, then any who question the reality of
their Professions. There is no doubt but it is the Devils design to ruin
General Assemblies, and every Ordinance of Christ if he could, but the way by
which Satan has most advanced that design has been through their own
corruption, and when they were faithful, opposition has little prevailed.

PROTESTATION Reviewed.
BUt they would make some clearing here, by telling us, that all who are
acquainted with the principles and practices of our worthy Predecessors, and of
the learned and godly non-conformists in England, will easily see how far they
are from their judgments and practices, who follow the ways of separation.
Belike they still dwell beside evil neighbors; but which is worse, they are
hardly believed, when men call to mind and consider how now of a long time
still they took the patrociny of all that were suspected to follow those ways.
2. What progress some of their chief and cryed-up men have made in those ways.
3. What affection they still carry to them, and how familiarly they converse
with them, even although excommunicate. 4. But especially how unavoidable
separation is upon their grounds: For, if it be a matter of conscience for them
to join with others in Civil duties, that necessarily belong to the
Incorporation, whereof both are members, sure much more in Ecclesiastic. But a
little time will further clear this.

PROTESTATION Defended.
HEre he bends all his endeavors to make it appear, that the Protesters
incline to separation; but he answers not what is said in the Protestation for
their vindication, to wit, that their ways are agreeable to the principles and
practices of their Predecessors and the Non-conformists in England, he brings
four considerations why the professions of the Protesters are not believed.
First, he says, that the Protesters still took the patrociny of all that were
suspected to follow these ways; but what does all this amount unto? For he
says not that they patronized these who followed, but these who were suspected
to follow the ways of separation. It is well known that too many have an evil
eye against Reformation, and have suspected all that has been done these
fourteen years in the Lords Work, as tending to separation: But what will he
say for his associats, who have not only taken the patrociny of men suspected
for Malignancy, but of these that were condemned and excommunicated for being
murderers of the People of God; yea, and what if they have recommended them to
Public trust and employment? To that which he alleges in the second place, I
answer, that this is the old Prelaticall song against the Non-conformists,
because some of their number turned Separatists: therefore to say that they
were all for separation, though they kept Christ's middle way between
extremes, and did much more against Separation by Word, Writ and Print, then
all the Prelaticall Party; And I may say the like of the Protesters, that they
have taken more pains by word and writ, to prevent and remedy the declining of
some to the ways of Separation, then all that are for the Public Resolutions
have done. Beside he would consider what is said in the Representation which
was given in before the Protestation: How great a snare your former actings
which were not to edification have been to some people to tempt them to the way
of separation, and to the shaking of the government of this Church, etc. He may
also bethink himself what great numbers of these that were most zealous for the
Public Resolutions, have either departed from their Principles to the contrary
way, against which they were fighting the former year; or otherwise, if they be
still walking upon their principles, it is true which the Protesters a leage,
that the Public Resolutions lay a foundation for conjunction with all parties
whatsoever. To the third I say, that he has forgotten the rules recommended by
him to the Protesters in the preceding page, anent purging out scandaious,
insufficient and ill-assected Ministers. Will he not allow the same moderation
to men reputed godly, when they fall into an error of judgment? He recommended
to the Protesters consideration 1. Tim. 5.19 Tit. 3.6. Gal. 1. Brethren, if a
man be over-taken in a fault, ye which are spiritual restore such an one in
the spirit of meekness, considering thy self left thou also he tempted. He
recommended also Jude 22 23. and of some have compassion, making a difference,
and others save with sear, etc. I wish these rules had been observed in the
excommunication of some: for rash censures, bring authority in contempt. I add
unto these another place, 2 Thessalonians. 3.14, 15. and if any man obey not our word
by this Epistle, note that man, and have no company with him, that he may be
ashamed, and yet count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother. And
I say no more, but desire that he and his party may be as studious to observe
these rules in their censures, as the Protesters are desirous to make
conscience of keeping these rules in their conversation. As for his fourth
consideration, he mistakes the question, there was more in the case of
non-concurrence with the Forces of the Kingdom, then association with
Malignants: for the state of the quarrel was changed from what was agreed on
by State, Kirk and Army, before the fight at Dumbar, as has been showed
before. Next, the interest and ends of the War were changed, when the Malignant
Party became the predominant and prevalent part in Judicatories and Armies; It
is one thing to join with a few evil doers in a great Army: It is another
thing to join with the Congregation of evill-doers, and where notorious evil
doers bear the sway and rule in government. There was a third thing, that
though all were clear anent the unlawfulness of the Invasion, and did concur
to oppose it; yet very needlessly several were made to scruple in their
actings, and their hands were weakened by the States slighting and rejecting
the offer of a Treaty for peace, which was made by General and Council of the
English Forces not long after the fight at Dumbar, seeing it had been an easy
matter in a few days to have made trial and discovery, whether there was any
reality in that offer or not, but not so much as an answer was returned by word
or writing to that Letter, notwithstanding that it was once resolved on by the
most part of the Members of the Committee of Estates that were then present at
Sterline. Now it is evident, that these things are of a different nature from
the question about separation from worship, because of the sins of
follow-worshippers. But yet further I say, there are many clear differences
betwixt non-concurrence with the Malignant Party in Arms, according to the
Public Resolution and separations from the Ordinances of God, for the sins of
fellow-worshippers: for in acts of worship, the effect is to every man
according to his faith, but in fighting together there is one common effect
resulteth to all, and all must share therein, according as the Lord dispenses
a victory or defeat; now the Lord is with his friends and blesses them, and
against his enemies and curses them, therefore Jehosaphat and Amaziah are
forbidden conjunction with Israel, 2 Chronicles. 19. and 25. And to express it
Further, I give this Instance, that when men join in Arms, they fight one for
another; but in participation of the Sacrament they do not Communicate one for
another; also there is no implicit obedience to be given in Acts of Worship as
there must be in war in some cases: For inferior Officers and Soldiers are
sworn to obedience by their military Oath, and if they should refuse until
they understood a reason for the command given them, 't would be judged Mutiny,
and worthy of death: Therefore friends, and not our bloody Enemies are to be
entrusted as Commanders, likewise there are not such Commands, Prohibitions and
Covenants in the one case as the other; and we see in Scripture that Jehosaphat
and Amaziah are forbidden conjunction with the Israelites in war, yet incase
the same Israelites had come to Jerusalem to Worship, Jehosaphat and Amaziah
had been obliged to join with them in Acts of Worship; there be diverse other
differences, but because they are set down in other Papers for answering the
same Objection, I shall not repeat them here. In the last place I shall add a
further consideration, and that is even in the case of abstaining from
conjunction with these that not only come the length of profession, but
seriously to essay to join themselves with the Church, which it seems this
Reviewer does condemn as altogether unlawful in any case whatsoever. There is
great difference betwixt open enmity against the Lord and his Work and bloody
persecution of his People, and betwixt common scandals; these two are not to be
confounded together, for actual enmity suspendeth the duty of all relations,
so long as it is continued, even between Father and son, and husband and wife,
at least these duties which cannot be performed without real danger; for
natures light teaches, that one would not trust himself on the same bed or
roum with another whom he had found diverse times endeavoring to cut his
throat; but common scandals do not suspend the duty of relations, for a son is
bound to do duty to a father under censure for gross scandals. Before Dumbar
the Remonstrators did join in Arms with known scandalous persons, yet they
would have scrupled to have joined in Councels and Arms with notourly
treacherous Rebels, that had been active and frequent in shedding the blood of
the Lords People, unless they had seen evidences that they had repented of
that enimity: But to make good what is before said, see Acts 9.26. The
Disciples at Jerusalem were all afraid to join with Paul who had been a
persecutor, and believed not that he was a Disciple, though he essayed to join
himself to them, and no doubt Paul being so wise a man, and knowing how great
offense his former carriage had given, did declare to some of them the manner
of his conversion, when he did essay to join himself, yet he could not obtain
this without Barnabas his testimony to the Apposties anent the sincerity of his
conversion; It is well said by Calvin upon the place, and timendum erat ne
periculum sibi temere accerserent si prabuissent se adeo faciles itaque timorem
illis justa de causa conceptum nemo vitio vertere debet, nam si ad reddendam
fidei rationem vocati fuissent non Paulum mode, sed omnes inferorum furias
intripide provocassent. It is the judgment of some Divines upon Gal. 16, 17, 18
that Paul had then been three years preaching after his Conversion at Damascus,
and in Arabia, before he came to Jerusalem; which if so, may further strengthen
the Argument if there were need; and however Acts 22 18. Such was the Lords
gracious condescendence (far different from the imperious and boisterous way of
rulers upon earth) that though upon right information concerning Paul, all
scruples might have been removed, yet he gave command to Paul to depart from
Jerurusalem, make haste (says the Lord) and get thee quickly out of Jerusalem,
for they will not receive thy Testimony concerning me; As for Paul's answer
although Interpreters differ about the meaning thereof, yet it is most probable
that his words are a confirmation of what the Lord had said, and an humble
confession that they had reason to scruple in receiving his Testimony; and if
Paul had been offering a reason to the Lord for his stay at Jerusalem, as some
think, he would have added something about the reality of his Conversion, as
Barnabas did for him, Acts 9.27. But however, the Lord renews his Command,
verse. 21. Depart for I will send thee far hence to the Gentiles. These
considerations, together with the present practice of the Protesters may
suffice to Vindicate them from such calumnies.

PROTESTATION Reviewed.
AS for an Argument drawn from the disclaiming corrupt Assemblies at Glasgow,
or the following Assembly at Edinburgh, its affirming those corrupt Assemblies,
were a chief cause of the evils we then groaned under. How weak, I say, such an
Argument will be for justifying their present practice, is palpable to any who
will either look to the matter concluded in those corrupt Meetings, or the
manner of their procedure, or the particular reasons whereon they were
condemned, in all which there being nothing alike, I wonder why they are
alleged, except perhaps, they know many of their Proselytes will take upon
trust, whatsoever comes from them, or seems to borrow countenance from
Glasgow.

PROTESTATION Defended.
IT is to be observed, that where the Protestation upon good ground says, That
the secend Assembly after this last Reformation has clearly determined the
keeping and authorizing corrupt General Assemblies to have been one of the
chief causes of the many evils which have befallen this Church; he only says
that it affirmed that these corrupt Assemblies were a chief cause etc. If any
of the Protesters had spoken so barely of so solemn an Act and determination of
the General Assembly, it had been a Crime to have been noted with great
Letters; but he also passes over these words, keeping and authorizing these
corrupt Assemblies, which are the words of the Act, and of no small use in this
debate betwixt them and the Protesters; and if the late Assembly be corrupt,
the forbearing to keep them, and to concur for authorizing them is so far from
separation, that it is a duty so to do. In the next place, I observe that he
seems to grant the nullity of the late Assemblies, if they be like unto the six
corrupt Assemblies, either in matter, manner or reasons condemning the same;
and if he shall be pleased diligently to peruse the Review of the late
Vindication, he may see their likeness in all the three, though he yield that
one of them is enough; As to that bitter scoff, saying, That the Protester I
know many of their Proselytes will take upon trust whatsoever comes from
them, or seems to borrow countenance from Glasgow. I wish the Writer of this
Paper had as great ability and dexterity to speak in things concerning
Edification, and the promoting of godliness, as he has for jeers and scoff,
wherein he seems to speak as one who had delighted to exercise himself
therewith from his youth; but surely he is greatly mistaken in the truth of
what he says, and if he shall ask these whom he calls Proselites, I trust he
shall find them in some measure able to render a reason of their doings, and
that they act from a Principle of knowledge, and not of ignorance.

PROTESTATION Reviewed.
THey say they have a clear warrant from Scripture, to plead and testify
against corruptions: it is indeed but withal they should have better grounds
then any we have yet heard of, or can conceive, before they trouble the Peace
of a Kirk and so peremptorily conclude that a corruption, which they cannot
prove one, yea what all, not only reformed Churches from the light of Scripture
are persuaded of, but even generally all people from the light of nature, and
upon the Principles of self-preservation, are convinced is a duty.

We pass for the present to give any verdict, concerning some by past Acts of
theirs (which they mention) how good they were or how true. What is said being
sufficient to clear, that this their Protestation is also needless (to say no
worse) as the following grounds given for it are frivolous, which themselves
seem in part to assent to, while they say, they do it for all or some of the
reasons following and so insinuate, that some of them will not hold water,
which (in my humble opinion) they might safely have affirmed of them all.

PROTESTATION Defended.
When the Protesters bring Arguments from the Word of God, from sworn
Covenants, and the Acts and Declarations of this Kirk, to prove a defection in
this Kirk, and that in the Public Resolutions they have departed from former
Principles then this Reviewer takes himself to general Arguments from the
light of nature, and self-preservation, etc. Which shows that he has nothing
to answer in particular to the Arguments brought against them: Many Acts and
Declarations of this Kirk have been made use of in former Papers against the
Public Resolutions, but never any one Act or Declaration could be produced for
them; all their arguments from the light of nature have been answered formerly
by the Protesters, and it has been showed that it is against natures light to
associate with actual enemies and bloody rebels, they have but a poor plea to
plead before consciences bar, to say that nature taught them to pronounce
absoluution to all the Malignant Party, and to declare them friends to the
Lord, his Work and People, without evidences of Repentance, to the end they
might be strengthened by their help and assistance for defense of Religion and
the Country. It is a sad matter that Ministers of the Word of God, who should
magnify the Law and make it honorable should make it a hand maid to the light
of nature, whereby it is to be feared the Lord may be provoked to remove
Scripture light from his seers, and to let them walk in the light of their own
fire, and in the sparks which they have kindled. I do not easily believe, that
he who delights so much in reflections and aspersions against these whom he
disliketh, would pass any bypast acts of the Protesters (as he says) if
there were any thing he could with any show of reason quarrel, yet he
concludes the Protestation was needless, and the grounds of it frivolous, and
he would fetch a proof hereof from themselves, because they say they do Protest
for all or some of the reasons following, which says, he does insinuate that
some of them will not hold water: But he wittingly omitteth in the same place
that they do also Protest upon the grounds before mentioned, wherein they all
did agree, and these alone had been sufficient to infer the conclusion. The
true reason of that expression, for all or some of the reasons following was
this; There were amongst the Protesters against the late corrupt Assembly at
Edinburgh, diverse who were fully persuaded concerning the sinfulness of the
Public Resolutions, and accounted the Assembly at Dundee corrupt, for the
matter, yet had some doubts anent the form, but perceiving this year a corrupt
constitution continued according to that corrupt act, and rule of constitution
of Assemblies made at Dundee, they were clear, that it was their duty to
Protest against this Assembly at Edinburgh, as corrupt in the form and
constitution: But the most part by far were clear, that it was a duty to
Protest against the constitution of that Assembly at St. Andrews and Dundee,
yet did not judge it expedient to make two several Protestations because of
this difference when they agreed in the main: Therefore that all might join in
one Protestation, that manner of expression was used; and what has this
Reviewer to insult in against the Protesters when all the matter is, that the
number of the Protesters against the late Assembly at Edinburgh is increased
above the number of Protesters against their Assembly at St. Andrews.

PROTESTATION Reviewed.
THeir first reason is, That this Meeting has its dependence, power and
authority for its indiction, from that of St. Andrews and Dundee. Is not that
to beg the question? and besides, has no weight, neither in respect of us who
hold and have determined it a free lawful General Assembly, as indeed it was,
and does appear from the Vindication thereof, a nervous piece not yet answered,
nor easily answerable; Nor in respect of themselves, and their Principles, who
in their Arguments against that Assembly, do determine that Presbyteries may by
mutual consent, meet in a free, lawful General Assembly; now the Commissions
directed to this, do presuppose and import the mutual consent of Presbyteries.

PROTESTATION Defended.
IT is not a begging the Question, because the Reasons given in the
Protestation against the Assembly at St. Andrews are cleared and confirmed, and
that Vindication which he extolleth as a nervous unanswerable piece, is fully
and convincingly answered, and refuted in the Review of that Vindication, and
the Nullity of that Assembly therein demonstrated: and however the Writer of
this Paper is pleased to commend the Vindication of that Assembly, yet the weak
grounds held forth therein by a man of such abilities, have confirmed some
concerning the unlawfulness of that Assembly. The strength of the first reason
given in the Protestation lies in this: That the Assembly which met at St.
Andrews, and adjourned to Dundee, being unfree, unlawful and corrupt, and
having neither power nor authority to make Acts obligatory of this Kirk; much
^o^^e to censure any Member thereof, or to make rules for Election of
Commissioners to ensuing General Assemblies, nor to Convern them according to
these rules, as they pretend in their Acts, and the Acts of their Commission;
the following Assembly at Edinburgh conveened by that pretended authority can
be in no better capacity then the pretended Assembly which did so conveen it,
seeing they could not communicate that to another that which they had not in
themselves, and albe^^ he thinks that this suteth not with their new
Principles, yet it suteth well with the Principles of the Protesters, and sound
reason; and it makes nothing against this, that Protesters hold that
Presbyteries may by an intrensecall power meet in a free lawful General
Assembly without such pre-limitations, and according to the rules let-down in
uncontraverted Assemblies, but it speaks against them who rejected such an
Overture made at the meeting 12. May 1652. and would have to Assembly but such
an one as did depend upon the Authority and Acts of the Assembly at Dundee.

PROTESTATION Reviewed.
Their second reason is, That it is constitute after the same manner, and (for
the most part) of the same members that the last Assembly was, to wit, of
persons that have carried on a course of defection, and in respect hereof, are
incapable of being Commissioners; which again beggeth the Question, and besides
that, it is answered in the fore cited Vindication, includes this falsehood,
that they are (for the most part) the same Members constituent, whereas the
Rolls compared will clear, that not the third man who was present the last year
are Members of this, neither did this Moderator precede in that challenged
Commission of the Kirk, nor was so much as present at it. But especially this
Argument our Remonstrators have borrowed from the Remonstrants of the
Netherlands, their Protestation against the Council of Dort; at which meeting,
it was largely and learnedly refuted, as may be seen in the Judgments of the
Orthodox Divines thereupon.

PROTESTATION Defended.
HE is still in the wrong to say the Protesters beg the Question for what is
asserted in the Protestation was before the making thereof, clearly proved in
former Papers; he does often cast in the Protesters way that Vindication, but
it seems he had not then seen the Review of that Vindication, else he would not
think it difficult to be answered; he does by this time know (I think) that it
is answered in all the parts thereof, and very particularly in that concerning
the Argument of the Remonstrants of the Netherlands, which is well refuted and
retorted. In this place he alleges that the Protesters second reason
includes a falsehood: But if it be a falsehood, it is one of his own devising,
and yet he would impute it to the Protesters, for he does forced in two words,
at two several places; in the first place he puts in the the word [and] in the
second place he puts in the word [same] then in the third place he leaves out
the word [constituent] and so alters the sense of the words; the words of the
Protestation are these, It is constitute after the same manner for the most
part of the Members constituent, as the former protended Assembly, of persons
which were authors and abetters of and have carried on a course of defection,
of which words he makes this false repetition, that it is constitute after the
same manner and for the most part, of the same Members that the last Assembly
was, etc. And yet he would charge the Protesters with a falsehood; how like is
this to the Thief that did steal his Neighbors pur^^, and put into an honest
man's pocket, and then stirred up him that wanted the Purse to challenge the
honest man for a thief. That which the Protestation says is. That the most
part of the Members constituent of the Assembly at Edinburgh, are Authors and
Abettors of, and have carried on a course of defection, as the Members
constituent of the pretense Assembly at St. Andrews had done contrary to the
Word of God, Covenant, solemn Acknowldgment and Engagement, express Acts and
Declarations of this Kirk, and being under so great a scandal, are by the Acts
of the Kirk incapable to be Members of a General Assembly. But indeed now this
Reviewer gives occasion to think upon that which he calls a falsehood, and
though the Protestation says nothing of the same persons being Members of the
Assembly at Edinburgh, that were Members at St. Andrews. as he would have the
Protestation to speak, yet there is more truth in that, then he is willing to
express, for the chief leading men for the Public Resolutions were
constituent Members of the Assembly at Edinburgh, and of the grand Committee,
and of the Committee appointed for Conference with the Protesters. As to that
he says of their Moderators, not being at the Commission at Perth, it might
have been foreborn, and I take no pleasure to remember how isntrumental he was
otherwise.

PROTESTATATION Reviewed.
THe third reason is, because of the pre limitation of Elections, by the Acts
made at Dundee injoyning Synods and Presbyteries to proceed to censure all who
oppose the Public Resolutions, or should not acquiesce to the Acts made at
Dundee, and so excludes all not involved in the course of defection, from
Elections, in pursuance whereof, there were sundry pre-limitations made since,
by several Synods and Presbyteries. For answer, I would enquire with what
conscience this Argument is proponed by them, who (for ought I know) are clear
against the major, and cannot be ignorant of the vanity or nullity of the
minor. Their major must be, no Assembly that is pre limited, can be free. But
to pass the judicious considerations thereof in the learned Vindication, sure
I am, themselves will never assent to any Assembly in this Kirk, without
strange prae-limitations, yea and prae-conclusions too; as they did signify at
the Meeting and Conference in May last. And for the Minor, there were
prae-limitations here, I pray you what? Such as may nullify an Assembly? No
such thing. Is a future Assembly pre-limited, because a prior determined the
qualification of its Members? Was the Parliament 1649. pre-limited and unfree,
because the Committee of Estates excluded therefrom, all that sat and voiced
in the former? Or the Assembly of Glasgow, because the Tables appointed and
laid down away who should be elected thereto, and who not ^^ Or all future
Assemblies, because that of Glasgow excludes from them all that shall not take
the National Covenant? Whither does their passion lead them to plead the
Episcopal cause? Besides, did not the Letter of the Commission in May last,
require of Presbyteries to choose faithsul and honest men? Which whatever some
have said, was no sinful pre-limitation. Add, although the Act of Dundee
requires Presbyteries and Synods to proceed with the Censures of the Church
against them, who after conference opposed the Public Resolutions (not as they
say, with a disjunctive, or who shall not aquiesce to the Acts made) yet has
no Presbytery nor Synod that I know, censured any upon that account, or
excluded any from voicing in Elections; but rather all Presbyteries did require
them thereto. Now, if they might elect, they might also by the same reason be
elected; but themselves foreseeing that, in few Presbyteries obtainable; where
ever they were, they refused and dissented, being probably themselves
pre-limited by the order and advice of their Ringleaders. Lastly, it is at
best, needlessly added, that there were several limitations since, in several
Synods, I believe there will be nothing else found but the same, viz. The
assertion of the Constitution of the Assembly of Dundee, which we will not
grant, and they cannot prove to be such a pre-limitation, as is destructive of
the freedom of an Assembly.

PROTESTATION Defended.
CErtainly this Reviewer either has not read and considered the Reasons of the
Protesters upon this subject, or otherwise it would seem he is valde perfrictae
frontis, that can enquire with what conscience this Argument is propounded. He
says, their major must be, no Assembly that is prelimited, is free, and that
they cannot he ignorant of the vanity of the minor: But their Argument is, That
no Assembly prelimited in the free Election of Commissioners by secluding and
making incapable those who may, and should be chosen according to the Acts of
this Kirk; and by including solely those, who according to the Acts of this
Kirk, are incapable, is a free Assembly: But such was this late pretended
Assembly, Ergo. The Protesters never asserted, nor assented unto such
pre-limitations, and pre-conclusions as this Reviewer speaks of; and he does
well to suppose that there were such pre-limitations in their late Assemblies;
but he is much to blame that he studyeth to confound pre-limitations of the
freedom of an Assembly, with due qualifications of its Members, agreeable to
the Word of God, to our Covenants, and the Constitutions of this Kirk, as if
these were one and the same. If he think that in the Rules of Constitution of
the Assembly at Glasgow, or any other Assembly since that time preceding their
late Assem. at S. Andrews, there was any other thing required but these due
qualifications of Members before mentioned, let him speak out, that his mind
may be known; and for their Act and Letter, and Public Papers 1651. and their
late Acts at Dundee, excluding all that differ from the Public Resolutions: he
will never be able to prove those to be such: he is begging the Question
indeed, when he supposes that Assembly at Dundee to be a free lawful Assembly,
determining the qualification of Members. He tells us, that in the Assembly at
Glasgow, all were excluded that did not take the National Covenant: But that
was no prelimitation of due freedom, it was a requisite qualification. Indeed,
if the Assembly at Glasgow had secluded all that did take the Covenant, from
being Members of any Assembly, and had appointed, that Assemblies should
consist only of such as had opposed the Covenant, and concurred in the course
of Defection, as the late Assembly at Dundee has done in the case of the
Public Resolutions; it had been a prelimitation of the freedom of Assemblies,
and it had been great unfaithfulness not to have given testimony against the
same. It would seem by the Argument, which this Reviewer has framed, That if
the Assembly at Dundee had brought in the Prelates and Service Book men, to be
Members of the Assembly at Edinburgh, he would have sustained it to be a free
lawful General Assembly, for says he (very loosly, without restriction
according to the Word of God, Covenants and Constitutions of this Kirk) a prior
Assembly determined the qualification of its Members. Surely these who have
brought in the Malignant party iisdem viis modis and methodis, may bring in the
Prelatical party, and thereafter the Popish party. The Covenant is as expressly
against Malignants, as against Prelates and Papists. Both Prelates and Papists
can dissemble as well as the Malignants, and a pretended necessity may be soon
found out for seeking their help, and assistance for relief of a distressed
Land.

The Letter of the Commission in May last, did require the choosing
Commissioners to the Assembly, to be done according to the known and ordinary
Rules of Election. Now if the Authority of that Commission of the Assembly at
Dundee be acknowledged, how can any man conceive that they understand by known
and ordinary Rules any other then these which are established by the Assembly
at Dundee, from whom they had their Commission, it being a known and ordinary
Rule, not to choose such to be Commissioners as were censured by the last
Assembly, or whom they appointed Presbyteries to process and censure; and so
all that differ from the Public Resolutions must be excluded from Election,
which, whatsoever this Reviewer has said, is a sinful pre-limitation. He
grants, that the Assembly at Dundee did by their Act, require Presbyteries
and Synods to proceed with the Censures of the Kirk against them, who after
conference oppose the Public Resolutions; but all the Copies which I have seen
or heard of, have also this disjunctive, Or who shall not acquiesce to their
Acts and Constitutions; but the difference is not great, seeing they well know
that such who for conscience sake cannot acquiesce, will, as they are called
thereunto by providence, testify their dislike of the Public Resolutions,
which in the judgment of men zealous for the Public Resolutions, will be
accounted opposition. But, says he, The Presbyteries have not put these Acts
into execution. I desire to know how he will reconcile their principles and
practices herein; for if the Assembly at Dundee did right in making these Acts,
the Presbyteries do wrong in not executing them; the forbearence of the
Presbyteries is either from policy, as was done in their Assembly at St.
Andrews, which is well discovered by the Review of the Vindication. Or it is
from conscience, because the Presbyteries do think that the dissenters from the
Public Resolutions deserve not censure, but are capable of being elected
Commissioners, and if so, then the same conscience cannot but tell them that
the Acts at Dundee are wrong and unjust. As for the prelimitations in Synods,
he says they were nothing else but an assertion of the Constitution of the
Assembly at Dundee. But that Constitution was made up of persons scandalous for
defection from the Covenant and Cause, which was never denied in this Kirk to
be destructive of the freedom of an Assembly, except at this time, and in
former corrupt Assemblies. If it were needful, Acts, Orders, and practices of
Twenty General Assemblies can be produced against the admission of such to sit
as Members; but that controversy is so well handled in the Review of the
Vindication, as it stands not in need of my Additions.

PROTESTATION Reviewed.
THe fourth Reason is made up of many Particulars, which we thus particularly
reply to. 1. There are many Presbyteries who refuse to send Commssioners to
this Meeting, as an Assembly. But there be many unquestioned Assemblies have
been made up of fewer Members, as upon the inspection of the Rols will appear.
Neither is a Meeting that has no determinate Quorum, evacuate or made null,
because a Minor part legally warned, cannot, or will not come thereto; as the
perpetual practice of Presbyteries, Synods, former Assemblies, and Parliaments
shows. Nor is the number of the Absents here so great; and although it were
greater, it is not their simple absence, but unjust exclusion, that renders
the meeting obnoxious to exception. 2. They say, there are many Presbyteries
that do concur in protesting against this Assembly. To which I reply, We have
heard of dissents, but not of any Protestation, except this, which they now
have given, which if they mean here, as the Protestation is not Presbyterial,
so the Reason will be found to have no more of Reason in it, then if they had
argued thus; We find our selves necessitated to protest against this Assembly,
because we have protested against it. Or thus; This our Protestation is just
and lawful, because we have protested.

PROTESTATION Defended.
TO the fourth Reason of the Protestation he answers cunningly. There are
diverse things put together, which he takes asunder, and answers severally,
making use of a common fallacy, adevisis ad conjuncta. But suppose one of these
alone to be (as he alleges) a defect in an Assembly, which in some cases
might be dispensed with, yet that will not hold, if all the five Considerations
be taken together, as is done by the General Assembly at Glasgow in the like
case. As for his Answer to the first of these Considerations, he grants, That
unjust exclusion renders the Meeting obnoxious to exception. And I trust, it
is sufficiently proved in the Review of the Vindication and Papers printed
therewith, That there is an unjust exclusion, by the Acts made at Dundee, which
stand still unrepealed, and in effect acknowledged by the Assembly at
Edinburgh: And if the Act at Dundee anent the Constitution of Assemblies be
acknowledged to be just and right, then subsequent Assemblies, otherwise
constituted, are by the Acts of this Kirk null and void; so that until that
Rule of Constitution, made at Dundee, be disclamed, Whether opposers of Public
Resolutions be admitted or not) subsequent Assemblies are still questionable;
therefore there was a necessity to protest, or else to give way to a corrupt
Constitution of Assemblies hereafter, which is as poison in the fountain, a
defect in the cause, an error in the principles and foundation, and has an
universal influence in the streams, effect and superstructure. He affirms,
that these Presbyteries which refused to send Commissioners, were legally
warned: But there can be no legal warning, where there was no Authority to give
a warning. He grants there were dissents; but denies (in his Answer to the
second Consideration) that there were any Protestations made in Presbyteries,
but Protestations were only needful in those Presbyteries which refused to put
Dissents upon record. To the rest of what he says there, I say no more, but if
he had known that several Presbyteries did send two or three of their number,
warranted by Commission, to protest; he might have spared his censure of a
supposed tautology.

PROTESTATION Reviewed.
WHere Presbyteries have sent Commissioners, the Elections are generally
controverted, there being Protestations made, at least dissents entered,
against most of their Elections, upon good grounds. But here (I think) a
special providence has ruled, that there was no Protestation. In most
Presbyteries there were no dissents at all; and all that we heard of, were
simply against the Elections, not against the persons elected besides that;
they were not prosecute, nor brought in, to be discussed. And a dissent
infers not by the Act of the Assembly a suspending, let be a repealing of
the Act of the Judicatory; Only it makes the Judges liable to the censure of
their Superiors, for what they have done; which if it be amiss, the dissenter
is not involved in their guilt or censure; but if not, he is censurable
himself. And if it were otherwise, we should absurdedly be forced to confess,
that every Member of a Judicatory has a negative voice, which will open a
door, whereby every faction may elide all General Assemblies for ever.

PROTESTATION Defended.
FOr his answer to the third, it is replied, That there were dissents, or
otherwise, no Commissioners sent in, more then most part of Presbyteries, as
was found upon trial by the Protesters in the very time of that Assembly;
Where there was no Election, there needed not a dissent, and where dissents
were entered, there needed not Protestation; and if the dissents were against
the election, it does necessarily infer a not election of the persons; and for
the prosecution of these dissents, they were timeously objected against in
their Assembly at the reading of the Commissions, and an offer made to
prosecute them, if according to the constant practice of this Kirk the
Commissions should be laid aside until they were tried; but this was rejected,
contrary to the known rules acknowledged, even by the Assembly, and the so much
cried up Vindication, to wit, that a dissent entered in the Presbytery, and
timeously proponed in the Assembly, and offered to be prosecuted, should be a
ground to lay aside contraverted Commissions, until the relevancie of the
reasons of dissent be examined, and proof made of what is alleged, sed ubi
semel deerratum est in praeceps ruitur.

PROTESTATION Reviewed.
THere be wanting Commissioners from Burghs, in respect of their present
incapacity. We need say no more to this, since themselves answer it, that they
are in an incapacity: and suppose they were not, yet have they not a negative
voice. Besides that, all were not absent.

PROTESTATION Defended.
TO his fourth Answer I say, that he knows that the Assembly at Glasgow made
use of this jointly with other reasons for nullifying the Pretended Assemblies,
and their being in an incapacity ought to have carried its own weight for
suspending the constituting themselves into an Assembly, especially when so
many other things did concur. He says further, that all were not absent, but
all of them that were present for ought I can learn, if they were dualis, yet
they were not pluralis numeri.

PROTESTATION Reviewed.
THe generality of the Godly in the Land go along with us (say they) and
approve our protesting against this meeting. A strange assertion, and of
dangerous consequence. This Protestation was given in at the very beginning of
the Assembly, ere ever it was constitute, and that upon the delay of taking in
their first Paper; and is it probable they could gather all their consents in
so short a time? Or, had they them before? But that smells of a prae-meditate
Faction: Or go their resolutions along with whatsoever these Protesters do? But
that is not suitable to them that are truly godly, to have their faith pinned
to the slieves of any, how high soever they hold their head. Or is it that they
will allow none to be of the number of the godly, who go not along with them in
every thing? This (I suspect) be the marrow of the matter: But who gave them
that power to put out and put in into the Roll of the Godly, whom they please?
And as we doubt of their authority so to do, even so also of their power: can
they reach the heart, or are they quicker sighted then Elias, who saw not one
of the seven thousund God had reserved to himself? Will they condemn all for
ungodly, that are not of their way? How suiteth that with their professions
elsewhere? I am sure, we have here reason to dissent and appeal from such an
uncharitable censure of them that have no power, to the righteous Trihunall of
the Lord, to whom we stand. There may be somewhat more yet of dangerous
consequence in it, in that they seem to subject the Public Ministerial
authority to the People; and amongst them, to such only as are visible Saints,
where, if there be any mystery, they will do well to unfold it.

And now for the solemn words of the Protestation, the grounds and reasons
thereof being houghed, we need say no more; but if those Principles from which
they say they do it, viz. the Zeal they owe to the glory of God, etc. were
rightly weighed, they would infer, and have produced the qutte contrary
conclusion: Which the Lord out of his tender mercy to this poor bleeding Church
and Country, imprint upon their spirits for Christ's cause. AMEN.

PROTESTATION Defended.
AS for the fifth, that term of the generality of the godly has been cleared
before, and the Argument was used by this Kirk diverse times. Likewise if he
please he may first quarrel with the General Assembly 1648. for the
expression an^ argument both. The ground upon which the Protesters have made
use of that reason is this; At the meeting in St. Andrews the Protesters
delivered in a Representation, notwithstanding whereof, the Meeting did proceed
to constitute themselves into an Assembly, and thereafter did approve of the
Public Resolutions, and enact severe censures against all Ministers and
Professors in the Land that were of a different judgment, which gave an
occasion to many Ministers and Professors throughout the Land, timeously to
take into their consideration, what should be their duty at the next Meeting
which was appointed by that corrupt Assembly at Dundee, and they doing well,
approve of the method followed by the Protesters at St. Andrews, thought fit
that first a Representation should be given in, desiring these which were to
meet, not to proceed to constitute themselves into an Assembly, but to enter
into a conference with their Brethren who differed from them in judgment, and
eight Propositions were agreed unto after mutual correspondence, and a report
made from the several quarters of the Country, which were to be offered as
the subject of the Conference; and incase Conference should be denied, and that
the Meeting should proceed to constitute themselves into a General Assembly,
as they had done formerly, it was thought a necessary duty, that these who were
to repair to the place of Meeting should protest against the authority,
constitution and acts of that Assembly. Now, in all this, what is there of a
praemeditated faction? There was indeed a considerable number in all quarters
of the Land of such as in former times have been found to be faithful, who
perceiving that the edge of Church Discipline was turned against many of the
godly in the Land, and for protecting and countenancing the wicked and
profane, that some godly Ministers were already suffering, and that both
Ministers and Professors were like to suffer more by the prevailing faction of
a corrupt Party in the Ministry, they held it their duty to use all lawful
means in their power, to remedy past evils, and to prevent them for the future,
by offering their humble advice to that Meeting; and incase of their procceding
in the course of the begun defection, to protest against these corruptions, and
this was al^. They are very far from rigid censuring of others, as this writer
would have the world to believe, there are many whose judgments are for the
Public Resolutions, who will be loath to account all Professors in the Land to
be godly, and in their Sermons and otherwise, they do make a difference amongst
Professors, as well as the Protesters do, and they also do very well know, that
the Protesters do not subject the Ministerial authority to any other, but unto
their Master from whom they have their Commission, and to the Officers
thereunto appointed in the Church according to Mat. 18. and 1. Cor. 14. yet
they do desire to render all due respect to the Saints, so far as they are
known unto them, and do acknowledge, that they have so far an interest in these
matters, as that they cannot be denied a judgment of discretion; and when they
see corruption in government, to supplicat for a redress. And what for a
Minister of the Gospel is he, that will not lay more weight upon the judgment
of such as live according to godliness, then upon the judgment of such as lead
a life directly fighting against it? In all which they differ nothing from the
received Doctrine and Discipline of this Kirk. He will not find in all the
Protesters Paper any thing which may give him ground to think, that these
Meetings of Ministers and Professors are looked upon by them as Judicatories;
and therefore what needed all these suggestions of Mysteries, and I know not
what? But it is a time of reproaches, and we must resolve in the Lord strength
to endure the scourge of the tongue, so long as there be so many enemies in the
Land to his truth and Cause. And now to co^c^^de, I trust that the grounds and
reasons of the Protestation stand unshaken. And sure, for all that the Writer
of this Paper has objected against them, and likewise that ^t was very
agreeable to the Principles from which they did it, to protest against the
Authority, Constitution, Acts and Proceedings of the pretended Assembly which
lately did meet at Edinburgh.

READER,
IT is left to thine own discretion to correct faults in the Punctation, and
other escapes, which the sense may discover. Besides those, take notice, That
Page 6. line 25 these words were left out, many able and godly Ministers and
Elders from being Church Officers so likewise Page 31. line 5. for, yea they
were admitted, read, and afterward they were admitted. P. 34. ^. 8. f. and that
solidity and judgment and nerv^s are in it (...) as to the vindicating, etc. r.
and what solidity and judgment and nerve^ are in^t. as to the vindicating, etc.
P 47. l. 14. f. and Acts and censures. (...). and made Act and censures. P. 60.
l. 6. after the Parenthesis, dele and. P. ^5 l 2. f. ground and expression, r.
ground and manner of expression. P. 78. and 79. the figures are misplaced, 1.
for 2. and 2. for 3. etc. and the punctuations is bad, as in some other places
P. 79. l 21, f. could only r commonly. P. 103. l. 13. after Assembly, r. at S.
Aud^ews These faults have been observed upon a superficial reading, but very
like there may be more, which the Courteous Reader will pardon.

FINIS.
REader, for thy better information anent this debate, and likewise anent the
Union which has been endeavored by the Protesters since the late P. Assembly,
it is thought fit to subjoyn the following Papers that past he wixt the P.
Commission, and some of these who protested against the last P. Assemblies.
TO THE RIGHT REVEREND THE MINISTERS and ELDERS Met at Edinburgh the 24. of
November. 1652.
WHereas we have not only been patients and defenders in the differences that
have lately arisen in this Church, but willing and ready to embrace all
opportunities for removing them: And for that end upon an Overture made to us
the last Winter, have since that time forborne to act authoritatively, and in
the capacity of Commissioners from the General Assembly 1650. (which
delegation we conceive to be still in force, until the next lawful free
General Assembly) And notwithstanding grounds were given to us when that
Overture was made to expect to like from you; Yet ye did assume to your selves
that authority, and acted accordingly; which has very much heightened our
differences. And forasmuch as at the late Meeting of our Brethren in Edinburgh
upon the (...) day of July last; We did earnestly desire that they would
forbear to constitute themselves into a General Assembly, (which had they been
pleased to grant, might through the Lords blessing have proved an effectual
means of peace) So now we being met together, and understanding that you are to
meet upon the (...) of this instant: And we being still desirous of peace and
of an union with our Brethren in the Lord, and to entertain with all due
respect, the endeavors of some godly and reverend Brethren for this effect. We
do earnestly beseech you by the love you bear to the peace of this Church, and
by your desires to heal the breaches thereof, that you will presently declare,
that you will forbear all acting as Commissioners of a General Assembly, so
long as endeavors and conferences for Union shall continue (as upon your
condescendence we hereby do declare the like concerning the Commission of the
Genesis Assembly 1650) And that you will presently interpose with others of your
judgment in the respective Synods and Presbyteries, not only that supposed
censures may be looked on and accounted as no censures, But that they do not
proceed to put in execution any of the Acts of the late Meetings at Dundee and
Edinburgh, against Ministers, Elder, Professors, and Expectants; or to do any
other thing not already determined by uncontraverted Assemblies; which we are
confident shall be the practice of Synods and Presbyteries that are of out
judgment. If the Lord shall convince and incline your hearts to this motion,
whereby we may be in a fit capacity to confer tog therefore removing our
difference; In that cast our opinion is, that by mutual consent, some time may
be appointed for our seeking the Lords face, for the further knowledge of his
controversy with us, and for our direction in the way of Union in him, that we
may in love and soberness of spirit speak of these things which may conduce
for the healing of our breach; then which, nothing is more sincerely and
seriously desired by us. But if this motion may not be hearkened to, and there
be a proceeding in these things which are so grievous to us, and burdensome to
the consciences of many of the Lords People and Ministers, we cannot forber to
warn you, that we shall be constrained to vindicat our selves and others from
such usurpation and persecution by the use of all lawful and possible means for
our own defense, and for preservation of the truth and liberties of this Church.

Subscribed in the name of the Ministers, Elders and Professors met at
Edinburgh the 11. of Novem. 1652. By Sic subscribitur SAM^EL RUTHERFURD.

Edinburgh 26. November, 1652. post meridiem, Session 5.
THe Commission of the General Assembly having received upon the 14 of this
instant a Paper presented to them by my Lord Wariston, Mr. R^bert Trail, Mr.
John Sinclar and George Dundasse of Duddingsteun, and subscribed by Mr. Samuel
Retherford, in the name of some Ministers, Elders, and Professors met at
Edinburgh upon the 11. of November, and having taken the same into serious
consideration, do return this Answer thereunto.

Although we being unwilling to enter upon any debate or inquiry who have been
the Agents in raising, continuing, and heightning the late^ d^fferences in this
Church (being more desirous to have these differences and distractions that
have followed thereupon removed, and the memory thereof buried) yet we may say
that our Brethrens vigorous activity therein all along has been conspicuous
enough to all who have been looking upon the matter. And as we will not
question the willingness and readiness of our Brethren to embrace
opportunities for removing these differences, nor whether for that end they did
forbear the last year to Act Authoritatively, and in the capacity of
Commissioners from the General Assembly 1650. (which power they had assumed to
themselves, it being expired and extinct by the Meeting of the Assembly 1651.
by virtue of the indiction of the Assembly 1650) and that upon such an Overture
made to them as they mention (which yet seems to us not to be well consistent
with their Answer given by them upon the (...) day of (...) 1651 to the Paper
presented to them from the Provincial Assembly of Lothian) so we remember well
that the Commissioners of the Assembly 1651 though having no lawful call and
Authority, did notwithstanding from that time mentioned by our Brethren for
preventing the heightning of differences, not only forbear acting any thing in
that capacity, but even abstain from so much as meeting to adjourn, until the
time of the General Assembly near approaching, they behoved to meet in that
capacity, for determining the place of that Assembly ensuing, which had been
left in the indiction under the uncertainty of an alternative, by reason of the
times, which was the only thing they acted, and could not in reason be
accounted a cause of heightning the differences. Further as the Commissioners
of Presbyteries met in Edinburgh in July last could not hearken to our
Brethren, desiring them not to Constitute themselves into a General Assembly
without unfaithfulness in the trust committed to them (they being
Commissionated to that very purpose) and without apparent and inevitable danger
of present loosing the liberty of the Public Judicatories and Government of
this Church, especially considering the posture of Civil affairs in the time:
So we see not how the forbearing thereof could have been a means of a right
peace; we still conceive, as has been const^ntly held in this Church, that a
lawful General Assembly, such as that was, is the most Sovereign means under
God to heal any ruptures and distractions that are in the Church: like as we
find that it was the endeavor of the said Assembly to the outmost of their
power to compose the present differences, and unite the distracted Members of
this Church, and accordingly did condescend upon such Overtures as they
possibly could perceive to be most conducible to this end.

Albeit we cannot but signify our just grief at the unjust reflections and
aspersions cast upon us and other preceding Public Judicatories of the Church,
partly indirectly, partly directly in the narrative of this Pap^r, and conceive
it had been more suitable to the Profession of so earnest desires of Peace and
Union expressed therein to have foreborn them, yet not doubting of the reality
of the desires themselves, we do h^artily entertain those with all due respects
And being for our part most de^ireous of Union with our Brethren in the Lord,
we are willing to condescend so far as possibly we can in the trust committed
to us, and with a good conscience by any means to attain that end: And
therefore do declare, that we shall not at this Meeting, nor hereafter before
the third Wednesday of February Act any at all in prosecution of any Censure
against our Brethren which are already pronounced, or which may be incurred by
them by virtue of any acts of the two last Genesis Assemblies at Dundee and
Edinburgh, relating to the late differences: And although as to the execution
of the Act of the late Assembly for regulating the Admission of Elders to Vote
in Presbyteries and Synods, and of Expectants to their trialls for the
Ministry; we must leave these Judicatories to that discretion and prudence
that the exigence of their several conditions requires, yet we shall interpose
with the respective Presbyteries and Synods, that they may during the space
abovementioned sist, and not proceed further in any of the fo^esaid censures:
And that we are content and willing that betwixt and the day foresaid there be
a Meeting at a time to be appointed, before our parting hence, between some of
us and some of our dissenting Brethren in such a number and such a way as shall
be most convenient, considering the case of the time, for holding forth to them
so far as we can, and the Lord shall assist us, light in the matter of their
differences from the Public Judicatories, and for searching into further
knowledge of the Lords controversy with us, and speaking in love and soberness
of Spirit in such other things as may conduce for healing our breach. And it
shall be matter of our earnest desires and Prayers to the God of Peace (as we
doubt not but it will also be in our Brethren, if they embrace this way) that
he may be graciously pleased so to bless these endeavors, that the issue may
be a clearing of His ways to us all, an healing of our wounds, and an uniting
of us in himself to serve him with one consent, in doing or suffering jointly
for His Cause and Honor, whatsoever shall be his holy will.

As for that Certification in the close of the Paper, as we conceive that it
might been well spared, so we shall say no more to it but thi^, That we are
confident that this Commission and the other late Public Judicatories, having
a calling and being constitute according to the order of God, and constitutions
of this Kirk, are very far from usurpation; and that both the by past carriage
of the respective Judicatories Public and Private does clear them, and our
carriage shall clear us before God and the World from that grievous aspersion of
persecution, the uncharitableness and injustice whereof we heartily pardon,
and pray the Lord to pardon in our Brethren.

J: MAKGHIE.

Edinburgh 27. November 1652. Antemeridiem, Sess. 6.
THe Commission of the Gen Assembly has appointed, Masters Ro^ Blair, James
Wood, Davin Forest, Andrew Honniman, James Sharp, and the Moderater Mr. David
Dickson, incase the convenieney of his health and affairs can permit, to Meet
at St. Andrews the first Wednesday of Jannary next; and there to attend such of
our dissenting Brethren as shall come to them, and to confer with them upon the
particulars expressed in the Answer to their Paper.

JO. MAKGHIE.

Edinburgh 27. November 1653.
WHereas our earnest Desire and Overture for fisting the present Differences to
make way for an Union, has been met on your part with no small heightning of
the Differences, by your Actings in matters contraverted, betwixt the time of
our giving in an Overture and your giving answer to it, and by your refusing
all and every one of our just desires and asserting the authority and Acts of
the late pretended Assemblies and Commissions thereof, and by your declaring
the unpossibility of any further condescendance on your part for Union, then
has been already held forth in the Acts and Overtures of the late pretended
Assembly at Edinburgh: And you having also disolved your Meeting before the
return of an Answer to us, or hearing what we had to say to you in reference to
your Answer and to the authoritative appointment subjoyned thereunto; We are
necessitated to Declare unto you that we are not instructed to call any Meeting
for Conference with you in this case of so unsatisfactory an Answer: And that
we are free of any concessions conditionally offered on ourpart.

Subscribed in the Name of those who were appointed by the Meeting of
Ministers, Elders, and Professors to present the Overtures, and receive the
Answer. Sic sub. Mr. ROBERT TRAIL.

OBSERVATIONS upon the Answer of the Commission of the pretended Assembly, to
the Overture of the Brethren who dissent from the Public Resolutions: As
likewise upon their Letter to PRESBYTERIES.
IT is to be observed, that the scope of the Overture made by the Protesters,
is, That all claims to power and authority from the controverted Assemblies at
Dundee and Edinburgh upon the one hand, and all controverted power, as derived
from the General Assembly 1650. on the other hand, being laid aside during
endeavors for union; as l^kewise all Censures, or Acts enjoining Censures for
the late differences since the said Assembly 1650. at which time this Kirk was
of one judgment, and all Papers against these controverted Assemblies not yet
published, being also for that time suppressed, There should be a friendly
Conference agreed on by mutual consent, for searching into the Lords
Controversy against the Land, and for removing our differences. The Brethren
who stand for the Public Resolutions are so far from ways of peace, as they
refuse all conferrence, except they Treat and conser as the lawful
Representative of this Kirk, and be clothed with their Commission and
Authority; and therefore their Answer to the Overture is returned in the Name,
and by the Authority of a Commission of the Kirk, and a Committee is by Act of
the pretended Commission, appointed for that purpose, viz. Their Moderator and
some Brethren of the Presbytery of St. Andrews.

2. In that Act the said Committee is limited in their conference to the
particulars expressed in the Answer to the Overture.

3. The Answer to the Overture, not only refuses all things demanded by the
Protesters, as previous and preparatory to a Conference, but also makes the
end of the Conference (which was modestly and fairly expressed for both in our
Overture) to be, to hold forth light to the Protesters in the matter of
difference from the Public Judicatories, and (as the Letter to Presbyteries
expressy bears) that the dissenters from the Public Resolutions may be
brought up to unite with the Public Endeavors of this Kirk, and so the state
of the difference betwixt them and us, is now again (upon what considerations,
or expectations I shall not descant) made as wide as it was before, when all
the Malignant party was in Ar^^^ to protect them therein.

4. The Answer asserts and justifies, not only the Calling and Constitution,
but all the Acts and Proceedings of the late pretended Assembly and their
Commissions, and condemns all Testimonies against the Public Resolutions,
and the said pretended Judicatories.

The said Answer declares, That no Agreement is to be expected upon other
terms then the late pretended Assembly at Edinburgh did propose; for the Answer
does affirm that they have found that the said Assembly has endeavored to the
utmost of their power to compose the present differences, and did condescend
upon such Overtures as possibly they could perceive most conduceable to that
end.

Now, these Overtures, by them mentioned, do require an express passing from
all our former Testimonies, and that in time coming we shall never give any
Testimony against the Public Resolutions, and other late corruptions and
novations brought into the Church, for it is required to be set under our
hands, That we shall not hold up debates by preaching, writing, or otherwise,
for any thing which does concern the late differences that has arisen in this
Church: So that we may not give Testimony or declare our Judgments in any
case, but must either be altogether silent in these things, or else conform our
language to the judgment of the pretended Assembly, and if any Minister or
Elder cannot in conscience comply with these Overtures, though they be men
eminent for gifts and graces, and have been very useful and profitable servants
in the Lords Vinyard, and differ in nothing in judgment with their Brethren in
the Confession of Faith, Directory for Worship and Government, yet they must be
cast forth as unsavory salt, because they cannot agree to a Novation which
never was heard of before in this Church, and which themselves in their
Vindication grant to be indeterminati juris. The same severity is enacted
against expectants to the Ministry, and they must be debarred for this sole
cause, though they were never so well qualified. If this be not Usurpation and
Tyranny, the Prelates are very excusable for their carriage.

6. Observe how their Answer to us, and Letter to the Presbyteries is stufled
with carnal policy, and very far from that simplicity and candor which becomes
Ministers of the Gospel. They say, they are desirous to have the memory of our
differences and distractions buried, yet with the same breath they give out
sentence, That we have not only been agents, but active agents, and vigorously
active; and affirm this to be conspicuous, not only to some, but to all who
have been looking on the matter. But were it so, what need was there to tell
it? If they would have these things buried, why did they assemble so frequently
this Summer, to dig them out of their grave? Were it not greater ingenuity to
tell the truth (as some of their number do) that these Public Resolutions must
stand as the Authority and Warrant for the Body of the People, to rise all in
Arms (without making distinction of Friends and Enemies to the Lord his Work
and People) and associate among themselves, and with Foreigners, when they
shall land with the King. They say, they will not question, whether we did from
a desire of removing differences, forbear to act in the capacity of
Commissioners from the General Assembly 1650. yet in the very next words they
do expressly question it, and say, It seems not to consist well with our
Answer to the Synod of Lothian. This is but a seeming inconsistency grounded on
a real mistake; for the Overture mentioned by us, is not the same with that,
proposed by the Synod of Lothian, neither for the Matter, Persons, Propounders,
or the time of making thereof: It was a more equal Overture then that from the
Brethren of Lothian, for it did not condemn the Authority of the Commission
1650. more then that of 1651. as that from Lathian did; and it was propounded
at a Conference with some of the Brethren of the Presbytery of St. Andrews,
and that diverse months after the Overture made by the Brethren in Lothian: If
our Brethren had been well advised they had spared this reflection. They say,
they absteined from meeting so much as to adjourn the Commission, and that to
prevent the heightning of differences til the time of the Assembly did approach
that they behoved to meet. I will not say, as our Brethren do, That I will not
question if it was for that end they did abstein, and then follow it with a
contradiction; I do plainly and ingenuously profess, That I think it was
another reason which made them abstein: It was a clear case to all who
conversed with them at that time, That fear of interruption by the English, and
drawing prejudices on their persons, made them abstein, until the Malignant
party (their penitents and correspondents) began to have power and favor, and
procured some underhand assurances for their security. And it may be well
remembered, that their Meeting at that time in May, before their Assembly, was
colored with specious pretenses, of using endeavors for union with the
Dissenters from the Public Resolutions; yet here they plainly tell us, that
the express end was, To determine the place of the ensuing Assembly; to which I
do readily give credit: for they slighted the sending advertisement to us, and
would not delay one fourthight at the earnest desire of some few of our number,
that were present at that Meeting. They say, they could not delay to constitute
themselves into a General Assembly without unfaithfulness, notwithstanding they
know that it was agreeable unto the practice of diverse Gen-Assemblies, to
adjourn without constitution, and no prejudice at all to their Liberties, as
was represented to them at the same time. They say, that it has been
constantly holden in this Church, That a lawful General Assembly (such as this
was) is the most soveragin mean to heal ruptures and distractions in the
Church. If they take out these words [such as this was] which they have foisted
in to destroy the Text, their own consciences will bear witness to us, that we
are of the same judgment: But to say, That a pretended Assembly, made up of
such as have brought in Novations and carried on a course of Defection, and
continuing therein without Repentance, is a Sovereign mean to heal ruptures and
distractions, is so far contrary to all reason and experience, as it has
proved to be a main cause of the evils and troubles of this Church, as is
declared by the General Assembly 1639. in their Act of the 17 of (...) They do
without cause, resent, That the Narrative of our Overture does cast upon them
reflections and aspersions, and yet all along their Answer they make it their
study under the covert of Albeits, Althoughs, and Parentheses to abuse us with
Calumnies. They declare, That they shall not at this Meeting, nor hereafter,
until the third Wednesday of February. Act in prosecution of Censures already
pronounced, or which may be incurred by their Brethren; and that they will
interpose with Synods and Presbytery for the like. But what Sophistry is there
here to delude the wo^l^, o^ rather to mock their Brethren? For first, They act
what they had a mind to act, in reference to matters in difference; and then
after their Meeting is dissolved, and no sooner, they declare to us they will
act no more at that Meeting, nor hereafter, till the third Wednesday of Febr.
and that is the time of their next Quarterly Meeting. 2ly, This seeming
forbearence to act during that time, is not general, but limited to the matter
of censures, 3ly, That Is clogged with another limitation, for say they, We must
leave Synods and Presbyteries to that prudence and discretion which the
exigence of their condition shall require, for putting in execution the Acts
for debarring Elders from Voting in these Judicatories, and Expectants from the
Ministry, which themselves the last year did account to be no small Censure, in
the debarring Malignants from trust; but how much more in this case, which has
great influence to corrupt the Ministry and Judicatories. 4ly, Their
expressions which they chose in their Letter to the Presbyteries and Synods,
are such, as do rather incite to Censures, then prohibit; for they insinuate a
dislike of their former moderation in Censures, which (they say) is well known
to them, and to all men. 5ly, They well knew by the Conference which we had
with them in July last, that it was not their Censures we feared, or much
valued, but that we desired that both of us might be in the account of either
in a fit capacity to confer together, and not they looking on us as Delinquents
at the bar, and themselves as our Judges; otherwise we see not to what good
purpose we should meet. 6ly, The time, place, way, and number of Persons (which
indeed is least of all) ought to have been ageeed upon by mutual consent; yet
even in these smaller matters they must keep a state and authoritatively enjoin
all, without the giving us the least intimation of their Resolutions, till they
were risen and the Meeting was adjourned. In the close of their Paper they
would fain vindicate themselves from persecution, but they would consider, that
justified defection ends ever in persecution of the witnesses against it.
Some, who at the beginning of this Defection, abhorred the very supposition of
troubling any godly Brethren who differred from them in judgment, within some
months were perceived to make no great scruple to help forward the
persecution: others, who called it a persecution the last year, to debar
Malignants from Civil and Military Trust, will have it this year no persecution
to debar godly and faithful Elders, from Trust in the Kirk; and able, gracious
and well qualified Expectants, from the Ministry: Conjunction with Gods
Enemies, is always attended with persecution of his Friends; and experience
may teach us, that large Charity to Malignants will dry up much former love to
Gods People. Man's heart is deceiptful above all things. I say no more, but I
desire heartily to pray the Lord, to forgive them the deed and thing, who storm
so grievously to be told of the name of persecution.

FINIS.
OBSERVATIONS Upon the Chief Acts of the two late P. Assemblies at St. ANDREWS
and DVNDEE, the Year of God 1651, and 1652.

Together with the Reasons why the Ministers, Elders and Professors, who
protested against the said Pretended Assemblies, and the Pretended Assembly at
Edinburgh, cannot agree to the Overtures made to them at the Conference upon
the 28. and 29. days of July 1652.

As also the Instructions given by them to such of their Number as were sent to
the said Conference. And the Letter directed to Mr. David Dickson for
communicating their PAPERS.

Whereunto is subjoyned the Propositions which were offered to the Meeting of
Ministers and others appointed to be kept at Edinburgh July 21. 1652.

Printed in the Year 1653.

OBSERVATIONS Upon the Chief Acts of the Two late P. Assemblies at S. Andrews
and Dundee, the Year of God 1651. and 1652.
Act at Dundee, approving the Proceedings of the Commission of the former
Assembly, July 24. 1651. Postmeridiem.
THe General Assembly having considered the report of the Committee appointed
for revising the Proceedings of the Commission of the preceding Assembly; a and
having also heard the doubts and objections of diverse Brethren, against their
Acts and resolutions after-mentioned, after due examination, long and much
debate and mature deliberation, b The Assembly finds the Zeal, diligence,
wisdom and faithfulness of the said Commissioners in the discharge of the
trust committed unto them, very great, and in the manifold difficulties of this
last years great and dangerous occasions, their watchfulness and labors to
have been very singular and more then ordinary: And therefore do approve their
Acts and Proceedings, c especially their sense of the Western Remonstrance,
Perth November. 28, their Answer to the Parliaments Quaere, anent the more
general calling forth of the People, Perth December. 13. their Solemn Warning,
Perth Jan. 6, their Answer to the Letter of the Ministers of the Presbytery of
Stirling, Perth Jan. 6. their Answers to the Letters from other Brethren and
Presbyteries in relation to Public Resolutions; their Answer to his Majesty,
and Committee of Estates Letter anent the Protestation of the Ministers of
Stirling, Perth March 18; their Act concerning the opposers of Public
Resolutions, and Letter to Presbyteries thereupon; their Answer to the Quaere
anent the Acts of Classes. d And in these and the rest of their proceedings, do
judge them to deserve high commendation. e Only the Assembly having considered
their Act and Declaration of August 13, 1650. at the West Kirk, finding that
some have already made ill use of the same: And to the end that it may not
hereafter be to any a ground of unwarrantable proceeding in reference to the
Kings Majesty, or any of his Successors, Declare, that the said Act and
Declaration shall not in any time coming be interpreted to have any other
meaning, then that the Kings Interest is not to be owned but in subordination
to God, the Kirk being ever willing, as their duty is, to own and maintain in
their station, his Majesty's Interest in that subordination, according to the
Covenants. And the Assembly Ordains Master Robert Bailie Moderator pro tempore,
to return to their said Brethren hearty thanks in the name of the Assembly, for
their great pains, travel and fidelity.

Sic subscribitur A. KER.

Observations upon the same Act.
A. THere was neither such-fair hearing allowed, nor such due examination used,
nor such mature deliberation taken as was requisite in such a case, anent which
such a multitude of godly Ministers, Elders and Professors in the Land had so
great dissatisfaction in their consciences; For, 1. Albeit the most material
and important of these proceedings of the Commission (to wit, their answers and
resolutions about employing such as were formerly excluded) were of things
which the Authors thereof acknowledge not to have been determined by any of the
former Assemblies of this Kirk, as is granted in the Vindication of that
Assembly; yea, of things which to their knowledge were in the judgment of many
gracious ones in the Land, contrary to many Acts, Warnings, and Declarations of
former Assemblies, and to the Covenant, and the Word of God, yet as the
Commission had at first determined the same in a very thin meeting at Perth,
not only before communicating the same to Presbyteries, and hearing their
judgment there-anent; but the greatest part of their number being absent, and
many of them not being at all advertised; so did that Assembly at Dundee go on
very suddenly, notwithstanding that a delay was most earnestly desired at S.
Andrews where they first met, and that it be expressly provided by an Act of
the Assembly 1639, That no Novation which may disturb the Peace of the Church,
and make division, be suddenly propounded and enacted; but so, as the motion be
first communicated to the several Synods, Presbyteries and Kirks, that the
matter may be approved by all at home, and Commissioners may come well
prepared, unanimously to conclude a solid deliberation upon these points in the
General Assembly. 2. Albeit many things were offered unto them, both from the
Scriptures and Reason, and from many Acts of former Assemblies against the
proceedings of the Commission, and the approving thereof; the reading of a part
whereof, to wit, Sir Archibald Johnstoun of Waristoun their own Clerk his
Letter, was much pressed at several Diets by many of their own number, yet
were not these things heard, nor taken in consideration, nor could the reading
of that Letter be obtained, notwithstanding that it was once publicly promised
by the Moderator.

B. Would to God their wisdom and faithfulness in the discharge of their
trust had been such as might justly deserve such a commendation; but we fear
that upon examination, it shall be found not to have been so: 1. Because they
did not keep themselves within the bounds of their trust, which was to treat
and determine in the matters referred unto them, as their Commission expressly
bears; but it was not referred unto them to determine Cases not formerly
determined by any Assembly of this Church, there is no such clause in their
Commission; yet did they determine a very grave Case, to wit, the employing of
these who were formerly excluded, which by the chief Authors of that
determination, is acknowledged to have been indeterminati juris, a fault that
was the greater, because it is provided by the Acts of the General Assembly
1641, That since it has pleased God to vouchsafe us the liberty of yearly
General Assemblies, that no novation in Doctrine, Worship or Government, be
brought in or practiced in this Kirk, unless it be first propounded, examined
and allowed in the General Assembly. 2. Because they did not only go beyond
their trust, but walk contrary unto their trust, great part of their trust was,
to preserve the established Doctrine, Discipline, Worship and Government of
this Kirk, against all who should endeavor to bring in any contrary thereunto,
to censure Complyers and persons disaffected to the Covenant, according to the
Acts of the Assembly, and to protest against all encroachments upon the
Liberties of the Kirk; in all which three they failed: 1. In the matter of
preserving the Doctrine, not only because they taught and allowed, that
Malignants being Subjects, might be employed and entrusted for defense of the
Cause and Kingdom, as appears at length in their Warning of the date January
(...) 1651. and in their Answer to the Letter of the Presbytery of Stirling at
the same Diet, notwithstanding that the contrary had been constantly taught and
holden by this Kirk these years past, but also were isntrumental unto the
actual employing and intrusting of these men, which as to man could not but
prove destructive to the Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government of this
Kirk. 2. In the matter of censuring Complyers and Persons disaffected to the
Covenant, according to the Acts of the Assembly, because they did not only
allow persons who were not of constant integrity and affection to the Cause,
and of a blameless and Christian conversation to be employed and entrusted,
which was contrary to our Solemn Engagement, but also because they take off
Censures which had been formerly inflicted upon many disaffected persons, who
had not in their ordinary conversation, given real testimony of their dislike
of the late unlawful Engagement, and of the courses and ways of Malignants,
and of their sorrow for accession to the same, and to live soberly, righteously
and godly, notwithstanding that this was expressly provided by the Act of the
General Assembly 1649. and did ordain Presbyteries to censure all such
Ministers within their bounds as did oppose or bear testimony against these
their proceedings. 3. In the matter of protesting against encroachments upon
the Liberties of the Kirk, because when some Ministers were confined at Perth
by the Civil Magistrate for their doctrine, before they were cited or sentenced
by any of the Judicatories for the same, they were so far from protesting
against this, that as they were silent when these Ministers were first cited,
notwithstanding that the Letter of citation was communicated unto them by the
Committee of Estates; so by a Public Paper given in to the Parliament, they
did condemn the Protestation of these Ministers against that citation and
confinement, which Paper is especially approven in this Act.

C. It is not our purpose to fall upon the particulars which are said to be
especially approven here; but by the word especially, and by the particulars
which are here mentioned, it is evident that the spirit which ruled in the
Assembly at Dundee, was zealous above measure for the Public Resolutions, most
of all the Proceedings of the Commission that relate thereunto, or to the
opposers thereof, or any Testimony given against the same, being particularly
mentioned, and especially without leaving out, much less excepting so much as
their Act concerning the opposers of Public Resolutions, and Letter to
Presbyteries thereupon, by which all of them were appointed to be cited as
persons guilty to the Assembly, and so were excluded from having any hand to
treat or vote therein in any thing concerning the Public Resolutions, which
beside the injury done to the persons, was to prae-limit the Assembly, and to
make it up of such only as did approve of their Proceedings.

D. The generality of Malignant and disaffected persons in the Land, who have
been enemies to Reformation and godliness, do join in this high testimony, and
cry-up these proceedings and the Authors thereof, as deserving high
commendation, but most of the godly of the Land refuse to put to their seal
thereto, and make these proceedings the matter of their mourning, begging
pardon and repentance unto the Authors thereof.

E. This is another evidence, what spirit led that Assembly, as every thing
must be cried up that made for strengthening of the Public resolutions, so
every thing must be cryed-down that made for weakening thereof; yea, that very
Declaration which before Dumbar was unanimously condescended upon and approven
both by the Commission of the Kirk and the Committee of Estates, for holding
forth the true state of the quarrel upon which the Kingdom then fought, and
for shutting out every Malignant party, or quarrel, or interest. 1. By
insinuating that it has already been to some a ground of unwarrantable
proceeding in these words of their Act: To the end it may not hereafter be to
any a ground of unwarrantable proceeding in reference to the Kings Majesty, or
any of his Successors. 2. They take only one clause of the whole Declaration,
to wit, that the Kings Interest is not to be owned but in subordination to God,
leaving wholly out another material part thereof, to wit, and so far as he
ownes and prosecutes the Cause of God, and disclaims his and his fathers
opposition to the Work of God, and to the Covenant, and likewise all the
enemies thereof; which is again repeated thus in the close of that Declaration,
and that they will with convenient speed take in consideration the Papers
lately sent unto them, and vindicate themselves from all the falsehoods
contained therein, especially in those things wherein the quarrel betwixt us
and that party is mis-stated, as if we owned the late Kings proceedings and
were resolved to prosecute and maintain his present Majesty's Interest, before
and without acknowledgment of the sins of his House and former ways, and
satisfaction to Gods People in both Kingdoms. The omitting of which Clauses
does so sar as I can discern either from the Assemblies own words, or from the
judgments and expressions of these who had chief hand therein, or from
comparing things with things, indeed import an altering of the state of the
question, and brings it to that which was so much pleaded for by the opposers
of Reformation from the very beginning of our differences with the Kings
father, especially by some of the Authors of the cross Petition in 1643. and
of the unlawful Engagement in the year 1648. to wit, that though the King did
not disclaim his former opposition to the Work of God and to the Covenant, and
likewise all the enemies thereof, and own and prosecute the Cause of God, yet
we ought to own his Kingly Interest, by admitting him to the exercise of his
Royal Power, and obeying him in all things lawful, which how far it reaches,
as to the casting loose, and condemning of the former proceedings of this
Church and Kingdom with the King and his Father, and making a new state of the
question, has been often heretofore shown by this Church, and cannot but be
obvious to every intelligent man.

Two Acts of the Assembly at Dundee, and one Act of the Assembly at Edinburgh,
which relates unto censures.
DUNDEE Julii 31. 1651. antemer. Sess. 19.
Act for censuring of those who do not acknowledge this present Assembly, and
do not acquiesce to the Acts thereof, etc.
THe General Assembly considering that all persons who protest against, and
decline the authority of the General Assembly, are censurable by the Acts and
Constitutions of this Kirk, with the highest censures thereof, and that by the
Act of the solemn General Assembly of Glasgow, 20. December. 1638. Sess. 26.
Presbyteries and Provincials are ordained to cite and censure all such as would
not acknowledge the said Assembly. And the Assembly being very sensible of the
prejudice this Kirk may suffer in her Liberties and Privileges, by the
beginnings of such practices (if they be not timeously prevented and
restrained) Therefore according to the practice and example of the said
Assembly, They ordain Presbyteries and Provincial Assemblies, to call before
them all persons that do not acknowledge this present Assembly, and to censure
them according to the degree of their contempt and obstinacy to the Acts of
this Kirk: And the Assembly having also considered that by the aforementioned
Act of the Assembly of Glasgow; and another Act of the said Assembly, December.
18. Sess. 24. Presbyteries are ordained to proceed against these that do not
acquiesce to the Acts of the said Assembly, and that refuse themselves, or draw
others from the obedience of the Act of the General Assembly, in manner
mentioned in the said Act. Therefore do ratify and approve the said Acts, and
declare, that they are to be extended against Ministers censured by this
Assembly, and all those that oppose the Public Resolutions thereof. Ordaining
also Presbyteries and Provincial Assemblies, To call before them all persons
that shall not acquiesce to the Acts and Constitutions of this present
Assembly, and to deal with them by conference for their satisfaction. And if in
their conference with them they shall still oppose the Acts and Conclusions of
this Assembly, That they censure them according to the degree of their offense
and obstinacy to the Acts of this Assembly. And where Presbyteries are
negligent or wanting herein, the Assembly appoints the Commission appointed for
Public Affairs, to proceed against the said offenders respective and to
censure them in manner abovespecified, giving unto them full power for that
effect.

Eodem die at Dundee Ses. 19. antemerid.
Act against Expectants who oppose the Public Resolutions.
THe General Assembly understanding the scandal and prejudice of practices and
carriage of some Expectants and students, attenders of families, for
performance of religious duties by their private or public opposing Public
Resolutions; For removing whereof, they do extend the Act of the Assembly 1640.
Sess. 10. against expectants, refusing to subscribe the Covenant and the
censure therein specified, against all expectants, students in Divinity, and
attenders upon families for religious duties, that shall not acknowledge the
General Assemblies of this Kirk, and this present General Assembly, and that
shall not acquiesce to the Acts and Constitutions thereof; and do ordain them to
be removed from Bursaries, and to be discharged from public preaching and
catechizing in Congregations and families, and from all other privileges and
liberties allowed to expectants; appointing Presbyteries and Provincials to
proceed against them accordingly.

Edinburgh 3. Aug. 1652. antemer. Sess 19.
Act concerning admitting Expectants to their trials, and Ruling Elders to act
in Presbyteries and Synods.
THe General Assembly having out of their earnest desire of the Peace and Unity
of this Kirk, condescended upon an Overture of Peace, and not only propounded
it to some Brethren who were here, opposite to the Public Judicatories of this
Kirk, But also in pursuance of that end, Ordained the said Overture to be
presented and offered by the several Presbyteries or Synods, to all in their
respective bounds, who have Protested against, and Declined, or consented or
adhered unto the Protestations and Declinatours made against this and the
preceding General Assembly, and the conditions therein contained, to be
required of them; And considering the great prejudice like to arise to this
Kirk, by increasing of our unhappy Differences and Distractions, if young men
shall be admitted into the Ministry, which shall still blow the fire of
contention, and continue in avowed opposition to, and contempt of the Public
Judicatories, Therefore Ordains Presbyteries to take special care, that upon
the calling of any Expectant to a particular charge of the Ministry, before
they admit him to his trials, they require him under his hand, to pass from
the Protestations and Declinatours against this, and the preceding General
Assembly, if he has been accessory to the same, and to promise and give
assurance, that he shall abstain from holding up Debates and Controversies,
about matters of Differences in this Kirk, since the Assembly 1650, in
Preaching, Writing, or other ways. Upon the performance whereof, the
Presbytery shall proceed to his trials; if not, in that case, the Presbytery
shall foebear to proceed until the next General Assembly, leaving liberty to the
Presbytery and Congregation for planting of the place otherwise. And the
Assembly Ordains and requires, that Presbyteries be not sudden to lay by such
young men as at first refuses or scruples to perform these conditions
mentioned, but that pains be taken upon them to convince them of the
reasonableness thereof, and to persuade them to embrace them, and to give them
a competent time for that effect.

Likeas the Assembly considering the prejudice of Elders coming to Presbyteries
for strengthening a faction in opposition to the Public Judicatories, Ordains,
that Presbyteries shall require the same things fore mentioned of every Ruling.
Elder that comes to sit and act in Presbyteries; and in case of his refusal,
shall not admit him to act as an Elder in the Presbytery, but require the Kirk
Session from which he is sent, to make choice of, and send another, who for the
Peace of this Church, shall agree to perform the conditions required.

THese three Acts I have put together, because they are much of the fame or
like nature, that is, such as ordain censures upon these who do not acknowledge
the authority of that Assembly at Dundee, or who shall not acquiesce to the
Acts and Constitutions thereof, or who shall not pass from the Protestations
against these two pretended Assemblies at Dundee and Edinburgh; and I offer
unto the Reader these animadversions upon them: 1. That in the first Act at
Dundee, the Act of the Assembly at Glasgow 20. December, 1638. Sess. 26. is not
faithfully made use of, but by leaving out of some words, is stretched beyond
the sense and meaning thereof, The words of that Act December. 20. 1638 are, that
all such as are scandalous and malicious, and will not acknowledge nor
acquiesce unto the Acts thereof, be censured according to their malice and
contempt. But at Dundee these words, scandalous and malicious are left out, and
the censure is extended to all persons that do not acknowledge that Assembly,
how blameless or holy soever they be in their carriage, or how tender or sober
soever they be in not acknowledging the same. 2. Whereas the Act of Glasgow
1638. December. 18. Sess. 24. Ordains Presbyteries to proceed with the censures
of the Kirk to excommunication against those Ministers only who being deposed,
acquiesce not to their sentences, but exercise some part of their Ministerial
function, refuse themselves, and withdraw others from the obedience of the Acts
of the Assembly. By the Act at Dundee, all persons whatsoever who shall so do,
are made liable to excommunication. That the sin and snares of these three Acts
may be the better understood, I desire a short view to be taken. 1. Of the
thing that is thereby made censurable. 2. Of the censures themselves. 3. Of the
persons who fall under that censure. The thing that is made censurable is, the
not acknowledging of that Assembly, or not acquiescing to the Acts and
Constitutions thereof, or refusing to pass from the Protestations against the
two late Assemblies, etc. things that are in themselves not censurable, but
commendable, not sins but duties, as is sufficiently demonstrated in other
Papers and Treatises which are already published; because that Assembly at
Dundee was no free nor lawful Assembly.

The censures contained in these Acts are either in reference to places and
trust in the Church, or in reference to Church Fellowship and communion as
Church Members. The censures of the first kind are either for keeping from
places and trust, or for removing from the same. The first are relative. 1 to
Expectants, students of Divinity, attenders upon Families, who by the second
Act at Dundee, and by their extending the Act of the Assembly 1640. Sess. 10.
are declared incapable of a Pedagogie, teaching of a School, catechizing of a
family, preaching or catechizing in a Congregation, or of a Bursary, or of
liberty to reside within a Burgh, University or College, or of any other
privilege and liberty allowed to Expectants And by the Act at Edinburgh it is
provided, that if any of them be called to a particular charge of the
Ministry, that the Presbytery shall not admit him to his trials, unless he
do under his hand pass from the Protestations against these two Assemblies at
Dundee and at Edinburgh, and promise and give assurance never any more to open
his mouth, nor put pen to paper against the Public Resolations, and the things
that have followed thereupon, which they express by abstaining from holding up
Debates and Controversies about matters of Differences in this Kirk, since the
Assembly 1650. which if he do refuse, that there shall be no proceeding in his
trials till the next General Assembly, and that in the mean while liberty be
left to the Presbytery and Congregation to plant the place otherwise. 2. To
Ruling Elders coming to sit and act in Presbyteries, who by the Act at
Edinburgh incase of their refusal to perform the things formerly mentioned,
the Presbyteries are ordained not to admit them to act as Elders in the
Presbytery. These censures that concern removing from places and trust, are
determined in regard of Elders in Presbyteries, and Expectants to preach or
catechize in Families or Congregations, or have Bursaries, for both these (if
they do not condescend to the former conditions) must unjustly be removed and
discharged, the Elder from sitting in the Presbytery, the Expectant from his
preaching or catechizing, or bursarie. Concerning Ministers they are not so
express, but leave it to Presbyteries, to proceed according to the degree of
the offense; yet so, as there be clear ground laid for their suspension or
deposition; yea far more, because they not only appoint censures equivalent to
the suspension or deposition of Ministers upon Expectants and Elders, and have
gone before by their own example, suspending some Ministers, and deposing
others: but do ordain Presbyteries and Provincial Assemblies, to call before
them all persons that do not acknowledge that Assembly at Dundee, and to
censure them; and do also in the beginning of the first Act declare, That all
persons who protest against, and decline the authority of the General
Assembly, are censurable by the Acts and Constitutions of this Kirk, with the
highest censures of this Kirk; and in the body thereof do declare, That the two
Acts of the Assembly at Glasgow 1638. (The first whereof ordains Presbyteries
to proceed with the censures of the Kirk to excommunication) are not only to
be extended against Ministers censured at Dundee, but also against all those
that oppose the Public Resolutions thereof.

The censures that relate to Church Fellowship and communion, are designed in
the first Act, which strikes equally against all persons whatsoever, who are
Church Members, Ministers, Elders, Expectants and Professors, who if they do
not acknowledge that Assembly at Dundee, are appointed to be cited and censured
according to the degree of their contempt and obstinacy against the Acts of
this Kirk, and if they oppose the Resolutions, or do not acquiesce to the Acts
and Constitutions of that Assembly, then to be proceeded against and censured
according to these Acts at Glasgow which are extended unto them; now the not
acknowledging or declining the authority of the Assembly is in their
construction in the beginning of this Act, censurable with the highest censures
of the Kirk, according to the Acts and Constitutions of this Kirk, and the
opposing of the Public Resolutions, or the not acquiescing to the Acts and
Constitutions of the Assembly at Dundee, is to be censured with the censures
contained in the Act at Glasgow, Dec. 18. Sess 28. 1638. Thus all the
Ministers, Elders and Expectants in the Church of Scotland, who do not
acknowledge that Assembly, or oppose the Resolutions thereof, or do not
acquiesce to the Acts and Constitutions thereof, are to be laid aside,
discharged, silenced, suspended or deposed; yea all the Ministers, Elders,
Expectants and Professors in the Church of Scotland, who do not acknowledge
that Assembly, or who do oppose the Resolutions thereof, or who do not
acquiesce to the Acts and Constitutions thereof, are made liable to
excommunication, if after conference they do not receive satisfaction.

From what is already said it does appear who are the persons (as to the matter
of their supposed offense) are to be censured, I shall only add, that as to
their real qualification and carriage, that they are not such who have been
enemies, or disaffected to the Work of Reformation, or scandalous or loose in
their conversation, but such as have been zealous thereof, and faithful
therein from the beginning, and blameless in their conversation, and cannot
acknowledge that Assembly, nor acquiesce to the Acts and Constitutions thereof
for conscience sake, having a well-warranted persuasion in themselves, that
they do herein walk according to former sound principles, to depart from which
were but to involve themselves in the common defection with others. And as
these persons are so qualified in their carriage to the Public Work, and in
their conversation, so for their number they make up a very great part of the
godly in the Land, whether Ministers Elders, Expectants or Professors.

An Act and Overture of the General Assembly, for the Peace and Union of the
Kirk.
Edinburgh 2. August, 1652. Postmeridiem. Sess. 18.
THe General Assembly being deeply affected with sense of the many and sad
evils and calamities that have already arisen both to Kirk and State within
this Land, by the lamentable divisions and distractions amongst Ministers and
others of the People of God in this Kirk, and apprehensive of greater evils
which may yet follow, to the over-throwing of the blessed Work of Reformation,
(which the Lord, in his great and special mercy, was pleased to set up amongst
us, having carried it through many difficulties and oppositions) and to the
laying of the Kirk of God waste and desolat, if these divisions and
distractions shall continue; And being most desirous, as the Servants of Jesus
Christ, who is the Prince of Peace, to use all necessary and lawful means (so
far as their knowledge and power can reach) for preventing the increase of
these divisions, and making up of the breaches. And being firmly resolved, for
obtaining of this desirable end, in all meekness, gentleness and moderation,
to condescend so far as they can, without violation of Truth, and of the just
authority of the Government and Courts of Jesus Christ in his Kirk) unto their
Brethren of the Ministry and others of the People of God, who have been this
late time bypast, and are at difference with the Judicatories of the Kirk, for
bringing them to an happy conjunction with their Brethren in unity of the
Spirit in the bond of Peace.

Therefore, for giving an evidence and demonstration of their real intentions
and sincere purpose about the premises, as they have already, by some of their
number commissionated for that effect, Declared and made offer to some of these
their Dissenting Brethren, who were here in the time of the Assembly, so now
again do Declare and make offer by this present Act, That the four Brethren,
who, by the preceding General Assembly at S. Andrews and Dundee, were upon
special consideration justly censured, for protesting against and declining
the Authority thereof, shall have the censures inflicted on them by that
Assembly for the cause foresaid, taken off them; And further, that no censure
shall be inflicted on them for not submitting to the foresaid censures; yea,
and that no censure shall be inflicted for their Protesting against, and
declining of this present Genesis Ass. Providing 1. that they do pass from the
said two Protestations against, and declinators of the two foresaid Assemblies,
judicially under their hand, between and the second Wednesday of November next
ensuing, in their several Presbyteries or Synods respective. 2. That they also
give assurance in manner foresaid, that they shall forbear holding up divisions
by debates about matters of our late differences since the Assembly 1650. in
preaching, writing, or any otherwise. Likeas the Assembly does Declare and make
offer, that all such as did concur in, or have been accessory unto the
Protestation and Declinatour against the Assembly at S. Andrews and Dundee, and
were not censured, shall be free from whatsoever censure might have been
inflicted by any Act of the said Assembly, and that no such Act shall have any
force against them hereafter in any Judicatory of this Kirk, and that no
censure shall be inflicted on them for their accession unto the late
Protestation and Declinatour against the present Assembly, Providing they shall
perform the foresaid provisions within the time, and after the manner therein
specified.

And for prosecution of this purpose, the General Assembly ordains the several
Presbyteries or Synods of this Kirk to present this offer, with the Provisions
therein contained unto all such persons as are beforementioned within their
bounds respective: And incase the plurality of Presbyteries or Synods shall
refuse to propound the same, the Assembly does warrant such Brethren as
acknowledge the Authority of these Assemblies, to propound them: and, having
made report of their diligence and success therein to the next ensuing
Quarterly Meeting of the Commission of the Kirk, if they be then sitting,
thereafter to do as they find by the Rule of the Word of GOD, and the Acts and
Constitutions of General Assemblies of this Kirk, to be most necessary and
conducible for preservation of truth, for procuring the Peace and welfare of
the Kirk, and maintenance of the Authority of the Assemblies thereof, as they
will be answerable to the next General Assembly; And recommends unto them to
take advice of the Commission of the Kirk for their proceeding in any matter of
importance of this kind.

And now the General Assembly having out of tender affection toward their
Brethren, and sincere desire of unity and concord with them in the Lord, and
for the Lord, condescended unto this moderation and meekness, do obtest all
and every one of them in the Name of Jesus Christ, and expect, as they tender
the preservation of the Government of this Kirk (which adversaries without and
within, taking advantage of our divisions and distractions are laboring to
subvert) and as they love the establishing and promoving of the Kingdom of
Christ in this Land, and will be answerable to him in the great Day, that they
would, accepting of this offer of love, return unto unity with their Brethren
in their several respective places and Judicatories, and concur in an
unanimous way, for preserving and promoving the Work of Reformation in all the
parts thereof, and for electing of Commissioners to the next ensuing General
Assembly. And if they shall (refusing to accept this offer) continue to hold up
the divisions, the Assembly leaves it to the judgment of all the Kirks of
Christ abroad, to bear witness if we have not faithfully endeavored for our
part, to heal our present breaches; and if we shall not be free of the guilt of
the sad consequences that may come to the Work and people of God in this Land,
by continued distractions.

J. Makghie.

OBSERVATIONS.
THis Overture, for the substance of it (as is hinted in the Paper it self) was
in the time of the sitting of that Assembly communicated in a Conference by
some of the Members thereof in the name of the rest, unto some who were sent
from the Meeting of these who differ from the Public Resolutions; and being
reported by these Brethren unto the rest of their number, was taken in
consideration, and reasons then given (which are herewith printed) showing the
unsatisfactorinesse thereof, and why it could not be embraced; which reasons
are still in force. I shall therefore now only desire these two things to be
taken notice of in this Overture. 1. That notwithstanding of all the Solemn
professions of real intentions and sincere purposes of peace and of meekness,
gentleness, moderation and condescendence, which are contained in this and
others of their Papers, yet they not only justify and hold fast all their
former grounds and proceedings in reference to themselves and their own
judgments, but impose them also upon their Brethren (who differ from them, and
have been so much stumbled therewith) as the only mean of healing and of
Peace. And therefore in reference to what is past, whosoever have concurred in,
or been accessory to the Protestation against these two Assemblies, must pass
from the same judicially under their hands, between and the second Wednesday of
November next ensuing in their several Presbyteries or Synods respective, and
in order to the Public Resolutions, must give assurance in manner foresaid,
that they shall forbear to speak or to testify any more against the sin of
these which they express, by forbearing to hold up divisions by debates, about
matters of our late differences since the Assembly 1650. in preaching, writing,
or any otherwise, and in reference to what is to come, the Acts of the Assembly
at Dundee, for censuring of all these who do not acknowledge the Constitution
of that Assembly, or who do oppose the Resolutions, or who do not acknowledge
the Acts and Constitutions thereof, stand unrepealed; to which, a new one in
this Assembly at Edinburgh is added, excluding all Expectants and Ruling
Elders, who refuse the conditions contained in this Overture. When I think upon
these things, I can not but call to mind and lay before others to whom Union
and Peace (which is so much pleaded and pretended) may and ought to be sweet
and dear. 1. That which was spoken publicly in that Assembly at Edinburgh by
one of their own Members, whilst they were upon the debate of their Acts and
Overtures about these differences; to wit, All the Reverend Brethren speak for
moderation, but I think we are very like those in Micah, who cry peace peace
and bite with their teeth, Micah. 3. v. 5.

Secondly, The practice of our Prelates in Scotland, who after they had usurped
upon the Church, and brought in many of their corruptions did aggravate and cry
out of all the evils of divisions, and schism, and much plead for, and make
great professions of a desire of union and peace, that the Church might be
strengthened against the common enemy, by whom it was threatened with great
danger, and against whom they did profess much zeal, but so as they did always
hold fast their corruptions, and go on therein from year to year, and would not
yield to any other grounds of union and peace, but such as did include the
approbation of, and subjection to their authority and proceedings, and yet did
always charge their Brethren who did bear testimony against their defection,
and could not be consenting to their courses, as men of unpeaceable
dispositions, and turbulent spirits, who would rather rend the Church of GOD,
and fill all with confusion and division, before they did not satisfy their
own proud and contentious humors, in striving (as they alleged) about things
(of no great consquence) relating to Church Policy, when there was no
difference in matters of Doctrine; who so pleases to look upon the records of
that corrupt Assembly at Lithgow 1608. will find that the Prelates and their
party who prevailed in that Assembly, make a great deal of noise concerning the
distractions of affections, and diversity of judgments that was arisen amongst
the Ministry, and upon the first of these they do insist at length, holding it
forth to be carnal, and therefore say they, the more dangerous, because it
suffers not the Brethren whose affections were separated to unite themselves
with effauld and uniforme counsels and advice to resist the subtle practices
of the common enemy, and so gave him place with his subtle crafts and shifts
to enter into the Kirk of GOD, and thereby to supplant and undermine the same:
Therefore their advise is, that as the danger increases by the nourishing of
the distracted affections of the Brethren, even so the cure was the more
necessary, and hastily to be applied, to wit, that the whole Brethren of the
Ministry should presently in the fear of God lay down all rancour and
distraction of hearts and affections which either of them has born against
others in any times, and be reconciled with hearty affection in CHRIST, as
becomes them who are Ministers of the Word of GOD, and Preachers of peace and
Christian life and charity to his people, to the effect that by this hearty
reconciliation, hearts and advice may be communicate for disappointing of the
crafty devise of this common Enemy. But as to that which was the real and
first fountain of this distraction and difference of judgment, to wit,
Ministers voting in Parliament, their taking of Prelacies, and settling constant
Moderators; no acknowledging of these things as a sin, or passing from them as
corruptions, but holding them fast, and building a further superstructure of
declining upon them, whilst in the mean time by their professed forwardness
against Papists, who was then the enemy with whom the Church had to do, and the
arguments taken from the benefit of union and peace, and the sad consequences,
and bitter fruits of distraction and division, and the small importance of the
things which were then in question amongst Brethren did prevail with many of
the Ministry, not only to engage themselves in a solemn way in the Assembly,
and in their Presbyteries, with holding up of their hands to lay down and cast
away all grudge and rancour that any of them did bear at another, and to
maintain union of hearts and affections, and to continue in mutual friendship
and holy amity in GOD, as becomes the Pastors of the Kirk of Christ, (which was
a thing in it self very good and commendable) but also to be silent in all
matters of difference about the Government and Discipline of the Kirk, by which
it came to pass, lest they should thereby hinder union and peace, and weaken
joint endeavors against the common enemy, that whilst the Shepherds were sung
asleep, the foxes came in and destroyed the vines, which may give warning to
all the Ministers, Elders and Members of this Church who desire to have the
work of Reformation preserved in purity, and promoved in power, that they be
not as their fathers and Predecessors not long ago, charmed into silence by the
sweet songs of union and peace, until they be cheated out of the precious
Truth, and pure Ordinances of GOD, but that they take notice of, and resist the
beginnings of evil, by refusing to be consenting thereto, and concurring
therein, though happily they should because of this, be cried out on, as the
troublers of Israel, and as these who weaken the hands of the Church against
the common enemy, by contending about things of no great importance.

The other thing which I take notice of in this Overture is, that
notwithstanding the authors and approvers thereof charge the Protesters with
laying of the grounds of separation, and for making good their charge, do
amongst other grounds allege, that though they be but the smaller and the
fewer number, they take upon them to judge and act in the things of the Church,
and to exercise jurisdiction and authority over their Brethren: Yet in this
Overture this power seems to be given by the Assembly to the smaller part, or
fewer number in Presbyteries or Synods who acknowledge the authority of these
two Assemblies at Dundee and Edinburgh, because both in the matter of
propounding the Overture, and in the matter of reporting of diligence, and in
after doings, the same things are committed and entrusted to the fewer or
smaller number which are committed and entrusted to the whole, or greater part
of the Presbytery or Synod. It is true that they ordain them to do as they find
by the rule of the Word, and the Acts and Constitutions of the Genesis Assemblies
of this Kirk to be most necessary and conduceable for preservation of Truth,
for promoving the peace and welfare of the Kirk, and maintaining of the
authority of the Assemblies thereof, but yet puts a restriction upon the
smaller part to proceed even to censures against the greater part, but only
lays down the rule according to which they ought to proceed, and the ends
which they ought to have before them in their procedures when they do proceed
unto, or abstain from censures, as seems to be clear by their way of
Expression; and to confirm that this is the meaning, I desire it to be
considered: First, that if they had an other meaning it had been easy for them
to express it in such words as would have holden forth their sense clearly and
unquestionably. Secondly, these limitations which they use as to the matter of
procedure, are equally holden forth both to the greater and smaller part of
Presbyteries and Synods. Thirdly, They did take notice of the smaller parts of
Presbyteries in several places of the Country who had withdrawn and separated
from the greater part, and acted Presbyterially, and apart by themselves, not
only without the concurrance and consent, but against the Authority and
declaration of the greater part, yea they did receive Commissioners from some
of them, and admitted them to sit as Members of their Assembly. Fourthly, they
gave Commissions for over-powering the greater part in some Presbyteries, that
Churches might be planted, and things done contrary to the mind of the greater
part. If notwithstanding of these things, or any thing that is intended in the
Overture it self, they will vindicate it from such a meaning; I believe it
shall be acceptably taken off their hands, but until it be done, I wish none
of them may charge the Protesters with separation upon that ground for which
they themselves, to the apprehension of the Protesters, have both in their acts
and practice clearly paved the way.

Edinb. 5. Aug. 1^52. Antemer. Sess. 23.
a Right Honorable, right Worshipful, and Worthily respected,
WE, being met in Edinburgh at the time appointed by the former Assembly at
Dundee,b of purpose to study the healing of begun breaches in this Kirk, were
interrupted at our first down-sitting, and hindered from constitution of the
Assembly by our Dissenting Brethren their offer of Propositions and desires to
be granted by us, which could not to any good purpose, c either be debated or
effectually granted, as was required, before the Assembly was constitute, and
the Judicatory fixed. Which short delay of our answer, till we were in capacity
to answer,d was met with a Protestation, prepared before hand, for a
declinatour of the Judicatory, and all the Commissioners of Presbyteries,e as
freelychosen as any were, and sent forth from all parts of the Kingdom. In
which Protestation were containedf many grievous and unjust aspersions upon us
and others (who dare not pass from the possession ofg yearly General
Assemblies; which, being in former times interrupted, was purchased at a dear
rate, before it was recovered)h and all this was presently put in Print, to the
great disadvantage of us, and misinformation of all the Kingdom. After the
Assembly was constitute,i a conference was offered by us, wherein some from us
desired, That to the intent we might join the better for promoving the Work of
Reformation, legal bars hindering us from peace, to wit, Protestations on the
one hand, and Censures inflicted, or which might be inflicted, on the other
hand, being removed. They should give assurance to forbear to trouble the Kirk,
by holding up debates on the matter of our late Differences, about the managing
of Public Affairs.k But after conference, finding no ground of hope for
present agreement, we have made the same offer to all them who adhered to the
Protestation, whether in the Town for the time, or not, as our Act (the Copy
whereof is with these come to your hands) at more length does declare, and
granted unto all, time to advise till the second Wednesday of November next to
come. And now because our Dissenting l Brethren have the advantage of the Press
for the present, and and are too too diligent and painful in gathering of
hands and subscriptions to their Protestation, of young men or elder, masters
or servants, without any trial of their qualification, to n make the world
think, that the generality of the godly (as they in their Papers presume to
call themselves) and that in great number do stand for their divisive way, o
Therefore we thought it our duty to write unto you all, who love the Union and
Peace of this afflicted Kirk, that by your counsel, conferrence, and all other
godly means, so many as in your bounds, Ministers, or others, are upon this
divisive way, which tends so much to the hinderance of the Work of
Reformation, and peace of the LORDS distressed people may be timously
reclaimed, and moved to accept the peaceable offer made to them by the General
Assembly, and the rest within your bounds may be kept free from thisp uncouth
separation, that it grow not greater, q and that difference of judgment about
the managing of public affairs in our late troubles, which occasioned this
unhappy rupture, may be no prejudice to our joint acting in Ecclesiastic
Judicatories, for keeping the Liberties thereof, and the peace of this Kirk,
which at this time does so much call for communion of counsels and actings:
Wherein as you shall prove isntrumental, you shall be found to do a work of
service unto GOD, of love to your Mother-Kirk, now distressed on all hands,
most suitable to your Covenant and Profession, and contributive as to your
peace, comfort and credit in this life, so to the furtherance of your reckoning
in the day of the LORD.

Subscribed in name and at command of the General Assembly, by

OBSERVATIONS.
A. It suffices not the authors and abbettors of the Public Resolutions who
were Members of that Assembly to have stirred up the Civil Magistrate against
their Brethren, and to have made acts in the Commission where these Resolutions
were first taken, first requiring Presbyteries to censure the opposers thereof,
then to cite them to the Assembly, and in these two Assemblies for excluding
and removing them from all Ecclesiastic employment, from Church communion and
fellowship; but they must now for ensnaring of them or rendering them
contemptible and hateful throughout the land, write this Letter to Noblemen,
Barrons, etc. in all the parts of the Country.

The direction or inscription is comprehensive (which is also proven by the
deliverance of these Letters to sundry such in several parts of the Country,
and by their stickling upon the receipt thereof) even of many of these whose
admittance to Church Fellowship, and to power and trust, is the great ground of
the Protesters stumbling and grievance; I mean many malignant and disaffected
persons, who being formerly excluded were received by the Commission 1650.
without sufficient evidences of their Repentance, and are cleaving unto their
former bad Principles, and continuing in their former evil courses, must these
be first admitted without repentance, and then whilst they are proclaiming
their impenitency to the whole Land by their evil fruits, be sent to reclaim
such who did bear testimony against receiving of them; surely this is a strange
method, and if there had not been a turning of things up-side down it would not
have been thus.

B. That some of them had such a purpose I do not question, but that the
greater part had it, is not like. 1. Because at their former Meeting at
Edinburgh the twelfth of May, they did refuse to delay the indicting the Diet
of their Assembly for a few days, until some considerable number of those who
did differ from them might be advertised to meet: Notwithstanding that, it was
earnestly desired, to the effect that by mutual previous conference some right
understanding might have been begotten, and way made for the choosing of
Commissioners and sitting of an Assembly, with the mutual consent and
satisfaction of both. 2. Because it being most earnestly desired, and the
Reasons thereof at large remonstrated unto them the first day of their Meeting,
that they would forbear to constitute themselves in an Assembly, until first
there might be a Conference upon these Propositions. (which desire and
Remonstrance they do here suppress, putting another face upon the business)
yet did they refuse the same, notwithstanding that the present constituting of
the Assembly was to make the matter hopeless, and to put us upon the necessity
of a Protestation, unless by our silence being present, we would have involved
our selves in the acknowledgment of an unlawful Authority: and notwithstanding
that the delay was pressed by some of their own number, and that it might have
been condescended unto, without any detriment to themselves, or their cause,
(unless it had been two or three days longer stay in town) seeing they could
conveniently according to the sundry former instances of that kind, which were
then given, have kept their Assembly under adjournment, though not constituted.

C. They might have been debated and granted to very good purpose before the
Assembly was constituted, and the Judicatorie fixed; because the debating and
granting of them in an amicable way, and in a mutual free Meeting of both, was
the most effectual means of removing differences and begetting a right
understanding, and so of having a free and lawful General Assembly, which would
have produced an unanimous and effectual Conclusion upon these Propositions,
whereas to refuse to Debate, or grant any thing by way of friendly conference,
or constituting of the Assembly, and fixing of the Judicatories, was in effect
to deny these Propositions and make them ineffectual, because a main intent of
these Propositions was, to find a remedy for the wrong constitution of the
former Assembly at Dundee, and for preventing of the like now at Edinburgh,
which was altogether disappointed by their proceeding to constitute the
Assembly.

D. There was a necessity of a Protestation, because the desire of delaying the
constitution of the Assembly, until there might be a previous conference, was
so peremptorily and needlessly rejected.

E. The choice was not free, because the Letter of their Commission from their
Meeting at Edinburgh in May, did contain a pre-limitation, appointing the
election to be made according to a rule, which did include the Acts and
Constitutions of the Assembly at Dundee, which do exclude all that are opposite
to the Public Resolutions; and because there were dissents and protestations
against the election in several places, neither were they sent forth from all
parts of the Kingdom, because there were many Presbyteries who did send forth
no Commissioners at all.

F. Whether there were any grievous aspersions, and unjust imputations
contained in that Protestation, does appear from the Reply that is given to the
Paper, wherein those pretended aspersions and imputations are holden forth.

G. Yearly General Assemblies, rightly constituted, and proceeding rightly, are
as much and as earnestly desired by the Protesters as by any others; and from
the desire which they have to preserve the liberty and freedom of these, they
do bear testimony against the pre-limiting and corrupting thereof.

H. Nothing was put in print by order of the Meeting, nor was it at all done,
until there was no hopes to obtain what was desired: And what was printed,
though it might be to their disadvantage, yet was it not the disadvantage of
the Truth, or mis-informing of the Kingdom; but for giving them a true account
of matters as they then were, and though by the order of narration which they
do here make, they insinuate that things came out in print before the
Conference ended, which they afterward mention, yet was nothing published in
print, until that Conference was given up and made hopeless.

I. They allege, That a Conference was offered by them; but they neither tell
when, nor how, nor to whom it was offered; and I believe it would trouble them
so to do, for they did keep such a distance that they would neither send nor
allow any of their number to motion a Conference to their Brethren who were met
together, but desired some of their number to tell such of them as they met
with upon the streets, that they were willing to confer; and when at length
there was some meeting of some few of both sides, those of that Assembly, who
were upon the Conference, could by no persuasion nor reason be induced to give
any note of their Overtures in writing, though it was often and earnestly
desired, that being clearly communicated to the whole Meeting of Protesters,
they might return a clear Answer thereunto.

K. Why this desire was not hearkened unto, good and relevant reason, is given
in another Paper long since printed and published.

L. That advantage at that time, for any thing their Brethren know, was open to
both alike, and did appear immediately thereafter to be so by their Papers
against the Remonstrance and Protestation which came abroad in print.

M. There was no diligence nor pains used to gather any Hands to their
Protestation, only those who were come together from several parts of the
Country from their respect and affection to the Cause (many of which came
commissionated from others) did put to their Hands; and for that which they say
of yong-men, or elder, masters or servants, without any trial or qualification,
it is a little disdainfully and too liberally spoken; there were many
honorable and grave persons there, and though some were young men or servants,
yet is that no imputation either to themselves, or to the cause which they
maintain: for it is neither men's age nor condition that does difference them in
the matters of God, but their qualification and carriage which is known to be
blameless and christian, as to those who subscribed the Protestation; and if
they can give any instance to the contrary, I believe the Protesters will take
it for a favor to have any inordinate walker of their number discovered unto
them, and shall account it not the weakening, but the strengthening of their
Cause to be rid of such; yea, at that Meeting where the Protestation was
subscribed, it was their care to admit none to join with them, but such as were
of a known integrity, or if not so well known to all, yet such as had the
testimony of others who were known to all; and being such, how mean soever
their condition was, that could not be a reason or ground to refuse their
testimony, when it was willingly offered.

N. Albeit a great deal ado is made upon that expression, yet there is truth
in the bottom of it, most of these in the Land, who have a testimony in the
consciences of truly godly Ministers or Professors either upon the one side or
the other, for acquaintance with God and the power of godliness, being of that
mind; and if this expression satisfy not, that the generality of the godly
stand for that divisive way, I shall give them one that they can less
contradict, that is, that the generality of the wicked are against that
divisive way, and for their uniting way; yea, I trow that sober men among
themselves will not refuse it, that the wicked, Malignant, loose, profane
persons in the Land, almost to a man, and as one man, do zealously, and to
their p^th, oppose, and contradict and reproach that divisive way, and
cordially promote and commend their uniting way, or the way of these two
Assemblies at Dundee and Edinburgh; and though this argument be now
undervalued, yet was it wont to bear weight in the 48 year of God against the
unlawful engagement. And, I confess, with me is of a very great weight. That
which relisheth so well to the palate of profane loose men, and of such as
have zealously opposed the Work of God, and the power of godliness these years
past, and wherein their hearts does so much rejoice, I fear, has too much of
the spirit of the world, and too little of the spirit of God in it.

O. This way does not divide from any point of the truth of God, but leads in
the good old path of former found principles, and cannot be justly charged as
divisive because it will not unite with a course of defection, and therefore
there can be no just reason to say, that it tends to the hindering of
Reformation and Peace. The true fountain of our divisions does spring from the
Public Resolutions, which divided many from received truths and former
principles, and did necessitate others to evidence their cleaving thereto, by
testifying against such backsliding; neither know I any thing that has so
directly tended to the hinderance of the Work of Reformation as their Public
Resolutions did. The Work of Reformation, as to the outward of it in Church
and State, did much stand in purging the Ministry and Elderships, and the
Judicatories and the Army, and have not all these been obstructed by the
Public Resolutions, which laid a foundation for bringing into the Army and the
Judicatories, men of questionable integrity, disaffected to Reformation, and of
scandalous conversation, and has not only blunted, but turned the edge of any
zeal that was formerly bent against ignorant, disaffected and scandalous
Ministers and Elders, and Professors, against these who cannot be consenting
to the late courses.

P. Separation and Schism has been the ordinary charge of back-sliders,
against such as would not concur with them in every age of the Church, and some
of the most eminent of these who are now for the Public Resolutions, may
remember, that they were not only laden herewith by the Prelates, when they did
oppose the course of conformity, but also by all the Malignant and disaffected
persons in the Land, when they did oppose the course of malignancie; but to say
nothing, that this Assembly at Edinburgh have taught the Protesters a way of
separation, which they cannot well condemn, unless they condemn their own
judgment and practice, I mean, the allowing of the smaller part, not only to
divide from the greater, but also to act without them, and exercise authority
over them. I desire 1. that they will be pleased to let the world know what
truth that has been taught in the Church of Scotland, either concerning Faith,
or good Works, or Worship, or Discipline, or Government, they have departed or
separated from. Is it a separation, because they will not approve of, nor
submit unto the authority of two corrupt and unfree Assemblies. 2. I desire it
to be considered, that whatsoever be in the matter of separation, the
Protesters are not separantes but separati, not fugientes but fugati, they are
driven violently by unjust censures and persecution, as I have already shown
from the Public Acts.

Q. If they be indeed of the opinion, that difference of judgment in these
things should be no prejudice to joint acting in Public Judicatories, then it
concerns them for their own vindication, and for reconciling their practice
with their opinion, to tell us why their Assembly at S. Andrews did not only
approve of the Act of Commission, appointing those who oppose the Public
Resolutions to be censured, but also made Acts of their own for censuring of
such; and why the Assembly at Edinburgh did ordain, That Elders and Expectants,
who will not engage themselves under their hands, to abstain from holding up
this difference, are to be excluded from sitting in Presbyteries, and being
received as Ministers; sure if this difference need be no prejudice to joint
acting in Public Judicatories, the maintaining thereof is without ground made
a cause of censure, which must incapacitat men to act, or of exclusion, which
must bar them from joint acting in Judicatories, what shall be said to this, I
do not know, unless it be alleged, that it is not simply difference of
judgment, that is made a ground of censure or exclusion, but difference of
judgment kythed in opposing the Public Resolutions, or holding up debates and
controversies in preaching or writing about these things; but first, if it be
meant of that difference of judgment that is inward only, it is to small
purpose, because that being latent and not known to me, cannot be made a ground
for my withdrawing from joint acting with these who thus differ from me: and
if it be known and professed, how shall there be any known difference of
judgment, without some opposition to the adverse judgment, especially if it be
established in a Law, he who professes and declares the difference of his
judgment from the Law, and dis-satisfaction therewith, is he not in so far, a
weakner, gainsayer, and opposer thereof. 2. If they mean it thus, they have not
measured the same measure unto themselves and to others; they will have others
to pass from their Protestations under their hands, and to engage themselves
not to hold up debates, otherwise they will not act jointly with them in the
Judicatories, nor allow them the legal capacity to act at all, and yet while
they will do no such things themselves in reference to their Assemblies and the
Acts thereof, yea, will have these Assemblies to stand as free and lawful, and
all the Acts thereof, wherein their judgment is involved, as binding and
obligatory, they desire that their Brethren may be dealt with, not to let this
hinder them from a joint acting in the Public Judicatories. 3. If it be only
the opposing of Public Resolutions, and the holding up of debates that they
quarrel with, how is it that in Presbyteries they will have young men who have
hitherto been silent, publicly to declare themselves anent these things, or
else refuse to admit them to their trials, or to stop them being admitted, or
to refuse them Testimonials being approven.

Act for putting in execution former Acts and Constitutions of General
Assemblies, anent trying, admitting, removing, and deposing of Church Officers,
censuring of scandalous persons, receiving of penitents, and debarring of
persons from the LORDS Table.
Edinburgh 3. August. 1652. Postmeridiem. Sess. 20.
THe General Assembly, considering the obligations that lies upon all
Ecclesiastic Judicatories and Ministers within this Land, by the commandment
of GOD, and our Covenants and Engagements taken upon us, before GOD and the
World, (whereunto they resolve, in the power of the LORD'S might, constantly to
adhere) and to show themselves faithful and zealous in all their
administrations for the LORD, and for advancing the Work of Reformation; and
particularly, considering that the condition of this time does require in
special ways, that in trying, admitting, removing, and deposing of
Church Officers, censuring of scandalous persons, dispensing of Ordinances,
receiving of penitents, the Rules of the Word of GOD, and Constitutions of this
Kirk be diligently put in execution, and accuratly observed. Therefore,

The Assembly Ordains, That Presbyteries and Synods, in admitting of Persons to
the Ministry, be accurate in their trials, according to the Order prescribed
in this Church, that none be admitted to the holy and high function, but such
as are qualified according as is required in the Word of GOD, and Constitutions
of this Kirk, both for knowledge in the mystery of godliness, and abilities to
teach and convince the gainsayers, as also in conversation and godliness,
that they lay hands suddenly on no man, nor be partaker of other men's sin; and
for this end, that every Presbytery be careful to have gathered together such
Acts of Assemblies as concerns the trial of Ministers, and have them before
them, whenever any person is called to any place of the Ministry, and is
upon his trials.

2. Ordains that Preshyteries and Synods, in their respective bounds, make
conscience, that such Ministers as are found either ignorant and not apt to
feed the people of God with knowledge and understanding, or erroneous in their
judgment in matters of Religion, or are scandalous in their life and
conversation, and are not examples unto their flocks in godly and holy walking,
or disaffected to the work of Reformation, be centured according to the degree
of their offense, and Acts of Assemblies. And for this end, that they be
frequent and acurate in visitation of Kirk, and therein make conscientious use
of the rules prescribed for visitations, and of such Acts of former Assemblies,
as holds forth the duties of Ministers, and the grounds and causes of censure.

3. Ordains that, where Ministers lawfully deposed; are unlawfully admitted,
and not according to the Order prescribed in the Acts of General Assemblies,
or intrudes themselves into places, Presbyteries and Synods make use of that
power and Authority which Christ has put in their hands, to remedy the same,
and to censure such disorders and enormities, as they deserve, And that people
be not accestory unto, or concurring with any Ministers that are deposed, in
intruding themselves into places, nor give them any countenance that does so,
as they would not draw upon themselves the wrath of God, by contemning and
despising Christ's Ordinance of Discipline, And that no Presbyteries or Synods
proceed to open the mouths of, or re-admit unto the Ministry, any deposed
Ministers, but according to the Order prescribed in the Acts of General
Assemblies, As they will be answerable unto the General Assembly.

4. Ordains that Sessions be careful that none be admitted to be Elders in
Congregations, but such as are in some competent measure able and qual fied
with knowledge of Religion, and understanding of the duties of their Calling,
for discharging the duties of that Office, and of a blameless, Christian and
godly conversation; And that before any be admitted to be an Elder, the Persons
name that is designed, be publicly intimate to the Congregation the Lords day
before, that if any have any thing to object against him, they may present the
same to the Session or to the Minister. And that if any Elder be found
negligent in the duties of his charge, and continue so after admonition, or
scandalous in his life and conversation, or to be a neglecter of the worship of
GOD in his Family, he be removed from, and purged out of the Session.

5. Ordains that Sessions and Presbyteries be careful, and make conscience by
all means to censure impartially all persons of whatsoever rank or condition,
that are scandalous, either in things of the first, or in things of the second
Table, according to the Rules and Order which Christ has prescribed in his
Word, and to proceed to the highest censures, with such as are grossly and
obstinately scandalous, or are ignorant, and contemn, and continuedly neglect
the means of knowledge, as public and private catechizing, etc. after they are
made inexcusable by sufficient means used to reclaim and gain them.

6. Ordains that Ministers and Sessions in Congregations be careful, as they
will be answerable to Christ Jesus, to debar from the Lords Table, all such
persons as are found not to walk sutably to the Gospel, and being convinced and
admonished thereof, do not reform; As also all such as have not knowledge to
examine themselves, and to discern the Lords Body. And that for the more
orderly performing of this, the Minister in examination of the people, have
some of the Elders always with him, and represent unto the Session such as are
found grossly ignorant, that by order of the Session they may be debarred.

7. That Presbyteries and Sessions make conscience, that such persons are found
scandalous, and are under censure for that cause, be not received nor absolved
from their censure, unless they give such satisfaction and evidences of their
repentance, as are expressed in the Acts of the Assemblies, concerning the
receiving of penitents.

J. MAKGHIE.

OBSERVATIONS.
This Act (as is professed and given out by many) was not only intended, but if
they may be trusted, does indeed and upon the matter give full and clear
satisfaction to the Propositions which were offered by the Protesters unto
their Brethren of the Assembly at their first down-sitting, as the best means
for satisfying of their consciences, securing of the Work of Reformation,
purging the Church, promoving the power of godliness, removing of these sad
differences, and for attaining and preserving a good understanding, and
therefore these (as they allege being satisfied) the propounders of them not
acquiescing therein, must have some other thing before them: Therefore for
vindicating of these, I shall mark a few things for showing how unsatisfactory
all that is contained in this Act is, unto the desires contained in these
Propositions, until there may be opportunity to make a more full discovery
thereof. 1. To pass the ambiguity of their Answer to the first part of the
first Proposition, wherein it is desired that they give evidence, etc. They
omit the whole second Proposition, to wit, That it be seriously laid to heart,
etc. which in order to the ends that are propounded in the Preface to these
Propositions, to wit, the satisfaction of our Consciences, is as to the present
condition of affairs betwixt them and the Protesters, the most important of
these Propositions, yea in their other Papers these things which the Protesters
complain of as defection, they commend as duty, and profess their adherence
thereunto, and appoint censures to be inflicted upon all the opposers thereof.

2. They also omit the whole third Proposition, to wit, That as we are ready in
our station, etc. by which ommission they give just ground to suspect, that
there is in their apprehension no malignant party that needs to be discovered,
or from whom the Work of God stands in danger; and though the Protesters do not
in the first part of the Proposition take upon them to secure and guard the
Cause and Work of God against error heresy and schism, but only by this
Overture gave evidence of the sincerity of their intentions in order to that
end, that so they may satisfy their Brethren in the matter of their Jealousies
thereanent, yet as they do still apprehend a great danger to the Lords Work
from a numerous party of malignants still in the Lord, so are they much
unsatisfied that the Assembly gave no expression of their sense of danger this
way, nor evidence of their willingness to concur in securing against the same,
nor hold forth any way for the discovering and knowing of these for the time to
come.

3. Whereas they seem to grant much in order to the trying, admitting,
removing, and deposing of Church Officers, censuting of scandalous persons,
dispensing of Ordinances, and receiving of penitents, they do really and in
effect grant little or nothing; yea they do expressly refuse the desire of the
Propositions upon these things, and establish the very contrary: Because the
desire of the Propositions is, that the late Meeting at Dundee and the Acts
thereof being taken out of the way, and the Work and People of GOD secured from
the harm and evil consequences which have already, and may further ensue from
the same, as is expressed in the last Proposition (which they wholly omit) all
these things may be done according to the Acts of former uncontroverted
Assemblies of this Church, concerning the Work of Reformation in the literal
and genuine sense and meaning thereof; but their grants and concessions do
include for the rule, according to which they are to be regulated, viz. the
Acts of General Assemblies, and Constitutions of this Church indefinitely,
which in their sense does clearly and undeniably include the Acts of the last
Assembly at Dundee and Edinburgh, which instead of purging of the Church from
ignorant and disaffected and scandalous Ministers and Professors purge it from
a very great part of the able well affected and good Ministers, Elders,
Expectants, and Professors of the Land, because of their not acknowledging the
authority, and acquiescing to the Constitutions of these Assemblies.

4. Their actions (which before the Lord, and also with intelligent and
discerning men, are the most real evidences of the reallity and sincerity of
men's intentions) since that time do demonstrate, whether they have granted the
desire of these Propositions: Tell me how many ignorant, disaffected,
scandalous Ministers or Elders, are censured by the Authors of the Public
Resolutions since the last Assembly, or how many lawfully deposed and
unlawfully admitted are proceeded against, etc. They would fain find some
shadow of an excuse for so gross an oversight, and cast the blame upon the
Protesters, who say they have so weakened the authority of the Church, that her
censures are rendered altogether ineffectuall. But 1. To say nothing that
spiritual censures are not always to be foreborn, because men refuse to obey;
yea in many cases they are the more vigorously to be prosecuted. 2. With what
color of reason can it be alleged that those who not only acknowledge their
authority, but very zealously pleading for it, as most of the scandalous and
disaffected Ministers and Elders of the Land do, will not submit unto it. 3. It
is time for them to plead, that excuse when they meet with that difficulty;
tell me how many of that kind can be instanced whom they have not censured, who
have not submitted to their censures. 4. The not submitting to their censures
does not hinder them to proceed very zealously against sundry Ministers, and
many Elders who adhere unto the Protestation and bear testimony against the
Public Resolutions? Let Consciences speak as before the Lord, whether they
have faithfully and zealously improven the power and authority that remains
with them in Synods, Presbyteries and Sessions for purging of the house of God,
even according to these things which they seem to grant, or whether they have
not been negligent exceedingly in this, to say no worse, and employed most of
their endeavors and zeal to bear down the Protesters.

REASONS why the Minister, Elders, and Professors, who protested against the
Pretended Assemblies as St. Andrews, Dundee and Edinburgh, cannot agree to the
Overtures made unto them at the Conference, upon the 28. and 29 of July, 1652.
etc.
ALbeit the Essays and Endeavors which were used by us, before our coming
hither, for removing of Differences, and attaining of Union and Peace, upon
such grounds as might (indeed) bring forth a discovery of our, and the Lands
Sin, and contribute for removing the guilt thereof, and for securing and
promoving the Work of Reformation amongst us, might in a great part have
arquited our consciences, and cleared us before the world; yet the deep sense
that we had of the many and great prejudices which do ensue to the Work and
People of God, by our continued Divisions, and our ardent desire of Peace and
Union, upon the grounds foresaid, constrained us to lay hold upon the
opportunity of your meeting together at this time, and to represent unto you,
some necessary and just Propositions, as a fit subject of our conference; and
that we were willing to hear what should be offered by you to us, in order to
these ends; and, that therefore you would forbear to assume unto your selves
the power of, or constitute your selves into a Genesis Assembly. And when we found
this in-effectual, and our Union rendered more hopeless, by your denying a
desire so just and reasonable, and so agreeable to the practice of former
Assemblies, as was instanced before you by these who knew the Records:
Nevertheless upon a surmise of a purpose in you to confer with us, we did for
diverse days wait upon you, being desirous to have seen upon your part, some
serious applying of your selves to the real means of healing, and to have found
solid satisfaction unto the things contained in the Propositions offered to you
by us: But in place of this, the Brethren who were appointed by you to confer
with some of our number, did intimate unto us, that all which they had in
Commission to make offer of, was, That ye were willing to take-off the Censures
inflicted by the former Assembly at St. Andrews and Dundee, and the
Censurableness that persons, who have transgressed against the Acts thereof
might be liable unto: Providing, that these Brethren censured, and deserving
Censure, should pass from their Protestation against the former and present
Assemblies, and judicially before their Presbyteries and Synods, engage
themselves under their hands, not hereafter to deliver their Judgments in
Preaching or Writing, or any way else to hold up the late differences. Which
Overture when it was earnestly desired by these of our number to be given to
them in writing according to their Instructions, not only because it was diverse
ways represented by such of your number as did confer with them, but also that
they might the more perfectly and better understands the same, and be able to
make an exact report thereof to these who sent them, and mistakes thereupon
might be Prevented: It was most peremptorily refused, albeit most earnestly
urged and desired during the whole time of the Conference: Therefore having set
down the same as truly and impartially as our judgments and memories could
attain; We do for our own vindication, and satisfaction of others, give these
Reasons following, why we cannot accept thereof.

1. Because there is hereby no remedy at all offered for the course of
defection involved in the Public Resolutions, nor for preventing the like for
time to come, which is the main ground of difference; but upon the contrary we
are required upon the matter to retract our Testimonies thereanent, and
judicially to give Bonds and Engagements hereafter to be silent concerning the
sin and guilt thereof.

II. Because our passing from our Protestant does import a real acknowledgement
of the lawfulness and freedom of the Assemblies in regard of their
constitution, and of power in them to inflict and take-off Censures, and so by
our own consent, does not only retract and condemn the testimony which we
formerly gave against the same; But also obstructeth the remeading of what is
past, and the attaining a lawful, free, General Assembly for the time to come,
and so wreaths about our own neck, and the necks of the Lords People, the yoke
of unfree, corrupt, and unlawful Assemblies.

III. Because the offer which is made, though it contains Immunity in regard of
these who have not a quiesced unto, or opsed these Acts for the time past, yet
the Acts of themselves do not withstanding thereof, still stand in force, as a
ground of persecution against all these Ministers and Professors, who shall not
accept of the conditions contained in this offer, or thereafter fail in
performance of the same.

IV. Because this offer is so far from reaching satisfaction to all, or most
part of the Propositions offered by us, that it does not give satisfaction to
any one of them, put pitcheth upon a particular, which ought to be of least
consequence with us, (as importing but our personal suffering) without taking
notice of the Lands defection, and of those things which do concern the Kingdom
and Interest of JESUS CHRIST, and the purging of his House; and what a sin and
provocation should it be against the Lord, and what a stumbling and grief of
heart unto the godly who have concurred in these Propositions, and after such a
defection, do expect repentance and reformation, and the purging of his House
of corrupt Officers and Members, if we should make such a transaction, as seems
to promise present sesecurity to our selves, but does not contri^ute for
preserving of the Truth, and attaining a solid Peace and Union in the Lord.

V. We cannot see how the passing from these Propositions, and the taking upon
us such Engagements for the time to come as are desired, should not involve us
in the condemning of our own judgments, and in the acknowledgment of a sin and
offense in making these Protestations, and bearing testimony against the
Public Resolutions, and import that what is done by you in taking off of
Censures and censurableness (as you term it) is an Act of meet favor and grace
upon your part, unto Delinquents, upon their repentance. And though we hope
that we shall never be ashamed, but esteem it our mercy and glory to
acknowledge any thing whereby we have provoked the Lord, or offended others,
yet being more and more convinced in our consciences, that what we did in these
things was a necessary duty, we dare not purchase immunity and exemption from
Censures at so dear a rate, as to deny the same, we shall rather choose still
to be sufferers, and to wait upon the issue that the Lord shall give, then to
provoke the eyes of his Glory, grieve the spirits of his People, and would our
own Consciences, by so unsatisfying and so sinful a transaction.

And conceiving that, we shall not have the opportunity to speak unto you
hereafter, as being now about to dissolve our Meeting; We do from the zeal that
we owe to the honor of God, and from the tender respect we owe to you as
Brethren, and for exonering our own Conscience, most earnestly beseech and
obtest you, by your appearing before the Lord Jesus Christ, to give your selves
unto Prayer, and searching of your own hearts and way, in Order to Public
Resolutions and Actions, until each of you find out wherein ye have turned
aside from the straight way of the Lord, and employed your gifts and power not
for Edification, but for grieving the spirits of many of the Godly, and
strengthening of the hands of the wicked, and to Repent thereof, and to do no
more so, least wrath be increased from the LORD, the Godly of the Land more
offended, and our breach made wider, and our wound more incurable. If both you
and we might obtain mercy of the Lord to know our trespass, and why he
contends, and to accept the punishment of our iniquity, and humble our selves
before hime, who knows but that he might yet have compassion upon us, and
pardon our sins, and heal our Land.

July the 28. Antemerid. 1652.
Mr. Andrew Cant, Mr Samuel Rutherford, Mr James Guthry, My Lord Waristoun, Mr
Robert Trail, Mr John Nevay, Mr James Nasmith, being nominated to meet and
confer with some Brethren, Members of the present pretended Assembly, the
Instructions following were given them, and the Meeting does require and
expect, that they will walk according thereto.

I. That they shall declare to the Brethren with whom they are to meet, That as
they do adhere to the Protestations formerly and lately given in; so they do
protest, that they do not meet nor confer with them, nor receive any Papers
from them, as being in the capacity of Commissioners of a General Assembly, but
only as sent from a meeting of Ministers and Elders, wanting any such
Authority. II. That whatever be offered by the Brethren with whom they do
confer, they desire to get it in writing from them, as the mind of the Meeting
whereof they are Members; That it being communicated to us, Answer may be given
thereunto by our whole Meeting. III. That they do not engage in Conference with
them at first about the matter of Censures; It being neither the chief nor only
ground of our grievance; and because with us things of that nature, and any
thing of personal concernment, ought to be of the smallest value, while there
are many things in question betwixt them and us, of far higher consequence to
the Kingdom of Christ and his Interest, as anent the causes of Gods
controversy with the Land, and the way of remedy and cure of the former and
late defection, and the way of preventing the like in time coming. The
establishing and promoving the Work of Reformation, and the purging of the
Kirk, and the like, as are laid before them in our Propositions given in to
their Meeting; And that they do intimate to the Brethren foresaid, that we
cannot look upon an offer relating only to the Censures, upon some of our
number, as satisfaction to them or us, and that (besides what we have said) for
other reasons to be communicated in due time to their Meeting. And that
therefore they shall offer to these Brethren, and desire of them, that if there
be any Conference at all, the subject matter of it may be upon the whole
Propositions in the order as they stand. IV. That in case of their refusing the
latter part of the former Article, they shall require and demand from the
Brethren of the other Meeting, That they would declare whether we may expect,
that these from whom they were sent, will either by the said Brethren, or any
other way, give answer and satisfaction to us anent the Propositions, and what
is their sense and meaning of the Public Resolutions, and anent the
Constitution, Acts, and Proceedings of the Meeting at Dundee, and of this at
Edinburgh, and what they mind to do in reference to the same. V. That in case
there be not satisfaction obtained in these so just and necessary things, They
do profess their own and our dissatisfaction with any thing that has been
offered by them to us, or answered to our desires first or last. And that they
protest for themselves and us, That as we have sought Peace, and pursued it by
all lawful and possible means, though much in vain on their part. So we are
henceforth free from the guilt and blame of the sad prejudices and evil
consequences whatsomever, which may follow upon their present way, and their
former and future actings of that nature, so contrary and destructive to
Edification and Peace.
Right Reverend,
WE have now for these fourteen days past, been employed in using our best
endeavors, and waited for Overtures from you, for healing the breach, and
removing the differences that are amongst us; And now there being no ground of
hope given us, nor any desire made unto us for continuing the Conference,
whereby a better understanding might be attained; We have thought good before
our parting from this place, to send unto you this enclosed Paper, together
with the Instructions given in writing to these who were sent from us to the
Conference, the Copy whereof was offered by them to these who were sent from
your number, and left with them; Both which Papers we desire you to communicate
to those of your meeting. And so we rest,

Your very loving Brethren in the Lord.

Edinb. 29. July 1652.

Subscribed in the name of many Ministers, Elders, and Professors throughout
the Land, who desire truth and peace. Directed, For the Reverend Brother, Mr.
David Dickson, Professor of Divinity in the College of Edinburgh.

PROPOSITIONS which were offered to the Meeting of Ministers and others,
appointed to be kept at Edinburgh, July 21. 1652.
WHereas we, and many of the godly in the Land have been really scandalized and
stumbled at their late Acts and Proceedings, relating to Public Resolutions
concerning the same in the nature and Intention of the Work, to have obstructed
and shaken the Work of Reformation (although we think honorably of diverse
Godly and Learned men who have been concurring in the same, and dare not judge
their Intentions to be such as we think their Work has be, and do allow
charity to others.) Therefore for satisfaction of or conscience, and for
securing the Work of Reformation, for purging the Church, and for pr^moving the
power of godliness, and for removing of these sad differences, and for
attaining and preserving a good understanding, We desire,

That they give evidence and assurance, that they approve of, and will adhere
unto the solemn Public Confession of sins and engagement to duties, and all
the Acts of the uncontroverted Assemblies of this Church, concerning the Work
of Reformation, in the literal and genuine sense and meaning thereof. And that
in dispensing of the Ordinances, censuring of scandalous persons, receiving of
Penitents, trying, admitting, removing and deposing of Church Officers, they
will walk according to the same. That it be laid seriously to heart before the
LORD, how after such a defection, and so sad judgments for it, the LORD may be
restored to his honor, the Land to his favor, and the like defection prevented
in time coming.

That as we are ready in our station, to follow all religious and conscionable
means and Overtures for securing and guarding the Cause and Work of GOD against
Error, Heresy and Schism on the one hand, so they would hold out to us a
solid way for securing the same against dangers from Malignancy on the other.
And we would know what shall be the Characters in time coming, by which
Malignancy may be known and judged.

That a real and effectual course be taken, according to the established
rules of this Kirk, for purging out, and holding out all such Church Officers
as have not the Position, and qualifications required in the Word of God, and
Acts of this Kirk; partiularly, where Ministers deposed by lawful Assemblies,
have intruded themselves, or have been unwarrantably restored by Synods and
Presbyteries to their Charges, contrary to the form and order prescribed in the
Acts of Assemblies, be romoved, and condign censures inflicted, and that
sufficient Provision be made for preventing the like in time coming.

That after means be fallen upon and followed for censuring of all scandals and
scandalous persons, and casting out of these who shall be found grossly and
obstinatly scandalous or ignorant, after they are made inexcusable by
sufficient means and pains taken for their instructing and reclaiming.

That some course more effectual than any has been fallen upon hitherto, may
be condescended upon, for putting in execution the Acts of this Kirk, anent
debarring from the Lord's Table such persons who are found not to walk suteably
to the Gospel, and have not knowledge to examine themselves, and to discern
the Lord's Body.

That in the receiving of Penitents, care may be had that none be admitted to
the public Profession of repentance, or reconciled to the Church, but these
who are found to give such evidence of their repentance, as is expressed in the
Acts of the Assemblies, concerning the receiving of Penitents.

That an effectual course may be taken for securing of the Work and People of
GOD from the harm and evil consequences which has already, and may further
ensue from the late pretended Assemblies at S. Andrews and Dundee, and the Acts
thereof.

FINIS.

