AN ANSWER TO MALICE DEFEATED: OR, Some Reflections upon Madam Cellier's CASE.
SO Damnable and Malicious are the Popes Imps grown, especially the Female Sex,
though both as bad a Torment to England, as Hell to them: They cannot be
content to come off with their Damnable PLOTS, by running down the KINGS
Evidence and upbraiding them: But presently they print and publish a parcel of
Hellish Lies to excuse their cursed infernal Practices, thinking thereby to
deceive the World with their impudent and deceitful Lies: Knowing full well the
Pope will pardon all they do in his Service, for they have not been such bad
Servants to him; but for the Thousand pounds, they say, they spent in their
damnable and deceitful plottings against the Protestants: He will, you may be
sure; pay them double, and it may be give them three Hundred Masses for the
use: Yet, I do not question but God will discover, your hellish cloven Foot
under your long Coats, to your Shame and Confusion, and the Nations good.

I do suppose that the Pope gave you a pardon before your Case was writ, or
otherwise you would not have deceitfully said, You did not fear Death; nor the
Smell of Newgate; and so have sealed such a Parcel of damnable Lies, and
impudent and hellish Language up with your Blood.

Your popish, upbraiding hellish Speeches shows you have a damnable, wicked and
hellish Spirit within, and a Pocky Cloven Foot without. But the God of all
Truth will render unto the Wicked according to their Deserts, and bring to
light all your Damnable practices: and release his people from your damnable
hellish Claws.

You say, Capt. Thomas Dangerfield, who is worthy of the Name, has been a
wicked man; if he had not, he would not have concerned himself with your
Damnable, Deceitful and cursed PLOT.

But, to make the Nation amends, he has Discovered your Damnable and
ranck-poyson PLOT; which in so doing, he has done the Nation more good a
hundredfold, than ever he did them harm: for in his Discovering this your
Damnable and Cursed PLOT, he has showed himself an honest man, both to his
King and Country; as you will, I am afraid, know to your Cost.

If the Pope, and all his Imps stand by you; (as, D. B. P. S. A. P. C.) you
will be mightily mistaken, if you think that your Female Sex, or Male Sex, can
run down a Nation, far better than where your Old Grand-sir, the hatcher of
mischief dwells; I mean Rome, where the Devil in the Pope lives. (...) But, pray
Madam, before you go any farther, take my Advice, (and do not Curse me, when
you see this your Looking-Glass) which is, Make an open Confession to God, and
all the world, of all your Damnable and Cursed Practices, and this Nation will
be bound to pray for you: but, if you continue in your falsehood, and believe
the Popish Religion, than I will give you my farther Advice; that since you
have done more harm to this Nation, than ever you or the Popes Agents can make
good: Go you over to Rome, and there spend the rest of your days in a Nunnery,
there let your cloven Foot with your rank body and poisoned Mind continue till
you die: but then God have mercy on your Soul; for the pope can give none.

London, Printed for the Author William Fletcher. 1680.


