AN ANSWER to a PAPER Written by Count d'Avaux, The French King's Ambassador in
Sueden. Concerning the PROPOSALS of PEACE MADE BY FRANCE TO THE CONFEDERATES.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane.
MDCXCIV.

A TABLE OF THE Principal MATTERS contained in this ANSWER.
I. GEneral Reflections on Count d' Avaux's Paper. Page 1. II. He endeavors to
remove the Fear of the Allies about the Offers of Peace made by the King his
Master. Page 2 III. Enquiry whether this Fear be well or ill grounded. ibid.
IV. An Objection against it. ibid. V. An Answer to that Objection. Page 3 VI. A
second Objection, with its Answer. Page 4 VII, VIII. Enquiry into the
Conditions Monsieur d' Avaux brags to be very Advantageous: And first into
those concerning the States General; together with an Examination of that
important and foregoing Question; Who is the Author of this War? and
consequently the Aggressor? ibid. IX. The Interest of the States General about
the Re-establishment of Peace. Page 7 X. Terms concerning the King of Great
Britain. Page 8 XI. Terms offered to the King of Spain. ibid. XII. Some
Important Reflections on the French King's desisting from his Pretensions to
the Spanish Netherlands in favor of the Elector of Bavaria. Page 9 XIII. A
continuation of the same Reflections on the pretended nullity of the French
King's renouncing to the Succession of the King of Spain. Page 11 XIV. Terms
offered to the House of Lorrain. ibid. XV. Terms proposed to the Empire. Page
12 XVI. A Continuation of the Reflections on the same Subject, with a
refutation of Monsieur d' Avaux's Reasons. Page 14 XVII. Some particular
Remarks concerning the City of Strasbourgh. Page 16 XVIII. Monsieur d' Avaux's
Accusation of his Imperial Majesty answered. ibid. XIX. Remarks on the taking
of the City of Strasbourgh. Page 17 XX. On its present Condition under the Yoke
of France. ibid. XXI. As also on the Importance of this Place. Page 18 XXII.
Answer to Monsieur d' Avaux's Objection on this Subject. Page 19 XXIII, XXIV.
An Answer about the Equivalent proposed in lieu of the City of Strasbourgh.
Page 20 XXV. An Answer about the Mediatorship proposed concerning the Reunions.
Page 21 XXVI. That the Proposals of France tend only to get more ground upon
the Confederates. ibid. XXVII. The Vnbyas'd Sentiments of his Suedish Majesty
compared with those of Monsieur d' Avaux. Page 22 XXVIII. Monsieur d' Avaux's
Reasons he makes use of to prove that the King of Sueden is engaged by his
Interest to press the Allies to accept of the Proposals made. ibid. XXIX.
Enquiry, into his Reasons. Page 23 XXX. A Refutation of what Monsieur d' Avaux
alleges against the House of Austria concerning its Pretended Aim at an
Universal Monarchy. Page 24 XXXI. An Answer to Monsieur d' Avaux's Reasons, by
which he endeavors to engage the Honor of the King of Sueden. Page 26 XXXII.
The Conclusion. Page 27
AN ANSWER TO A PAPER written by the Count d' AVAUX, concerning the Proposals
of PEACE made to the Allies by FRANCE.
I.
ONE shall hardly meet with a more specious and subtle Paper, than that by
which the Count d' Avaux, the French King's Ambassador in Sueden, has supported
the Offers and Conditions of Peace made by his Master. Every thing there seems
plausible; and if one only considers the beautiful and lively Colors which he
so artificially makes use of, one would think that all the Reason and Justice
lay on the French King's, as all the Wrong on the Confederates side; and this
too in an Affair of the highest nature, since it is to put an end to an almost
General War amongst Christians in all the parts of the World, and to
reestablish a Peace which is to decide either the Liberty or the Dependancy of
all the Princes and States in Christendom.

But whereas in Affairs of this Importance, instead of being drawn in by
outward appearances we ought to sound the bottom, let us narrowly enquire into
his manner of Reasoning, without any Passion or Prejudice, which are as blind
Guides as they are depraved Counselors. The matter in hand deserves it; and if
ever there was required a true Touchstone in State Affairs, we stand now in
need of it.

II.
The Count d' Avaux endeavors strait to remove the Fears of the Confederates;
who considering the great Eagerness the French King shows to enter upon a
Treaty of Peace, have a shrewd guess, That his only Design in doing so, is to
separate and disunite them. In order to which he alleges, That the King his
Master has offered advantageous Terms to all (not excepting any of) his Enemies.

III.
Now to judge whether these Fears are well or ill grounded, we ought to
remember what has been done in this Affair in particular, with the Duke of
Savoy, the Emperor, the Elector of Bavaria, and even to the King of Spain, by
the Holy Father's Mediation.

Again, we ought to consider what pains have been taken to make this War pass
for a War of Religion, with the zealous Roman Catholics. The Emergency of the
Affairs of England, and the late King James's Misfortunes, have furnished
France with some specious Pretenses for it. With the Protestant Princes other
Engines have been set at work, and a show has been made of some other
Pretenses, which the Northern Crowns can prove with a witness. Neither ought we
to forget the famous Negotiation of the Treaty at Nimeguen, which was no sooner
set on foot, but France obtained her Ends, viz. To separate the then Allies. An
unhappy Separation which plunged them into all those Misfortunes they have been
forced to undergo since that time; and which no man can give a better account
of, than Monsieur d'Avaux himself. It Is then this sad Experience that has made
them more wise, and it is also the only and true Reason that has obliged the
French King to make Proposals and Terms of Peace to every one of them, as
having lost all hopes of disuniting them by Separate Treaties.

IV.
But, says one, what means this wavering? Would it not be better to enter
strait upon the matter? Does it not seem strange that the Allies have not
thought fit as yet to make the least Declaration about the Terms proposed by
France? That they do not name the Place of Assembly? Nay, that they will not so
much as hearken to the Preliminaries of a Treaty? And has not France reason to
cry out against this Conduct of theirs, and to accuse them that they will have
no Peace; but that on the contrary they are resolved to continue the War, for
ends sinistrous and prejudicial to the Tranquillity and common good of all
Christendom?

V.
To which the Confederates will perhaps answer; First, That they do not like
that Haughty Air of Superiority which France assumes in making the Proposals,
as if it was her due to give Peace to her Enemies, when and on what Terms she
pleases. It was in this manner they were treated at the Peace of Nimeguen; a
thing never before heard of amongst Independent and Sovereign Princes. Neither
have they forgotten as yet what Statues were erected in the Place des
Victoires, and in the Court of the Townhouse at Paris; what Representations and
Inscriptions were made there; what Panegyricks, what Speeches, and what Verses
were composed; the most outrageous and most ignominious to the other
Sovereigns, that ever were heard of; even without sparing the most Generous and
Faithful Friend and Ally France had then, I mean the Brave King of Sweden, who
after he had in those times hazarded his Kingdom together with his dearest
Interest in favor of the French King, had no other Reward but the Injurious
Reproaches of his having reestablish'd him on his Throne. These are the fine
and immortal Monuments, which as they strike a just Horror into the
Confederates, so they make them cautious not to be treated so a second time.

Secondly, It may be alleged by the Allies, That they find no Security for
themselves in the Proposals made by France. They know but too well, and by sad
Experience, That France acknowledges no other Limits to her Treaties, than what
agree with her Designs. It Is this which the Pyrenean Treaty, that of Aix la
Chapelle, of Nimeguen, and the Truce of Twenty Years, the most solemn, and the
most advantageous to France that ever were made, lay continually before her
eyes, and of which they are yet more convinced by the Maxims of the French
Writers, who maintain, That their King can alienate nothing of what once has
been incorporated into that Crown; nay, That he cannot renounce upon Oath his
Rights, whether true or but pretended, so as to bind his Successors by it. Who
will then assure us, That the Treaty that is now to be made, will last, I will
not say for ever, but any longer than those that have been made already, and
which have been broken as soon as ever a fallacious Peace has first separated,
and then disarmed the Confederates?

VI.
But, says another, at this rate we shall have here an everlasting War, since
this last reason will always hold, and be ready to be made use of by the
Confederates on all occasions.

To which I answer, No; this is not in the least their intention. They desire a
Peace as much as France, but it must be a sure, an honorable, and a general
one: And to obtain such an one, they believe there are no other means but to
reduce her to such Terms, as will make it her interest to live hereafter in
Peace with her Neighbors, notwithstanding her dangerous Maxims. This is also
without doubt the reason, why the Confederates have not as yet returned any
Answer to the Proposals of France; since there is some time required to agree
amongst themselves about an Answer proper to obtain these ends, and which at
the same time may be approved of by every one of them.

VII.
Monsieur d' Avaux maintains further, That one cannot wish for more
advantageous Terms than the King, his Master, has offered the Confederates.
This is a thing worth our enquiry.

VIII.
He begins with those offered to the States General, and that he may not leave
undecided that question, Who is the Author of this War, and consequently the
Aggressor? Since it is of great weight in this matter; he charges the States
General of having been the Cause of it, by lending their Assistance to the
Prince of Orange, that he might make himself Master of England. A mighty Point
which it concerns us to enquire into.

All the World knows, That in the year 1688, there was no War in Europe, but
that with the Turks, which of all the Princes and States that are now in
Confederacy against France, the Emperor bore alone the weight of; all the rest
lived in a profound Peace; when France on a sudden, being puffed up with her
Fortune and Grandeur, and bent to improve the opportunity of securing to her
self for ever, what she did but enjoy for twenty years, made that bloody
Invasion into the Empire, that did so little expect it, as thinking it self
secure under the shelter of a dear-bought Truce. She attacked and took
Philippsburg, and possessed her self of all the Rhine, save only Coblentz,
Rhinfelt, and Cologne; and it is to be noted, That this Invasion which was
resolved upon in the Council of France, as soon as Belgrade was taken by the
Emperor from the Turks, was executed immediately after, to wit, at the
beginning of September, and consequently two Months before the then Prince of
Orange came over into England. What relation then has this War with the
Assistance given by the States General to that Prince? Since notwithstanding
there was then a defensive Treaty between the Emperor and the States General
still in being; yet their Alliance was not renewed till May 1689. by a
defensive and offensive Treaty, being grounded on the rupture of France. This
was not done till a year after the taking of Philipsburg, Heidelberg, Manheim,
Frankendal and Mayence; and, in fine, after a general devastation of the
Palatinat and the Circles of the Upper Rhine, of Suabia and Franconia.

France, as all the world knows, and as the nature of so vast and unbounded
designs did require it, had taken her measures to enslave the Rhine, before the
Prince of Orange's passing the Sea was ever thought of, either in England or
Holland.

It Is true, some time before its being put in execution, they began to suspect
a design of the Prince, by the fitting out a Fleet in Holland, and afterward
by an agreement made with some Princes of the Empire about some Troops of
theirs, but it is no less true, that in France this Design was looked upon as
Chimerical, and those as Blockheads that gave a hint in their Letters that it
was laid against England. Howsoever they flattered themselves, that they should
have done soon enough with Germany, to be able to bridle afterward the Prince
of Orange and the States General; and behold here one of the greatest effects
of the Divine Providence that ever was! For it is certain that if the French
King instead of invading the Empire, had sent a good Army toward the Frontiers
of the Netherlands, though it had been only to threaten them with a War; never
could the Prince of Orange have been able to come over into England. The
Emperor, the Empire, the King of Spain, had still been in Peace with France;
England had been Enslaved by King James; and the rest of Europe by the French
King.

Besides, we have still place for another Reflection, which is, that at the
bottom France has put the Late King James out of, and set the Prince of Orange
on the Thrones of Great Britain. It Is long since that France looks on the Power
and Greatness of England with jealous eyes, as the only Kingdom capable of
prescribing Limits to her unbounded Designs. For which reason she has held for
a State-Maxime, to destroy England by its own Forces, by Domestic Troubles,
and Intestine Wars. She began to put it in practice in the Reigns of the Two
Charles's, the First and the Second; and thinking she was just upon the point
of obtaining her Ends, when James the Second, with whom she had had a long and
strict Alliance, and whose Bigottry and Ambition she but too well knew, mounted
on the Throne, she did not fail to improve that opportunity, and the Passions
of that Prince, to push him on to a Despotick and Arbitrary Government, and the
bringing in of Popery against the Fundamental Laws of the Realm, of which the
English are more jealous than any Nation in the World besides is of theirs.

This is a Truth the Late King James could not be ignorant of; and consequently
he might easily judge, that without a powerful Assistance from abroad, it would
be impossible for him to compass so vast and so monstrous a Design; and who was
likelier to lend it him but the French King, puissant and dreadful to all the
World? In short, the thing was as readily granted as desired; but at the same
time it was whispered in the Late King's ear, that all would be in vain except
the States General were overturned, as being the only in the World that might
oppose his Designs; and that would infallibly do it by reason of the great
Interest, which together with the Prince of Orange, their Stadtholder, they had
in this Affair. Wherefore a Secret League was concluded between the two Kings
in order to a total destruction of the United Provinces, which was to be put in
execution on the first opportunity; and France, who had a mind to strike the
Iron whilst it was hot, was not willing to put it off, till after she had
finished her Conquest of the Rhine, and forced the Emperor and the Empire to
confirm her in the possession of it by a shameful Peace, whilst the Late King
James, by the means of his Army, was to render himself Master of all at home,
to the Subversion of the Government and Religion established by Law in the
Three Kingdoms. This is the true cause of all King James's Undertakings in
England, Scotland and Ireland, against his true Interest, which was to govern
his People according to Law, and to oppose the pernicious Designs of France.
But his having been drawn in by her, has cost him very dear; for the English
being resolved not to outlive the loss of their Laws, their Religion, their
Liberties and Properties, called secretly to their assistance the then Prince
of Orange, who was obliged to it by a thousand Reasons. But the Prince being
wise and cautious, and knowing perfectly the consequence of so great an
Enterprise, suffered himself long to be solicited; and did not hearken at last,
but to the Threatenings that were made him from England, to abandon entirely
his, and that Incomparable Princess his Wife's Interest, and to give way to
some desperate Action, would have cost them Rivers of Blood. Nevertheless, it
was not till August 1688. that the States General were acquainted with this
great Affair; and they did not grant the Prince their Assistance, till the very
time the French King's Armies were on their march to invade the Empire, and to
attack Philipsbourg, and then they were not like to refuse it, since otherwise
they would only have had the advantage of being swallowed up last.

Now this being well considered must not one have a strong Forehead to affirm
that the States General are the cause of this War? But besides, in granting the
Prince of Orange' s Request, did they do the least thing against France? or did
they infringe the least Article of the Treaty that was then in being with her?
There is no man of sense can aver it; and Monsieur d' Avaux himself, in his
thundering and threatening Speeches, he made then at the Hague, could allege
nothing, but that his Master found himself obliged to assist his Allie. Was it
then requisite that the States General should have tamely waited for the mortal
Stroke that was prepared for them? and being perfectly acquainted with the
League of both Kings that had sworn their ruin, should they have let slip the
only means to save them, and which indeed secured them effectually from the
Attempts of France, who was going to build on their Ruin her vast Designs of an
Universal Sovereignty over all the States in Europe.

IX.
And now to come to the point; it is evident by what has been said, that the
great Interest the States General have to observe by a reestablishment of
Peace, is the securing themselves effectually for the future by Sea and by
Land, without which, all they have to expect will be a suspension only of their
total Ruin, so much the more inevitable, the less hopes they can have ever to
meet with so fair an opportunity as they have now at this present, to secure
their State, their Commerce, and their Tranquillity for the future. The fatal
Consequences of the precipitated Peace of Nimmeguen are yet too fresh to be
forgotten; and the boasted of Barriere, France offers to restore, will no more
establish their quiet for the future, than it has done for the time past.
Besides, France does not offer to restore the entire Barriere, since she
pretends to keep Luxenburgh, of which more hereafter.

X.
Monsieur d' Avaux passes but slightly over the Terms which the King of Great
Britain is to have; and it seems he fancies forsooth, His Majesty wants nothing
but to remain in possession of his Three Kingdoms, and that on that score he will
not scruple to restore what England has taken from France in the West Indies.
But in this Monsieur d' Avaux is so much out of the road, that we have reason
to doubt whether Their Majesty's will ever permit that it be inserted as a
Condition into a Treaty of Peace, that France is to acknowledge Their Dignity
and Title, which is sufficiently established by the right of Blood, and by the
Offer the Representatives of both Nations have made Their Majesty's of the
Three Crowns after the Late King James' Abdication, and his Retreat into
France. Besides, all Potentates of Europe having acknowledged the Title of, and
congratulated Their Majesty's, there is no doubt but France will be forced to
make use of the same Language, in case she has a mind the King should ever
enter with her on Articles of Peace. But do they think us tame enough to rest
satisfied with that? or rather, do they not imagine we shall ask for somewhat
more, some small Terms for our Safety, being acquainted, as we are, with the
dangerous Maxims and Designs of France that tend to our destruction? Is it
probable the King will abandon his Principality of Orange, and his other Lands
by Inheritance, taken from him, and confiscated against all manner of Justice,
a long time before the beginning of this War, and in the midst of Peace?

XI.
And what are the Terms proposed to Spain? Monsieur d' Avaux talks very high
and makes a mighty noise about them. Five fine Places taken in Flanders and
Catalonia, which the King, his Master, offers to restore, are no Sugar-Plumbs,
and his desisting from his pretensions to all the Spanish Netherlands in favor
of the Elector of Bavaria, carries so mighty a weight with it, that Spain
cannot but choose to embrace these Proposals with both hands. But has not the
Catholic King already rejected them with scorn, and declared rather to die,
and to carry on the War all alone, then to accept them? Which if it be done
with reason, we are now to consider.

The King of Spain knows well that the Places France offers to restore,
especially those in Flanders, will be no longer his, than during the French
King's pleasure; and that their distance from him, and their Situation, in
regard to his Crown, will make them fall again sooner or later with the
remainder of the Spanish Low Countries into the French King's hands, at least
if it be not prevented by the King of England's Assistance, and that of the
States General. Neither will a Resignation, in favor of the Elector,
contribute more to the fixing of that Turbulent Humor of the French, than that
which was formerly passed in favor of the Archduke Albert and the
Arch-Dutchess Isabella. The King of Spain therefore will think perhaps fit, to
demand some greater and more real Pledges of his Safety, by a Barriere that may
effectually cover the rest of his Netherlands; and it is left to every ones
judgment, Whether he has not reason to demand them, after the frequent
Infractions of the Pyrenean Treaty, that of Aix la Chapelle, of Nimeguen, and
the last Truce, on the French King's side.

In the second place, France has a mind to keep for ever the Fortress and
Duchy of Luxemburgh, and the rather, because the States General have consented
to the leaving of them in her hands during the space of Twenty Years, and that
this Fortress is without the Barriere. But is there no difference between a
forced Resignation, and that only for some years, and a voluntary one, and that
for ever? Besides, we ought to consider, that the City and Province of
Luxemburg is of greater Importance to the King of Spain, than one half of his
Low Countries; not so much by reason of its Extent and Revenue, as by its
commodious Situation, which opens and shuts the Gates to the Succors which he
that is in Possession of the Netherlands may expect and receive from the
Emperor and the Empire; and that it is a Bulwark of those Provinces against
France.

XII.
But there remains yet another Point to be cleared, of a far greater, nay, of
the highest nature; which is, That the French King in desisting in favor of
the Elector of Bavaria from his Pretensions to the Low Countries, does still
reserve to himself his Pretensions to the Succession of the King of Spain, in
case he should happen to dye without Issue. Which is in plain English, That in
case a Peace should be concluded to day, and the King of Spain happen to dye
without Issue to morrow, we should then have a new and as fierce a War as ever,
in the old world as well as in the new one. Monsieur d' Avaux indeed calls this
a very Malicious Interpretation, and charges the Emperor with it, as being the
nearest concerned therein. But he is not aware that he does himself establish
and confirm it more than any body besides. For to maintain, as he does in his
Paper, That the Renunciation made, not by the French Queen only, as he does
insinuate, but also by the King her Husband, for himself and for his
Successors; I say, that this Renunciation made upon Oath, and the most solemn
one that ever was passed amongst Sovereigns, is null and void of it self; and
to propose to the King of Sueden the Arbitration of that great Succession, What
does it mean else, but that the French King pretends to it more than ever?
Otherwise he should have spoke out, That the King his Master scorned to do it,
as being resolved religiously to observe the Laws he has dictated to himself by
this Renunciation. But by the way, Monsieur d' Avaux flatters himself, that by
making these Proposals to the King of Sueden, he has hit the Point in
Politics, that will effectually engage that Prince into the French King's
Interest; and he boasts of it as an Honor that was never conferred on any
Prince within the memory of men. Indeed to see one self an established Arbiter
of a Difference that concerns no less than the greatest and richest part of the
New World, and so many Kingdoms and Provinces in the Old one, is a thing
capable of flattering a mind, tho possessed with the highest Ambition; and yet
the King of Sueden is too Generous to be drawn in by it. If it was a difference
of an intricate and dubious nature, something might be said for it; but since
it is about the most frivolous and unjust Pretension that ever was, I think the
King of Sueden has not much Honor done him by being made an Arbiter of what
undoubtedly belongs to another. All Sovereigns are engaged not to suffer an
Example of such ill consequence, otherwise farewell all Right and Possession,
since none would be the better for 'em. Would not the King of Sueden think it a
great Injury, and a piece of the highest Injustice, in case it should be
proposed to him to submit his Kingdom and Dominions that undoubtedly belong to
him, to the Decision of a Third Person, tho his Brother or his dearest Friend?
And save this consideration, the highest that ever was, the Emperor and the
King of Spain do confide so much in the King of Sueden's Justice, Candor, and
Generosity, that they would gladly receive him as an Arbiter in any other
Difference but this: In this they will undoubtedly stick to the French King's
sworn Renunciation, which excludes him from all Pretensions to the Dominions of
the King of Spain, and the effect of which will never be removed, for all
either Monsieur d'Avaux can say, or the mercenary Pens of France, on which he
grounds himself, can write; at least as long as any Contract and Obligation
amongst Sovereigns does subsist, and Laws Divine and Human are in force.

XIII.
Neither does Monsieur d'Avaux prove better the pretended Nullity of this
Renunciation, by reason that the Spaniards (as he pretends) have not discharged
the Sums they were to pay in a limited time: For in the first place it ought to
be proved that it has been the fault of the Spaniards that the Portion of the
late French Queen has not been paid, and that they have had no reason to
imagine, that the Arrears of the Portion of Elizabeth of France, Queen of
Spain, and Mother to the late French Queen, might well account for it. But in
the second place suppose the Spaniards had been backward in this point, the
Contract of Marriage of the French Queen does not say, That in case her Portion
should not be paid within the time prescribed, the Renunciation made so
solemnly to the Succession of Spain, was to be null and void. By which it
appears, That all the French King had to do, was to oblige Spain to perform the
Contract, the Renunciation remaining howsoever entire, as having a Motive and
Object far greater, more important, and more glorious than the Five hundred
thousand Crowns of the promised Portion can come to, that is to say, (to give
it in their own terms), To secure for ever the Public Peace of Christendom,
and to procure the Common Good of the Kingdoms and Subjects of both Crowns. The
King of Spain and the French King being at that very time willing to prevent
the Conjunction of both Crowns, as being too big to be united into one. After
which can it be said with the least color of Reason or Justice, That the
French King has the least pretense to annul this Renunciation.

XIV.
As to what relates to the Terms offered to the House of Lorrain, it is a Jest
to pretend that the Empire has no Right left to meddle with what regards that
Duchy, since the late Duke did not accept of what was stipulated for him at
the Treaty of Nimeguen. The Empire says with far more justice, That France
having broke that Treaty, can draw no advantage from it, and consequently none
neither in regard to Lorrain. It Is notorious moreover, that the late Duke of
Triumphant Memory, did never accept of what Offers were made him at that
Treaty; for which reason the French King has no Right neither to the Four
Highways in Lorrain, of the breadth of half a mile, that were granted him on
that score. But France, according to her celebrated custom, boasts of Treaties
as far as they can be stretched to her Advantage; whilst on the other hand,
that part which does not serve her purpose, is most scornfully rejected.
Besides, we ought to observe here, That it is the French King's way to take
away with one hand what he gives with another. He Will desist forsooth from his
Pretensions to the Four Highways, but he will retain in exchange Four of the most
important Places of that Duchy, viz. Sarlewis, Bintche, Hombourgh, and
Longivy, reserving over and above to himself a Passage for his Troops through
Lorrain, which alone would keep the Duke and his Country in a perpetual
Slavery. But according to all appearance, the present Duke of Lorrain will find
it as hard to persuade himself to the resigning of these Four Places, as his
Father did when he was to grant the four Highways; at least, he will not think
himself to be very much beholden to the French King for it. In short, if the
French King will make us believe that he has a real design to restore to the
House of Lorrain what belongs to it by an undoubted Right, why does he retrench
from it so considerable a Branch? Is it perhaps because he still grounds
himself on some ridiculous Treaties made with the old Duke of Lorrain, Charles
the IIId. possessed in those times with an implacable hatred against his
nearest Relations, and blinded by a foolish Love? And does he pretend that they
are obligatory to the present Duke, who having had no hand in them, claims with
a Just Right what belonged to his Ancestors, and what by the same Right is now
his own.

XV.
After this, Monsieur d' Avaux examines the Proposals made by his Master to the
Empire, on which he dwells the rather, because the King of Sweden is
particularly concerned therein. Let us follow him step by step.

He supposes before all things, That the Treaties of Westphaly and Nimeguen are
to remain in their full force and vigor. To which we may reply by the by, That
although the French King has rendered himself unworthy of what has been decided
there in his favor, yet there will hardly be any dispute about them on the
Empire's side, especially about the Treaties of Westphalia; but the question
is, Whether the Proposals made by France are capable of restoring those
Treaties to their full force and vigor? To which every reasonable and
unbiassed man will be obliged to answer in the Negative, and that we are to
prove hereafter.

Besides, the old difficulty holds here still, to wit, How we shall be assured
that the French King will better keep those Treaties for the future, than he
has done for the time past? 'Ts notorious, That that of Nimeguen was no sooner
executed, but he raised in the year 1680. a quarrel about his dependencies and
his frivolous Reunions; by the means of which, though grounded only on some
whimsical Titles and Pretenses, and pleaded before his own Courts, where he was
himself both Judge and Party; several Princes and States of the Empire were
dispossessed of their Countries, there being found out a way to father always
on the nearest places a dependency from those had been last taken. A goodly way
indeed that would have Reunited at last the whole Empire to France!

In the year 1681, he Surprised and possessed himself of Strasburg. The
violences and outrages that were committed there, and since that time, are of a
fresh date, and ought to be abhorred by all true Germans, as long as they have a
drop of blood in their Veins.

Monsieur d' Avaux pretends also, that the Truce of twenty years concluded at
Ratisbonne, should be converted into a definitive Treaty of Peace. But why
would not the Emperor and the Empire consent to it, when that Treaty was made,
or since, before the new Invasion by France? They would have prevented by it,
what they have suffered from the barbarous Ravages and Desolations that have
been carried during this War, into the best part of Germany, but they had but
too much reason to refuse it. Wherefore to soften that Proposition, which was
from that time rejected, Monsieur d' Avaux thinks to have mended the matter by
making some Alterations in it, which he cries up for so many convincing proofs,
that the King, his Master, has no thoughts of making the least Conquests in the
Empire. These Alterations are as follow, viz. Instead that heretofore, and
since the Truce, France demanded that all should remain in Statu quo, that is
to say, that she was to keep by a Peace all Places and Provinces she Usurped in
the Empire, the Possession of which was not secured to her but during the
twenty years of the Truce; She offers now to surrender some of those Places
demolished, viz. Mount-Royal, Trarbach, and the Works of Fort-Lewis and
Hunninguen, which Works being in regard to France on that side of the Rhine,
the meaning of it is in plain English, That she will raze indeed the Forts built
on the German side, cover the Bridges of Fort-Lewis and Hunninguen, but as to
the body of those Places, Situated in regard to her on this side the Rhine,
She Will keep them: She offers besides to surrender Philipsbourg and Frybourg
fortified, as they are now at present: She offers moreover to restore the
Palatinat and the Duchy of Deux-ponts; and besides all this, shell submit the
Affair of the Reunions made for the time past, to the decision of some
Commissaries to be named on both sides, or to the Arbitration of the Republic
of Venice. Now according to these fair Proposals, If we'll believe Monsieur d'
Avaux, the French King retains nothing, but only the City of Strasbourg, with
the Forts belonging thereunto, which indeed by way of Compensation, he will keep
for himself and his Successors for ever.

XVI.
It Is indeed a rare show, to see what pains Monsieur d' Avaux takes to make the
Germans relish these Proposals, which with an Assurance peculiar to a certain
Nation, he would have them look upon as a Favor his Master has a mind to
bestow on them. Add to this the cunning he employs to diminish the Importance
of the City of Strasbourg, and it is passage, as also what he alleges to
justify his Master's keeping of it. Insomuch, that the first thoughts that
come into one's head, on the account of so injurious Proposals made to the
Emperor, and the Empire, are, that according to the ridiculous ditty, or rather
impertinent Satyr of his Country, he takes them for Allemands, or to speak more
intelligibly, for Irishmen, That do not know so much as the bogs of their own
Country. But let us see how the matter stands.

In case the Places France offers to restore to the Empire, as an Equivalent
for Strasbourg, were either part of the Kingdom of France, or got by that Crown
by a just Title, it is agreed that they might hearken to the Places proposed.
But can they name one that does not belong to the Empire, except Frybourg,
which was resigned to France by the Treaty of Nimeguen? On what score then can
the French King dispose of Places that are not his own, and offer them as an
Equivalent to the Emperor, to whom they undoubtedly belong? But, says Monsieur
d' Avaux, the King, my Master, is in Possession of them by Right of Conquest,
and the Emperor is not like to retake them. To which I answer, It Is agreed that
in case it were lawful amongst Christians, to Invade without either Reason or
Justice, the Countries of their Neighbors when they least think on it, and
imagine themselves secure under the shelter of Treaties of Peace, or when they
are employed some where else, as the Emperor, and the Empire were by a War with
the Infidels, raised by the tricks and cunning of the Most Christian King, and
Fomented by his Treaties, and by his Supplies of Officers, Engineers, and
Money; I say, if there was no more to be done but to take Possession of another
Prince's Country, and then offer to restore him one part of it, on condition to
leave that which is the most considerable in the lurch; then, and then only
would there be some sense in Monsieur d' Avaux's reasoning. But what right,
either Divine, or Human, did ever Authorize so unjust a Title of acquisition?
And what security could there be henceforward expected in the World, if this
Practice once came to be allowed? Every Society would then be but a band of
Robbers, where Force, Violence, and Tyranny, would take place of Right and
Justice. It Is left to every one's Judgment, Whether it be not the Interests of
all Princes to oppose with all their might such pernicious Maxims. In effect,
in such cases all Alliances are at an end, and none can be bound by them to
Assist so inhuman and barbarous an Aggressor. It has been said heretofore, how
France Attacked and Ravaged the Empire in 1688. with the greatest Injustice,
and without the least shadow of reason, by Monsieur d'Avaux's own tacit
acknowledgment, for it is a point he has not thought fit to meddle with; and
consequently, if Divine and Human Rights are allowed to take place, the French
King, far from getting any advantage by it, or keeping the least foot of ground
after so crying an Usurpation, is bound to make Reparation, and the Offended
Parties have just grounds to demand Damages of him for what he has caused them
to suffer. But, good God! What Damages may there not be asked? Entire Provinces
utterly destroyed; Cities that opened their Gates, relying on the Faith of
Capitulation made with the French Dauphin, Razed to the very ground; Actions
innumerable of Cruelty and Barbarity unparalled in all Histories; what
Reparation, I beseech you, is there to be made for all this? Yes, to weigh all
things rightly, a good part of France it self would not suffice. Nevertheless,
to make the measure full, instead of thinking to give the least satisfaction,
the French King sets a price on his Cruelties; for these are the bloody Titles
by which he pretends to keep what he has got by them. But, God be thanked, the
Emperor and the Empire are not reduced to acquiesce in them, at least they will
not think themselves much beholden to him for the offer he makes them to
restore some of the places he Usurps in the Empire, in lieu of the City of
Strasbourg.

XVII.
It Is this City which sticks closest to the Count d'Avaux's heart; for he
leaves no stone unturned to inveigle the Empire to abandon it. At one time he
endeavors to prove that such a Resignation is not contrary to the Treaties of
Westphaly, since the Emperor, if you will believe him, has infringed them in
regard to Sueden as well as France; and that in the Empire it self Instances
are to be found of diverse Alterations made since those Treaties. At another
time he makes bold to maintain, That the City of Strasburgh has surrendered it
self willingly to its Master; that it is its Interest to remain under his
Protection; that this City is of little or no importance to the Empire; and
that unless it be resigned, there will be no quiet for it, nor any assured
Peace between the Empire and France; and in fine, that at all hazards the blame
of it can never be laid at his Master's door, since he has offered for it a
more than sufficient Equivalent.

All this fine Gibberish needs no Refutation. Neither do I think fit to meddle
with that Question, Whether an Alteration may be lawfully made in the Empire,
against and after the Treaties of Westphaly; since it would be no more to the
purpose, than the Instances Monsieur d'Avaux gives of it. All I have to say as
to that Point is, That no part of the Empire ought to be dismembered from it,
nor any Alteration made, except in Cases of the highest Necessity, and when
there are some great and visible Advantages to be got by it. But what good will
it do the Germans to abandon the City of Strasburgh? Or rather, What hurt will
it not prove to them? Since this Place is both the only Key to, and the sole
Bulwark of the Empire against the Invasions of France.

XVIII.
As to what regards the Accusation of the Emperor, as if he had infringed the
Treaties of Westphaly, in the Wars of Poland and Denmark, Monsieur d'Avaux
makes use of it as an Argument that strikes home: But it is not fair to unravel
things that have been buried in Oblivion by a Solemn Treaty in 1660.
Animosities between Princes are not to be looked upon as Eternal, since they
are not only obliterated by Time, but the Interest of their Country often
changes them into a sincere Friendship; as indeed since that time we have seen
strict Alliance made and kept, and a perfect Correspondency reign between the
Emperor and the King of Sueden, to their mutual Advantage and Satisfaction. On
the contrary, the strongest Ties are broken, when that Interest which made
them, happens to cease: Witness Sueden and France after the Peace of Nimeguen;
the latter having treated the first with great Haughtiness, and all imaginable
Scorn.

Yet suppose there had been some Infraction on the Emperor's side, which yet
the Imperial Court has formerly denied, alleging the Defensive Alliance was
then in being between the Emperor and Poland, that was the Party invaded; that
Difference has been made up by the Treaties of Peace, and does not authorize
the French King to do as much after the Peace was made. It Is so plain a Point
that we need not enlarge upon it. Let us rather consider what regards the City
of Strasburgh in particular.

XIX.
Whether that City has voluntarily surrendered it self, or not, is left to be
decided by Matter of Fact, which is of so late a date, that we cannot but
remember the Circumstances of it. Three or four Villains in the Senate,
Traitors to their Country, corrupted by French Money, and blinded by their
ambition, (one of which was soon after A Principal Person concerned in the
betraying the City of Strasbourg sent for to Paris, under pretense of Reward,
by the French King's Order, Banished to one of the remotest parts of France.
paid off by the French King himself) did the business; and the poor
Inhabitants resolved to defend themselves, were intimidated by the approach of
a French Army ready to Attack them in the midst of Peace. They saw themselves
without hopes of Relief from abroad, and without Advice from within by the
Treachery of their Chiefs, and consequently were forced to open their Gates.
This is the consent Count d' Avaux does so much brag of. The French King would
undoubtedly look on such Magistrates of his Towns as great Traitors, that
should act as those of Strasbourg have done, and he would do it with as much
reason, as there is but little now, to call those of Strasbourg, The best and
soundest part of the Inhabitants.

XX.
What Monsieur d' Avaux says of this City, viz. That it is it is Interest and
Advantage to remain part of the Dominions of France, is of the same piece. It Is
certain that it has found it self well under the Protection of the Empire
during several Ages, at least that it has enjoyed a full and entire Liberty in
Matters Ecclesiastical and Civil; when on the contrary, it is now subjected to
the Tyrannical Government of the French King, who alleges no other reason for
his innumerable Edicts, Declarations, and Ordonnances, but what we always read
at the end of them, Car tell est Notre Plaisir. For that is Our Pleasure.

XXI.
But for what a Conjurer would Monsieur d' Avaux pass, and what a Master would
he seem to be of the Art of Persuading, if he could make the Germans believe,
that this City is of little or no importance to the Empire, and that unless it
be resigned, there would be no quiet for it, nor any Peace assured between the
Empire and France.

To show Monsieur d' Avaux that the Empire knows perfectly well the value and
importance of that Place, and far better than he; be it known to him,, if he be
ignorant of it, that upon this City depends the Preservation or loss of three
Circles of the Empire, viz. of Suabia, Franconia, and the Upper Rhine, that is
to say, a third part of Germany, that Strasbourg being under the Protection of
the Empire, serves instead of a Wall to these three Circles; but that being in
the possession of France, it serves her by the rule of contraries as an An
Inroad, or Highway, is called in the German Language, Strass.
Inroad (as its name imports) as a Key, and as a Place of Arms, to invade, to
ravage, and to enslave these three Circles; that this Place being in French
hands cuts Germany off from Switzerland on the side of the Upper Rhine, and
renders them Masters of that great and important River, from Basle on to the
very Gates of Philipsbourg, which France offers to surrender: And there needs
no other proof of it, but a remembrance of the business of the Reunions and
Dependancies which after the taking of Strasbourg, was carried on with more
boldness and violence than ever. In short, it is the most sensible breach of the
Treaties of Westphaly that France can make, to desire the keeping of Strasbourg
by way of advance. Such a demand has no coherence with the foundations, the
Count d' Avaux himself has but just now laid of the Peace that is to be, viz.
That the Treaties of Westphaly and Nimeguen, are to remain in their full force
and vigor. One might enumerate a hundred other Advantages that Strasbourg
yields to the Empire, but we have said enough to convince every reasonable man
of the great importance of that place to the Germans.

Again, to say that Philipsbourg is a greater Inroad into the Empire, and that
consequently it is of as great, if not greater, importance than Strasbourg, is
still to take them for Irishmen; for to speak soberly, What comparison can
there be made between such an inconsiderable Place as Philipsbourg, unwholesome
by its Situation, blocked up within the Territories of the Empire, and which
cannot contain but a Garrison of 3 or 4000 men at the most; and Strasbourg,
which with the Provinces that surround it, may contain an Army of Fifty
thousand men? Besides by what has been said, Philipsbourg, as well as
Strasbourg, ought to be restored to the Empire.

XXII.
To answer also to the Objection that has been made, That as long as Strasbourg
remains part of the Empire, there can be no assured peace and quiet between it
and France; we need but turn the Tables, and say with more reason, that on the
contrary, as long as Strasbourg is in the French King's Hands, all Peace, and
all Treaties of Peace, will be in vain: For with what Patience can that great
Nation behold in the Power os France, a place that has belonged to them during
so many Ages? that has been so Treacherously stole from them, that threatens
them incessantly with a terrible Storm, ready to break out upon them on the
first opportunity, and that in fine is the Capital of that beautiful and great
Province of Alsace, in which France by the Treaty of Westphaly is only
entitled to the City of Brisac, the Landgraviat of the Lower and Upper Alsace,
in the same manner the House of Austria did possess it, the Suntgau and the
Provinoial Mayery of the Ten Cities? Nevertheless Count d' Avaux passes over
this great and delicate morsel in silence, and pretends to swallow it up
without so much as speaking of it. There are no instances, at least for several
Ages, That the Empire has Invaded its Neighbors. An Offensive War does not at
all agree with its Constitution, since to resolve upon it, more than 200 Voices
are requisite, of Princes and States that are of a different, not to say
opposite, Interests: When on the contrary all Europe smarts by the frequent
Invasions and Insults of France: All Ages furnish us with Instances of that
kind, and the present more than all the rest; And how can we expect better for
the future from that unruly and turbulent Nation.

XXIII.
As to the Count's maintaining, That the King, his Master, offers the Empire a
more than sufficient Equivalent for the City of Strasbourg; we have already
Answered, that the Surrender of whatever the French King has Possessed himself
of during this unjust War, is so far from being a Compensation for that Place,
that on the contrary he is holden to make the Empire Restitution of it with
Cost and Damages.

XXIV.
And indeed it is matter of wonder to see, That Monsieur d' Avaux, who is, and
Writ in Sweden, dares not only advance, that more than Two thirds of the
Palatinat, belong uncontrovertedly to the Duchess of Orleans; but that also he
takes upon him to offer and to dispose as an equivalent of the Palatinat, and
the Duchy of Deux-Ponts, the latter of which belongs as undoubtedly to the
King of Sweden, as he has Right of Succession to the first. This is a Point
indeed of the highest consequence, but it is left to the decision of that
Prince, who as he is most concerned therein, so he will know without doubt, how
to maintain his Interest. We shall only allege here, the Memorial presented in
the year 1685 to the Diet of Ratisbonne, by the Minister of the Prince
Palatine, in which it has been made out, that according to the Constitutions
and Customs of the House Palatine, which the Duke and Duchess of Orleans have
acknowledged by their Contract of Marriage, and by a solemn Acquittance
delivered on the Payment of her Portion, the present Duchess of Orleans has no
manner of pretensions, no more than the rest of the Princesses Palatin, either
to the Territories of that House, or to what depends from them, as long as
there are Princes Palatine and Dukes of Bavaria alive, who altogether descend
in a direct Line from Stephen Count Palatine their Common Father, and Author,
and Founder of this Constitution, which since that time has been acknowledged
by so many solemn Renunciations of all the Princesses Palatine, and more
particularly by that of the present Duchess of Orleans. We'll content our
selves also with admiring the boldness, to say no more, of Monsieur d' Avaux in
offering to restore the Duchy of Deux-Ponts in the Condition it was in when
his Master seized it; For what will become of the use and revenues of that
Duchy, he has enjoyed during his Usurpation? According to all Laws they ought
to be made good at least, to the King of Sweden.

XXV.
As to what regards the Reunions made for the time past, and the Proposals to
submit the decision of them to some Commsssaries, or to the Arbitration of the
Republic of Venice; it is of the same nature with the Succession of the King of
Spain, which we have examined already. The name alone of Reunions, Barbarous
and unknown to all other Languages, will be for ever detested by the Germans,
so far are they from disputing about, and agreeing to an Arbitration of that
kind. And would it not be a tacit acknowledgment, that France had had some
reason to make them? For we ought never to enter upon the debate but of such
Points, that are not, as this is, obvious, clear, and evident on the Empires
side. What if the Arbiter should happen to decide in Favor of France, Would
not that goodly work of Reunions go bravely on anew? And the French Writers,
would not they have a fair play to maintain, that what had once been their
King's Right, must be always so, in spite of what all future Treaties might
decide against it? Far be it therefore from the Germans to submit a certain and
undoubted Right, to the chance of a doubtful decision. Besides, the French King
pretends to remain in Possession of the Reunions till that decision be made.
Now suppose those Commissaries, or the Republic of Venice just and bold
enough, to give these Reunions to the Germans, How shall they come at them but
by the means of a New War?

XXVI.
And thus far have we followed Monsieur d' Avaux close in the Enquiry of the
Proposals he has made; and tho we have reason to believe that we have
sufficiently demonstrated the Injustice and Unreasonableness of them, yet this
will be more conspicuous yet, if we consider that there is not one of the
Allies on whom the French King by these Proposals does not endeavor to get
ground; and that he treats every one of them, as a Conqueror would do his
vanquished and prostrate Enemies; of which I am going to give an Account, but
in a few words.

France demands of England what has been taken from her in the West Indies; of
the States General, that they are to acquiesce in the renewing of the Treaties
of Peace, and a Commerce with France, on the same foot as they were before the
beginning of this War: Of Spain, the Duchy and Fortress of Luxemburgh, with an
Establishment of her Pretensions to the Succession of that Prince: Of the Duke
of Lorrain, Four important Places, with a Passage for his Troops, that are to
pay for what they have: And of the Empire, the City of Strasburgh, will all its
Forts; as also, That the Decision of the Reunions may be left to some
Commissaries, or an Arbiter.

XXVII.
The King of Sueden was so sensible of the Extravagancy of these Proposals,
that when his Ministers presented them to the Confederates, they declared in
the Name of the King their Master, That it was by no means his Majesty's
Intention to Persuade, much less to Force the Parties concerned, to acquiesce
in them: And yet Monsieur d' Avaux has the boldness (to say no more) to
maintain to the King of Sueden's face, That it is his Interest as well as for
his Honor, to press the Enemies of France to accept of the Proposals of Peace
she has made them; and that whosoever talks to him otherwise, has no true Zeal
for his Service, nor a due unconcernedness toward all the other Princes of
Europe. Good God! who could have expected such a Declaration from the French
Ambassador in Sueden, who has so great a Reputation? We need not again but turn
the Tables, and say with much more truth, That it is the King of Sueden's
Interest, as well as for his Honor, to press France to grant the Allies more
just and reasonable Terms; and that whosoever talks to him otherwise, has no
true Zeal for his Service, nor a just unconcernedness toward the French King:
I say, we might say all this; but we have too much Respect for that King, and
too much Consideration for his Ministers, to reproach them with what they do
not deserve.

XXVIII.
Nevertheless let us examine the Considerations Monsieur d'Avaux alleges in
order to support his Reasons, and to make the King of Sueden relish them: One
regards his Interest, and the other engages his Honor.

By the first he pretends, That the House of Austria being the common Enemy of
France and Sweden, as the two only Kingdoms capable of opposing its Designs of
an Universal Monarchy, (which if you will believe him, sticks close to its heart)
and of protecting the Liberties of the Princes of the Empire; that this House
makes it its study to ravish from these Crowns the Territories they are in
possession of in Germany; for which reason, says he, it is the Interest of both
Kings to maintain their Ancient Union; and that the King of Sueden is so much
the more obliged thereunto, because in case it should happen that France
notwithstanding all her Victories by Sea and Land, should lose a considerable
Battle at last, he would hardly be able to raise the dejected Party. On the
other hand, he maintains, That it is no less the Interest of the King of Sueden
to prevent the French King's falling off at Sea, and to oppose the Tyranny
which the English and Dutch endeavor to establish there.

XXIX.
To hear Monsieur d'Avaux reason at this rate, one would be apt to think he had
quite forgot the Circumstance of Time. If his late Uncle had made this Harangue
at the Treaty of Munster, it might have passed; but what Alterations have we
not seen since that time in the Affairs and Interests of State? Has it been
forgotten, that since the Peace of Munster, and especially during and after the
Negotiation at Nimeguen, France has endeavored to mortify the King of Sueden a
hundred ways, to create him Enemies, and to entangle him into Wars? That she
has disposed of the Lands of that prince, as if he had been under her
Guardianship, and of her Dependancy: That she has abused his Ministers: That
she has made a League against him, and come to that height as to send her
Squadrons against him into the Sound: That she has offered to hinder him from
making Defensive and Harmless Alliances; witness the noise she made at
Ratisbonne and in other places, against that was then made between the Emperor,
the King of Sueden, some Electors, and several Princes of the Empire, in the
very same year she made an end of her seizing the Duchy of Deux-ponts; where
she had no more regard for the King of Sueden, than she would have had for the
least State of the Empire. On the other hand, Is it not visible, that at the
present Juncture of time, the Emperor's and King of Sueden's Interests are
absolutely the same? And that it is morally impossible to separate them, since
one cannot be saved without the other. And it is for this reason, that the
Houses of Brandenburgh and Lunenburgh are in a strict Alliance with that King;
and that far from thinking of getting ground upon him in the Territories he
possesses in Germany, they are as ready, as they are obliged, to defend them
against any body whatsoever.

But how does this agree with the pretended Union of Interest which is imagined
to subsist at present between France and Sueden? Is it not ridiculous to
endeavor to move the King of Sueden to authorize and to be the Guarantee (if
one may say so) of the Superiority and the Conquests of the French King? since
the latter has declared and made War against the Empire and its Allies, without
acquainting him in the least with it; nay, rather against himself, in his
Duchy of Deux-Ponts, and by the Desolation of the Palatinate. Besides, France
demands this Guarantee, without being willing to let the King of Sueden share
in the Conquests she has made, and that are directly against his Interest: For
it is evident, that if the War with the Confederates, and the need the French
King stands in of Sueden, had not brought him a little to reason, never would
he have thought of restoring the Duchy of Deux-Ponts to its right Owner: Nay,
he would have pretended also to retain the best part of the Palatinate, to the
prejudice of the Ancient and Natural Rights of Succession of that King. Was
there ever such a Confederacy, unless that of the Lion in the Fable?

XXX.
But what did Monsieur d'Avaux dream of, when he accused the House of Austria
of aspiring to an Universal Monarchy? Does he think that all the world is
either blind or out of their wits? For if a Philip II. in the last, or a
Ferdinand II. in the present Age, have perhaps conceived such a Design, being
tempted to it by the Greatness of their Power, and encouraged by their
Victories, it has been buried with them, and none but France has inherited it;
she being in reality now, what the House of Austria was formerly. We have seen
with our eyes, that since the Pyrenean Treaty France has not only affected an
Arbitrary and Absolute Government over all the Princes and States in Europe,
but that she has actually exercised it. We appeal to 'em all, whether one can
say that he has been exempted from it. Those whom Nature has made their
Neighbors, have been all either swallowed up, or put out of a condition to
resist; and those whom a kinder Heaven has removed from her, have felt her
Insults and Threatenings. And without entering into Particulars, which would
perhaps be tedious, it is enough to make the King of Sueden remember, as we have
already said, how he has been used by France, especially when she sent a
Squadron against him into the Sound, which till then had never been heard of.
For it is worth our while to know, That France affects no less a Sovereignty
over the Seas, than she does over the Land; and it is for this Reason, and not
that Monsieur d' Avaux alleges, That England and Holland have united
themselves against Her.

And now it is left to every one's judgment, Whether it be for the King of
Sueden's Advantage, to assist the French King in the prosecuting of these
wicked ends, as he would do by procuring him such Advantageous Terms of Peace
as he demands; and by which he cannot but get more ground upon his Neighbors,
and augment considerably his Power: Or rather, Whether it be not his true
Interest to oppose it with all his might, together with all other Princes
concerned therein, and to hinder that France may not get the better by this
War, by obliging her to restore what she has so unjustly taken from her
Neighbors. For, in fine, if she has committed so many Outrages before she was
in Possession of Strasburgh, Luxemburgh, and so many other Places and
Provinces, what will it be for the future, if she comes to keep 'em by a Peace?
Two years of a good Harvest and Trade will make up all her Losses, and render
her more powerful than ever, and put her in a condition to make all other
Princes sensible of the deplorable effects of her Turbulent Humor and
Ambition. Now is the time to throw off that Yoke we have felt so heavy. If we
let it slip, never must we hope to see it again. For what appearance is there
to expect such another Juncture, or to see again so many Means and Forces which
a happy Destiny has now united, on purpose to deliver us from Slavery and
Bondage? Or now, or Never.

Neither is it to be feared the thing should be stretched too far, and the
Enemies of France grow too great, by Her becoming less; as yet Monsieur d'
Avaux endeavors to insinuate, by a Confessien that undoubtedly has cost him
very dear. Ah! how far are we yet from it, and how many things are there still
required, to put the Scales into a Balance, which now entirely incline toward
the French side? There are some Limits may be prescribed to make that Balance
even; which will be done, if things be set in the same posture they were in
immediately after the Westphaly and Pyrenean Treaties; for it is from that time
onwards, that France did extremely outweigh the Balance.

XXXI.
And now we are come to Monsieur d'Avaux's Second Consideration which he lays
before the King of Sueden, in order to engage him to his Master's Interest, on
account of his own Honor.

The King his Master, he says, has strait accepted of the King of Sueden' s
Mediation; and on the contrary, the Confederates, (if you will believe him) have
rejected it, as being unwilling to hearken to any Peace, for some particular
Ends of the Emperor, and the King of Great Britain; and from thence he
concludes, that the King of Sueden is in Honor engaged to make himself to be
looked upon as a Great Prince, such as he ought to be; that is to say,
according to Monsieur d' Avaux, he should either procure Peace to Christendom,
or side with one of the two Parties; it being the thing he advances at the
beginning of his Paper.

Now tho we may very well admit of this Proposition, That the King of Sueden
ought either to procure Peace to Christendom, or side with one of the two
Parties, yet the Question is, To what Party his Honor, Glory, Reason, Justice,
and own Interest ought to incline him; and we need but open our eyes to see
that he ought to join with the Confederates, as we have already proved by all
we have said in this Answer.

In the mean time, it is not true that the Confederates have rejected the King
of Sueden' s Mediation; they are, on the contrary, ready to embrace it,
persuaded as they are, of his Majesty's Justice, Equity, Candor, and
Generosity. It Is then the French King's fault alone, that the Mediation of
Sueden has not as yet taken any effect in a Treaty of Peace; and this Obstacle
will not be removed, as long as the French King sticks to his Proposals, which
he calls his Vltimata; and the Confederates can never accept of, since instead
of a sure and durable Peace, they would only obtain by them a delay of their
Ruin and Misery; and that if they should take place, France would soon be in a
condition to begin a New War and fiercer than ever; and that at the latest, in
case Europe should have the misfortune to see the King of Spain die without
Issue; in the mean time France under the shadow of Peace, would be busy in
endeavoring to embroil the Affairs every where, especially in England and
Holland, which as they are the two great Obstacles to her vast Designs, so are
they also the Objects of her Hatred.

XXXII.
But let us make an end by remembering the King of Sweden once more, That the
work of an honorable, sure, lasting, and general Peace, seems to be reserved
in a great measure to his Glory: That he needs no more but desire it, by
obliging France to restore all things in regard to the Empire, into the same
condition they were in by the Treaties of Westphaly; and in regard to Spain, if
not exactly according to the Pyrenean Treaty, yet the nearest to it, as
Justice, and the security and welfare of the Catholic Countries and Europe
requires; and finally, to let the other Confederates have also a just and
reasonable Satisfaction; which being done, there will be no more dispute about
the Proposals of Peace that then will offer themselves.

FINIS.
Books Sold by Richard Baldwin.
BIbliotheca Politica: Or an Enquiry into the Ancient Constitution of the
English Government; Both in respect to the just extent of Regal Power, and the
Rights and Liberties of the Subject. Wherein all the Chief Arguments, as well
against as for the Revolution, are impartially Represented, and considered, in
Thirteen Dialogues. Collected out of the Best Authors, as well Ancient as
Modern. To which is added an Alphabetical Index to the whole Work.

The Works of F. Rabelais, M D. In Five Books; or the Lives, Heroic Deeds and
Sayings of the Good Gargantua and Pantagruel, and his Voyage to the Oracle of
the Bottle As also his Historical Letters. To which is added, the Author's Life
and Explanatory Remarks. By Mr. Motteux. Never before Printed in English.

The Four Epistles of A. G. Busbequius, concerning his Embassy into Turkey.
Being Remarks upon the Religion, Customs, Riches, Strength, and Government of
that People. As also a Description of their Chief Cities, and Places of Trade
and Commerce. To which is added, His Advice how to Manage War against the Turks
Done into English.

The Bounds set to France by the Pyrenean Treaty; and the Interest of the
Confederates not to accept of the Offers of Peace made at this time by the
French King. To which are added, Some short Reflections showing, how far
England is concerned in the Restitution of that Treaty. Together with a List of
the Towns and Countries that the French have taken since that time.

Letters of State, Written by Mr. John Milton, To most of the Sovereign Princes
and Republics of Europe. From the Year 1649. Till the Year 1659. To which is
added, An Account of his Life. Together with several of his Poems; And a
Catalogue of his Works, never before Printed.

Mathematical Magic: Or the Wonders that may be performed by Mechanical
Geometry. In Two Books. Concerning Mechanical Powers, Motions. Being one of the
most easy, pleasant, useful, (and yet most neglected) part of Mathematics,
not before treated of in this Language.

Mercury: Or the Secret and Swift Messenger. Showing how a Man may with Privacy
and Speed communicate his Thoughts to a Friend at any distance.

A Compendious History of the Taxes of France, and of the Opressive Methods of
Rasing of them.

An Impartial Enquiry into the Advantages and Losses, that England has
received since the beginning of this Present War with France.

The Gentleman's Journal: Or the Monthy Miscellany. In a Letter to a Gentleman
in the Country. Consisting of News, History, Philosophy, Poetry, Music,
Translations, etc, June, 1694. Sold by R. Baldwin, Where are to be had complete
Sets for the two last years, or single ones for every Month.

A Collection of Speeches, Of the Right Honorable Henry, Late Earl of
Warrington.


