An ANSWER to some of the Linnen-Drapers Objections.
First, THey Object, The Indians will not sell us their Raw Silk and Salt
Petre, unless we will take their Wrought Silks, etc.

Answer. Why did not the Indians deny us their Raw Silk and Salt Petre sixteen
years ago? For then little or no Manufactured Goods was brought over. We will
show your Lordships an Instance of this kind: The Turkey Company brought over,
Forty or Fifty years ago, great quantities of Mohairs and Grogorams; and
although at this time we take not one Piece of them, yet they take our Cloths
and Stuffs as freely as before; and we have in Return greater quantities of Raw
Silk and Grogoram Yarn than before, which Employs our Poor, spends our Growth,
and is of great Advantage to the Nation.

Secondly, They Object, That we cannot make our Manufactured Goods so cheap as
the Indians.

Answ. Ours will be as cheap in time, (if this Restraint be not laid upon
theirs) but then the Price of Land will fall accordingly: For we humbly
conceive, Your Lordships will Grant, That there must be a Proportion betwixt
the Price of Labor and the Value of Land; for Example, If a Man works for Two
Pence a day, he must buy Beef for a Farthing per pound, and his Bread, Drink,
and Clothes proportionable, or starve; and the Farmer must have his Land
accordingly, or he cannot pay his Rent; and so it is plain, the Value of Land
and Workmens Labor will go together.

They would have us wear their slight Shadows and rotten Calicoes in England,
and send our own Manufactures abroad.

This shows plainly, they design the Ruin of our Home Manufactures; for where
can we find Markets that will take off such vast quantities as we spend at
Home? Besides, it is more proper for them to carry abroad their East India
Silks, etc. For it is the Blessing of Heaven, that we have so good Woollen
Stuffs of all sorts to wear in this cold Climate: And not only so, but we are
able to demonstrate it to Your Lordships, That if Encouragement be given, we
can furnish all Foreign Markets: The truth of this is demonstrable by what
their Council declared, That the Weavers were increased from One to Thirty in
twenty years time; now if Your Lordships be pleased to consider, that as the
Weavers increase, so do their Dependants, as Combers, Spinsters, Dyers,
Callenders, etc. and Throwsters of all sorts; and as all these increase, so
much more of the Growth of the Nation is Manufactured to send abroad, which
bringing Returns in unmanufactured Goods, when worked up, will be sent out
again, and this will bring the King double Custom.

Thirdly, They Object, We want Hands, and cannot make Goods to Answer the Use
of India Silks, etc.

Answer. We have not half Work enough for the Hands we have already: But if we
want Hands, we may set up Factories in a great many Cities and Populous Towns
in England, that would be glad of Work at a much cheaper Rate than we now give,
(which will remove the Linnen-Drapers groundless Assertion as to the Rise of
Goods, for it will certainly make them Cheaper) and then if the Company will
bring us greater quantities of Raw Bengal and Cheny Silk, and fine-spun Cotton,
all which we want in vast quantities, to mix with Wool, and for Warps for
Antherines, which answers the Use, and is better and cheaper than Persian
Silks, and is Nine parts in Ten English Wool: But if the Company will be
angry, and will bring nothing but what will ruin our Home-Manufactures, there
are others that will undertake to Trade thither, and bring nothing but what is
for the Good of the Nation. As for Calicoes, our Tammies and Tammarines, Says,
and Stuffs of all sorts, made of Wool, Figured or Printed, will do better, and
were better approved of before Calicoes were in use: However Scotch and Irish
Linen, which we have in Return for our own Manufactures, as we can prove, will
be cheaper to us than Calicoes bought with our Money.

As for Mr. Wise saying, That One Weaver told him, he would raise his Goods if
the Bill passed, it is very insignificant; for what is One to Five Hundred
Thousand? And it is also a thing impossible; besides, he is an Indian-Gown-Man,
and was a great Stickler against that Bill, and set his Hand to a Petition
against it, and therefore we cannot tell what he meant in appearing as a
Witness for the Bill.

But we entirely trust in Your Lordships Great Wisdom and Care for us, and that
you will never throw this Bill out, which is not only for the good of Landlord,
but also of the Tennant, the Artificer and Labourer, even the whole Nation,
except a few East India Men and Linnen-Drapers, which are all nothing in
comparison of the Lands of England, its Noble Growth, and its Growing and
Increasing Manufacturies.


