An answer to a printed Paper, entitled The state of the Case of Mr Henry
Howard, Son to the late Earl of Arrundell, Sir William Tirringham, Colonel
Sandys, Colonel Phillipps and others, claiming 35000 acres in the fennes
called Bedford Level.
The Petitioners spent near two hundred thousand pounds in Draining 365000.
Acres, whereof 95000. Acres was allotted to the Participants in general, being
fourteen in number, out of which 12000. Acres was given to the King for his
consent, and 35000. Acres at least belonged to the Petitioners shares. And
after it was Drained, and adjudg'd, and allotted, the King was in possession of
his 12000. Acres, and the Petitioners of their 35000. Acres, and so continued
for many years.

IT is agreed, that the late Earl of Arrundell and others, under whom the
parties in the Case do probably claim, and others became Adventurers with
Francis late Earl of Bedford, for diverse proportions of the 95000. Acres in the
allegation mentioned, but not to the number of 35000 acres, and the King was to
have 12000 acres. In anno 1636. the Level was adjudged drayned, and therein
expended by the said Participants xxs. per, acre, and not more. It is not
admitted that the said late Earl of Arrundell, and those under whom the parties
in the Case do claim, had any possession; or if they had, yet were they outed
immediately after by the Country, and thereupon the Level became totally
drowned, and the expenses in drayning, wholly lost and so continued drowned,
and in the Countries possession, until the undertaking upon the pretended Act
of May, 1649.

But by a pretended Rump Act made 29. of May 1649. the Kings 12000. Acres were
first sold, and then the Petitioners 35000. Acres, and thereby the King and the
Petitioners outed of their possessions.

The said late Earl of Arrundel and Sir Miles Sandys, were two of the most
active persons that procured the pretended Act; and Sir Miles Sandys under whom
Colonel Sandys pretends to claim a party to the sale of the Kings 10000 acres,
and of diverse other; and the said Earl paid Taxes present at sales, and acted
under the same pretend Act for about two years: and others of the pretenders
present at actings, under that pretended Act, William now Earl of Bedford,
Richard Lord Gorges, Colonel John Russele, Sir Thomas Gardner, Sir Thomas
Thynn, Sir John Marsham, Anthony Hamond, Esquires, and others sufferers for the
Kings interest, Participants with the said Earl Francis, who were more in
number of persons, and had a far greater interest in the 95000 acres, and were
out the same expenses in the first drayning, for their proportions, as the
pretenders were made use of, that authority to be restored to their right, and
perform so public a work: in prosecution whereof, every participant was
admitted that would pay taxes: and in his default others were admitted barely
for the taxes being pursueant to the agreement under the 14th part deed.

The King is now restored to his 12000. Acres, nevertheless the parties in
possession by that Rump Act, do still hold possession against the Petitioners
of their 35000. Acres at least.

The purchasors of the Kings Lands bought them subject to his title; and yet if
his Majesty has his Lands, the reason is not the same, that therefore the
pretenders must have theirs. For by the said 14th part deed for default of
payment of their taxes, others might be admitted to their shares; and the new
purchasors who came in to defaulters Lands, have been at the expenses of 3l.
the acre, to gain them from the Country and the waters; and if they should be
taken from them without satisfaction, it will be a discouragement to future
public undertakings, yet submit to such Judicature as the Parliament shall
appoint.

Now the Kings 12000. Acres and their 35000. Acres being Drained at so great a
charge to the Petitioners, and the equity to possession the same with the Kings;

They desire, that as the King is restored to his 12000. Acres, they may also
be restored to their 35000. Acres, or so much as belong to their allotments, so
unjustly taken and detained from them by color only of the said Act.

The part of this paragrave answered before.

And for the better management of the work, they further desire that the
Charter granted to them in 10 Car. I. (still in force) may be Confirmed and
Supplied with the number of fourteen persons as formerly.

The Charter is altogether insufficiant for Government of the Level, there
being no authority thereby granted, nor can be, to lay or levy taxes, with many
other defects.

Memorandum, Col. Saudys and such as claim under him has a right to 11875.
Acres part of the 35000. Acres, which were conveyed over by Sir Miles Sandys to
Trustees for Indemnifying him against the Debts-wherein he stood engaged with
Sir. Miles, amounting to above 47000 l. which Deeds were made before sale of
the Lands.

It appears by the Books of Entries, for conveyances, remaining with the
Adventurers: That Sir Miles Sandys and his Trustees conveyed under the
pretended Act about 7500 acres of his proportion of the 95000 acres: and it is
concieved that when those in possession of the residue of his Adventure, the
certain number of acres being not known, that they may produce either his and
his Trustees conveyance, or his assent to the Sales. It is denied that the
Company was indebted to Sir Miles Sandys at the time of the sale, but he was to
the Company.

Besides, when the Lands were sold for not-payment of Taxes, the Company owed
Sir Miles more money then the Tazes amounted to, yet they would not default it.




