An Answer TO THE Bishop of ROCHESTER.

AN ANSWER TO THE Bishop of Rochester's FIRST LETTER TO THE EARL of DORSET, etc.

Concerning the Late ECCLESIASTICAL COMMISSION.

By an Englishman.

Lege REX.

LONDON, Printed for W. Haight in Bloomsberry. 1689.

AN ANSWER TO THE Bishop of Rochester's First Letter to the Earl of Dorset, etc.
Right Reverend,
I Had not given my self the trouble of reading your First, had it not been for
your Second; nor the World the trouble of reading this, if the Apologist had
not set up for an Adviser; Nor do I presume to answer your Letters to the Earl
of Dorset and Middlesex, as such, but appearing in public, they become Appeals
to the People, and in that respect, as one of your fellow Subjects, my Lord, I
take the liberty of saying, Your Two Apologies need a Third.

If the acceptance of your first Letter by that Noble Lord, gave you
Encouragement to a Second; yet, certainly, you ought to have confined your self
Strictly to your own Particular, without, so early, attempting to plead for all
the Criminals of the Nation, in the debate of a general Oblivion; Or, at least,
have reserved your Florid Maxims to a place where the Bishop hopes to be
distinguished from the Commissioner. But to close your Acknowledgment, with a
design to overruled, and lead others into your Opinion, when, notwithstanding
your most meritorious Services, the best of your Argument lies in Excuse,
through Weakness, and being your self Misled, is so far from a state of
Mortification, that the Good Nature of the Englishman you would insinuate your
Case into, cannot digest your Pretense to Affliction, without first Undressing
your Apologies.

To which end I have read them, more than once, considered them Naked, neither
sent to, nor accepted by Greatness; and, desirous to convince your Lordship of
the necessity of a Third, lay before you these Remarks upon your First,
Previous only, in my way, to the latter part of your Second, and rising
Obvivious, Unprejudiced, with the Sincerity of a plain, ordinary, Man, and no
Dealer in the Art of Language: For, beside the Aversion I have to all Flights,
where the condition of any person may be at Stake, my Temper inclines me wholly
to Things, for they will not long endure to be Ill Administered, and not to
perishing Words, and the Vanity of Address.

I love Virtue in a good Garb, and delight to see it well treated by the World,
but am not ashamed of it in Rags, nor afraid of it in Poverty, being taught to
Want as to Abound. Clear, Inflexible, Honesty, and that Eternal Frame of mind,
which Tacitus mentions in the Life of Agricola, and you lessen into the
innocent Character of Honest Hardiness, meaning perhaps, Fool Hardiness, are of
greater Esteem with me, though a Foot, and in Dirt, than all the Pageantry of
Circumstance the Son of Adam can loose himself in, Or the most exalted Figure
in Humanity, upon the dishonorable terms of a Mean Shift, and the Ignoble
Surrender of his Better Understanding to the Extravagant Desires, Or the Vain
Imaginations of any Prince whatsoever.

First Paragraph of the Letter.
I think I should be wanting to my self at this time in my own necessary
Vindication, should I forbear any longer to give my Friends a true Account of
my Behavior in the late Ecclesiastical Commission. Though, I profess, what I
shall now say, I only intend as a reasonable mitigation of the Offense I have
given, not entirely to justify my sitting in that Court, for which I
acknowledge I have deservedly incurred the Censure of many good Men. And I wish
I may ever be able to make a sufficient amends to my Country for it.

Answer. No part of your Case, my Lord, will bear a Vindication; for how
Plausible, soever, your Behavior may have been in that Commission, the very
Act of Compliance to serve under it, sunk you below the dignity of such an
Expression: Instead of a Mitigation, it agravates the Offense, to say, you
cannot entirely juistifie your sitting in that Court; when, sensible of the
Action, and clothed with the Spirit of Humility, you ought fairly to declare,
you cannot in the least justify sitting there; and so deservedly incur the
Censure, not only of many Good, if such there be, but of all Honest Men. You
have been bred to Learning, your Education, my Lord, is Evidence against you;
you are a Bishop, a Shepherd, in a Trust of mighty Supervision, Vigilance and
Courage are the Essentials of your Station. The Example is more dangerous in
your Ability, than your Quality, capable of doing much good, or Hurt, as you
are well, or ill inclined. Your Friend Cowley says, there are great Men, the
labor of the Mother, the Works of Nature; and great Men, their own Labor, the
effect of Art, and ought to be of Honesty; there are, therefore, Lords
pardonable, and there may be Lords unpardonable. If Ignorance of the Law be no
direct excuse to any, that very Ignorance doubles the Crime in some; so that if
the Lord, by the Chance-Stroke of Nature, happen to be guilty in conjunction
with the Lord by the False-Stroke of Art, the judgment of the One, may be
presumed to mislead the good manners of the Other, and the Professor to answer
for the Courtier. I concur in your Wish, that you may ever be able to make
sufficient Amends to your Country for it, the first step to which is a
sufficient acknowledgement to your Country of it; Yet; I trust in the mercy of
God who wrought our deliverance, in the Justice of the King, the great
Instrument of it, and Wisdom of the most happy Parliament that ever sat in
this Kingdom, who have Crowned it, and are so assiduous to secure it, that we
shall not be, at the Expense of so many Millions to rescue our selves, in the
hands of Obnoxious Men again, but that satisfaction shall be taken of some,
(the Dying not too nimble for us, nor the Living too bold for us) others
obliged to undergo their Quarantine, and Provision made, that all of them may
be disabled from ever doing their Country more such Audacicious Mischiefs.

The second Paragraph of the Letter.
Yet thus much, my Lord, I can justly allege for my self, that the Commission
was made, and my Name put into it, altogether without my knowledge, when I
happened to be at Salisbury, holding an Archiepiscopal Visitation with the
Bishop of Chichester, where, by God's blessing, we composed several old
Differences, and Animosities, and restored Peace, and Unity to that Church.

Answ. I am willing to think some part of your time was spent in your Duty, and
am heartily sorry, that any part of your time was spent so far out of it, as
that abominable Commission carried you. I believe also, not forgetting that
Smart Escape of your Pen, the Otesian Villainy, that the Bishop of Rochester was
not in the Contrivance of the Commission; nor that your Lordship solicited
your Name into it: But they who had engaged your Parts so often, and so deeply
before, knew themselves beyond the Ceremony, of persuading you into their
Service again. It looks like an Assurance of their Man, proof of Resignation,
no Extenuation of the matter. At first, no doubt there was some labor with you
behind the Curtain, for Men cannot easily depart from themselves, into
Obsequious Bondage, Facing their Country in barbarous Adventures. There will be
some struggle of Honor, if not of Conscience; And Divines were treated after
the manner of Lawyers; We all know, that when a Judge, between fear and shame,
started at a farther degree of their Commands, so that there was occasion for
another, the Course taken by the Workers of Iniquity, was to dive into the
Opinion of the Counselor, and having found or made him wicked, as themselves,
out they brought him, in Caparison, and up they set him, to give the Arbitrary
Blow in the Formality of a Judge; Adored by the Profane Crowd, despised by the
Brave, a Scandal to his Profession, a Traitor to his Country, the Murderer of
Men, and a Destroyer of Families.

The third Paragraph of the Letter.
At my return from thence to London, I found I was appointed One in a New
Commission: But never could see a Copy of it, nor did I ever hear the Contents
of it, or know the Powers granted in it, till the Time of its being publicly
opened at Whitehall; whither I was sent for, on purpose, in haste, that very
Morning from my House in the Country, being just come home from a
Confirmation, and from paying my Duty to her Royal Highness the Princess of
Denmark, at Tunbridge.

Answ. A Bishop of this Kingdom, no less Man, coming to London, found himself
appointed one in a New Commission! No matter what, but a New Commission, and my
Lord was appointed to be One! down he goes into the Country, without hearing
the Contents of it, or the Powers granted in it; but a new Commission, and my
Lord was one! satisfied with himself, a Favorite to the Best of Kings, James
the Just! Visits the believing World, makes his Court to Princes, takes a turn
or two, upon the Walks of Tunbridge, that Parade of Gravity, and Thinking, and
so home to his Country House, satisfied with himself, for my Lord was one. By
that time the Commission is ripe, my Lord is sent for, Express, on purpose, in
haste, that very morning from his Countrey-House, and for ought appears to the
contrary, drove three quarters speed to the very Gates of Whitehall, lest he
should come half a minute too late. For what? Truly, the no less Person than a
Bishop came, Post-haste, to the no less wickedness, than a Declaration of War,
to root the Protestant Religion out of these Kingdoms, and by consequence out
of the World. Was there ever such an Apology as this! That a Bishop should find
himself appointed One in a New Commission, One, that he could never see a
draught of, nor so much as be told the Contents of, or the least Item of the
Powers granted in it, till it was publicly opened at Whitehall to be executed,
and he sent for, in haste, that very Morning (for the Conspiracy was in Travel,
and could not be delivered till my Lord came) from his Country House, to such a
monstrous Birth; methinks, a Bishop of common Understanding should have been
concerned at the name of a New Commission, have pursued an Inquiry into the
utmost drift of it, at least, have in some measure examined the Contents before
he had gone into the Country, that so he might consider how to behave himself
in the Commission, for the Kings Honor, if fit to be assisted, or to avoid it,
if unlawful, and not come in that hasty manner to such an extraordinary design,
as a New Commission must carry in the Belly of it; at a time, when every
Protestant was supposed, from the whole Conduct at Whitehall, to be upon his
Guard. The poor Curate of Mark-Lane, the Curate of Timothy had more Honor, he
sacrificed all, his utmost twenty pounds a year, stripped himself, it may be, to
the Skin, rather than betray his Profession, so far, as to read twenty lines of
a Declaration at the Command of a Prince, who but a little before had threatened
us to raise the Glory of the Kingdom higher than in the time of any of his
Ancestors, by the same Measures that his Brother Charles the Merciful, after
the Dissolution at Oxford, promised to Govern us by Law.

The fourth Paragraph of the Letter.
Upon the first publishing the Commission, I confess, through my Ignorance in
the Law, I had little or no Objection in my Thoughts against the Legality of
it; especially, when I considered that having past the Broad Seal, it must
needs, according to my Apprehension, have been examined, and approved in the
King's Learned Council in the Law, Men generally esteemed of Eminent Skill in
their Profession. Beside, I was farther confirmed (tho too rashly, I grant) in
my Error, when I saw two Gentlemen of the Long Robe, Persons of the greatest
Place and Authority in Westminster Hall joined with us; who I should have
thought would never have ventured their Fortunes and Reputations by Exercising
a Jurisdiction that was Illegal.

Answ. Here, Right Reverend, if the Robe worn by your Lordship did not confine
to Solemnity, there is Room for more Wit than I have to dispose of: For, beyond
all contradiction, there was never a greater Satyr upon that King's Council in
the Law, than to call them, Men generally esteemed of Eminent Skill in their
Profession; or more Jest upon Persons of the greatest Place, and Authority in
Westminster Hall, at that time, than to term them Men of Fortune and
Reputation; you impose upon the World, my Lord, in the Minute you desire
excuse, and think to write your self into Ignorance, by endeavoring to write
others out of it. Satyr, and Apology are repugnant. You are not so Ignorant,
but to know the Inquiry was not after Skill, but Readiness; the Question was
not, what is Law? but, will you serve the King in his own way? There was
possibly a skilful Wretch among them, whose Ambition might suppress his
Honesty; but in general, the Men were not so Eminent. And for Reputation and
Fortune, they (despicable Ingredients,) were as strange to the Persons of the
greatest Authority and Place in Westminster Hall, as the Bishop of Rochester
must be unknown to all England, if he can persuade us into the Opinion of his
Ignorance, as to the Legality of an Ecclesiastical Commission, by the Rule of
Persuading us out of our Senses, into the skill of the One, or the Reputation,
and Fortune of the other.

The fifth Paragraph of the Letter.
And I believed I had reason to conclude that this very Argument might prevail
also with some others of the Temporal Lords, that sat among us, Particularly
the Earl of Rochester, has often assured me, 'twas that which induced him to
accept of the Commission, and that he did it, as I my self did, with a purpose
of doing as much good, as we were able, and of hindering as much Evil, as we
possibly could in that unfortunate Juncture of Affairs.

Answ. I will not take upon me to argue for, or against the Earl of Rochester,
but sure I am, that he who ventures his Temporal condition to save his
Spiritual, is of much more Value, than he who ventures his Spiritual to save
his Temporal. If the Earl of Rochester hazarded, and lost the first place of
England, the Treasury, for the sake of the Protestant Religion, when the
Formality of a Conference might appear some kind of Contest with a King, a
Brother-in-Law, and so great an Employment, that one Action shall be imputed to
him for Righteousness in this World, and ought to stand in Balance against any
great oversight, because from the many Cases of History, informing that Lord,
how dangerous it is for a Favorite, in a set Competition, to be Wiser than his
Prince, much more, how Fatal to condemn his Religion, he could not but see his
Fall in the Perseverance, and are therefore Irrefragable Arguments, that
neither Ambition, Relation, nor Temporal Interest governed him.

But if the Bishop of Rochester put the Protestant Religion in danger, for an
Hour, in servile Obedience to the Arbitrary Will of his Prince, the Presumption
is Violent that he followed Humane Interest in the Compliance; especially if
the Bishop had never been seen in any one important Self Denial, for the sake
of his Religion, that might stamp the Character upon him, of one that would not
Act against his Conscience. Wherefore I think, the Spiritual Rochester can by
no means assign Ignorance for Plea, with the same Application the Temporal
Rochester may, if but for want of the Like Credentials, nor pretend to shelter
himself under the same Paragraph of Umbrage, because he never parted with the
least Advantage, that ever came into Public Discourse, for the sake of his
Religion.

The Good you urge to have done, was Evil in you all, because unjust in the
Foundation; the Evil you did, was much more Evil in you, my Lord, because of
the Good you might properly have wrought out of that very Evil: Not by
accepting the Commission with purpose of doing what Good you could, and
hindering as much Evil in the Subservient way of your latter Paragraphs, but
opposing the Commission it self, a first, a second, a third time, and so left
them; been earnest and forward in your protestation, preparing your self to
declaim strenuously against it, Asserting your Religion, like a Bishop, in a
Just foresight of Evil to come, and taking the freedom of St. Paul to plead for
God against the Idolatrous design, maintaining the Liberty you are required to
stand fast in. This was your Duty, my Lord, and the Good ought to have been
wrought by a Bishop out of the Evil of the Commission, thanking God for the
Opportunity he had given you to appear in defense of the Christian Faith; to
manifest your contempt of Ease, Pleasure, Life it self, accounting all things
but Dung, and Dross, compared with the Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ
your Master. And if your Heart, through Natural Infirmity, or Temporary
Delights, had failed you, Retired to your Closet, down upon your Knees, have
humbled your self before him, adoring his Divine Bounty in Grace of
Inclination, and besought him to remove from before your Eyes the Prospect of
any Felicity, that stood between you and your Resolution, in his Service; have
turned to the Life and Death of some Primitive Christian Bishop, whose Example
might support your Spirits; Or it may be, my Lord, not to despise poor Fox,
your Book of Martyrs, if that Manual of Popish Clemency durst be seen in your
Study, might have shown you, about a dozen or two, of your Countrymen of the
meaner sort, upon a Page, Cobblers, Weavers, and such like Weaklings, in a Chain
tied to a stake, kissing the Post, rejoicing in the Flame, and blessing the Day
that God had vouchsafed to single them out to bear Testimony against the
Persecution of Princes. This, my Lord, was the least of your Duty, and I
believe had been performed, if the Temporalties of the Episcopacy, to say
nothing severe, had not gained time upon the Spiritualty of the Bishop.

The sixth Paragraph of the Letter.
As for my own part, I was startled when I perceived my Lord of Canterbury
scrupled to be present with us; whose Example, it is true, I ought rather to
have followed, than the greatest Lawyers, in all matters of Conscience. Yet I
hope, his Grace will excuse me, if I declare, that I did not at first know, He
made a matter of Conscience of it; Nor did I understand his Grace took
Exception at the Lawfulness of the Commission it self, till after my Lord of
London was Cited, and had Appeared and Answered, and the unjust Sentence had
past upon Him.

Answ. The Scruples of that Archbishop have been my great Satisfaction, and
are now as much my Trouble. I am not worthy, but as hearty to Remove the
Latter, as I was ever ready to Justify his Former; with reference to that
Commission his Grace behaved himself like the Metropolitan of all England to
refuse Attendance, and you had appeared a worthy Suffragan, if the Countenance
of his Disdain had raised you up to a Defiance; You ought, my Lord, to have
argued against, what he thought below him to take notice of. Vindicating, at
once, a Temper in him, Suitable to the Apostolic See, and in your self, to the
Sincerity of a Protestant Bishop; that is, an humble greatness of Mind
explained in Him by the modesty of Not Appearing, and Christian Fortitude in
You by the Vigor of Opposing.

If after my Lord of London had been cited and appeared, you had consulted his
Grace how to carry your self at the next meeting, and followed his Advice, such
a Retrieve might have been an Apology for the Surprise in your First sitting
there; but to let the Citation, Appearance, Answer, Sentence, and All be over,
All past, my Lord, before you could move from Westminster to Lambeth, let a
Bishop be affronted in an Unjust Sentence, before you would vouchsafe cross the
Thames to understand why my Lord of Canterbury' your Metropolitan, disowned the
Commission, puts your Case beyond Scruple and Startle, into Wilfulness
Prepense, and me, almost, beyond reasoning into Astonishment; Demonstration it
self, that you took care not to approach his Grace's Exceptions to the Legality
of the Commission, lest they should prove too clear for your Unlawful Obedience
to the pleasure of the King, or rather, lest he should tell your Lordship, you
understood the Illegality of it beyond any Excuse of Ignorance, if you made
your Conscience a Slave to his Power. No, my Lord, Ignorance was to be reserved
against a wet day, and might serve well enough to Charm a Good natured,
Unthinking, Lethargick People, Easy to be pacified, a little whining will melt
them down, if ever they are redeemed into a capacity of demanding Justice, but,
at present, Unshaken Loyalty, is the word, and I must On. Thus, it seems to me,
your Lordship debated with your self, and came to a Resolution of Owning the
Court to the degree of a Sentence, ratifying your Devotion to the King, and
giving the Conspirators assurance thereby, that allowing you the favor of a
State Vote in particulars, (which they had no occasion for) in general no
Project of theirs was too open for your Compliance, and, with the help of your
many precedent Instances of Submission, putting Us out of doubt that you saw
Heaven at the remote end of the Glass; could not endure the Frowns of your
Prince, though all the Laws of the Land warranted you against them, because you
saw those Laws languishing under the weight of Dispensation, nor hazard your
Preferment for the sake of the best Church in the World, because you thought
her expiring.

The seventh Paragraph of the Letter.
For it was on the very day the Commission was opened, immediately, as I
remember, after it was read, that my Lord of London was informed against for
not suspending Doctor Sharp, which, though it exceedingly surpised me at first,
yet observing with what heat the Prosecution was like to be carried on against
him, that very Consideration did the more incline me to Sit and Act there, that
I might be in some Capacity of doing Right to his Lordship. And whether I did
him any Service through the whole Process of his Cause, I leave it to my Lord
to judge. That I gave my Positive Vote for his Acquittal, both the Times when
his Suspension came in question, I suppose I need not tell the world.

Answer. The Persecution of the Bishop of London could be no Surprise, that
Diocesan having been found in a watchfulness too exact for the bearing of a
Papist. He knew God was no Respecter of Persons, and had told the Duke of York
so, by inviting him to the Sacrament in our Church, thereby confirming Our
Discovery of a Religion that kept him, not only, from all Communion with Us,
after the first Discovery, but from all Charity toward Us for it; a Religion,
which has wrought all the Evils these three Kingdoms have endured from the
Reformation to this hour, and may quickly double upon us, in a return of Blood
and Confusion, if Surprises and Scruples shall pass for National Apologies.
That Discovery, my Lord, raised a subject matter for Displeasure in his Breast,
who wanted nothing but the Title of King then, and when God permitted him, as a
Judgment for our Sins, to take possession of the Crown afterward, would have
been much more than so. And there it lodged till the Plot had occasion to make
use of it; then Out it came under another Notion, but might, indeed, surprise
any Man, that so mean a Cause, as the not suspending Doctor Sharp, should bring
to light that secret of Indignation (Visible in Forgiving the One, and
Persecuting the Other) So that, my Lord, if you were exceedingly surprised,
that Very Exceeding ought to have Spirited your Lordship to some Honest, Able
Adviser; And if you did observe with what Heat the Persecution was like to be
carried on against him, that very consideration ought to have engaged you not
to sit, nor act there; And that you might be in the better capacity of doing my
Lord of London right, you ought to have joined in Averring his Plea, protesting
against the Jurisdiction; And you could do him no other service through the
whole Process of his Cause, for there was no process of Cause beyond that Plea.

Your Vote of Acquittal was insignificant, if not prejudicial. They had set
Protestant against Protestant before, the care was now to divide the Church
against it self. An Ecclesiastical Commission could have no color without some
Ecclesiastical Persons. It was Art enough to bring a Bishop to judge a Bishop,
they could not expect to find him Theirs in the immediate Sentence. And yet, if
upon an easy Judgment made of things, Precipitation was then apparently their
Ruin, all that restrained them were so far wiser for them, than they were for
themselves, and so much the more Our Enemies. If the Judges had unanimously
driven every Person and Matter into Condemnation, the proceeding had been too
Gross, and Unpallatable; but sure of a Plurality upon a stress, by the mixture
of the Men, with Bishops and Lawyers, to support the Foundation of the design,
Liberty of Assent or Dissent, seemed a kind of Pro and Con, which kept in sight
a Form of Justice, enough to amuse us, tho no Realities at bottom to preserve
us.

Thus far, my Lord, I have kept Company with your Letter, Paragraph by
Paragraph, and, if I do not mistake, think fully signified my Affliction for
your Lordship, that you should expose to the World your No Vindication, in so
imaginary a Confession, and have brought your Apology to Judgment, where you
hurried the Bishop of London into that unjust Sentence, resolving your Venial
Ignorance into Mortal Presumption, I say, you, my Lord, upon this distinction,
that when a Court is Legal, every Man shall account for his own Opinion,
whether of unqualifying Ignorance, or Wickedness; so that if an Arbitrary
desire, or notorious Weakness in the Major Number of the Judges overruled the
Less, yet that less shall stand, when the Majority shall fall; Nor, with
allowance against Infallibility, shall a Judge, if in his turn of Place,
finding the Plurality, by their Opinions delivered, to be against his, be
thought to maintain the Doctrine of the Bow-string, if wanting some Heights of
daring Honesty, he shall rather be silent; And though, for a Judge to say, I
doubt, without Reasons, is no better in strictness than sitting Mute, where the
Natural Life of Man, or the Political Life of a Nation, is at stake; yet it
will be Cruelty to think, the Doubter does not appear an unsatisfied Judge; And
in the Morning of a Persecution, it may be thought some Test of his Aversion to
Evil; though not of firm Integrity, and Purity from Crime, if he adjourn himself
to a short season of Retreat, or be admitted (considering the Vast Catalogue of
Men) to tempt his Quietus by a handsome Carriage in a second Cause; For the
Foundation of the Court being Just, there is Room for Apology, that he
continues among them to do what Good, and prevent what Evil he can. But if a
Court be Illegal, not well Constituted, and Erected, every Arbitrary Proceeding
shall stand in charge against all the Judges, without regard had to any
Affirmative, or Negative in a particular, because the Illegality being in the
Frame, the very Act of joining with it, incorporates a Man to the Guilt of it,
and renders a Bishop as Censurable, in being Ecclesiastical, as it can do a
Lawyer, because a Commission; and, as I think, with deference to the Wiser of
Mankind, it ought not, in any high degree, to do a Layman, whose Obedience
may, without stram of thought be easily supposed to depend upon the judgment of
the Professors.

All that looks like Repetition is too much. Upon the whole matter, therefore,
of your First Letter, my Lord, what remains of it, is, with me, but what I call
in the beginning of mine, An Ignoble Surrender of your Better Understanding to
the Extravagant Desires, and the Vain Imaginations of your Prince. And though
every Paragraph following, nay, every Line in every Paragraph, is liable to
Refutation upon the Head, Mean Shift; yet my Intention being against you, as an
Adviser in the Second, not directly against you as a Commissioner in this, I
will carry it on no farther, desirous not to improve a Charge so heavy in it
self; But conclude thus, The Commission was a Dragoon Commission, no Moot Case
among the principal Lawyers, but a condemned, abrogated, and exploded Case
among the Meanest; And that your Lordship not protesting against the Court,
when the Bishop of London's Plea brought the Jurisdiction, regularly into
Examination, without any Voluntary of your Own, though the last was your Duty,
and ought to have been your Strict Inquiry; Yet that Notice divested you of all
manner of Pretense to Ignorance, and a full stop should have been made; So
that, all those reiterated Acts of Subserviency you claim under, are but so
many deplorable Instances of a wretched Compliance; And, how contrary soever to
the Humor of the COURT your Votes were in particular; Yet, for as much as
every Sentence was Irregular, every Decree Extravagant, All Prosecutions
Unjust, for they had no cogniuisance of any Cause; And that my Lord of London,
by refusing to buy off the Suspension at so dear a Rate, as the Prostitution of
his Conscience to an Inglorious Submission, might fully convince you, how
steadfast a Bishop ought to be in a Good Cause. Your breaking lose from the
Commission, at a time when the Nobility and Gentry of the Kingdom were so
disgraced, they could do no less by all the Rules of Honor, and Honesty, than
Unite into a general dissatisfaction, that their Gallantry might cover the rest
from the impending Storm, and that all the Clergy of the Land had, as it were
one Man, denied Obedience to the Arbitrary Commands of the King, in not reading
a Declaration: And the whole Body was ready to take Wing in Defense of the
Protestant Religion, and Interest, upon the first Opportunity, in a stand of
Men, to favor their Conjunction: Your Retreat then, my Lord, and what you call
joining your self to the Honest Clergy again, was, in truth, but a stealing
your self away from the rest of your Brethren, the Commissioners, in the Hour
of Danger, and so far from an Apology, That, if others are no Wiser than I, you
deserve a Reward.

Right Reverend, London, April the 23d. 1689. Your Lordships Humble Servant.

FINIS.

