AN ANSWER To Several REMARKS UPON Dr Henry More HIS EXPOSITIONS OF THE
APOCALYPSE and DANIEL, As also upon his APOLOGY.

Written by S. E. MENNONITE, And Published in English by The ANSWERER.

Whereunto are annexed two small Pieces, ARITHMETICA APOCALYPTICA, AND
APPENDICVLA APOCALYPTICA.

Of all which an Account is given in the PREFACE.

LONDON, Printed by Miles Flesher, for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in
St. Paul's Churchyard. 1684.

THE PREFACE.
Reader,
THOU may justly expect from me some account of my publishing these Remarks
of S. E. and of my Answers thereto, which I will give, as clearly and briefly
as I may. The Remarks seem writ by one, not only very serious, but highly
confident in his way, and as Magisterial as if he were no vulgar Interpreter of
Prophecies of Scripture, nor ordinary Remarker upon the Interpretations of
others, but some infallible Judge or decisive Oracle in the case. And therefore
that which is so highly prized of himself, it seemed hopeful that it was of
such a nature, if rightly answered, that it might give some diversion at least,
if not satisfaction to others. Who the Remarker is, I cannot satisfy thy
curiosity to tell thee. But I have adventured to call him Mennonite for that
odd wild conceit of his, that all Magistracy and Monarchy consequentially, will
go down in the Millennial Reign of Christ. Which is the opinion of Daniel
Brenius a Mennonite, but otherwise not an unlearned Person, and the point is
disputed betwixt him and his Master Episcopius. What Dutch or German, or other
foreign Name those Initial letters S. E. will answer to, I cannot easily
conjecture. But if it were left to me fit a name to them, from what language I
please, I would do it from the Greek, and it should be Streblosinous
Ereunetes, those two words comprizing both the good and bad of his Genius and
Performance, viz. his pains in enquiring into the sense of the
Scripture-Prophecies, which is a laudable enterprise, and his studied
perversion and distortion of the sense of them to make them comply with the
unaccountable dreams, as I deem it, of his own fancyfull Melancholy, which is a
thing no-wise approvable. However, he seeming to me one more than ordinary
addicted to, and exercised in this study of interpreting Prophecies, and
particularly those of Daniel and the Apocalypse, I thought it not amiss to
publish all his Remarks upon Dr. H. More his Expositions of them, together with
my Answers thereto, for these Reasons following.

First, For that the Remarker having used all the diligence he could, and as I
perceive, being eagerly set to find flaws in the Expositor's Interpretations of
the Visions of those two Prophets, and attempting to substitute others in their
room; I have plainly discovered, that in effect he has found none, nor could
substitute any thing that would so properly agree with the Text as that which
the Expositor has made choice of before. Which therefore is a demonstration of
the firmness and certainty of Intelligibleness in the Divine Visions, and that
they are in no-wise compliable with every fancy of either a rash or designing
Interpreter, nor may be made a nose of wax, as some fondly imagine.

Secondly, In answering these Remarks, there are so many occasions of taking
notice of the true and genuine Rules of interpreting Prophecies, the Visions
especially of Daniel and the Apocalypse, and of the Remarker's transgression of
them, that the reading of these Remarks, with the Answers thereto, cannot but
add to the skill and judgment of any one that has a Genius this way.

Thirdly, In the Answers to these Remarks, there is not only a farther
illustration and confirmation of the Expositor's interpretations of these
Prophecies, but light also given to several other Prophecies or passages of
them. Upon which account they must needs seem considerable to such as have a
mind to these kind of studies, than which there are none more noble or more
becoming either a Philosopher or a Christian, provided they pursue them out of
their love to God and humble adoration of his Providence over the Sons of men,
and out of no sinister design of serving a Party.

Fourthly, I thought it very requisite to publish these Remarks, together with
my Answers, because I could not be assured but that sometime or other they
might come out without any Answer to them, which might be a prejudice to the
Truth. For they seeming to be written with great confidence, and pretending
much to Scripture-Autority, and being varnished over with Scripture-phrases,
and no body by to show their errors and defects, they may strike great
reverence into the heedless Populacy, and make the Remarker go for some notable
Hypopheta or Interpreter of the Prophets (whenas there is not one true stroke
in all his pretended Interpretations that clash with the Expositor's; though it
is not so much to be imputed to want of diligence and ability in the Remarker
as to the invincibleness of Truth) and so the ordinary people would be drawn
into wretched mistakes; And the profane Wits not thinking it worth the while to
give themselves the trouble of discovering the errors of this new Interpreter,
would be the more strongly confirmed in their own, and have new cause to insult
over all pretenses of understanding Prophecies.

Fifthly, And I thought it the more requisite to publish these Remarks, and to
answer them, because some extravagant Notions are applied to the Prophetical
Visions by the Remarker (whether they be to be deemed Romanistical or
Anabaptistical, I know not, but) such as I thought did not so well comport with
either a Christian spirit or the peace of Christendom, and therefore I thought
it my bounden duty to beat them out of this harbor, and not to suffer these
holy Oracles that were communicated to the Church for her more safe and
peaceful Guidance to be made Instruments of her Disquiet and Confusion.

And lastly, I had a more special eye to those two great and useful Truths
exhibited to us in the Visions of the Apocalypse. The first, That the late
Reformation begun by Luther, and propagated and perfected in other Kingdoms and
Countries, and more especially here in England was the Rising of the Witnesses.
The Second, That the Primitive Times till about four hundred years after Christ
were Symmetral. The evidence of which two Truths, the Remarker endeavors tooth
and nail to smother and suppress by most wretchedly distorting and slubbering
over the sense of the tenth Chapter of the Apocalypse and of the two succeeding
Synchronal Visions, the one comprised in the eleventh Chapter, the other in the
twelfth, thirteenth and fourteenth; and also by peremptorily denying but
groundlesly, That the Vision of the seven Churches reaches any farther than to
the beginning of the Millennium. All which is done in favor of his beloved
Mennonism, that Christ may not be held to begin his reign where there is any
visible Monarch or Civil Magistrate that rules. Which opinion, though it may
seem the more tolerable and harmless, by how much the distance is the greater
from the present Age to the Millennium, yet it being apt to beget a prejudice
against Monarchy and civil Magistracy, and to impress a false Idea of the reign
of Christ in the minds of the Vulgar, as if his reign was inconsistent with
Monarchy and civil Magistracy; And for as much as it is joined with the
denying, That the late Reformation is the Rising of the Witnesses (which truth
utterly routs that fond opinion against civil Magistracy) and also with a
belief that their 1260 days prophesying in sackcloth is but about expiring, or
but just expired, upon which the Witnesses are to lie three days and an half
slain, etc. which naturally tends to the impregnating men's minds with a fond
expectation of a sudden completion of the Prophecy of their Rising (which yet
God be thanked is accomplished already) and so to cause endeavors of
Innovations and Tumults of Seditions and Rebellions (as amongst the Jews by
pretense of false Christ's after the true one was come so) amongst Christians
upon a false expectation of the sudden Rising of the Witnesses, when in truth
they are risen already: These things are of so great import, as also the
acknowledgment of the Symmetricalness of the Primitive Ages, for the present
peace of the Reformed Churches, and the reconciling the Sectaries to the
public worship, that I thought them alone a sufficient Motive to publish these
Remarks and Answers for the stearing men off from such wild and disorderly
conceits which so easily find harbor in Melancholic and Enthusiastic
spirits, and which other crafty and disaffected Politicians are over prone,
cunningly and designingly to serve their turns of. See the Expositor's Pref. to
his Apocalypsis Apocalypseos, 12.

This usefulness made me with great alacrity publish these Remarks, they giving
me so fit an occasion to instruct, and I hope to convince men of the error of
this false spirit that has gone out into the World, and has, I fear, deluded
too many. And therefore the Remarker, whether he has writhen and forced his Wit
and Invention to personate an eager Impugner of the Expositor's Interpretations
of the Prophecies of John and Daniel, or has indeed seriously attacked them, he
has however done good service to the Church of God by drawing out Answers more
fully to explain and confirm those important Truths so certainly exhibited in
the Prophecies. And if the Answerer seem at any time to be something quick and
smart upon the Remarker, or rather upon that Spirit he is actuated withal (for
he has no enmity against any man's person whatsoever) I hope it will not seem
more to an indifferent judge than the perverseness of the matter or manner of
uttering it by the Remarker naturally called for. And not to show a man's
dislike of such things with some commotion of mind would but feed the humor of
a conceited Enthusiast, and make him fancy he has got the Ascendent of his
tame Adversary, and not impute his being gently handled to his Christian
meekness and kindness of temper but to the power and dominion of his own tumid
and delusive spirit, that commissions him to ride triumphantly over the necks
of all such as are not ready to submit to the mistaken Dictates of his false
light.

And if this quickness and freeness of the Answerer should draw from the
Remarker a bitter reviling Reply, which is neither a desirable nor probable
Event if the Remarker have that ingenuity as to rejoice and acquiesce in the
Truth with whomsoever it is found, yet it will not want its proper use. For
then it will be still more manifest, that whereas the Remarker (though not
taken up into an exceeding high Mountain, as Christ was by Satan, and shown all
the Kingdoms of this World and glory of them yet) fansying himself highly
caught up in the Spirit has uttered such sublime matter in this exaltation
touching the glorious State and Economy of the new Jerusalem, and things in
tendency thereto as transcend the conceit and allowance of any sober and
considerate man; it will be hence I say still more manifest, that it is not
from the height of any Divine Rapture that he has discovered such mavelous
Mysteries, but that all this elevation of Spirit is nothing but the heaving of
the Hypochondria, and the vain delusion of the touring fumes of an overheated
Melancholy; And that the sound understanding of Daniel and the Apocalypse does
not belong to Fanatical Enthusiasts, but to men of a more rational Genius,
serene mind and sober judgment.

Thus, Reader, thou have as full an account as I can give of the publishing
these Remarks and Answers, together with the manner thereof. How sufficient it
is, thou will best perceive upon the perusal of them. Which thou will do, I
hope, with no small satisfaction, if orderly, as they are placed, Chapter and
Verse, thou read the places in the Expositor's Expositions of Daniel and the
Apocalypse before thou read the Remark and Answer. And if thou have not
those Expositions by thee, provided thou read but the Verse in the Bible which
the Remark and Answer relate to, thou will seldom be at a loss for the
understanding either of them. But as for the Remarks upon the Apology, if thou
be at a loss, thou must have recourse to the Pages thereof, which are
constantly set down at the beginning of the Remark.

As for those two little additional Pieces, Arithmetica Apocalyptica, and
Appendicula Apocalyptica, I need say little of them. The occasion of writing
them is set down in each, and the scope and end of them is much what the same,
with that of my Answer to the Remarks, viz. to undeceive the World and free men
from such false Notions of some passages in the Apocalypse as tend to
unquietness of mind, and unsetling the Church and State. For my Answer to the
Remarks upon the Apology (which I would have the Reader thoroughly to consider)
so plainly demonstrating that the partial fall of Babylon and Rising of the
Witnesses is the Issue of the 42 months war of the Beast with the Saints (
Apoc. 13. v. 5, 7.) and with the Witnesses (chap. 11. v. 7, 11.) which Issue is
coincident with the close of the sixth Trumpet, chap. 11. v. 14. And that all
the Vials follow the sixth Trumpet, and the three Doxologies or Triumphs, And
that the Reformation is the fulfilling of this partial fall of Babylon and
Rising of the Witnesses; the Issue, I say, of the 42 months war being thus
accomplished, it naturally follows that the compute of the 42 months, (whatever
that Number signifies) expires therewith, or is no farther to be reckoned upon.
For the Time of a Vision can reach no farther than the Vision it self. But
because he that gave me the occasion of writing Arithmetica Apocalyptica, seems
not aware of this Reason, but does notwithstanding his acknowledgment of the
Reformation being the Rising of the Witnesses, produce the Time of their
Witnessing in Sackcloth beyond the abovesaid Issue of the 42 months war, more
than an hundred years, in which expiration of the 42 months or 1260 days
prophetical he surmises that Antichristianity will be utterly rooted out of the
Church, as if that would be the full completion of the Rising of the Witnesses;
this gave me occasion in the abovementioned Arithmetica Apocalyptica, to show
that Daniel's seven Semi-Times not the 1260 days nor 42 months is the true
Authentic eventual measure to compute the fulfilling of the Medial-Visions by.

And I may here add, that if the fulfilling of the Vision of the Rising of the
Witnesses and the fall of Babylon be enlarged to an utter ruin of the
Antichristian Kingdom, and advancing the Reformation throughout Christendom,
and to the extending the last blast of the second Wo-Trumpet or sixth Trumpet,
or the beginning of the seventh, and consequently the three Triumphant
expressions of Joy till then, (for they must be contracted or enlarged
together) I having proved so plainly that all the Vials, which are so many
plagues upon Antichrist follow the sixth Trumpet, and those Triumphs or
Doxologies, chap. 11. v. 15, 16, 17. chap. 14. v. 8. and chap. 15. v. 3. there
will be no time for the pouring out these Vials till Antichrist be gone, upon
whom they are to be poured. Which shows plainly that the success of the 42
months war with the Saints or Witnesses is not to be, as it were, continued
from the Reformation till an universal Rising of the Witnesses or full and
final Ruin of Babylon at the expiration of the 42 Prophetical months, or 1260
years, but that the Reformation past is the adequate success of that 42 months
War or Daniel's Time, and Times, and half a Time, which is equivalent thereto,
and the only Authentic measure of the truth of the events of the
Medial-Visions. And forasmuch as many Authentic copies, (Apoc. 13.15.) instead
of [to continue] have [to make war] forty two months, and that (...), if you
leave out (...), signifies here to act at pleasure, prosperously, freely and
unmasterly, or untrollably as judicious Interpreters have noted; and since
however the Beast cannot make war before he continue, and that therefore his
continuance at least commences as high as his making war, and both are said to
be 42 months; it is plain hence, that the Beast's continuance and his war do
perfectly synchronize, and as one ends, so must the other, at the same time.
But the Rising of the Witnesses is the issue and end of the 42 months war,
therefore the continuance of that state of the Beast who is said to continue 42
months ends at the Rising of the Witnesses or fall of the tenth part of the
City. Which is a plain intimation that those Interpreters are in the right that
interpret (...), v. 5. (if (...) be left out) to act at pleasure with
uncontrollableness and success. Which state of the Beast ceased at the Rising
of the Witnesses and fall of the tenth part of the City. For then was he
over-mastered in a large part of his Dominions, and he could not (...), act so
freely and domineeringly as he did before. So that all the pretense of
prolonging the 42 months continuance of the Beast, Apoc. 13.5. beyond the time
of the issue of the 42 months war, v. 7. and then at the 42 months end
precisely taken, of quite extinguishing his power, plainly vanishes; the 42
months only pointing at the entireness of his reigning before he came into
that broken condition, and not at the time of his reign at large. Of so great
use is that little Piece for the preventing mistakes touching this matter.

And for Appendicula Apocalyptica, by maintaining Mr. Mede's Interpretation of
the Seals against Mr. Durham's, as also his Symmetral Times of the Church
antecedent to the Asymmetral, it does plainly strengthen the Right of Monarchy
and Episcopacy from the Holy Writ against such as are otherwise affected.

And this is all that I have to say by way of Preface touching the whole Book,
nor shall add any thing more to detain thee from the perusal thereof, but my
prayers, that thou may read to thy own edification, and that what thou
read may either beget or increase in thee a sober mind, and sensible of thy
duty to God and to thy Prince, and to all that are in Authority under him,
whether in Church or State. Farewell.

The ERRATA correct thus.
For Read Page 3. lin. 17. Seraphimus, Seraphinus Ibid. l. 18. Peresius
Pererius P. 7. l. 33. now not P. 12. l. 3. his this P. 33. l. 20. from being
for being P. 44. l. 10. Seat Seal P. 50. l. 28. regenerating degenerating P.
51. l. 10. Trumpet, might Trumpet might P. 59. l. 19. (...) (...) P. 65. l. 20.
toils evils P. 67. l. 1. world word P. 83. l. 30. most of those most of all
those P. 103. l. 23. Primity Primitiae P. 117. l. 24. Vails Vials P. 129. l. 4.
Vial-Angel first Vial-Angel* P. 130. l. 20. game gain P. 139. l. 2. partly
Party P. 143. l. 29. in the is the P. 161. l. 11. (...) (...) P. 176. l. 30.
Motiminous Moliminous P. 238. l. 19. many main P. 274. l. 26. Arm Army P. 325.
l. 24. Aetymological Etymological P. 351. l. 30. rom from P. 368. l. 31.
Synopsis of Synopsis P. 383. l. 33. to the as the P. 410. l. 1. seven seventh
P. 412. l. 22. why has why has not

AN ANSWER To Several REMARKS UPON Dr. Henry More HIS APOCALYPSIS APOCALYPSEOS,
Written By S. E. MENNONITE, And Published in English by The ANSWERER: Together
with his ANSWERS thereunto.

JAM. III. 13, 14. (...).

(...).

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for Walter Kettilby. 1684.

REMARKS UPON APOCALYPSIS APOCALYPSEOS.
Chap. I. Verse. 4.
BOTH here and verse. 11. the direction to the seven Churches is rendered, [To
the Catholic Church distinguished into seven Successions,] and so no literal
sense, but only a prophetical sense regarded in the Epistles.

Ans. It was no part of the Expositor's scope to meddle with the literal sense,
but to give a continued, coherent, prophetical sense only, of this whole book
of Prophecies, the Apocalypse.

Ver. 6. Kings and Priests are doubtlesly to be taken here, as in chapter 5. v. 10.
And have made us to our God Kings and Priests, and we shall reign on the Earth.
So that the sense here given is a straining of the Text from a proper literal,
to a forced metaphorical sense.

Ans. The sense is very easy, unforced and exceeding useful, and a fit
caution against such hot and heady Saints, who would be presently up, and
reigning on the Earth before they have attained to the Kingdom of Heaven within
them, and have become Masters of their own Earthly minds. Reigning upon Earth
seems here in the Text, on purpose omitted, to give way to such an useful and
edifying Interpretation as is here given by the Expositor.

Ver. 13. Our Savior's being clothed with a garment down to his foot, and
girt about the paps with a golden girdle, seems to respect not only his
Priestly, but also his Kingly Office, the garment signifying the first, and the
girdle that righteousness which was the girdle of his loins, and that
faithfulness which was the girdle of his reins, Esa. chapter 11. v. 5. where he is
described as a glorious, spiritual Prince. And as in the Epistle to the
Philadelphian Church, his calling himself holy and true, respects both his
Offices of Priest and King; so his garment seems to refer to the one, and his
girdle to the Truth wherewith he was girded, whereby he is our Prince.

Ans. That his Priestly office is here aimed at, is without question, and the
Expositor is for such Expositions as are most unquestionable. If what is added
had been as certain, he would have taken it in. But it seems not only
uncertain, but unlikely. For Kings wear not their girdles about their paps, but
about their loins; but the Priests did. And Aaron's girdle was interwoven with
gold. See Cornelius a lapide on the place. And lastly, as for [Holy and True]
Truth as well as Holiness, respects his Priestly office according as the
Seventy render Vrim and Thummim, (...).

Ver. 15. To say that the voice of Christ being as the sound of many waters
does plainly discover, that Christ is here represented as in Union with his
Church, is scarce sense. For the Union of him with his Church being spiritual,
can badly be represented by the sound of a voice. Nor does what is said here of
his voice, signify more than what is described, Psalm. 29. viz. That the voice
of the Lord is upon many waters, and is powerful and full of Majesty, etc. And
though waters in the Prophetic style are used to signify a multitude, yet it
follows not that they must always do so, but may also be used in a Literal
sense, as they are, chapter 20. v. 13. The Sea gave up the dead, etc.

Ans. Whenas it is said expressly, that his voice is as the sound of many
waters, and waters in the prophetic style signify multitudes of people; what
can be more easy and obvious than to interpret it, that his voice was as the
voice of a multitude; and how fitly does that then signify, that Christ is
here represented in union with his Church, through whose mouths, by the
breathing of his Holy Spirit in them, he speaks to the world, etc. And it is
not the Expositor's conceit alone. St. Gregory, Tychonius, Haymo, Seraphimus
and Peresius interpret it of the sound of the Gospel, which was preached by
zealously inspired Emissaries, and the truth thereof testified by innumerable
witnesses in union with Christ by his Spirit. And indeed what can better
signify the spiritual union of the Church of Christ with his living members,
than that all their voices should be, as it were, one voice, breathed out from
the mouth of the Son of God? For that shows that they also have one heart, and
one spirit, which is the Spirit of the Son of God, with which they are all
united.

Ver. 17. John's falling at the feet of Christ as dead, proceeded not from his
fear, that the Vision might portend great evil to the People of God, but from
such an astonishment as made Daniel, chap. 10. on the like Vision of Christ,
there fall on his face in a dead sleep, having no strength remaining in him,
and his comeliness turn into corruption, and made a great quaking fall upon
them that were with him, though they saw not the Vision. And as also made
Joshua fall on his face on his appearance to him, as a Captain of the Host of
the Lord.

Ans. That it was not only from the glory, but the terror of the Vision, his
legs standing in fire, and a sword coming out of his mouth, that caused John to
fall down as dead, appears farther from his comforting of him, in telling him,
that himself was dead, but is now alive, and has the Keys of Hell and Death,
etc. to fortify him against the dread of Persecutions, that even then were
exercising the Church; and John might well suspect that this Vision did portend
greater.

Ver. 19. [The things which thou have seen] respects the precedent Vision of
the seven Churches: The following words [The things that are and shall be
hereafter] should be [Both the things which are and shall be hereafter] and so
make the Vision contain both a Literal and Prophetical sense; whereas the
taking of the words in the sense supposed, viz. to signify the past Ephesine
State of the Church, and the present Smyrnean State of it, and the future State
of the other Churches, destroys the literal sense, and also spoils the
coherence, not only with the precedent Vision, but also with the following
verse.

Ans. This Remark upon the Expositor is very impertinent, he professedly having
nothing to do with the literal sense. But that account which he gives in
reference to the Prophetical, is so easy, unstrained and natural [hast seen]
so plainly denoting the time past, that D. Pareus on the place writes thus: Ita
rest Apocalypseos Christus ipse in tres ordines distinguit. Quasdam jam viderat
Johannes inde ab exordio Evangelii sub Nerone and sequentibus Imperatoribus ad
Domitianum usque gestas; quasdem in praesenti videbat, majorem partem de
futuris porro visurus erat. How naturally then, the whole time of the Church
being cast into seven Intervals, Ephesine past, Smyrnean current, Pergamenian
and the rest to come, are those words [Write the things which thou have seen,
and the things that are, and the things that shall be hereafter] interpreted as
the Expositor has interpreted them? And how fitly do they cohere with what
follows? (...) -- and (...) -- which being the Accusative case, shows plainly
that the seven Candlesticks take in all the seven Intervals of the Church,
past, present and to come.

Upon the NOTES of Chap. 1.
Rem. 1. The seven Churches in Asia, refers not to its signifying Fundamentum,
thereby to signify all the Churches that keep the Apostolical foundation in
doctrine and practice, for that is implied in calling them Churches, and Christ
owns none to be Churches farther than they do so, without which doing they
cannot be united to him, and so cannot be of his Church which is his body. But
Asia here alludes both to its signifying the Earth, and also Action. (Of both
which see Exposition of the seven Churches). So that [to the seven Churches in
Asia] does signify, To the seven Churches in their state of Action and
Conflict, or Militant State on Earth; and this in distinction from that blessed
state of Rest and Joy in that great Jubilee of the World the Millennium, which
the labors of this Militant State will end with. And so the prophetic sense
of the Epistles reaches but to the commencement of the Millennium.

Ans. It is sufficient that others would call those Churches that did not keep
to the foundation, but added doctrines and practices contrary thereto; And
therefore Asia's signifying Fundamentum, is not needlessly superadded to design
the truly Catholic Church. That Asia signifies Action, is granted on both
sides; but it is Illogical to deduce Conflict from Action, and the Arguing a
genere ad speciem, as if one should say, It is a living Creature, Therefore it
is a Man. Though all Conflict is Action, yet all Action is not Conflict. This
is foisted in to serve a false Hypothesis, and to exclude the Millennium out of
the Intervals, and to make them reach but to the beginning thereof.

Rem. 2. There Is no need of the Ephesine State of the Church its ending at the
beginning of the Persecution in Nero's time, but it may continue after, as the
Pergamenian State does continue through the succeeding Epistles. For as the
advancement of the Church to that State was from Christianity's being received
by Authority, so the continuing of Authority to profess that Religion is a
continuing that State, though from a new emerging condition the Church may
receive a new denomination. And so the Ephesine State being agreeable to the
whole Primitive time, though the emerging Persecution does give the
denomination of a new State to the Church, yet it destroys not the former that
is consistent therewith. That the Ephesine Church was not tainted with
Nicolaitism, is no Argument that it expired before the beginning of that Sect,
but rather of the contrary. For if that Sect was not then in being, it was no
commendation of the Church not to be tainted therewith, nor could it be said to
have it.

Ans. It is sufficient that from a new emerging condition the Church may
receive a new denomination, and so begin a distinct Interval; and thus will the
whole Succession of time, from the beginning of the Church to the end of the
World, be distinguished into so many Intervals. So limited, as History
complying with the characters of the Prophecy, will ratify, which is all that
is intended. And thus the Ephesine State or Interval will be naturally
terminated upon the commencement of Persecution in Nero's time, the Smyrnean
then beginning; And the Smyrnean end upon the emerging of the Church out of
persecution by the Emperors turning Christian, and the Pergamenian then begin.
But, the Church quickly degenerating into Idolatry, and persecuting the
Apostolic Christians, and so long a time continuing so, from some remarkable
change of the Modes of their Idolatry and Persecution, and other degeneracies
of the Church, this Pergamenian denomination may cease, and the degenerate
Church be called Thyatirian, and the true Church be said to be, the Church in
Pergamus, and the Church in Thyatira, because it was within the Jurisdiction of
the degenerate Church so denominated, etc. As for that touching Nicolaitism, it
is a mere cavil or quibble. For it plainly was a commendation of the Ephesine
Interval, that there was not yet that uncleanness found in it that was after
set on foot by the Nicolaitans. And the Nicolaitans being Christians, they
could no sooner appear, but the Church ipso facto would be defiled by them.
Wherefore the Ephesine Interval of the Church being now defiled by them, it is a
sign that Interval comes short of the times of the Nicolaitans.

Chap. 2. Verse. 11.
THE promise here to the overcomer being only that he shall not be hurt of the
second Death, gives no assurance thereby of being partaker of the first
Resurrection. The crown of life which is promised to them that are faithful to
death must certainly be meant of the reward in the other life. And what reward
would it be to the sufferers unto death to have their successors obtain the
imperial Crown? Besides, take it to signify the reward in the other life, and
it will so agree with what follows the Epiphonema, the one promise explaining
the other, whereas the senses here given of both are so different as to make
them badly suit for promises of the same Epistle.

Ans. The promise here to the overcomer, according to the Elliptical
intimations in the Apocalypse is the promise of partaking of the first
Resurrection, and so has the ancient Church expounded it. And to ask what
reward it would be to the sufferers unto death to have their successors to
obtain the imperial Crown, is to tell us without asking, that selfishness, or
want of that unselfinteressed love, which makes us prefer the public good of
the Kingdom of Christ before our own, causes the Remarker to make such a weak
objection as this. And if the Crown of Life, and not being hurt by the second
Death explained each other, and were but the same thing, it would be a needless
tautology: whenas taken in these different senses it is a double promise to
encourage the Smyrnean Church to suffer Martyrdom, the one that their
sufferings shall turn the Roman Empire Christian, the other that they for their
Martyrdom shall partake of the first Resurrection, a privilege peculiar to
Martyrs, etc. To which may be added that it is observable where there is any
promise or threatening before the Epiphonema it indicates things Political
touching this state on Earth, but if placed after the Epiphonema, the invisible
state and concerns of the other world. And why may not one Epistle use both
these arguments, they having both force to persuade to the same thing.

Verse. 13. The Pergamenian state commencing at the Emperors professing
Christianity, the testimony and suffering of Antipas is not to be applied to
the Pope only, but does primarily respect that haughty imperious spirit which
was generally observed in Patriarchs and Bishops after they grew so great
through the protection and favor and bounty of Princes, which begat such
fierce contentions amongst themselves and furious ragings against their
adversaries or opposers.

Ans. The sufferings and testimony of Antipas does chiefly respect those that
were martyred by the Church of Rome under the Pope in this Interval, which is
bounded by the ending of the War against the Waldenses and Albigenses which
were slain with the sword. These things are certain and conspicuous, as is made
out in the Exposition of the seven Churches. As for smaller matters if any have
the like evidence let them add them that will.

Verse. 16. [I will come unto thee quickly] is taken in a distinct sense from
the following words. And I will fight against them, etc. Whenas plainly the
coming quickly is to fight, etc. And this threatening to fight with the sword of
his mouth is against the true Church, which by transgression had deserved such
sharp rebuke, and therefore cannot be intended against the enemies of it.

Ans. What strange confidence is this upon no ground at all? I will come unto
thee, I will fight against them. Is not [thee] and [them] sufficient notes of
diversification, that they are spoke touching distinct, nay opposite, parties,
the one his Church, the other their adversaries, whence he says he will fight
against them? To all which you may add, That this is the Political Prediction
preceding the Epiphenema.

Verse. 18. Thyatira does, as in all other Epistles, signify the state of the
true Church that is written to, and not of the Antichristian Church at that
time; and therefore it cannot refer to the making the Virgin Mary the daughter
of God, but alluding to that signification of the word may signify that state
of the Church wherein the authority of Christ began to gain the ascendent of
worldly powers, and which therefore may be reckoned the infancy of his Kingdom;
and in that respect the Church as to that time may be called a daughter, though
otherwise styled a woman. Which time we suppose to commence from the expulsion
of the Goths out of Italy (whose Reign there was the seventh Head that was to
continue but a little time) immediately after which the Popes grew so great as
to cause the Exarches first to remove to Ravenna and after to be expelled
Italy, and so prospered with their usurped authority as by degrees to make all
the foreign Nations that had overrun the Empire and settled in it to be subject
to them. He therefore gaining such rule by his false pretensions to be Christ's
Vicar, does evidence the reality of that authority, by usurpation whereof he
grew so potent, as also did the Roman Hierarchy, who often proved able to sway
the States of Kingdoms, to depose their Kings, etc. Since therefore the
usurpers of Christ's authority, grew so potent and prevalent thereby, such as
were redeemed from the world to become members of his Kingdom, and so were
really accompanied with the power of his spirit proportionably to the state
they had attained to, must surely be likewise of great prevalency in their
several stations though but of private condition. Hence so great power is
ascribed to the two Witnesses, chapter 11. And hence the great persecution and war
at length was raised against the Saints by the Antichristian powers to suppress
the emerging power of Christ's Kingdom in them, which fulfilled the other sense
of Thyatira, by the multitude of Martyrs sacrificed, etc.

Ans. In the Epistle to the Church in Pergamus Christ says, I know thy works
and where thou dwell even where Satan's seat is. Which undoubtedly is the Sea of Rome, and therefore the Church in Pergamus is the Apostolic Church
within the jurisdiction of the Roman there termed in the Prophetic style
Pergamenian, and so undoubtedly Thyatirian in this Interval. And therefore
barely to contradict this without any reason added, is mere wantonness and
humor. But now the Pergamenian Interval ending in the year 1242, when the
Pope's Legate Amelin made an end of the Albigensian war with Trancavel,
Bastard-son of the Earl of Beziers, what an extravagance is it to say that the
Thyatirian Interval began near seven hundred years before the Pergamenian
ended? The faithful Martyr Antipas by his account should be slain in the
Thyatirian Interval, whenas the Prophecy places him in the Pergamenian. And
that the slaying of Antipas respects and typifies those vast slaughters of the
Waldenses and Albigenses with me there is not (nor can there be with any one
else that well considers it) the least doubt imaginable; and therefore I make
no question but the Pergamenian Interval reaches so far as to include them,
whence the Thyatirian denomination must of necessity begin after their time,
nor can the distinct denominations which constitute the Intervals interfere one
with another. Again, a Daughter in the Prophetic style is a delicate Damosel
in her flourishing age, not an Infant; and Christ's true Church upon the
expulsion of the Goths was so far from getting the ascendent over the worldly
powers that she grew more and more enslaved under the power of Antichrist,
under the bondage of that Roman Pharaoh, than which there is not a more worldly
power under the Sun, and was held under this power till the Sardian Interval,
viz. till the rising of the Witnesses, that is to say, till the late happy
reformation begun by Luther, etc. This therefore is a very rude rush against
manifest truth, as if the Remarker did not mark what he did or said. Else he
would not say that the Popes caused the Exarches to remove their seat to
Ravenna, whenas no History that I meet with makes any mention of any other seat
of them but that. But such slips as these I could willingly wink at, if the
main of the remark had any solidity in it. But how lax and lank it all is, the
intelligent will easily discern by these few hints I have given.

Verse. 23. I will kill her children with death, seems here to signify a
spiritual death and curse ensuing the same, and so will better cohere with the
following words, All the Churches shall know that I am he that searches the
reins and heart, etc. and is of the like signification with what is threatened
Zach. 14. against such as fought against Jerusalem and would not keep the feast
of Tabernacles.

Ans. Those two Expositions given by the Expositor are plain, and events
answerable. But no events have answered or are likely to answer to the other as
to the strange miraculous diseases. And for her children to be killed by a
spiritual death it would be no loss to her, they would be the more alive to her
and snug in her bosom, and be the closer Thyatirians. And for the coherence of
what follows it is sufficiently perspicuous in the other plain and unstrained
way.

Verse. 26. Giving power over the Nations respects not the Governors and people
that were reformed. For they gained no power thereby, but freedom only from
the thraldom they were formerly under. But if this respects any thing of the
Reformation, (which I conceive it does not, and that the Thyatirian Interval
reaches not so far) it must signify the chief leaders in the Reformation, who
through the cause of God they were engaged in attained to bear so great sway
and make so great changes, etc.

Ans. Those that were under the rule and power of the Nations (even whole
Provinces and Kingdoms of them) that is to say, under the power of the
Paganochristians, shall vanquish and overcome the Paganochristians so as to
turn them to their own Religion, or those that remain of them unconverted to
have them under their girdle, etc. This therefore is a mere cavil. The easy
sense is, whereas suppose the Antichristian powers bore sway over the Kingdoms
or Nations of England, Scotland, Ireland, Denmark, Swedeland, etc. under the
Thyatirian Interval: in the Sardian Interval the Apostolic Christians, such as
Christ speaks to in the Church of Thyatira shall bear the rule over these
Nations. And the ruling them with a rod of iron, and breaking them a-pieces
like a Potter's Vessel, is shattering a-pieces the Antichristian Compages they
were held together in before, and subjecting them to the Gospel of Christ: this
shall be effected upon several Nations, that were before Paganochristian, in
the Sardian Interval. What can be more easy and clear?

Verse. 28. There Is but one Morning star and that is bright, so that the
Morning Star and the bright Morning Star must signify the same. And they are
so far from signifying several states of the Church, that the one is spoken
only of Christ himself, viz. he calls himself the bright Morning Star. But
what the Morning Star is which is promised to the overcomers in the Thyatirian
Church, is hardly to be understood farther than we are partakers thereof, but
seems to be of like signification with 2 Pet. 1.19. both seeming to respect an
addition of light of life to the light of truth before received.

Ans. There Is but one Morning star indeed, which is Christ, who is here
signified, but in a political consideration as Prince of his Empire on Earth,
which may have degrees of largeness and luster. And that Christ is here
understood in a Political sense the foregoing verse intimates, that speaks of
the enlargement of his Kingdom. Of which also the subsequence of the Epiphonema
farther assures us according to the rule noted in the Exposition of the seven
Churches. And where Christ is called the bright Morning star, Apoc. 22.16. it
is not spoke there simply of his Person, abstracting from his Kingdom on Earth,
because he says immediately before it, I am the offspring of David, which is a
challenging his right to all the Kingdoms of the Earth upon that score of his
descent from David the King to whom God had made the promise, Ps. 2. And this
following the description of his glorious Reign in the new Jerusalem, and
relating to those times, he says not, as in the Sardian Interval, I am the
Morning Star; but, the bright Morning Star, by reason of his exceeding great
luster and glory in his Millennial Reign. Why should any one wink against so
clear a light and inviolable coherence and congruity of things? But why he is
called (...) instead of (...), in the Sardian Interval, the Expositor has noted
in his Exposition of the seven Churches.

Chap. 3. Verse. 4.
WAlking with me in white, is in this Verse made signify that conversing with
Christ by his Spirit, whereby they shall be enabled to walk with him in all
innocence and integrity. But in the following Verse, the being clothed in
white raiment, which is the same with walking in white is taken in a different
sense, viz. to be prosperous in the propagating the affairs of Christ's
Kingdom. Also in the said following verse, those words, I will not blot his
name out of the book of life, which interpret the foregoing words, ( viz. that
the walking in white, and the being clothed with white raiment, is the walking
in the light of life, whereby we become heirs of the crown of life, and so
written in the book of life) are yet taken to signify a continued succession
of such men to the end of the world, whereas the continuance of such a
succession is no reward to the Sardian Church, though it may be joy to them as
they are concerned for the propagation of Religion.

Ans. If there be any Error in this Interpretation, it is, in that the
Expositor has not expounded [to walk with me in white] in the same sense he
expounded [to be clothed in white rayment] which has a Political sense, and
signifies the good success of affairs with them. For the Remarker was to
remember that the Expositor was giving the prophetical sense of these Epistles,
not the literal, moral, or spiritual. And that therefore according to that
solid Rule set down, That the Declarations touching the success of the Church
that is writ to, before the Epiphonema, signifies politically, so this being
clothed in white is to be expounded accordingly. But being whiteness,
signifies as well Innocence as Prosperity, and Innocence is a fitting these few
names in Sardis for their prosperous success, that I made use of these
different significations so well subordinated one to another, deserves not to
be cavilled at, but rather to be approved. And correspondently to this
Prophetical sense which must be Political [I will not blot his name out of the
book of life] is to be understood, that these few names are the durable seed of
such a Church as shall last to the end of the World. But to say, this is no
reward to them that they have such a durable succession, is a reproach to the
Remarker, as if he were a stranger to the true Christian State, and knew not
the gratifications of a soul regenerate into the living Image of Christ, who
with his Church is one mystical body in succession through all ages; and
therefore what any part of them suffer for the present, if it make for the
greater good of the Church for the future, they take themselves to be amply
rewarded by so happy an event. And such a success as causes joy to them, as the
Remarker acknowledges, must be a proportionable good to them, and if consequent
upon their labors and sufferings, a reward thereof. So that such Allegations
as these are mere affected Cavils.

Verse. 8. The opened door that cannot be shut, and the little strength signify
not any outward force or army, but that spiritual strength that is attained to
by faith, working by love, which makes us become freed by the truth from the
thraldom of the worldly Powers, and gain that entrance into the Kingdom of our
Lord as never to fall. Both this and the four following verses do show the
Philadelphian Church to be in a Militant State in progress to the victorious
state of rest and glory in the Millennium. And what is said in these verses, is
spoken of the entire State of the Philadelphian Church, and therefore cannot be
referred to the seventh vial as the commencement thereof. But to instance in
their signifying a Militant State, etc. The promise, v. 9. to make them of the
Synagogue of Satan, who say they are Jews, to come and worship, etc. does
plainly show the Church to be in conflict with such Enemies as pretend to be
true Christians, and yet refuse subjection to the true Church, which cannot
agree with the Millennial State, when Satan shall be bound and all Enemies put
under the feet of Christ, etc. The promise, v. 10. to keep from the hour of
Temptation that shall come upon all the world, etc. does evidence and a State
far different from that of the Millennium, and does seem to signify that time
of great trouble precedent thereto, Dan. 12. The promise also, v. 11. to come
quickly and warning to hold fast, etc. does also plainly show that the time of
the Millennium, when God will reward all his servants, chapter 11.18. is not then
come, though it be near approaching. And the several promises, v. 12. made to
him that overcomes, do also evidence the Church to be then, as we have said,
in a Militant State. The first of those promises, viz. to make the overcomer a
Pillar in the Temple of God, seems to signify, that he shall be of great Rule
and Authority. For the Worshippers in the Temple do chiefly respect the Mosaical
or ruling judicial office, as we show, chapter 11.1. The next promise, viz. He
shall go no more out, etc. does plainly signify a Militant State, which he
that overcomes is promised a cessation and rest from. The three following
promises are all much to the same purpose, signifying the great manifestation
of the glory of God in such as overcome, whereby it shall be visible to all to
whom they belong, etc.

Ans. Here again the Remarker forgetting that we are upon the Prophetical sense
of these Epistles, writhes his fancy into a Moral or Spiritual interpretation,
though I will not take notice from what kind of spirit this may be. Most
undoubtedly the prophetical sense of this eighth verse is Political, and
denotes the uncontrollable success of the Church of Philadelphia. But to wrest
it to a Moral or Spiritual sense, as it is a Prophecy, is to do violence to
the scope of the Holy Ghost therein. This little force or army, as it is indeed
little compared with the other great appearance at the battle of the great Day
of God Almighty, are no other than those that follow the noble Heroes on the
white Horse, Apoc. chapter 19. and the Boanerges's thundering over the great City,
divided into three parts. So that the commencement of this Philadelphian
Interval is in the seventh Vial, but reaches to the fourth Thunder. Which
consideration silences all the pretended Reasonings of the Remarker, against
the Philadelphian Intervals comprehending the Millennial Reign of Christ. For
the entire State of the Philadelphian Church is comprised in that Interval
according to our Hypothesis, and according to Truth, as shall appear. I say
therefore briefly, that I acknowledge the Philadelphian Church in part of her
Interval to be Militant, that is to the expiration of the seventh Vial or first
Thunder. But under the second Thunder according to promise she obtains the
Title of the City of God, which is the new Jerusalem, which comes down out of
Heaven from God, just as it is described, Apoc. 21.11. What can be more plain
and express? Philadelphia therefore must be this new Jerusalem, as sure as
Christ will keep faith in his promises. So that the Philadelphian Interval
reaches so far as the second Thunder inclusively. But that it reaches through
the Millennium also, may appear to the unprejudiced from what follows. [And I
will write upon him my new Name] where Grotius expressly upon this very passage
says. Hoc novum nomen Christi est (...). This new name of Christ is, King of
Kings and Lord of Lords. Which therefore must undoubtedly respect his
Millennial Empire, which yet is given to this Philadelphian Church in whom he
shall thus reign. And Grotius again, Apoc. 19.16. Hoc est nomen illud novum,
says he, quod innui, cap. 3.12. Vere novum si non jus spectes, sed juris
eventum. For though he had always a right, yet then at last he was in full
possession when his Millennial Empire was erected, which was a new thing, and
not before, and he but newly actual King of Kings and Lord of Lords.

But besides this (keeping still to the prophetical sense, which is undoubtedly
Political,) That first promise, Him that overcomes will I make a pillar in the
Temple of my God, and he shall go no more out, implies plainly the perpetuity
of the Philadelphian Church to the Worlds end, though otherwise modified and
differently denominated in the Laodicean Interval. Here, Him that overcomes,
respects the whole body of the Philadelphian Church, and therefore the
Philadelphian Church shall reach to the Worlds end, though it afterward vary in
modification and denomination, namely, after the expiration of the Millennium.
He must wilfully wink, and perversely shut his eyes that sees not this truth
clearly already. And the Remarker seems to do so in so violently wresting the
signification of a Pillar in the Temple of God, which so naturally signifies
stability and permanency, to the signifying great Rule and Authority, upon a
dark private notion of his own, chapter 11.1. (which we will examine when we come
to it) as if he were wiser than Christ, and knew his meaning better than
himself. For he plainly expounds this Pillar, of stability and permanency in
saying, And he shall go no more out. So stable and permanent shall this
Philadelphian State be, as a Pillar in a Temple, whose removal would hazard the
whole Edifice. And this terrestrial Scene shall fail so soon as this
Philadelphian Church shall cease to be. This passage he thus mis-interprets,
and those other that are so close and home to the business he shuffles off with
this general account, That they manifest the glory of God in them that
overcome. But they manifest such a glory as belongs to the new Jerusalem and
the Millennial Empire of Christ, if we can assure our selves of the sense of
any passage from the easy, plain and natural signification of words and
expressions.

And now as I was going to say, let us add to all this, That as the Ephesine
Interval represents the truly Catholic and Apostolic Church as something
declining in her zeal and fervor, and threatened therefore with Persecution:
And as the Smyrnean Interval represents her in her Persecution under the Pagan
Jurisdiction, but quitting her self courageously and victoriously upon promised
success, that their sufferings would win the Imperial Crown at last, and the
Roman Empire turn Christian; As the Pergamenian Interval represents the same
Church exalted out of her Pagan Persecutions, but, upon the degeneracy of the
Church into Superstition, Idolatry and Cruelty, suffering again under a
Paganochristian Jurisdiction. And as the next Interval, viz. Thyatirian,
represents the said Catholic and Apostolic Church suffering under the same
Paganochristian Jurisdiction, but quitting themselves nobly, supported by the
promise, that these sufferers under Pergamus and Thyatira shall have the rule
and possession of whole Nations at the next turn of things, and Respit from
their Persecutions and Martyrdoms, viz. in the Sardian Interval: In which there
is no complaint of eating things sacrificed unto Idols, as in the Pergamenian
and Thyatirian Intervals, nor any Intimations of Martyrdom for not complying
therewith, but only a complaint of that Imperfection of state and signal
remisness from what they were at first when newly come out of their sufferings.
Which Sardian Interval therefore does plainly represent the state of the
Catholic Church emerged out of the gross corruptions and barbarous
persecutions of the Roman Church, though themselves yet are not so good as they
should be; although there be in it some few Names, some few excellent Persons
that are as it were the seed of a better state of the true Church to come, etc.
Now therefore, say I, as these five Intervals represent the state of the truly
Catholic and Apostolic Church, so plainly, amply and lively, so does the
Philadelphian Interval the succeeding state thereof, where is not only no
Idolatry to be tempted to, nor any Martyrdom for refusing to comply therewith,
but also no spot nor wrinkle, nor any such thing but it is entirely holy and
without blemish. This is the description of the sixth Interval or Succession of
States in the Church Catholic and Apostolic. And therefore I demand here of
any man that has any spark of judgment and sagacity left in him, what time this
can be but such that includes in it the Jerusalem State and blessed Millennial
Empire of Christ, which cannot be more pure* perfect and glorious than this
State of the Philadelphian Church. Which is a Prophetical description of some
state of the Church as is acknowledged on both hands, and which is to succeed
the Sardian, and also that there will be a blessed Millennium on Earth.
Wherefore this consideration alone might assure us of this truth. But when
there is farther added; That on him that overcomes, (that is on the
Philadelphian Church) I will write the name of the City of my God, which is new
Jerusalem, which comes down out of Heaven from my God, etc. Can it be any
thing but affected stupour or some strange invincible prejudice, (a Prophetical
sense being allowed) that any one should doubt but that the times of the New
Jerusalem and Millennial Empire of Christ are included in the Philadelphian
Interval, which was the thing to be demonstrated.

Verse. 20, 21. Christ's coming in to sup with them that open to his knocking,
does signify his receiving them to his Marriage-supper. And his granting to
them that overcome to sit down on his Throne, signifies their reigning with him
in the Millennium. And these being two promises to the same purpose to be
fulfilled in the Millennial State, and being made to the victorious in the
Laodicean Church, does manifest the same to be in a militant state precedent to
the Millennium. Nor is the degeneracy of the Laodicean Church competent to the
Millennial state, of which there is no account that there should be any such
change in it, nor is it imaginable how it should, it being established in that
glorious state of righteousness as is described, and having all occasion of
evil removed by the Devil's being bound and all things being made new. And
though he be to be loosed again, yet it is not to deceive or work any change in
those that belong to the new Jerusalem, but to seduce the Nations about it, who
through his deceit are to be stirred up in enmity against it, though before
they brought their glory into it and walked in the light of it.

Ans. To pervert the genuine sense of this Prophecy, here the Remarker
interprets that Politically that he should interpret Mystically or Spiritually
as he has in other places interpreted that Spiritually which should have been
expounded Politically. So sinuous and serpentine a thing is beloved falsehood.
From v. 15. to v. 20. The declension of the Philadelphian state after the
Millennium in their remisness in pursuing spiritual gifts and graces, and
breathing after the living image of Christ in themselves and in their
propagating of his Kingdom, is prefigured or predescribed (the Church being
depressed then into a new denomination of Laodicean) and they sharply rebuked
and terribly threatened if they do not repent of these immoralities or
Dispiritualities, if I may so speak. And thus continuedly in the same Moral
sense he still farther upbraids them, that though he, by the searching rebukes
of his spirit, knocks at the door of their Consciences to awaken them out of
their remisness and litherly formalness, yet they are insensible of his call,
being satisfied to celebrate the Lord's Supper without idolatry still indeed,
(as it was in the Popish Mass) but also without any breathing after the fruits
thereof, our living union with Christ and spiritual Communion with him; and yet
he tells them for their comfort as well as reproves them, that if they will
open to him through constant obedience to his dictates that they shall fully
enjoy his communion and be in a truly living union of Spirit with him, which is
the true meaning and scope of the Lord's Supper, and which will recover them
again into that wholesome state the Philadelphians stuck to universally in the
former Interval. That this is thus Spiritually or Morally to be understood and
not Politically, as the Marriage Supper of the Lamb is, Apoc. 19.7, 8, 9. is
farther manifest in that it is said, If any one hear my voice and open the
door, I will come in to him and will sup with him and he with me, viz. at his
home; they will sup together there, which therefore is no invitation of the
party abroad to sup. Wherefore what a fond thing is this to apply Christ's
coming into our hearts and Souls, and entertaining there spiritual Communion
with us, such as is signified by the Communion of the Lord's Supper, unto that
Political sense of things, the Jews adjoining themselves to the Church of
Christ, and acknowledging him their Messiah, their Head and Husband in the
above cited place? This is enormously to strain and pervert the sense of
Scripture.

As is also that conceit of interpreting [to sit down on his throne] of their
reigning with him in the Millennium. For being there is no mention here of such
conflicts and persecutions and martyrdoms in this Laodicean state, to which an
earthly deliverance and victory, and an earthly crown and dominion was promised
in the Smyrnean, Pergamenian and Thyatirian Intervals, nor any mention of the
word of Patience, etc. the throne that is here promised must be of another
nature, that is, a place or seat in Heaven as universally it is interpreted by
Expositors. And being the conflict the Laodiceans are here exhorted to is the
subduing their carnal minds and affections, and through mortification to be
renewed unto the Heavenly image of Christ by the spirit of life in the new
birth, which is the true and only method of attaining to this Heavenly Throne
or Crown of glory, it is very unnatural to understand it of any other Throne
than that. But they being roused thus up by the exhortation of Christ to shake
off that dullness and torpor of spirit and dead formality and carnality, and to
be enlivened again into a quick sense of their duty by virtue of their
Regeneration into his living image, that of St. Paul to the Ephesians, chapter 2.
will be fulfilled in them. When we were dead in our sins he has quickened us
together with Christ, and has raised us up together and made us sit (there is
the promised Throne) together in Heavenly places in Christ Jesus. And that it
is an Heavenly seat or Throne, that passage in the promise (...), does
naturally insinuate according to that in the [Te Deum] When thou had overcome
the sharpness of death thou did open the Kingdom of Heaven to all believers.
His ascending into Heaven and sitting at the right hand of God was the
consequence of his sufferings. In which Heaven there are many seats or
mansions, as he elsewhere tells us, which undoubtedly he has prepared for every
one that overcomes. As Christ after he overcame, sat down in his father's
Throne which he gave him; so all judgment being given to the son, he that
overcomes shall sit down in a Throne or seat in Heaven of Christ's giving, as
Grotius seems to interpret the words. For it is most natural to conceive the
Throne of Christ and of other Victors, though not of equal majesty and glory,
yet to be of the same nature, that is to say, Heavenly, as the current of
Expositors runs. And it was an Heavenly Throne Christ ascended after he had
overcome, not an Earthly Millennial Throne, which according to the Remarker, he
had not obtained in the Laodicean Interval, whenas he says expressly he was sat
down already in the Throne his Father gave him upon his overcoming. And
therefore the like Thrones he promises other overcomers.

And lastly, it being so plainly demonstrated before, that the Millennium is
comprised in the Philadelphian Interval, it is impossible that this Throne
promised to the Laodicean Victor should be understood of reigning with Christ
in the Millennium. So that I conceive it is plain enough, that as this
Epistolar Prophecy is acknowledged by the Remarker to reach from the beginning
of the Church to the commencement of the Millennium, so upon better reason that
it reaches to the end of the world. For when the slate of the Church is
divided into so many successions, and prefigured in a Prophetical manner, why
should two such notable Intervals as that of the Millennium and the after game
of Gog and Magog, etc. be omitted? It were a rude and immodest thing in me to
suppose the spirit of Prophecy defectuous in this point rather than suspect
mine own judgment and slowness that may hinder my discerning the completeness
and perfection of this Prophecy.

But the Remarker produces reasons why we should think the Prophecy of the
seven Churches reaches no farther than the commencement of the Millennium. The
first is, Because Christ invites the Laodiceans to the Marriage supper of the
Lamb, and promises the Overcomer a Throne in the Millennium.

The Second, That there is no account given that the Millennial state should
ever degenerate into the Laodicean.

Thirdly and lastly, That it is unimaginable that the Millennium, being
established in that glorious state of Righteousness that is described, and all
occasions of evil removed, the Devil being bound, nor to be let loose again
upon those that belong to the new Jerusalem, but only upon the Nations; that
the Millennial state should degenerate into the Laodicean.

But I have already answered the first by showing that Christ's promising to
sup with him that opens to him the door is no invitation to the Marriage Supper
of the Lamb, nor the promised Throne an Earthly Throne in the Millennium, but a
promise of the Heavenly Kingdom which this Throne signifies. According as our
Savior promises his Apostles, Luke 22. I appoint unto you a Kingdom as my
father has appointed unto me (which hugely fits this place, To him that
overcomes will I grant to sit with me in my Throne, even as I also overcame
and am sat down with my father in his Throne) that ye may eat and drink at my
Table in my Kingdom, and sit on Thrones judging the twelve Tribes of Israel.
Which place is parallel to that of Matthew. 19.28. Verily I say unto you, ye that
have followed me, (...), (which Grotius expounds by (...), and Munster by
Resurrectio Mortuorum; and Calvin says, Non dubium est quin hic de extremo die
loquatur Christus) at the Resurrection when the Son of Man shall sit on the
Throne of his glory, ye also shall sit on twelve Thrones judging the twelve
Tribes of Israel. So that this is also a Throne of Judicature, a Laodicean
Throne, from which this Interval in one respect has its denomination, because
at the close thereof Christ with his Saints will judge the people, which makes
this promise the more suitable. And that the Saints should have their Thrones
of Judicature then to judge the people with Christ no man can much marvel at,
that considers that of Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 6.3. Know ye not that we shall judge
the Angels? that we shall be co-approvers of the sentence of Christ against the
Devils and wicked Souls at the last day? which shows how fitly, unforcedly and
naturally this Throne here promised is understood of the Heavenly Throne, as I
have demonstrated it cannot be understood of an Earthly Throne in the
Millennium.

To the second I answer, That there is a very good account out of the
Apocalypse to be given why we should think that the Millennial or Philadelphian
estate will at last degenerate into the Laodicean. It is true there is no
express imputation of any fault upon the beloved City in the Prophecy of the
opened Book, but that after the Millennium there is a change of affairs is
thence plain, it telling us of the loosing of the Devil, and the endeavors of
Gog and Magog to subdue the Holy City, but the reason in that Prophecy is
omitted, and it is the artifice of concealment in the Apocalypse to omit things
in one Vision and supply them in another, and the supplement is manifest in
this Vision of the seven Churches. For the Laodicean Interval succeeding the
Philadelphian which I have demonstrated to include in it the Millennial Reign
of Christ, must needs synchronize with that state of the Church which is after
the Millennial Empire. Wherefore the reproofs of the Church of Laodicea for
their Lukewarmness and Remisness in the affairs of the Kingdom of Christ, and
neglecting to retain and propagate that inward state of the spirit of life in
the new birth, but resting in a dead, formal, though otherwise unexceptionable,
external worship of God, etc. this shows the reason of the Devil's being let
loose again, that he might raise stirs against the Church, and so they might
reflect upon their condition, and repent them of their Lukewarmness and
Remisness. Which Hypothesis is more agreeable to the Justice of God and his
care over his Church, than that he should loose the Devil again and raise
storms against his Church no man knows why nor wherefore.

To the last I answer, that it is very easily conceivable, though the Church
does at last become so pure and spotless, so holy and righteous, yet that in
process of time it may decline. (...), In this state of mortality nothing can
be absolutely firm and durable. Did not the blessed Angels who were created in
unspeakable purity and glory fall from their station? who yet had no Tempter
from without, for there were no Devils that needed to be tied up before the
Angels fell. Wherefore as to that point they had as much advantage as the
Philadelphian Church, but exceeding much more in being Spirit and not Flesh.
But the Philadelphian Church will be mortal flesh as other sons of Adam.
Wherefore in long process of time they may well degenerate something even
before the loosing of the Devil out of Prison. And when he is loose again, it
is but a precarious surmise to think he can act only upon the Nations that are
not in communion with the Church. For when he is loose he is as he was before
he was imprisoned. Nor is there any ground to restrain the word [Nations] to
those only that are not in visible communion with the Church, but it may very
naturally signify that multitude of Nations and People in the World whether of
the Church or not. And it is a rash presumption to suppose that the Nations
that walk in the light of the new Jerusalem are not converts to the Christian
Faith, forasmuch as they are said to be saved; or the Kings of the Earth that
bring their glory into it that they are not whole Kingdoms converted to the
Christian belief as that auspicious acclamation foretells, that the Kingdoms of
the World are become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ, etc.

Wherefore we see that there is not the least shadow of reason, but that the
Prophecy of the seven Churches is a Prophecy of the state of the Church
distinguished into seven Intervals from the beginning of the Church to the end
of the World. Which may the better assure us that the two Prophecies, the one
of the sealed Book, the other of the opened Book, are so likewise.

Chap. 4. Verse. 3.
THE pure transparent Iaspar stone is an Emblem of Holiness, and the red Sardin
stone of Justice; and therefore he that sat on the Throne being like unto
them, does signify the Holiness and Righteousness of God in executing of
Judgment, and so does better suit with the occasion of the Vision, (it being a
Representation of God on his Throne of Judicature as Judge of the World) than
to make the firmness of the one to signify the strength or omnipotency of God;
and the red fiery color of the other his piercing Activity, etc. But indeed it
is not of a fiery red, but of a dead red color.

Ans. God is not represented here on his Throne of Judicature, but simply in
his Chair of State, as I may so speak. It is the Throne of the Divine Majesty
as Creator and Governor of the World, and more peculiarly of his Church,
according to that Doxology, v. 11. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory,
and honor, and power; for thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure
they are and were created. Wherefore Grotius judiciously notes that the Jasper
does signify invictam Dei potentiam (which we may briefly call his radical
Omnipotency, or rather the necessity of Existence of his indiscernible
essence.) And the Sardius (which (...) answers to in Hebrew, so called from its
redness) vim Dei activam qualis in igne est. They are his very words on the
Text. And Zegerus tells us, that Tychonius, Primasius and Beda, all three make
the Sardius to have the color, of fire. To which you may add Victorinus,
Rupertus, Richardus and Lyranus, who all give the signification of fire to the
Sardius. And Aretas expressly says in Cornelius a Lapide, Sardius quia sanguinei
and ignei coloris est, igneam, i. e. sublimissimam and efficacissimam Dei
naturam significat. But what the Remarker objects, that the Sardius is but of a
dead red color, is not true of the best sort, and least true in the appearance
of the Vision. Where though the color was not so brisk as that of a flame (for
there are three differences noted here both in Greek and Latin, (...), and
Pruna, Flamma, Splendour,) yet it might very well be like that of (...), or
pruna. Which suits best with the Vision in Ezekiel, which answers to this, and
is noted in the Exposition it self.

Verse. 4. These Elders are only Spiritual Rulers in the same sense, as they
and the four Beasts, chapter 5. are said to be Rulers. For they come together in
thanksgiving, from being redeemed from the Earth, and made Kings and Priests,
etc. So that the reigning here signified is such as is common to all Saints;
and therefore it is a gross perverting of Scripture to appropriate it to worldly
Princes.

Ans. The Song of Thanksgiving is this, chapter 5. v. 9. For thou wast slain, and
have redeemed us to God by thy blood out of every kindred and tongue, and
people, and nation. What wonderful weak arguing is this? Because the Kings out
of every Nation are redeemed by the blood of Christ, and publicly confess the
same, therefore they are no more Kings of any Nation than the common people
that are so redeemed. As if true Christianity took away all subordination of
Ranks and Degrees in the world. Why then have they not all Crowns, if they be
all Kings alike? or why has any so? Who grossly perverts Scripture now? And what
does the Remarker mean by worldly Princes? If he means worldly-minded Princes,
this contradicts the Scene of things here, which is a Representation of the
Millennial Happiness and Holiness upon Earth, and therefore these four and
twenty crowned Elders or Monarchs are not supposed worldly-minded. If he makes
them worldly Princes, because they are still in the world, that is, on the
Earth; that is a contradiction to Christ's Millennial reign on Earth, The
Millennium must be in Heaven then, not on Earth. If subordination of Ranks and
Degrees, from the Prince to the Pezant, make them worldly Princes, the Polity
in Heaven is worldly. For there is a subordinate Hierarchy of Angels there, and
Archangels, of Powers, Principalities, Dominions and Thrones, Colos. 1.6. and
so the Millennial Reign will be no where. O but it is said in the following
verse, And have made us to our God Kings and Priests, and we shall reign upon
the Earth. Ans. This questionless alludes to that which God commanded Moses to
tell the children of Israel touching him, Exodus 19.6. And ye shall be to me a
Kingdom of Priests, which is called a Royal Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2.9. and the
Apocalypse more distinctly styles the true Church in those happy days Kings and
Priests. But as under Moses the Nation being called a Kingdom of Priests, it
did not confound the distinction betwixt Priest and People, but Aaron was the
High Priest, and had other Priests under him, And Moses was King in Iesurun,
and had the heads of the Tribes under him; so the four and twenty Elders, and
the four Beasts, the whole body of the Church joining together in this
Doxology, Thou have made us Kings and Priests, and we shall reign upon Earth,
does not confound (with him that has a distinct understanding) the subordinate
degrees and ranks of men, but there may be Kings, and Bishops, and Priests that
are in another sense so, than the common people are. Therefore this ground is
exceedingly too weak to support such a monstrous Paradox in Theology and
Politics. That the reign of the Messiah alters not the course of Nature, but
sanctifies it and makes it holy, is an opinion of some of the best of the
Rabbis. And to give unnatural Expositions of Prophecies, is to cast a Mist
before the eyes of men, that they will not be able to discern when they are
fulfilled. As if the Millennium will never be till Princes be no more Kings
than the people; As the Jews fancy the times of the Messiah, not yet come,
because the Lion does not yet eat Hay with the Ox.

Verse. 6. The Sea of Glass being the Laver of Regeneration, does not signify
the condition of those that are regenerated thereby, but that which does
regenerate them, viz. that Manifestation of God in our Lord Jesus, the glory of
which we beholding as in a glass, are changed into the same Image from glory to
glory.

Ans. Why may not the Laver of Regeneration signify the condition of those
that are regenerate? For, qualis causa talis effectus. Why may not then the
quality of the one signify the quality of the other? The pure transparent
Laver of Regeneration, the purity of the Regenerate, and their perviousness to
be shined into and illuminated by the Spirit of God. This is spoke more within
compass than the Remarker's turning the Font into a Lookingglass, especially if
we consider that Sea signifies a Body of people. Besides, according to the
Remarker's own self, The manifestation of the glory of Christ regenerating us
into his own Image, and so we becoming like Christ; that which represents him
that regenerates, represents us also regenerated into his Image; whence it is
plain, that the Sea of Glass represents the Regenerate people, and that the
Remarker contradicts himself.

Chap. 5. Verse. 1.
WRitten within and without, cannot signify the outward sense or symbols of
the prophecy, and the inward sense or things represented thereby (for that
inward sense cannot be written, but only the words or symbols containing it,
so that one writing must serve for both) but does plainly mean that the outward
writing contains the Prophecy of the Seals and Trumpets, and the writing within
that of the opened Book.

Ans. It is a childish thing to think that the book seen by John was written
with all those words contained in the Apocalypse, but it was a symbol of the
Compages of those Prophetical Representations, and of the inward meaning of
them contained in the mind of Christ and the Holy Angel sent to John. Now as
the Book in general was a symbol of the figurative Representations, and the
inward meaning of them in the mind of the Angel, that is to say, of the inward
Prophetical sense of them; so the being writ within and without distinctly
signifies, the latter the external Representations and Symbols of the
Prophecies, and the being writ within the real prophetical sense of the figures
and symbols. And of the being writ within and without, that this is the natural
sense of it, is moreover manifest, because all the ancient Interpreters have
been harping much upon that string or something like it. S. Ierom amongst the
rest will have this Book to signify the Scripture: and the being writ within
and without to signify the literal and mystical sense. But certainly this
sense which I have given is much more natural, which restrains it to this
present Book of Prophecies, and to the symbolical sense and real prophetical
sense thereof. To take away this sense, and tell us only that the matter not
being able to be contained in the inside of the rolled Book, the rest was fain
to be writ on the outside, so that it was Liber opisthographus, is either to
trifle or do worse, to reproach the Penman as either over-sparing of his
Parchment, or overseen in the proportioning it to his matter. But this
intimation of these two senses I have noted is useful and weighty, whereby the
vanity and madness of those Interpreters is discovered that confound the
symbolical sense with the real or Prophetical, as R. H. has done. See the
Expositor's Epilogue, sect. 10. And this of our Remarker's is of little more
weight than the rest, viz. That written within and without must mean the
disposal of the Prophecy of the opened Book within, and that of the Seals and
Trumpets without. To what purpose is this Intimation? And besides, it is an
Hysteron-proteron, to write that which is last in the inside, and that which is
first on the outside, quite contrary to the mode of Opisthographal Writings.

Verse. 6. In the midst of the Throne and the four Beasts, is not between the
Throne and the Beasts. For if the Beasts stood so round about the Throne, the
Lamb could stand but between the Throne and one Beast. But the Beasts are here
indeed upon the Throne, as the Seraphims in Esaias, and so the Lamb rose up in
the midst, etc. Which appears farther from one of them, giving the seven Vials
to the seven Angels.

Ans. If twenty Beasts stood round about the Throne, the Lamb could stand
betwixt the Throne, and but one Beast. And the Lamb may be said to stand
betwixt the Throne and the Beasts, though he stood but betwixt the Throne and
one Beast, as is manifest both out of phrase of Scripture and common speech, so
that that is but a slight exception. But if the Beasts are indeed upon the
Throne, as the Remarker would have them, they are in good truth, very
unmannerly Beasts. Nor could they excuse their presumption from the example of
the Seraphims in Esaias. 6.2. For (...) there both Kimchi and Aben-Ezra render
Iuxta, not Super, near or by, not upon; and Munster and Grotius, with other
Interpreters of the best note, agree thereto. And why one of the Beasts may not
give the Vials to the seven Angels, standing by the Throne, as well as being
upon it, I understand not. These Beasts in Heaven are Angelical bodies or
companies, and therefore Peganius his Note on chapter 15.7. is ingenious, who
understands it of the Angelical General, who had the Lion for his Ensign, etc.

Chap. 6. Verse. 2.
THE warfare of this Conqueror is not spiritual, but his Conquering signifies
his victories over the Jews by the Roman Armies, whereby he fulfilled what he
had foretold of sending forth his armies to destroy those Murderers, etc. And
his, to conquer, signifies his like success against the Roman Empire by the
seven Trumpets and Vials, etc.

Ans. The Prophecy of the seven Churches commences from the very beginning of
the Church upon Christ's Ascension, and sending upon the Apostles the Holy
Ghost. Wherefore there is more humor than judgment to thwart Mr. Mede's
Interpretation of the Rider of the white Horse with a bow in his hand, to whom
a Crown was given, the Imperial Crown no doubt. For the aim of his War was to
turn the Roman Empire Christian, which was effected under the sixth Seal. Which
Rider of the white Horse Mr. Mede understands of Christ. Wherefore when Christ
upon his pouring down the Holy Ghost had fitted his chief Commanders in this
Evangelical warfare, to carry on the design of converting the Empire to
Christianity, why should not he be this noble Heroes on the white Horse, not F.
Vespasianus, nor Titus, his Son, who sacked Jerusalem, thus making the Prophecy
to commence forty years later than it should? The warfare therefore of this
Conqueror is both Spiritual, or Evangelical, and Political; that is to say, the
external guidance of affairs, as his moving Vespasian to his Wars against the
Jews, and giving him that success is in order to the propagation of the Gospel
through the Empire. And it is well known that Julian, to hinder the growth of
the Gospel, encouraged the Jews to rebuild their Temple. But this noble Heroes
on the white Horse, by his invisible Powers miraculously defeated the design,
as you may see in Ammianus Marcellinus. The stretching his going forth
conquering and to conquer, to the seven Trumpets and Vials seems to me a
forcing of the Text (beyond its proper intention) needless and impertinent.
Christ was so far from a conquering condition under the Trumpets, that his two
great Enemies, Mahomet and Antichrist, had in a manner overrun his Kingdom in
those times.

Verse. 8. Fourth part, is not here used, because the destruction did not reach
over all the Empire, for some of the Trumpets which reached but part of the
Empire, are said to fall upon the third part of the Earth, etc. because a third
part is used as a Symbol of the Empire.

Ans. But where is [a fourth part] used for a Symbol of the Empire? Wherefore
it is plain there is not the like Reason in both. And a fourth part of the
Earth being less than a third part of the Earth, it is plain that a portion
less than the whole Empire is intimated thereby.

Verse. 12. The Civil Authority, and not the Draconick Majesty, is the Sun, and
the Priesthood is the Moon; and the Draconick Majesty exercising its Authority
in both, is included in both.

Ans. This is dictated, not proved. If the Draconick Majesty influence by his
Authority both the Priesthood and the Secular Magistracy, there is then one Sun
and two Moons. For derived Authority is mutuatitious, as the light of the Moon,
and that which derives it, is as the light of the Sun, innate and Original. But
the secular Moon is not considered in this Vision. It lay upon the Remarker to
prove it.

Verse. 14. The Heavens departing as a scroll, signifies a dissolution of the
Pagan Magistracy, as well as of the Hierarchy; and therefore it is said in the
following verse, The Kings of the Earth, and great men, and chief Captains,
etc. called to the Rocks and Mountains, etc.

Ans. The Kings of the Earth, and great Men, and chief Captains calling to the
Rocks and Mountains, etc. does not signify a dissolution of the Secular
Magistracies, but it sets out the fear of those great Men that would support by
their Arms the Pagan Religion; who though they perished some of them in the
quarrel, yet the constitution of the Empire as to Seculars, continued still the
same, the same Orders and Offices, Emperors, Consuls, etc.

Chap. 7. Introduction.
THE first six Trumpets cannot (as the Introduction to this Chapter makes them)
be a vengeance on the Roman Empire for persecuting the Primitive Christians,
because it was destroyed ( viz. The Western Empire which is here intended) by
the three first of them. The fourth is upon Rome, under the seventh Head, viz.
The Ostrogothian Kings; the fifth and sixth do concern both the Greek Empire
and the Ten-horned Beast under the eighth Head. Also it is unagreeable with the
making the Christian Emperors the seventh Head, by reason of the Church being
then Symmetral. For it is unreasonable that the Empire being then in so regular
a condition as is supposed, should be punished for its former Irregularities.
But the Ostrogoths were indeed the seventh Head, as will be afterward showed.

Ans. If the Expositor had said all the six Trumpets were a vengeance on the
Roman Empire for persecuting the Primitive Christians, the Objection had been
the more valid. But he says only, In the time of the six Trumpets vengeance is
taken, etc. And I think if the Western Empire was destroyed by the three first
of them, vengeance is pretty well taken of the Empire. And if the Greek Empire
and Ten-horned Beast, of which the Greek Empire is part, be concerned in the
fifth and sixth Trumpets, vengeance is farther taken of that Empire that was
the Murderer of the Primitive Martyrs: In which many of the Pagans remaining
at first, and the Empire degenerating so generally into new Paganick
Superstitions and Idolatries, it is no wonder these plagues of the six Trumpets
should thus fall upon them. But there are two farther mistakes in the Remarker;
The first is, that the Church about the commencement of the Trumpets was
Symmetral, which is contrary to the Expositor's Hypothesis; and when the Church
became Asymmetral, the Christian Emperors who followed the guidance of the
Church in the same measure, became Asymmetral also, and were the Head of the
Beast, that was, is not, and yet is, in that measure it had degenerated into
that form. The second is, that it is unreasonable that God should punish the
Empire while it was in so regular a condition. For (to omit how the marked or
sealed company were safe, and that there are several passages in History
testifying thereto) that which Mr. Mede has here noted is considerable. Neque
sera, says he, Christianorum Imperatorum ibi rerum potiuntium pietas justitiae
Dei intercedere debuit non magis quam Pietas Iosiae ut regnum Iudae sanguinis a
Manasse effusi reum, excidium a Deo decretum effugeret. See 2 King. 2.16. And
the making the Ostrogoth Kings one head of the Beast; how vain a conceit that
is, I shall note in its proper place.

Verse. 2. Christ is not called the East, but the Dayspring, etc. And the
naming him from a quarter of the Heavens, is an improper Appellation, though to
name him from the light arising there, is proper. And the Angel's ascending
from the East was, because he came to seal those that were the Children of
light, faithfully keeping the doctrine of the Sun of righteousness, and
therefore did sutably to his office come from the Region of light.

Ans. There wants no farther answer to this Exception, than what may be read in
the Notes on this second verse. When Christ is called (...), which is here
rendered the East, a quarter of the World is not understood, but the light
arising in that quarter.

Verse. 9. The Palm-bearing Multitude are not the Victors over the Beast, but
the Primitive Martyrs, who slain under the Altar, cried for vengeance in the
fifth Seat, and being there comforted with white Robes given them, and told
that they should rest a little, whilst their brethrens sufferings were
accomplished; that time being expired, they in their white Robes come in
Triumphant Acclamations, entering into the happy state here described, which is
the Reward of their sufferings, as the first Resurrection is the Reward for the
Sufferers under the Beast. But for the Victors over the Beast to be here
signified, is improbable; both from the unseasonableness of it before the
sounding of the Trumpets, and the needlesness of it. Because what is said here,
if meant of those Victors, is more fully set forth after the sounding of the
Trumpets; Nor is there mention here of their advancement to Rule, or of
judgment being executed upon their Adversaries, which are the chief burden of
those Songs and Acclamations after the seventh Trumpet. Also here they are said
to be without fault before the Throne of God, and to serve him day and night in
his Temple; whereas of the Victors over the Beast in the New Jerusalem state
it is said, the Throne of God and the Lamb is in it, and I saw no Temple there.
The cry here also of salvation to our God, v. 10. does answer to that loud
voice in Heaven, chapter 12.10. Now is come salvation and strength, etc. Which
seems to be uttered by an Angelical quire, but is a rejoicing at the same
salvation wrought by the Devil's being cast out, as is intended by this cry,
etc. There Is also no coherence or connection betwixt the sealed company and the
Palm-bearers, to make the sense here given allowable. For the sealing is before
the beginning of the Trumpets, and the other not till the end of them. And
though the signification of the sealing may reach to the end of the Trumpets,
yet the coherence of all Prophecies being primarily in the Cortex or Schemes
and Symbols, and secondarily in the sense contained in them; there being no
such coherence here in the former, neither can there be in the latter.

Ans. The making the Palm-bearing multitude the Souls of the Primitive Martyrs,
is a mere conceit, and quiet out of the Rode of Prophetical Interpretation of
the Apocalypse, which insisteth not upon the Description of the State of Souls
in Heaven, but of the State of the Church on Earth. That short hint, touching
the Souls of the Primitive Martyrs under the Altar, that they should rest, that
is, expect a little while and their blood would be revenged, and that in the
mean time they were put in an happy condition, signified by their white Robes,
is sufficient; what more can be expected to be said of them? But the
description of the Palm-bearing company does not suit with separate Souls in
Heaven, but with the Inhabitants of the New Jerusalem on Earth, as may appear
to any unprejudiced Reader of the 15, 16 and 17 verses of this Chapter. The
conceit is so extravagant, that according to the Remarker, instead of having
but two Resurrections, we shall have three. So that instead of Blessed and holy
is he that has part in the first Resurrection, it should be said, Blessed and
holy is he that has part in the second Resurrection, if there was a
Resurrection before it, answering to the first Resurrection of them that
suffered under the Beast, as this passage in the Remark implies. And that the
Victors over the Beast should be here intimated, is neither unseasonable, it
being upon the Excursion of the time of the sealed, and forearmed against the
plagues of the six Trumpets; Nor needless, it being the Artifice of the
Apocalypse to represent the same time, and state of things, more and less
perfectly or fully, and to supply in one Vision what was omitted in another. So
that it is no wonder that this Vision notes only their Peace, Holiness and
Security from Persecution. Consider the Expositor's Explication of those
verses. And for their serving God day and night in his Temple, that is no other
Temple than that in the New Jerusalem, of which it is said, The Lord God
Almighty, and the Lamb is the Temple thereof. And certainly the Cry of
Salvation may well be as loud among the Victors over the Beast upon the Rising
of the Witnesses and the seventh Vial, as on the defeat of Paganism in
Constantine's time. And as for the Sealing, though it be declared before the
sounding of the Trumpets, yet the nature of the thing does necessarily imply,
that it is performed all along the succession of the Church through the first
six Trumpets. And lastly, the coherence of all Prophecy is primarily and
radically in the things predicted. But the coherence of the Cortex is a
slippery hold, it being framed and fitted very often merely for external
ornament and embellishing. This is so obvious and frequent in the Apocalypse,
that it is needless to name any example. Wherefore this sealing and sealed ones
reaching to the end of the sixth Trumpet, a mention of the Victors over the
Beast, the Witnesses rising at the Exit of the sixth Trumpet, is seasonably and
orderly placed, and with all imaginable dueness of coherence, which was the
thing to be demonstrated.

Chap. 8. Verse. 8.
SEA is not used here as signifying Three or Third, and so being a character of
the Roman Empire, but signifies the universal dominion of the Earth, as it does
in Daniel's Vision of the four Beasts, where the four Winds are said to strive
upon the great Sea, etc. And the Roman Empire being reputed a third part of the
then known dominions of the Earth, it is therefore called a third part of the
Sea.

Ans. The Expositor does not here say that Sea signifies Three or Third, but
that it signifies the Terretories and Jurisdiction of Rome, the Number Three or
Third being the character of the Roman Empire. But the ill pointing of the
place, made the Remarker mistake the sense, and make so wise a Remark.

Verse. 12. The Sun signifies not the King only, but the Legislative Authority,
wherever it resides, that being the Light whereby the affairs of all Dominions
are guided and governed; the Moon signifies those who have the Rule and
administration of matters in Religion, and the Stars the Grandees or chief
Ministers in the Government.

Ans. The Remarker is of one mind, but Achmetes and the Indian, Persian and
Egyptian Onirocriticks of another, who say the Sun does (...), constantly and
immutably signify the King, the Moon the next in power to him. But that it
signifies the Legislative Power in abstracto, is the private fancy of the
Remarker, for which he has neither Reason nor Example. And the same is to be
said of the Moon's signifying the Priesthood. That it signifies next in
Authority, is warranted by the Interpretation of Ioseph's Dream of the Sun and
Moon and eleven Stars worshipping him, where the Moon is interpreted his
Mother, though no Priest, as the Sun his Father.

Chap. 9. Verse. 2.
THE Sun darkened here is not the Gospel, but the Authority or Legislative Power
of those Dominions overrun by the Saracens, and Religion but secondarily
concerned, as it suffers by the suffering of the Authority which upheld it. And
as the Sea denotes the many Dominions of the Earth, so does the Sun here
signify the various Powers or Autorities that governed them.

Ans. That the Sun does not signify Legislative power in abstracto, but the
highest person in Authority, I have noted already. And though one great Sea may
signify a comprehension of several distinct Kingdoms subject to tumultuate, or
rather War one against another, as having no union under one Head* yet the
several Heads of these Kingdoms cannot so properly be represented by one Sun,
which naturally implies one Head over them all. Wherefore being that the
Saracens overrun so many Kingdoms and Principalities, if this must be the
darkning of them, it would then have been said that the smoke of the Abyss
darkened the Stars. For when Multitudes of Kings and Princes are concerned
together, that have no dependence one of another, they are then signified by
Stars. Whence the Red Dragon is said to have pulled down so many Stars with his
tail, that is, to have subjected so many Kings and Princes to the Roman Empire.
Wherefore it is rashly pronounced, That the Sunshine of the Gospel of the Sun
of righteousness is not meant by the Sun that is here said to be darkened,
whenas the smoke of the pit must be Mahometism. And therefore in this passage
Religion most certainly is related to, and is the main concern of the whole
Book of the Apocalypse, and other things predicted merely in order to it, viz.
to the right worship of God through Jesus Christ. And therefore that sense
which is easy and natural, and tends that way, is most assuredly the true
sense of any passage of these Prophecies. See the spiritual signification of
Sun in the Expositor's Alphabet of Iconisms.

Chap. 10. Verse. 2.
THE Ten-horned Beast did rise out of the Sea, and two-horned Beast out of the
Earth; and our Savior setting his right foot on the Sea, and his left foot on
the Earth, does signify here his coming down from Heaven, to put down all
Authority and power under his feet, the Earthly Powers within his Kingdom being
within the seventh Trumpet to be abolished, and all things to become new, by
forming a new Heaven and a new Earth, or establishing the Kingdom of Heaven
upon Earth; and so making the Kingdoms of the World become the Kingdoms of our
Lord, and of his Christ.

Ans. This Remark is not much amiss, saving that it lears toward that foul
conceit, that there will be no Monarchy nor Princes over their respective
Principalities and Kingdoms, where the Kingdom of Christ is set up, whenas the
twenty four crowned Elders do most certainly denote the pure Apostolic
Christianity of those many Kings and Princes that will be contained within the
Kingdom of Christ in the Millennium: And setting one foot on the Sea, and
another on the Earth, refers particularly to the vanquishing the ten-horned
Beast that came out of the Sea, chapter 13. and the false Prophet or two-horned
Beast that came out of the Earth, v. 11. (out of a Claypit, for the Clay in
Daniel signifies the Ecclesiastic regenerating party) which two, chapter 19.20.
are taken alive and cast into the lake of fire and brimstone.

Verse. 3. The sounding of the seventh Trumpet is plainly not at the time of the
roaring of the mighty Angel, and therefore cannot be branched into the seven
Thunders. For after his roaring and the seven Thunders uttering their voices
thereon, and the other matters after declared, there is a Regress to begin a
new Prophecy of the Contents of the opened Book, and to bring the same down to
the seventh Trumpet also, that the affairs of the six Trumpets and the opened
Book ( viz. during the time of the Antichristian and worldly Powers) being
connected as synchronizing the seventh Trumpet, might close both together. The
seven Thunders therefore seem symbolically to signify a preparation of the
Christian party against the great day of God at the seventh Trumpet, as the
three unclean spirits, like Frogs, are of the Antichristian party. That as the
latter bestir themselves with miraculous deceits to excite the Princes of the
Earth to battle, so the former signifies a miraculous power of spirit, that
shall exert it self in many Christian Heroes, whereby they shall become
exciters and conductors of the Christian party to the same; and hereunto shall
also become Boanerges's thundering out such powerful convictive testimonies
against the abominations of their Enemies, and such denunciations of God's
judgments against them for the same, as were not meet before that time to be
uttered, and therefore were to be sealed up, etc. Some such meaning seems to be
signified in Micah, chapter 5. v. 5, 6.

Ans. The more clearly to decide this point, let us consider that the
Apocalypse consists of three Prophecies, The Prophecy of the seven Churches,
The Prophecy of the sealed Book, and the Prophecy of the opened Book; And that
as it less derogates from their perfection, to be conceived each of them to
reach from the beginning of the Church to the end of the World, viz. of the
affairs of this Earth, so of the first of them I have proved the same, as also
shown that the second commenceth from the beginning of the Church, and that it
reaches to the end of the world, is plain from hence. The whole time of the
Book consists but of seven Seals, and some things of the book reach to the end
of the world, therefore the seventh Seal must reach to the end of the world.
And the seventh Seal being divided into seven Trumpets, the seventh Trumpet
must reach to the end of the world. Wherefore it is plain that the Prophecy of
the sealed Book reaches to the end of the world; And if this Reasoning will not
serve, I will anon confirm it by the Oath of the Angel. But in the mean time
let us farther note, that the sounding of each of these seven Trumpets, and the
Visum of each Trumpet do synchronize or are of equal extent, begin and end
together. As for example, The Visum of the sixth Trumpet, which contains the
overrunning of the Turks, and the general Impenitency of the Western Christian
World for their Idolatry, etc. c. 9.20. The sixth Trumpet, I say, is conceived
to sound all the while this Visum continues. Now the seventh Trumpet belonging
to the Prophecy of the sealed Book, it was (before we come to the Prophecy of
the opened Book) immediately to succeed the sixth, and to sound all the time
its Visum is exhibited. But it is manifest the roaring of the Angel immediately
succeeds the sounding of the sixth Trumpet; wherefore it is plain, that the
roaring of the Angel is substituted in the place of the sounding of the seventh
Trumpet; and that the roaring of the Angel, as well as the sounding of the
seventh Trumpet, reaches to the end of the world. But the Text says, (...),
when he cried or roared, (not (...), when he had cried) seven Thunders uttered
their voices. Wherefore this roaring of the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, which
reaches from the sixth Trumpet to the end of the world, is divided into seven
Thunders. But the seventh Trumpet reaches from the sixth to the end of the
world, therefore the space of the seventh Trumpet is divided into seven
Thunders. And how easy, natural, and indeed inevitable is this to one that is
not blinded with prejudice. That in this Prophecy of the sealed Book, as the
seventh Seal is divided into seven Trumpets, so the seventh Trumpet (which as
the rest belongs to the Prophecy of the sealed Book) should be divided into
seven Thunders, those seven Thunders immediately following the sixth Trumpet,
as the seven Trumpets immediately follow the sixth Seal. Out of all which it is
manifest, that the Prophecy of the sealed Book reaches to the end of the
world, as well as the Prophecy of the seven Churches.

Now therefore to consider the Remark on this verse, it is manifest out of what
has been said, that the seventh Trumpet does synchronize with the roaring of
the mighty Angel, because his roaring is substituted into the place of the
sounding of the seventh Trumpet, which reaches to the end of the world, and
that roaring being branched into seven Thunders, that the seventh Trumpet is
branched into seven Thunders. Nor does the Regress to begin a new Prophecy of
the Contents of the opened Book clash at all with this synchronizing of the
seventh Trumpet, with the roaring of the Angel and the seven Thunders, but most
naturally agree with it; this roaring and seven Thunders reaching to the end of
the world (to the utmost term of the Laodicean succession, of the (...), as
Ptolemy calls it, Laodicea combusta, Laodicea burnt down by Thunder and
Lightning from Heaven at the Conflagration, which congruity in all likelihood
gave occasion of denominating these seven divisions of the last Trumpet from
Thunders; and farther confirms, that these Thunders reach to the end of the
world), and therefore the most fittingly intimates a Regress to a new Prophecy,
namely, to that of the opened Book. Which, if we will not derogate from its
perfection, must, as the two former, reach from the beginning of the Church to
the end of the world. And as for the synchronizing of the affairs of the first
six Trumpets, with those of the opened Book, till the seventh, that it is a
precarious surmise, will appear in its due place. But now it being so plain,
that the seven Thunders synchronize with the seventh Trumpet, it is manifest
that all that the Remarker delivers about the Frogs, and Hero's, and
Boanerges's (the seven Thunders being a symbol of no such things, but of a
distinction, as other sevens in the Apocalypse, of that last space of time into
so many Intervals; and those things being before the seventh Trumpet, according
to his supposition,) it is manifest, I say, that all those conceits of the
Remarker are only an idle evanid Dream.

Verse. 4. As, [Write not] viz. the things which the seven Thunders uttered, is
the general translation, so is it far more agreeable with the command to seal
them up, than that singular Translation, Thou shall write them hereafter. For
if they were to be written at all, where should they be written but here where
they are uttered? And to write them hereafter, is to make them belong to the
opened Book, whereas they belong to the sealed Book, if the seventh Trumpet be
branched into seven Thunders.

Ans. His Remark upon this verse is more material. But I answer, that it is not
one single copy we rely on. The Biblia Regia, says David Pareus, has it, (...),
Thou shall write them hereafter. And Andreas, (...), Write them hereafter. And
the copy that Grotius comments on, whatever it is, has it. (...), Thou shall
write them hereafter. And I must confess I do little question but that is the
true Reading, whenas our ordinary copy has it, which our English Translation
follows, (...), Which corrupt Reading, I conceive, proceeded from the
heedlesness or unskilfulness of some Scribe, and some ill writ copy, which made
him turn (...), written contractedly thus, [(...)] into (...), and so made it
(...). And afterward, (...) being the future tense, and therefore not so fitly
applied to a present action, others turned (...) into (...). But from this and
for that (...) is superflous, for (...) had been enough; or if a Pronoun had
been to be added, it would rather have been (...), and the whole command would
have run thus, (...), or (...). But whatever Writers or MSS have (...), I
conceive that after the true Reading (...) was corrupted into (...) was turned
into (...) by some busy Critic or Scribe, which others afterward might follow:

From these considerations, I say, I do strongly suspect, or rather not at all
doubt but that (...) is the true Reading. And it agrees very well with the
command to seal them up, as being needless to relate the affairs of the seven
Thunders here, because they shall be related in the Prophecy of the opened
Book, that Prophecy containing the Fate of the Church as the other of the
Empire; And therefore this is but a more Majestic Transition from the finished
course of the Prophecy of the sealed Book, to make a Regress to the Prophecy of
the opened Book. Nor is there the least Inconvenience that the distinct Visions
writ down in the Prophecy of the opened Book, and in that Regard belonging to
it, should as to the Intervals of the Thunders spoke of in the Prophecy of the
sealed Book be referred Synchronistically to that Prophecy also.

Verse. 6. If [There shall be no more time] did denote the end of the world, it
would be very improperly placed here above a thousand years before. But it is
meant of the Political Order and Government of the world, which [Time] does
symbolically signify; because all Political government is managed and upheld
by certain Laws, and Rules, and Forms, and Methodical ordering of affairs, as
Time is measured by Days, and Months, and Years, etc. Whenas in the Millennial
State all Government will be regulated wholly by the guidance of the Spirit of
God dwelling among them, and so thoroughly enlightening them with the Judgments
of his Truth, that they shall not need the light of the Sun or Moon, viz. of
those humane Laws and Policies, etc. So that Time shall be no more, and the
Mystery of God shall be finished, does here answer to that great voice from the
Throne, at the pouring forth of the seventh Vial, viz. It is done. And to the
same voice from him that sat on the Throne, chapter 21. who also there says,
Behold I make all things new, viz. The Mystery of God being finished by the
former things passing away, a new state of things is to be introduced, as is
there after described.

Ans. At the expiration of the sixth Trumpet, it is not improper to give notice
that there will be no more time than what is contained in the seventh, because
the seventh is both contiguous to the sixth, and reaches to the end of the
world, as was noted above. But that Time signifies Political Order and
Government, is a private precarious Notion of the Remarker, without any ground
or example in Scripture, or the Onirocriticks. And for his reason for which he
imagines it signifies so, it is over-lax. Time indeed is divisible into Ages,
Ages into Years, Years into Months, Months into Days, etc. But what greater
matter of order in this, than in the dividing and subdividing of any other
quantity? Or if there be, how does this Typifie Political Orders and Laws more
than in Husbandry, Mechanics, etc. So that it signifying all things under the
Sun done in any order or method as well as Political Laws and Government, when
this Time here spoken of shall be no more, we may all put up our Pipes,
Tradesmen, Husbandmen, Students, in whatever Arts and Faculties, and fall
asleep with our fingers in our mouths, unless a spirit waken us that will drive
us to act without order or government, which yet can be no Apostolic Spirit,
because the Apostle's Precept is, 1 Cor. 14.40. Let all things be done decently
and in order. How much better were it, Sapere ad sobrietatem, than to entertain
such high-slown conceits as these? In these best times undoubtedly there will
be humane Laws and Polities, that is, Laws and Polities constituted by men, but
perfectly conformable and complyable with the Laws of God, and dictates of his
Holy Spirit, and his guidance will assist in making them. To fancy an
Aziluthick State on Earth, whenas a Briathick Constitution is consistent with
the State of Heaven, is a too too extravagant surmise. As for, It is done, and
All things are made New. Here would be rather undoing than doing, and nothing
would be made new. No new Heaven, nor new Earth (which certainly has a
Political sense) if there were no Polity in this renewed state. And the Polity
will be constituted by men, though by the guidance of the Holy Spirit, which
will invigorate also both Governors and People to support the said Laws, and
to live according thereunto.

Verse. 7. The [saving] here is a great straining of the Text, to uphold a crazy
Notion. For whereas it is said in the Notes on the Verse, That the sense is
exceeding imperfect, unless (...) be put for (...), or (...), saving, or
except, the common sense given of it is very clear, and this new imposed sense
so exceeding imperfect as to be really false. And the several places cited to
prove that it may be taken in this sense, is no proof that it is taken so here.
Nor do those Citations prove that it is so taken in them. For the Particle
(...), or But, will signify the same with saving or except, etc.

Ans. The Remarker here is very Magisterial, and somewhat Scoptical. But the
Expositor is crazy neither in his notion nor the proof of it. For no man that
understands Greek, but must acknowledge that our English Translation is out in
rendering those words, (...), thus, When he shall begin to sound, the Mystery of
God should be finished. For it leaves out the Particle [(...)] and yet makes
but imperfect sense, rendering (...) [should be finished] whenas to make the
sense perfect, it should be rendered, shall be finished, but that would ill
agree with (...). But in the days of the voice of the seventh Angel, when he
shall begin to sound, the Mystery of God shall be finished: That is the sense
our English Translation aims at, but then it should not be (...), as it is, but
(...); And yet so [(...)] being left out, which yet is intolerable, (...),
will be rendered unsutably to the words following, (...), ut Evangelizavit, as
he told the joyful news to his servants the Prophets. Wherefore this Mystery
of God containing that joyful news, it is very hard to conceive it not to
contain the new Jerusalem and the Millennial reign of Christ. Which Mystery is
not finished at the beginning of the sounding of the seventh Trumpet, but
rather at the end thereof. But now render but (...) [saving] as it certainly
does signify sometimes, and (...) [shall sound] as it naturally signifies, and
all will run as glib as can be, (according to the most approved copies of the
New Testament set out by Isaac Casaubon and Dr. Winterton, which is the
Cambridge Greek New Testament;) thus; That there shall be time no more saving
in the days of the voice of the seventh Angel, when he shall sound and the
Mystery of God be finished. Which shows that the sounding of the seventh
Trumpet will reach to the end of the World. But now, according to these
Authentic Greek Copies, if you render (...), [But,] not [Saving] or [Except].
The sentence will not be sense: thus; That there shall be time no more: But in
the days of the seventh Angel, when he shall sound [or begin to sound] and the
Mystery of God be perfected. What then? what of all that? one may well say.
This plainly is not perfect sense to any one that understands sense, unless you
take away the Colon, and take [but] in the same sense that [except] has: which
is all that I contend for. Wherefore it being so plain, that the sentence is
imperfect sense, unless you understand (...) and But to signify the same that
(...) and [Except] if (...) does sometimes signify so, it plainly follows it
signifies so here. This is more than enough to this Remark.

I will only here note which I intimated above on v. 3. That this Oath of the
mighty Angel, That there shall be time no more saving in the days of the voice
of the seventh Angel, plainly imports that the sounding of the seventh Trumpet
reaches to the end of the World, or of the Scene of affairs on this Earth,
(whence I inferred that the Sealed-book-prophecy did so.) Which is an Article
so contrary to the belief of Atheistical and sensual men, that it is no wonder
that so strong an Asseveration is used to impress it on them. But this answers
to his calling himself, the Amen, etc. in his Epistle to the Laodicean Church,
where the same Article is asserted. See the Exposition it self on this present
Chapter. This Angel therefore swearing at the Expiration of the sixth Trumpet,
that there shall be no more time, saving in the days of the sound of the
seventh Trumpet, and this before there is any entrance into the Prophecy of the
opened Book, plainly joins the seventh Trumpet to the sixth, and so makes a
decursion from the beginning of the Sealed-book-prophecy, to the very end of
it, conterminating to the end of the world, and by mentioning the seven
Thunders also before the said Sealed-book-prophecy is finished, points us
plainly to a division of the sounding of the seventh Trumpet into seven such
Intervals, as the seventh Seal was divided into, viz. seven Trumpets, as we
noted above. And thus by the Oath of the Angel, as I observed before, by the
bye, it is assuredly true that the Prophecy of the sealed Book reaches to the
end of the World.

Chap. 11. Verse. 1.
It Is very incongruous that the Temple or Thysiasterion, and the Outward Court
being one Entire Fabric, should signify prophetically things succeeding one
another. But they here signify indeed things that synchronize. For the
Worshippers in the Temple, and at the Altar, are measured, to be preserved from
those evils which they in the outward Court do suffer by its being trodden
down, and are the same with the two Witnesses in the next verse, the Moses and
Aaron, or those that officiate in the ruling or judicial, and in the Priestly
offices. The Worshippers in the Temple signify the first, because there was
the Law in the Ark, on which the Divine Presence was seated in the Mercy-seat,
as on a Throne of Judgment, to be consulted with, and the Worshippers at the
Altar do plainly enough signify the latter.

Ans. That things coexistent together, may signify things succeeding in time
one after another, may appear from that Analogy Space has to Time; and they
partake so much in the common similitude of one nature, that Spatium signifies
as well Spatium Temporis, as Spatium Loci, as is abundantly manifest in reading
Latin Authors. And as in the Extension of Space or Place, one part is out of
another, not confounded one with another, and upon some respect one part
counted in site before another, another after: So it is also in the succeeding
parts of Time. And as the parts of Space are measurable or numerable, so are
the parts of Time: And there may be the same proportion betwixt a part of
Space, to a part of Space; that there is betwixt a part of Time, to a part of
Time, and alternatim. So that even from hence we may be satisfied, that the
Area of the Inner and the Outer Court, without any Incongruity, may be made
prophetically to signify things succeeding one another. If the Inner Court
have an aptitude to denote the Church in her purer condition, and the Outer in
her less pure, as questionless they have, and she be first in that first
condition, and after in the second; it is plain that the Inner and Outer Court,
though they be coexistent, yet have an aptness to signify things succeeding
one another. And if the Area of the Inner Court bear the same proportion to the
Area of the Outer, that the Time of the Purity of the Church to the Time of her
lesser Purity, by easy Analogy the Proportion of the Outer Area to the Inner,
will give us the proportion of the time of the less Purity of the Church to the
time of her Purity. These things will be whether we will or no.

And these significancies are so congruous and natural, that they are
ordinarily hit upon. Thus Cornelius a lapide on Ezekiel says, Atrium gentium
non mensuratum significat innumerabilem gentium multitudinem Ecclesiae
adjungendam. And H. N. makes the Sanctum and the Sanctum Sanctorum two
Dispensations, the one following the other, and favorably interprets the
latter of the Dispensation of his own Followers. Also the three immured
Intervals of Space in Cebes his Table, signify three States or Moral
conditions of men succeeding one another in time. And the seven Churches in the
Apocalypse, though coexistent together, yet the spirit of Prophecy makes use of
them to signify seven succeeding States of the Church Catholic and
Apostolic. And the parts of Nebuchadnezzar's Image he saw in his dream, though
viewed altogether, represented notwithstanding four successive Kingdoms,
according to the number of the Metals it consisted of. And lastly, Aretas, even
upon this place, by the Inner Court understands the Iudaical Church, by the
Outer the Christian. Wherefore it is very congruous to understand, though they
be States in succession, the Inner Court of the pure State of the Christian
Church, and the Outer of her State Apostatical.

But to make the Inner and Outer Court to signify things that do synchronize,
spoils those elegant Analogies of Time and Place, which I noted above. For as
the Outer Court's dimensions lie out from the Inner, so the Time that is
signified by the one, should be distant from the Time that is signified by the
other, and should by no means synchronize; which is as gross and harsh as to
fancy the stones that paved the Inner and Outer Court laid confusedly and
intermixtly one by another.

Besides, making the things signified here by the Inner and Outer Court to
synchronize, makes the Prophecy of the opened Book to commence no higher than
the beginning of the seventh or last Seal. Which is a strange mutilation, or if
you will, decollation of the Prophecy of the opened Book, whenas the Prophecy
of the seven Churches, and of the sealed Book, and it was a point of their
perfection to do so, commenced from the beginning of the Church. Wherefore
this is a surmise very absurd. And the Absurdity still appears greater, in that
the proper undertaking of the Opened-book-prophecy is to set out the affairs of
the Church, as the other of the sealed Book the affairs of the Empire. And yet
thus it would omit the chiefest and most notable times thereof, viz. the
Primitive Times, and the Victory of Christianity over Paganism. For if this
present Vision begin so low as the seventh Seal, the next of the Woman clothed
with the Sun, must do so too, or else it would be a gross neglect of order and
method, not to begin the Prophecy of the opened Book with a Vision that had as
high an Epoch of time as any. Which considerations may assure any intelligent
Reader, that the Remarker is enormously out in making the things signified by
the Inner and Outer Court to synchronize.

Such a monstrous mistake as this must needs beget a many frigid and dilute
notions and interpretations: Such as these are that follow. The measuring of
the Inner Court signifies its preserving from the toils the Outer is oppressed
with, which he offers as an argument that they synchronize. But the natural and
obvious sense, and only sense of measuring a thing, is to try if it have its
just dimensions, discoverable by the measure. Thou son of man, show the house
to the house of Israel, that they may be ashamed of their Iniquities, and let
them measure the pattern. And suppose measuring signified preserving, yet it
follows not that they of the Inner Court, and they of the Outer synchronize,
but that such an Interval of the Church which answers to the Inner Court, shall
be preserved from such Apostasies as that succession of the Church which
answers to the Outer Court shall fall into.

And a like groundless conceit it is, that the Worshippers in the Temple, and
in the Thysiasterion, should be the two Witnesses, as if the two Witnesses were
not sufficiently described under that very Title in the Residue of the Vision,
and moreover by an allusion to Zorobabel and Ieshuah, but must be typified
also, the secular Magistratical Witness by those in the Temple, the Sacerdotal
by those in the Thysiasterion. Which is the most evanid and uncouth conceit
that any man of wit and parts could pitch upon. But the former must signify
so, because there was the Law in the Ark, on which the Divine Presence was
seated in the Mercy-seat, as on a Throne of Judgment to be consulted with. But
I answer; therefore the Worshippers there were in the quality of Subjects,
rather than Magistrates. Besides, he that sits here in the Throne, sits there
not to judge Causes, but to utter Oracles, which is the office rather of a
Priest or Prophet, than of a Judge, as Aaron's Breast Plate was called the
(...): And this Sanctum Sanctorum, where the Divine Presence is seated, in
Hebrew is called (...), which the Seventy usually render (...) or (...), but
Aquila and Symmachus (...), as Buxtorf also Oraculum. What Is this to civil
Magistracy? And though the Law was in the Ark, yet this Law concerns Sacerdotal
matters as much, if not more than Civil; and Aaron's Rod that budded was there
also. To all which you may add, that the Temple altogether relates to
Sacerdotal matters and Religion. To the high Priest alone it was permitted to
go into the Sanctum Sanctorum. In the Sanctum was the Incense-Altar, which was
once a year sprinkled with the blood of the Sacrifice by the high Priest. And
the golden Candlesticks were also there, which denote the light of the World,
as the Altar of Incense the requisiteness of Prayers; which two duties of
Preaching and Praying, (the Priest's lips shall preserve knowledge) are the
notorious duties of the Priesthood. Thus it was with the Temple, but for the
Thysiasterion, not the Priests alone were there but upon the occasion of
offering their oblations and sacrifices, which the sons of Aaron assisted in,
the people had frequent recourse thither. Let us consider what Oecumenius and
Elias Cretensis tells us in Cornelius a lapide, upon Exodus 27.21. There were
three Tabernacles, say they, the first the outmost closed on the sides with
Curtains, and open above, which they call (...), Sanctum seculare, or Mundanum,
because it was common to all. In this stood the brazen Altar for Holocausts sub
dio: This therefore is the Thysiasterion. The second Tabernacle was the
Sanctum, quod erat quasi Templum Sacerdotum, hoc undique clausum erat and nexum
Sancto Sanctorum. In hoc erat Candelabrum, etc. And the last Tabernacle was the
Sanctum Sanctorum soli Pontifici patens, etc. Add unto these the Authority of S.
Chrysostom and Theophylact, to which also Erasmus subscribes. Out of this I
think it is abundantly manifest, what a groundless conceit this is to make
those in the Temple the Secular and Magistratical witness, and those in the
Thysiasterion the Sacerdotal, when both the Temple and Thysiasterion belong to
the Priests, (though the people had also access to the Thysiasterion,) but are
unfit to represent those that are in the ruling or judicial office. And
therefore it is plain that those in the Temple and Thysiasterion signify but
one sort of men, or one succession of the Church, that are symmetral indeed, as
answering to the measure they were measured with, but one part less holy than
another, as the Holiness of the Sanctum Sanctorum, Sanctum and Thysiasterion
differs in degrees. For the Church in her Holiness lessened by degrees, till at
last she fell into her gross Apostasy.

Verse. 2. The Court without the Temple being left out, and not measured, is
explained by the Holy City, being trodden under foot, etc. Which shows that the
coming down of the New Jerusalem from Heaven is the Restoration of the outward
Court, that God may be worshipped there as in the inward Court, which, during
the time of the other being left out, continued in such a state as to need no
restoration, and consequently they synchronize.

Ans. That City, viz. the Church, which was holy before the Apostasy, and
therefore compared to the Inner Court, being trodden down by the Gentiles after
the Apostasy came in, is compared to the Outer: But the Outer Court is here
explained by the Holy City, because in Moses's time there was no other Outer
Court than the Camp of Israel, or the holy people of the Jews, who were
gathered in the Outer Court when the Temple was built to serve God, as Mr. Mede
has rightly noted. And therefore the coming down of the New Jerusalem from
Heaven is the Restoration of the Outer Court, that is of the Apostated Church
to the Primitive Purity of the Inner, before the Apostasy. But what argument
of the state of the Inner and Outer Court sychronizing can there be gathered
from hence?

Verse. 7. The ordinary Translation, viz. And when the Witnesses shall have
finished their Testimony, is true: And the Beast overcoming them is not only
Politically meant in keeping them out of power, but also in silencing them from
Prophesying; And for this it is that the dwellers on Earth do so rejoice over
them, because the Witnesses had tormented them, viz. by their prophesying. Now
they prophesied 1260 days, so that the victory over them for which there is such
joy, being after their prophesying, viz. for their being silenced, it must be
after the 1260 days. Nor can they be supposed to prophecy the three days and
an half they are said to lie dead, though they may when they are only
Politically slain, viz. kept out of power.

Ans. The ordinary Translation is true, so far as it respects the sense of the
Letter or Cortex; But [when they shall be a finishing their testimony] is also
a true and natural sense, and indeed the only sense consistent with the truth
of the Prophecy, as I have clearly proved in the second part of my threefold
Appendage. And for the silencing the Witnesses after they had prophesied 1260
days, that this must be their three days and an half lying dead is a mavelous
mistake. For how can they be silenced, but upon the penalty of their
prophesying or witnessing? There is no other way of silencing them imaginable.
And for God knows how many hundred years they were so severely silenced before,
that banishment, imprisonment, all manner of torturous Deaths were their
penalty, for offering to speak against the corruptions of the Apostatized
Church. And lastly, they may prophecy as well when they are said to lie dead,
as when politically slain. For to be Politically slain, is either at least to
have no power or influence on affairs for the right guiding of them, or
actually to be outed from any office in Church or State, which is to lie dead
as to those points, but yet they may prophecy at their own peril. Political
Death is opposed here only to natural Death. And when they are silenced, i. e.
put out of Authority, or license to preach or prophecy, that is one kind of
that Political Death that is opposed to Natural; but they thus lying not
naturally dead, they may preach or prophecy as I said, at their own peril.
This therefore is a gross error.

Verse. 12. This Call from Heaven is not any Political call by Princes, but the
Exaltation by the spirit of life, that entered into them, and set them on their
feet, whereon judgment began to be given unto them to take away the Dominion of
the Beast; but their rising hereby in power and interest in the world, was by
such secret operations of God, as is undiscernible to the world, and so they
ascend as in a cloud. This Spiritual Exaltation of them may occasion their
worldly Exaltation also by Princes to such employments as they are free to
accept of.

Ans. Heaven, in the prophetic style, is the Region of Political Powers, and
to interpret a Prophecy out of the road of the Prophetic style, is merely to
trifle with a man's own private fancy. And the Spirit of life entering into
them, signifies Politically, as in that Vision of Ezekiel, chapter 37.9. And to
interpret the cloud they ascend up to Heaven in, of secret operations of God,
and undiscernible to the world, being again quite out of the road of the
Prophetic style, is a mere private imagination. Achmetes interprets, ascending
in a cloud, of glory and power, and the Scripture frequently describes that
state so. And Interpreters ordinarily intimate that this ascending of the
Witnesses in a cloud after their three days lying dead, is an allusion to
Christ's Ascension, after he had lain three days in the Grave, who ascended in
a cloud conspicuously and gloriously to take possession of that Throne and
Dominion his Father had promised him.

Verse. 13. The tenth part of the City fell, cannot signify the taking away the
Tithes of it, For the words denote a ruin to the body of the City, and not a
loss of some appurtenances as revenues, etc. Which is plainly confirmed by the
following words, viz. the great Earthquake, and the seven thousand slain, and
the affrightment of the rest. Which seems to aim at some great Revolution, to
the subverting of the Antichristian State of affairs in one of the ten Kingdoms
the Empire was divided into, and so introducing such a settlement as to be a
prelude and pattern to what is to succeed in other Dominions.

Ans. The meaning is not, that the Tithes, i. e. the holy Revenue of the City,
were taken away, without the fall of any part of the City; But being the Tithes
did fall, but whether a just tenth part of the City or no, was uncertain, the
Expositor contented himself with what was certain. But that there was a partial
fall of the Polity or City, he does not question. Brightman and Pareus
understanding by the City, the Polity of Antichrist or his Kingdom (for to
understand it of a City of Wood and Stone, is a little too gross, I think)
adventure to pronounce, that at least a tenth part of the Papal City fell in
the late Reformation. Which if true, I willingly admit to be understood by the
fall of the Tenth part of the City, as well as the Tithes, if not rather. But
that this Earthquake should be meant of one of the ten Kingdoms, is a dwindling
business, the prophecy is fulfilled in a more illustrious way already.

Verse. 14. The third Wo-Trumpet cannot be the pouring forth of the Vials,
because the Trumpets belong to the Visions of the sealed Book, and the Vials to
the opened Book; and also because the state of affairs before the Vials are far
from agreeing with what is described at the seventh Trumpet.

Ans. The Description indeed of the Visions of the Vials, and other Visions
that fill up the Interval of the seventh Trumpet, which is the third
Wo-Trumpet, belong to the Prophecy of the opened Book, as being set down there.
But this hinders not but that they may be referred for order sake unto the
third Wo-Trumpet. Is it not expressly said here in the Text, that the seventh
Angel sounded, though it be in the Prophecy of the opened Book? What therefore
is this for, but to give us notice of the due order and Intervals of things in
this Opened-book-prophecy, from what we may observe in the
Sealed-book-prophecy, where there was mention of the seven Thunders? And this
also may give great countenance to that Reading, (...). For this sounding of
the seventh Angel mentioned here, implies, that what was suppressed, and not
written, concerning the affairs of the sounding of the seventh Angel in the
Sealed-book-prophecy, shall be declared in that Interval of the Visions of the
Opened-book-prophecy, that synchronizes with the seventh Trumpet of the sealed
Book. This is an Observation very remarkable. And as for the state of affairs
before the Vials, how well or ill they agree with what is described at the
seventh Trumpet, I can say nothing, unless the Remarker had particularized; But
I presume the imagined disagreement is from his own misplacing them before the
Rising of the Witnesses. But place them after, and the Agreement is good, and
according to that auspicious Acclamation, v. 15.

Verse. 15. No Kingdoms of the World became the Kingdoms of the Lord by the
Reformation. For though they rejected the Pope's Supremacy, and reformed some
gross Corruptions, yet they continued so many as made them not cease to belong
to the Ten-horned Beast. And indeed Christ's Kingdom being to be governed
wholly according to the Laws of Truth, by the guidance of the Spirit of God,
all Government, so far as it falls short thereof, and is Politically managed
according to the course of the worldly Powers, and upheld to the obstructing
the advancement of Christ's Kingdom upon Earth, it is so far Antichristian.

Ans. There is a very gross and false Principle laid down in this Remark, if I
mistake not the Remarker's meaning. Which is this: That Christ's Kingdom cannot
be there where things are ordered by any external or Political Rules or Laws in
either Church or State, but merely by the immediate guidance and motion of
God's Spirit. That the Spirit of God will assist in making these Laws, and will
actuate and invigorate both Rulers and People with a sensible and living relish
of them to observe them, and see them observed in those excellent times that
are to come, I willingly grant. But that other Principle I look upon as
proceeding either from a deep or high melancholy, I know not which to call it;
or if the Remarker can bear it, a Religious delirancy. And it is a most
enormous piece of Ingratitude against the Holy and Benign Providence of God to
speak so vilifying of the Reformation as he does. If the Reformed people, as
they are called, had taken half the pains to spy out every one his own faults
(and sincerely, with imploring the Divine assistence, had endeavored to mend
them) that they have taken to spy faults in Governors and Governments, we
should have had a glorious Church of it by this time. But spiritual Pride has
laid waste their Understandings. The Kingdom of Christ can very well subsist
without such Enthusiastic whimsies. Consider Apoc. 12. v. 10. Now is come
salvation and strength, and the Kingdom of our God, and the Power of his
Christ. Which is the Triumph of Christianity over Paganism. And yet the
Primitive Christians lived under external Laws and Rules both Spiritual and
Civil.

Verse. 19. This Verse ought to begin the next Chapter, it being the beginning
of the Prophecy of the opened Book. The Temple of God was opened in Heaven,
when Christian Worship was received and autorized by the Emperors, and the Ark
of the Testament was seen in the Temple, when Christian Laws became received by
authority, to become the Laws of the Empire, and the lightnings, and
thunderings, and voices, signify the great changes in the world (by shaking
the powers thereof) that should be made thereby.

Ans. What a mavelous Remark is this, that this verse is the beginning of the
Prophecy of the opened Book! Whenas it is said chapter 10, 11. upon John's eating
the opened Book; Thou must prophecy again before many Peoples, and Nations,
and Tongues, and Kings. The Vision of the Inner and the Outer Court, the two
Witnesses, their slaughter and resurrection, is it no Prophecy? What an
affected blindness is this, not to see so plain a Truth? Wherefore that Vision
most certainly begins the Prophecy of the opened Book, which John is said to
swallow, and thereupon that he was to prophecy before many peoples, etc. Which
words this Vision immediately follows. And again, what a violence is this to
make the opening of the Temple of God in Heaven no part of this first Vision,
but to tear it off from the rest of the Vision, and make it part of the
following, contrary to the authority of the best Copies, and most approved
Expositors of the Apocalypse? There must be a strange prejudice that should
hurry any one upon such an outrage, it being also repugnant to what is said in
the same verse, which he thus unnaturally breaks off* And there were
lightnings, and voices, and thunderings, and an Earthquake and great Hail,
which is plainly a description of matters concerning the seventh Vial, where,
chapter 16. it is said upon the seventh Vial being poured out into the Air, That
there were voices, and thunders, and lightnings, and an Earthquake, and a
great Hail indeed, the Hailstones being of a talent weight. The concurrence of
these five Phenomena, voices, thunderings, lightnings, Earthquake and a great
Hail being found here, and no where else in all the Apocalypse, saving under
the seventh Vial, what can it be but an Indication of their synchronizing or
signifying the same things? So that this cannot be the beginning of the ensuing
Vision or Prophecy, but the conclusion of this comprised in this eleventh
Chapter. And still it is more impossible, for as much as it is certain, that
the Vision beginning in the next Chapter contains the Persecutions of the
Primitive Church, as we shall see anon, whence all in the foregoing Chapter
must necessarily belong to that first Vision. And therefore this Interpretation
of the Temple of God being opened in Heaven, is exceeding extravagant. For this
comes to pass after the seventh Angel begins to sound, which is a thousand and
odd hundred years after the Christian Worship was received by the Emperors. We
may note also, that the pretty Interpretation he makes of this passage depends
upon a Political sense of [Heaven] which he rejected before, and may better do
it now, it being not likely to signify any thing more than merely the place
where the Temple was seen; as [Heaven] is taken in the following Vision. (Where
certainly it signifies not Symbolically, but Topically or Locally) viz. the Air
from which Region the Thunders and Lightenings were seen, as well as the Temple
of God appeared there; As it is also said chap. 16. that upon the Angels
pouring his Vial into the Air, there were thunderings and lightenings, which
confirms to us, that [Heaven] here, which the Remarker would interpret
Symbolically, signifies only Topically, and denotes the Air.

Chap. 12. Verse. 1.
THe Woman clothed with the Sun signifies the Church her being established in
a Heavenly station by the Emperors receiving the Faith, (the supreme power
being signified by the Sun) and so autorizing and defending the same by their
authority; and is not applicable to the Sun of Righteousness farther than he is
owned by the Emperors or worldly Powers to be Prince of the World, for she is
beautified with this clothing by her being in Heaven. But she was before her
exaltation to that station as much clothed with the light of the Gospel, or
the Sun of righteousness, and her Crown of twelve Stars does signify as much
as her being clothed with the Sun in that sense.

Ans. That the Expositor's interpretation of the Woman travailing in Birth and
pained to be delivered is true, this alone may assure us, viz. because it is
very natural and such as is hit upon by all Interpreters in a manner, I may add
also necessary, it being incredible that the Opened-book-prophecy prefiguring
the fate of the Church should omit the state of Persecution the Primitive
Christians were under. Which if not here is no where figured out in the
Opened-book-prophecy. Whence it is plain that as the Vision of the measured
Inner Court prefigures the purity and unapostatized state of the primitive
Church, so this of the Woman in the throes of Childbirth, her sharp
persecutions under the Pagan Emperors. But now for the Remarker's exposition,
besides that it is tautological, it presently repeating what was understood,
according to him, by the Temple opened in Heaven, that it is false appears, 1.
Because it deprives the Opened-book-prophecy of any Vision that sets out the
persecutions of the primitive Church, which is as notable and considerable as
any thing that is prefigured in the whole Apocalypse, and so makes the
Opened-book-prophecy defectuous. 2. It supposes, (which is false) that [Heaven]
in this Vision signifies Symbolically when it signifies only Topically. (...),
etc. If (...) had signified Symbolically it would have run thus, (...), i. e.
And there appeared a great wonder, a Woman in Heaven clothed with the Sun,
etc. if being seen in Heaven had signified her Political state or condition.
Which it does no more than it does concerning the red Dragon, v. 3. who is not
said to be seen in Heaven, to set out his Political condition, for that his
seven Crowns sufficiently show, namely that he was in the highest Political
state, but only signifies Topically, and declares in what place John saw this
wonderful sight; and so it is of the Woman being seen there. 3. The Remarker's
interpretation here and his exposition of [the Temple appearing in Heaven]
contradicts the Text. For he supposes in both the Christian Religion to have
become the Religion of the Emperors, and the Christian Laws the Laws of the
Empire. Whence it is plain that the Woman clothed with the Sun in his sense is
past her Throes. This is point blank against what is declared in the Vision,
that the Woman clothed with the Sun being with child, cried traveling in
birth and pained to be delivered, whenas the being in Heaven in the Remarker's
sense, implies she was delivered already.

Wherefore it being so plain from hence, that the 19th Verse of the precedent
Chapter is not the beginning of this Vision, it is manifest that it ends the
former, and that the Earthquake and great hail is the same with that of the
seventh Vial; And consequently from what has been already noted here on this
Chapter, and what delivered in my answers to the Remarks on the former, that
the Vision comprised in that Chapter commenceth with the beginning of the
Church, and ends with the seventh Vial. It is also plain already, that the
Vision begun in this 12th. Chapter commenceth from the beginning of the Church, and
ends not till the Vision of the Wine Press, which closes the 14. Chapter,
and which the Remarker himself cannot deny but synchronizes with the seventh
Vial. So that the 12.13. and 14. Chapters contain one entire Vision (consisting
of several parts) synchronal to the Vision contained in the 11. Chapter And the
affairs represented in this 12. Chapter reach unto the Woman's flight into the
Wilderness, where she is to be for a time and times and half a time, and to the
emerging of the healed Beast out of the Sea, who makes war against her seed for
42 months, the same with a Time and Times and half a Time, and with the 1260
days of the mournful Prophesying of the Witnesses. Which time and things
answer to one another, those of the 13. Chapter to those of the 11. as the time
of the affairs of this 12. Chapter to the measured Inner Court there in Chap.
11. And now forasmuch as there is a War betwixt the Beast and the Soldiers of
the Lamb in the 13. Chapter, the mustering of these Soldiers takes up part of
the 14. Chapter, and the description of their condition, which Soldiers
therefore synchronize with the War mentioned in the 13. Chapter. And the voice
of the first Angel is a menacing admonition to the Bestians for their Idolatry,
threatening to them the ill success of their War against the Saints at last.
Which comminatory voice of this first Angel commenceth for ought I can see with
the fifth Trumpet, and extends it self to the Western as well as Eastern
Empire, but is restrained to the time of the 42 months war. But the second
Angel tells the actual success thereof, Babylon is fallen, is fallen. Which
answers to the fall of the City in the 11. Chapter, which is the success of the
War there betwixt the Beast and the Witnesses. But what follows the Fall of the
City, in the 11. Chapter, and the fall of Babylon in the 14. reaches into the
times which commence with the seventh Trumper and end with the seventh Vial. So
that there being such a perpetual correspondence of Time and Things betwixt the
Vision comprised in the 11. Chapter and this integral Vision contained in these
three next, it is manifest they are two Synchronal Visions. And this I thought
was a seasonable place to represent them to be such.

Verse. 2. This travailing in pain is not the suffering of the Primitive
Persecutions, but her laboring to bring forth the Man-child that was to rule
all Nations; that as she was exalted to that Heavenly station by the Emperors
receiving the Faith, so the Devil might be cast down from the same, and so
outed of his Dominion, which he held thereby, whereby the authority of Christ
might be established in Heaven as Prince of the World.

Ans. This travailing in pain must be understood of the Primitive Persecutions.
For after the Christian Religion had become the Religion of the Empire (which
was upon the victories of Constantine, in whom the Man-child which the Woman
brought forth who was to rule all Nations ( viz. those numerous Nations
contained in the Roman Empire) was caught up unto God and his Throne, that is,
was invested in the imperial Throne) the Woman, that is, the Apostolic Church
was freed from her Throes. The Remarker seems to interpret without any regard
to History. And here he harps again upon the same mistaken string, making
Heaven signify Symbolically when it here only signifies Topically.

Verse. 7. The War here does not signify the conflict between the primitive
Christians and their Persecutors: For the Christians were not then in such a
station as to war in Heaven, but the War here on their side bears the same
sense with the War of their Adversaries, viz. the Devil being sentenced to be
cast out on the Man-child's being caught up unto God and his Throne, the War
here was to put that sentence in execution, and it was betwixt the Christian
Emperors and the Heathen Emperors, and also the Tyrants who in favor of
Paganism rose up against the Christian Emperors, by which War at length the
power of the Devil or Pagan Empire was wholly abolished.

Ans. The War does signify the conflict betwixt the Primitive Christians and
their Persecutors. And the reason alleged against it is very vain, as if
[Heaven] signified Symbolically and not Topically, which most certainly it
does, as Grotius has also noted, and renders [ in coelo] in aere. And when the
Man-child was caught up unto God and his Throne, the Devil was not only
sentenced to be cast out but was actually cast out. Nor was the Man-child taken
unto the Throne of God, till the Christian Emperor had overcome the Pagan.

Verse. 11. Though the Primitive Christians did overcome their Accuser by the
Blood of the Lamb, so as to be exalted to the Heavenly station of ruling by the
Man-child being caught up unto God and his Throne, etc. and obtained sentence
against their Adversary to be cast out, etc. yet was that sentence executed as
before by the War, v. 7.

Ans. See what headstrong prejudice will do! As if the Remarker should say,
though this eleventh verse does imply that the War was betwixt the Primitive
Christians and their Persecutors, yet it was not. But it does most certainly
demonstrate that the War was betwixt the Primitive Christians and their
Persecutors. For the words are these, For they overcame, ( viz. the red Dragon)
by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony, and they loved
not their lives unto death. What can be a more express description of Martyrdom
than this? This is not a description of a War of Emperors against Emperors
with their armies in the field where they fight upon equal terms, but of
Martyrs (with the word of their testimony) passively undergoing for their
witnessing to the truth, what their cruel Persecutors would inflict upon them.

Verse. 12. The Dwellers in Heaven are bid to rejoice by reason of the salvation
and strength and Kingdom of God and power of his Christ, which was to come, and
therefore surely must signify them to whom the same came, whose particular
concern this matter of joy was; whereas Angels and Martyrs are no farther
concerned in it than in general, as they are concerned for the welfare of the
Church; Nor can those that were exalted by preferments to the Political Heaven
of the Empire be concerned in it farther than they were in such a state as to
have the coming of salvation and strength and the Kingdom of God fulfilled in
them. For it only respects those that are in such a state, who are called
dwellers in Heaven in respect of the Heavenly station that they were exalted to
thereby after the Devil and his Angels were cast out, and the authority of
Christ established as Prince of the World. For then they became the joyful
company with the Lamb on Mount Sion singing the Song of the victory, etc. who
as they are there marked on their foreheads for preservation, so they are the
worshippers in the Temple and Altar (or the two Witnesses) meted for the same
purpose, and are the same that are called dwellers in Heaven, Chapter 13.6. and are
thus distinguished from those dwellers on Earth, against whom the woe is
pronounced by reason of the power the Devil will have over them still after he
is cast out.

Ans. The Expositor has taken in both senses of [Heaven] political and natural,
they being both sure and consistent one with another, and the joy of Angels and
Martyrs at the welfare of the Church is too great to be slighted or omitted.
But to ramble into mystical senses, and reach out to the company of the Lamb on
Mount Sion, is not to interpret by rule, but to trifle. All Apostolic
Christians were concerned in this victory of the Church, and most of those in
high place in the Empire turned Christian. But the foregoing verse so plainly
determining this joy to the victory of the Church in the times of Constantine
(which shows that the Kingdom of God and power of his Christ was come already,
and is said to be so, v. 10. (...), etc. not yet to come) it is a strange
vagary to ramble from the Antemedial synchronals to the middle synchronals,
which undoubtedly the company on Mount Sion belong to. And for the Remarker's
groundless conceit touching the worshippers in the Temple and Thysiasterion,
the vanity thereof has been above sufficiently shown. And for the dwellers in
Heaven, Chapter 13. v. 6. we shall consider it when we come at it. But for this
present place, if the Dwellers in Heaven be those in high degree, the Dwellers
on Earth must naturally signify those in low degree, or common people, as the
Expositor has interpreted it.

Verse. 15. Arianism cannot be here intended more than the Catholic doctrine,
they both running into extremes, and each maintaining their cause with like
fumous Animosity. But by the Serpent's casting out water like a flood seems to
be signified the frequent tumultuating of the common people and Magistrates
that continued Pagans against the Christians, whereby great outrages were often
committed. But such Arians and Catholics may be also included who under a
cloak of Religion did violently prosecute each other out of enmity or
self-interest to the great reproach and ruin of Religion.

Ans. The contention betwixt the Arians and Catholics is most certainly
included, and is that which History most of all rings of, and most highly
concerned the Church, and therefore could not be omitted in this
Opened-book-prophecy which concerns the state of the Church: As for any other
contests less notable betwixt Christians and Pagans they were such as could not
hazard the Woman's being (...), her being carried away with the sloud. None but
a contention betwixt the Christians themselves and such as shaked the very
foundation of their Religion could put her in that hazard. So that this is a
very lank sense which the Remarker gives of this passage.

Verse. 16. The Earth that helped the woman, by swallowing the sloud, may
signify the sober, stayed sort of people, who being either seasoned with
principles of Religion, or being of peaceable spirits, and obedient to
authority, did endeavor to assuage all such tumults, and discountenance and
oppose all such furious Animosities, and were for composing all differences in
a legal, orderly, and peaceable manner.

Ans. Undoubtedly that sloud of contention was the hot Contest betwixt the
Arians and Catholics. Could therefore the soberer sort of common people,
Christians or Pagans, compose this difference? What an absurd conceit is this?
The Earth that swallows up this sloud, does not signify the common people
here, though sometimes it is a Symbol of them. But the sense is only this,
That this flood of contention was swallowed down and dried up by the help of
Ecumenical Councils, as some rapid Torrent is sucked down by the gaping of the
Earth. This is enough. But farther curiosity might invite a man to fanfie that
(...), which is included in (...), whence [Oecumenical] comes, is alluded to;
or Earth in general put for clayish Earth, which in Daniel is a symbol of the
Ecclesiastical Power, of which Councils did consist. And then it fits obviously
and exquisitely.

Chap. 13. Verse. 1.
THE name of Blasphemy, if it does intend Idolatry, yet it has a farther
signification, as, All sins and blasphemies shall be forgiven men, but the
blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, etc. Where the malignant reproach of God's
Spirit evidencing it self in the works of our Savior, is said to be
unpardonable blasphemy; And the like reproaching of the holy Spirit manifesting
it self in the Saints is likewise blasphemy, though not of so heinous a degree.
Which kind of blasphemy seems here to be chiefly intended. Also our Savior
says to the Philadelphian Church, I know the blasphemy of those that say they
are Jews, etc. viz. Spiritual Jews or Christians, The belying the Truth and
Righteousness of God in believers, in making that to be it which is not, is
there called blasphemy. And so this Beast is v. 5. said to speak great things
and blasphemies; and v. 6. to blaspheme the name of God and his Tabernacle, and
them that dwell in Heaven, whereby seems to be signified his enmity against the
Saints with whom, v. 7. he makes war, but does, v. 6. discharge his wrath
against them with blasphemous scoffs and reproaches to overwhelm them with
contempt, etc. Of which see v. 6.

Ans. That the Name of Blasphemy does chiefly, if not only intend Idolatry, is
the current sense of Expositors, Papists and Reformed. And Blasphemy being an
Iconisme of Idolatry, that sense is more probable for its being Iconistical,
the Genius of the Apocalyptick style being such as to signify things
Iconistically, rather than plainly. See, Blasphemy, in the Expositor's Alphabet
of Iconisms. Moreover, this Vision sets out the state of the visible Church
(which visible state of things in the Church is the main object of those
Visions of the Apocalypse that concern the Church, as this Prophecy of the
opened Book does) wherefore the Vision in this 13 th Chapter comprizing those
times of the Church, wherein she was so visibly apostatized into Idolatry, some
Iconistical passages or other must particularly indicate that, nor the Vision
be content with that more slight and unobservable intimation, by calling the
two Beasts that appear here (...), which does more palpably denote their
cruelty than Idolatry; and therefore there is this farther Intimation, and
plainer, in saying there was the name of Blasphemy on his seven Heads, and that
his mouth spoke great things and blasphemies, v. 5. Where, great things being
joined with blasphemies, it is a plain Indication, that blasphemy here has no
such dwindling sense as the Remarker would put upon it. And lastly, that it
does not signify Blasphemy in the Remarker's sense, viz. reproaching and
speaking evil of the Saints, may appear from hence, because this Title of
Blasphemy is set in common upon all the seven Heads, whenas several of them as
the Kings and Decemviri had nothing to do with the Saints or any of the Church
of God. Nay, six of these Heads were gone before the Saints, which the Remarker
means, were on the Stage, and so had no occasion to blaspheme them. But that
they are all seven Idolatrous Heads, is unquestionable with those that
understand sense. Wherefore Blasphemy, and to blaspheme, in several other
places of Scripture, signifying Idolatry, as well as here, as is abundantly
made out by Mr. Mede and Peganius upon the place, (see also the Alphabet of
Iconisms,) it seems to me an homoursome business in the Remarker, that he
should balk the Exposition of that excellent Interpreter Mr. Mede, and take up
with one so little approvable with any, unless with some conceited touchy
souls, that fancy themselves Saints before they be so, and love separation,
and cry out, Stand off, I am more holy than thou; that when they are sharply,
though justly, reproved for their real Hypocrisy, factiousness and other vices
and miscarriages, they may imagine themselves to be blasphemed by the Beast or
his Worshippers, and so be the more confirmed in their presumed Saintship, and
in all the enormities that attend such a delusion. So little edifying is such a
precarious Exposition as this. There wanted no prophetical Monitions or
Prefigurations that wicked men will speak ill of good men from that Antipathy
which is betwixt them. But that the pretended Church of Christ still professing
Christianity, and declaring against Idols, should really become Idolatrous, and
establish Idolatries by a Law, to be able to predict this, was becoming the
Prescience of God, and to predict it, his Goodness, it being so useful for the
Reformation of the Church. There is nothing more that is material in this
Remark, unless I should take notice of that Assertion which seems to insinuate,
that men's speaking evil of the fruits of God's Spirit appearing in good men,
though of a private and ordinary quality, not special Missionaries from God, as
Christ and his Apostles were, nor public persons or Grandees in Government,
that reproaching such is termed Blasphemy in Scripture. Which I dare say is
false; let him search all the English Bible, and find a place if he can. And if
so; then this Interpretation of the Remarker is quite out of doors.

Verse. 2. The Dragon's power here given to the Beast, is the same with the
Beast's power, v. 8. Over all that dwell on the Earth, whose names are not
written in the book of life of the Lamb, etc. viz. All who by entrance into
life by faith do not attain to become members of Christ's Kingdom, are shut out
under the powers of darkness, and so become subject not only to Idolatrous
delusions, but to cruel bondage also, etc. The Dragon's seat and great Authority
is not the Imperial Crown, for that he lost being cast out of Heaven, but it is
his dominion over those dwellers on Earth, whose names are not written in the
book of life, etc. Which is like the Dominion which a Rebel may gain over a
great part of the Prince's Subjects, that revolt from him, though the Prince
keep his Crown.

Ans. The Dragon's power here in this verse does not signify the same that the
Beast's power in the 7 th and 8 th verses. For here the word is (...), there
(...). And (...) here signifies Military forces, and what they are the
Expositor has explained. And (...) used here also, and rendered Authority, shows
that (...) signifies Military forces, or else it were a needless tautology.
Indeed (...) here may well be parallel to that (...) in v. 7. and explained
thereby. For this (...), this great Authority is said, v. 7. to be an (...), a
power or authority over Kindreds, Tongues and Nations, and that is a great
Authority indeed, saving that there is made that diminution from it; It does not
reach those, to make them submit to the unlawful edicts of it, whose names are
writ in the book of life of the Lamb. That the Dragon could not give the
Imperial Throne to the Beast, because he was cast out of it himself, is wittily
observed. But you must understand he surrendered it not willingly, but because
he could not keep it. It signifies only, that the Beast succeeded the Dragon,
and that is imputed to the Dragon as done by him, which was done only upon
occasion of the condition he was in, by a Zoopoeia of the second kind. But the
furthering of the debauchery of the Empire by Pagan-like Superstition and
Idolatry, there he may have a positive influence and help on the mischief by
his invisible Forces.

Verse. 3. The deadly wound of one of the Heads of the Beast is not the Ruin of
the Pagan Empire by its Conversion to Christianity, but it is that wound by the
sword, verse. 14. viz. the ruin of the Empire by the Incursion of the barbarous
Nations, and the extinguishing of the Western Emperors in Augustulus.

Ans. The deadly wound of one of the Heads of the Beast is the Conversion of
the Emperor, the sixth Head, to Christianity, which was the issue of the War
betwixt Michael and the Dragon, the War betwixt the Primitive Christians and
their Persecutours, chapter 12. as has been there proved against the Remarker. And
the wound by the sword, v. 14. relates to that Battle. It was by their faith in
the Word, which is the sword of the spirit, that the Primitive Christians
overcame their Persecutours. This meaning is very easy and natural. But that
the Remarker would distort this passage to the Incursion of the Barbarous
Nations, and the extinguishing of the Western Emperors in Augustulus, shows
him less mindful of that indispensable Rule in the Interpreting the Visions of
the Opened-book-prophecies especially (which set out the affairs of the Church)
That that Interpretation is to be preferred that points at the state of the
Church and matters of Religion. This is a most certain Truth. And to show how
unsuccessfull he is by balking it, it is said v. 3. that the Head that was
wounded was healed. So that this Vision represents the Ten-horned Beast (whose
ten horns were crowned, and wounded Head healed at the same time) under his
healed condition, though the perfection of his cure extended farther. But in
the Political sense this Western Head was not healed till Corolus Magnus his
time. So that by this account the Epoch of this Vision must be 800 years after
Christ, and the continuance of this Beast, which is 42 Prophetical Months,
commence from thence. Which I think is sufficiently absurd.

Verse. 6. His Name, his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven, may signify
three states or degrees of Saints, in whom God was blasphemed by the contempt
and reproaches cast on them by the Beast, to represent them as evil doers, and
falsely accuse their good conversation in Christ. The first such as are but in a
Legal state under a Christian profession, and therefore are peculiarly
characterized by bearing the Name of God, because the loving and professing the
same is the height of such a state. Therefore Esaias. 63.19. makes it the
distinguishing character of the Jews from other Nations, that they were called
by God's Name, and on their revolt from their obedience, Ier. 44.26. they are
threatened, that God's Name shall be no more named by any of them. And our
Savior's first Petition in his prayer seems to respect this state as
preparatory to that which he teaches next to pray for. The second, such as by
faith have attained to an entrance into life or communion with God by his
Spirit, but not thereby to such a full subjection to him, or victory over the
World, whereby to live in a constant communion with him, but his abode in them
is as the sojourning in a Tabernacle; and this state of Christians does answer
to the outward Court, which was left out and not meted to be preserved from
profanation, etc. Rev. 11.1, 2. Whence at the descent of the new Jerusalem
(which is at the Restoration of the outward Court) it is said, The Tabernacle
of God is with men. The third, such as answer to the Worshippers in the Temple,
and at the Altar, and are measured for preservation, when the outward Court is
left out to be profaned and trodden down during the Antichristian Apostasy.
These overcome the Beast, and are those Inhabitants of Mount Sion, that were
redeemed from the Earth, and follow the Lamb wherever he goes, being without
fault before the Throne of God, etc. In whom God is not a sojourner as in a
Tabernacle, but makes his constant abode in them (by that communion with him in
life which they enjoy) as in a Temple, and who though, as being the two
Witnesses, they are described in a mournful condition by reason of their being
sorrowfully affected with the evils of the World they testify against, yet
they are joyful Harpers on Mount Sion, chapter 14. to whom that voice is directed,
chapter 12.12. Rejoice ye Heavens, and ye that dwell in them. But to make the
Idolatrous worship of God, or of Saints and Angels (supposed here for the
dwellers in Heaven) to be signified by the blaspheming of him and them, is a
forced construction, being what is done is out of a real design of paying due
worship and honor to them. Though it be erroneous and corrupt, yet can it
badly be called a blaspheming of them (which imports rather a malignant purpose
to reproach them than to honor them) especially in reference to Saints and
Angels, who have by such worship more ascribed to them than is due, though it
may be in reference to God, who has thereby less ascribed to him than his due,
and so is dishonored.

Ans. That there are two states of men in reference to Religion, I allow, a
legal or exterior state, (when out of fear of Hell and hope of Heaven they
live as near as they can according to an external Rule) and a spiritual state,
which is the state of Regeneration and of the spirit of life in the new Birth,
which may be less or more perfect, whereby they have a sense of the sweetness
and loveliness of the Divine life, and are held thereby in communion with God.
And I allow also that this state may be either vincible or invincible. So that
the Remarker may imagine three estates if he will, but by the like subdivision
of the legal state there may be four. For there may be such a strong fear of
Hell in an unregenerate man, that it may make him also invincibly resist all
such Injunctions as are put upon him, which seem repugnant to the word of God,
for fear of being damned and tormented in Hell. So precarious is this conceit
of just three states. But grant just three states, I deny that the men under
these three states are signified by the Name of God, by the Tabernacle of God,
and by the dwellers in Heaven. First, because men merely under such
dispensations, who yet are neither extraordinarily inspired Missionaries as
Christ and his Apostles, nor public Magistrates, which the Scripture calls
Gods, and the like, are not capable of being blasphemed, that is, the phrase is
not proper for them, and therefore it is a sign they are not here understood.
Again, the Remarker cannot produce any places of Scripture where the Name of
God signifies Men in a legal state, or the Tabernacle of God signifies men in a
less perfect spiritual state, or that the Dwellers in Heaven denote men
precisely in an invincible spiritual state. As for the Scriptures cited for the
first. God's name was not the people of Israel themselves; and when we pray,
Hallowed be God's name, do we understand the people of God there by God's name?
What trifling is this? And lastly, besides all this, if by God's name is meant
those that bear his Name; this, according to the style of the Apocalypse,
signifies the highest attainment in Christianity, as being the character of the
Philadelphian state, chapter 3.12. I will write upon him the Name of my God. And so
the Tabernacle of God, it cannot be the Note of the less perfect degree of the
spiritual state, because it is the Ierusalem-state, the highest degree of the
spiritual state, that is, Apoc. 21.3. and the condition there described is a
permanent condition; so that this conceit of sojourning is a perfect mistake:
According to which, the Restoration of the outward Court would be a restoring
of it to a sojourning condition. How repugnant are these things? Nor is there
any thing brought to prove, that the dwellers in Heaven signify men of the
third state, but that of chapter 12.12. Rejoice ye Heavens, and they that dwell in
them. Which we have proved to belong to the Times of Constantine. And as for
the conceit touching the Worshippers in the Temple, and Thysiasterion, the
groundlesness thereof was showed in my Answer to the Remarks on Chap. 11. So
that this whole Remark hitherto is a strange incoherent dream of forced and
far-fetched fancies.

And for his impugning the Expositor's Interpretation, it is as weak as the
other was wild. For supposing the Idolatrous worship of God, Saints and Angels
to be well meant by them, that so worship them, (though the gain of the Church
more than the glory of them that they so worship, is in all likelihood aimed at
by them that give the example to the people) yet it does not follow but that
this worship is really a reproach to them. Which Reproach, they being all made
Objects of Religious worship, is properly called Blasphemy, as Act. 19.37. the
Town-Clark clears the Apostles from being blasphemers of the Goddess Diana.
That they are all reproached, both God, Saints and Angels is made good in the
Exposition; and it is farther fitting that this reproach should be called
Blasphemy, that by this sharp reproof they may be the more effectually staved
off from committing Idolatry in such worship of God, Saints, and the holy
Angels. To all which you may add, that it is usual in Scripture to charge the
sinner with that directly which he commits but interpretative, as Ier. chapter
2.27. the Prophet there makes the Jews to say to a stock, Thou art my father;
and to a stone, Thou have begotten me, for their praying to stocks and stones.
See Synops. Prophetic. Book 1. Chap. 1.

Verse. 10. This Scripture is of like sense with, Reward her as she has rewarded
you, etc. chap. 18. but the sense here given is to make a mercy and blessing to
be threatened instead of a judgment, and the Scripture to speak so ambiguously
as to be unintelligible.

Ans. This is a comfortable promise to them that suffer for the present, that
their cause shall obtain at last, and a threatening to the unconverted part of
their enemies, that they shall lose so much of their dominion by those that are
converted; and this certainly was to come to pass, and did come to pass against
the Papal Power in the Rising of the Witnesses, the late blessed Reformation,
which was more considerable than the killing by the Sword in a literal sense,
which was no farther to come to pass than themselves necessitated it. This
verse therefore sets out the expectant state of the Soldiers of the Lamb, the
firm hope of victory at last for their sufferings, as is expressly said in those
last words. Here is the patience and faith of the Saints. But the news of their
actual victory is by the second Angel, chapter 14.8.

Verse. 12. The exercising all the power of the first Beast, etc. does signify
the temporal dominion of the two-horned Beast, by plucking up three Horns by
the roots; and for the better countenancing the power he did exercise, he as a
Prophet, or Christ's Vicar, did confirm the exercise of the same power by the
Beast, and so caused all to worship him. But his exercising all the power of
the first Beast cannot signify his making Laws in matters of Religion; for if
the first Beast had such power (which is not to be granted) yet that cannot be
called all his power, nor the greatest part of it.

Ans. One would think the Remarker a man of a mighty secular and worldly
Genius, when notwithstanding this Opened-book-prophecy related to the state of
Religion in the Church, he ever distorts things to a Politic or Civil sense,
which yet are most naturally understood of Religion. For the words here run
thus; And he exercises all the power of the first Beast before him, and he
causes the Earth, and them that dwell therein, to worship the first Beast,
whose deadly wound was healed. Before which immediately precedes, And he spoke
as the Dragon, viz. decreed Idolatries* and the reason then follows, because he
had got the authority of the first Beast into his own hands, whereby he reduced
the world again to a Draconick Religion, bloody and Idolatrous. He had got all
this kind of power into his hands, the two-horned Beast, I say, had so, but he
had not got all the secular power of the Empire into his hands, no not by
plucking the three Horns up by the roots. For the ten-horned Beast signifies
the whole secular Dominion of the Empire. Besides, that the two-horned Beast
began to renew the Image of the Dragon before he had plucked up the three Horns
by the Roots. So that that passage [ all the power of the first Beast] must be
understood of that kind of power, it being false of the other. And this power
of approving and allowing matters of Religion in the supreme secular
Magistrate, as it is declared in our Church, is most certainly their right; but
this is not a place to dispute the point. Thus safe is it to stear the sense of
the Opened-book-prophecy, by having an eye to the affairs of Religion in the
Empire.

Verse. 14. The change of Religion by the victory of the Martyrs cannot be
called a deadly wounding of the Beast by a sword, nor was there any ruin to it
thereby; for the same Politic Body of the Beast continued till it was wounded
to Death by a sword, viz. ruined by the Incursion of the Barbarous Nations. And
as he was not ruined by the ruin of the Pagan Religion, so the restoring of
the like Religion was not the reviving of him. But he lived again when the like
Politic body or Civil state of affairs in the Empire was re-established by the
Ten-horned Beast, by the barbarous Nations settling into a subjection to, or a
compliance with the Roman Laws. And as the Beast was revived when the former
Politic state of the Empire was restored in the Ten-horned Beast, so when the
Pope created a new succession of Emperors, it then became a complete Image of
the former Beast. So that the Beast and his Image are not so denominated from
the affairs of Religion, but from the Civil state of the Empire, yet so as to
include Religion as it is complicated with the civil affairs.

Ans. Here the Remarker again misseth the mark quite, by not taking heed to
that inviolable Rule in expounding the Opened-book-prophecy, viz. that it sets
out the state of the Empire in reference to matters of Religion, and the pure
worship of God and Christ, and that these Expositions are the surest that
respect that. For what cares the Spirit of Prophecy for taking notice of the
changes of secular States and Kingdoms, but so far as God's true Church and the
Purity of his Worship are concerned, and consequently those that worship him
according to the Laws he has appointed? The Pagan Emperors of Rome were
Pontifices Maximi, as well as Emperors, and the Pagan Religion part of the
Laws of the Empire, it being enacted and ratified by the Supreme Powers
thereof, as the civil Laws were. Wherefore the Pagan Religion equally, if not
more, being the very life and soul of the seven-headed red Dragon (that is, of
the Pagan Empire, which would cease to be the red Dragon, if the Pagan Religion
ceased) than the Civil Laws themselves, when the Pagan Religion was in a sort
abolished by the sixth head of the red Dragon his turning Christian, namely the
Emperor Constantine, etc. Certainly that was the Head (and then) that was
wounded to death, and wounded to death in the fullest sense that the
Opened-book-prophecy can be truly thought to take notice of, as chiefly to aim
at. For what is the Church concerned in the affairs of Kingdoms, but so far as
they either hinder or further the pure worship of God and Christ? And in the
same sense that the Head was wounded to death, is the Beast said to be wounded
(in this verse) by the sword, namely in the red Dragon's fight with Michael and
the Martyrs, the battle being described in the immediately foregoing Chapter;
and therefore where should he get his wound but there? For the Martyrs sticking
close to the truth of the word, which is the sword of the spirit, got the
victory over the Beast, they loving not their lives unto the Death. Add unto
all this, that the Beast could not revive before his head wounded to death was
cured. Neque enim sanatio istaec factum aliquod posterius fuit, sed ipsa
Nativitas Bestiae novissimae, as Mr. Mede judiciously concludes from the
genuine sense of the Text of the Prophecy. But in this civil or secular sense
that the Remarker drives at, his head was not cured till Carolus Magnus was
made the Western Emperor. But he is represented in this Vision in the
beginning of it as with ten crowned Horns, so with his head cured. Such he was
when he emerged out of the Sea, he was revived again from his deadly wound.
Therefore the Epoch of this Vision, as I noted before, commenceth as low as
the reign of Carolus Magnus, according to the Remarker, and the 42 Months of
the Beast must end after two thousand years after Christ. And besides this,
according to the Remarker's sense of the reviving of the Beast, and Beast's
Head will continue dead near three hundred years after the body of the Beast
was revived. This it is to attempt to unlock the Apocalypse without that
excellent Key, the Rule I have so often mentioned.

Chap. 14. Verse. 7.
IF the zeal of those Greek Emperors named were not a sufficient fulfilling of
the monition of the first Angel, the overrunning of the Empire by the Saracens
would be far more proper to make it up, both in regard of time and other
respects, than the subduing by the Turks. But neither of them are signified,
being Visions belonging to the sealed Book. Nor needs there any farther
fulfilling than what was by those Greek Emperors.

Ans. The Expositor's words on this verse are these; That this Angelical
Monition was the most loudly and earnestly urged upon the Christian World, at
the dreadful siege and storming of Constantinople, and subduing the whole
Eastern Church and Empire to the Turk. Which makes neither the plague of the
Saracens nor Turks to belong to the Opened-book-prophecy, but lets them keep
their place in the Prophecy of the sealed Book. But implies only, that the
voice of that Angel is not confined to the Greek Emperors only, but may be
stretched to as many, either secular Potentates or Prelates, or other eminently
zealous men, and observant of the severe judgment of God against the Idolatrous
Greek Church. For ought I know, those early Evangelici may come in for a share
here, who were Preachers of the everlasting Gospel, that which was purely
contained in Scripture, and declared against the Idolatries and Superstitions
of the Church of Rome, and sealed their Testimony with their blood, I mean the
Waldenses and Albigenses. Who if they made any use of the judgments of God by
the Saracens on the Empire, as well as others might do of his judgments by the
Turks, and it can be made out, I am not against it. And from the end of the
Albigensian War, which was finished Anno 1242, to the taking of Constantinople,
which was in the year 1453, in that Interval there were many famous men
declaring for the everlasting Gospel against the Antichristian doctrines and
practices, and they making the Pope of Rome the Antichrist, could not but
denounce this approaching judgment. You may see their names in Alstedius and
David Pareus. And upon the taking of Constantinople by the Turk, the voice of
this first Angel would be louder in preaching the everlasting Gospel, and
denouncing the fall of Antichrist or Babylon till the second Angel could tell
the news that it was done. See Alstedius his Chronologia testium veritatis,
where you may easily make Collections to this purpose.

Verse. 8. The fall of Babylon, viz. the commencement of it, is most aptly
applied to the separation of the Albigenses and Waldenses from the communion of
it; to which may be added the separation of the Greek Church from it, before
the subduing of the Empire by the Turks. But to apply this to the Reformation,
will clash with the admonition of the third Angel.

Ans. The Waldenses and Albigenses could not be the Angel that declared that
Babylon was fallen, but were a people that were aggrieved that it stood, but
were an holy good people, and truly Evangelical, and preachers of the
Everlasting Gospel, and denouncers of the judgments of God against Babylon,
predicting that it would fall, and therefore belong to the first Angel. And
though Mr. Mede would draw the affairs of the Waldenses and Albigenses to the
voice of the second Angel, yet he has not the confidence to say that their
appearing was the fall of Babylon, but only, that, as he phrases it, Iam nunc
ruinae Babylonis jaciuntur fundamenta. And he would countenance his application
from the very place that, [ Babylon is fallen is fallen] alludes to, Isa. chapter
21. Because at the time that Isaias uttered that Prophecy, the Medes cast off
the yoke of the Assyrians, and building their imperial City Ecbatana under
their new King Dejoces, laid the foundation of an Empire fatal to Babylon, as
well as to Nineve. But supposing that so, yet it is plain in the Vision that
the Prophet Esay's Imagination was not carried to the time of Dejoces and the
building of Ecbatana, but to that very festival night that Belsazer celebrated,
in which the Medes and Persians took Babylon. And it might very well then be
said, Babylon is fallen, is fallen. But the other time being about 150 years
before, if it had been said that then Babylon was fallen, it had been a
falsehood, and so it is in the News of the second Angel, if the Angel respect
the Times of the Albigenses and Waldenses, and say that then Babylon was
fallen, it is plainly an untruth, it standing tight about 400 years after their
appearing. Nor can his so pronouncing be excused by this passage in Esaias, as
has been plainly proved. See Munster, Vatablus and Cornelius a lapide upon that
Vision of Esaias.

But now, how the separation of the Greek Church has any place here, I
understand not. But if the breaking of that short union, such as it was, of the
Greek Church with the Roman be reckoned to this partial fall of Babylon, how
much more is the Reformation begun by Luther (which is nearer to that affair of
the Greek Church, than that to the Albigensian) to be reckoned thereto, when so
many Countries, Principalities and Kingdoms fell off from the Papacy? Wherefore
this voice of the second Angel is most fitly applied to the Reformation, as the
Rising also of the Witnesses, the Rising of the Witnesses being the fall of
Babylon. And it is said expressly, at the Rising of the Witnesses, that a tenth
part of the City fell, viz. of the City Babylon. Which being not a final or
total Ruin of Babylon, but, as it were, the Primity thereof, and at least a
tenth part thereof falling at the Reformation, it is a most evident argument
that the Reformation is the Rising of the Witnesses, and this very fall of
Babylon, which is with that Joy and Triumph declared by this second Angel. What
can be more clear? And therefore this joyful Annunciation of the fall of
Babylon corresponds with the Doxology of the Elders upon the sounding of the
seventh Trumpet, chapter 11. Nor does this at all clash with the Admonition of the
third Angel, as we shall presently see.

Verse. 11. The misapplying the Monitions of the two former Angels has run the
third out of distance, to signify the Condemnation to Hell Torments, which is
peculiar to the day of judgment, whenas plainly here is signified a judgment in
this life. For their torments are said to be in the presence of the holy
Angels, and by reason of the suffering them the Worshippers of the Beast have
no rest day nor night; And it is also said, Here is the patience of the Saints,
viz. in bearing what they shall suffer from the Worshippers of the Beast
enraged with these Torments. So that doubtless this Monition of the Angel does
signify the plagues of the Vials.

Ans. The Monition of the third Angel is not run out of due distance, nor
reaches to the last judgment, when the wicked shall be cast into Hell, but is
only a peremptory declaration, that those that worship the Beast and his Image
shall be so served at the last day, at the general day of judgment. But this
does not excuse them from unquietness and unpeaceableness of mind in this life.
And that that final Judgment is to be inflicted in the presence of the holy
Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb is no argument that it is a judgment in
this life, because the Holy Angels, as also the Saints ( Martyrs especially)
will be Assistents to the Lamb on his Tribunal at the last day, when he shall
pronounce that dreadful sentence, Go ye accursed into everlasting Fire, etc.
All Expositors agree that Infernal Torments are here understood, by being
tormented with fire and brimstone, and the smoke thereof ascending up for ever
and ever. But that which follows concerns the unpeaceableness of mind, and
unquietness of conscience in them that have any conscience left in them, if
they worship the Beast and his Image, by reason that the voice of this Angel
will be so loud and clear touching the Idolatrousness of the Church of Rome,
and the Unsalvableness of those in her Communion. Which will the more enrage
the Pontifician party to persecute and necessitate others that have any
conscience left in them to suffer any persecution rather than hazard their own
salvation, and turn Idolaters. This will be the most eminently fulfilled, I
mean the preaching of the third Angel, under the effusion of the fourth Vial in
the Mystical sense thereof, though it has in some measure been fulfilled all
along the Reformation, and may reach through all the Vials by a Geniconaea, but
by an Idiconaea more peculiarly respect the fourth. But from hence is that
which follows: Here is the patience of the Saints, etc. So that the Remarker
and Expositor here agree, That the Monition of the third Angel respects the
plagues of the Vials in some sort.

Verse. 15. The Angel coming out of the Temple, does here and elsewhere signify
their coming from the Throne of God, where they received his commands, and
justice and judgment being the habitation of his Throne, the righteousness of
those commands may be farther signified. Also they being ministering Spirits
attending at the Throne (signified by the seven Lamps burning before it) the
Temple is their proper abode till they be sent out. But what ground there is to
make the Temple here to represent the Church, I do not apprehend.

Ans. This conceit of the Remarker would be the more plausible, if the Angel
had been said to come from the Throne. But every one that went into the Temple
went not into the Sanctum Sanctorum. That was a privilege of the High Priest
only. And that all Angels have the honor to attend the Throne, is a point the
Remarker will never be able to prove; Nor that the Temple here signifies the
(...) thereof in that strict sense. For (...) sometimes signifies as large as
(...), which is rendered Templum, which contains the outward and inward Court
also. And Peganius, an excellent Critic in the Jewish learning, touching this
Angel coming out of the Temple, says, It was anciently a custom among the
Jews, out of the Temple to appoint laborers for the first Harvest, and to
signify to them when they should begin. Certainly those laborers which were
appointed out of the Temple, nor the appointers of them were such as entered the
Sanctum Sanctorum, and approached the Throne, etc. And Mr. Mede expressly
interprets this Angel's coming out of the Temple of the prayers of the Church
in general, as that from the Thysiasterion of the prayers more especially of
Martyrs and Confessors. How largely (...) signifies, may appear from what is
said, Psalm 29.9. (...), And in his Temple does every man speak of his glory.
But it is not for every man to enter into the Sanctum, much less into the
Sanctum Sanctorum. The whole Fabric is called (...), as being the Habitation
of God, as the Notation of the word implies. And John 2.19. where our Savior
says, (...), Destroy this Temple, the Jews presently understood it of the whole
fabric that included the Courts, which makes them answer, Forty six years,
(...), was this Temple a building, etc. Wherefore it is plain there is ground
enough for the Temple, representing the Church of God, the Congregation of God
or his people using solemnly to be gathered thither. And our Savior calls it
the house of Prayer. This Angel therefore coming out thence, and speaking to
the other Angel sitting on the cloud representing Christ, to put in his sickle
signifies whitherto the prayers of the Church tended.

Verse. 16. The reaping of him that fate on a cloud, may signify the ascending
of the Witnesses in a cloud, or rather the consequences thereof. For their
ascent will be the pitching of the Thrones for the Ancient of days to sit, or a
commencement of that judgment that is to be given to the Saints of the most
high to take away the Dominion of the Beast. So that the reaping here will be
the separating of the people of God from communion with the Beast, to associate
themselves with the Risen-witnesses, and to fulfill the Monition, Come out of
her my people, etc.

Ans. Is he then that sits on the cloud the Risen-witnesses? It Is pity but
there had appeared another with him to make them two. The description imports
that it is Christ himself, according to the usual sense of Interpreters, even
that son of man that comes in the clouds of Heaven, and the Ancient of days
gives him the Kingdom, which he augmenteth here by this Harvest of the
converted Jews, this immediately preceding the Vintage, which synchronizeth,
and is in a manner the same with the seventh Vial, (see Mr. Mede) and with the
battle of the Rider on the white Horse, chapter 19. which there immediately ensues
the Marriage of the Lamb, which in all reason is understood of the calling of
the Jews. The Rising of the Witnesses is certainly before the first Vial, but
this affair synchronizeth with the sixth. So much out is the Remarker here.

Verse. 18. Here the Angel that has power over the fire, his crying to him that
had the sharp sickle is said to be for vengeance on the cruel Murderers and
Idolaters, but the vengeance taken by thrusting in the sharp sickle is said
more especially to respect the converting them, which is a strange vengeance.
And the making the mention of fire here to be, because of the Martyrdoms
inflicted by it, is not sense. But the Angel is said to have power over fire in
respect of his executing God's wrath by causing fierce and bloody wars
consuming like a fire, etc. In which sense fire is used in the first Trumpet,
and the Censer of fire cast upon the Earth before the Trumpets; And so likewise
here the Angel with a sharp sickle being to reap the Vine of the Earth, viz. to
gather the Antichristian party to battle, is odered thereto by the Angel that
had power over fire, viz. who (as our Savior came not to bring peace, but
division, and to send a fire on Earth, and as the Rider on the red Horse in the
second seal had power to take peace from the Earth, etc.) had power to cause
such divisions and commotions as should incense and stir men up to the said
battle, etc.

Ans. Upon those words [which had power over the fire] Peganius writes thus:
Who in the Priesthood, says he, of the Heavenly Tabernacle was to have care of
the fire upon the Altar, whence now should be kindled the fire of vengeance.
Which is a sense no way inconsistent with mine, viz. That this Altar is named
in relation to the Martyrdoms under the Papal Tyranny, and the fire the rather,
because their Martyrdom was much by fire, they were burnt as Holocausts to the
pride and covetousness of the Papacy. And Peganius himself upon those words
precedent [And another Angel came out from the Altar] where the souls of the
Martyrs, says he, were kept, and whose blood the Lord would avenge at this
time. But the fire of the Altar does not signify wrath and vengeance simply of
it self, as appears from Esaias. chapter 6. where a live-coal taken from the Altar by
a Seraphin, and put to the mouth of the Prophet, is a sign of his iniquity
being taken away, and of his sin being purged, which is not vengeance, but
mercy. And the use of this fire on the Altar was to burn their Sacrifices,
which were to propitiate God's wrath, not to kindle it. Wherefore these things
being considered, what a severe sentence is this of the Remarker to say [That
the making of mention of fire here is, because of the Martyrdom inflicted by
it] is not sense? For it is more perfect and adequate sense than the other. The
Altar and the fire that burnt their Holocausts, compared with the burning of
the Martyrs, which the Pontifician Power burnt as so many Holocausts, to their
Pride, Avarice and Cruelty, being a more proper and efficacious Incentive to
pray for vengeance against them than merely the heat of fire signifying that
way, which may as well signify the warmth of mercy, the ardour, of love, and
zeal for the conversion of men as vengeance. Nor does the fire of Incense,
Apoc. 8. of it self signify wrath and vengeance, else prayer, which the fume
of Incense signifies could only be for vengeance, which is extremely absurd.
But the coals of Incense there are determined to that sense, because the
prayers of God's people had been uttered that way. And the Angel that had the
care of the fire on the Altar, (fire signifying the flames of holy zeal and
love, as well as the heat of wrath and revenge) may call to him that has the
sharp sickle, according to both these senses, out of wrath to destroy one
party, and out of love and mercy to convert the other. For that seems to be an
affected mistake in the Remarker, that he makes the Expositor to allot both
vengeance and conversion to the same party. So that the Objection is a mere
Cavil.

Verse. 19. Here is likewise a strange Wine Press of the Wrath of God, viz. Men's
being pressed in conscience upon sharp convictions of sin by powerful
preaching, whereby the wrath of God against them is kindled in them. Such
perverting of the easy, plain sense of the Text seems to proceed from an
affectation of speaking smooth things.

Ans. This meaning of the Wine Press is not so strange as true, as I shall make
appear in my Answer to his next Remark. And as for the Remarker's insinuating
an affectation in the Expositor of speaking smooth things, and that he should
mis-interpret the Vision out of this principle, if he again should say that the
Remarker mis-interprets Prophecies out of a deep fierce Melancholy, would that
be an argument? or only a sign of want of better arguments?

Verse. 20. As the Juice of Grapes trodden by horsemen in a Wine Press would spue
out to the horse-bridles, so a great slaughter is here aptly signified by blood
coming out to the horse-bridles in the Wine Press of the wrath of God. But that
a perfect victory over the contumacious by a full conviction of them should be
here signified, is the continuance of the strange conceits in the two foregoing
verses, turning the great wrath of God, which at the great day of God the
seventh Trumpet is to be executed upon the obdurate enemies of Christ by that
decisive battle betwixt him and them into the great blessing of making them
Converts, etc. And that 1600 furlongs should here signify Symbolically, and
not Numerically, is also a groundless conceit. For the Numerical signification
is the plain easy sense, and there is no intimation of any other sense; whenas
the number 666 (which is instanced in to countenance a Symbolical sense here)
has the same plainly signified in the Text, that it is to be taken
symbolically or mystically. And also the same is evident in the wonderful apt
application of it, which in this case altogether fails. Therefore it had been
better still to have taken up with Mr. Mede's conceit, than to relinquish it
for this undoubted Mystery, which is doubtless a great mistake.

Ans. This is the first news I have heard of Horses being Wine-pressers. Nor is
the blood of the Grape in the Vision said to spurt up to the Horse-bridles in
the Wine Press, but to come out of the Wine Press, even to the Horse-bridles,
and that for the space of one thousand six hundred furlongs. What, could the
blood spurt so far out of the Wine Press? then certainly it spurted above the
Horse-bridles in the Wine Press. Ribera most certainly has hit on the most
genuine literal sense of this passage, who first mentioning that of Joel, chapter
3.13. Get ye down, for the Wine Press is full, the Wine-fats overflow; he says,
John outdoes this expression of the Prophet, whenas he says so much Mustum came
out from this pressing, that not only the Wine Press was full to the top, but
overflowed the neighboring ground to a thousand six hundred furlongs, and so
deep that all the space was unpassable by any footman; and if an horseman rid
in it, it would take his Horse up to the bridle. This is assuredly the easy
and natural sense of the letter. And therefore if the letter be to be expounded
of a carnal warfare, there will be such a battle as will overflow the ground
with blood for sixteen hundred furlongs, that is for two hundred miles
together. Which if you suppose in length, as all Interpreters in a manner look
that way, and take it for granted that the longitude of the bloody Tract is
intimated, unless there were a chanel made on purpose, it would proportionably
spread in breadth. But to make a more favorable construction of it, let these
two hundred miles in length spread but a mile in breadth, so that the Tract of
blood may be but 200 square miles, which is but a modest supposition, this
slaughter being to be executed by the victorious Saints, nothing but either
heedlesness or an efferate religious Melancholy can make any one conceit so
salvage a scene of things introduced by them.

Besides that, it is infinitely incredible that so vast a multitude of men
should be gathered into one field-battel, as that if all their throats were
cut, or however else they were slain should fill two hundred square miles with
blood up to the horse-bridle. Wherefore the nature of this Symbol here (which
is incapable of the gross literal sense) as that also of the Rider of the white
Horse, with a sharp sword going out of his mouth, and the Camp suddenly turned
into a tripartite City, and the synchronism and congruity of these three
Visions that aim all at one thing, may assure any one, that either Prejudice,
Heedlesness or Complexion does not hood-wink, that the victory over one part
indicated in these Visions is spiritual, viz. their Conversion; but as for the
other part, which is here understood, by the City without which the Wine Press
is trodden (and is the same City, a tenth part whereof fell at the Rising of the
Witnesses,) and in the seventh Vial, by Babylon, and by the Beast and false
Prophet in the Vision of the Rider of the white Horse, the victory over them is
Political, and indicates their confusion. Not that they are to be murdered
neither, but that the City Babylon, which is the bloody Idolatrous Hierarchy,
their Revenues will be gone, and their Authority abolished, and the same is to
be understood of the false Prophet, which is the City Babylon. Nor is there any
need to understand any other destruction to the Beast distinct from the false
Prophet, than the dissolution of that of his power that constituted him a Beast
in the Prophetic style, Cruelty against the Saints, and his upholding
Idolatry. Which power being extinct, the Beast is destroyed, but the Legal
Sovereignty is preserved for the support of Truth and Purity of God's worship,
and Kingdom of his Son, who surely reigns there where his pure Gospel obtains
and is maintained by the Magistrate. These things will certainly be. But to
interpret these Prophecies of such salvage and prodigious, nay impossible
slaughters, and that by the Saints, as it is a reproach to them that are truly
so, and may animate pretended Saints to tumults and rebellions, so it does
great injury to this book of Prophecies, and seasons the Peoples minds with
such false notions, that when they are fulfilled, they will not know they are
fulfilled, as it has happened already in the Rising of the Witnesses. The
Symbols of those three Visions are such, that any one that has any nasuteness
of interpreting of Prophecies, if he give due heed, he must needs conclude that
the slaughtering passages in the battle of the great day of God Almighty is a
Parable. Nor do they belong to his obdurate Enemies, but to those that have
been strangers to the Faith, nor had before the like opportunity of knowing the
Truth, and being converted. His obdurate enemies rather are to be found in
Babylon, who though Hailstones of a Talent weight fall on them, are not made
contrite thereby, but blaspheme; They are obstinate, like the Fool in Solomon,
whom if you bray in a mortar with a pestil, yet will not his foolishness depart
from him, the conceit of Infallibility has so far infatuated them.

What remains in the Remark is spoke with a great deal of confidence, though
what is alleged against the 1600 furlongs, signifying Symbolically, not
Numerically, is exceeding weak. For the Numerical signification applied to the
extent of the slaughter, is so far from being plain and easy sense, that it is
a sense incredible, yea impossible: And therefore a certain Indication, that
this slaughter is to be taken in a Parabolical sense, such as the Expositor has
given. Suppose an Army in the field of a square figure, and that the men were
so closely set together, that each of them had but half a pace, or five
half-feet squared to turn them in, and that this square Army took up near upon
200 miles, let the Latus be but 14 miles and square it. The whole Army will
consist of Seven hundred eighty four thousand thousand men, (whenas one
thousand thousand is ten hundred thousand men) which therefore is near three
hundred times a greater Army than that prodigious Army of Xerxes, which
Herodotus says consisted of 2641610 fighting men. Can the Remarker believe that
there will ever be such an Army so numerous meeting thus in one place? But
suppose it, and the blood of this Army, even of every single Soldier of it to
be wholly let out of his body, which is scarce done in any one slain. In a
vessel of two foot and half square, how deep would the blood be? Certainly
scarce an Inch. But scarce thirty Inches deep will reach to the Horse-bridle.
So that the blood of an Army above thirty times greater than what I have
described, and nine thousand times greater than Xerxes his Army will scarce
suffice to make such a deluge of blood, though wholly effused, as to reach 1600
furlongs, I mean 200 square miles, to the Horses bridles. And the Saints the
Executioners of God's wrath must be the Butchers to let out all this blood:
What a monstrous conceit is this? what more incredible? what more impossible?
And if we should make our Hypothesis yet more modest, and instead of the 200
square miles, be content with 1600 square furlongs, the root of which would be
put 40 furlongs or five miles, yet according to this Hypothesis, blood to the
Horse-bridles for such a space, will require the slaughter of above a thousand
times more men than those in Xerxes his Army, though his Army consisted of
2641610 fighting men. Wherefore this is a certain sign that the sense is
Parabolical, and that the number is not Numerically, but Symbolically to be
taken. Nor needed there any Intimation of extracting the square root here, as
there is in the Number 666, because that Number is not a perfect square number;
and the less need, because this way of extracting the square root was freshly
intimated before, in the Number 666, and lay obvious to the eye in the 144
Regiments or Chiliarchies in the beginning of this Chapter, and in these 16
Hecatontads it does lie as obvious here to an observant eye, and unprejudiced
judgment, if he be acquainted with the Symbolical meaning of the Quaternary or
Number Four. The aptness of the Application whereof to the present occasion the
Expositor has fully made out in his Exposition and Notes. And it is notorious
ignorance or prejudice in the Remarker (no mistake in the Expositor) if he be
not thence satisfied.

Chap. 15. Introduction.
THE Introduction to this Chapter does make these three places, chapter 11. v. 15,
16, 17. chapter 14. v. 8. chapter 15. v. 2, 3, 4. to signify the same Triumphal Song,
which is a triple error: The first being the Doxology at the seventh Trumpet,
the second no Song, but the denouncing the commencement of Babylon's fall by
the Waldenses, the third no Triumphal Song of Victory (though sung by the
Victors over the Beast and his Image,) but of admiring and glorifying God for
his judgments by the pouring forth of the seven Vials, then in view in the
Angel's hands, so as to make all to fear and glorify him.

Ans. These three places do most certainly refer to the same thing, to the fall
of the tenth part of the City of Babylon, or the Rising of the Witnesses, which
is in a manner the same; They are also three testifications of Joy and Triumph
upon that notable passage of God's Providence, call them Songs, or Doxologies,
or joyful Annunciations, it is all one to the Expositor. The first is a
Doxology at the seventh Trumpet, but for the Rising of the Witnesses
immediately mentioned before. The second is the joyful Annunciation of the
good news of Babylon's fall in part, namely the tenth part of the City, which
the Waldenses could not tell was fallen, nor any for them in their time, for it
stood then entire, and so continued for about 400 years after. The third is a
Song of Victory, it being a Song of the Lamb, in imitation of that of Moses,
when they triumphed over Pharaoh and his host after they were overthrown in the
Red Sea. What can be plainer? And these are said to be Victors over the Beast;
and in the Song it self it is said, All Nations shall worship before thee,
because thy judgments are manifested, namely upon Babylon in the fall of the
tenth part of their City, and in the Rising of the Witnesses. How clearly and
naturally do these things hang together? Which if it were not, there would be
no occasion nor object of this Triumphal Song. For who but fools or mad men
triumph before victory? Nor could it be for the future pouring forth the Vails
then in view. For it is not said these Victors saw them, but that St. John saw
them. Nor did St. John see them before this Song of the Victors was ended. For
the first verse is only a general Title of the Chapter about the Vials. The
particular order of his seeing them is afterward. For he says expressly, v. 5.
That after this Song of the Victors he looked, and behold the Temple of the
Tabernacle of Heaven was opened. Which implies it was shut, or his eyes shut to
it before. And the seven Angels came out of the Temple, etc. And it is farther
manifest from v. 7. For one of the four Beasts there mentioned had not given
the Vials to the Angels till then. How could the Victors then see them have
them, before they were given them? So that this Song will have no Object of
praise and thanksgiving. Which is a plain demonstration that the Remarker is in
a mistake.

Verse. 1. The Beast is not the Roman Hierarchy, but the Ten-horned Beast headed
by the false Prophet or Roman Hierarchy. It Is sufficient to call the Vials the
seven last plagues, if they begin after the sixth Trumpet, and end with the
seventh, especially the Trumpets belonging to the sealed Book, and the Vials to
the opened Book, and so may rather respect the preceding plagues of the opened
Book, viz. those said to be inflicted by the Witnesses, and also by the two
precedent Angels to the third, who is Monitor of the Vials.

Ans. The Beast here is most certainly the Roman Hierarchy or two-horned Beast,
because v. 2. the Victors are said to have got the victory over the Beast, and
over his Image; and it is plain, chap. 13. That the Two-horned Beast was the
Maker of this Image: but it farther follows, And over the number of his name,
which also plainly belongs to the two-horned Beast. And as for the seven last
plagues (in which is filled up the wrath of God against the said Beast, which
suffered considerably in the Rising of the Witnesses) none of them seven can be
called the last, which end before the sixth. Those plagues must certainly
expire before any of the seven begin, in respect of which all seven are to be
called the last plagues. This is pitiful tearing and forcing of things to
serve a fond Hypothesis, that will not hold water. Lastly, The second
Wo-Trumpet being mentioned in the Opened-book-prophecy, is a plain Indication
that as to order of time and succession of things, the seven last woeful
plagues in the last Wo-Trumpet must succeed the second Wo-Trumpet, and
consequently the fall of Babylon and Rising of the Witnesses, though all the
first six Trumpets belong to the Sealed-book-prophecy, as does also the
Interval of the seventh. And as for the plagues inflicted by the Witnesses,
they were during their 1260 days prophesying, chapter 11.6. and therefore the same
with the six first plagues, there being no other actually inflicted plagues
prefigured but they. And for the two Angels, they are no Inflicters of plagues,
but Advertisers touching God's judgments to come, or already fallen on the
Idolaters.

Verse. 2. The Sea of glass here is the same with that chapter 4.6. and therefore
has respect to nothing farther than what it there signifies; And to make
standing on the Sea of glass to signify standing on the shore of that Sea, is
a great straining of the Text; Nor was there any such deliverance of the
Protestants, or overthrow of the Pope by the Reformation, as to make any
Parallel between that and the Jews deliverance and Pharaoh's overthrow. Nor was
the overthrow that was then given to the Pope by the doctrine of Justification,
that being but one particular of the Reformation, but the main of his overthrow
then was the casting off his Supremacy.

Ans. That the Sea of glass is not the same with that in chapter 4.6. though it may
be also alluded to, is plain in that it there is said to be (...), as the Lamps
are also said to be, and therefore within the N(...). (For indeed the whole
scene of things, some whereof, according to the Mosaic Position, are without
the N(...), are there represented as within, and that not without a Mystery, it
signifying that the Representation is of the state of the Church reduced to the
most early Primitive Apostolic Purity.) But the Sea of glass here is seen by
John before the opening of the N(...), before the Temple was opened, v. 5.
Which does put it more out of doubt that the Red Sea congealed as it were into
two Walls of glass, (as Zeno Veronensis glosses on Exodus 14.22.) that the
Israelites might pass over the yellow or fulvid Sand, betwixt, is chiesly
alluded to; and it being called also the Song of Moses, the servant of God,
does farther ratify it. And indeed I meet with no Expositor Papist nor
Protestant, old nor modern but agree that Moses his song at the overthrow of
the Egyptians at the Red Sea is alluded to. Wherefore the Remarker's
refractariness to so evident a Truth is very remarkable. Nor is it any
straining of the Text to translate (...), standing upon the shore of the Sea.
For (...) signifies as much as prope or juxta, and therefore if it be near or
hard by the Sea, where is it but on the shore? And that it is understood of the
Red Sea, all Interpreters agree, as I noted before. But the Remarker it seems
is wiser than them all. But I hope he will not be wiser than the writer of the
Apocalypse, who compares the State of the true Church under the Tyranny of the
Papacy to the Israelites servitude in Egypt. chapter 11. Wherefore our being freed
from this bondage, may very well be paralleled to the Jews deliverance and
Pharaoh's overthrow. And lastly, the doctrine of Justification, though it was
not the only Instrument, yet it was a main one. The comfort whereof being so
zealously and frequently instilled into the minds of both People and
Potentates, and that great drudgery and bondage under the Pope being held up by
the contrary doctrine in that Church; this proved a notable Engine to out the
Pope, not only of his Supremacy, but to free the people of all those
superstitious Burdens they groaned under before.

Verse. 5. The a Harpers victory over the Beast does not signify the
Protestants victory, but the victory of those sealed and measured, for
preservation against whom the Antichristian Powers could not prevail. b The
Temple of the Tabernacle of the Testimony in Heaven is not the same with the
Temple opened in Heaven, wherein was seen the Ark of the Testament, chapter 11.19.
c For that, as formerly was said, signified the receiving of the Christian
Worship and Laws by the Emperors. d But this verse apparently relates to
another time.

Ans. That the a Harpers victory over the Beast signifies the Protestants
victory, has been proved over and over again; It is a Song of Thanksgiving for
their deliverance from the Roman Pharaoh, and declares God's judgments to have
been manifested upon him. And as for the 144 thousand sealed ones, (for that
that measuring for preservation is a mere conceit I have shown in its proper
place) whose invincible constancy and faithfulness to the Lamb, and their
privileges of the New Birth is intimated in the foregoing Chapter, their new
Song is also there mentioned, which none could learn but the 144 thousand that
were redeemed from the Earth. That sets out their internal state, but this is a
Song of external deliverance, and alludes to the deliverance of the Israelites
from Pharaoh King of Egypt. And these 144 thousand sealed ones are the sealed
of the twelve Tribes of Israel, chapter 7. As here is the Song of Moses the servant
of God for their victory over Pharaoh. Wisdom is easy to him that
understands, but to him that will not understand all things are hard. b The
Temple opened here, and the Temple open chapter 11.19. is most assuredly the same
Temple. For the Ark of the Testament is said to be in the one, (...), by which
word (...) the Seventy render (...), and they render it also by (...) [ Deuteronomy.
9.15.] Testimony. And this other is called the Temple of the Tabernacle of the
Testimony. And Exodus 25.21. it is said, (...), but also before v. 16. the same
thing is said, and Vatablus from the Hebrew renders it, Ponesque in arca
Testimonium quod dabo tibi; upon which Cornelius excellently well, Hinc, says
he, dicta fuit Arca Testimonii, id est, Legis, and Arca Testamenti, id est,
Foederis. Continebat enim legem quae erat conditio foederis inter Deum and
Hebraeos initi. Consequenter Tabernaculum ab Arca quam continebat vocatum est
Tabernaculum Foederis and Tabernaculum Testimonii. So Cornelius a lapide.
Whence we see plainly that the Temple in these two places named is one and the
same Temple, which Temple stood open (out of which the Vial-angels came) as
well after the Doxology of the Elders, chapter 11. as after the Song of the Harpers
in this Chapter; But chapter 11.19. the Ark of the Testament is said to be seen in
it, because this points at the sixth Vial, which synchronizeth with the
Harvest, by both which is understood the calling of the Jews. And therefore by
the Ark of the Testament being seen in Heaven, is signified that that was the
time in which God would have an eye to his everlasting Covenant made with the
Jews, and resume them again to be his People; which sense is worthy the taking
notice of, though it was omitted before. c That sense which the Remarker would
put upon the Ark of the Testament being seen in Heaven, chapter 11.19. I have shown
the vanity thereof sufficiently above, nor need I here repeat it. His conceit
therefore sailing, and there being no mention of opening the Temple of the
Tabernacle of the Testimony or Testament in Heaven but in these two places, chapter
11. and chapter 15. and they both being after a Song of Thanksgiving, it is a
shrewd Indication; d That the times of the opening the Temple here, and those
in chapter 11.19. are one, though the mention of the Temple being opened chapter 11. be
deferred till v. 19. that it may set off the appearing of the Ark of the
Covenant with a greater grace, but the time of seeing the Ark of the Covenant
differs from the time of the opening of the Temple, for the former is at the
sixth Vial, the latter just before the first. Wherefore in brief, The opened
Temple in Heaven, chapter 11. and this opened here being one and the same, and this
in order to the effusion of the Vials, this is no small confirmation of the
Expositor's Interpreting the two last verses of chapter 11. touching the affairs of
the Vials, which was worth noting by the bye.

Verse. 6. The seven Angels coming out of the Temple may signify that it is by
the Worshippers in the Temple, and at the Altar, viz. the two Witnesses, that
they pour forth their Vials, and that they minister to them in that service.
Their being clothed in white linen, and girt with golden girdles, signifies
the righteousness and holiness of their administration for the advancement of
Christ's Kingdom, which though spiritual, extends to the executing Justice, and
upholding true Worship, and they are the Ministers of God's wrath for
transgressions against both.

Ans. That the Worshippers in the Temple, and at the Altar, are not the two
Witnesses, I have shown above, and therefore the Angels coming out of the
Temple here, cannot denote them; and if the two Witnesses be the Ministers of
God's wrath, it is the more unlikely that that effusion of blood from the
Wine Press, so that it would reach to the Horses bridle for sixteen hundred
furlongs together, should be understood Literally, and not Parabolically, else
these Ministers of God's wrath must shed the blood of an Army nine thousand
times bigger than that of Xerxes, as was noted above. A Butchery incredible to
be perpetrated by the Saints and holy Witnesses of God.

Chap. 16. Verse. 2.
a TO understand the pouring forth of the first Vial on the Earth in such a
general sense as the command is to pour all the Vials on the Earth (so that it
is only to correspond with the other Vials in the Cortex) is to make it
signify nothing; and therefore the effect of the first Vial, viz. the grievous
sore on the Worshippers of the Beast is imputed to another cause, viz. to their
exulcerate rage at the Rising of the Witnesses. b These are but sorry conceits
for which one should reject Mr. Mede's far more current account of this Vial,
viz. that it signifies the Bohemian War that ensued the sufferings of Huss and
Ier. of Prague; whereby great ruin fell on the Popish Clergy and the religious
houses in that and the adjoining Countries, and miraculous defeats on the great
Popish Armies sent against the Bohemians, etc. Which plague is aptly signified
by the Vial poured on the Earth, the two-horned Beast rising out of the Earth.
And that there was then the like spirit in agitation in other Countries, though
it did not break forth, may appear by our Commons Petitioning in Parliament,
about the same time, Henry the fourth and the Lords, that he may have the
Temporalties of the Bishops and Clergy which were consumed in unnecessary
courses, etc. And also by the Parliaments importuning Henry the fifth to
suppress the Religious houses, as being Nurseries of Idleness, and Cages of
unclean Birds. To divert which storm, the Clergy set on foot the claim of the
Crown of France, and the War thereon, etc. c Also there could be no such
exulcerated rage at the Rising of the Witnesses, because the Reformation was
not the Rising of them. For though thereby the Pope's Supremacy was rejected,
and some gross corruptions reformed, yet did the Reformed Churches retain
generally the same Political state of Government, and so much of the Popish
Leaven in Matters of Religion, that they did not cease to continue members of
the Beast. d Nor did there appear any such Spirit of life in them to set them
on their feet, and cause them to ascend, etc. they continuing in the same
worldly state and station, though freed from some Popish Grievances.

Ans. a Though the first Vial were poured out on the Earth in that general
sense, does its pouring forth signify nothing? It will necessarily hit some
particular thing or person or other, and it particularly hits the marked slaves
of the Beast, and inflicts a sore on them, and so every Vial the pouring it
forth will mediately or immediately concern the Terraqueous Globe, namely the
Inhabitants thereof. But for that special meaning of Earth, which the Remarker
takes notice of, and I have noted to answer to the Clay in Daniel, and to
signify the Ecclesiastic Rank of men, if this in general were understood by
the Earth, v. 1. it were an Hypothesis very allowable, yea laudable, being
these Vials concern the Pontifician Hierarchy, which Mr. Mede calls Bestiam
Antichristianam, and all reach him either immediately or mediately, even those
that are poured on the Sun, into the Air, or on the River Euphrates, they all
touch the concern of the Beast that rose out of the Earth, as you may see by
the Exposition of the Vision. And the first Vial poured on the Earth in this
sense, reaches them immediately, it inflicting so noisome and grievous a sore
on those that are the marked slaves of the two-horned Beast especially, their
Interest being so much concerned in the fall of Babylon and the Rising of the
Witnesses. Wherefore that Cup of Intoxication and Dementation through Envy,
Malice, Rage and Fury (as it is said chapter 11. v. 18. upon the Rising of the
Witnesses and Doxology of the Elders, And the Nations were angry, which answers
to the effect of the effusion of this first Vial, the noisome sore on the
marked slaves of the Beast) that Cup, I say, is really the pouring forth of
this first Vial, which is a grievous plague indeed. Impedit ira animum -- And
Quos Jupiter vult perdere eosdem dementat prius. So that by the Remarker's
leave these are no sorry conceits, nor the Expositor's private opinion, but the
opinion of worthy Interpreters before him. b But the Remarker's is a groundless
conceit to apply that which belongs to the times preceding the Rising of the
Witnesses to the Vials, which come after their Rising, as is most plain to them
that do not wilfully wink against the Truth. Wherefore the War of the Hussites,
etc. is such a business as the Albigensian War; and if justifiable, to be
referred to the War betwixt the Beast and the Saints, chapter 13. v. 7. c Nor has
the Remarker any evasion out of this evidence of truth, but by an unworthy
vilifying of the Protestant Reformation, which undoubtedly was the Rising of
the Witnesses, and most certainly was a very illustrious Achievement of
Providence, and quite wiped away that foul face of things, which Custom and
Law had established before, and is described in the Idea of Antichristianism,
and therefore it is most wretched Ingratitude to undervalue so great a Bounty
of the Divine Majesty toward his servants; like the murmuring of the
Israelites against Moses and Aaron, by whose conduct they were delivered from
the bondage and Tyranny of Pharaoh. Nor was the Pope's Supremacy only
rejected, and some gross corruptions, here in the Church of England suppose,
reformed, but all gross corruptions, nor were there any left that can be a just
cause of Separation from our Church. But the cavil now forsooth must be,
because they retain still Political Government (for Popish leaven in matters of
Religion, which is reformed to the pattern of the Times that were symmetral, is
plainly outed from our Church) and continue in the same worldly state and
station (the terms for Political Government) as if all Political Laws and
Orders, though they were made and managed for the support of the Kingdom of God
and the purity of his Worship were worldly. How freakish is this? But how
outrageous to make the Reformed Churches, merely for this cause to continue
Members of the Beast? This is such a wild Imagination, that it is more becoming
those Dreamers St. Jude describes, that despise dominion and speak evil of
dignities than any sober Christian. d And lastly, as I remember I noted before,
the Spirit of life entering into the Witnesses has not a Spiritual sense, but
Political. And the Genius of Prophetic Iconisms, and of the Apocalyptick
Prophecies, is rather to adumbrate the External and visible state of the Church
than the Internal.

There is only one thing remaining in this Remark, at the beginning, that I
may seem to have slipped over, viz. That the effect of the first Vial, namely
that rankorous sore does not seem to be imputed to the effusion of the Vial,
but to the Rising of the Witnesses. But I answer, that it is sufficient that
this sore rages in the time of the Vial-Angel. For here are seven distinct
Times allotted to the seven Vial-Angels, as there are seven distinct times
allotted to the seven Trumpet-Angels, and what happens in the said allotted
times is attributed to the Angel to whom the time is alloted, whether the Angel
contribute any thing to it or no. Nor does any one imagine that the Locusts and
Euphratean Horsemen were blown out of the fifth and sixth Angels Trumpets, but
that those things happened under the times allotted to them. And the Rider of
the red Horse under the second Seal, he is said to take peace from the Earth,
merely because in his time there were such killing and slaying one another. And
it is something Idiotical to think otherwise of these things. But supposing
there must be some real activity in this first Vial-Angel for the inflicting
this angry Egyptian boil, there is not the least absurdity in allowing it,
viz. That as an evil spirit from the Lord haunted Saul when his Melancholy fits
came upon him, so this first Vial-Angel may commissionate some spirits, upon
the envy and the anger the Bestians had conceived against the Risen Witnesses,
to actuate them with more than ordinary rage and madness against them, and so
infatuate their counsel by this distemper. This, I hope, will take away all
scruple touching this first Vial.

Verse. 3. The second Vial is made to synchronize, and in substance to be the
same with the first, the first being supposed to be the envious raging at the
Reformation by the enemies of it, and the second the Reformation it self in
rejecting the Pope's Authority, etc.

Ans. This second Remark is a mere calumny. For the first Vial does not
synchronize with the second, because the first, viz. that exulcerated Rage of
the marked slaves of the Beast began presently upon the Rising of the
Witnesses, while the Reformation was but fresh, young and tender, and not so
thoroughly established, but was capable of quick Reciprocations of affairs, as
it happened, here for example in England, Queen Mary so suddenly succeeding
King Edward. But after this there was a more full settlement and firm
establishment of the state of the Risen Witnesses, so that through many
Provinces, Principalities and Kingdoms, which are so many Seas, the Pontifician
party was hopeless and helpless, those Seas becoming by the effusion of the
second Vial as the blood of a dead man. For they were all dead to the Emissary
fishermen of the pretended successor of St. Peter, nor a live Fish to be
taken for their game. The perfect Revulsion of these great Parts of the
Pontifician Jurisdiction from those that his power still did actuate and
enliven; and the hindering them from reuniting for a due time, till they were
turned into the congealed blood, as it were of a dead man; this was the
effusion of the second Vial, and plainly distinct from the first, and such as
to which the first might well contribute. For the marked slaves of the Beast
being dementated with wrath, would necessarily do such things as would excite
the other party to use all possible care and diligence, courage and resolution
to make all sure against them for the future. The second Vial therefore is not
the Rising of the Witnesses or the first appearance of the Reformation, but it
bears that analogy to the Rising of the Witnesses, that the descending of the
New Jerusalem under the second Thunder (which comprizes the settlement of the
Millennial Empire of Christ) does to the victory of the Rider of the white
Horse under the first.

Verse. 8. The word of God is no subject capable of pouring a Vial thereon: And
as for the clear convictive Explications thereof, this as to those that are
convinced thereby is not a punishment ( viz. a Vial of wrath) but a blessing:
And so if it be taken to signify the conversion of any Emperor or Potentate,
etc.

Ans. I noted at first that all the Vials are commanded to be poured on the
Earth; which if we consider seriously, must needs be understood in the inward
sense, of the two-horned Beast that came out of the Earth or Clay. And
therefore on whatever they are said to be poured, they must reach this Earth
either mediately or immediately, directly or indirectly, that is, reflexively,
or else the Angels do not obey the Divine Command. But if the effusion of the
Vial reach the two-horned Beast to detriment him, whether mediately or
immediately, it is poured on the Earth, and the Divine Command is fulfilled.
And in this sense a Vial may be poured on the Word of God, which may illuminate
Emperors, Kings or Princes to the great damage of the two-horned Beast, and so
rightly be said to be poured on the Earth, though it be first discharged on the
Sun in those senses the Expositor intimates.

Verse. 10. a It was to the Ten-horned Beast that Satan gave his seat, and so
the Vial poured here on the seat of the Beast does signify that Beast. Hereby
the root of the Beast's Authority seems to be struck at, viz. That whenas the
precedent Vial poured on the Sun, and scorching men with great heat, seems to
signify men's being zealously incensed, and so sharply inveying against, and
reproving the corruptions and oppressions of the Antichristian Powers then
ruling; this Vial seems to proceed farther, and to strike at the Root of their
Authority, c asserting the right of Christ to rule, and his Laws of Truth to be
obeyed, and so all powers that obstruct the advancement of his Kingdom to be
enemies, etc. Therefore it is likely to be the Result of the Rising of the
Witnesses.

Ans. This is an Assertion quite contrary to that necessary Hypothesis in
explaining the effusion of the Vials, whose Object is the two-horned Beast.
Besides, if this seat signify Rome, as Mr. Mede would have it, this indeed the
Dragon gave to the ten-horned Beast, but it is plain the two-horned Beast
possesses it, nay he has usurped the secular power also in ordine ad
spiritualia, so that it is a vain thing to understand here any Beast but the
two-horned, at whom the whole Vision of the Vials does aim. The Residue of the
Remark is mavelous (unless I misunderstand the Remarker's meaning) which
supposes bitter Invectives against the Sun, that is the secular Powers
Antichristian, like the barking of dogs against the Moon, to be the pouring
forth of the Vial upon the Sun. Certainly that Angel that does thus, mistakes
his Instructions. For he was to pour his Vial upon the Earth from that general
command, and here he pours it upon the Sun without any reference to the Earth.
Besides that, this account of this fourth Vial, by the Remarker, is very dilute
and indistinct, he making the Sun to signify any secular Antichristian Power,
and the effusion of this Vial upon it nothing but the grumbling of some
malcontents against their Governors, and inveying against their
administration of affairs, because they suit not with their humor or interest.
Which is a thing done by some or other so repeatedly or continually in all
Governments (which are never free from such spirits) that it is impossible this
should be a particular character of any of the Vials. And moreover it is a
plain contradiction to the Text it self, which runs thus: The fourth Angel
poured out his Vial on the Sun, and power was given him to scorch men with
fire. Whom then can he be thought to scorch but those that have so incensed
him? So that the plague will be on them that invey against the Antichristian
Powers or the Beast, which is contrary to the drift of the Vision, and to the
mention of the blasphemy of them that are scorched. This is fond enough I
think. But something follows still worse, and more foul and fond (if, as I said
before, I rightly understand him.) b What Achmetes, what Artemidorus ever
taught the Remarker, that the seat of a secular Potentate signifies the root of
his Authority? This must be in some Country, pardon the pleasantness of the
conceit, where men's Chairs grow to their Breech, even as the Root and the Trunk
or Stalk of a Plant grow together. But as the fancy is forced, so the doctrine
therein implied is unsound in his exposition of these two Vials, fourth and
fifth. And besides, that gloss on the fifth is nothing but that stale
Calvinistical or rather Iesuitical Principle, a weak and wicked falsehood, not a
stinging truth that should make them gnaw their tongues for pain, viz. Dominium
sundatur in gratia. Which Vial has been pouring out so long that methinks it
should be empty by this, or never be empty till the Millennium, and so this
Application will have the same diluteness and indistinctness that the former.
To rail against the Authority one lives under is against the duty of a
Christian. The Apostle Paul says, Thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy
people, Act. 23.5. The Apostle Peter describes the worst of men thus: 2 Pet.
2.10. They despise Government, presumptuous are they, self-willed, they are not
afraid to speak evil of dignities. To which add that of Jude; yet Michael the
Archangel, when contending with the Devil, he disputed about the body of Moses,
durst not bring against him a railing accusation (though you may be sure he was
in the right) but said the Lord rebuke thee. Certainly none of the
Antichristian Powers can be worse than the Devil the Prince of Darkness, nor
any of the reprehensive Saints greater or more holy than Michael, which I note
that they that take themselves to be Saints may learn good manners of him. c
And then for the striking at the root of Authority in pretense of Christ's right
to rule, and his Laws of Truth to be obeyed: If this be the result of the
Rising of the Witnesses to come, God be thanked that they are risen already,
and that this is but a dream, and are ready to instruct all the world, and have
done it upon occasion. That every soul is to be subject to the higher powers:
For the powers that be are ordained of God; whosoever therefore resists the
power, resists the Ordinance of God; and they that resist, shall receive to
themselves damnation. And yet the Powers then, touching which St. Paul speaks,
were not only Antichristian in some sense, but mere Pagan. But from this we
may understand, that the Root of all Authority is God himself. And therefore
they are Witnesses with a witness, that in pretense of Christ's right to rule,
will strike at the Root of all Authority, God himself, and be guilty of a (...),
as the ancient Giants were, viz. of fighting against God. Wherefore this
doctrine implied in the Interpretation of these two Vials, made by the
Remarker, is extremely unsound and unchristian, and consequently upon this
account also his Interpretation is false.

Verse. 12. Though the drying up the River Euphrates may signify such mutation
in the Turkish Empire as to make way for the Jews and Eastern Nations, etc. yet
it is like to have some farther signification, viz. That whereas Euphrates was a
great defense to Babylon, by diverting the stream of which Cyrus took the City,
something analogous thereto (whence may be the great strength and confidence of
Mystical Babylon) may be here signified to be removed to the like purpose. But
what this is, time must disclose.

Ans. This Remark is ingenious enough. But why may not the Entireness of the
Turkish Empire be the great defense of the Mystical Babylon? So that as the
Entireness of the Roman Empire hindered the appearing of the Man of sin or
Antichrist, so the Entireness of the Turkish Empire may retardate Antichrist's
ruin; The Kings of the East not appearing for the truly Apostolic Church,
till there be some change or brokenness in the Turkish Empire.

Verse. 16. a There Is no such Commutation of Iconisms here as is imagined, b but
the division of the City into three parts is the consequence of that decisive
battle, viz. the Antichristian party being over-thrown and dissolved, two parts
thereof, viz. the Beast and false Prophet are cast into the lake, etc. and the
third slain with the sword proceeding out of the mouth, etc. chapter 19. v. 20, 21.

Ans. a It is impossible but that there should be a Commutation of Iconisms in
this Vision. For the fore part of the Vision, from v. 13. to v. 17. represents
the forces of all the Kings of the Earth, those of the Dragon's party, viz.
Pagans and Infidels, and those of the Beast's and false Prophet's party, viz.
the Antichristian forces, drawn out to fight against the Army of God Almighty
or the Lord of Hosts, viz. the Evangelical party, into the fields of
Armageddon, but neither fight nor success is mentioned hitherto, no nor so much
as the seventh Vial poured out upon them yet for the discomfiture of the
Infidel and Antichristian party by the Evangelical. Wherefore unless there were
a Commutation of Iconisms, and these tripartite forces in Armageddon, (which
comprize, as it were, the forces of all the world) were turned into as great
and large a City, which might contain the same parties, there is nothing of
either conflict or success of that vast multitude congregated in Armageddon,
set out in the Vision, which is extremely absurd; as if the Spirit of Prophecy
had forgot in the midway what he was about. Wherefore the same thing to be
predicted, is continued, but by a Commutation of Iconisms, and the tripartite
forces in the field are represented by a mighty City divided into three parts,
and the Battle is represented by those Boanergeses the preaching part of the
Evangelical Host thundering over this great City, and the success by declaring
that the Cities of the Nations, that is, the Infidels, they fell, were
thunderstruck, converted to the pure Apostolic faith by the powerful
preaching of these Evangelists. But it is said of Babylon, which is part of
this great City, that Hailstones of a talent weight fell upon her; but instead
of being converted, she blasphemed; but that she was vanquished in a Political
sense, is plain from the Description. A man must wink hard that can keep his
eyes from intromitting so clear a Truth. But now to what the Remarker alleges,
I say; b How can the dividing of the City into three parts be the consequence
of the Battle in Armageddon, when there is no fighting there, nor the Vial
poured out till v. 17? And the great City answering to the tripartite forces
drawn out into the fields of Armageddon, viz. Infidel, Antichristian and
Evangelical, the said City must contain the same, but this Tripartition the
Remarker would take up withal, leaves out the Evangelical party, and makes the
Antichristian party two, whenas, quatenus Antichristian, they are but one
party, and ought to be so accounted. And lastly, for the third party slain with
the sword; here is no mention of slaying with the sword in this Vision, but of
the Cities of the Nations being Thunderstruck. To all which you may add, that
the Beast and the false Prophet were as much two before the fight as after, and
those slain with the sword, viz. the Draconick party were one part of this
Tripartition as much before as after the fight. So that the fight could be no
cause of this Tripartition. Nor is there any true Tripartition but what was
before the Conflict, and which was of the whole number of the forces,
Evangelical, Antichristian and Infidel, into those three parts. For Logic
tells us, as there is Reciprocatio definitionis cum definito, so there must be
Distributionis partium cum toto. There must be an adequateness in both.

Verse. 17. a It Is done, does here (as formerly noted) answer to the same words,
chapter 21.6. and signify the same with, The mystery of God shall be finished, and
time shall be no more, chapter 10. viz. The course of this world is at an end, and
all things are become new, the Politic frame of Governments is to be
dissolved, and a new Heaven and a new Earth to be established, etc. b But to
imagine here to be signified the overthrow of Antichrist by powerful preaching
is a strange conceit. They had long since by obdurate impenitence been past
such cure (of which they had long before this sufficient Trial) and become ripe
for this finishing plague, which in the supposed sense would not be such, but a
mercy. c The Vial into the Air signifies the immediate pouring it upon the
Power of the Devil (the Prince of the Powers of the Air) or the extinguishing
his power by which the Beast and false Prophet were acted.

Ans. a This fond fancy of the Remarker I have refuted above; And it is a mere
precarious dream of his, that all Political Government shall cease. The Mystery
of God is finished if the Antichristian Governments cease, and a true Christian
Polity, that faithfully and effectually supports the Kingdom of Christ and the
Purity of God's Worship, be established in the room of the order. This
extravagant fancy tends to nothing but Enthusiastical Anarchy. The new Heaven
and new Earth, in the Prophetic style, signifies a new Polity; and this, such
a Polity, where reigns Righteousness. b It is a mistake in the Remarker, and
that a gross one, that he thinks the Expositor supposes the Antichristian party
to be converted by these Boanergeses, it is the Infidel partly that are.
Babylon remains obdurate, but in virtue of the conversion of the Infidel party
to the Purity of the Gospel, the Evangelical party grows so strong, that the
power of Babylon is quite abolished, which is the victory over them. c That the
pouring of the Vial into the Air should signify the immediate pouring it on
the power of the Devil, the Prince of the Air, is a conceit both uncertain and
needless, and therefore the Expositor omitted it. It rather respects the
consequent Thundering and Lightening in the Air, etc. The miraculous restraint
of the power of Satan begins with the Millennium, which commenceth with the
third Thunder.

Verse. 18. The voices, thunderings and lightenings signify no such
promulgation of the Gospel by the Boanergeses, as is imagined, but the great
judgments that then befell the Beast and false Prophet, as they signify, chapter
8.5. and as the great Hail does plainly show they do so here, which therefore
is advisedly not taken notice of.

Ans. These voices, thunderings and lightenings do very fitly set out the
promulgation of the Law of the Son of God, alluding to the thunderings and
lightenings and dreadful voice of God, like a Trumpet at the giving of the Law
on Mount Sinai, Exodus 20.18. Deuteronomy. 5.24. and 18.16. But I do not deny but in
some places it may signify Wars in the ordinary sense. But the circumstances
of things determine otherwise here. Nor does the mention of Hail hinder that
determination, which advisedly is defrred in the Vision, and placed after the
fall of the Cities of the Nations, to intimate that the subduing of Babylon or
victory over her was of another sort, from that over the Cities of the Nations.
Wherefore the mention of Hail is deferred till the very last verse of the
Vision, and disjoined from the Thunderings and Lightenings, that it may
peculiarly respect the distinct execution done upon Babylon, and such as
followed the conversion of the Cities of the Nations.

Verse. 19. It Is a great reproach to the Evangelical party to reckon it part of
the City of Babylon, out of which they were come before in obedience to the
voice, Come out of her my people, etc. But the three parts of the City ( viz.
that the Antichristian party was composed of) are the Beast's, the false
Prophet's, and the Dragon's party, answerable to the three unclean spirits,
etc. and the three parts it was divided into are as is mentioned on v. 16.

Ans. The Evangelical party is not reckoned as part of the City of Babylon, and
therefore no reproach to them. Nor can this great Armies gathered together in
Armageddon, which comprised the Evangelical forces also, be conceived not to
contain the Evangelical party in it. For this great City is not Babylon it
self, no not according to the Remarker's account that makes the Dragon part of
it, and therefore it must be the most absolute great City, that contained all
the three parties met in Armageddon, the Infidel, Antichristian and Evangelical
party. The Remarker's Tripartition was sufficiently confuted before on v. 16.

Chap. 17. Verse. 3.
BLasphemy is to be taken here in the sense spoken of, chapter 13. as well as to
signify Idolatry; and so far as it intends Idolatry, it respects that which is
committed by worshipping or idolizing the Beast, as well as what is by the
Beast's worshipping of Idols; the former, though not so heinous, being of
larger extent than the latter, etc.

Ans. What a fond strained conceit that is of the Remarker to stretch the
meaning of Blasphemy here to the sharp reproofs given to immorigerous Saints,
as some fancy themselves that deserve not the Title, I have noted chapter 13. But
here is an Addition, That by the Names of Blasphemy written on the Beast, must
be understood also the idolizing of the Beast, or worshipping him. By this rate
all the Saints and Angels in Heaven will be full of names of Blasphemy, the
Virgin Mary especially. But what Pen would ever set out the Idolatrous worship
given to them from multitudes of people, by describing them full of names of
Blasphemy? This it is to affect freaks and conceits of ones own, contrary to
the current of all Expositors.

Verse. 8. The Ten-horned Beast signifies the Civil Politic State of the
Empire, and so has its denomination from the corruptions thereof, viz. the
violences, oppressions, and crafty fraudulent management of affairs which
attend worldly Governments. Therefore though their being Idolatrous may
influence them to make them more corrupt, yet it makes no alteration in the
Civil State of affairs to give a new denomination thereto. So that the
sixth-headed Beast continues the same after the Empire being Christian, till it
receive the deadly wound by a sword, viz. till its ruin by the Barbarous
Nations; and the seventh-headed Beast that is to continue but a little while is
(according to Forbes) the Ostrogothian Kings (adding thereto the preceding
Reign of Odoacer) about the expiring of the reign of which Kings happened
diverse Prodigies significant of the false Prophet or two-horned Beast ( viz.
the eighth Head) beginning to reign. And if the said Kings be not the seventh
Head, they will be taken no notice of in the Prophecy, though their reign be
almost as long as the Christian Emperors, who are here made the seventh Head,
and how much shorter it is than the reign of the other, it suits so much the
better with that Head its being to continue but a little time. And the dominion
of those Kings was so absolute, that the eighth Head could not begin to reign
until their expulsion, etc. And if they were the seventh Head, then the
Heathen and Christian Emperors make but one Head, and so the same Beast
continues, as I said, under the reign of both, and therefore is not so
denominated on a religious, but on the civil account aforesaid.

Which is farther evident from the signification of (...), viz. a wild Beast,
and the Beast is so named for the same reason, that Jerusalem is called a
Lioness, and her Kings Lions, Ezekiel. 19. and Nimrod a mighty Hunter, etc. And
how early all worldly Rulers were noted for violence and oppression, appears by
that saying of Job, chapter 9.24. The Earth is given into the hands of the wicked,
he covers the faces of the Judges thereof; if not, where, and who is he? And
Solomon says, He beheld the place of judgment that iniquity was there, the
place of righteousness that wickedness was there: And the oppressions done
under the Sun made him praise the dead more than the living. And Psalm 82. God
reproving the Rulers of the Earth for judging unjustly, and accepting the
person of the wicked, and neglecting to defend the poor and fatherless, and to
do justice to the afflicted and needy; it is added, They know not, neither will
they understand: they walk on in darkness, all the foundations of the Earth are
out of course. So that though the Earth be in such a disorder and dissolved
condition, by reason of their evil Government (as on the same occasion it is
said, Psalm 75.3. The Earth and all the Inhabitants thereof are dissolved,) yet
they are like to proceed in the same course. Hence the Psalmist concludes,
Arise, O God, judge the Earth, for thou shall inherit all Nations; signifying,
that no better is to be expected till he arise to judge the Earth, who is to
inherit all Nations. Doubtless therefore the Beast his being called (...), does
chiefly, if not only, respect the evil administration of Justice.

What is here said to be the plain and natural sense of that Description: [The
Beast that was, and is not, and yet is] is forced, and even frivolous. But the
true sense is plain and weighty, viz. The Beast that was in the Empire, under
the Emperors, whether Pagan or Christian, which ceased to be when it had its
deadly wound by a sword, viz. was destroyed by the Incursion of the Barbarous
Nations, and the Emperors extinguished in Augustulus, viz. the Empire then
ceased to be the Roman Beast, or a Politic body governed by the Roman Laws,
and headed by a Roman Prince; Odoacer then succeeding, and the Ostrogothian
Kings to him, who being foreign Princes, getting to rule, and continuing to
govern by the sword, and not according to the Laws and Government of the
Romans, are therefore rightly reckoned a new or seventh Head. But after their
Expulsion, the foreign Nations settled in the Empire began to be formed into a
Politic Body according to the Roman Laws, which to that end were collected and
published in the Pandects, Code, Novels, etc. by Justinian, who expelled the
Ostrogoths; And those Nations thus formed in subjection to the Roman Laws
became the Image of the former Beast; to complete which Image, the new German
Emperors were set up. And the false Prophet or Antichristian eighth head of
Rome did so promote and countenance this new Model of the Empire, and caused
such obedience to be given thereunto by the Authority he usurped, as was really
a giving life to this Image; And in respect of the whole sway he obtained in
matters of Religion, and that he had also in civil affairs in ordine ad
spiritualia, he became truly the Head of the Ten-horned Beast. But the
government which that Beast exercised according to the new Politic Model of
Roman Laws (which became the common Law of the Nations settled in the Empire,
though Statute or customary Laws were added thereunto) it is in respect thereof
called the Image of the Beast, viz. of the former Beast, which was wounded to
Death, etc.

Ans. This is a large Remark, and therefore has room for many errors. The
first is, That a Kingdom or Empire is called a Beast in the Prophetic style,
from the violences, oppressions, and crafty fraudulent management of affairs
within themselves; as if it were such a wild Beast that it tore and devoured
its own flesh, which it must do if in this regard it is called a Beast or
(...), a wild Beast. But a whole Kingdom or Empire being but one entire Beast,
its wildness and cruelty is to be understood of its ravening upon other Beasts,
that is, Kingdoms or Empires, or those that belong unto them, and are part of
them. This is the constant sense of a Beast in the Prophetic style. And is
repeatedly so in Daniel and the Apocalypse, but with a more precise regard to a
certain Kingdom, which is the Kingdom of the son of man, which was inchoated in
the Jews, enlarged under Christianity, but will come to its full extent and
glory in the Millennial Empire of Christ, upon the overthrow of the Kingdom of
Antichrist. This Kingdom of the Son of man is set in opposition to the Kingdoms
of those several Beasts in Daniel and the Apocalypse. And whenas Mildness and
Humanity, and pure, spiritual, rational Religion belongs to Man, fierceness and
cruelty, and a proneness to worship outward garish objects (as is observable in
the Cercopithecus and Elephant, see Mystery of Godliness, Book 2. chapter 10.)
belongs to Beasts. Whence (...) is rightly conceived to include Idolatry in it
as well as Cruelty. And because the Saracens and Turks are not guilty of this
external gross Idolatry, though they had Cruelty enough to be represented under
the Type of ravenous wild Beasts, yet that is declined, and they are
represented, the one under the form of Locusts, but with the faces of men, and
the other under the Type of strange Centaurs or Horsemen, where the humane form
comes in again. This were enough one would think to confirm us in the opinion
of Grotius and Iacchiades, that such Empires are as much, or rather more to be
esteemed wild Beasts for their Idolatry than their Cruelty. But they are called
(...), wild Beasts more properly, and especially for their being Man-keen, that
they will fall upon and devour men, that is, the Subjects of the Kingdom of the
Son of man, which is a rational Creature, and who are for a (...), not for the
brutish worship of Idolatrous Empires or Kingdoms. Nor does either Daniel or
the Apocalypse take notice of any Kingdoms under the notion of Beasts, but such
as be Idolatrous and raven upon the Subjects of the Kingdom of the Son of man,
so that their Political order amongst themselves is not regarded, but their
Idolatry and Cruelty upon the Subjects of the Son of man for not submitting to
their Idolatry.

Secondly, His application of this his false Notion to the Ten-horned Beast in
this place, is wonderful bold and daring, as if by the Beast here described
only the Political or Secular State were understood, whenas the Text expressly
says, That this Ten-horned Beast was full of names of Blasphemy, that is, of
Idolatry, according to all Expositors. Nothing can be more fully expressed than
this concerning the Idolatries of the Beast, and the Scarlet color only, if
that, intimates his cruelty. Therefore it is not so much the Civil, Politic
State of the Empire, as the Religion of the Empire established by Law that
John's description of the Beast aims at. And the Religion of the Empire
established by Law is as much the Law of the Empire, and as essential to such a
Beast as the Civil Institutes are; And therefore it must necessarily give a new
denomination to the Empire when the established Religion is changed. But the
Civil State alone is not the Beast or Empire John describes. Nay the Civil Laws
are not at all involved in his description, but only the several forms of
Sovereignty, as if he meant only to characterize the Beast from the state of
Religion, not from Civil Laws.

Thirdly, It is a false Principle in general the Remarker supposes, that the
Spirit of Prophecy is employed chiefly in prefiguring the changes of the Civil
State in Kingdoms, especially in the Visions of the Opened-book-prophecy, which
concerns the affairs of the Church and purity of God's Worship, as I noted
above. So that he does toto coelo errare in these wild rambles of his.

Fourthly therefore, It is impossible that the sixth-headed Beast should
continue the same after it was turned Christian. It were more tolerable to
conceive that, if all the Civil Laws had been abrogated, and the same Pagan
Religion retained with the same Ranks of Magistrates, that the Beast would have
continued the same. For in the sense of the Prophetic style it is Idolatry
alone with Cruelty, especially against the Subjects of the Kingdom of the Son
of man, that makes an Empire a Beast. And therefore,

Fifthly, The Incursion of the Barbarous Nations, unless they were the first
Extinguishers of the Pagan Religion, could not be the givers of that deadly
wound to the Beast by a sword. But that wound was given before by the hand of
Michael in the Combat of the Primitive Christians, with their Persecutours
under the red Dragon.

Sixthly, The Ostrogothian Kings cannot be the seventh Sovereignty of the
Empire, (for the seventh Head they are not to be called, because there are but
seven Heads in all of the Beasts, and the eighth Sovereignty is one of them)
the Ten-horned Beast signifying the whole Empire. But the Ostrogothian Kings
were Masters of but a small pittance thereof. This is a palpable demonstration
of the falsity of Forbes his conceit. And therefore there is no inferring the
Christian and Pagan Caesar's to be but one Sovereignty from this Topic, and
that therefore the Civil Polity is only considered, not the Religion of the
Empire.

Seventhly, That is also a great piece of ignorance to call the eighth King the
eighth Head, which I glanced at before. For the Vision says expressly, that the
Beast had but seven Heads, upon which seven Heads were the Names of Blasphemy,
chap. 13. Which shows plainly that the slaying of the Beast was under that King
or Head of the Empire (though not of the Beast) who was not Idolatrous, and
that was the Christian Emperors, Constantine* etc. Which again is a plain
evidence that the Empire is called Beast quatenus Idolatrous. Who can resist so
clear light?

Eighthly, The Ostrogothian Kings reign in Rome, if it be taken no notice of in
this Opened-book-prophecy, there is not one halfpenny worth of harm done, this
Prophecy respecting Religion and the Church, not civil changes in the Empire.
This only farther confirms that Principle so useful in it self, but so
neglected by the Remarker; and that the Remarker also has no ground to make the
Pagan Emperors and Christian Emperors but one Head or King, that he might
infer the Conclusion he so dotes on. That the Ten-horned Beast signifies only
the Civil State of the Empire, etc.

Ninthly, I have abundantly proved, that (...) stylo prophetico signifies an
Idolatrous Polity or Empire, so that it is needless here to repeat it, nor does
the accumulation of so many places of Scripture at all enervate what I have
said; but only intimate the Maladministration of affairs in each Empire
amongst themselves, which is not the meaning of (...) in the Prophetic
Visions, but it means Idolatrous Empires persecuting the true Church. And

Lastly, Whereas the Remarker says, that what the Expositor calls the plain and
natural sense of that Description of the Beast, [The Beast that was, is not,
and yet is] is forced and even frivolous, there wants no farther confutation of
this uncivil reproach, than what is already said on this Remark, and may be
read in the Exposition of this present verse in Apocalypsis Apocalypseos; but
that the Remarker's sense is such, nay corsly false and impertinent, I shall
now fully make evident, if it may convince him of his error. I shall answer to
every material particular thereof.

First therefore, whereas he says; The Beast that was is the Empire, under the
Emperors, whether Pagan or Christian: This assertion is grossly false (besides
the defect in omitting all the Heads preceding the Pagan Emperors.) For the
Empire under Christian Emperors, before they became Paganochristian, was not a
Beast, that was the Interval in which it was true of the Beast to say, It is
not, as may clearly appear out of what has been said already to the Remarker's
first, second, and seventh errors, and briefly out of the description of the
Beast by John. It is a Beast full of Blasphemies, that is, hugely Idolatrous.
This Beast therefore ceased to be under the Christian Emperors. And if
Idolatry be not of the essence of this Beast, the Beast will have eight Heads,
which is grossly repugnant to the Vision.

Secondly, Whereas he says, That this Beast ceased to be upon the Incursion of
the Barbarous Nations, and the Emperors extinguished in Augustulus, and the
Rule then under Odoacer and the Ostrogothian Kings, being not by the Roman
Laws, but by the sword: here again the Remarker is quite out of the story. For
though the Incursion of the Barbarians did vex the Empire, yet it did not
destroy it, but they were as Morbifick matter, and preternatural or febricitant
heat in the Body natural, which implies not actual Death, but a Disease only.
Nor were the Civil Laws of the Empire abrogated, but were still in use, though
their course might be here and there something interrupted or obstructed as the
course of the blood is in a diseased body. And for Odoacer and the Ostrogothian
Kings in Italy, it is plain out of Carolus Sigonius, De Imperio Occidentali,
lib. 15. and 16. That Theodoricus, and so of his Successors, they supported
the Roman Laws and Magistracies. Senatum, Consules, Patritios caeterosque qui
fuerant in Imperio Magistratus retinuit; and a little after, Atque omnino
instituit regnum veteris Imperii ex omni part simillimum. Wherefore the Empire
could not cease to be the Roman Beast upon the Ostrogothian King's Rule, they
retaining still the Roman Magistracies and Laws, though they were not of the
Roman blood; for several Emperors before were not. To which you may add, that
Theodoricus was sent as a Viceroy by Zeno the Eastern Emperor; and that Zeno
was then the Head of the Empire the Ten-horned Beast, that is, of the whole
Empire the Western Caesar's failing. And therefore.

Thirdly, Whereas he affirms the Ostrogothian Kings to be the seventh Head of
the Empire, it is apparent he is grossly out, both upon the former account, as
also because it is plainly ridiculous and impossible that the Ostrogothian
Kings, whose Jurisdiction reached to such a small scantling, should be the Head
of the Ten-horned Beast, which signifies the whole Empire.

Fourthly, Whereas he tells us, that the subjection of the barbarous Nations to
the Political Roman Laws, collected by Justinian, was the making of the Image
of the Beast, that is again a conceit impossible. For as much as the Image of
the Beast is the Image of the Red Dragon, whose character is Idolatry and
Persecution; and therefore the Remarker here stands in his own light, that
would restrain his sense to Political or Civil Laws, not Laws about Religion.
But as for Civil Laws, I proved before they did obtain, so that Justinian did
not play the Painter to draw an Image of the Beast, but rather the Physician,
that cured the Beast of a Fever, and gave the course of Law more free passage,
which is as the blood and life in a body Politic And besides this, it is
suggested in History, that Justinian was not so good a Painter as to draw a
true Image of the Beast his under Workmen failing him. For Tribonianus, who
was the greatest Lawyer, and most in his favor, it is said of him, that he was
a covetous fellow, and did pretio leges figere and refigere, make and null Laws
merely for money. In the Code, says Sleidan, Quam plurimae sunt Justiniani
Leges quae superioribus derogant. And the Novels the Remarker mentions bear no
good Omen in their Name. They were new Laws, made upon new emergent occasions.
See Antonius Contius his Preface to the Novels. So sorry an Image is this of
the former Roman Polity.

Fifthly, Whereas he says, That this Image is completed in the Pope's creating
the German Emperors to be the Emperors of the Western Empire; I say, whether
these Emperors or the Popes be conceived to be the eighth Head of the Beast,
the seventh being supposed, as the Remarker would have it, the Ostrogothian
Kings, and the raising the living Image of the Beast the subjection of the
Barbarians to the Roman Political Laws collected by Justinian, it will follow,
as I think I have elsewhere noted, that the Beast will be some hundred of years
revived before his Head, than which, what can be more absurd in Reason and
Philosophy?

And lastly, for the Pope's giving life to this Image of his making, it being
only a civil Image, as the Remarker would have it, and not reaching Religion
and Ecclesiastic affairs, the Pope has not so little to do as to inspire any
life into it; but if this Image reach Religion and Ecclesiastic affairs, then
the Remarker contradicts himself. Thus I think I have sufficiently proved that
the Remarker's sense of that Description [The Beast that was, is not, and yet
is] is so far from being the plain sense, that it is grossly false, it being
understood of the Civil Roman constitution only; which all the time he speaks
of, never ceased to be* Whence it could never be said properly of it [it was]
because that is of things past; nor [is not] because that is not true of things
present; nor [is not, and yet is] because that is nonsense applied to the same
thing still in Being. So infinitely false is this conceit of the Remarker. But
that it is also impertinent, I shall dispatch in one word. This gives us no
instruction touching the State of the Church as to the purity of Religion and
Worship, and therefore is useless, and impertinent, and uncompliable with the
main and general Scope of the Opened-book-prophecy.

Verse. 12. Receive power as Kings one hour with the Beast, viz. not the
two-horned, but ten-horned Beast headed with the eighth Head or two-horned
Beast. For when the Empire, invaded by the Barbarous Nations, settled again into
a subjection or conformity to the Roman Laws, then did the Princes or
Christians of those several Nations become settled as Kings in the several
Countries of the Empire where they were seated.

Ans. The Ten-horned Beast contains the Roman Empire with its ten Kings.
Wherefore if the Beast does not include Idolatry here in it, the sense will be,
The ten Horns will receive power as Kings, when all the ten Kings of the Empire
receive power as Kings; that is, They shall receive power when they shall
receive power. What a trifling is this? But if we take Beast in its proper
sense, according to the Prophetic style, it will naturally signify as the
Expositor has noted, That about that time that the Roman Empire, which was
Christian before, begins to revive into the Image of the Dragon for
Superstition, Persecution and Idolatry, then shall the Ten Horns also be
receiving their power as Kings, etc. This sense, as it is plain, so it is
instructive, and compliable with the general scope of the Opened-book-prophecy,
that informs us of the State of Religion, and of the Worship of God and Christ
in the Christian World. But what Iustinian's Code has here to do, I know not.
Theodorick was appointed King of Italy by Zeno the Emperor before Iustinian's
time.

Chap. 18. Verse. 1.
THE Description of this Angel does much agree with that, chap. 10. The crying
here mightily with a strong voice answering to the crying there with a loud
voice, as when a Lion roareth, and the enlightening the Earth with his glory
here, to the face of the Angel like the Sun there, yet they seem not to be the
same. But this here seems to be the great Prince Michael, who, Dan. 12. is said
to stand up in the time of great trouble, such as never was since there was a
Nation, and then the people of God should be delivered, etc.

Ans. That the Angel here described may reach into the times of Michael, Dan.
12. I will not deny. But then that is no bar to the sense the Expositor has
given. For by Michael, not Michael himself, but some illustrious Persons on
Earth are understood. And when so many Illustrious Persons, Kings and Princes
appeared for the Truth at the partial Fall of Babylon or Rising of the
Witnesses, viz. at the late Reformation, that partial fall may well be taken in
to this account. But the Times of Michael are afterward, and may respect the
Kings of the East and the Conquests of the Rider of the white Horse with a
sword coming out of his mouth. Which are the affairs of the sixth and seventh
Vials.

Verse. 2. Babylon is not said to become the Habitation of Devils after its
power is utterly destroyed; but when the people of God are warned to come out
of her, lest they partake of her plagues, so that her final destruction was to
come. Which when it is come, her whole Politic body will then be dissolved,
that then she will cease to be Babylon, nor will the people of God then need
any admonition to come out of her when they can have no motives to stay in her.
But she is said to be fallen here, because she had lost the Authority with
which she formerly ruled in the world, and her game she had now to play was
with all her force and Arts of Policy to defend her self against the great
judgment coming upon her.

Ans. Babylon is undoubtedly said to be the Habitation of Devils after she is
utterly overthrown and brought to ruin, the haunting of Devils and unclean
Birds being the very character of such ruined places, and alluded to here. Nor
are the people of God warned to come out of her ruins, but that voice out of
Heaven to God's people, to come out of her, was uttered before the Rising of
the Witnesses, and this Angel's strenuous proclaiming the fall of Babylon. This
warning, I say, precedes both the partial and final overthrow of that great
City. But the description of her desolation and ruins from their being haunted
with Devils and unclean Birds, respects especially her final overthrow. Nor are
the people of God bid to come out of her Ruins, as I noted before, but to come
out of Babylon both before her partial and consummate fall. Here therefore is
an Hysterology in the Cortex. But the description of so complete an overthrow
of Babylon does plainly show us and assure us that the bidding to go out of her
is before her fall. And therefore this voice from Heaven commanding God's
people to come out of her, answers to the voice of the first of the three
Angels, chapter 14. flying in the midst of Heaven, and exhorting men to fear God
and to worship Him, that is, the Creator of all things, that is to say, to
cease from Idolatry. The voice from Heaven here is coincident with the latter
part of the time of the voice of the first Angel from the midst of Heaven.
Examples of such Hysterologies in the Cortex are so frequent, that I need not
name any.

Verse. 3. There Is no need of taking Merchants of the Earth in any other than
the literal sense. But then it is not to be applied solely to the City of Rome,
but to all other Cities under her Jurisdiction, which being of the same
Political body, are comprehended under the name of Babylon, and by imitation of
her delicacies and splendor became in like manner enrichers of her Merchants.

Ans. It is not likely the Spirit of Prophecy would spin out so long a
Threnodia, if it was only the howling of some secular Merchants, that their
worldly Traffic failed them. What Is this to the Church and Religion which the
Opened-book-prophecy has always an eye to? And what a sapless thing is the
literal sense of this lamentation in comparison of the Parabolical? And what
Jurisdiction has Rome as a secular trading City over other trading Cities of
the Empire? The new Jerusalem, to which Babylon is directly opposed, does not
signify a material City, but a State or Polity, therefore undoubtedly Babylon
signifies so too. And lastly, this City of Babylon is said to deceive all
Nations by her Sorcery, and to be guilty of the blood of Prophets and Saints,
etc. Are secular Merchants such profound Magicians, or so concerned to suck the
blood of Saints and Prophets? This therefore is an overmuch homespun and
secular conceit in the Remarker to fancy the Parabolical sense needless of
this lamentation.

Verse. 17. As we said, v. 3. Merchants needed not be taken in any other than
the literal sense, so consequently Sea will not need here to be taken in any
other sense, though in the Prophetic style it has another sense.

Ans. That both Merchants and Sea should be taken in a Parabolical sense in
this prolix Threnodia, I have declared sufficient reason, I hope, upon, v. 3.

Chap. 19. Verse. 4.
THE Doxology supposed to end here is continued in the three following Verses,
and the four first Verses seem to respect only those who are called to the
Marriage-supper, or appertain to the new Jerusalem, and the following three
verses the joining all others with them in the Doxology, who are concerned in
that great Revolution and blessed Renovation of the World, when the earnest
expectation of the Creature which waits for the manifestation of the Sons of
God shall be answered, and thereby the Creature it self that had been so long
subject to vanity, shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the
glorious liberty of the children of God, Romans 8.19, 20, 21. and there is no
going back till verse the eleventh.

Ans. The four first verses do plainly contain a Doxology, or the praising of
God for his just judgments upon Babylon, as is plain from v. 2. where he is
said to have judged the great Whore. This is the occasion and object that this
Doxology is conversant about. And the occasion and object of the following
Doxology in the three next verses is the Marriage of the Lamb, as is plain v.
7. Let us be glad and give honor to him, for the Marriage of the Lamb is come,
etc. Wherefore they having distinct occasions and objects, it is sufficient
Reason they should be looked upon as distinct Doxologies, and that the former
should not be conceived to be continued three verses farther than it is. Whence
it follows, the Marriage of the Lamb, or Conversion of the Jews synchronizing
with the sixth Vial, as the Battle of the Rider of the white Horse with the
seventh, that the going back must be before, verse. 11. viz. at verse. 5.

Verse. 12. The Crowns here signify not the Kings of the East submitting
themselves to the Rider of the white Horse. For those are Believers who are to
reign with Christ, but wear no such Crowns as are here signified. For the
Crowns here are of those Kings that war with the Lamb, but he shall overcome,
and so he wears the Crowns which he had won.

Ans. If there were an accession of many Kings to the Kingdom of Christ,
whether they yielded voluntarily, or by force, there was an accession of so
many Crowns ipso facto, and their Conviction by the power of the Gospel is the
best kind of vanquishing in the Kingdom of Christ and his Militia.

Verse. 14. The Armies being clothed in white linen, does well accord with
understanding the war literally. For this clothing does only signify that
it is an holy war, being under the conduct of him who in righteousness does make
war.

Ans. White linen may signify holiness, but by no means a carnal war. If that
had been meant, it would have been said, they were clothed in white armor,
bright and shining. Which would aptly have signified both holiness and war too.

Verse. 15. Nor does the sword issuing out of his mouth, wherewith he smites the
Nations, show it to be no carnal or literal warfare, but signifies the sharp,
but righteous sentence of judgment, which he does first pronounce against his
enemies, and then does the war execute the same. And also signifies farther,
that spiritual slaughter or powerful conviction of the Remnant, v. 21. Thou
shall rule them with a rod of Iron, and break them, etc. does plainly signify
the absolute subjection he shall bring his obstinate enemies into, as the
admonition in the following verses thereto, in Psalm. 2. does show. To which
does answer in Psalm. 110.2. God shall send the rod of thy strength out of Sion,
rule thou in the midst of thine enemies. But contrition of heart by conviction,
can with no aptness be signified by the said expressions of the Psalmist, it
being a spiritual subjecting of men into a voluntary obedience, contrary to the
other.

Ans. The sharp sword issuing out of the mouth of the Rider of the white Horse,
cannot signify the sharp sentence of judgment which he does first pronounce
against his enemies, for that is supposed to have been done in his Royal Tent
at a Council of war, but he is here upon his march with his squadrons of Horse
following him. Nor does it also, but only signify that spiritual slaughter or
powerful conviction of the (...) of the rest of his enemies, namely those
distinct from the Beast and false Prophet, which therefore are the Infidel
party. And as for Christ's obstinate enemies; Turks and Infidels have been
such, and will be such, till they be, as Esaias speaks, chapter 11. 4. smitten with
the Rod of his mouth (not the rod of his strength in the Remarker's sense)
which Forerius interprets of the Preaching of the Gospel. And as for that
passage in the second Psalm, we are to take notice, that the Prophecy there
belongs first to David, and is literally to be understood of him. But in the
spiritual and mystical sense referring to Christ, his Kingdom being mainly
spiritual, his warfare and conquests are rightly understood to be chiefly
spiritual also. The Text runs plainly upon this sense, viz. And out of his
mouth goes a sharp sword (and this is in his march to the battle, as I noted
before) that with it he should smite the Nations. This therefore is his weapon
of war, whereby he subdues the Nations. And he shall rule them with a rod of
Iron, alluding to Psalm. 2.9. where for (...) [ reges eos] the Hebrew has (...)
[ conteres eos] which aptly intimates that Contrition the Expositor mentions,
and farther confirms the sense of the sharp sword: As also does that which
follows; And he treads the Wine Press, etc. which we have demonstrated above,
what a salvage mistake it is not to understand it in a Spiritual or Parabolical
sense. Wherefore the Vision of the Wine Press, the seventh Vial and this
present Vision synchronizing and indeed setting out the same thing, and that of
the Wine Press necessarily inferring a spiritual meaning, and the Camp of
Armageddon being turned into a City the Boanergeses thundered over, (which
plainly puts off the conceit of a carnal battle in Armageddon) and here the
Commander on the white Horse being called the Word of God, and the weapon
whereby he subdues his enemies being a sword that comes out of his mouth, and
the Habits that both he and his followers are clad in, being fine linen, white
and clean, not white armor, bright and shining; all these things considered,
unless one be blinded with invincible prejudice, how can he miss of
interpreting all these of the spiritual warfare of Christ and the victories of
the Gospel?

Verse. 16. The writing on the Thigh does not properly signify his descent, but
his posterity or spiritual offspring, viz. That he is King of Kings in respect
of those who through faith in him are begotten to be Kings and Priests to God,
chapter 1. v. 6.

Ans. The Thigh is a Symbol of Generation, and consequently of Pedigree and
Genealogy. Which therefore may look both backwards and forwards in respect of
the person whose Pedigree is considered. Wherefore if any one will interpret
this place both ways, he has my free leave.

Verse. 17. As the Legislative power, being the light of the World by which the
affairs thereof are governed, is in the Prophetic style called the Sun; so the
Kingdom of Christ having become now far the most prevailing Authority of the
World ( Babylon being fallen, and in almost an expiring condition) he in the
glory of his Kingdom on Earth is here called the Sun, in whose power the Angel
makes the following Invitation. But to refer this so glorious a description of
the great Battle and Victory of our Savior to preaching of the Gospel, (and
that in the time of so great knowledge, when there will be so little need of
it, and the enemy will be so obdurate against it) is an extravagant conceit. So
is it, that the Beast and false Prophet gathered to the Battle, should not be
included in the slain; and that for this wonderful reason, that they were cast
into a lake of fire, and therefore the Fowls could not feed on them. Whereas
their feeding on them is at the victory, and the casting into the Lake follows,
which what it signifies, see v. 20.

Ans. This is a pretty conceit of the Remarker, touching the Angel standing in
the Sun, but it is raised upon weak grounds. For Sun does not signify the
Legislative power in abstracto, nor yet in concreto, unless it be Monarchical,
which is not according to the Hypothesis of the Remarker. Nor is Babylon fallen
before this battle, in that consummate sense, that to a carnal eye the victory
could appear so sure on the Evangelical parties side. And therefore though
Christ were supposed here the Sun, (which renders the other Hypothesis needless
of making Sun to signify the Legislative power, he in respect of his Kingdom
being a Monarch) the assurance of the victory is not to be foretold by a
Politician from the visible power of Christ's Kingdom. For this is the
Philadelphian Army, which Christ himself calls (...), i. e. small forces, chapter
3.8. and therefore no Politician could compute the success thereof from its
Military power. But these were some inspired Prophets of the Evangelical party,
that from the sure word of Prophecy and their experience of the mavelous
effects of the zealous preaching of the pure Gospel in the power of the spirit,
foretell the success of the Battle in this Invitation, standing in the glorious
light or Sunshine of the Gospel. But to make the Angel that stands in the Sun
to stand in the person of Christ, the Monarch or Head of his Kingdom, seems
rude and incongruous. This confident Invitation answers to that voice from the
Throne, from the Dabir or Oracle, chapter 16.17. It is done. Nor need the Remarker
judge the referring this so glorious a description of this great battle and
victory to the preaching of the Gospel an extravagant conceit, as there being
then little need of it, and the Enemy so obdurate against it. For there will be
great need of such preaching of the Gospel, as we have described, and the power
of it predicted, is not upon the Antichristian party, which the Remarker
fancies so obdurate, but upon the Infidel party especially, which are said to
be slain with the sword of him that sat on the white Horse. But the Beast and
the false Prophet are not so slain; and it is a wonderful good and solid
reason which the Expositor intimates for it. Because the Fowls of the Air could
not feed on them, they being cast into the Lake of fire. Nor could they feed on
them before they were cast thither, as the Remarker imagines, because they were
taken alive and cast into the Lake of fire; And Fowls that follow Armies do not
seize on men before they be slain. Wherefore it is a demonstration that the
Beast and false Prophet were none of the slain by the sword that goes out of
that Hero's mouth on the white Horse.

Verse. 18. The fowls invited to this feast are all noble-spirited and
virtuously disposed persons, who though not in a state of Faith, will, in this
flourishing state of Christ's Kingdom, be ready to side therewith, as all
filthy degenerate people will (or rather must by reason of the low state they
are sunk into) side with the Babylonish party, though in a fallen expiring
condition. For then is Babylon the Hold of every foul Spirit, and Cage of every
unclean bird, chap. 18.2.

Ans. The meaning of the Fowls of the Air, which the Expositor has given, is
clear and without all exception; and if that of the Remarker were to be
admitted, it were to be admitted but as a secondary sense, though also true.
But it seems improbable to be true, both because there is no Example of Fowls
signifying precisely so as he supposes, and also for as much as it is
incredible, that such nobly-spirited and virtuously disposed persons, not in
the state of Faith, and therefore indeed Infidels, such as mere Deists are (and
with numerous multitudes of such Christendom swarms) and therefore are not so
properly of the Antichristian party, as under the Dragon, or amongst the
Infidels; I say it is incredible when those Boanergeses shall thunder over the
tripartite City, or the Army of this Heroes on the white Horse appear, that is,
the pure Gospel be preached in the power of the Spirit; but these noble and
virtuous spirits will be found among the slain by the sword, that goes out of
that Hero's mouth; that is to say, will be converted. Which if they be not, it
will be an Indication, that they are not such noble and virtuously disposed
Spirits as the Remarker imagines, and therefore no Fowls flying in the midst of
Heaven, and so the Parable will be meant only of the Angels. Touching the last
clause of this Remark, see what we have said upon chap. 18.2.

Verse. 20. This lake burning with fire and brimstone, wherein the Beast and
false Prophet are consumed, may signify what befalls them in the other life,
into which state the Devil after is to be cast, chapter 20.10. And also the
inflamed zeal with which men will then be moved against the former Politic
state of the Beast and false Prophet, whereby the same will be wholly
dissolved, and so the former things will pass away, and all things become new.
And the lake of fire, in this sense, may signify the same with the great
Hailstones of a talent weight which fell on men, chapter 16.12.

Ans. The nature of Prophecy is to tell us of the visible events of things in
this life. And the event of the Battle, as to them that are said to be slain
with the sword, concerns their visible state here on Earth; why should not then
the event of the same battle, as it is figuratively or symbolically set out,
concern the Beasts and false Prophets state in this world too? The being put
therefore into the lake of fire and brimstone, signifies not their being
punished in Hell in the other world, but the consumption and abolition of their
power in this. For by fire are things consumed. And it is said of the Whore,
that some of the Kings should eat her flesh and burn her with fire. And it is
the loftiness of the Prophetic style to parallel this consuming fire here,
which denotes the full consumption and abolition of the power of the Beast and
false Prophet, to the fire and sulphur of Hell. This is so plain and necessary
a sense, that both Grotius and Dr. Hammond embrace it, and make use of it on
the place, though not to the same purpose. That the inflamed zeal of the
Conquerors against the corrupt and idolatrous state of the Beast and false
Prophet may contribute much to a speedier and perfecter dissolution thereof, is
not unreasonable to imagine. But that a lake of fire and brimstone should
signify such zeal in men, I know no example in any Interpreter of Prophetic
symbols. The other sense suffices. But that the great Hailstones of a Talent
weight denote the same thing that this fiery lake does here, therein I easily
agree with the Remarker. Which does farther confirm that the Lake of fire
signifies not the state of the Beast and false Prophet in the other world, but
in this.

Verse. 21. The Remnant is not one of the two parts, but the third of the three
parts that the Antichristian party were divided into, the Beast and false
Prophet being the other two. And they are said to be slain with the sword that
proceeds out of the mouth, etc. in distinction from the slaughter of the
Beast and false Prophet, which shows that the slaughter of them was real in
battle.

Ans. In this Battle of the great day of God Almighty there are but these three
Parties in all; Those under the Dragon, which are Atheists, Deists and
Infidels; Those under the Beast and false Prophet, which are the Antichristian
Party; and those under the Rider on the white Horse, which are the pure
Evangelical party. There is therefore no pretense of dividing the Antichristian
party into more than two parts, one under the Beast, the other under the false
Prophet. How can then the (...) (which our English Bible renders Remnant) be
the third of the three parts that the Antichristian party were divided into,
that may be said to be slain with the sword that proceeds out of the mouth of
the Rider on the white Horse, in distinction from the slaughter of the Beast
and false Prophet? The Beast and false Prophet undergoing both one and the same
fate, it shows they were looked upon as but one of the two parties that the
Heroes on the white Horse warred against; and therefore, when it is said, (...),
the rest were slain by the sword that came out of the mouth of Him that sat on
the white Horse, it is necessarily understood that that was the fate of those
that were under the Dragon, the third part not of the Antichristian party, but
of all the forces gathered in the field of Armageddon. Were not this true,
there is nothing said of the event of the Battle upon those that were under the
Dragon, which surely was the most numerous multitude. And that this victory
over them is Parabolical, not carnal and literal, has been abundantly proved
upon v. 15.

Chap. 20. Verse. 1.
IF the great Chain to bind Satan be a making Laws to bridle the wicked, then
the loosing of him must be a taking away or Relaxation at least of those Laws
to give the wicked liberty, which is not to be imagined. Nor needs there be any
other Laws than the known Laws of God already to restrain wickedness, when
there is that spirit in Rulers as to see them duly executed. By this binding
therefore of Satan, may be signified an Infernal confinement of him from that
going to and fro, and walking up and down on the Earth, Job 1. which Peter
calls going about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. So that he
is to be deprived of his power of working mischief, by deceiving people, and to
be bound in chains under darkness, Jud. 6.

Ans. The neglect of executing the Laws may well be a loosening of Satan. For
the neglect of execution is the next door to the abrogation of Laws, which will
make them to be looked upon as obsolete, and not binding. And this is a thing
easily to be imagined, when the Philadelphian State was a degenerating into the
Laodicean. That there needs no Laws but the Bible, is a mere presumption. How
mis-interpretable the Bible is, to say nothing of the largeness of it, is too
notoriously known. Wherefore a clear Abridgement out of it, with a sense agreed
by a truly holy and truly infallible Ecumenical Council, as I may so call it,
upon the Abolition of the Babylonian Polity, will be of great use for the
settlement and expedition of all affairs. But to leave things in a scattered
way to the spirit of Rulers, is, instead of erecting an holy City or Polity, to
leave all things to the disorder and confusion of an Enthusiastic Anarchy.
This therefore is the Political sense of the binding of Satan. But for that
Physical sense, as I may so call it, of infernal confinement in the Dungeon of
the Rephaim; if it were admitted, it does not at all clash with this other. Nor
will I stick to admit it upon condition, that the Remarker will also admit that
which is very consentaneous thereto, viz. That about that time the Devil is
sentenced to Hell, the Martyrs be also sentenced to Heaven in glorified bodies,
by virtue of their Privilege in the first Resurrection.

Verse. 2. If the seventh Trumpet be branched into seven Thunders, to reach to
the end of the World, the space of one Thunder must be a large time to be spent
in making Laws to establish a new Polity, whenas the Millennial State will be
no Politic, but a Spiritual Government, and the multitude of Laws is the chief
grievance of most Governments. And that will be a time of so great light, both
by reason of Humane knowledge, and much more of Divine, through the
illumination of God's Spirit dwelling among them, that surely it is not
imaginable what need there will be of farther Laws for bridling wickedness than
what God has already given. Nor can more extensive Laws to that purpose be
conceived, were there but a due spirit ruling, to see them executed, which will
not then be wanting. All other Laws will be the light of the Sun and the Moon,
which they will have no need of, having the glory of God and the Lamb to be
their light. And as the Millennial State will need no such preparation for its
settlement, as this second Thunder is supposed to be, so it will not have any
such declension by degenerating, as is imagined, in the fourth Thunder, (the
Devil's loosing being not to make any change in it, but only to stir up the
foreign Nations against it) but will be one simple glorious State arising upon
the destruction of the Beast and false Prophet, and the removing of the
Deceiver out of the way; whereby the Law of God will have its free course, and
his servants will be in full power to prosecute the execution thereof. By their
righteous administration whereof, they will shine forth like the Sun in their
Father's Kingdom.

Ans. What is said in the beginning of this Remark, supposes the Intervals of
the seven Thunders to be equal; whenas they are very unequal, as the Intervals
of the successions of the seven Churches, and of the seven Heads of the Beast
are. And whereas he says, that the Millennial State will be no Politic
Government, it is a plain contradiction to the language of the Apocalypse,
which by City understands Polity; so that as the City Babylon is a (...), to
which the City Jerusalem is the (...) or opposite City; so there must be a
Ierusalem-Polity opposite to the Polity of Babylon. Nor can there be any Polity
understood without Order and Laws. Nor is multitude of Laws any grievance of
Government, if they be no more than do really serve for the security of the
Government, the purity of God's worship, and the real good of the people: And
in the Millennial Empire of Christ there will be no other Laws than such, nor
any more than will serve those ends; and to bring things to that accuracy, will
require longer time for discussing and sifting things, than a greater number of
Laws would. But to say that the Millennial State will not be Political, but
Spiritual, is to make an opposition betwixt those things which may very
friendly agree. For a Political State may be also Spiritual, as this Millennial
State will be, the Laws being dictated in that great Ecumenical inspired
Council, by the Spirit of God himself, and the Rulers in their respective
places by virtue of their regenerate state, and the Spirit of God, richly
abiding in them, heartily relishing these Laws, and vigorously pursuing the
execution of them. If this be not a Spiritual State, though Political, what can
be a Spiritual State or Government? What may seem to be wanting is, I fear,
nothing but an unaccountable Huff, a Blast or Humor, nothing of the Spirit of
God. And as for the abundance of Humane Knowledge and Divine Illumination in
those times, as if that took away the use of Laws; I say, Laws are not for the
just, but unjust, it is a Chain to bind the Devil and all that truckle under
him. For to think that in the Millennium there will be none, where the Saints
live, but mere Saints is a rash conceit; There will be several odd fellows
lurking in the Ruins both of the Dragon's Kingdom and of Babylon. What follows
is magnificent enough, but empty, and I have answered it already upon the
foregoing Remark. And the latter part of this Remark does only declare, not
prove, there will be no declension in the Philadelphian State, whenas I have
proved there will, by making good my Interpretation of the Epistle to the
Church of Laodicea, as also of the former Epistle, against the Exceptions of
the Remarker. And it is a wonderful groundless conceit to think that God would
let loose Satan again out of his prison to disturb the affairs of his Church,
and change the condition thereof, if they had not first changed their own
condition, and merited this Judgment. And lastly, touching the Deceiver removed
out of the way; I ask what Deceiver caused the Angels to fall, before whose
fall there were no Deceivers nor Devils? And the Devil when he is restrained to
his Infernal confinement, yet all that then can be said is but this, Let no
man, when he is tempted, say, I am tempted of the Devil; for he, during his
infernal confinement, tempts no man: But every man is tempted, when he is
drawn away of his own lust and enticed, etc. Iam. 1.13. And certainly in the
Millennium men are not born without Original sin, nor is their body of flesh
less subject to various lusts than the Ethereal bodies of Angels were. So that
what is here produced is mere Rhetorical color, no solid or substantial
Argument.

Verse. 3. This conceit of iron, adamantine, rigid Laws, etc. (and these to be
in a time when there will be so little need of them) does show an imagination
much upon the rack. If the wicked in the Millennium are to be kept under such
Laws, they will have little heart to join in that Song, Blessing, honor, glory
and power, etc. be unto him that sits on the throne, and unto the lamb for
ever. Which is said every Creature in Heaven and Earth shall do, chapter 5. But
these will be times for which Paul says, The earnest expectation of the
creature waits, and wherein it shall be delivered from the bondage of
corruption into the glorious liberty of the children of God, it being not made
subject unto vanity willingly, but by reason of him who has subjected the same
in hope, Romans 8. viz. That wickendess which John says the whole world lies in,
being the result of its thraldom and delusion under the power of the Devil,
which lapsed man became subject unto; yet in hopes to be delivered therefrom,
they becoming in this Millennial State partakers of their hopes, having all
stumbling blocks of iniquity taken away, and receiving all advantages to
further them in the ways of righteousness, they will joyfully walk therein, and
through the blessings they find do attend their so doing, will be moved to join
in the said Song of, Blessing, honor, glory and power, etc.

Ans. Here Is but the Repetition of the same things in the beginning of this
Remark, which were in the former, and therefore they need no new Answer. But
afterward he offers at two new Arguments against this conceit, as he calls it,
of iron, adamantine, rigid Laws. For if there be such in the Millennium, the
wicked will have little heart, says he, to join in that Song, chap. 5.13.
Blessing, honor, glory and power, etc. Whenas it is said, Every creature in
Heaven, Earth and under the Earth, etc. shall join in it. In answer to which, I
only demand, Whether the old Serpent in his Infernal confinement, which is
under the Earth, will either join in, or say Amen to that Doxology? In what
sense he will, the wicked will also. The other Reason is, That this is the Time
(viz. the Millennium) wherein the Creature shall be delivered from the bondage
of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God. But I here demand,
first, Whether all the Creatures, or all men will be thus delivered from the
bondage of corruption, nay whether all men that live in the same Countries that
they that belong to the new Jerusalem, do? I suppose the Remarker will not
adventure to assert it. Wherefore there being those among the Saints that are
not Saints themselves, these rigid Laws are fit to bridle them. But then
secondly, I deny that this place of Romans 8. refers to the Millennium, but to
the state of the Resurrection. For then only will this deliverance from the
bondage of corruption be, and the attainment of the freedom of the Sons of God,
which is the Title of the Angels. For then in our glorified bodies we shall
become (...), equal to the Angels. And this is the (...) which is mentioned, v.
23. which we groan after and wait for, viz. the Redemption of our bodies, that
they may be glorified and made Angelical, such as the (...), have, the Angels
or Sons of God.

Verse. 4. The first Resurrection is not a Revivification into their glorified
bodies to reign in Heaven. For there Saints cannot be said to reign, there
being none there to be Subjects to them. And that State is not attainable till
the Resurrection at the last day, when Christ has promised to raise up those
that believe in him, John 5.28, 29. Also the following words; Blessed is he
that has part in the first Resurrection, on such the second Death has no
power; do show, that the first Resurrection is not an emerging above the
Regions of Mortality, by being revivified into glorified bodies, for then the
pronouncing the second death to have no power over them would be needless.
Which is also farther evidenced by the reign in the first Resurrection, being a
thousand years, whenas the Heavenly state is everlasting. And it is a great
violation of Scripture to make a thousand years, when spoke of the
Resurrection, to signify Symbolically, when it is so often in the Chapter used
Numerically, and by coherence of the discourse must everywhere needs have the
same signification. Therefore the first Resurrection is a Privilege of the
Martyrs that suffered under Antichrist to reign in the Millennial State, as the
Powers of the Air, viz. the Devil and his Angels did among the worldly Powers,
till he was bound in the bottomless pit.

Ans. I answer; Saints may be said to reign in Heaven, (...) at least, if not
(...). Besides, what will the Remarker say to that Text, 2 Timothy 2. If we
suffer, we shall also reign with him. And to Romans 8. Heirs of God and
joint-heirs with Christ, if so be we suffer with him, that we may be also
glorified with him, that is, partake of his glorious Kingdom, according to
that, Mat. 25. Come ye blessed of my father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for
you, etc. Whence it is plain, that the Saints may be said to reign in Heaven
according to phrase of Scripture. And if there be a Polity in Heaven, as most
certainly there is, the Martyrs may have several Provinces to rule over in a
Briathick State, as the Cabbalists seem to call it. And that the Heavenly State
is not attainable before the general Resurrection, is against the opinion of
the ancient Fathers, as you may see in Mr. Mede. And the last day reaches from
the beginning of the Millennium, to the end of the World, or general
Resurrection, as I have discoursed this point more copiously in a Letter to a
friend, and therefore am loath to repeat it here.

The adding to the mention of the first Resurrection, that the second death has
no power over them, is not needless, both because it more manifestly imports
that this Resurrection is not meant of a Political Resurrection, but a
Physical, and also that it assures us of the sense of that passage in the
Epistle to the Church of Smyrna; He that overcomes shall not be hurt by the
second Death; from the comparing of which two places together, the Ancients
rightly inferred the Rising of the Martyrs at the first Resurrection, that it
was their privilege. So that as some of the passages in Daniel and the
Apocalypse are, as it were, Tallies kept by parties one with another, to give a
just account of the sense, so the same are some passages of the Apocalypse one
to another, of which I might give many more examples, but I hold it needless.

Nor does the Martyrs reigning in Heaven that thousand years of the Millennium
clash with their reigning there for ever afterward. But from the beginning of
the Millennium, to everlasting, is their reign, and Omne majus continet in se
minus, so that it is true that they reigned in Heaven, while the Saints which
worshipped not the Beast, with their successors, reigned in the Millennium on
Earth, viz. they reigned a thousand years while the Martyrs reigned in Heaven
the same time. But in this place it was impertinent, and too motiminous, nor
suitable to the accustomed brevity and succinctness of the Apocalyptick style,
to tell they yet farther reigned to all eternity, that being to be signified
afterward. Nor is it any violation of Scripture to make (...), in the sixth
verse, signify symbolically, when in the fourth and fifth it does not, the
Article [(...)] being in the fourth and fifth verses. Which therefore points at
the determinate thousand years of the Millennium. But it is lest out in the
sixth verse, and, as it seems, on purpose to lead us to that symbolical
meaning, touching those that partake of the first Resurrection, and which was
proper to them, in conterdistinction to those Confessors who worshipped not the
Image of the Beast, and who, with their successors, only reigned that thousand
years of the Millennium. Which farther argues, that the first Resurrection is
Physical, and into an Heavenly glorified body. So coherent is the discourse,
and agreeable with the symbolical sense of (...) in v. 6.

But to make the Privilege of the Martyrs in the first Resurrection to be, that
they reign during the Millennium, as the Powers of the Air, the Devil and his
Angels did among the worldly powers, till he was bound; this, though it may
seem a witty conceit, yet it is not true. For then they have but the office of
ministering Angels, which is not to reign, but to minister. For I hope they will
not do as the Devils did, receive religious worship from us mortals. And if
these Martyrs have no bodies, how is it a Resurrection? and if only Aerial
bodies, so have other souls as well as they. And if you say they only minister
for the good of the Saints in this Airy Region, what hinders but other souls
that are not Martyrs may have the same office? so that this is no Privilege of
the Martyrs, nor the right State of the first Resurrection. Wherefore the
safest and most natural sense of the first Resurrection is not to crop or
mutilate it, but to let it be full and of the same kind with the general
Resurrection of the just.

Verse. 8. There was no increase of wickedness by relaxation of discipline. For
these Nations that gather themselves against the Saints are foreign Nations,
that were never subject to their discipline; but during the Devil's being
bound, did live peaceably by them, and happily did so rejoice in the light of the
New Jerusalem as to fulfill those sayings; The Nations that are saved shall
walk in the light thereof; and, The leaves of the tree of life are for the
healing of the Nations; but were now so deceived by Satan's being loosed, as to
combine against the beloved City, as the Neighbor-nations used to
confederate against Jerusalem.

Ans. That there was no increase of wickedness by relaxation of discipline, is
a thing said, not proved, though I have proved above to the contrary. Nor is
there any sufficient intimation in the Vision, that they were foreign Nations
that environed the Holy City (that is, the Holy Polity,) but people of a
foreign spirit and aliens from the faith and genius of those that are of the
true Household of God, though they lived amongst the Nations that were converted
to the true Apostolic Christianity. And the Kingdom of Christ having become so
large at that time, when, Apoc. chapter 11.15. chapter 15.4. all the Kingdoms of the
World, as it is written, were become the Kingdoms of the Lord and his Christ,
it is hard to conceive it should be otherwise; and also, by relaxation of
discipline, that even those that were subject to their discipline should not so
corrupt as to make part of the Army of Gog and Magog. And what Nations can be
thought to walk in the light of the new Jerusalem, but those that are converted
to the Christian Faith? For by faith we are saved, as the Apostle tells us. And
those Nations that are healed, are the same that are saved also; no other at
all need be implied.

And whether you count Gog and Magog neighboring or foreign Nations, it is but
childish and Idiotical to take it so far in the literal sense, (and against the
genius of the Apocalyptick style) that they must signify either neighboring
or foreign Nations in a Geographical meaning, but in a Mystical Dissimilitude
of spirit and profession answering to distance of place; and those that have
the same profession but not the same spirit really and the same says are
Borderers rather than Natives. And such are those that bear the name of the
Christianity then established, I mean in the Millennium, but covertly favor
the Dragon and the Beast. And these are Gog, which signifies Tectum. But those
that are open Draconists or Bestians, these are Magog, which signifies Absque
Tecto, as the Lexicon Sanctum will have it. But this is a greater curiosity
than needs. It is sufficient in the mean time to observe, that as the very
people Gog and Magog, that were the ancient Enemies of the Jews, are not here
understood; so no people of a foreign Nation, out of the bounds and precincts
of the New-Ierusalem Jurisdiction or Kingdom of Christ, are necessarily
signified thereby, though I do not deny but by Magog may be also understood,
whatever foreign forces are accumulated to those that are within the Dominions
of the new Jerusalem.

Verse. 9. Those in the Jerusalem state being called the Camp of the Saints and
the beloved City, does show they are in no such a degenerate state as the
Epistle to the Laodiceans describes, and so is one reason more to those many
given, chapter 3. that the two last of the seven Epistles do not concern the
Millennial State. And it is a great straining of the Text to serve the contrary
conceit, to make those Titles be given the new Jerusalem, because there were
many Saints there, and the rest so as to purity of external Worship. For if
those many were the greater number, then the Laodicean state would not be
applicable thereto; if the less, then the Titles of the Camp of the Saints and
beloved City would not agree therewith, and the purity of their external
worship in all, will not mend the matter, unless Hypocrisy may entitle one to
Saintship.

Ans. That the Church of Philadelphia, though degenerated into a Laodicean
state, may be called in these straits the Camp of the Saints and the beloved
City, appears out of chapter 11. The City is there called holy, though trampled
down and polluted by the Gentiles. Nor is it any straining of the Text to make
them called the Camp of the Saints, because there were many Saints there,
though not all such, whenas the greater part, according to several degrees of
Saintship, might be Saints, and these less degrees of Saintship an effect of
the degeneracy, and that the external worship in all was still pure and
incorrupt, and they that used it did it out of judgment and conscience, being
sincerely pleased, in that they thought God was pleased with it; this adds a
farther weight to make the City both holy and beloved, especially in comparison
of the rabble of their enemies. And therefore it was not Hypocrisy, but a
solid ground that entitled this Camp to Saintship. And if we should suppose the
most degenerate part to have listed themselves in the Army of Gog and Magog, as
it is exceeding probable, the Holy City seeming in such imminent danger; this
is manifestly consistent with the Camp being called the Camp of Saints, and the
City the beloved City, and likewise with the degeneracy of those times, I mean
the Laodicean degeneracy, at once; those degenerate persons being now drained
out of the Holy City into the Army of Gog and Magog, and so the City lest fit
to retain the Title of holy and beloved still without any scruple or exception.

Verse. 13. Death and Hell are here made one to be the Species of the other,
viz. The first to signify those dead by diseases, and the other the whole
Region of Mortality. But surely it will be a better account of the Text to
suppose this to be a like distribution of the damned into two parts, as the
twenty four Elders and the four Beasts is of the Saints, viz. into the
Governors and governed; and that Hell signifies those children of wrath who
have been Rulers in the World under the Powers of darkness, and Death those
that died in their sins in their private condition, but were not public
Instruments of evil as to others. And that this distinction of them is made by
reason of the different state or degrees of punishment that befalls them after
this life, according to that saying; The Lord soon pardons the mean, but the
mighty shall be mightily tormented. This sense will well agree with v. 14. viz.
Death and Hell were cast into the lake of fire, but so will not the other
sense. For not all that dye of diseases, much less shall the whole Region of
Mortality be cast into the lake of fire, etc.

Ans. Death and Hell are not here made the one the species of the other, but
rather the one a part of the other. (...), which is translated Hell, signifies
the dark invisible Receptacle of the deceased; and Hell has its name from an
Anglosaxon word, that signifies to cover. (...) therefore, which is here
rendered Hell is the common or universal Receptacle of all the deceased. The Sea
gave up the dead that were in it, and Death and Hell delivered up the dead that
were in them. There was begun an Enumeration of the Receptacles of the
deceased, or by a Prosopopoeia, of the Keepers of these Deposita, viz. the
deceased. The Sea is one; Those places that take in the bodies of those that
dye of diseases, another; but to be short, he abruptly names that common
Receptacle or Keeper of all the deceased, (...), which is translated Hell. This
is the plain meaning of the Text. But the Remarker's two parts are out of
doors, because if Death and Hell make two parts, Sea will come in for the
third, and so spoil the conceit, which otherwise had no harm in it. For whereas
he most of all applauds his exposition as so well agreeing with v. 14. [Death
and Hell were cast into the lake of fire] if he take in Sea too, to cast into
the lake of fire, it will make strange work. But the Interpretation of v. 14.
by the Expositor, does not suppose Death there to signify either all that dye
of diseases, or none but those that dye of diseases, but to signify, Death it
self, and (...) [Hell] to signify this Region of Mortality wherein he reigns,
as you may see in his Exposition, where the sense is sufficiently clear and
smooth.

Chap. 21. Verse. 1.
SEA does not signify here the unquiet multitude of the wicked, but as it does
in the second Trumpet and the second Vial, viz. The over-spreading of worldly
Dominion that does overflow and overwhelm men with power, as the Sea overflows
the Earth.

Ans. The nature of the Sea is to be tossing, unquiet and moving, which
therefore very well sets off the disposition of the Mobile vulgus, especially
the wicked part of them, that are easily ruffled into seditions and rebellions.
But when this new Heaven and new Earth, that is, this New-Ierusalem-Polity is
settled, there will be no such thing as the appearance of a fluctuating Sea, or
of a Sea by invasion breaking in upon the Land; but all will be in settled
peace and quietness, as the Expositor has explained this passage. But to
interpret Sea and Waters not of multitudes of people, but of worldly Dominions
(the ruling Part) is quite out of the road of the Prophetic style. But the
worldly Powers and worldly Dominions hugely fill the Remarker's fancy.

Verse. 2. The New Jerusalem coming down from Heaven is not a Polity to be
settled on Earth by Councils, but it is God's taking up his abode among men, to
rule and govern them by his truth and life dwelling in them, whereby they shall
walk in the light of life, and so not need the constitutions of Councils.

Ans. The New Jerusalem come down from Heaven, is the new Heaven and the new
Earth, and a new Heaven and a new Earth in the Prophetic style is a New
Polity. See the Alphabet of Iconisms in [Heaven and Earth.] And besides, in
that it is the City Jerusalem, in opposition to the City Babylon, it must be a
Polity antistoechal to a Polity, City signifying a Polity in the Prophetic
style. And a Council and Laws will be requisite, yea necessary in the
Millennium; for there will be Draconists and Bestians, though under the
Hatches, mingled within the Dominions of the Kingdom of Christ. And it is a
childish conceit to think, that through so vast a Dominion as the Millennial
will be, there will be none but such as are pure Saints, and have the truth of
life dwelling in them. And however that be, men will not then be born Saints,
but emerge into true Saintship by degrees, and therefore will need an external
direction. But the Remarker seems to imagine they will be grown men as soon as
they drop out of the womb, and will want no Childrens Catechisms to instruct
them.

Verse. 6. I will give to him that is a-thirst of the fountain of the water of
life freely, does primarily respect the Millennial State, which is the present
subject; and so likewise do the words in the next verse, viz. Shall inherit all
things, yet eternal Rewards may be included in those promises.

Ans. I say these places here mentioned do plainly point at the Heavenly
Reward, as the Expositor has explained them, when Christ saves us to the
utmost. His saying he is Omega as well as Alpha, intimates as much. For the
last letter in the Alphabet of salvation is our enjoyment of the Heavenly
Inheritance, in which we inherit all things that heart can wish. And v. 7. as
if he alluded to the conclusion of his Epistle to the Church of Laodicea (which
farther confirms the Expositor's sense of that Epistle) he uses the phrase, He
that overcomes, He shall inherit all things, and I will be his God (he speaks
there in reference to his Divinity) and he shall be my Son, and consequently an
heir of the celestial Inheritance with Christ, enjoying such happiness as his
glorified Humanity does there in the Kingdom of his Father.

Verse. 13. The Inscription of the Names of the twelve Tribes on the Gates is
but a continuance of that Israelism, which runs through the whole Prophecy. But
if the imagined sense here were true, that there is no entrance into the
dispensation of the spirit without endeavors to live up to the external rules
of the Word as well as one can, how come Publicans and Sinners to enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven before the legal Scribes and Pharisees?

Ans. To make the distinct parts of the continued Israelism in this description
of the New Jerusalem to signify nothing, is to make the Spirit of Prophecy to
trifle in the description thereof. Nor does this useful and edifying sense the
Expositor has given at all clash with that saying of our Savior; That
Publicans and Sinners enter into the Kingdom of Heaven before the Scribes and
Pharisees. For they did not live up to the external Law of God as near as they
could, for then they had been sincere. But our Savior Christ expressly calls
them Hypocrites. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees Hypocrites, ye tithe, mint
and cumin, but omit the weightier matters of the law, judgment, mercy and
faith. So that there was more sincerity in the Publicans and Sinners our
Savior pleads for than in them.

Verse. 15. The golden Reed here is to answer to all the rest of the splendid
Description of the New Jerusalem, but neither it nor the Angel measuring with
it, signifies the Jerusalem state, to surpass those measured, chapter 11. For it
being (as is showed there) the restoration of the outward Court to the inward,
is not a superior state to that of the Worshippers in the inward Court. But
the measuring there by a man, is by John himself, to signify his being to
Prophecy of them, and what he does Prophecy of them respects chiefly their
preservation from being trodden down, and the duties they should perform. So
that a golden Reed were not agreeable for that occasion.

Ans. This shuffling off this solid interpretation of the Angel's measuring the
City with a golden Reed, depends upon the Remarker's making the Witnesses and
the Worshippers in the Temple and Thysiasterion, chapter 11. to be the same, and
the Inner and Outer Court to synchronize. But the vanity of this Imagination I
have sufficiently confuted on that Chapter. And therefore measuring the Inner
Court, signifying the symmetricalness of the Church visible for about 400 years
after Christ, as not yet degenerated into that gross Apostasy, and there being
different degrees of Holiness in the Sanctum Sanctorum, Sanctum and
Thysiasterion, which also insinuates that that Interval of the Church did
lessen in its Holiness by degrees, till at last it degenerated into that state
of the Apostasy, and according to History those times having several things in
them of a superfluous and combustible nature, that will not abide the fire as
Gold will, and lose nothing of its weight, it is apparent that that state of
the Church was inferior to this of the Millennium, and that being measured by
an ordinary combustible Reed, and but by a man, for John was such, this by an
Angel and with a golden Reed, it does not only admit but enforce upon the
intelligent such an Interpretation as the Expositor has given, which is an
edifying instructive Interpretation, when that account the Remarker gives
signifies nothing, viz. only, That the golden Reed here is to answer to the
described splendor of the New Jerusalem. I demand then, What does that
ordinary Reed answer to? Certainly to a more combustible and inferior
condition of the Inner Court, or the Worshippers therein, viz. the Church for
about 400 years after Christ. (...), as Aristotle somewhere tells us. The City
therefore being measured by a golden Reed, and by an Angel, is not said so for
pomp sake, or merely to follow suit, as at a game at Cards, but by an
antistoechal Reflection on the Reed and the man measuring the Inner Court, chapter
11. to denote the excellent State of the Millennial Church above that of the
Church till about 400 years after Christ, though that was an excellent state of
the Church too in comparison of the times of Apostasy. This is more than
enough on this Remark; that which I have wrote on chapter 11. does alone abundantly
demonstrate the weakness thereof.

Verse. 18. The City being of pure gold does signify the sound judgment and
righteousness that will dwell therein by the Throne of God and the Lamb being
in it. Which to be sure will not be without charity; but the description does
respect a spiritual state of Government.

Ans. Sound judgment and righteousness necessarily arise from the Spirit of
Divine love or charity. Vnself-interessed Love must needs clear the sight in
judgment. But the Remarker is shy of admitting Charity primarily to be
understood, because it suits so well with making the Millennium the same with
the Philadelphian Interval after the settlement of things, which he has taken a
toy against, though it be most certainly true.

Verse. 19, 20. The twelve stones, which are the foundation of the Wall, need
not each of them a particular signification here, but as all precious stones,
are chiefly valued according to their degrees of splendor and solidity; so
these two qualities seem mainly here to be aimed at, to signify the soundness
and beautifulness of that Apostolical Righteousness whereon the safety and
defense of the New Jerusalem shall be founded; yet not excluding an allusion to
such qualities in any of the stones as will bear an apt application. But
straining here to give a particular account of them all, has caused a strange
luxuriancy of fancy.

Ans. To slubber over the Mystery of the twelve stones, with those two
significations only in general of splendor and solidity, is again to make the
Spirit of Prophecy to trifle. And being thus niggardly as to admit of but two
properties, it is still worse, in that one is less proper for a Wall, which is
a structure for defense, rather than for beauty and ornament. But take them
both in; if this were the business, one kind of stone would have served better
than all twelve, and that is the Diamond, which out-does them all for solidity
and splendor. What stone so hard and invincible as it? What stone so
beautiful and splendid? But yet in a better mood he seems inclined to admit of
an allusion to such qualities in any of the stones as will bear an apt
application. But if in any, why not in all? He says straining here to give a
particular account of all has caused a strange luxuriancy of fancy. But how
can that fancy be luxuriant that is not exorbitant, but keeps within a
prescribed compass, and takes notice of no virtues in any of these stones, but
what tend to the safety and security of the City, to preserve the Philadelphian
State therein, and hinder it from lapsing into the Laodicean. But that is the
very thing that the Remarker has a pique at the presumption of the Expositor,
for, that he would give an account of every stone in the Wall, they several of
them supposing, and so aptly complying with his Hypothesis of making the
Philadelphian state and New Jerusalem state all one, and the Laodicean to
succeed; so that he cannot endure it, and upon that account calls that strained
fancy in the Expositor, which is strickt and unexceptionable Reason, as any one
that examines it without prejudice will find it.

Verse. 23. Christ's Kingdom being Spiritual, the Kings or Rulers there will
rule by a Spiritual Power, by which they will be also Priests; such as the
twenty four Elders are to the four Beasts, and such as they and the four
Beasts, to those they shall reign over. And therefore to suppose, as here is
done, that Monarchs or crowned Heads (who rule by worldly power) shall be Kings
or Rulers in Christ's Kingdom, shows little understanding of the state of it,
or something worse. Of that Lordship which the Kings of the Gentiles exercise,
and of their being called Benefactors, our Savior says, It shall not be so
among you, but he that is chief as he that serves, Luke 22.25. And their
profession of Christianity, while they rule by the same Worldly and Political
Government, cannot make them Christian, but rather the more complete
Antichristian Rulers. But the Authority that those Spiritual Kings and Priests
will have in the Millennial State over those they govern, may be likened to
that Rule and sway which the Nobility, Gentry and Clergy have over the
Commonalty, saving the great difference that, whereas the one is gained by
worldly means, and managed for worldly interest, to the much grievance and
oppression of the people, the authority of the other will be exercised with a
true Christian spirit, to the full satisfaction and joy of those who are
governed, and so will cause the fulfilling of what was told at our Savior's
Birth, of great joy and gladness that should be to all people, and of that
Doxology ( chapter 5.13.) of every Creature in Heaven and on Earth, Blessing,
honor, glory and power, etc.

Ans. This is one of the oddest Remarks of the whole pack. We will therefore
consider each passage therein more strictly. Christ's Kingdom being spiritual,
says the Remarker, the Kings or Rulers there will rule by a spiritual power, by
which they will be also Priests. Here we are first to consider in what regard
the Kingdom of Christ upon Earth may be called spiritual, in such sort as to be
inconsistent with its being a Kingdom Political, which is settled by Councils,
and ordered by Laws and Decrees. For certainly the Kingdom of Christ was a
spiritual Kingdom from the Apostles times, and onward, at least till the
Christian Religion became the Religion of the Empire, and yet the affairs of
the Church were regulated by Laws, and established by Councils. There was at
least twenty Councils before Constantine's time; So that the Church was both a
Spiritual and Political Kingdom of Christ at once.

In what regard therefore was it spiritual? It was spiritual, first, in regard
of its Erection, which was not by an arm of flesh or worldly forces, as other
Kingdoms ordinarily are raised, but by the Spirit of God in powerful preaching
of the Gospel, and in doing of Miracles.

Secondly, It is an holy spiritual Kingdom, antistoechal to the Kingdom of evil
spirits, against which this Kingdom of Christ was erected, to rescue us from
their Temptations, and the thraldom of sin and wickedness under them: And St.
Paul declares, Ephesians. 6.12. That we wrestle not against flesh and blood (as if
we had any carnal or worldly design of wrestling the dominion of the World into
our own hands, that we might enjoy the World) but against Principalities,
against Powers, (...), against the present Princes of the dark World, (...) (
Syrus legit (...), says Grotius) against the evil spirits, (...), in the airy
Regions, which is an Hellenism, (...) answering to (...), which often signifies
no more than the air. And Drusius on the place, cites one of the Commentators
on Liber Aboth, who tells us, A terra usque ad firmamentum omnia plena esse
turmis and praefectis, and infra plurimas esse creaturas laedentes and
accusantes omnesque stare ac volare in Aere, etc. Which shows plainly that
Drusius is of the same mind with Grotius. In this sense therefore is the
Kingdom of Christ a Spiritual Kingdom, in that by the working of the Spirit in
his servants it wrestles with, opposes and finally overcomes the Kingdom of
evil spirits, tempters to all manner of wickedness and debauchery, under which
the Souls of men were enslaved.

Thirdly and lastly, The Kingdom of Christ is a Spiritual Kingdom, because the
proper aim and scope thereof is merely spiritual, viz. the end and aim of it is
not worldly and temporal things, but things spiritual and eternal. The Polity,
Laws, and administration thereof by those that have the Spirit of God tend to
this scope, that all the Subjects thereof may advance in the state of
Regeneration by the power and working of the Spirit of God in them here, that
they may be Heirs of that Heavenly, invisible, spiritual and eternal Kingdom in
the world to come. Whatever more than this, is imagined of the spirituality of
Christ's Kingdom will end, I fear, in blind Enthusiastic Huffs and sudden
Blasts, that will tear all into Anarchy.

But we proceed: Christ's Kingdom being spiritual, says he, the Kings and
Rulers there will rule by a spiritual power. Why? so they will, though it be
such a Polity as I have described, the Governors being endued with the Spirit
of God, and acting for the abovesaid spiritual ends, and being autorized so to
act by the Laws of Christ's Kingdom, which their inward frame of spirit
heartily closes with, and assures them of the truth and equity of them, as
also all the people of the New Jerusalem, who will be found willing to subject
themselves thereto in this day of Christ's power. Is not this plainly and fully
to act and rule by a spiritual power? Nor does this ruling thus by a spiritual
power presently make them Priests properly so called. Christ is our King as
well as our Priest. And so there may be as well Spiritual Kings in his
Millennial Empire, as Priests according to the sense above declared, they
ruling and reigning in the same Christian spirit, and for the same Spiritual
ends that the Priests officiate for.

But to illustrate his meaning how they will be Priests, he farther adds, That
they will be such as the twenty four Elders are to the four Beasts, and such as
they and the four Beasts will be to those they shall reign over. But there is
so much light in the Illustration, that it discovers the darkness of his own
error. For the description of the twenty four Elders is this, chap. 4. That
there were twenty four [(...)] Thrones, and on these Thrones twenty four Elders
in white raiment, and there were golden Crowns on their Heads. What can be more
expressive of Kings, than Thrones and golden Crowns, and of holy and righteous
Kings, than the white raiment they are clothed with? Which in all likelihood
is white silk, which is called soft raiment in Matthew, and said to be fit for
Kings houses. But that it is left indifferent, it is the more capable of having
some allusion to the Priesthood likewise, but then with a complication of
Holiness in these Millennial Kings, that they had the power of Kings, and the
holiness of Priests, and were supreme Heads of the Church in Ecclesiastic
causes also, in their own dominions. For the Kings in these times will not be
so blind as to be led by the nose by the Priests, but see what is fitting
themselves, and accordingly approve of it, and the Priests will easily appeal
to them, they themselves being faithful also to the true end of Christ's
Kingdom. If these Kings were Priests properly so called, or Kings properly so
called were not here meant instead of golden Crowns on their Heads, they would
have had golden Girdles girding their white raiment. Wherefore it is plain that
the twenty four Elders are properly Kings in respect of the four Beasts. But
they are Kings only over the four Beasts, the four Beasts comprizing the whole
Israel of God, that is, the whole Kingdom of Christ in the Millennium. And
therefore the four Beasts are Subjects, nor are they Kings or Rulers over other
people or Nations out of the Kingdom of Christ, which is rashly and without
ground asserted by the Remarker.

Wherefore the Remarker vainly insults over the Expositor in the following
words: And therefore to suppose, as here is done, that Monarchs or crowned
Heads (who rule by worldly power) shall be Kings and Rulers, etc. This is to
fly in the face of the very Text, and pull the golden Crowns off the Heads of
the four and twenty Elders. For they are crowned Heads, and reign and rule in
Christ's Kingdom. But that he may seem to have some wit in his wrath, he would
by crowned Heads understand such Monarchs as rule by worldly power. But I have
already demonstrated, that the Monarchs in the Millennial Polity rule by a
Spiritual power, and that a Political and Spiritual Government are not terms
inconsistent one with another, nor need I again repeat it. Whence it is
manifest, that the Remarker out of the ignorance of the state of Christ's
Kingdom or something worse, an affected singularity in high-flown Notions, has
erred in so material a point.

But he holds on to maintain it from that saying of our Savior, Luke 22.25.
which is the same with Mat. 20.25. but neither are any Reprehension of just
Political Government, which is managed (...), as Aristotle speaks, Politic.
lib. 3. cap. 7. but of that which Aristotle there calls the (...), of any kind
of Government, as he calls (...), Tyranny, (...), a digression from the Regal
Power, and defines it (...), a Monarchy constituted for the good of the
Monarch; which, with Aristotle's leave, it should be, but I suppose he means
exclusively to the good of the public. It Is this our Savior blames, if any
thing here in Monarchy, not Monarchy it self merely as Political. But mainly he
spoke this to upbraid the ignorance of those of his disciples that were
ambitious of high places in his Kingdom here on Earth, they foolishly
conceiting they should have the pleasure and riches (whereby they may be
enabled to be gracious Benefactors) and splendor of worldly Potentates. This
concerns the Apostles themselves and the succeeding Bishops, which were to be
Rulers of the Church (and therefore is rather a prediction for them than any
Prescription to secular Christian Monarchs that should be afterward) the
Apostles, I say, this seems only to concern, and the succeeding Primitive
Bishops, who were to live in mean rank as to the condition of the world, and to
care and toil for the good of the Church, and bear the brunt of all
Persecutions, as our Savior himself dyed for his Church. This is the genuine
sense of those two places. But for such a Monarch as really rules for the good
of the Kingdom of Christ, that those places any thing concern such a Political
Government, is a wonderful groundless conceit, and quite out of the Road of
Truth. As that which follows, is either grossly false or impertinent. For if he
mean that Political Government simply in it self, will make a Christian Ruler,
or a Ruler that professes Christianity rather the more completely
Antichristian, it is wretchedly false, as may appear out of what has been said
already. But if he mean by Political Government, Worldly Government, which
serves the ends of the World, rather than of the Kingdom of Christ; this is
absolutely impertinent to the present point, and contrary to the Hypothesis,
which is that these Millennial Monarchs rule by such a Political Constitution
as best serves the promotion and conservation of Christ's Spiritual Kingdom,
and best suits with the Regenerate spirits both of the Governors and Governed.
Which he keeping to, though himself were unregenerate, yet is he far from being
Antichristian; but as it is said in lower matters, Malus homo, yet Bonus Civis,
so such an unregenerate man would be a good Christian Monarch, not at all
Antichristian.

A man would think that the Remarker were a Republican or Antimonarchical man
by such wild passages as these. But what follows may clear him from that
suspicion. For he likens the Authority that those Spiritual Kings and Priests
will have in the Millennial State over those they govern to that Rule and sway
which the Nobility, Gentry and Clergy have over the Commonalty, etc. Which if
it relates to the English Constitution, he must needs understand of the Time
out of Parliament, because Convocations, Councils and Parliaments are of a
Political nature, which he will not allow of in the Millennium. From whence it
is manifest, that the Rule of those Spiritual Kings and Priests in the
Millennium over them they govern, is merely precarious, and they may choose
whether they will obey them or no. And so this deep mystery of the Remarker,
touching the Millennial State, is resolved at last into mere Anarchy. Though I
will be so charitable as to hope he will allow Monarchy to be the best
Government till that time, (which is far enough off) that the Millennial
Anarchy comes in.

This is an extravagant dream, arising out of a dry and over-thoughtfull
Melancholy, thus to fancy the Millennial State here on Earth to be
Aziluthical, or like Ovid's golden Age, when there was neither Law nor
Magistrate, whenas I have above noted, that even the unfallen Angels, and that
before the lapse of any, were in a state Briathical or Political in the
Heavenly Regions. And lastly, as for the Joy and Doxology he concludes with, no
intelligent good man but would be more thankful to Divine Providence, for such
a tight and well-knit Polity in the Millennial Kingdom of Christ, as I have
described, than such a lax and lazy Anarchy as is described by the Remarker.

Verse. 24. The Kings of the Earth bringing their glory to it, does not signify
their becoming Converts, but their doing honor to it by Acts of bounty, etc.
as foreign Princes did sometimes honor to the Temple of Jerusalem by
Sacrifices and Presents, though they became not Converts.

Ans. That the Kings of the Earth bringing their glory to it, does signify
their becoming Converts, plainly appears from the precedent part of the verse
(for there is but the repeating, according to an usual scheme in Scripture, the
same thing again in different words, the Conversion of Nations implying the
Conversion of their Kings, and the Conversion of Kings the Conversion of the
Nations they rule over.) And the Nations of them that are saved shall walk in
the light of it* (...), which answers exquisitely to that passage, Act. 2.47.
The Lord added every day to the Church, (...), new Converts, such as should be
saved. And Esaias also, to which this place of the Apocalypse alludes, chap.
60.2. plainly confirms this sense. (...), The Nations shall come to thy light,
and Kings to the brightness of thy Rising. Lift up thine eyes round about and
see, all they gather themselves together, they come to thee: thy sons shall
come from far, and thy daughters shall be nursed at thy side. Then thou shall
see and flow together, and thy heart shall fear and be enlarged, because the
abundance of the Sea shall be converted unto thee, the forces of the Nations
shall come unto thee. What can signify the Conversion of Kings and Nations
more fully than this?

Chap. 22. Verse. 1.
THis pure River of Water of life, is the waters of life which every one that
is a-thirst is called to drink of freely; and its issuing out of the Throne
does signify, that the executing of righteousness by the Throne of God
dwelling among them, is accompanied with the full communion of his Spirit. So
that the Throne of God is not here to be applied to those that are in Authority,
more than the whole City in which the Throne of God is; and that communion with
him by his Spirit, is a blessing attending the Throne of God being therein,
viz. It Is that River, the streams whereof make glad the City of God, Psalm. 46.

Ans. The Expositor has given so easy, apposite and natural a sense of this
and the following verse, that were it not for the pertinacious continuance of
the Remarker in his Aziluthick dream, he would never go about to substitute any
other in lieu of it, and say, The Throne of God is not here to be applied to
those that are in Authority more than the whole City. As if the Throne of God
(which doubtless signifies the Sovereign Throne, as Apoc. 12.5.) were equally
erected in every private Citizen. What can be more gross than this? This is
like that arrogance in Core, Dathan and Abiram, Numb. 16. who said to Moses and
Aaron, Ye take too much upon you, seeing all the Congregation are holy, every
one of them, and the Lord is among them; As the Remarker says, The Throne of
God is in the whole City. If every Citizen then be a Sovereign Magistrate,
where are the People to obey? Wherefore it is a mere Aziluthick dream, and a
substituting Anarchy, for an holy and righteous Polity, and perfectly repugnant
to the very Text. And therefore that v. 17. of him that is athirst, his
drinking the waters of life freely is rather to be interpreted Politically, by
this River issuing from the Throne of God, that they that sincerely desire it,
may admit themselves into a Church and Polity where pure Doctrine and impartial
Justice is to be had, and where there are none that do, (...), nor sell Justice
for money and bribes. Which yet does not exclude that more general sense of the
communion of God's Spirit in all the Citizens of the new Jerusalem.

Verse. 2. Tree of life may be another Symbol to signify the same thing with
the Waters of life. And thus did the Tree of life signify in Paradise, viz.
That Dispensation of life to be revealed by the Prince of life, who brought
life and immortality to light. And therefore Adam was not disposed to eat of
the Tree of life, being not forbidden, though he was so forward to eat of the
Tree that was forbid; which after he had done, he was expelled Paradise, lest
he should then take of the Tree of life; whereby is signified, that entrance
into life is not to be gained by following our own inventions, in searching
after the knowledge of good and evil. But if this Tree of life be taken (as it
is here) to signify Men, it must not be to signify Grandees only, but all
Citizens, viz. all Plants of Righteousness nourished by the Waters of life. The
leaves healing the Nations does not mean those that were become Subjects to
Christ's Kingdom and Discipline, but neighboring Nations, whose Kings brought
their honor and glory to the new Jerusalem. And that light of Instruction they
borrowed from the glorious luster of it (in the light whereof the Nations which
are saved shall walk) is signified by the leaves of the tree of life healing
the Nations. In like manner did other Nations borrow light from the Iudaical
Worship, and the Heathen Priests and Philosophers did rectify their Theology
by the Christian doctrine. And though this healing of the Nations by the leaves
will be much more verified in the people subject to the Dominion of the New
Jerusalem, than in those neighboring Nations, yet that verifying of it, is
signified by the description given of his righteous Dominion, who is to judge
the World in Righteousness, and minister Judgment to the people with Equity.

Ans. The Tree of life the Remarker here will have to signify the same thing
that the pure River of water of life. What a tautological Bungle is this, and
slurring this distinct Political description of the state of the New Jerusalem,
as if in all that is said nothing is understood, but only in general, that the
Citizens of this City are in the Dispensation of life. But this is the effect,
as I said, of his Aziluthick Dream. These trees therefore that signify
Grandees in the Jerusalem Polity, whether Ecclesiastic or Civil, are such as
answer to the (...), the Magnates of the Polity of Babylon, who were Merchants,
and did (...), and sold Justice for money, being earthly-minded, and as to the
life of God, trees quite dead and withered.

As for the Tree of life in Paradise, it was the sincere union of our wills
with the will of God, and the Tree of knowledge of good and evil, is the
following our own will, and the not keeping in that former union. But what this
is to the explication of the present Text, I see not. Trees here, according to
the Prophetic style, signify Men, and that Grandees: If they had been the
Commonalty of the City, or all the Citizens, Grass and Flags growing by the
River sides had better represented them than Trees. That, not neighboring
Nations, but converted Nations become parts of the Kingdom of Christ, are
understood by Nations, I have above sufficiently proved. And it is a strange
Paradox, that those Nations that are capable of healing, were not capable of
being converted to such a frame of Polity and Religion, which so palpably
tended to both the present and future Happiness as well of Prince as People,
and was intended by Providence for the common Religion of Mankind, whenas the
Jewish was only Topical. And therefore the ancient Philosophers borrowing of
the Jews, without turning to their Religion, signifies nothing here.

Verse. 3. There shall be no more curse, signifies not Papal Curse, but the
curse of God for sin; and therefore it follows, But the Throne of God and the
Lamb shall be therein, and his servants shall serve him, viz. By the Throne of
God and the Lamb being therein, they shall be established in righteousness and
holiness whereby his servants shall serve him, etc.

Ans. If the curse of God for sin is taken away in the Mellennium, then there
will be no more, neither diseases nor death; no Briars nor Thorns, nor labor
of tillage, etc. This is another Aziluthical whimsie or dream of a golden Age,
in which Ovid makes the Earth to bring forth all manner of fruit, yea Corn it
self without plow or tillage. Mox etiam fruges tellus inarata ferebat,
Nec renovatus ager gravidis canebat aristis.
But it is a childish conceit to think that in the Millennium external Nature
will be changed, though men will then have more healthful bodies, by reason of
their Regeneration into true Holiness and Righteousness. The judgment of R.
Moses Aegyptius is far more sober and sound touching the state of things in the
reign of the Messiah, than the Remarker's; who writes thus, Non ascendat, says
he, in cor tuum, etc. Let not such a fond conceit arise in thy mind, as if in
the days of the Messiah any thing would vary from the usual custom of this
natural World, or any thing be innovated in the work of the six days Creation.
But the course of Nature will then be no otherwise than now it is. See Munster,
on Esaias, chapter 11. whose expressions touching the times of the Messiah, v. 6, 7,
8. that Wolves, Lions, Bears and Leopards will then lose their salvageness,
gave some Jews occasion to deny, that the Times of the Messiah are yet, because
these Beasts still retain their old nature. Which shows the danger of
extravagant interpretations of Prophecy; To set the sense of things upon such a
strange rack, and incredible, that they that shall believe it will be hindered
from acknowledging Prophecies to be fulfilled, when yet really they are. And
therefore, as chapter 21.4. where it is said, And there shall be no more death; the
meaning is not, that the Citizens of the New Jerusalem shall never dye; but
there shall be no such death as in the Polity of Babylon, no more bloody
massacrings of the faithful witnesses of Christ; so likewise here, (...), And
there shall be no more curse, is to be understood, not that the curse of sin
shall be taken from external Nature, but such curses as were most notorious in
the Polity of Babylon, those Papal (...) or excommunicatory Denunciations that
often did set all Christendom on fire, and embroiled it in bloody and
destructive Wars. The true Key of rightly explaining the State of the New
Jerusalem, is the interpreting things in way of opposition to the State of
Babylon, and the condition of the faithful servants of Christ under it. Which
is worthy of any intelligent person's observation. And what follows in this
verse, exquisitely well agrees with this exposition. But the Throne of God and
the Lamb shall be in it. The Pope before had usurped the Throne of God, from
whence be thundered and lightened so with his (...), his Excommunicatory curses
to the disturbance of all Christendom; but now this Throne of God is taken from
the Usurper, and become the Throne of the Lamb, to the peace and refreshment of
the Universal Church of Christ. Such is the State of his Millennial Empire.

AN ANSWER To Several REMARKS UPON Dr. Henry More HIS EXPOSITION OF THE VISIONS
of DANIEL, Written By. S. E. MENNONITE, And Published in English by The
ANSWERER: Together with his ANSWERS thereunto.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for Walter Kettilby. 1684.

REMARKS UPON THE EXPOSITION OF THE VISIONS of DANIEL.
Vision 1. Verse. 33.
THIS Image being to represent the four great Kingdoms that were to arise
successively on the Earth, and which is said to be terrible in the same sense,
as the four Beasts in the next Vision are called (...) or wild Beasts, it is
very incongruous to understand any part of it, of any other than secular power;
So that the feet being part of Clay, and part of Iron, cannot signify the
Roman Empire, its becoming partly Ecclesiastical, and partly Secular, the first
being no such Empire or Power as is intended to be represented by this Image. I
understand therefore by the Iron and Clay the mixed Monarchies that did arise in
the ten Kingdoms the Empire was divided into, whereby the Legislative Power
became in the King and States jointly (whereas the Emperors and precedent
Monarchs represented by this Image, and also all Heathen Monarchs had it
absolutely in themselves) which States are signified by the Clay, answering to
the Beast that wore the ten Horns, and the Ecclesiastic power is no farther
concerned therein, than as it is a part of the States.

Ans. Though we should suppose this Image to be said in the same sense
terrible, that the four Beasts in the next Vision are called (...), or wild
Beasts, yet it is not incongruous to understand part of it to concern other
than secular power. Nay, it being to represent the same four great Kingdoms
that the following Vision does, and to the same extent of time, it had been an
hideous defect, if there had not been something in this to answer to the little
Horn with eyes in the other, that being a Principal Object of Divine Providence
and of the Prophecy: But the little Horn with eyes is the Ecclesiastic Power
in the fourth Kingdom, when it was divided into ten Horns. And the very Title
of this Power is Reverend, which is something akin to Terrible. For what we do
revere, does, in some sense, cause fear in us. But besides this, this
Ecclesiastic Power is, in the Apocalypse, called (...), a wild Beast, with two
Horns, which every wild Beast has not. And if it be the less frightfull,
because they are said to be the Horns of a Lamb, yet the Beast is still
sufficiently terrible, in that it has the voice of a Dragon. But this
Lamb-like condition of it is chiefly represented in this present Vision, its
seeming harmlesness and unarmedness, its suppleness and compliableness to
cleave to that which is stronger; as in moist Potters-clay -- Argilla quidvis
imitaberis uda. Whence it is plain, there is no need of this new conceit of the
Remarker, that would confine this mixture of Iron and Clay to a mere secular
mixed Monarchy. But the Clay is the same power here (but under such a notion as
I have intimated) that the little Horn with eyes is in the ensuing Vision; and
yet happily with this difference, that this white Clay or Potters-Earth signifies
the Ecclesiastic body in general, as they are opposed to the Laics; the other
the same, more perfectly molded into an Hierarchy: And so it may be the more
fitly conceived, why the two-horned Beast is said to rise out of the Earth,
namely out of this Clayey-Earth or Potters-Earth. But if a mere mixed Secular
Monarchy were understood thereby, that being so congenerous a body, they all
being Swordmen, Steel and Iron had been more fit to represent their
difference, than Iron and Clay, which, as the little Horn is said to be
different from all the rest; so this Clay palpably at the first sight, without
giving notice, is presently discerned to be vastly different from the Iron. And
the Remarker himself acknowledging the Ecclesiastic power to be part of the
States in this mixed Monarchy, as he imagines, and the Vision making these two
differences only, he must have a wonderful dim and undiscerning fancy that
does not forthwith descry, that the Secular part of the power is all, and only
understood by the Iron, and the Ecclesiastic only, by the Clay; as in the
following Vision the Secular part only is understood by the ten Horns, the
Ecclesiastic only by the little Horn with eyes. Nothing is more clear to an
unprejudiced judgment than this.

Verse. 41. The Papal Hierarchy, which by the Authority it usurped, attained to
head the ten-horned Beast, must very unproperly be signified by the Clay, when
the Power that became subject to it is meant by the Iron. But the Iron does
signify a stronger Power that what is meant by the Clay, and therefore by
reason of it the Kingdom is said to be partly strong (as retaining some of the
strength of the former Iron Kingdom) and by reason of the Clay, partly broken,
that is, part of its Power is divided from it, and transferred unto that part
of the Government signified by the Clay. And thus have the Kings of the ten
Kingdoms retained some of the strength of the Iron, viz. a Supreme Prerogative
Power over the States, though they shared with them in the Legislative Power.

Ans. No question but the Iron does signify a stronger power, as to the arm
of flesh, as it is called, than the Clay does, it chiefly alluding to the
Military Power and ordinary worldly forces which Kings and Princes raise to
defend themselves and their Kingdoms with, of which their Nobles, Gentry, etc.
are part. But the Clay is not apt to signify any such Power, and therefore is
used on purpose that you may understand the Ecclesiastic part of the Empire
thereby: Who having no such power themselves, but yet versed in all the Arts of
Insinuation, and Enveagling of those in whom this Iron-Power was placed, got at
last such an hank upon the Iron part of the Empire, (by pretending a power in
ordine ad spiritualia) as to compass such things as weakened both the power and
security of the Monarchs of the Empire; so that the Papal Hierarchy at last in
Reality became the Head of the Empire. But this was not an Iron-power or
Worldly-power, but a pretended Spiritual Power; which therefore the Spirit of
Prophecy, in the Apocalypse, ever and anon compares to Magic and Witchcraft.
Whenas the visible Power of Arms is a plain solid thing, and bears the face of
its own strength, and of what it is apparently before it. The ten Horns without
eyes, giving up themselves to be led by the little Horn with the eyes of a man,
(who thereupon framed all matters of Religion to the Interest of his Hierarchy,
and they having a Clayey conscience, that would comply and fit it self to any
occasion that would advance their grandeur) this was most certainly the
weakening of the Power of the Monarchs. Nor can any Monarch be absolute, that
in the mutable matters, which concern Christian Religion, is not Supreme Head
himself, but yields his neck to the yoke of a foreigner. The Competition is
betwixt the ten sightless Horns, and the little seeing Horn. There Is no other
States taken notice of in that Vision, and no more there is in this. The
mixture of Monarchy in a mere secular sense, is not an Object worth the taking
notice of by these Divine Prophecies, whose main scope is to foretell the State
of the Church, not the condition of secular States as such.

Verse. 43. Whereas the Act of mingling here is ascribed to the Iron, viz. It
mixeth with the Clay, signifying the descending of those Kings from that height
of Majesty and Power with which Heathen Kings and Emperors reigned, to the
admitting of those signified by the Clay to some participation in the
Government: the conceit here of Seminaries, etc. does ascribe the Act of
mingling chiefly to the Clay. And no better is the account of the words [They
shall not cleave one to another] which are made here to signify the bickering
and clashing betwixt the Secular and Ecclesiastical Power, whenas the true
sense of them is, That notwithstanding those Kings shall yield to the States
sharing with them in Government, as aforesaid, yet they shall keep them at
their distance, and retain the Majesty of Kings, etc.

This change of the Power of Kings, from absolute to mixed Monarchy, was the
result of Christianity's being established the Religion of the Empire. Whereby
the Man-child was caught up unto God and his Throne, and the Devil cast out
unto the Earth, Revel. 12. and so could not Lord it with the absolute Dominion,
as he did formerly in his Heavenly station. For the Authority of Christ's Laws
being now acknowledged, would not admit of such Tyrannical Rule, though the
subtle Impostures of the false Prophet did, under pretense of Religion, after
introduce such barbarous cruelties as did equal or exceed what was acted by the
Heathen Powers. But so powerful a check had the States (whereof the Clergy was
a part) on Princes by virtue of Christian Laws, as often to depose them for
Maladministration. Which Authority some of the Princes did allow them to have,
by virtue of the Episcopal Power, joined with them, as appears by that Speech
of Carolus Calvus at the Council of Tullum, viz. From which my consecration or
sublimity of Kingdom, I ought not to be cast down or supplanted by any without
the judgment of the Bishops, by whose Authority I was consecrated King, and who
are called the Throne of God, in which he sits, and by whom he decrees his
judgments. To whose fatherly correptions and castigatory judgments I am ready
to submit my self. Mr. Baxter's Abridgment of Councils, page 271.

Ans. The Act of mingling is not here ascribed to the Iron, but the expressions
are wonderful accurately agreeable to the sense which the Expositor has given.
For (...) is a Participle of the Passive voice, and is rendered by the
Septuagint (...), and by our English Translation [mixt] not mingling it self,
which is quite against the conceit and surmise of the Remarker, that makes the
Monarchs of their own accord without being trepan'd or played upon by the
Ecclesiastic Party, to communicate part of their Legislative Power to what is
signified by the Clay. But the Text plainly imports the contrary, viz. That
mutual compliance which was betwixt the Iron and the Clay, which is expressed
by the Participle in Hithpael, (...) (the Septuagint render it (...)) that it
is effected (...) by the Seminaries of poor, despicable, mortified men, in
appearance or profession, but notably trained up to make the Iron stick to the
Clay, the Secular power to the Ecclesiastic, as is set forth in the
Exposition. These were shrewd efficacious Instruments for the promoting and
continuing the adhesion of the Iron to the Clay, the Secular Power to the
Sacerdotal Hierarchy of the Empire. And though (...) in your ordinary
Dictionaries has no such Metaphorical sense, yet the Metaphor being so easy,
unstrained and natural, and so exquisitely agreeable to the sense of the
Prophecy, it is an Idiotick or Pedantick humor to suspect or refuse it. And
that Prescience that foretold these things, did foreknow also that such places
of Education would be called Seminaries; in like manner as, That the Saints
which are Superstitiously and Idolatrously worshipped, would be accounted and
called (...) and (...), to which Mahuzzim exquisitely answers. And lastly, the
Horsemen on each side of an Army, which were to protect the foot, that the
Romans would call them Alae; beside that the Analogy is very obvious and
natural. And therefore though no Hebrew Dictionary tells us, that (...)
signifies Idolized Saints, or that (...) signifies the Wing of an Army, yet the
most genuine meaning of those passages in those two Prophecies calling for such
a sense, and the easy naturalness of the Similitude or Analogy of things
warranting it, Mr. Mede did very well and laudably to use the freedom of so
interpreting those places, though none were so wise or lucky as to hit on it
before him. And there is the very same reason for the Expositor his making
(...) to allude to the Seminaries of Ecclesiastics trained up for the Interest
of the Papal Hierarchy.

That against making the Iron and Clay their not cleaving to one another to
import their falling out or clashing is a very sorry Cavil. For what is
disunion of friends, but falling out and clashing? and it is very usual for a
Negative to signify a Positive, contrary to the Positive denied, as in that of
Virgil, -- Quis aut Eurysthea durum?
Aut illaudati nescit Busiridis aras?
Where Illaudatus, does not signify one that simply is not praised, but one
that is detested and execrated of all for his barbarous cruelty. And there are
infinite Examples to the same purpose. But the Iron ever keeping the Clay at a
distance, imports they never mingled or cleaved together, which is plainly
against the Text. So that the Remarker had better have let things alone when
they were so well adjusted before, than have tampered so unskilfully with them;
and upon grounds so conspicuously false, as if the Iron and Clay signified any
other than two Orders of men, Secular and Ecclesiastic; He might as well say,
Black and White would do so.

What follows in this Remark, is big with a double mistake. First, that the
Defeat of the red Dragon by Michael was an abatement of the Secular power of
the Empire or Emperors, as if Constantine had less Secular power by becoming
Christian: Whenas the overthrow of the red Dragon concerned only the Pagan
Religion; and what pitiful work the Remarker has made on that 12 th Chapter of
the Apocalypse, I have above shown on his former Remarks. The Emperor
Constantine therefore remained as absolute a Prince as his Predecessors. Nor
did he ever give away, (which is the other false surmise of the Remarker,) his
Legislative power more than his Predecessors. But being miraculously converted
to the Christian Religion, he did but that which the most absolute Princes that
are, being in their Wits, would do, for the good of the Empire, which was
committed to him by God, without the due worship of whom, through Christ, he
could not think the Empire could flourish. He therefore consulted, especially
with the Bishops, not to communicate his Legislative power to them, but for
them to communicate their skill in the Mysteries of Christian Religion to him,
that he might order affairs accordingly. And if Constantine in virtue of the
Christian doctrine, wherewith he was embued, ruled more righteously than his
Predecessors, this was no abridgment of his absolute Power, but merely a right
use thereof. And the same may be said of the ten Kings or Monarchs, the ten
Horns of the Beast. They were trepan'd out of their Right, when they
acknowledged any Sovereign in causes Ecclesiastic as well as Civil, besides
themselves. And I wonder, whenas the Remarker produces such a notable example
in the case of Carolus Calvus of the Ecclesiastic encroachments upon the
Secular Power, that he should at all doubt, but that the Clay is the
Ecclesiastic Power, as well as the Iron the Secular, and such a Power as alone
is fitly set out by the Clay, in full distinction to the Iron or Secular Power
in Kings, Nobles and Gentry, etc.

Vision 2. Verse. 2.
a SEA, in the Prophetic style, signifies not simply vast multitudes of
people, for then, There was no more Sea, Rev. 21.1. must signify there was no
more multitudes. But by Sea is meant such multitudes united in a Political
State under the Powers that rule them. b And that Power which does overflow,
and so subject them to its Dominion, is rather the Sea (as appears by the
second Trumpet and the second Vial) and they as the Fish moving in it. By
reason whereof, and the fluctuating condition they are in thereby, they are
represented by Waters, Rev. 17. c This Power is the Spirit of the World ruling
in them. Their thraldom, under which is that bondage of corruption, which
subjects them to the Prince of this World. Of which Spirit Solomon says, He
has set the World in their hearts, etc. And Paul, We have not received the
Spirit of the World, but the Spirit of God, etc. And by reason of the rule of
which in us, we are said to be of the World, and so under the power of
darkness, in opposition to that Spiritual state which Believers are begotten
into, whereby they cease to be of the World, and are translated from darkness
to light, and from the power of Satan to God, delivered from the power of
darkness, and translated into the Kingdom of our Lord. This Spirit of the World
therefore is the like Principle of the natural Life in man's heart, as the
Spirit of God is of the spiritual Life therein; and by the one do the Devils
bear the like sway in natural or unregenerate men, as Christ does by the other
in the Regenerate. Hence is ascribed to the Devil that power over those who are
delivered to him for the destruction of the flesh; and also the power of Death,
through fear of which, he makes men all their life subject to bondage. And
hence did he make that claim to all the Kingdoms of the World: which our
Savior did not gainsay. For he by the power mentioned being the spirit that
works in the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. (which all mankind are
till they are recovered out of their lapsed state) he can, as Paul says, take
them captive at his will, and so rules as he pleases in the world, save
wherein God as supreme Governor of the World, does interpose in the behalf of
his servants, and for bringing to pass what Changes and Revolutions he has
determined. The four Winds striving on the great Sea, and four Beasts coming
out of it signify the four great Kingdoms that were to arise successively on
the Earth, and the great commotion and combustion they would cause in the World
by their vanquishing one another. d But the Aerial Genii, or Angels, are not
concerned therein as Ministers of God's Providence farther than they are a part
of the Powers of those Kingdoms that are so to arise. Such are the
Presidentiary Angels of the Kingdoms of Persia and Graecia in Vision 5 th.

Ans. The Expositor does not say that a Sea signifies multitudes of people
simply, but that the great Sea, in this place, signifies so (according to the
Prophetic style) which does not denote the determinate Dominion of any one
Potentate, but the people of adverse Potentates, who are so far from being held
under one Government, that they are the people of opposite Governments or
Empires, and therefore cannot be called one great Sea, as under one Government,
but as one great Multitude, which is called a great Sea, by reason of the
greatness of the Multitude, and is well represented by the great Sea, with
Winds ruffling the waves thereof, by reason of the Commotion and War one
against another. b But that a multitude under one Government is not called Sea,
unless it be overflowing some other Government, I deny to appear either out of
the second Trumpet or second Vial. The Remarker should have spoke out more
clearly. But I say the Sea, though it be not actually overflowing another,
being so subject to fluctuations from several cross Winds and unexpected
occasions, is properly a Symbol of worldly Governments, that are obnoxious to
these Commotions and Mutations. Whence that passage, Revel. 21.1. is fitly
understood. [And I saw a new Heaven and a new Earth] where Heaven signifies the
governing Part, and Earth the Multitude governed; which being expressed by
Earth, there was no want of Sea to signify the same; but to denote the
stability of this new constitution of things, it is added, [And there was no
more Sea] which does not signify there was no more multitudes, but no more
tumultuating multitudes, and that firm Peace and Tranquillity possessed the
Millennial Empire of Christ and his holy and righteous people. From whence come
wars and fightings amongst you? come they not hence? even of your lusts that
war in your members? Jam. 4.1. c What follows in this Remark is something
prolix and mysterious, but may be well meant for ought I know; but so far as I
see, enervates nothing that the Expositor has writ on this verse. For the
Spirit of the World, which he discourses of, certainly Ambition, which the
Expositor names, is the chief effect of it, and most chiefly considered in this
place. d Nor does the Remarker deny but that the Aerial Genii are concerned in
these Mutations and Revolutions in Kingdoms, which is all I care to have
granted. This looks like a desire of saying something contrary to the
Expositor, when there is nothing to be said.

But I cannot let pass one passage of Scripture amongst the many he has cited,
viz. that, Eccles. 3.11. where he insinuates, that in [He has set the World in
their hearts] by [He] is understood the Spirit of the World; whenas it is plain
from the foregoing words [He has made every thing beautiful in its time] that
it is God that has set the World in men's hearts, viz. in their understandings
(For the Heart is the seat of the Understanding in the Scripture Phrase) in
virtue of which they take more notice thereof than Brutes, but yet are far from
being Masters of the Mysteries of his Providence, as is intimated in the
following words of that verse, That no man can find out the work that God
makes from the beginning to the end.

There is also another Scripture that he seems to intimate a false sense of,
Luke 4.6. Where the Devil says the Disposing of all the Kingdoms of the Earth
is given to him, and he bestows them on whom he will. Which the Remarker says,
Christ does not gainsay; insinuating thereby, as if his silence admitted it for
truth. And indeed Christ himself, in St. John, more than once calls the Devil
(...), the Prince of this World. But that is only to be understood in a Moral
sense, not in a Political. For this Spirit of the World, of which the Remarker
makes so many words, and which is the Image of the Devil in as many as it is,
as the Divine life is the Image of God and Christ in us, nothing can more
clearly, nor yet more succinctly describe it than what we find, 1 Ioh. 2.16.
All that is in the World, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the
pride of life is not of the Father, but of the World; that is, of the Spirit of
the World. And therefore he that is quit of these, and is transformed into the
Divine life, which is the Image of God, is really translated out of the
darkness of this World, into the Kingdom of his dear Son, as the Apostle
speaks, and is a true Christian; he in the mean time adhering to the profession
of the ancient Apostolic Faith, and holding communion with the truly Catholic
Church. Which others, while they pretend to do, though they be plainly under
an Antichristian Economy, the Spirit of the World, according to St. John's
description, reigning in them, they are Morally reigned over by the Devil, who
obtains a wicked Tyranny over them, driving them to Tyrannize, or to be
tyrannized over, even in a Political sense. And thus, I confess, the Devil by
his Instruments has a great sway over those that are of the World, in the sense
above explained, and holds them in great slavery and bondage, while the
softness of the flesh, and abhorrence from death and hardship, and the
covetousness of the eye, and the pride of life, ambitious Aspires makes them
subject to be led captive at his will. In this sense our Savior's calling the
Devil the Prince of this World, is true. But the Devil's boast of being the
Prince of this World, in his own sense, is as false as the other is true. And
as for that power he has over the bodies of men, as to torturous diseases or
death (in which respect he is called Samael by the Cabbalists) he looks there
more like an Hangman or Executioner than like a Prince. So that it is hard to
conceive what the Remarker would have by his Spirit of the World, as to this
place of Daniel, that may refer to the Winds blustering on the great Sea, more
than the Expositor has offered already, in suggesting that they are either
Angelical Powers, that bear a great stroke in all humane affairs, or the busy
and unquiet Activity of ambitious minds especially, which St. John calls the
Pride of life, which does not exclude the other two Concomitants. But here has
been too much said to such a needless Digression.

Verse. 4. The Eagle's wings being plucked, is spoken of the whole Kingdom
represented by this Beast, and therefore is not to be applied only to the
first King thereof, much less to that humbling Providence of driving him from
his Kingdom, etc. Whenas he was restored therefrom to his former Majesty,
Splendor and Glory, viz. the wings wherewith that Kingdom was exalted; by
reason whereof, it is the golden Head of the Image, and Babylon is called by
Esaias the golden City, and this continuing the same to the end of the Kingdom;
the wings taken in this sense cannot be plucked till then. That haughtiness
also wherewith the heart of Nebuchadnezzar was liftted up, was inherited by his
Posterity, as appears by Daniel's reproof of Belshazzar, chapter 5.23. And
therefore the plucking of the wings, by reason of it, ought to respect the one
as well as the other. The being made to stand upon the feet like a man, and
having a man's heart given it, are two expressions to the same purpose, and
being (as I said of the plucking of the Eagle's wings) spoken of the Beast
representing the whole Kingdom, are not to be applied only to the first King,
much less to that single Providence which befell him of his being restored from
his delirancy. But they signify, that though this Kingdom is represented by a
(...) or wild Beast, as well as the three succeeding, yet is it not of so
degenerate a salvage nature as they will prove, but that the Spirit of a man
will bear some sway in it to the furnishing it with some manly endowments, viz.
the Morality wherein Calvin makes one Kingdom to exceed the other as much as
the metals do one another; And the noted Chaldean Wisdom (which though perhaps
not greater than in the succeeding Kingdoms, yet did more influence the
Government in those less corrupt times.) And also the noted Majestic splendor
of that Kingdom; of which speaks Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4.36. And for the glory
of my Kingdom, my honor and brightness returned unto me, and excellent Majesty
was added unto me, etc. And hence it is not only likened to the most noble
generous spirited Beast, but also the same has Eagles wings given unto it;
which though they signify the haughty aspiring aforesaid (which is described,
Esaias 14.13, 14.) yet it is such as transcends the brutish nature, and must
proceed from the spirit of a man. But to make the man's heart given to the
Beast signify Darius his humanity to Daniel, is a strange conceit. For if
Darius was one of the Babylonian Kings, yet what is spoken in general of the
Beast, which signifies the whole Kingdom, cannot be appropriated to the last
King, and he of so short a reign. But that the Babylonian Kingdom was finished
in Belshazzar, appears by Daniel's interpreting the handwriting on the Wall,
with which Ieremy's Prophecy does agree, of Nebuchadnezzar's Kingdom continuing
to his Son, and his Son's son. And those who reckon the next Kingdom to begin
in Cyrus, it is because Darius his reign was so short, as to be hardly taken
notice of; and also, during his time, the Government was mainly in Cyrus,
though he bore the name of King.

Ans. Most of this Remark would have been spared, if the Remarker had fully
understood, or sufficiently considered the nature of a Prophetic Henopoeia.
For in such an Henopoetick Type, the Head or Horn of a Beast, together with the
body thereof, make but one Beast to the end of the succession thereof. And
therefore what the Beast in any part of its succession does, or suffers in any
part thereof, it is said simply of the Beast to be done or suffered. And what
by times or intervals is done by, or happens to such a Typical Creature, be it
Man or Brute, is in the Prophetic Representation set out at once; And History
only can discover how often, or in what part the Type is verified. I will give
but one example for many. The Woman, Apoc. 17. sitting upon the
Scarlet-colored Beast, John says, he saw her drunk with the blood of the
Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus. Vidit eam ore rabido, says
Grotius, despumante and evomente sanguinem, ut ebrii solent. But this was not
the constant pickle she was in, and unintermitted, though it was seen and
represented all at once to John; But whether you understand it of Rome-Pagan
with Grotius, there was not one-continued Persecution under the Pagan
Emperors, but ten distinct ones, as they are reckoned. Nor under
Paganochristian Rome has this glut of blood been one continued Persecution, but
Massacres at Intervals repeated, as also other Murtherings: But this being thus
at several times drunk with the blood of the innocent, is set out at once, as
if it were but one fit of Drunkenness; or as if she were always drunk, neither
of which is true. But the Henopoetick Type implies neither of those, but is
only a notable mark at large, and Prefiguration, that at some times she would
most barbarously persecute the Saints of God, and Martyrs of Jesus. This is all
that this Henopoetick Type signifies.

And therefore it is great unskilfulness in the Remarker, that he will have the
plucking of the Eagle-wings of the Lion to be done only once, that is, when he
is destroyed, as they pluck Capon's wings not before their heads be writhen
off. But by what has been said, these wings of the Lion may well be said to be
plucked, when any thing happened which might humble him, weaken him and
discourage him, which certainly that sad Providence upon Nebuchadnezzar did,
and could not but be a great Obstacle to the affairs of his Kingdom. The
Retardation of which Affairs also happened again, and was notorious under
Evelmerodac, when by the Rebellion of Cyrus, Media was rent from the Babylonian
Empire. And then again in Belshazzar, whose knees knocked together for fear, at
the handwriting on the Wall, etc. All these by virtue of a Prophetic
Henopoeia, are referrible to that one passage of the Prophecy [I beheld till
the wings thereof were pluck't] like as to the following words [And was made
stand on the feet as a man, and a man's heart was given unto it] both the
restoring of Nebuchadnezzar and the Humanity of Darius Medus, which the
Expositor has noted, are referrible also. And being the Text of the Prophecy
places this reducing of the Eagle-wing'd Lion, upon the plucking of his wings,
to a more humane Temper; it is evident, that the erect stature, and the man's
heart, these Symbols of humanity, is not the continued character of the
Babylonian Kingdom, as the Remarker would have it, but intermittent and
occasional. And lastly, that Darius Medus succeeded Belshazzar in the Empire,
the Remarker may be satisfied out of Thomas Lydiat. Emendat. Temp. Anno M.
3469. He that considers what has already been said, will easily discern all the
other strained conceits in this Remark to break apieces of themselves, and
therefore I will not misspend time in needlessly answering such slight matters.

Verse. 5. Grotius his conceit of [ Iudaeae nihil nocuit] was not worth
borrowing of him, though it is fansied here to be so abundantly reasonable; and
as to those decrees alleged to make it good, there may be also contrary
Decrees (by which the building of the Temple was so many years obstructed)
instanced in to disprove it. But the plain easy sense of the Beast raising it
self on one side, is, That whereas the Beast signifies the same Kingdom that,
chap. 8. is described by a two-horned Ram, having one Horn higher than the
other, the highest whereof came up last; the Rise of the Beast here on one side
signifies, that it had its Rise from the first Horn, viz. the Kingdom of the
Medes, though the other Horn (the Persian Kingdom) did overtop the first to
obtain the dignity of the Empire.

Ans. Upon misinformation from envious neighbors, the building of the Temple
was some years retarded: But this is to be attributed to the ill will of those
neighbors of the Jews, not of the Persian Monarchs. And it was through their
favor alone, that both Temple, City and Walls of Jerusalem were built at last.
So friendly were those Monarchs to the Jews. So that what was borrowed from
Grotius, was worth the borrowing; but it is but what others have said before,
and the Jews particularly, as you may see in Cornelius a lapide. But this
pretty unexpected conceit of the Remarker seems utterly impossible, as being
plainly unnatural. For in what posture could the Bear stand to show one side to
be higher than the other, as the Horns of the Ram are said to be? What, did he
stand on his two legs on the right side, with his left legs lift up into the
air, that that side might be higher than the other? Wherefore if he raised
himself at all, it was on his hinder feet, in a rampant posture; and his thus
raising of himself was on one side (...), that is, in unam partem; and as
Vatablus would have it, in Babylonios; but as Grotius and the Expositor, in
Gentes, at large in counterdistinction to the Jews. But the Original also seems
to refuse the Remarker's sense, who says, It had its rise from the first Horn;
or He raised himself from the first Horn to obtain the second also, and become
Medo-persian Emperor, and so possess both sides at once. This sense naturally
requires it should be (...), not (...), The reaching out from the expressed
Terminus a quo, taking hold on the Terminus ad quem, which is not so tight the
other way.

Verse. 6. That the four wings of this Beast do assuredly note the Celerity of
Alexander's Conquest, is an assured mistake. And the distinguishing the
signification of the four wings, as they are wings, from, as they are four, is
to separate what the Vision has united, and what is inseparable. For four wings
cannot be considered but as four wings, etc. But they, as well as the four
heads, denote the Division of Alexander's Kingdom, and do signify (as the
wings of the first Beast did) the haughty aspiring of the Kings of those
succeeding Kingdoms, and the exalted state of their Kingdoms.

Ans. How confident either Ignorance or Heedlesness makes the Remarker? This
Leopard with four wings of a fowl upon his back, is one and the same Beast,
from the beginning to the end, according to the nature of these Henopoetick
Types; and so what events or actions suit with the symbolical parts of the
Creature, are to be referred to those Symbols. Wings therefore being the Symbol
of swiftness, the swiftness of Alexander's Victories is notified by them, as
the Eagle-wings of the Lion denoted the same. The swiftness of whose
expeditions, viz. of the King of Babylon, Jeremy compares to the slight of
Eagles, chap. 4. and chap. 40. Wherefore these four wings of this Leopard
answer exquisitely to the description of the He-Goat in the next Chapter, which
is the same Empire, viz. the Greek. Behold an He-Goat came from the West on the
face of the whole Earth, and touched not the ground. What did he then but in a
manner fly? And what can better set out such a flying, than wings? So fitly do
these two Visions explain one another as to this passage. But in the mean time
the Remarker professes himself of a wonderful indistinct conception, that
cannot distinguish the nature of the four wings, in general, from the Number of
them: wherein yet he contradicts himself. For he will not say that the four
wings as four signify haughty aspiring, but as wings. Wherefore as he from the
general nature of them would have signified ambitious aspiring (which if they
did both here and in the Lion, it clashes not with the Expositor's
Interpretation, one Symbol being capable of several senses by an Henopoeia of
the second kind) so the Expositor from the said general nature of them will
have them signify swiftness, which is at least the more principal sense, as
has been proved, and will reach also the swift division of the Greek Empire
into four parts, Alexander living so little a while after his Conquest.

Verse. 9. Though it be difficult to give an account of Ezekiels Vision, chap.
1. yet I think it may be safely concluded, that the living Creatures and Wheels
are not Angelical, as is here supposed. For those four living Creatures
agreeing in number and name with the four Beasts, Revel. 4. (for they are both
called (...)) and the four faces of each of these living Creatures being the
faces of the four Beasts; it shows, that as the last signifies a successive
body or society of men, so the other must have the like signification. Which is
farther confirmed by their all four having the likeness of a man, and a man's
hand under every wing, and their having Calves feet (signifying the labor and
travel which is given to men under the Sun) and also by the spirit that is said
to be in them and in the wheels. Whereas Angels are called Spirits, and not
described by any Spirit abiding in them.

1. The four faces and the four wings of the living Creatures I take to
signify the same thing, viz. The complication in humane nature, of the nature
of those four Animals, signified by the faces, that is, of Reason, Religion,
Courage and Industry. Of these four does humane nature consist and subsist by
them, they being the life and support of humane affairs. The four wings may
signify the several spirits from which these operations are produced, and the
man's hand under each wing the management of all these operations by reason and
prudence. The four Beasts, all of them representing the same body or society of
Christians, have the same signification with the four faces and wings of each
living Creature, but it would not have agreed with them, that each of them
should have had four faces, as it does with the erect stature of the living
Creatures; and also it would have been needless, being the same thing is
signified by the four several Beasts. Besides, those Beasts having six wings,
there would have been faces wanting to two of them. 2. Which two wings added to
the other four, I take to be the same with the two wings with which the
Seraphims fly, Esaias 6. (these six-winged Beasts being the same with those
Seraphims) and to signify that grace and truth which came by Jesus Christ, or
that Life and Truth which he says he is, and thereby the way to the Father. And
we being by this grace or life, and truth, quickened and raised unto newness of
life in Christ Jesus, whereby we cease to be of the World, and are delivered
from the power of darkness, and translated into the Kingdom of our Lord, and so
raised up, and made to sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus, Ephesians.
2.6. they thereby become truly wings to us, in exalting us from a worldly or
earthly, unto such an heavenly state. Ezekiel's Vision therefore of the living
Creatures and Wheels, I take to be a Representation of the ruling of the God of
Israel over his people in a natural state, under a Legal or Iudaical
Dispensation, as the twenty four Elders and the four Beasts represent the same
rule in a Christian state, under the Dispensation of the Divine life. The
latter of which is to be fulfilled in the Millennium, but the former was never
fulfilled completely, because the Jews failed of living up to the height of
that Dispensation. 3. But this Vision of Ezekiel, and his other also of the
Temple, seem to be designed for the like purpose, as the Tree of life was
planted in Paradise, viz. to signify that Dispensation of life which men in
due time were to be admitted unto, but not then, the natural earthly state of
man not admitting thereof. 4. So likewise the two mentioned Visions, the first
of them seems to signify the Spiritual power wherewith God would have ruled
over his people, and the last the Spiritual communion he would have had with
them, with the blessing attending the same, if they had walked perfectly with
him, according to all his righteous judgments in that legal dispensation. 5.
Hence the close of the Vision of the Temple is. [The name of the City from that
day shall be, The Lord is there] that is, from the time they shall keep and
observe all the Laws and Ordinances then delivered. 6. And hence the God of
Israel on sending Ezekiel to prophecy the ruin of the City, and Temple, and
Captivity of the people does (to render their iniquity more heinous) show
himself to the Prophet in the glory of that government which their
transgressions made them fail of, or fall from, to be cast off.

7. Two instances of their falling from that Government are, First, their
making the Calf, whereon God, who, Exodus 29.45, 46. had promised to dwell among
them, does, chap. 33.2, 3. say, he will send his Angel before them, but
refuses to go up in the midst of them, lest he destroy them. Secondly, their
desiring a King, which is said to be not the rejecting of Samuel, but of God to
rule over them. 8. The Wheels I take to be the same to the four living
Creatures, as the four Beasts are to the twenty four Elders, viz. as the
Governed to the Governors. 9. And both the Wheels and living Creatures being
under the Throne, and not rising, but as lifted up; nor moving, but as acted by
the spirit, which was in both, seems to signify the natural earthly state of
those they represent, whereby they were as mere passive Subjects to the actings
of the Spirit of God upon them, like as the Prophets were to the Spirit of
Prophecy that came upon them: 10. Whereas the four Beasts are upon the Throne;
and the twenty four Elders surround it, sitting on their seats in their Kingly
and Princely Habits, signifying the Heavenly station they are exalted to by the
Spirit of God, being a Principle of life dwelling in them; from which new
nature they become as active spirits, to do what the others have no power
unto, but by the adventitious acting of the Spirit of God upon them. 11. The
living Creatures appearing like burning Coals, and Lamps may signify the
burning zeal or spirit of Elias they are acted by, in distinction from the pure
serene Christian spirit of faith working by love, which answers to the still
small voice, which afected the Prophet more than the precedent strong Wind, and
Earthquake, and Fire. Hence though our Savior calls John the Baptist a burning
and shining light, yet he says, He that is least in the Kingdom of Heaven, is
greater than he. 12. That the Temple-Vision designs to set forth such a perfect
legal state of righteousness and the Spiritual communion attending the same, as
aforesaid, seems concludible. First, from Chap. 43.10, 11. where the Prophet is
commanded to show the house of Israel the pattern of the house, that they may
be ashamed; which if they be, he is to show them all the form, and Laws and
Ordinances of it, that they may keep and do them. So that all the Laws and
Ordinances given by the Prophet, after the manner of Levitical Law, are of the
same import, and to be taken in the same sense with those delivered by it,
which they had before broken. 13. Secondly, from the Oblation of the holy
portion, being 25000 Reeds square, and the City being 5000, and the Sanctuary
500 square, which all are symbolical Numbers of a natural or fleshly state. So
that as the Number of the Beast 666 (the root of which is 25) sets forth a
complete, carnal, politic state, according to humane natural Wisdom; so here
seems to be signified the perfection of a people in a natural state, by being
solely under the conduct and government of divine Laws, and the righteous
Judgments of God agreeable to that state. 14. Thirdly from the 18000 measures,
which is the compass of the City, being the Perimeter of the Cube of 12000
furlongs, which is the Cubical measure of the New Jerusalem, as appears by Mr.
Potter, whereby seems to be signified, that the one represents the state of a
people under the Rule of Divine Laws, and the righteous Judgments of God,
according to an external legal state, so long as they can perfectly conform
thereunto: And the other such a solid state of righteousness, or inward
Dispensation of life, as does enable men to a perfect walking with God, by
fulfilling all his righteous Judgments. But as our Savior has taught us first
to cleanse the inside of the Cup, that the outside may be clean also; so it is
only by the inward Dispensation of the latter, whereby we become able to
fulfill the righteousness designed by the former. So that the waters out of the
Sanctuary becoming a River, and the Trees growing on the banks thereof, with
what else in this Vision agrees with that of the New Jerusalem, signifies what
would have been fulfilled in the Israelites in that state, if they could have
been ashamed of all their iniquities, and kept all the Laws, Forms and
Ordinances then given, and what will be fulfilled in that righteous state,
wherein all the Statutes and Judgments of God shall be duly performed. 15. As
to the difference of the Mosaical Laws, and the Laws of Ezekiel's Temple, the
Reason thereof is, That the one delivers to them what was required of them that
they should do, the other what they ought to do, to live up to the height of
that Dispensation, whereby to become partakers of the Blessings thence
signified. But enough of Conjectures about things so obscure and mysterious.

Ans. The Remarker, according to that competent share of confidence Nature has
endued him with, thinks it may be safely concluded that the living Creatures
and Wheels are not Angelical. But does he think it so safe a thing to conclude
of his own private opinion against the sense (to say nothing of the consent of
Christian Interpreters) of the whole School of the Jewish Rabbis, who as they
call their Natural Philosophy Bereshith, so their more abstruse Theology
touching God and Angels, they call Mercavah, which is this very Vision of
Ezekiel, and signifies, Currus, a Chariot? And that the Chariot of God is
Angelical, is plain from that in Psalm. 68.17. The Chariots of God are twenty
thousand, even thousands of Angels, and the Lord is among them, as in Sinai in
the holy place. In which Sinai Moses also saw this glory of the Lord, Exodus 24.
And chap. 25.18. he is commanded to make two golden Cherubims (in imitation of
this Cherubick Chariot which Ezekiel afterward saw) which were to be placed
upon the Ark, where was to be the Throne of God in the Temple. And Psalm. 18. he
rode upon a Cherub, and did fly, etc. Where Grotius thinks that of old (...)
Rechub, currus, was writ, not (...) Cherub. But it tends all to one, the
Cherubims being his Chariot. And what follows, [He came flying on the wings of
the wind] the word there is (...), which signifies a Spirit as well as a Wind,
and so the whole sense may be, he rid on his Chariot, viz. his Angelical
Chariot, and was carried swiftly on the wings of his ministering Spirits, that
readily execute his word. And Psalm. 99. He sits between the Cherubims, etc.
And these living Creatures in this Vision of Ezekiel, chapter 10. are at least ten
times called Cherubims. And are not Cherubims Angels? And the same may be said
of the Seraphins, Esaias 6. which is a like Representation of the Divine Majesty,
are they not Angels?

But the Remarker alleges Reasons why the living Creatures in Ezekiel's Vision
are not Angels. First, because these four living Creatures agree in number and
name with the four Beasts, Revel. 4. and therefore they signifying a successive
body of men, Ezekiel's four living Creatures must signify a body of men also.
Secondly, they all four have the likeness of a man, and a man's hand under
every wing, and therefore they must be men that are signified thereby. Thirdly,
they have Calves-feet, which signifies the laboriousness of men under the Sun.
Fourthly and lastly, A spirit is said to be in them, and in the Wheels.
Wherefore Angels cannot be signified by either, Angels being called Spirits,
and not described by any Spirit abiding in them.

But in answer to this, I say, First, that this Vision is an Ideal Symbolum, or
Symbolical Idea of the glorious Majesty and Empire of the God of Israel over
the whole Angelical World, divided into four parts (the Cabbalists give names
to them, Azeluthick, Briathick, Ietzirathick and Asiathick) he ruling them by
the Divine Influence of his Spirit, whereby he has the perfect and absolute
command over them. This Symbolical Idea of the glory of the God of Israel Moses
saw in the Mount, and ordered things according to this pattern in the Mount, as
he was directed, of which the Cherubims on the Ark of the Covenant is part, as
also the pitching of the Tents of the Israelites about the Tabernacle, in four
parts, with the Standards bearing the names of these four living Creatures, in
their Camp. These were an external Imitation of the Symbolical Idea of the
Angelical Kingdom of the God of Israel, but their Dispensation reached not to
the Life and Reality thereof, but they bore it only in the outward Image. But
this standing Symbolical Idea is that Seal which the Divine Providence intends
so thoroughly to impress on his Church at last in way of Life and Perfection,
that the God of Israel, by the Influence of his Spirit, will so actuate his
Church, that his Will will be done on Earth as it is in Heaven, or in the
Angelical World by his holy Angels. To which purpose this Vision is again
exhibited to John in the Apocalypse as a Representation of the blessed state of
the Millennium, when the State of the Church will answer this Symbolical Idea
in the truth of Life, or plenteous Dispensation of the Spirit. Here therefore
is the Remarker's mistake, that he fancies that the standing Symbolical Idea of
the Angelical World, where there is no Death nor Succession cannot set out the
State of the Church on Earth, where there is Death and Succession. Which,
methinks, is as awkardly argued, as if one should imagine, that St. Michael the
Archangel being the Seal of some Corporation, and intended for the signing of
successive Leases of that Corporation; the Seal should be argued successive,
and not to be the same standing Individual Seal, because the Wax and Leases it
seals are not so, and consequently that the Seal cannot be the Image of St.
Michael the Archangel, because he is one standing Person, and not in
Succession. Wherefore it is plain, that the standing Symbolical Idea of the
Angelical Kingdom, which is unsuccessive, may notify the Millennial Kingdom of
Christ on Earth, which is successive, and the said Kingdom be examined by it
how near it is to the Pattern, as the Seals of Leases how near they are to the
standing Original Seal of the abovesaid Corporation.

To the second I say, Those four living Creatures having the likeness of a man,
and the hand of a man under each wing, does not prove these Angels to be men,
but rather proves that the Remarker is mistaken in the nature of Angels, as if
they had either no form (which is impossible, they being finite Creatures, or a
round form, as if they were so many Aereal or Ethereal Foot-balls or
contracted Hedg-hogs. But if they have distinct Animal Forms, what can it be
but humane, all conceived imperfections being removed therefrom, and nothing
taken in but what will well consist with Heavenly Beauty and Glory? Wherefore
let their Figure for the main be humane, and other variations in them only
Symbolical Appendages; it does not follow from thence, that they are not the
standing Symbolical Idea of the Angelical Kingdom, but rather that the Angels
are naturally in humane shape. For that this Vision signifies Angels, is plain,
in that they are called Cherubims. But if one will be here resty and perverse,
there will be no room left for any Cavils; if we answer, that the faces of a
man, and the hands of a man signify no otherwise than the faces of a Lion, Ox
and Eagle, or the feet of a Calf, they all signifying only symbolically.

Which Answer will weaken also the third Reason. For the feet of a Calf need
signify nothing but what is competible to the Angelical nature, as the face of
an Ox or Calf does no other, it may signify robustious indefatigable
strength. And (...) which signifies God or an Angel, has its Notation from
strength, and is ordinarily translated (...) by the Seventy. And to give a
reason why all the four Beasts have Calves feet, is obvious enough, because
that which supports ought to be strong. But there are farther Cabbalistical
Mysteries touching that point, which is needless here to enter upon. It is
sufficient that we have hitherto proved, that the three first Reasons have no
force to evince, that these living Creatures and Wheels are not Angelical.

And for the last Reason, it is the slightest of all, as if Angels, which are
Spirits, were not to be actuated by the Spirit of God as well as the Souls of
men are. Whenas by virtue of the Divine Spirit they escape the being turned
into Devils. And indeed the many Reins whereby the God of Israel rules and
governs the four Provinces of his Angelical Kingdom is the Influence of his
Divine Spirit, which unites with their spirits, and they with it, whereby he
drives them whither he pleases. For his Spirit is as sure to be effectually in
their pure Essence, as the Rays of the Sun in the clear Air. Wherefore there
being such solid proofs, that the living Creatures in Ezekiel's Vision are
Angelical, and none but invalid Arguments against it, it is an argument that
the Remarker has much mistaken himself in thinking it was so safe to conclude
the contrary.

The rest of the Remark is a Digression into an Ethical or Ethico-political
explication of the Vision of Ezekiel, which though it were true and
unexceptionable, the Expositor is not concerned to meddle with, as not at all
enervating the Philosophical account of that Vision, he admitting both a
Philosophical and Moral Cabbala, touching both the Bereshith and Mercavah too.
But that the Remarker's pains may not seem to be over much slighted, I will
consider some passages in it.

First then, He makes the four faces the four wings, and the four Beasts to
signify but one and the same thing, which is a mavelous slubbering and
hudling things together, which surely have more distinct meanings. Certainly it
must be some great and abstruse Mystery that is thus repeatedly both by the
Faces, Wings, and whole bodies of the four Beasts and living Creatures, and
thus pompously set out. And yet it is only this; That there are these four
Properties in Humane Nature, Reason, Religion, Courage and Industry. Which
lying so bare and obvious to every understanding, what is this but the making
the Spirit of Prophecy to trifle, in setting out so pompously such a trivial
Theory that no man is ignorant of; nay I may say, and that so maimedly and
unfitly? For the Elephant certainly had been a more fit Animal to represent
Religion than the Eagle, so that there is a fitting Animal wanting to denote
the property of Religion in Humane nature. And for as much as Brutes have
Reason, and Man alone properly Religion, Man had been a better Symbol of
Religion than an Eagle. But then there had wanted an Animal to typifie Reason,
unless you made Man the Type of both, and put the Eagle quite out of office.
Thus crude and broken is the Remarker's conceit in this matter.

Again, There are good Scriptural-phrases produced about the two flying wings
of the Seraphins, which he will have the same with the third pair of wings of
the Beasts, but the Application is, methinks, much of the Hooks. For the two
flying wings of the Seraphins, Esaias 6. signify the readiness and expediteness
of their Ministry enjoined by God to the service of his Church, whenas he
referrs it to the exalting of ones self from a Worldly and Earthly, to a
Heavenly state.

Thirdly, That seems a precarious groundless conceit, or rather false. That the
Tree of Life was not set in Paradise for Adam to eat of, but to play at
Chop-cherry with him, and to mock him; whenas the Text says, The Lord commanded
the Man, saying, Of every tree of the Garden thou shall eat; and I hope the
Tree of life was one of them. The Original is, (...), thou have plenary
commission, if not command, to eat of all, saving the Tree of Knowledge of good
and evil. Which had been a mere mocking of Adam, if he had no power of eating
of the Tree of Life.

And now, fourthly, this being a fundamental mistake of the Remarker in the
case of Adam, the like discovers it self in his conceit touching the Jews, and
the two Visions of Ezekiel, that of the four living Creatures, and that other
of the Temple. God gave no impossible Commands to the Jews. But those exquisite
descriptions of things touching the Temple by a long and operose Hylasmus and
Israelismus, set not out what the Jews should have been, if they had kept these
Ordinances exquisitely, but what the Church of Christ would be (of which the
Jews were a Type,) in process of time. That this is the sense of that Vision,
the Apocalypse that borrows so many things from it, and uses such frequent
Allusions to the Temple, does sufficiently indicate. Nor is there any other
sense of the Vision of the four living Creatures, as touching the Jews, who
were not upon condition of legal performances, to arrive to that Angelical
State, that the Christian Church with them will arrive to at last. But the
Divino-political sense of that Vision (which yet is most properly applied to it
as repeated in the Apocalypse, which relates to the Camp of the Jews a figure
of the State of the Christian Church to come) is that the Church of God at last
will answer the Pattern of the Angelical Kingdom, and God's Will will be done
on Earth as it is in Heaven.

Fifthly, The Name of the City, The Lord is there, is the very Indication of
the state of the New Jerusalem, which is a demonstration it was never intended
for the Jews under their Legal Dispensation upon any terms.

Sixthly, Ezekiel is not here sent to Prophecy the Ruin of the City and
Temple, they both having been destroyed fourteen years before. But they being
destroyed, he in this Hylastick and Israelistick way prophesies of the state of
the New Jerusalem, which the Apocalypse also describes.

Seventhly therefore, The Jews their making a golden Calf, and craving a King,
whatever other inconveniences it may cause to them, it could not make them
forfeit that which was never intended them in that state.

Eighthly, If the Beasts be the Governed, and the four and twenty Elders the
Governors, how come the Beasts to be upon the Throne, and the twenty four
Elders only about it?

Ninthly, The Wheels and living Creatures being not moved, but as acted by the
spirit, does not signify an Earthly state in them, but the most Divine and
Heavenly, viz. an Vnselfwilledness in them. That they have no Self excursions
of mind or will, but that the Spirit of life from the eternal mind is the
perpetual principle of their motion and rest.

Tenthly, That the four Beasts are not upon the Throne, I have showed upon that
place of the Apocalypse; and that he contradicts himself in saying so, I
observed even now in the eighth Note.

Eleventhly, The burning Coals, which are Prunae, do not signify the Spirit of
Elias in Men, but the Seraphick Spirit in Angels, as Seraphin from (...) has
its denomination, viz. from burning. And the Seraphin are counted of the higher
sort of Angels. And as for Lamps, they are in the description of the scene of
the New Jerusalem, Apoc. 4.

Now for the Temple, I say, Twelfthly, That the whole Vision of the Temple
concerns the Christian Church, and therefore that command to the Prophet, chap.
43.10, 11. respects especially the Thyatirian and Sardian Interval thereof,
that they may repent of all their sins and corruptions, and so make what haste
they can toward that excellent State of the Church, which is prefigured by the
Vision of the Temple.

Thirteenthly, As for the Numbers 25000, 5000, and 500 Ezekiel. chap. 45. and 666
in the Apocalypse, nothing more can be signified by the former, viz. those in
Ezekiel, than that the New Jerusalem will gratify even the external man also,
and his outward senses; which the Quinary number does denote, namely, that even
the outward State of the Church then will be rich and glorious, according to
what is likewise prophesied of in the Apocalypse, that the Kings of the Earth
shall bring their honor and glory into it. And it is the encouraging
Prediction of Christ himself, Seek the Kingdom of God and his righteousness,
and all worldly good things shall be added thereto. Which will most amply be
fulfilled in the Millennial Empire of Christ, which is that eminent Kingdom of
God upon Earth. And for that other Number 666, it is not set down to signify
the most complete, carnal, politic State, but to be a certain character of the
Pontifician Hierarchy the two-horned Beast, who are discovered to have affected
the number 25, which is the root of 666. That is the main drift of that Number,
though deluding their followers with pleasing Objects of sense may happily be
aimed at thereby also.

Fourteenthly, The 18000 measures, which is the compass of Ezekiel's City
agreeing with the Perimeter of the New Jerusalem, whose Solid or Cubick measure
is 12000 furlongs in the Apocalypse; the true and useful meaning of that is,
to assure us that Ezekiel's Vision of the Temple is a Prophecy of the State of
the Church, which is set out by S. John in his description of the New
Jerusalem, that men may make no vagaries into any other fancies, as the
Remarker has done here. And the Wisdom and Providence of God is admirable
herein. Besides, if that Externality or Superficiality were aimed at, which the
Remarker would have signified, the measure of the Superficies of the Cube, not
the Perimeter, would have been set down and made use of.

Fifteenthly, The difference of the Mosaical Laws, and those of Ezekiel's
Temple, the greater exactness of these above the other, is not that the Jews
may obtain the blessedness of the New-Ierusalem state by a legal performance of
them, which, as I noted above, had been but a mockery; but farther to intimate,
that the Temple-Vision is a Prophecy of the Christian State, of greater
perfection than that of the Jews, though prefigured here, as in the Apocalypse,
by Matters and Ordinances belonging to the Temple.

And lastly, Though the Remarker, as to his main scope, is most certainly in a
mistake, yet his Misconceit is such, as it was not for every ordinary Genius to
hit upon, and he has ever and anon decked it with sundry piously sounding
Sentences and Scripture phrases, though they had not the luck to be rightly
applied. And this may be an Accession to his former commendableness, that he
abates something of his wonted stifness, and is content to let what he has said
to go for a conjecture only.

Verse. 14. To make all People and Nations to signify some of all People and
Nations, is a making too bold with the Text. But the words will be absolutely
true of all Nations within the extent of Christ's Kingdom, and in some degrees
true of all the other Nations, who will do a kind of Homage to him by the
walking in the light of the New Jerusalem, and bringing their glory and honor
into it. That manner in which this is supposed to be fulfilled between the time
of Constantine and the Apostasy, is such as does in no manner agree with the
state of Christ's Kingdom, as is showed in Remarks on the Exposition of the
Revelation. Of the four sentences supposed here to be represented, the first
and last might have been spared. For here is only signified the Judgment of
the Beast (which includes the little Horn) and the settling of Christ in his
Kingdom on Earth. And the assigning the Kingdom to him, besides the settling of
him in it, is an insignificant distinction.

Ans. The fore part of this Remark is so slight, that the best Answering of it
is to slight it. And as for that which follows, and were more material if it
were true, viz. That the State of the Church betwixt Constantine and the
Apostasy is in no manner agreeing with the State of Christ's Kingdom, it is
contradictious to the very Visions of the Apocalypse, chap. 12.10. Now is come
salvation and strength, and the Kingdom of our God, and the Power of his
Christ. Which is upon Michael's overcoming the Dragon. Which all men in their
wits, that consider these things understand of the Christians deliverance from
their Pagan Persecutours by Constantine. And I have shown all the affected
Paradoxes of the Remarker, how vain, how groundless and false they are in my
Answer to his former Remarks on the Exposition of the Apocalypse. And lastly,
as for the four Sentences. The first is very pertinent and significant, it
being so agreeable to the Crown given to him on the white Horse, Apoc. 6.2. The
second and third are acknowledged by the Remarker, and the fourth is made good
from the tenth verse of this present Chapter, where it is said, the Judgment
was set, and the books were opened. Which answers to Apoc. 20.11, 12. and
Expositors make the Judgment to reach to the last day here in Daniel, as well
as it does there in the Apocalypse.

Vision 3. Verse. 8, 9.
THough Seleucus was not one of the four notable Horns, yet he with his
Predecessors in the same Kingdom were one of them. And as there was many
changes of the line in the Macedonian Kingdom, yet all made but one Horn, so
the Seleucidae, with their Predecessors, make but one Horn in the Babylonian
Kingdom. And the Seleucidae and Lagidae being the two chief Kingdoms which
succeeded Alexander (of which there is so large a Prophecy under the Titles of
the King of the North and the King of the South) it is strange that one of them
should prove none of the four Horns his Kingdom was branched into. And it is yet
more strange, that the little Horn which was to arise in the latter time of
those Kingdoms, should be applied to Seleucus, who arose soon after the
beginning of them.

Ans. The Remarker seems not to mind what he says in this Remark. For how could
Seleucus, with his Predecessors, make one Horn in the Babylonian Kingdom, when
no Horn can be here meant but what succeeded the great Horn, Alexander the
Great? And never any one made the Babylonian Kingdom one of the four Horns. But
by help of Ptolemy, Seleucus did not only recover his Satrapy of Babylon,
which Antigonus would have deprived him of; but in a short time vanquishing
both Antigonus and his Son made himself Master of Asia, as well as of Syria and
Babylonia, and therefore himself began the race of the Kings of the North,
which is so famous in the Prophecy of Daniel, though he was by no means one of
the four notable Horns that immediately succeeded Alexander, nor so reputed by
Historians. The thing is so, nor can it be helped. But he may be a remoter
successor of Alexander, in that he succeeded Antigonus in the main of his
Dominions, and so may be fansied as of the line of one of the immediate notable
Horns, successors of Alexander, though this be more than needs. And as for the
other difficulty that is raised, how the little Horn that was to arise in the
latter time of those Kingdoms should be applied to Seleucus, who arose soon
after the beginning of them, we are to observe how the Angel, v. 23. by an
Idiconoea falls upon Antiochus Epiphanes, who is but one part of the little
Horn, but hugely to be noted, by reason of the affairs of the Church of God.
But expounding the Vision by way of a Geniconoea, the little Horn will take in
Seleucus, and reach to the end of that line of the Syrian Kings, or Kings of
the North. See the Expositor's Notes on this Vision, and there you will find
several Examples of Geniconoea's and Idiconoea's, and thence understand the
Reasonableness and Solidity of the answer to this difficulty.

Verse. 26. I am inclined to think, that as the description of Antiochus
Epiphanes is agreed to be Typical of Antichrist, so the 2300 days have a
prophetical as well as a literal sense. Else it had been a more ready way, and
more agreeable to the general course of the Prophecies to have computed the
time by Prophetical days. Also the saying that the Vision is for many days,
that is, a long time, does seem to import the same. For whenas Haggai says, Yet
a little while and the Lord shall shake Heaven and Earth, etc. and Malachy,
That the Lord whom ye seek will suddenly come to his Temple, etc. where the
Prophets express a longer time by a little while and suddenly, it is strange
that a shorter time here should be called a long time. So that these 2300 days
may prophetically signify some time of the Millennium, that may properly
signify the cleansing of the Sanctuary. For after the overthrow of the
Antichristian Party at the seventh Trumpet, and the seventh Vial, there may be
a long time spent before all the corruptions introduced by the Beast and false
Prophet in each of their Governments be eradicated to the accomplishing of that
saying of our Savior, Every plant which my Heavenly Father has not planted
shall be rooted up. For as the main Rise of those Corruptions was greediness of
gain, so men's Interests will be so interwoven with them as to make an absolute
extirpation of them, a work of time and difficulty. And this work may be
signified by what Ezekiel speaks of burning the weapons of Gog, and burying all
his multitudes in the Valley of Hamon Gog, and cleansing the Land. And also by
the Hailstones of a Talent weight, and the casting of the Beast and false
Prophet into the lake of Fire ( viz. as to one sense of the lake of Fire)
according to what is said of them in my Remarks.

Ans. That the 2300 days have a plain literal sense, is manifest from the Text
it self, which says, The Vision of the Evening and Morning is true. In the
Original it is (...), that is, It is a plain Truth, not aenigmatically or
symbolically expressed. For in the other sense all the Visions of Daniel are
true, which passage here would imply they were false, unless (...) had this
signification in this place, and the same that (...) has in the foregoing
Vision, v. 16. and 19. which Munster in his Chaldee Dictionary says is the
same with (...). And our English Translation in both those verses says, I asked
him the Truth of all this; and I would knew the Truth of the fourth Beast; not
that Daniel doubted but the Vision was true, but he would know the plain Truth
or meaning of those Symbolical Representations. Whence it is plain that (...)
Truth in these cases is not opposed to Falsehood, but to Symbols, Parables or
Aenigmes. And therefore the Expositor being assured that the literal sense of
the 2300 days was true, and being more solicitous of writing nothing but what
was true than adventurous upon things uncertain, though he took in the Typical
sense of the little Horn, as it denoted Antiochus Epiphanes; yet he would not
at that time declare, that the 2300 days were Typical also, and signified so
many years, which is nothing so certain as the other. But if they be Typical
(as the Expositor has thought of it before he see these Remarks, nor was averse
therefrom) the Epoch in all likelihood is to be taken from the profanation of
the Temple by Antiochus Epiphanes, as the Epoch of those Numbers is, chap. 12.
From whence it will follow, that it will be from the present year about 450
years, till the Church of Christ be cleansed from its corruptions and his
Millennial Reign begin upon Earth. Which 450 years partly belong to the Residue
of the first Thunder, which contains the seven Vials, and partly to the second
Thunder, in which is the descent and settlement of the New Jerusalem, the City
or Polity Antistoechal to the then ruined Babylon. But how much of these 450
years is to be allotted to the Residue of the Vials, and how much to the second
Thunder, the event must show; if the 2300 days have also a Symbolical sense.
But that after the overthrow of Babylon there will be such a huge while till
every evil plant be rooted out of the Church, is a mere conceit of the
Remarker. If things were lest to his sancifull Anarchical way, worldly
Interests might the more easily slacken the dispatch; but a truly Holy, and a
truly Ecumenical Council, whose Laws shall bind all Christendom, will expedite
the business in a competent time. So that the Interval of the second Thunder
need not be so long, nor the burning of the weapons of Gog, and the burying all
his Multitudes in the Valley of Hamon Gog, and cleansing the Land, take up so
tedious a time. By which, if the overthrow of Babylon is signified, that
passage in the Apocalypse, chap. 20.5 But the rest of the dead lived not again,
till the thousand years were finished, though it most naturally and certainly
intimates a Physical Resurrection preceding of the Martyrs, may also happily
insinuate a Political Resurrection of those multitudes buried in Hamon Gog,
that they shall not rise again till the thousand years be past; but after that,
they will so multiply, that they will besiege the Holy and beloved City, and
seem to hazard the true Apostolic Church, her being brought once again under
the yoke of the wicked. The Hailstones of a Talent weight, and the lake of Fire
belong to the first Thunder rather than to the second.

Vision 4. Verse. 25.
THough there be no Mystery in breaking the number here, yet sure it is not an
insignificant Hebrew Idiom, but that there is a reason for the doing of it, as
there is in the mentioned Genesis 5. where it is so often used, viz. To distinguish
the time of those Patriarchs lives before they began to have children from the
time of their lives after. But as to the instance of Genesis 8.3. there is no such
breaking of the number there. And as to Ezekiel 45.12. there is also a reason
for it, viz. The Maneh being sixty Shekels, is said to consist of 20, 25 and
15* Shekels, because those three were several sorts of Coin, which together
made up the Maneh. And so the Text here does plainly import a reason of
breaking the Number, viz. that it would be seven Prophetic weeks before the
building of the Temple and City be completed, and that it would after continue
to built for sixty two such weeks till the Time of the Messiah, etc.

Ans. This is the only place where the Remarker may seem to have got the
Expositor upon the hip. But he will fling two men at once then, Grotius and the
Expositor that adheres to him. The words of Grotius upon the place are these,
Duo hic notanda Hebraeos numerum perfectum in particulas scindere, ut Ezekiel.
45.12. deinde vero numerum minorem praeponere majori, ut, Genesis 5. saepissime
Genesis 8.3. and alibi saepe. The Expositor has followed this Copy exquisitely,
and in Grotius his order; and the Remarker should have done so, if he would
have done fair. Grotius from Ezekiel. 45.12. observes that the Hebrew sometimes
divides a full number into parts: Twenty shekels, five and twenty shekels,
fifteen shekels shall be your Maneh. This dividing of sixty into 20, 25 and 15,
Grotius took only to be an Hebrew Idiom, he finding so little reason otherwise
for it; and though some with the like confidence the Remarker does, give the
same reason with him, yet Vatablus and Clarius the one says [ sorte]. and the
other [ opinor] to the business, which are indications of their uncertainty
therein; And shows the cautiousness of Grotius, that he would rather resolve
the business into an Hebrew Idiom, than content himself with such conjectures.
For mine own part, I suspect it to be a mere Propheticism, as I may so speak,
that is, a prophetic scheme or propriety of speech useful for concealment
(which is one scope of the Prophetic style) or the making the Prophecy look
more obscure and mysterious, something like to that, Apoc. 9.15. which I cannot
insist on here.

This for the dividing a full number into several parts. Of putting the lesser
number before the greater, those Genesis 5. are repeated Examples; the Remarker's
reason whereof seems less probable, it implying that some of the Patriarchs
should live near two hundred years before they begot any children, and that
Adam had no child till he begot Seth; and being it is plain he had, others might
have so also. Which makes the Remarker's Reason quite fail. And as for Genesis
8.3. According to the Hebrew it is, And after the end of, [(...)] the fifty and
the hundred days the waters were abated. Which is a plain instance of what
Grotius would have. And therefore it was more advisable for the Expositor to
decline an Historical account of dividing the 69 weeks into 7 and 62, upon
Grotius his Critical account thereof, than to adventure to say with the
Remarker, that it would be 7 Prophetical weeks from the going out of the Decree
before the building of the Temple and City be completed, which is not
applicable to any History. And if there be any thing in it, it being a thing
only by the bye, and uncertain, the main thing aimed at being the
manifestation of the Messiah, at the end of the 7 and 62 weeks joined together,
and the Expositor being solicitous to make no application of History but what
was certain and true, he deserves rather thanks and commendation for his care
to impose upon none, than to be cavilled at by the Remarker for not being as
rash as himself, in making vain conjectures. But if there be any thing in
naming these 7 weeks apart before the other, the most credible account is that
of Thomas Lydiat in his Canones Chronici, that it respects the time of the
Presidency of Nehemias over Iudaea. But I think it not worth the while to
concern my self in it.

Vision 5. Verse. 1.
It Is much distortion of the words [And the thing is true] to make them
signify, It Is plainly delivered, and not enigmatically in Symbols. For the
things so delivered are as true as those which are plainly delivered. But those
words do refer to the following words, viz. But the time appointed was long;
that is, Though it may seem incredible to prophecy of affairs so particularly
for so long a time to come, yet the things foretold are true or certain.

Ans. It Is so far from being much distortion of the words to translate (...)
And the thing was a plain Truth, no Aenigme or Parable, that it is the only
easy, true and natural sense of them, as may appear from what we have said
upon the third Vision, v. 26. For here (...) is again used in that sense, that
it and the Chaldee (...) is noted to have, viz. plain truth without
Aenigmatical figures. And therefore Daniel says of it, that he understood the
thing, and had understanding of the Vision or Prophecy, without asking any
Interpreter, as he does in those Symbolical Visions. What a natural coherence
this is with the foregoing words? But to say that the thing is said to be true
for fear, because the time is long, the Vision or Prophecy should be suspected
of falsehood, is a very frigid account. For that was needless, it being a Divine
Prediction, and the Prescience of God reaching in infinitum. But that of the
longness of the time is mentioned upon the affirming the thing to be true, not
to obviate any diffidence of the truth thereof, though long, but it is given as
a mark for the right application of the Prophecy to Historical Events. Of
which, if Grotius had taken notice, he would have been ashamed to confine his
Historical Applications to the times of Antiochus, and the affairs of the
Maccabees, and no farther.

Verse 17. What befell Daniel here, was out of an astonishment at the Vision, as
also John fell at the feet of our Savior as dead on his appearance to him, the
frailty of humane nature being not able to bear the view of so terrible and
glorious a Representation. Hence God tells Moses, that none could see his face
and live; and the Israelites entreated that God should speak no more unto them
from Mount Sinai, lest they dye, and Manoah and his wife, on the Angel's
ascending in the flame, fell on their faces; and he said, we shall dye because
we have seen God. But such an exinanition as is here supposed for receiving
Divine communications, cannot be signified, for he was disabled to receive them
till he was revived and strengthened from that liveless condition the Vision
cast him into.

Ans. What a fond and even profane Cavil is this of the Remarker, against
these Mystical or Moral passages of the Expositor, upon what befell Daniel
before he received this noble and ample Vision of Truth? And how Pedantickly
does he instruct him, touching the natural horror and astonishment of mere
Mortals upon the sight of the Angelical Powers, as if the Expositor were yet to
learn that either out of the Scripture or other History, whenas he does plainly
acknowledge the literal sense, v. 18. besides the Moral Allegory, which are
very well consistent together, nor exclude one the other? And it is a
mavelous wise arguing in the Remarker, when he would prove that such an
exinanition as is here supposed for receiving Divine communications, cannot be
signified, because Daniel was dis-inabled from receiving them, till he was
revived and strengthened from that liveless condition the Vision of these
Angelical Powers had cast him into. But he seems so blind as wilfully not to
see or take notice that this reviving was from a supernatural power, which had
not been but upon a precedent exinanition, which made him capable of it. Which
is a Symbol of the new life which revives not in us, till the selfish life be
evacuated and abolished, till we be dead to it. Then the soul is fitted for
Divine communications. But it seems the Expositor had the luck here to cast
pearls before swine.

Verse. 21. I will show thee what is noted in the Scripture of Truth; signifies,
I suppose, no more than that I will more fully and plainly unfold to thee what
has formerly (though briefly and obscurely) been notified by the Prophets. For
the words do plainly refer to other Writings, which are called Scriptures of
Truth. But to make them signify the declaring of the Divine counsel, in plain
words, without Symbols, is an unaccountable distortion of them.

Ans. The Remarker is marvellously singular in this conceit, in understanding
by the Scripture of Truth [(...)] the prophetical Scriptures, written before
Daniel received this Prophecy. Whenas there is not one Interpreter that I could
ever lay my hands on, or find mentioned by any, but they understand thereby
only what is decreed and recorded in the Divine Mind. The standing Intellect
of God, in which are described all the Laws and Decrees of his Providence, is
that Writing or Book of God which is so often mentioned in the Bible. As Exodus
32. Blot me out of thy Book: and Psalm. 56. Are not these things noted in thy
Book? And Psalm. 139. And in thy book were all my members written. And that Book
represented to John, sealed and unsealed, is but a Symbol of this Book or
Writing, as I may so speak. And this Scripture of Truth in Daniel, in all
likelihood is the first ground of that Apocalyptick sealed and unsealed Book.
If by the Scripture of Truth had been understood the various Prophecies of the
precedent Prophets, it would have been said the Scriptures, not the Scripture
of Truth. Besides, it will be hard to find all the things of this Prophecy any
how written in the foregoing Prophets. But it is not worth the while to confute
so groundless a Paradox, which is indeed an unaccountable Essay of a distorted
fancy. But to make the Scripture of Truth to signify a declaration of the
Divine counsel and purpose in a plain way, without Enigmes, is no distortion at
all of the sense of the words. But is most easy and natural as to one part,
there being not one Interpreter but who has hit of it or approved it, that
Scripture here signifies the Decree or Counsel of God. And that Truth in the
style of Daniel signifies plainness, in opposition to Aenigmaticalness, has
been proved over and over again, and that it does particularly signify so
here, appears from chap. 11. verse. 2. And now will I show thee the truth. As if
none of Daniel's Visions were true till now. But the apparent sense is, Now
will I communicate a plain Prophecy to thee, without any Aenigmatical Figures
or Involutions. Which therefore shows that the Scripture of Truth is
particularly restrained to this Prophecy here, and not understood of the
Writings of the precedent Prophets at large, who abound with Enigmes or
Parables. If the Angel in saying* Now will I show thee what is written in the
Scripture of Truth, meant only, I will show thee what already is shown in the
Writings of the Prophets, it were a very sorry way of exciting attention in
Daniel, who might have said to the Angel, It were a needless thing to give
himself that trouble, if what he would predict was already predicted in the
Prophetic Writings. So extravagant is the Remarker in this Remark.

Vision 6. Verse. 22.
I Take this Verse to be a general account of what is more particularly related
in the following verses, and the Covenant the same with what is after called
the holy Covenant, and the Prince of it the same with the Prince of the Host,
against whom Antiochus Epiphanes is said to magnify himself, Vis. 3. whenas
Demetrius can very badly, by reason of his right only, be said to be Prince of
Antiochus and his confederate forces, whenas at the same time he is described
to be really King acting in his own behalf.

Ans. The Indistinctness of the Remarker's fancy would crumple up things
together, which Grotius by virtue of his skill in History has explicated more
articulately. And nothing is alleged against him of any value. For Demetrius
being really by right, though absent, the Sovereign of his Uncle Antiochus, and
of Attalus and Eumenes waging war against Heliodorus, though in behalf of their
Sovereign King Demetrius only in show, Demetrius may very well, justly and
properly be called the Prince of these confederates against his open enemy
Heliodorus. Their being perfidious to him did not extinguish his real Right and
Relation of being their King. Nor was Antiochus yet declared or acknowledged
King. The Remarker should have proved that.

Verse. 27. These two Kings meditating mischief in their hearts, seems to be
against the Jews, and not against one another, for that would not be so
agreeable with their meeting then in a friendly way, and the words do import
some mischief which they concurred in, and not mischiefs projected against one
another. And the lies they speak may then signify what they say of the Jews by
way of instigating one another against them. This sense will better than the
other agree with the scope of the Vision ( viz. to foretell what will befall
the people of God) and also with the following words. But it shall not prosper,
for yet the end shall be at the time appointed, that is, Notwithstanding such
meditating the Jews Ruin, yet the end of their state shall not be till the
time appointed. The same words to the same sense are, v. 35.

Ans. These two Kings meditating mischief one against another, when they
pretend mutual friendship, though it be not agreeable to the Laws of
friendship, yet it is to the nature and custom of Politic Potentates, and the
Prophecy predicts not what ought to be, but what would be. And the one being so
ambitious and covetous, the other so deeply injured, there was no likelihood
that there was any real friendship betwixt them, but that all their caressing
and complementing one another were imposture and lies, as they are called in
the Prophecy. And the scope of the Prophecy is sufficiently pursued without
distorting this place from this natural sense Grotius and others have given it.
For the feats of Antiochus against the Jews are fully declared afterward. And
for the following words, But it shall not prosper, etc. The sense the Expositor
has given agrees very well with this Hypothesis of Grotius. And besides, what
mischief the King of the North meditated against the King of the South, did not
prosper, as appears from v. 29, 30. But there is no mention of any Essay from
the King of the South, against the people of God, which farther shows the
Ineptness of the Remarker's conceit, which he would substitute in the room of
Grotius his judicious Interpretation. See also what the Expositor has writ, v.
35. on those words, Because it is yet for a time appointed, comparing them with
what he has wrote on the same words, v. 27.

Verse. 39. The conceit of making Churches and Monasteries to be called strong
Holds, seems very remote from the intended sense of the Text. a For they were
no such Holds at all, farther than the crafty Impostures of Priests did for
their gain delude the people with a belief of their being so. And it was in a
spiritual sense they were pretended to be such, which does not agree with the
words in this and the precedent verse, they bearing a Martial sense. b I take
them therefore to be spoken in way of c Antithesis on mentioning this strange
God whom this King should acknowledge, viz. That though the Laws of this
strange God teach righteousness and peace (which are to flourish in his
Kingdom) yet this King so acknowledging him* and honoring him with splendid
superstitious devotions, shall notwithstanding continue the same iron Kingdom
as formerly (though mixed with Clay in the sense mentioned, Vis. 1.) viz. the
same Kingdom of violence and war.

Ans. Nothing was ever writ with more judgment, elegancy and solidity, in
Explication of Prophecies, than what that excellent Interpreter Mr. Mede has
writ on this and the foregoing verse. Which yet this conceited Remarker very
superciliously calls a conceit, and says is very remote from the intended sense
of the Text, when nothing is more congenerous thereto, the Prophecy intending
to describe the State of the Church as to Religion and Divine Worship in that
space of the Time and Times, and half a Time, when the little Horn, which is
this King of Pride, should rule the roast. And therefore we may be sure it will
not omit to perstringe the Idolatry then sprung up, I mean the Pagano-christian
Idolatry, or an Idolatry of a new Mode. For it is said of this King of Pride,
v. 37. That he shall not regard the God of his Fathers, i. e. either none of
the Pagan Gods, he shall regard none of them; or if you will, more
particularly, he shall not regard that proper God of his Fathers, viz. Mars;
whom Grotius would have understood by the red Dragon. Of which Mars, Romulus
and Remus were born, and he is the special Presidentiary God of the Roman City
and Empire, as Grotius himself also will have it. This God of his Ancestors
this King of Pride does not regard, but is one who with his Hierarchy professes
Celibate, forbidding to marry, a single life for him and his Adherents being
most suitable, and for their ambitious designs; and preferring his own Politic
ends before any God or Religion, it follows, v. 38. according to a true,
skillful and faithful account of the sense out of the Hebrew. Together with
God he will in his place (or Temple where he is worshipped) honor the Mahuzzim
(not Mars the proper God of his Ancestors, but these new (...), as Mahuzzim may
signify from the Seventy's Translation, Psalm. 31.3. these new Numina
defensoria of his Empire) even with a God his fathers knew not (which is
Christ) shall he honor them with gold, and silver, and precious stones, etc.
This is the only easy and genuine sense that can be made of the 38 th verse.
And it being thus plain to any unprejudiced eye, that these Mahuzzim are the
Demons that S. Paul speaks of, 1 Timothy 4. where he tells us that the Spirit has
foretold (...) expressly that those that forbid to marry, etc. will bring in the
worship of Demons, (which express Prediction is nowhere but here) and the
degenerating Church looking upon the Relics of Saints and their consecrated
Images (whose form of consecration does sometimes specify their intended
virtue against the Invasion of Enemies) to be the Defense of the City where
they are, and the Saints themselves to be their Mahuzzim, their (...), or
Martial and Warlike Defenders of the City, where Temples or other places are
consecrated to them. What a groundless Cavil is this of the Remarker to except
against Mr. Mede's rendering the sense of this present verse thus, which is
exquisitely according to the Hebrew, viz. And he shall make the Holds of the
Mahuzzim jointly to the foreign God, understanding it of Churches and
Monasteries? For the Mahuzzim being once such Warlike Defenders, expressed so
under that Notion, and their help being supposed to come from the places
consecrated to them, what an easy and obvious Analogy is it to call those
consecrated places strong Holds or Forts?

a And the Prediction is not of what they would be in Reality, but what they
would be thought and reputed. Which therefore is a foretelling of those
delusions in the Church, under the reign of the King of Pride. That the people
should put their trust and confidence in such vanities.

b What the Remarker would substitute in lieu of this excellent account of Mr.
Mede, is very frigid and jejune; it giving notice of nothing, but that the King
of Pride will be for war as well as other Potentates, and so making him to
honor the God of forces, he makes him still a worshipper of Mars, the God of
his Ancestors, contrary to the Text. Besides, there is this other Incongruity
in this conceit, in that this Prince of Pride is not a Sword-man, but Rex
sacrorum, and his power lies merely in a manner (not in Martial forces and
feats of Arms, but rather) in Magical Incantations and lying Miracles, and
prestigious charming of people into such superstitions as make most for his own
advantage, and such whereby he has an hank upon the Empire, and deludes them
with all deceiveableness of unrighteousness.

c And as for the Antithesis in professing Christ, who is the Prince of Peace,
and yet to be given to War: Is not the Antithesis at least as full when Christ
came to introduce a pure divine Worship, to Worship the Father in spirit and in
truth, that this King of Pride has filled all with superstitious Rites and
Idolatries toward the Mahuzzim, the Demons or deceased Saints? And lastly,
there is another a more near, proper and immediate Antistoechy or Opposition
betwixt the Genius of this King of Pride and his Ancestors, in Mr. Mede's way,
they worshipping the God Mars in a gross Pagan secular sense, he the Mahuzzim,
which are as it were so many (...) or Paganochristian Mavortes, in a sense more
Spiritual and Ecclesiastical. To all which you may add, That Grammar and
Criticism will not so easily comply with the Remarker's way. But I have been
too long on this Remark already.

Verse. 44. Thy tidings out of the North is surely more likely to be meant of
the Germans, Poles, Muscovites, etc. than of the Tartars, both because they are
directly North of the Turks, whenas the Tartars are as much East as North of
them, and also because the End here foretold against the Turks is more likely
to be executed by the Christians than by those of the same Religion with the
Turks, especially whenas it is sent upon them in reference to the advancement
of Christianity, which is the occasion of its here being foretold.

Ans. That the tidings out of the North is surely more likely to be meant of
the Germans, Poles, Muscovites, etc. than of the Tartars, is spoke with more
confidence than sound assurance of Reason. For the Tartars being North-East of
the Turks, but much more properly North than the Persians; it is easy and
natural to conceive, that the tidings out of the East being out of Persia, that
the News of the Stirs in Tartary would be called the Tidings out of the North,
the Tartars being a people so hugely more North than the Persians. Any one that
but casts his eye on a Map, will at first sight discern this. So that the
Tartars having a capacity of an Eastern consideration, as well as of a
Northern, they will fit both the sixth Vial and the present passage of this
Prophecy too, and therefore have a privilege above the Germans, Poles and
Muscovites to make part of the Kings of the East, which the sixth Vial
mentions. And by that time this comes to pass, the Mohammedan and Pagan Tartars
may be turned Christians; and being fresh Converts, may have more zeal and
activity in the behalf of true Christianity than either Germans, Poles or
Muscovites. Besides, it is a mistake in the Remarker, that he surmises that it
is the Turk that comes to his end, v. 45. when it is the King of Pride that
comes to his end. For the Vision drives at him plainly from v. 36. to the very
end of the Chapter. And this last verse Luther (in his Letter to Count
Schlikius) And he shall come to his end, and none shall help him, interprets
it of the Ruin of the Pope. The Letter is in Martinius Horzovinus his
Collation of Huss and Luther, p. 118. And how absurd it would be to suppose the
contrary, the Expositor has signified in his Exposition of the last verse of
this eleventh Chapter, which is needless here to repeat. I will only here add
to what is said there, that this Vision of the Scripture of Truth being for a
long time, chapter 10. it is the more unlikely not to reach to the utter overthrow
of the King of Pride, and that being so notable a Providence not to skip over
it.

Verse. 45. It Is strange to run so far as old Rome for interpreting this verse,
whenas it may be much better applied to new Rome. 1. For Constantinople being
seated in the point of a Promontory, between two great Seas, is much more
properly said to be seated between two Seas than Rome, which is at a large
distance from those Seas it is seated between, especially from one of them; and
is no more seated between them than any other part of Italy. 2. Also the Title
of glorious holy Mountain is much more applicable to Constantinople than to
Rome, because Constantine there settled, when by reason of the hatred he
contracted for professing Christianity, he could abide no longer at Rome; and
also, because many Emperors reigned there, who were zealous against the
Idolatrous corruptions of the Roman Church, and many noted Councils also held
there, in one of which under Constantinus Copronymus the Worship of Images was
condemned as Idolatrous; And also, because before the Ruin of the Eastern
Empire they separated from Rome for its corruptions. 3. And new Rome may
farther be called so from what flourishing state Christianity shall be in
there, after the ruin of the Turkish Empire, whenas old Rome shall have the
same fate befall it with old Babylon, according to what is pronounced against
it, Rev. 18. 4. Also it is plain that in new Rome the King of the North has
placed the Tabernacles of his Palace, and the word Tabernacle may be perhaps
used, because of the following words, Yet shall he come to his end, viz. The
Turks will not have a settled Empire there, but it will be destroyed. 5. But
whereas the planting the Tabernacles of his Palace being related after the
tidings out of the East and the North, seems to signify what he shall do at
the end of his Empire, it may notwithstanding be understood in the sense I have
given. For after the describing of his Conquests, this planting of his
Tabernacles comes as an additional Character of him. Also the tidings out of
the East and the North may respect not only what shall befall him at the end
of his Empire, but also his almost continual conflicts, during his Empire, with
the aforesaid Northern Countries, and with the Persians. 6. That the planting
of his Tabernacle, etc. should signify the taking of Rome by the Turk, and so
fulfilling what is said of casting the Beast and false Prophet into a lake of
fire, is not only for the reasons aforesaid a groundless conceit, but also
disagrees with what the same Pen writes on Rev. 19. For there only the Remnant
of the Beast and false Prophet unconverted are made to be cast into the lake of
fire, etc. And of the lake of fire, no account is there given, and better none
than what is here given. For it is plain there, that the casting of the Beast
and false Prophet into the lake of fire, and so extinguishing the Western
Empire, as it is there called, must be by the Army of the Rider of the white
Horse, and consequently not by the Turks.

7. Ezekiel's Prophecy of Tire is no Type of Antichrist (as is imagined) and so
gives no countenance to the applying the words, [Glorious holy Mountain] as
here is done. Both his and Esay's Prophecy of Tire, as they are intermixed with
their Prophecies of other neighboring Nations, so there is no appearance of
their having any other meaning than what those other Prophecies have, viz. what
concerns only those Nations. And the reasons given to the contrary in Synopsis
Prophetica, Book 2. chapter 16. are of no moment. 1. For Tire is properly called an
Harlot, and said to commit fornication with all the Kings of the Earth, by
reason of the subtle deceits and allurements with which Merchants and
Trafickers enveagle their customers. 2. And Tire being forgotten seventy years,
according to the days of one King ( viz. of one Kingdom, as King is usually
taken) is plainly enough understood of the Babylonian Kingdom, which was to
continue seventy years according to Ieremy's Prophecy. And Tire being taken and
ruined by Nebuchadnezzar, did continue so till the end of that Kingdom. 3. But
the fansied Cabbalistical sense of those seventy years will soon vanish, by
considering, first, that the Christian Caesar's belong to the sixth, and not to
the seventh Head, as is showed in the Remarks. 4. And next that Antichristian
Rome, which is supposed to be Typified by Tire, was not in being before the
Christian Emperors, and therefore cannot be said to be forgotten, during their
Time. 5. As to the description of the Prince of Tire, for which he is supposed
to represent some great Priest in the Church; first being threatened with the
Death of the uncircumcised, is no more than what is threatened to Pharaoh in
Ezekiel. chap. 32. and is said to befall all the Princes there spoken of. 6. Next
he is not said to be adorned, as is supposed, with the high Priest's vestments,
but only with precious stones, to signify the perfection of beauty and
splendor, which by great wisdom he had attained unto. 7. By reason whereof he
is said to have been in Eden, the garden of God, in like sense as great Kings
are called Trees of Eden in Ezekiel, chap. 31.8. Then as to his being called
anointed Cherub, and his being upon the Mountain of God, and walking in the
midst of the stones of Fire; they all signify the perfection mentioned in the
next verse, which he had by wisdom arrived to, even to an Angelical state,
comparable to the anointed Cherub and stones of Fire, etc. 9. And being such,
it is no wonder that the word Sanctuary should be applied to him, whenas it is
so to Moab, Esaias 16.12. So that in this Vision of Tire is set forth the height
of perfection and glory that humane wisdom and industry could advance a state
unto. 10. Which though it was to so high a degree as is described, yet all
(proceeding not from the Spirit of Holiness to make their works to be wrought
in God) proved corruptible like unto all fleshly glory. 11. But to make all
this Typical of Antichristian Rome, is a like Romantic conceit with the
applying of a Moral Cabbala to the three first Chapters of Genesis. 12. For
besides what is already said against the same, The Vision setting forth the
perfection and glory of a secular Kingdom or Civil state, can but very
incongruously thereby typifie an Ecclesiastical state. But then all this
description being of what was real, and what Tire by Pride and Iniquity of her
Trafick fell from, will by no means be applicable to what was only counterfeit
in Antichristian Rome, and what by her corruptions and impostures she fell
into. And as to the State of the Roman Church before her Apostasy, it being not
then Antichristian, cannot be aimed at by what is Typical of the Antichristian
Church; nor was its condition then such, as can so answer to the description of
Tire, as to be Typified by it. The words therefore [Glorious holy Mountain]
having no countenance from the Vision of Tire, or any other reasons given for
it to be applied to Rome, the doing of it is altogether unaccountable, unless
it proceed from a disposition to give the old Gentleman at Rome a plaster for
having broken his Head, etc.

Ans. I is a pretty show the Remarker makes to induce us to believe, that
Constantinople is here meant by the City, betwixt two Seas, where the Glorious
holy Mountain is. But there is nothing solid in his arguing. For, first, (...)
does not so properly signify simply betwixt, as betwixt the middle parts of
the things any thing is said to be betwixt. And therefore here the Septuagint
accordingly render (...) is, betwixt the two middle parts of the Adriatic
suppose and Tuscan Sea. And so is Rome situated, thorough which, if you draw a
line to these two Seas, that line will touch each Sea as to sight, in the Map
of Ortelius and Ptolemy, in the middle. Whenas Constantinople is not situated
thus betwixt the middle parts of the Pontus Euxinus and Propontis, but rather
at the West End of the Euxine Sea, in which regard old Rome's situation has
much the advantage of New Rome or Constantinople. And considering the huge
length of the two Seas, extended along each side of Italy, and the narrowness
of the Land in comparison, he must have a wonderful capricious fancy that does
not presently acknowledge it very properly placed betwixt two Seas. And that
other Towns in Italy are placed so as well as it, is but a fond allegation.
whenas there are other Notes to restrain it to Rome alone. And there are other
Towns besides Constantinople placed betwixt the Pontus Euxinus and the
Propontis.

And then secondly, for the Title of [Glorious holy Mountain] which is the main
restraining Note of the place; The Hills of Rome are exceeding much more
celebrated in History than the Hills of Constantinople. They are but rarely and
faintly taken notice of in comparison. And for the Holiness of the place, if it
be to be gathered from the Holiness of Persons once there residing, what
comparison is there betwixt that one Emperor Constantine, who, hated for his
zeal for the Christian Religion, went to Byzantium (if Zosimus must be
believed, who was no friend to the Christians) and S. Peter and S. Paul, who
dyed Martyrs at Rome for the profession of Christ, as also did a dozen Bishops
of Rome in succession after them, Eleutherius being the first that dyed in his
bed? And yet after him also Cornelius, Lucius, Sixtus, Marcellinus, Marcellus
and Miltiades dyed Martyrs also for the Christian Religion. And such was the
eminent Holiness of the Primitive Bishops of Rome, that the Roman Bishop has
born the Title thereof ever afterward till this very day; As also their Church
and Hierarchy, how appropriated the Title of Holiness is to them, all men know,
and it will continue as long as they are; whenas the Holiness of Constantinople
is extinct by the overflowing of the Turk, and therefore the Glorious holy
Mountain can be no where but where this Title of Holiness does reside. And
Prophecy being anticipatory History, uses the same phrase that History would
do, or common speech does in the Age it points at: which is a consideration
worth the Noting. And as for those many Constantinopolitan Emperors that were
zealous against the Idolatrous corruptions of the Roman Church; and Councils
held there against the worship of Images, there were more that complied with
the Roman corruptions than that resisted them, and there were Councils there
held as well for the worship of Images as against it, and these prevailed
against the former. Which therefore argues the place more polluted than holy.
And even before the taking of Constantinople by the Turk, the Christians within
at their devotions for success against him, are said to carry their holy Images
in procession, as Leonardus Chiensis declares, then present in the City at the
Siege, in his Narrative of the taking of Constantinople by the Turk; and
Richerius also writes the same, lib. 4. De rebus Turcarum; and it being ever
since possessed by those Infidels, surely it has not increased the Holiness
thereof. And the manner of the Greeks devotions then is a plain demonstration
how little they had separated from the Roman Corruptions.

And thirdly, it is a sign the Remarker is hugely put to his shifts, when he is
fain to eek out the Holiness of that City with what he presumes it will be
after the destruction of the Turkish Empire, as if Rome and other Cities then
may not be as holy as it. For that the material City of Rome shall be so
utterly ruined, is a rash conjecture of his own, the Mystical Babylon not
signifying a material City, but a Polity.

And fourthly, That is the fondest argument of all for having New Rome
understood in this passage of the Prophecy, because the Turk already has placed
the Tabernacles of his Palace there, which is rather an argument against it.
For the words import some new Acquist of his. Nor does Tabernacle (a conceit of
the Remarker's) always imply a flitting condition, otherwise the condition of
the New Jerusalem would be such, because God then is said to place his
Tabernacle amongst men. And the Particle [Yet] is [(...)] in the Hebrew, and
may be as well translated [And] as [Yet] or rather better.

Fifthly, And if we cannot be assured from the order and nature of things in
this part of the Vision, that the acquiring of the possession of the glorious
holy Mountain betwixt the two Seas, is after the news out of the East and out
of the North, and the Turks trouble therefrom, and after his going forth upon
this trouble of mind with great fury to destroy by warlike invasion, amongst
which Invasions is the invading of the City betwixt two Seas, etc. it is
impossible for any one to have the assured sense of any thing written. But take
this unstrained, natural and necessary order of things; and suppose, with the
Remarker, that the City betwixt the two Seas is Constantinople, which is the
Metropolis of the Turkish Empire; where, for the more distinctness, we will
suppose him residing, and to hear the disturbing news from the East and North,
and to go out of Constantinople with great fury to destroy many; and amongst
other Acquists by War to take Constantinople, of which he is supposed all the
while possessed, and which cannot by any means now be supposed to bear the Title
of Holy: Can there any thing be more ridiculous and incongruous than this? And
that is a very lame, slim put-off to say, This taking of the City betwixt two
Seas is added only as a character of the Turk. For he was sufficiently
characterized over and over again by his other Achievements. And being it is
said, that after the News out of the East, and out of the North, he shall plant
the Tabernacles of his Palace, etc. it is evident that that achievement was to
come after; that is to say, After he had taken Egypt, v. 43. whenas he had
taken Constantinople before included in that general overflowing of the King of
the North, v. 40. according, as the Expositor there has hinted, and he is now
possessed of it. For in that 40 th verse the general overslowing of the King of
the North is comprised. But v. 41. there is particularized his being made
Master of the glorious Land Palestine or Iudaea, and v. 42, 43. of Egypt and
other Countries which he took after Constantinople: Thus exquisitely Methodical
is the frame of the Prophecy. Nor can such confusion as the Remarker would
have, be admitted under pretense of more fully characterizing the Turk when he
was sufficiently characterized already. And now I hope the Remarker will not
think it so strange, that the Expositor ran so far as Old Rome for a right
Interpretation of this verse, when pitching the sense upon New Rome would make
it intolerable Nonsense. And therefore to proceed.

Sixthly, New Rome being so utterly uncompliable with the scope of the
Prophecy, the taking Old Rome here by the Turk is no groundless conceit, but
apparently rational, though but conjectural. Nor does it at all disagree with
what the Expositor has delivered upon Rev. 19. where the overthrow of the Beast
and false Prophet is attributed to the courage and conduct of that Illustrious
Heroes on the white Horse, with a sword coming out of his mouth. For the
Influence of that Evangelical Arm (by virtue of whose preaching the Kings of
the East, Tartars and Persians suppose, by that time may be converted, viz.
within the seventh Vial) may bring to pass such things as may thus disturb the
mind of the Turk, and make him make such Incursions into Christendom, that at
last he may attack Italy and Rome it self, and plant the Tabernacles of his
Palace there according to the scope of the Prophecy. So that we see how the
overthrow of the Beast and false Prophet may be ascribed both to the Army of
the Rider of the white Horse, and to the Turk also, that Providence of God that
comprizeth all, attempering the affairs of the World to such ends as he has
foreseen and foretold by the mouth of his holy Prophets. But it is a childish
and Idiotick conceit to fancy that Army of the Rider of the white Horse to be
a company of men at one time gathered into one place, or that the Kings of the
Earth will be in such sort gathered; but what is more scatteredly and
interruptedly done as to time, and place, and parties, is according to the
uniting and constringing nature of a prophetic Henopoeia, represented as done
at one time, and in one place, and by one set-battel betwixt the parties there
congregated. And he that is not aware of the Genius of the Prophetic style in
such cases, will make strange work in the Interpretation of Prophecies.

Seventhly, The Remarker's affirming that Esay's and Ezekiel's Prophecy of Tire
is no Type of Antichrist, is more sullen than sound; the reason he brings for
it being so small and evanid, viz. because the Kings or Princes of other places
in the adjoining Prophecies are not made Types of Antichrist. But why should
this be expected more than that all the good Kings of Israel should be made
Types of Christ? Besides, how does the Remarker prove but that King* Pharaoh is
made a Type of Antichrist, Ezekiel. chapter 32. Of which we shall say more anon. But
there is a special reason to believe the King of Tire to be a Type of
Antichrist, the Apocalypse borrowing so many entire phrases out of the Visions
of Tire in the Lamentation over Babylon, which most certainly signifies the
Pontifician Polity. Which is a fair indication to any ordinary unprejudiced
sagacity that Tire is intimated a Type of the same Polity that Babylon is. And
the expressions are so high, sublime and grandisonant (which is ridiculous to
conceive to be levelled only at a mere rich cunning Merchant) that several
ancient Fathers, as S. Jerome, S. Austin, Origin, Beda, Ambrose and Tertullian
have thought it a Prophetic Parable touching the Devil; but others more
moderate, as Apollinarius and Theodoret understood some things therein, of the
Prince of Tire, others of the Devil. And so that which is said Esaias 14.12. How
art thou fallen from Heaven, Lucifer, thou Son of the Morning, Origin,
Eusebius, Ambrose, Athanasius, and most of the Ancients understood it of the
Devil; but S. Cyprian, to give him his due, understood Antichrist by it. And it
is plain from the Apocalypse, that by the King of Babylon is understood
Antichrist. Wherefore where there is the like exorbitant sublimity of style as
there is here toward the Prince of Tire, a meaner person than the King of
Babylon, (being but as it were an huge wealthy cunning Merchant, and a Prince
over such) surely some greater thing or person than the Prince of Tire must be
understood; and it being not to be understood of the Devil, who can claim a
juster right to be signified by the Prophecy in the full sense thereof, than
Antichrist himself? But particular reasons are farther given in Book 2. Chap.
16. Synopsis Prophetica, which the Remarker pretends to confute, to which
Confutations I will answer in order as they occur.

First then, Methinks he begins very inauspiciously to make cunning Traficking,
properly Whoredom. Let him produce any Lexicographer that will tell us that
Traficking signifies Whoring in any approved Author, sacred or profane, and a
farther answer shall be framed. In the mean time to one that will say any
thing, it is fit to answer nothing. Cunning Traficking may be akin to thieving;
but how it is to simple Whoring, I see not.

Secondly, The seventy years Tire is forgotten, and lies in Ruins, cannot be
understood of the seventy years of the Babylonish Kingdom. For then Tire should
be taken in the beginning of Nebuchadnezzar's reign, whenas it was not taken by
him till the 4136 year of the Julian Period, which is about 30 years from the
beginning of the Babylonian Kingdom, as you may see in Petavius his De Doctrina
Temporum.

Thirdly, What a vain conceit it is to make the Christian Caesar's part of the
sixth Head of the Beast, I have shown upon his foregoing Remarks. To make them
part of the sixth Head, is to make them Idolatrous, which is a perfect
contradiction to the Vision, which makes eight Kings but only seven Heads of
the Beast, and all of them Idolatrous. Wherefore one of these eight Kings must
not be Idolatrous, which were the Primitive Christian Caesar's, who were the
seventh King of the eight.

Fourthly, Rome was Idolatrous before it was Christian, and turned Idolatrous
again when it became Paganochristian, and Whoredom is the true Symbol of
Idolatry known to all; wherefore the Harlot, though she was silent awhile in
the time of the pure Christian Caesar's, which were the seventh King, yet when
that time expired, she might sing again like a Harlot. Nor does this at all
hinder but that this Vision is Typical of Rome-Antichristian, this stroke
setting out more exquisitely the Paganochristianism of their Idolatry, that
they Paganize again, and again play the Harlot by a new Mode of Idolatry, which
yet is the lively Image of the Idolatry of old Paganism.

Fifthly, As for Pharaoh his being threatened with the death of the
uncircumcised, we being taught out of the Apocalypse, that by Egypt is
understood the Pontifician Hierarchy, he must be of a slow sense that does not
discern that Prophecy of Ezekiel, chap. 32. v. 19. to concern the Papal
Hierarchy, which pretending to be Holy Church in a special manner, and that
this Papal Polity is that Kingdom of Christ that shall abide for ever, which is
the privilege only of the Millennial Empire of Christ, the Prophet upbraids
that confidence to this Roman Pharaoh, as if he were more holy and pure than
other worldly Potentates, and therefore says expressly, Whom do thou pass in
Beauty? Go down and be thou laid with the uncircumcised. Thou shall perish as
well as other Heathen or Pagan Polities. If there were not some such weighty
sense as this under it, it is incredible that Pharaoh's lying down in Death
with the uncircumcised, should be so often repeated in this Prophecy. He is
reckoned amongst that long list of uncircumcised Potentates, whose Empires
failed, and so must his, though he thinks himself in such a special manner a
circumcised one, and to be that Christian Kingdom which shall never fail.

Sixthly, That the Prince of Tire is described as adorned with the High
Priest's Vestments, is evident from hence; in that of all the nine precious
stones which are named, there is not one of them but what is in the High
Priest's Breast Plate; but to have named all twelve had been too bare for the
nature of a Prophecy of this kind, and too sorry a conceit it would be to
fancy the Breast Plate without the other clothing. And his naming a little
after the anointed Cherub, shows that the Prophet's fancy was carried into the
Temple (into the Sanctum Sanctorum) and to the High Priest, who alone had power
to enter thereinto.

Seventhly, And as to his being said to be in Eden, the Garden of God, that ill
suits with the City of Tire, built on a hard steril Rock; whenas Italy, the
seat of the Sacerdotal Prince chiefly aimed at, is by Geographers and
Historians acknowledged to be the very Paradise of Europe. Nor does the
Remarker mend himself by making the Prince of Tire the tallest Cedar in the
garden of God, by referring to Ezekiel. 31. For that example of the King of
Assyria is brought in only to set out the high Sovereignty and Magnificency of
Pharaoh, who is a Type of Antichrist, that exalts himself above all that is
called God or is worshipped. It is a Parable taken up against him. And
therefore v. 18. it is said, Thou shall lie in the midst of the uncircumcised
(for all thy pretended Holiness) with them that be slain with the sword. This
is Pharaoh and all his multitude, says the Lord God. The whole Parable of the
King of Assyria is understood of Pharaoh, and consequently of the Papal
Hierarchy, and it does lively set out the business, but it would take up too
much room to give an account of it here.

Eighthly, There must be a strange thick callosity on the perceptive faculty of
that man that can discern no more by those expressions, The anointed Cherub,
The Holy Mountain of God, The walking up and down in the midst of the stones of
fire, viz. clothed with the Vestments of Aaron, as was above noted, than the
signification of, forsooth, an Angelical state (as if the Angels in Heaven were
anointed Cherubs, whenas it plainly refers to the Cherubim in the Sanctum
Sanctorum, which were anointed and consecrated) of an high and mighty Merchant
with a company of his cunning Traders and Trafickers, if not blew-apron men,
grown rich and wealthy by their worldly craft and subtilty, nothing less than
the most holy things in the Temple of God must set out the greasy glory of
these fat Burgomasters, and their worldly splendor and prosperity, arising
from their overreaching arts in Trafick, and the thence issuing sordid gain.
What a homely course conceit is this?

Ninthly, As for the name Sanctuary, being applied to Moab, the word (...),
which is in both places, is of a general signification, and signifies any
consecrated place, whether it be to the God of Israel, the true God, or
otherwise. But that (...) here respects the true God, and alludes to the
Sanctuary of the God of Israel, and therefore denotes some high and mighty
Priest principally, not a worldly, though princely Merchant, the anointed
Cherub, the holy Mountain of God, and the Vestments of Aaron, a little before
mentioned, do naturally indicate, and that the fancy of the Prophet had not
withdrawn it self from the Temple at Jerusalem. The allusion to whose most holy
things to conceive to be merely to set out the worldly prosperity of a City of
subtle cheating Merchants; as also to conceive, that the comparing of the
Wisdom of the Prince of Tire with that of Daniel, and making the Tyrian Prince
prefer his own before it, does denote only his cunning in Trading, and not
some person that has more resemblance to the Prophet Daniel, as pretending
himself also to be a Prophet, though characterized in the Apocalypse to be a
false one, is most absurd and ridiculous. But it is too long to insist on these
things. And therefore

Tenthly, What the Remarker says, That this perfect Tyrian state proceeding not
from the Spirit of Holiness proved corruptible; this, I suppose, he collects
from v. 15. Thou wast perfect in thy ways from the day thou wast created, till
Iniquity was found in thee. But if this be all that is meant by this Vision,
that humane Polities, be they never so well ordered at first, if there be no
more than what is humane, will in process of time corrupt; besides, that it is
so obvious and trivial a Notion, it is not the Object of Prophecy. Wherefore
for the Prophet to make such a stir about so small a business, is a supposition
incredible. And therefore this perfect state, that is to say, this upright and
honest state, as well as beautiful and glorious of the Prince of Tire, is a
real prediction of the state of the Primitive Bishops of Rome especially, even
till the Apostasy came in. And the words of this 15 th verse sound so high,
that S. Austin, Gregory and other Theologers conceive they relate to Lucifer,
who was created perfect, but fell through his own Pride. These rich and
glorious descriptions therefore taken from the most holy things of the Temple,
respect the Bishops of Rome especially, and their Hierarchy before the Time of
the Apostasy, till Iniquity was found in them. Nothing but wilful blindness,
or a skew conceit against Episcopacy, as if the Remarker were a Presbyterian,
which yet I do not believe, can hinder a man from seeing so clear a Truth.

Eleventhly, As for the Moral Cabbala on the three first Chapters of Genesis,
it is a natural and coherent Application of the most sapid and weighty parts of
a Divine Morality. And let him take heed that he is not guilty (in an high
degree) of an Insensibility of such things that will adventure to call that
Cabbala a Romance. But this was plucked in by the head and shoulders by the
Remarker, and happily might as well have been omitted as answered by the Answerer.

Twelfthly, It is extreme precariously affirmed by the Remarker, That the
Perfections and Imperfections of a Civil state may not Typifie the Perfections
and Imperfections of a state Ecclesiastical, and especially as to some
particular point. As this Vision of the Prince of Tire is taken notice of in
Synopsis Prophetica, for a Prediction of Ecclesiastical Nundinations. Wherefore
this Tyrian Polity, they being a Polity of Merchants, and being for a time
honest and upright, and not adulterating their Wares, nor using any fraud or
couzenage may be a Type of the Primitive unapostatized State of the Church,
while her Merchandise was pure and incorrupt. For there is a spiritual as well
as a secular Merchandise, as appears by that of Solomon, Prove. 3.14. For the
Merchandise of wisdom is better than the Merchandise of silver, etc. And the
salutiferous Wisdom of the Gospel better than all other Wisedoms. And our
Savior Christ says, The Kingdom of God is like a Merchant-man, seeking goodly
Pearls, Mat. 13. And the goodly Pearl indeed that exceeds all other Pearls, is
pure Evangelical Truth, unsophisticate with any noxious error. This was the
Merchandise of the Primitive Church and of the Bishop of Rome, while he
continued perfect in his ways from the day God created him, that is,
constituted him Bishop of Rome, till Iniquity was found in him. Till he defiled
his Sanctuaries by the multitude of his Iniquities, by the Iniquity of his
Trafick, bringing in many Institutes and Doctrines Antichristian and repugnant
to the pure Evangelical Truth of Christ; and all this for filthy lucre and
worldly Interest. What an easy Type is Tire here, though a Civil State of a
State Ecclesiastic? But I am even weary of making out such plain things. What
follows is refuted already by this and by my fourth Answer. And I have been too
long already. It is sufficiently clear out of what has been said, that
Ezekiel's Prophecy of Tire is a Type of Antichrist, and consequently does give
countenance to the applying the words [Glorious holy Mountain] to Antichrist
himself or his seat, as well as the most holy things in the Temple, or relating
to Aaron, are applied in Ezekiel to the Prince of Tire, Antichrist his Type.

As for that passage of the Remarker's rare wit in the close of all, I only
answer this thereto, That the Expositor takes no pleasure in breaking any ones
Head of what quality soever, nor has any such intention any where, or of
administering any palliating Plasters. But if he had any Sovereign Cephalic, or
Medicated Cap that would corroborate and cleanse the Brain, and clear the
Judgment, I do not doubt but he wishes so well to the Remarker, that he would
bestow it on him, whereby he might be the better enabled to discern the
solidity and congruity of other men's conceptions, and the Absurdities and
Incongruities of his own. If he had in his understanding the last verse [Yet he
shall come to his end, etc.] of the destruction of the Turk conjoined it with
his pitching the Tabernacles of his Palace on Mount Sion and Mount Moriah in
expectation of the Kings of the East, the return of the Israelites to their own
Land, as Mr. Mede seems to intimate, there had been better sense in it; but to
join the destruction of the Turk with his pitching the Tabernacles of his
Palace in New Rome or Constantinople, is very absonous and ridiculous. But
whether Mr. Mede's way, or the Expositor's way, be the better, Time only will
certainly discover.

Vision 6. continued in Chap. 12. Verse. 1.
AND there shall be a time of trouble, such as never was since there was a
Nation, etc. answers not to the great Earthquake under the seventh Vial, but
proceeds from the great commotion that will be, by reason of the gathering of
the great Armies of the Christian and Antichristian Party to the great decisive
battle of that great day of God Almighty. And that Earthquake signifies the
great Astonishment the victory then will cause, and the great Revolution which
will ensue thereon. Which sense is confirmed by the following words, And at
that time shall thy people be delivered, viz. That deliverance will be the
fruit and product of those troubles, and it will be by the utter vanquishing of
the Antichristian Party, in the abovesaid battle.

Ans. The time of trouble, and the time of the great Earthquake are assuredly
the same, viz. the Time of War, and destruction which Earthquakes signify in
the Prophetic style, and according to Artemidorus and Achmetes. Wherefore the
Earthquake cannot be after the Victory, or signify any Revolution then, but
signifies the battle it self and the destruction thereby. But afterward comes
settlement contrary to an Earthquake, namely the Descent of the New Jerusalem,
wherein the Jews will be so notably concerned, the names of the twelve Tribes
of the children of Israel being to be writ on the gates thereof. Which sense
indeed is confirmed by the following words. And at that time thy people shall
be delivered, becoming Citizens of the New Jerusalem, they shall be delivered
both from all secular bondage, and also from the beggarly Elements of the
Mosaic Dispensation, and by their Christianity be made Heirs of eternal
salvation, as the word is (...) in the Septuagint. The Earthquake, Apoc. 16. is
put in lieu of the battle by a mutation of Iconisms, as the great City in lieu
of all the forces gathered together in Armageddon, by the same figure. But
after this Earthquake, which concludes the first Thunder, comes the Settlement,
as I said, under the second.

Verse. 2. If the words [Some to everlasting life, and some to shame and
everlasting contempt] respect the first Resurrection (as they seem to do) then
surely the awaking to shame and contempt must intend a state in the other life,
as well as the awaking to everlasting life does so. And the words [shame and
contempt] seem apt to signify what is likely then to befall them, when the
faithfulness of God's promises and threatenings to reward the righteous and
punish evil doers, will be made so manifest.

Ans. If we had nothing but the English Translation to go by, or other
Translations like it, what the Remarker says may seem rational enough; but if
we have recourse to the Hebrew, and withal consider the phrases of [shame and
contempt] the Expositor's account seems more rational, though, as I have above
noted, on the Remarks, he is not averse from admitting this sense of the
Remarker's also.

Verse. 7. The words a [scatter the power of the holy People] are surely meant
of the Christians or adopted, as well as of the natural Jews, and do more
respect them than the other. b But it is strange that the words [all these
things shall be finished] viz. an accomplishing to scatter the power, etc.
should be made to signify, All these mavelous things to the first and second
Resurrection, whenas they plainly mean the wonders that are to last for a time,
and times, and half a time, viz. the preceding wonders of scattering the power
of the holy people, which will then be accomplished or finished.

Ans. The words a [scatter the power of the holy People] are certainly
understood of the Jews. But that they are meant of others also, if the Remarker
had any reasons so to think, he should have produced them. b And that [all
these things shall be finished] are not to be restrained to the wonders that
are to last for a time, and times, and half a time, is plain from hence, in
that it is repugnant to the Text, which runs thus: And when he shall have
accomplished to scatter the power of the holy people, all these things shall be
finished; that is according to the Remarker, all the wonders during the time,
and times, and half a time. Which then will imply, that the Accomplishing to
scatter the power of the holy people precedes those wonders, which is grossly
false. Wherefore, All these things shall be finished, includes both those
wonders, and the accomplishing to scatter the holy people, and whatever else
has been hinted of the New Jerusalem, and the first and second Resurrection.
After which immediately occurs, v. 6. the question of the Angel. How long shall
it be to the end of these wonders? And therefore [all these things] take in all
before. And Daniel tells us, chapter 10. v. 1. that the time appointed was long.
And the Oath of the Apocalyptick Angel, and the Oath of this Angel here in
Daniel surely swear touching the same end of the Periods of Time, viz. that
besides the Time, and Times, and half a Time, there shall be no more time than
the Interval of the seventh Trumpet, which reaches to the Conflagration. See
the Expositor upon this verse.

Verse. 11, 12. Though the meaning here given of 1290 and 1335 days may be
intended, yet I suppose there is also another meaning which seems to be chiefly
aimed at, viz. 1. That as Antiochus Epiphanes did Typifie Antichrist, so by the
taking away the daily Sacrifice is signified the beginning of the Antichristian
Reign, and so those Numbers will have the same Epoch with the Time, and Times,
and half a Time, or 1260 days. 2. This sense will much better agree with the
Reckoning by Indictions (which began but about Constantine's time) than the
other. 3. And also does give a much more agreeable Answer to the Question, v.
8. What shall be the end of these things? Which does second the question, v. 6.
How long shall it be to the end of these wonders? and so is meant of those
wonders that are to last for a time, and times, and half a time, and does
enquire what shall be the end of them. Which the first sense of the Numbers
gives no apt answer to, telling only what shall fall out toward the end of
those wonders. But this other sense gives an apt, though not a satisfactory
answer thereto, telling Daniel, that as he understood not the words Time and
Times, etc. which answered his first Question, the meaning of them being closed
till the time of the End, so what he farther enquires is also concealed till
then. But at the end of the 1290 and 1335 days (beginning them, as aforesaid,
with the 1260 days) there will those things fall out as will give a
satisfactory account of what he enquires after, and make them peculiarly
blessed who reach those times. 4. So that whereas the end of 1260 days does
signify a time wherein the scattering of the power of the holy people will be
ended, and they wholly delivered from the bondage and evils they suffered; 5.
The end of the other Numbers signifies Times, wherein a great advancement will
be toward the glorious state of the Millennium. 6. For though it be one simple
uniform state, yet it may be a considerable time growing to the height of it.
7. With which seems to agree, Zech. 14.6, 7. In that day the light shall not be
clear, nor dark, not day nor night, but in the evening it shall be light. Which
signifies that those times will still be more refined toward the end of them,
which is most agreeable with their being to end with a Translation into an
Heavenly state. So far will they be from degenerating into a Laodicean state.

Ans. That Mr. Mede's Interpretation of these two Numbers is the only true
Interpretation, and that the Remarker's Interpretation, though it has some show
of ingeniousness in it, is groundless, I shall show by showing the weakness of
his reasons for it. For,

First, it does not follow because Antiochus Epiphanes is a Type of Antichrist,
that therefore by the taking away the daily Sacrifice, is signified the
beginning of the Antichristian Reign, so that it must have the same Epoch the
1260 days have. For chap. 8. the 2300 days which are said to be the time of the
ceasing of the daily Sacrifice and Pollution of the Sanctuary caused by
Antiochus Epiphanes, making both these days and Antiochus Typical of
Antichrist, and to point at the continuance of his once begun Pollutions, yet
the Epoch of those Prophetical days or 2300 years is not the Epoch of the
1260 years of the reign of Antichrist, but from the beginning of the literal
Pollution of the Sanctuary. Which yet might better have been there than here in
these Numbers of 1290 and 1335. Because it is expressly said here, That from the
time that the daily Sacrifice shall be taken away, and the abomination that
makes desolate set up, there shall be 1290 days, etc. So that the Epoch is
set to us here, when it was free in the other place; and yet not there neither
is the Epoch the same with the Epoch of the reign of Antichrist. It is
sufficient there that the days be Typical of years, though the Epoch of them
be not the Epoch of the Reign of Antichrist, of whom Antiochus Epiphanes is a
Type. For were it so, the Reign of Antichrist would continue above a thousand
years longer. And lastly, it may be considered whether the express fixing the
Epoch of the Numbers 1290 and 1335 on the taking away the daily Sacrifice, may
not be set down on purpose to be a guide to us, where to fix the Epoch of the
Number 2300 days, supposing it also Typical of years, and to indigitate to what
time the Antichristian Pollution will reach, having once begun, and so point at
the end of it, as the other does at the height of it.

Secondly, Though the two Numbers consist of Indictions, yet there is no
betterness in the Remarker's way than in Mr. Mede's way, both because the
beginning of Constantine's Indictions was about an hundred years before the
Epoch of the 1260 Prophetical Days, as is plain out of Petavius and Sigonius,
so that they could give no aim at that Epoch, and also that it is sufficient
that they point to the times in which these Indictions were in use, that no man
might fancy them to be literal Days, not prophetical; and also, that may give
a latitude of compute by Quindenaries of Fifteens, and not bind the event of
the Prophecy to a strict Prophetical day.

Thirdly, Nor does this way give a much more agreeable answer to the question,
v. 8. [What shall be the end of these things?] which does fecond the question
v. 6. For the question, v. 6. is manifestly of all the wonders from v. 36. of
the precedent Chapter, to v. 5. of this. Upon all this matter the question is
put, v. 6. How long shall it be to the end of these wonders? Amongst which is
the New Jerusalem intimated, and the first and second Resurrection. And
therefore the answer of him that swears by him that lives for ever, reaches
to that extent, and ends with -- All these things shall be finished; that is,
even to the second Resurrection. And this I think is a very pertinent and
satisfactory answer to that question, which was, How far to the end of those
wonders? And his Answer is, to the end of the World. As I noted above, that
Daniel said, The Time appointed was long. But here now, v. 8. Daniel, to whom
it was said, v 4. But thou, O Daniel, shut up the words, and seal the book even
to the Time of the end (which phrase denotes the fourth Monarchy) is made to
ask this question (understanding nothing by the question of one of the two
Angels, and the answer of Palmoni thereto) (...). What the latter part of those
times which was called the time of the end? For so (...) signifies. Which
place, because our English renders, What shall be the end of these things? the
Remarker understands what shall be the End or success of them: which is a
mistake. But the genuine sense is, What is the latter part of those Times,
which are called the Time of the End? by which is understood the Roman
Monarchy. And then, though Daniel was no wiser than he was before, who is bid
to go his way, for the words are closed up and sealed till the time of the End
(whether you take it in a more restrict sense, or in the same it is taken, v.
4.) yet those two Numbers from the Epoch given, v. 11, 12. do most plainly and
satisfactorily answer to the question, and evidently point at those latter
times of the Time of the End, or last Monarchy, which is the Roman, viz. at the
Time, and Times, and half a Time, which by S. Paul are called (...), the latter
Times of the last. Which is of very weighty use for the discovery of the Times
of Antichrist. But the Remarker's way leads the heedless into groundless hopes
of such an Acceleration of the Millennium, as to any prudent and knowing man
must seem incredible. And flesh and blood had rather be blessed by reaching
into the prosperous times of the Church on Earth, than be peculiarly happy in
the other state, by suffering Martyrdom here.

Fourthly, I deny that the End of the 1260 days does signify a time wherein
the scattering of the power of the holy people will be ended, forasmuch as the
Vials follow the 1260 days, and do not precede them, nor are they poured out
till the Rising of the Witnesses. And therefore,

Fifthly, It is impossible that these two Numbers in this Chapter, from the
Epoch of the Reign of Antichrist should reach into those times wherein the
glory of the Millennium is more advanced. And,

Sixthly, I say it is a mere surmise of the Remarker to make the proper
Millennial state so dim and imperfect, and contrary to the description in the
Apocalypse, which makes the state of the New Jerusalem so soon as it is settled
exceeding glorious. When once the New Jerusalem is descended, and the
Millennium begun, the glory will be so excellent, that it is not probable that
the Intention of it will increase but only the Extension, more people being
Proselyted to it. And,

Seventhly and lastly, As for that place of Zechary, chap. 14.6, 7. If it
respect the state of the Christian Church, as Grotius declines it, yet how does
it appear that it is understood of the Millennial Times, and not rather of the
Times before; The Millennium being the latter part of the Day of the Gospel,
and therefore more fitly answering to the Evening, and also a time of much more
light, glory and prosperity than the times before, which may answer to those
words of the Prophecy, But in the evening it shall be light. But if it must
respect the Millennium, as the Remarker would have it, the most natural sense
of the Original makes plainly against him. For, v. 6. the Hebrew runs thus: And
it shall come to pass in that day, (...), Non erit lux pretiosa; that is, There
will be no rarity or scarcity of light, as in Winter time, when days are short,
and the Sun seldom appears by reason of Clouds, and makes but a short stay when
he does, (...), Nec erit gelu. Nor will there be any Frost. Wherefore in this
sixth verse of chap. 14. of Zechary, the State of the Church is compared to a
perpetual Summer. But in the next verse the Description advances higher, and
takes away the Vicissitudes of Days and Nights, according to the description
of the Millennial state, Apoc. 21.25. and 22.5. where it is expressly said,
there shall be no Night there. So here, v. 7. Verbatim out of the Hebrew. And
there shall be one day known to the Lord, (...), No day and no night, (that is
no natural Day nor Night which are parts of the Nychthemeron, which therefore
Castellio thus paraphraseth, Perpetua lux erit, says he, nulla diei noctisque
vicissitudine) and it shall come to pass that at Evening time there shall be
light; that is to say, Whenas other days close in darkness, and are parts of a
Nychthemeron (which is the proper Notion of a natural Day to be part of the
Nychthemeron) it shall not be so here, but even the Evening-tyde, all of it
shall be light. So Castellio that excellent Hebrew Critic on the place: Which
is a lively Portraiture of the Laodicean state, whose light will not fail them,
but zeal and heat will be wanting, which is the condition of the Evening-light.
It is not so hot and vigorous as that of the Day. And the Laodicean Church is
blamed for her lukewarmness. The sixth verse therefore in this place of Zechary
is a description of the Times immediately precedent to the Millennium properly
so called, the latter end of verse the seventh, of the Times subsequent
thereto, viz. to the Millennium, which is the Laodicean state. And thus the
more cloudy and misty conceits of the Remarker vanish, and Mr. Mede's
Interpretation of these Numbers is found the only sound and solid Account.

AN ANSWER To Several REMARKS UPON Dr. Henry More HIS APOLOGY. (Wherein with
the right placing of the VIALS, the late Reformation begun by LUTHER, etc. is
demonstrated to be the Rising of the Witnesses.)

Written By S. E. MENNONITE, And Published in English by the ANSWERER: Together
with his ANSWERS thereunto.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for Walter Kettilby. 1684.

REMARKS UPON THE Apology, etc.
Remark upon Page 269, 270.
THE Comparison here betwixt Daniel's Visions, and the Visions of the Opened
book, and the Inference therefrom is an elaborate, insignificant Argument. a
For the two first Visions of Daniel running through the four Monarchies, and
the transition from each Monarchy to the other, being here called Ioints, if a
succeeding Vision prophecy but of the three first of those Monarchies it must
of necessity end in the third Joint, and does not do it out of Relation to, or
contexture with, the precedent Prophecies, and so can be no example whereon to
infer the like is to be done in the Visions of the Opened book farther than
there is the same necessity of it. For the said three Visions were received at
such diverse times, and in such diverse manners (and the first is but an
Interpretation of Nebuchadnezzar's dream) that they have no more relation to
each other, than the Prophecies of other Prophets on the same subjects have to
Daniel's Visions. b But as to the conceived Ioints in the Opened book, which
are imagined to answer to those Instanced in Daniel's Visions, the first is a
mere Imagination. For the measuring the inward Court, and not measuring the
outward Court (from which the distinction of Symmetral and Asymmetral Ages is
taken) do synchronize, as is showed in Remarks on the Revelation, chap. 11. c
The second Joint I agree to be so, viz. as it is a Transition from the
Antichristian Reign to the Millennial State; but then say, that the Vials do
not begin but end in that Joint. Which does therefore the better agree with the
Instance in Daniel, viz. of the Partial Vision ending in the third Joint. d Yet
is there no need of such partial Visions beginning or ending in such a Joint.
For the three admonishing Angels, Rev. 14. is a like Vision which does neither.
e The great pains taken to prove that the Vials do not begin with the Trumpets
might have been spared. For that without scruple will be agreed. But no use can
be made of it for the purpose designed, viz. That they must then begin at the
end of the Trumpets (which is the next Joint) For the Trumpets belonging to the
sealed, and the Vials to the opened Book, and they being distinct Series of
Prophecies, which have no contexture or Relation betwixt them (as is aforesaid
of Daniel's Visions) though they synchronize, the Vials in the one are not to
be guided by any Ioints in the other Series for their beginning or ending. f
Nor as I have showed is their beginning or ending in such a Joint needful,
though I have agreed they end in such a Joint.

Ans. It would amaze any man of an ingenuous Spirit to observe how strangely
the Remarker in the very entrance shuffles and flunders to evade the force of
the plain and orderly Reasoning of the Expositor, which in brief is this. In
the Book of Daniel it is to be noted, that after the two first Visions which
synchronize, and contain the Representation of the four Monarchies (the
conterminations of which Monarchies, that is, the Times wherein the precedent
ends, and the subsequent begins, are as so many eminent Ioints in the two
Visions) there is a Vision that begins short of the time of the two former, and
is added for a more full Representation of some things to fall out in some of
the Monarchies of the former. And that it also commences with the first of the
three eminent Ioints of the former. It is noted also in the two first Visions
of the Opened book in the Apocalypse, that begin from the same Epoch, and end
in the same times, and have two eminent Ioints, as Daniel's had three, viz. The
first the Contermination of the Antemedial Synchronals with the Medial, which
is the same with the Contermination of the sixth Seal with the seventh Seal or
first Trumpet. The other the Contermination of the Medial Synchronals with the
Post-medial, which is the same with the Contermination of the sixth Trumpet
with the seventh, the Time of the Risen Witnesses and partial fall of the City.
It is noted, I say, that after these two synchronizing Visions, there is a
Vision of the Vials that comes short of the Epoch of the two former Visions,
as that other does in Daniel. And therefore the Apocalypse being such an
Imitation of Daniel as it is, and they such a mutual Key to one another, it is
reasonable to conclude, That this third Vision in the Opened book, whose Epoch
falls short of the two former; that its Epoch, I say, must be placed in one of
the two eminent Ioints of the two foregoing Visions, and so, as it may serve
the like end as that third Vision in Daniel does, viz. more fully to represent
the matters belonging to some space of time in the foregoing Visions. The
Remarker himself is agreed that it is not to be placed in the first Joint.
Wherefore its natural place is at the second Joint after the Risen Witnesses
and partial fall of Babylon. For upon this it is presently said, The second Woe
is past, viz. the second Wo-Trumpet, or sixth Trumpet. This is the first
Argument of the Expositor, the following arguments are to be considered
afterward. Now what says the Remarker to this?

a If a succeeding Vision, says he, Prophecy but of the three first of these
Monarchies, it must of necessity end in the third Joint, and does not do it
out of any relation to, or contexture with, the precedent Prophecies, etc. But
I answer, that the succeeding Vision does not Prophecy of the three first of
these Monarchies, but of the second and third, and for that very purpose begins
at the first Joint, viz. with the Persian Monarchy: Nor does end at the third
Joint, but with the affairs of Antiochus Epiphanes, they respecting the Church
of the Jews, for whose cause this succeeding Vision is subjoined; but the line
of this part, viz. of the third Kingdom continued near an hundred years longer,
though I will not gainsay but in some considerable sense the times of Antiochus
Epiphanes may be said to be in the close of the third Kingdom. But it was the
beginning at the first Joint for the passing to the second, and to the third
Kingdom, which was the design. So that we see that this succeeding Vision is in
mere subserviency to the fuller illustrating some affairs touching the Church
that were to be in the Times of the third Monarchy, and therefore has relation
to the foregoing Visions as a supplement to some parts thereof, and thence is a
fit example whereon to infer the like was to be done in the Visions of the
Opened book. And that which he farther adds of these three Visions being
received at such diverse times, and in such diverse manners, one being but an
Interpretation of Nebuchadnezzar's dream, how weak and impertinent is this? as
if that Wisdom which inspired Daniel, could not so attemperate his Visions
that they might be thus subservient one to another. And besides, they are
actually placed thus in Daniel's book of Prophecies as the other three are in
the Apocalypse. So altogether nothing is it, that the Remarker has hitherto
alleged.

b But now, secondly, as to what he says of the first Joint in the two first
Visions in the Opened book, that it is a mere Imagination the Inward and the
Outward Court synchronizing, I have so fully confuted that fond conceit of his
in my Answer to his Remarks on that place, that I need only here remind him of
it. Nothing can be more rude and absurd than that.

c Thirdly, As for the second Joint, it is most certainly an Authentic Joint,
whether the Remarker will agree to it or no, and plainly demonstrated by Mr.
Mede in his Synchronisms, and solidly maintained by the Expositor, nor to be
denied by any one in his Wits, it being the Contermination of the Medial
Synchronals with the Post-Medial, and of the sixth Trumpet with the seventh;
But where the Vials are o be placed is the thing in dispute, and consequently
the beginning of the Millennium properly so called.

d Fourthly, His arguing that there is no need that a partial Vision should
commence with some eminent Joint of the more general Vision preceding, because
the three admonishing Angels is a like Vision, and does not, is very infirm:
Forasmuch as that of the three admonishing Angels is no partial Vision in such
a sense as the third Vision in Daniel is, and the Vision of the Vials, but
merely part of a Vision, viz. of the second Vision of the Opened book. And the
first Angel belongs to the Medial Times, the second to the Entrance of the
Post-Medial Times, the joyful Annunciation of the fall of Babylon respecting
the fall of the City at the time of the Rising of the Witnesses, which was just
at the close of the sixth Trumpet, as I noted before. So that all that follows
( chap. 14.) from verse. 8. to the end of the Chapter, respects things or events
after the Rising of the Witnesses.

e Fifthly, The Expositor's pains in proving that the Vials do not commence
with the Trumpets, is not misspent, because some learned men have been
inclined to that opinion, and there are some shows and plausibilities for it.
And sixthly, the pains taken to remove the Vials from the beginning of the
Trumpets is not to place them at the end of the Trumpets, (For the end of the
Trumpets is no Joint at all, the seventh Trumpet reaching to the end of the
World) but it is to place them in the second Joint of the two foregoing
Visions, viz. at the contermination of the Medial and Post-Medial Synchronals,
which is the same with the contermination of the sixth and seventh Trumpet. At
the close of the former of which the Witnesses rise, and the City of Babylon
falls in part. So that if they be placed at the second Joint of the two first
Visions of the Opened book, it is all one as the placing them in the second
Joint of the Vision of the Sealed book. And besides, to say, The Trumpets
belonging to the Sealed book, and the Vials belonging to the Opened book, and
they being distinct Prophecies, have no relation one to another, is a
wonderful groundless Assertion, and point blank against the express Indication
of the Spirit of Prophecy in the Apocalypse, who refers the Rising of the
Witnesses and the partial fall of Babylon to the exitus of the second
Wo-trumpet or sixth Trumpet: And yet the Rising of the Witnesses is part of a
Vision of the Opened book; And what correspondency things have prophesied of in
the Sealed book, to those prophesied of in the Opened book, it were easy to
show, but it would take up too much time.

f And seventhly and lastly, what the Remarker will call needful, I know not,
but that the placing of a partial Vision should be at some eminent knot of the
more general Vision preceding, is wonderfully natural and congruous, which is
the first argument of the Expositor for placing the Vials at the second Joint
of the preceding Visions, when the first would not do. But besides this, there
are four arguments more added, which we will now see how well the Remarker can
evade, in his next Remark, which is as follows.

Page 280, 281. The imagined slight intimations, says he, of the seven Vials,
Rev. 11, 18, etc. is a very slight fancy. a The Nations anger is that for which
the wrath of God is there said to come upon them (and not their anger or
exulcerate Rage at the Reformation, which Anger is made to be the first Vial,
but cannot be so, as is showed in Remarks) viz. whereas the Devil having great
wrath on his being cast down from Heaven, went thereon to make war with the
Saints, the Beasts warring against them, by his instigation (persecuting not
only with death, but with all other subtle and mischievous Antichristian
Practices) is that Anger of the Nations; for which it is said, Thy wrath is
come, viz. to reward them as they had rewarded the Saints, chap. 18.6. and to
destroy them that destroyed the Earth. So that this wrath cannot be applied to
the third or any other Vial, but to the whole judgment of God, which ruined the
Antichristian party, and inflicted due punishment on them. b The Temple of God
does signify (as is showed in Remarks) the Emperors embracing the Christian
profession, so far is it from being applicable to any of the Vials; Nor does
appear any reason why it should be applied to the sixth Vial, unless because it
is supposed the Jews will then be converted. Which if they be, they will be
then no more concerned in the Temple of God and Ark of the Covenant than the
Christians. The Earthquake and great Hail supposed to belong to the seventh
Vial, signifies (as is showed in Remarks) the great Revolutions in the World,
by shaking the powers thereof, which would be caused by Christianity being
autorized by the Emperors for the Religion of the Empire. c The Acclamations
in Heaven at the seventh Trumpet are no ways applicable to the Rising of the
Witnesses, and nor they nor the Doxology of the Elders do answer to the
Triumphal Song, chap. 15. which indeed is no such Song, as is showed in
Remarks. And lastly, all those Thanksgivings signify a much more flourishing
state of Christ's Kingdom by the absolute vanquishing of his enemies, and
subduing them than can be at the Rising of the Witnesses.

d The fansied glances, chap. 14. at the things of the fourth, fifth, sixth and
seventh Vials are as slight conceits as the said slight Intimations. But it was
advisedly done to omit instancing in the words that do so glance, because it is
so hard to do it. e Nor does it appear of what use the so glancing at the
affairs of the Vials here, and the slight intimations of them aforesaid at the
seventh Trumpet can be, save only what they are invented for, viz. to give
color to that crazy conceit of placing the Vials within the seventh Trumpet.
But there is so little or nothing said for them, that they are not worth saying
so much against them; especially I having given such account of the same
Scriptures in my Remarks as will sufficiently show the vanity of those
conceits, if it be not apparent enough already. f Which account does make the 8
th verse (which is supposed to glance at the second Joint of the Prophecy,) to
respect a much higher time, viz. the revolting of the Waldenses. And the
following to the 13 th (which is supposed to glance at the fourth Vial) to
respect all the Vials as a Monition. To which also belongs the next verse, viz.
v. 13. which is supposed (though no appearance why) to glance at the fifth
Vial. And the said Account does make from v. 14. to v. 17. (which is supposed
to glance at the sixth Vial) to respect the Rising of the Witnesses, and the
consequences thereof. And from v. 17. to the end of the Chapter, (which is
supposed to glance at the seventh Vial) to respect the preparation of the
Antichristian party to the great battle at the seventh Vial, and the seventh
Trumpet and the issue thereof. g And as to the adding the Visions of the Vials
in chap. 15. and 16. as a supplement to chap. 11. though it be said here
thereof, We may be sure it is sound and right; yet it is as groundless as any
thing I have spoken to, as appears by my Remarks; and what I have said, or
shall say, against the placing the Vials within the seventh Trumpet.

Ans. The next argument of the Expositor for the placing the Vials within the
seventh Trumpet, is, that placing them at the second Joint, their Position will
be such, that they will more fully illustrate those times of the foregoing
Visions, in which things are more scantly and obscurely represented, namely the
times after the Rising of the Witnesses, chap. 11.18. but are such as relate to
some of the Vials. As the wrath of the Nations to the first, The wrath of God
to the third, The Ark of the Covenant to the sixth, And the Earthquake and
great Hail to the seventh. And there is no question but the plagues of the
Vials are Vials of Woe to the Beast, and any one unprejudiced will say that they
are the plagues the third Wo-Trumpet or the seventh Trumpet is charged with.
For presently after the Rising of the Witnesses and fall of the City it is
said, the second Woe is past, and behold the third Woe comes quickly, and there
is nothing but the Acclamations in Heaven and the Doxology of the Elders
interposed, as an Interlude, and the Vision goes on. What then can it go on to,
but to some manner of description of the third Woe, which was to come quickly,
which are the plagues contained in the third Wo-Trumpet? For upon the saying
the second Woe is past, and the third Woe comes quickly, it is likewise said
immediately, And the seventh Angel sounded, etc. Wherefore what can be expected
after that short Interlude, but some kind of description of the plagues of the
third Wo-Trumpet, which is the seventh Trumpet, which I say are the Vials,
which are more obscurely and defectuously here intimated. The first the
intoxicating Cup of wrath, which dementates men, and infatuates their counsels.
This is hinted at by that short passage, And the Nations were angry. Which
anger, according to the sense of all Expositors, is their Anger and Envy
conceived at the Rising of the Witnesses and fall of the City, and exquisitely
Antithetal to the Acclamations in Heaven, and Doxology of the Elders. These
things strike so powerfully and strongly to raise this sense, that a man must
be very dull and stupid, or wilfully blind, that does not perceive it, and
readily agree to it.

a And yet the Remarker does not stick to say, That the Nations Anger is that
for which the wrath of God is there said to come upon them, and not their Anger
or exulcerate Rage at the Reformation, which anger is made to be the first
Vial, but cannot be so, as is showed in Remarks, etc. But, I say, this Hellish
Envy and immoderate Rage, they being given up to evil spirits to actuate them,
that this is the very first Vial poured upon them, I have sufficiently proved
against his Remarks in its proper place, and therefore need not here repeat it.
And [Thy wrath is come] refers to the revenge on these Bloud-suckers, who by
this intoxication will make themselves obnoxious thereto. Which therefore is
rightly referred to the third Vial. But for one to bring in by head and
shoulders here the wrath of the Dragon in another Vision, and in that part
thereof which respects things a-many hundred years before, yea above a
thousand, when there is so plainly before his face a fresh and notorious
occasion of new conceived wrath, is to resolve to say any thing rather than
profess himself to have nothing to say.

b Secondly, As to what relates to the sixth Vial; Here he runs into the like
extravagance, interpreting the Temple of God in Heaven of the Emperors
embracing the Christian profession, applying to this part of the Vision, which
respects things after the Rising of the Witnesses, (as is manifestly proved
against his Remarks) that which happened above a thousand years before their
Rising. And for that significant Symbol of the Conversion of the Jews, which
Judicious Interpreters of the Apocalypse conceive will be about the sixth Vial;
What a puerile piece of Sophistry is that to put it off by saying, They will
then be no more concerned in the Ark of the Covenant, than the Christians; as
if it could not belong to them then, because they would be Christians? But it
may signify notwithstanding that God will then within the compass of the sixth
Vial have an eye to his everlasting Covenant he made with the Jews, and so
convert them to Christianity. And it will be always true, that this was a
prophetic Type and prefiguration thereof, even when they are turned
Christians. And lastly, as to the Earthquake and Hail that does so palpably
answer to the seventh Vial; That it really does so, and does not respect any
Revolutions upon the Pagan Emperors turning Christians, I have in my Answer to
his Remarks upon chap. 11. verse. 19. abundantly demonstrated. And therefore it
must necessarily glance at the seventh Vial. So that it being so plain, that
the Residue of this Vision is a more imperfect signification of the things that
the Vision of the Vials does more fully signify, the argument holds good that
the Vials must be placed at the beginning of the seventh Trumpet or second
Joint of the two first Visions of the Opened book, that they may do the same
service to those two Visions that the third Vision in Daniel does to the two
precedent Visions there.

c And it is worth the observing, That as the Vision of the pouring forth the
Vials themselves, is much more full than the slighter account of those affairs
in this present Vision, chap. 11. So the Preamble to the Vision of the pouring
out of the Vials is much more large than the Preamble to their more obscure
Compendium here. And farthermore, That as those Acclamations in Heaven, and
Doxology of the Elders is upon some real overthrow of the Babylonish party, and
victory of the Apostolic party, which are called the Witnesses; So the
Triumphal Song of Moses and the Lamb must be upon the like victory, and I doubt
not but the very same. The Doxology of the Elders is a Song of Thanksgiving
plainly: We give thee thanks, O Lord God Almighty, because thou have taken to
thee thy great power, and have reigned. To which answers the Annunciation of
the second Angel, chap. 14. Babylon is fallen, is fallen (not will fall) the
great City; of which a tenth part fell at the Rising of the Witnesses. And in
the Song of Moses and the Lamb it is said; All Nations shall come and worship
before thee for thy Judgments are made manifest, and this before the pouring
out of the Vials, viz. in that partial fall of Babylon and Rising of the
Witnesses. Thus strongly do these three bind one with another, and one would
think invincibly. But what says the Remarker to this? The Acclamations in
Heaven at the seventh Trumpet, are in no-wise applicable to the Rising of the
Witnesses, and nor they nor the Doxology of the Elders do answer to the
Triumphal Song, chap. 15. which indeed is no such Song as is showed in Remarks,
etc. This is a mere sullen denying of a thing without giving any reason for it.
That there should be Acclamations in Heaven upon the fall of Babylon and Rising
of the Witnesses, and ushered in with the sound of a Trumpet, and yet should
not be applicable thereto, is very humourously and shamelesly spoken. And I
have produced reasons to prove that the Doxology of the Elders does answer to
the Song of Moses and the Lamb already, and the Remarker none in his Remarks,
that this Song of Moses and the Lamb is not a Triumphal Song. So that things
are hitherto firm in themselves, and the Remarker only obstinate.

But he comes in at last with this pretense, That the Acclamations and Doxology
at the seventh Trumpet are too great to be applied to the Rising of the
Witnesses. To which may be added, that they being after the sounding of the
seventh Trumpet, are rather for the effects of it, than for the fruits of the
close of the sixth, which is the Rising of the Witnesses. But as to the first;
He must be of a very niggardly gratitude that can think that either those
Acclamations in Heaven or Doxology of the Elders exceed so illustrious a
Providence as the Rising of the Witnesses, wherein so many Kingdoms,
Principalities and Provinces became the Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ;
nor is it said that all Kingdoms then became his. So that the form of speech is
strictly within compass: And yet these may be looked upon but as the Primitiae
of what was after to accrue thereto, and so that indefinite Assertion may be
enlarged to what is comprised in future hope and expectation. And in answer to
the second I say, The Acclamations and Doxology are not after the sounding of
the seventh Trumpet, but commence with it; But the sounding is mentioned first
for the better embellishing the Cortex, it ushering in, as it were, those
Heavenly Acclamations and Doxology of the Elders. And though they may glance at
more enlarged hopes of future Accessions, yet the principal Object and Occasion
of this Thanksgiving is the actual Rising of the Witnesses: And were it not so,
this signal Providence and illustrious Victory would be without any Doxology or
Thanksgiving, which is grossly absurd; that there should be no shout nor sign of
joy at such a surprising Providence as this, namely, at the Reviving of the two
Witnesses when they had lain slain three days and an half in the streets of the
City, nor at their ascending in a cloud into Heaven in the view of all the
people, the tenth part of their City, that slew them, falling in the mean time
by an Earthquake, and many thousands of their enemies buried in the ruins. How
incredible, how indecorous is it that so happy a Catastrophe of the Witnesses
sufferings as this, should pass without a Plaudite? Therefore it is a senseless
thing not to make the Rising of the Witnesses and the fall of the City the
Object of those Acclamations, and of the Doxology of the Elders, and contrary
to the usual mode of the Apocalypse, that ever closes the good success of the
Church with some Indications of Joy and Thankfulness, as chap. 12. verse. 10,
12. chap. 19. verse. 1. and again verse. 21. which concludes with a feast of Joy
and Thanksgiving for the victory of the Rider of the white Horse.

d And now to go on, mindless, in what follows, of the Remarker's haughty
verbosity the fruits of an heated Melancholy and a crazied fancy, which makes
him reproach the most sound and useful Truths. I will only take notice of
what is most material he says on this present argument. He says it was
advisedly done of the Expositor to omit instancing in the words that do so
glance at the fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh Vials, because it is so hard to
do it. But I answer, The Expositor omitted it, because it is so easy for any
one to do, that reads his Expositions of this part of this Vision, chap. 14.
and that of the Vials, chap. 16. How these comport one with another, is
manifest. For the Mystical Interpretation of the fourth Vial shows in what a
wretched and damnable condition they are in, that adhere to the Papacy, their
sad case being so manifest out of the word of God, which is the Sun, a Lamp
unto our feet, and a light unto our paths. And this answers to verse. 9, 10, 11.
of chap. 14. where eternal Torment and damnation is denounced to them that
worship the Beast and his Image, etc. And it is told in what unquietness of
conscience they are in, that in the light of those times adventure to do so.
And for verse. 12. [Here is the patience of the Saints] (that will not go
against their consciences, but rather suffer;) that answers to that part of the
fourth Vial [And men were scorched with great heat, and blasphemed the Name of
God] which Rage the Mother of Persecution does hugely well comport with the
affliction of the Saints, and the patience they are put to for that time. But
under the fifth Vial there is better news, especially from the Political sense
thereof, as if there would be some such change of affairs in the behalf of the
Evangelici, that the seat of the Beast would grow unfrequented, and his Kingdom
considerably clouded and darkened, upon which sense therefore of the fifth Vial
the 13 verse of chap. 14. may very well be thought to glance, [Blessed are the
dead that dye in the Lord, for their works do follow them] i. e. the effect or
success of their works and labors for the advancement of the Kingdom of Christ
and the fall of Antichrist. [From henceforth] from such a time of the Sardian
Interval, viz. under the fifth Vial will the scales turn, and the Evangelical
power begin to be preponderant to the Antichristian. Now the sixth Vial
concerns the Conversion of the Jews happily with some other Eastern people. How
fitly therefore and plainly does the Harvest, mentioned chap. 14.15. glance at
the sixth Vial? For conversion to the Gospel is reaping the Harvest, as our
Savior himself has used the similitude, Ioh. 4.35. And lastly, what an assured
Complication of time and affairs there is betwixt the Vision of the Wine Press,
the seventh Vial and the battle of the Rider on the white Horse, is so fully
made out by the Expositor, that no man that has read what he has writ, can
doubt of it.

e Farthermore, Whereas the Remarker says it does not appear, of what use the
so glancing at the affairs of the Vials here, and the slight Intimations of
them aforesaid at the seventh Trumpet can be, save only to give color to the
placing of the Vials in the seventh Trumpet; I say that that use alone were
abundantly sufficient for the Spirit of Prophecy to frame these two first
Visions of the Opened book so, as that by those Intimations and Glances not
only color, but sound evidence may be given that all the Vials are placed
within the seventh Trumpet. For from hence it will infallibly follow, that they
are to be placed after the Rising of the Witnesses, and that the Rising of the
Witnesses was the late Reformation begun by Luther, etc. which is of vast
consequence to be understood and acknowledged, That God may have condign praise
and thanks for so great a mercy to his Church; That broils and stirs of
Fantastical and Fanatical people may be prevented, who are apt to be
encouraged to attempt Innovations upon that false conceit that the Rising of
the Witnesses is near, and that then forsooth, that very Reformation will be
indeed, that is the true Rising of the Witnesses. Whenas most certainly the
Vision is accomplished already. It will also beget a just esteem of the present
Reformation, and make men with quiet of conscience and cheerfulness of mind
hold communion with the established National Churches, which is good for all
the Reformed Nations and Kingdoms. And lastly, it will, whenas things shall
appear so well constituted without, make men that have any sense of, or
propension to Religion, and a desire to excel therein, to look within
themselves, and to use all their zeal and heat against those faults that are to
be reformed within; as Pride, Self-conceitedness, Envy, Wrathfulness,
Implacableness, Censoriousness, Covetousness, Persidiousness, Contemptuousness,
Malepertness against their Betters, Indulging the use of the Creature,
Unconversableness, Cavils against public administration of affairs, and
despising and speaking ill of them that be in Authority, with whatever other
vices they discover in themselves; I say, they having no proper Object without
to exercise their zeal on, in reference to matters of Religion, it will be more
hopeful they will turn it inward against their own corruptions; but now falsely
fansying so much defect or corruption in the established Religion and
Ecclesiastic Constitutions, they are prone foolishly to imagine themselves
Saints, for their bitter inveying against the publicly constituted Religion,
and the administration of things there; when as they lie cold enough to that
necessary inward Reformation, and are little sensible of it. Wherefore, as I
said, this use alone of the Intimations and Glances of the two first Visions,
on the Vials, namely that we may thereby be assured that the Vials are all to
be placed within the seventh Trumpet, is sufficient that the frame of those two
Visions should be so contrived.

But questionless there are other Uses also, which would be too long to note.
These Intimations and Glances give the better assurance of the sense of the
Vials. As in the sixth Vial for example, which Interpreters expound of the
Conversion of the Jews, understanding them by the Kings of the East. But there
is nothing to signify conversion there. But in this glance here, by the
mentioning of Harvest, conversion is implied. And if any one will say, There Is
nothing signifying the Jews yet, I say the Intimation in the first Vision
respecting the sixth Vial, is the Ark of the Covenant which must needs point at
the Jews. But I cannot insist on these things.

f Now let us see what account the Remarker gives of those verses of this
second Vision, which the Expositor says, do glance at the four last Vials. But
he begins a verse higher, viz. with the 8 th verse, which, says he, is
supposed to glance at the second Joint of the Prophecy, viz. that voice of the
Angel, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, etc. This, says he, relates to the Revolt
of the Waldenses, etc. Which is plainly to make the Angel pronounce a gross
untruth. For Babylon was not then fallen, but stood till about four hundred
years after they appeared. But in the first Vision, at the close of the sixth
Trumpet, where the Witnesses are said to rise, there the City is said to fall
in part, and by the tenor of the second Vision, Babylon there can be fallen
but in part, the affairs of the last Vials being so plainly glanced at after
the mention of Babylon's fall. So that the fall of that City in part, chap.
11.13. and the fall of Babylon, chap. 14.8. do more fully expound one another,
the latter plainly declaring that City to be Babylon, and the former telling us
the fall is but partial: which the glances on the last Vials in the latter
Vision do fitly agree with. So that the fall of the City in the first Vision
must of necessity be the fall of Babylon in the second. And indeed what can it
refer to but that? And who but an exorbitant Humourist, that being mentioned in
the first Vision, can imagine any other meant but it in the second? Especially
if he consider that these two first Visions of the Opened book comprised, the
former in chap. 11. the latter in the 12, 13 and 14 Chapters, begin from the
same Epoch, and end in the same time, concluding with the seventh Vial; and
that they have parts all along correspondent one with another, and thereby give
to one another mutual light. Wherefore as there is War, viz. betwixt the Beast
and the Witnesses in the first Vision, so there is betwixt the Beast and the
Saints or Soldiers of the Lamb in the second; and as there is an actual
victory of the Witnesses, and a fall of the great City in the first Vision, so
there must be some thing actual in the second Vision, that must answer to so
notable an Occurrence in the first. And what is this but the second Angel's
Annunciation of the fall of Babylon, which both answers to the fall of the
great City in the first Vision, and also gives light thereto by plainly showing
it is Babylon that is there meant, and that Babylon's fall is but in part?
Babylon, chap. 14. shows that the fall of the great City, chap. 11. is the fall
of Babylon, and the fall of the great City, chap. 11. being but in part, shows
that the fall of Babylon, chap. 14. is but in part also, viz. the tenth part of
the City. Thus do these two correspondent passages of these Visions give mutual
light one to another. And there being nothing in the whole second Vision that
answers to that notable occurrence in the first, but this; Babylon in the
second Vision and the fall thereof must answer to the fall of the great City in
the first, and the Rising of the Witnesses; that is to say, The City is in
part, actually fallen in the first Vision, therefore (Prophecy being an
anticipatory History, and these two prophetical Visions corresponding one with
another) it ought to be, and is so in the second. What can be more clear? And
therefore the City fallen in the first Vision being at the close of the sixth
Trumpet, Babylon fallen in the second Vision, must be also at the close of the
sixth Trumpet, and at the Rising of the Witnesses; which was the thing to be
demonstrated.

Now let us proceed to the Remarker's account of those verses of the second
Vision, which the Expositor says glance at the four last Vials. The 9, 10, 11,
and 12 th verses, which glance at the fourth Vial, he will have to respect all
the Vials as a Monition. But if merely they did so, being the effusion of the
Vials is for the confusion of the Beast, and for the victory of the Saints, it
would not then be said, Here is the patience of the Saints, etc. but, Here is
their Joy and Exultation. So that this is a confounded account, and absonous,
the Expositor's distinct, that makes it respect chiefly the fourth Vial, not
all of them alike, and is agreeable to the nature of the thing. And the same
may be said of the 13 th verse, That the Expositor's account is more distinct
that makes it relate to the fifth Vial for the reason above alleged, that the
Sardian Church will emerge then out of some more than ordinary affliction which
it was under, during the fourth Vial, which affliction is predicted or menaced
in the Epistle to that Church. But all this is lost in the confused account of
the Remarker. The 14, 15 and 16 th verses, which respect the sixth Vial, he
will have to respect the Rising of the Witnesses, which is a thing plainly
impossible, it having been demonstrated, and will be still farther, that all
the Vials are within the seventh Trumpet after the Rising of the Witnesses; And
it was more particularly even now proved, that the fall of Babylon in this
Vision mentioned, synchronizeth with the fall of the City mentioned in the
former Vision, and with the Rising of the Witnesses; and therefore what things
are prefigured in these 14, 15 and 16 verses, must be after the Rising of the
Witnesses. And by the bye I will here note, the fall of Babylon synchronizing,
as has been proved, with the fall of the great City, chap. 11. and the
Remarker making the third Angel a Premonitor to all the Vials, it necessarily
follows, from what I have proved, and from what he himself asserts, that all
the Vials follow the fall of the great City and Rising of the Witnesses. The
17, 18, 19 and last verses, which glance at the seventh Vial, he will have to
respect the preparation of the Antichristian Party to the great battle at the
seventh Vial, and the issue thereof. And why not, I pray you, the Battle it
self also? So that here the Remarker, (if he would speak out) and the Expositor
do agree, and he, as well as the Expositor, makes the second Vision end with
the seventh Vial, as it is plain the first Vision does, which ends with an
Earthquake and great Hail, which in the seventh Vial are said to be Hailstones
of a Talent weight, which are great indeed.

The first of the four arguments mentioned at the beginning, viz. That the
placing of the Vials at the second Joint of the two first Visions does
illustrate the Remainders of those two Visions, several passages of the said
Remainders respecting several of the Vials, and receiving light therefrom, and
also giving light thereto, being thus unexceptionably and irrefutably
maintained, we will proceed to the three remaining. The Expositor's second
Reason for placing the seven last plagues, which are those of the Vials, after
the sixth Trumpet, or in the second Joint of the abovesaid Visions is this. The
six Trumpets are a set or number of plagues, and mentioned before these of the
Vials, which is another set of plagues, which whole set are called the last
plagues; Wherefore this whole set must be placed after the other, unless some
necessary Reason withstand. The answering this second argument, the Remarker
either heedlesly forgets, or discreetly declines, it being undeniable but the
natural Position is that which the Expositor contends for. The Expositor's
third argument is this, That though in reference to all the six plagues of the
Trumpets, the seven last plagues are rightly so called, yet the two later of
the six Trumpets being called Wo-Trumpets, that is to say, Plague-Trumpets in a
special manner, and that inflicted for the Pagano-christian Idolatry in the
Empire, of which the Western Empire did not repent upon the destruction of the
Eastern for that wickedness, that the seven plagues may be called in a more
special manner the seven last plagues, in reference to the two preceding
Plague-Trumpets, which immediately follow the fourth Trumpet; and that upon
these two later Plague-Trumpets being past, the seven last plagues or
Vial-plagues with the last Plague-Trumpet should succeed, and be inflicted upon
these impenitent Idolaters of the West part of the Empire. And the Text says
expressly, The second Woe is past, that is, the second Plague is, viz. the Plague
of the Euphratean Horsemen, and the third Woe or Plague comes quickly, and
then the third or last Plague-Trumpet sounds; and what can it breathe out but
the seven last plagues, which is the Title of the Vials? This is the
Expositor's third argument, and a plain and sound one too, and such as the
Remarker had the discretion to say nothing to. And lastly, for making the
Vision of the Vials a supplement to Chapter the eleventh, it is a sound and
unexceptionable conclusion from Premises the Remarker can never enervate, nor
is there any thing in his Remarks which I have not fully answered, nor has he
said any thing, nor will be ever able to say any thing which will disprove the
placing of the Vials in the seventh Trumpet, whereby that Vision may be
understood to be a less fit Supplement to the Vision in the eleventh Chapter.

Page 282. a Whenas it is argued that all the seven Vials must be placed within
the seventh Trumpet, because they follow a great Victory and Triumph over the
Beast, which must needs be the Rising of the Witnesses, etc. There is no such
Victory and Triumphal Song precedent to the Vials as is supposed (as is showed
in Remarks) but only a Song of admiring and glorifying God for his Judgments
to be executed by the Vials, and this sung by the Victors over the Beast during
the Antichristian reign, viz. by the Sealed Company of the Lamb, etc. b And
whereas the fall of Babylon, chap. 14.8. and of the City, chap. 11.13. are made
to synchronize with the Rising of the Witnesses, and to signify the victory
gained by them, how groundless this conceit is, see Remarks on the said chap,
11.13. and chap. 14.8. Yet this is p. 282. called invincible evidence; and it is
said there, that nothing can be more demonstrable, whenas nothing is there
demonstrated, but only, How the weakness of arguments to place the Vials
within the seventh Trumpet, is supplied with strength of confidence and
imagination. c But whereas the Doxology, chap. 11.16, 17. and the joyful
Annunciation of Babylon's fall, chap. 14.8. and the Triumphal Song, chap. 15.
are made to fall in together, and signify the same Song of Triumph; this is
inconsistent with the making the said chap. 14.8. to signify the same with
chap. 11.13. which precedes the seventh Trumpet, whenas the Doxology follows
it. d And whereas Sardis is said to signify a Song of Joy, and to fall in with
the said three Songs, it signifies also a Remnant, to which sense of the word
the Epistle seems chiefly to allude. So that the harmonious Coincidency that is
imagined of all these supposed Triumphal Songs, is no better than the clinking
of the Bells, as one thinks.

Ans. The second and third argument of the Expositor; S. E. thought fit to take
no notice of, as was observed in our Answer to the foregoing Remark. a But here
in the beginning of this he vouchsafes to consider his fourth argument, viz.
That all the seven Vials must be placed within the seventh Trumpet, because
they follow a great Victory and Triumph over the Beast, which must needs be the
Rising of the Witnesses, etc. To which S. E. boldly answers; There is no such
Victory and Triumphal Song precedent to the Vials, as is supposed (as is showed
in Remarks) but only a Song of admiring and glorifying God for his judgments
to be executed, by the Vials, and this sung by the Victors over the Beast,
during the Antichristian Reign, viz. by the Sealed company, with the Lamb, etc.
This is stoutly to deny a thing, but here is no reason produced for the Denial;
and what is pretended in the Remarks, I have there shown the Invalidity
thereof. And since, in the maintaining the first of the four arguments, page
309. l. 16. I have abundantly proved that as well the Song of Moses and the
Lamb, as the Doxology of the Elders, and the Annunciation of the fall of
Babylon is upon an actual Victory and Judgments of God on the Antichristian
party. And again have demonstrated page 317. That the fall of Babylon, chap.
14. and the fall of the tenth part of the City is the same, and consequently
that Babylon's fall there is in the close of the sixth Trumpet; And therefore
the Residue of that Vision glancing at several of the Vials, as has been
proved, it is plain that not only the Vials follow the sixth Trumpet, but that
the Song of Moses and the Lamb, that immediately precedes the Vials, is a
joyful acknowledgment of a real victory over the Antichristian party in a
Political sense, as well as that Annunciation of the Angel, That Babylon is
fallen, and the Doxology of the Elders upon the Rising of the Witnesses. Which
Annunciation of the Angel, and Doxology of the Elders a more brief and
compendious adumbration of the Vials does follow. And therefore as these parts
are the same with the Vials, though in a contracted way, so the Annunciation of
the Angel and Doxology of the Elders are conceived to be the same with the Song
of Moses and the Lamb, though in a more contracted way.

In brief, The fall of Babylon, chap. 14. being in the close of the sixth
Trumpet, as well as the Rising of the Witnesses, chap. 11. and a more
compendious description of the Vials immediately following each of them; it is
plain that the Song of Moses and the Lamb prefixed before the Vials, has a very
fit and fresh Object, the fall of Babylon and the Rising of the Witnesses, and
worth the praising and glorifying God for his Judgments therein; and it is said
in the Song, All Nations shall come and worship before thee, for thy judgments
are made manifest. Again, The fall of Babylon and the Rising of the Witnesses,
cannot but imply a victory over the Beast; and there is in this Song mention of
those that had got the victory over the Beast, and over his Image, etc.
Thirdly, The fall of Babylon is really the fall of Egypt, the Pontifician
Power being denoted by both, and therefore the Rising of the Witnesses implies
a deliverance from the yoke and bondage of that Egyptian Pharaoh, and his
overthrow in the Red Sea. And those that sing this Song, are said to stand
(...), that is on the shore of that Sea that was converted into Glass or Ice,
Exodus 15.8. while the Israelites passed over, and to sing the Song of Moses the
servant of God, etc. Fourthly and lastly, the Song is exquisitely framed to
signify a Thanksgiving for a victory and deliverance actually obtained; and
therefore if we cannot be certain that it is for such an actual deliverance and
victory, we can be certain of the sense of nothing. This, I hope, is invincible
evidence, nor can any thing be more demonstrable, and may deserve better
language than what the rude Remarker gives, viz. That nothing is here
demonstrated, but only, how the weakness of arguments is supplied with
strength of confidence and imagination.

b And now for the fall of Babylon synchronizing with the Rising of the
Witnesses, there wants no new proof thereof here. What has been said already on
this Remark, proves it over and over again. And if any one will consult my
Answer on S. E. his Remarks upon chap. 11. and chap. 14. it will be evident
unto him, that what he says there signifies nothing to the invalidating this
present Position. So that it is a groundless boast of S. E. to make any such
Reference.

c And for the next clause of this Remark, I say, the Expositor does not make
chap. 14.8. to signify the same with chap. 11.13. For this latter contains
only the fall of the great City, but the former the bringing the joyful News
of the fall of the great City or of Babylon, which joyful Annunciation
supposes what happens chap. 11.13. and the Annunciation of it, it self follows
in order of time after that Accident, as well as the Acclamations in Heaven, or
Doxology of the Elders.

d And now lastly, for that boyish Clause of S. E. so grave a Divine as he may
seem to be from his skill in the holy tongue, whereby he is able to note, that
Sar in Sardis may as well signify a Remnant as a Song; though it be but a
childish chiming piece of wit of his thus to allude to that old Proverb, As the
fool thinks, so the bell clinketh; yet to give him his due, he shows himself
a man of no small judgment in the manner of his Application, he omitting the
mention of Fool, and so closely reserving that Title to himself. In which that
he has done himself all imaginable Right, I shall prove in that he has so
fondly substituted (...), which signifies Reliquiae, for (...), which signifies
Canticum in the Aetymological account of the word Sardis. For his reasoning
here is wonderful weak and sorry. For First, Though Sar in Sardis signifies as
well a Remnant as a Song, yet it signifying both, and the latter sense
complying so well with the joyful Annunciation of the Angel, with the
Acclamations in Heaven and Doxology of the Elders, and with the Song of Moses
the servant of God, and of the Lamb, which all respect the commencement of the
Sardian Church, the Expositor had most solid and unexceptionable reason to make
choice of that sense of Sar in Sardis that comported so manifestly with the
Song of Moses and those other significations of Joy upon the fall of Babylon
and Rising of the Witnesses, and the commencing of the Sardian Interval of the
Church the late happy Reformation, so many strings drawing and tyeing us to
that determinate sense rather than any other. Secondly, Suppose Sar to signify
Remnant, how will he rid himself of the latter part of the word, (...), Dis,
which signifies Joy. So that this Remnant will be a Remnant of Joy however, or
a joyful Remnant. Who therefore cannot but break forth into Doxologies,
Praises and Thanksgivings for so great a deliverance? It would be a very
senseless and mute Remnant, if it were not so. But being so, there is a real
agreement and harmony betwixt even this Etymon of Sardis, and those Songs and
Doxologies above mentioned. But thirdly and lastly, To make Sar in Sardis to
signify Reliquiae or a Remnant, in reference to the emerging of the Sardian
Church upon the Rising of the Witnesses and the fall of Babylon is an apert
Repugnancy or gross Nonsense, those Kingdoms and Principalities then gained by
Christ out of the hands of Antichrist being the Primitiae of his Acquists by
his Wars and Victories, not the Reliquiae, and a Pledge of greater Accessions
to his Dominion to be made hereafter. So that this sense of Sar, which S. E.
would have, is utterly unapplicable to the Church of Sardis. And therefore
must, as the Expositor would have it, signify Canticum, not Reliquiae, and
Sardis [(...)] a Song of Joy, or Joy breaking out into Singing. So that this
Exception of S. E. is so very slight and sorry, that the grave Divine seems to
have been (in some more freakish fit) allured thereto, merely that he might
vent his boyish wit of thinking and clinking, with which he seems as much
tickled as a Squirrel with the Music she makes in her Wire-Cage, with Bells
hanging over it.

Page 283. a Whereas it is said here, that as Mr. Mede has placed the Vials,
only the seventh follows the sixth Trumpet; he has placed all of them
within the sixth Trumpet. b For the Bohemian War on the suffering of John Huss
was many years after the taking of Constantinople by the Turks, at which the
sixth Trumpet must commence, if not sooner. c So that though only the seventh
Vial follows the expiring of the sixth Trumpet, yet all of them follow the
commencement of it. d And whereas its argued that all the seven Vials must be
after the seventh Trumpet, because they are called the seven last plagues; e
it is a strange crippling the sense of the words, to make them serve the end
designed. But (as it is said in Remarks) they are most properly called the last
plagues in respect of the precedent plagues of the Opened book, viz. those
signified by the Monitions of the two precedent Angels, chap. 14. and the
plagues the Witnesses smote the Earth with, chap. 11. yet also with respect to
the Trumpets. But it is enough to denominate them the last Plagues, if they be
the last Series of Plagues, though there be a former Series of Plagues
unexpired when they began.

Ans. This Remark abounds with mistakes. For, First, a Mr. Mede has not placed
all the Vials within the sixth Trumpet, as appears by all the printed Schemes
of his Synchronisms that I have met with, in which the seventh Vial is placed
within the seventh Trumpet. And besides, he says expressly in his little
Treatise of Synchronisms, Part 2. Synchron. 3. Phiala septima quae
consummationis phiala est concurret cum initio Tubae septimae.

b Secondly, He makes the Bohemian War on the suffering of John Huss to be many
years after the taking of Constantinople. Whenas the taking of Constantinople
by Sultan Muhamed was in the year 1453. but the Bellum Hussiticum in the year
1420, above thirty years before. But supposing it was as many years after, how
does this prove that Mr. Mede places all the Vials within the sixth Trumpet? He
indeed makes the Hussites concerned in the first Vial, but then the sooner the
Bellum Hussiticum began, it were the more hopeful the Vials would end within
the sixth Trumpet; but the arguing from the later beginning of that War, I must
confess passes my reach to discern what the force of the reasoning is, and the
other way would be very little to the purpose.

c Thirdly, He seems plainly to contradict himself in placing all the seven
Vials within the sixth Trumpet before, and now letting the seventh Vial
commence after the expiring of the sixth Trumpet.

d Fourthly, Another gross mistake of the Remarker is, in that he makes the
Expositor to argue for the placing of all the seven Vials after the seventh
Trumpet, whenas he argues only for the placing them after the sixth. For after
the seventh is after the end of the World. But his arguing for the placing them
after the sixth Trumpet is very firm and strong. Because all seven of them are
called the seven last plagues, therefore not one of them is to begin and expire
before any of the six Trumpet-plagues, or the second Wo-Trumpet or
Plague-Trumpet expire, else that Vial that did so would not be one of the last
plagues, this second Plague-Trumpet, suppose, being later than it, or expiring
later than it.

e And this is no crippling the sense of [last] but maintaining the proper
sense thereof, and indeed the only sense. For how can that be said in
succession to be the last, that has a later, that outlasts it? And that the
seven last plagues respect the six first plagues, and consequently the first
and second Wo-Trumpet or Plague-Trumpets properly so called, the Remarker
himself cannot deny. And the Plagues of the six Trumpets are the very Plagues
that the Witnesses are said to smite the Earth withal. And it is wonderfully
weak and freakish to run to the Vision in chap. 14. for a plague or two, in
respect of which, the Vials may be called the seven last plagues, viz. to those
of the two precedent Angels there. Whenas the former of them is no
Plague-Angel, that is, no Inflicter of Plagues, but a Preacher of pure Worship,
and an advertizer of the approaching judgments of God against Idolaters, and
yet of no other than such as are comprised within the six first Trumpets, the
fifth and sixth particularly; And the second a Declarer of that actual judgment
befallen Babylon at the close of the sixth Trumpet; And then comes the third
Angel, whose voice, according to the Remarker's own confession, is only a
Premonition in general, touching all the seven Vial-plagues. Wherefore it is
not a Plague it self, and no more were the Advertisements of the other two
Angels. But I have really proved it to be a glance at the Plague of the fourth
Vial, and that after the fall of Babylon and Rising of the Witnesses, which
things are nothing to the tooth of S. E. the Remarker, but exceeding true.

And yet here I would have the Remarker to observe how unawares he has stumbled
upon Truth, in making the third Angel a Premonitor of the seven last plagues,
viz. the Vial-plagues and them to be last in respect of the plagues the first
and second Angel give notice of, which undoubtedly are the plagues comprised
within the Intervals of the first and second Wo-Trumpets, or Plague-Trumpets,
properly so called. The Vial-plagues, I say, are according to him the last
plagues, in respect of the Plagues of those two Trumpets, which is the very
thing I contend for.

And lastly, whereas, he says, It Is enough to denominate them last Plagues, if
they be the last Series of Plagues, though there be a former Series of Plagues
unexpired when they begun, is a thing said, but not proved. Yea very harsh and
repugnant it is to conceive. For whereas former and later here, is in respect
of Time, which is one single line of succession; whatever is terminated before
a certain term thereof (as in the line where the whole line of Time is AB, and
B the utmost term thereof) is necessarily said to be before that Term, suppose
B, and B to be later than it. So that none of those Divisions Ac, cd, de, of,
fg, can be said to be later in succession (which is the thing looked at in such
order of time) than the whole AB. Those parts are indeed Synchronal to the
parts of AB, but do not succeed it, and therefore cannot be later than it.
Besides, if there were conceived two such Series or (...), if you will, that
is, Catenae, or links of Plagues, the former would be properly called (...),
the latter (...), but if this were, the seven last plagues as to time and order
they would have been called (...), not (...), which is the same with (...). But
it being said (...), the seven last plagues, the plea of the Remarker has no
color at all. For it being said of every one of them, that it is (...), it
must be so in respect of all the foregoing plagues in the former conceived
Series, else it will be falsely called the last, nor would there be seven last
plagues in number. For no more of the seven can be said in respect of the
precedent plagues to be the last, than such as follow all the plagues precedent
after they have expired, that is to say, Unless the first of the last plagues
expire after the last of the former Series, the enunciation is false. This is
the plain, easy and natural sense of things. And besides, by other
demonstrative reasons it has been proved above, that all the seven last plagues
follow the sixth Trumpet, so that this Critical Altercation was the less
needful, and the rather because it is plain to any one at first sight, that is
not blinded with prejudice, That every one of the seven last plagues must be
later than any one of those plagues, in respect of which they are termed the
last.

Page 285. There Is a stronger Objection in Remarks against the conceit of
making the three days and an half of the Witnesses lying dead, signify the
same with three times and an half, than the second here mentioned, viz. That
the dwellers on Earth are said to rejoice over them when they are slain,
because they tormented them ( viz. by their prophesying and smiting the Earth,
etc.) but they prophesied 1260 days, and during that time smote the Earth with
the plagues; Therefore this slaying of them, are rejoicing thereat for putting
an end thereby to those Torments, must be after the 1260 days.

Ans. The Expositor's second Objection is, which he answers in that page, That
if the three days and an half be the same with the three times and an half,
which is the same with the 1260 days or 42 months, (which are but various
expressions of the three times and an half) then the Witnesses will be
conceived to speak and prophecy while they lie dead. But now this stronger
Objection of the Remarker, as he imagines it, which yet is not a jot stronger
than the other, is this: That the dwellers on the Earth are said to rejoice
over the Witnesses when they are slain, because they tormented them by their
prophesying and smiting the Earth, but they prophesied 1260 days, and during
that time smote the Earth with the plagues; Therefore this slaying of them and
rejoicing thereat for putting an end thereby to those torments, must be after
the 1260 days. This is a mighty argument with the Remarker. But his confidence
therein arises out of his ignorance of the nature of a Prophetic Henopoeia,
which exhibits things done or suffered at several times and repeatedly, under
one show, or at once, as if it were one continued Action or Suffering. The
repeated therefore killing of the Witnesses, whether naturally or politically,
as occasion was given, at several times is expressed by one killing of them;
The tormenting of the dwellers on Earth by the Witnesses prophesying at several
times, is represented as one continued prophesying; And the Rejoicing of the
dwellers upon Earth for their being rid of the Torments the vexatious
prophesying of these Witnesses put them to, being repeated as often as the
killing of the Witnesses was, at which they found themselves at ease, toties
quoties, is yet exhibited under the show of one Rejoicing. This is most
certainly the nature of a Prophetic Henopoeia, to represent things thus, which
the Remarker not considering, imagines a great strength in an Objection, which
in reality has no strength at all.

Page 289. a As for the first Reason for the said conceit of the Witnesses,
etc. Apocalyptick Nasuteness and Sagacity will not lead one to hold an opinion
against which there is such an unanswerable Objection as I take that now
mentioned to be. b As to the second Reason, Half a year in so short a time as
three years and an half may be considerable to take notice of. And perhaps it
may be also taken notice of in reference to the Profanation of the Temple by
Antiochus Epiphanes, and shutting up the Heavens from rain by Eliah (both which
were for the same time) and so may have partly a Symbolical signification, viz.
that this shall be a like short time of Trial, and have the like happy issue.
And in Rev. 9.15. There is a prediction that reaches to an Hour, which what
sense is to be given thereof, this may admit of the same. And the time here
signified seems to be like a short discord before a sweet close, and such a
turn of affairs as was Iulian's Apostasy before the establishment of
Christianity in the Empire, and as also was the Relapse in Queen Mary's days
before the settlement of the Reformation; so is this such a turn before the
advancement of Christianity to that Ascendent-state it will gain over its
enemies by the Rising of the Witnesses. As to the third Reason, c This
condition of the Witnesses will not be so sad as is imagined, but they are
likely to be very heart-whole, and to possess their souls in patience and
comfortable hopes of what they have a prospect to be near at hand. And though
it seems so incredible that they should recover in so short a time, yet it is
not so, that the commencement of their Recovery should be within so short a
time, but their Rising and absolute Recovery may continue long, though it will
be to a much better condition than they were in before. d As to the fourth
Reason, The Apologer himself, says he, makes their Political Death to be
represented by their mournful prophesying 1260 days; And it is also
sufficiently expressed by the suffering none to buy or sell that has not the
mark of the Beast, and also sufficiently implied by the cruel War against them.
For to be sure they would not be admitted to any Authority by those who were so
enraged against them. c As to the fifth Reason, This Persecution will chiefly
respect (as I have said) the strickt restraining of them from tormenting their
adversaries as formerly. For having so prevailed as to be about to finish their
mournful Testimony, and to begin to get the Ascedent of their Adversaries
before this turn of affairs, their Adversaries jealousy of them by reason
thereof, will make them use all watchful diligence to keep them under. f And
this Answer includes an Answer to the sixth Reason, if it need any. For this is
a different War from the former, being not to destroy, but silence and subdue.

Ans. He comes now to the Expositor's six Arguments, whereby he would prove
that the three days and an half that the Witnesses are said to lie dead, are
the same with the three times and an half, or 1260 days or 42 months. And to
the first, which is taken from the obvious answering of three Integrals and an
half, to three Integrals and an half, viz. Three days and an half to three
times and an half, the same with the 1260 days and the 42 months, he says,
That Apocalyptick Nasuteness and Sagacity will not lead one to hold an Opinion,
against which there is such an unanswerable Objection as the Objection even now
mentioned. But I have showed it to be so far from being an unanswerable
Objection, that I have fully answered it, with all ease and clearness
imaginable. I will only add, that Peganius, a very learned and pious Writer,
is of that Apocalyptick Sagacity and Nasuteness, that though he do not hold the
Witnesses already risen, but that they are to rise in the year 1860, which is
177 years hence, yet he makes the three days and an half to be the same with
the three times and an half or 1260 days.

b As for his Answer to the Expositor's second Reason, (which is, That the
Affectation of predicting to the curiosity of half a year is improbable) it is
manifold. First, That half a year in so short a time as three years and an
half, may be considerable. Secondly, That it may be taken notice of in
reference to the profanation of the Temple by Antiochus Epiphanes, and shutting
up the Heavens from rain by Eliah, and may be a Symbol of the short continuance
of the Trial, and the like happy issue. Thirdly, That there is a prediction,
Rev. 9.15. that reaches to an hour, which what sense may be given thereof,
this may admit of the same. Fourthly and lastly, That it will be such a sudden
turn of affairs as was Iulian's Apostasy before the establishment of
Christianity in the Empire, and the Relapse in Queen Mary's days before the
settlement of the Reformation.

But to the first I answer, That the whole three years and an half is so
inconsiderable, that no such small Periods of time are Typified in all the
Apocalypse by any number set down therein, the very nature of this Book of
Prophecies being such as only to prefigure the more large or general strokes
of Providence and Periods of time. So that to say half a year in respect of
three years and an half is considerable, is a mere sophistical quibble. So half
an hour would be in respect of three hours and an half, for the proportion is
alike in both. The strength of the argument is this, That the Apocalyptick
Prophecies intending to prefigure the state of no such small Periods of time by
any number, as four years suppose, nay if you will of four times four years,
that it is incredible that they should be so curious as to predescribe the
condition of just three years and an half, whenas if they had said roundly,
four years, it would have served all intents and purposes that three years and
an half could do.

To the second I answer, That the three years and an half of the Profanation of
the Temple does rather confirm the Expositor's opinion that makes the three
days and an half the three times and an half or 1260 days, the outward Court of
the Temple being profaned or trodden down by the Gentiles for that time,
according to the Vision. So that as Antiochus Epiphanes his profanation was a
Type of the Profanation and conculcation of the outer Court or holy City by the
Gentiles, so the three years and an half is likewise a Type of that Time, they
containing 1260 days to be expounded prophetically, as the three years and an
half are to be expounded. And the like is to be said of the shutting up the
Heavens from rain for three years and an half, that is, as is aforesaid for
1260 days, the time of the mournful Witnesses, during which time the
distilling of the salutiferous doctrine of the Gospel, which should descend
upon the people as a refreshing Rain was hindered. Which farther confirms that
the three days and an half is three times and an half, and refers to the state
of things in the 1260 days of the mournful Witnesses. And that therefore the
three years and an half of Antiochus his Profanation of the Temple, and the
shutting up the Heavens from Rain by Elias, are no Symbols of a short
continuance of the Trial, though they may be of the happy issue of things in
the Conclusion.

To the third I answer, That [Hour] Apoc. 9.15. signifies there the same that
time; And if half a day here will be admitted to signify half a time, the
Remarker and Expositor are agreed. For I hope he will not stick when he has
once admitted that the half day signifies half a time, to acknowledge that the
three days will signify three times; so that then it will be, Three times and
an half, or a Time and Times and half a Time, as Daniel has it, which is the
thing the Expositor contends for.

To the fourth and last I say, That the turn of affairs were very sudden indeed
upon Iulian's shorter reign than half of three years and an half; and his
Successors, as he before them, being Emperors of the whole Roman Empire might
quickly re-establish the Christian Religion therein; But if once the Reformed
Kingdoms and States, or People were overrun again with Popery, there being no
one Emperor or Head over them all, the Remarker's conceit is not credible. And
as for Queen Mary's reign, it was almost twice three years and an half, and
that Recession respected only the Dominions she was Queen of. So that if in
her time there had been as many Nations overflown again with Popery, as have
now been converted from it to the Gospel, the rest of the Witnesses would have
been left in the lurch, and lain still in the dead slate they were in before.
But the Rising ought to be general, unless there be some thing intimated to the
contrary. But lastly, it is not enough for the fulfilling of the Remarker's
sense of these three days and an half, that there be a sudden turn of things,
but that the ill plight of the Witnesses should be confined to just three years
and an half, which is a thing not only incredible, but even ridiculous for one
to conceive. But yet, all that is brought, which does not evince this, is
nothing to the purpose. And I am confident nothing will ever be brought to
evince it.

c The Remarker's Answer to the Expositor's third Reason, which is, That if the
State of the Apostolic Church be ever brought to so sad a condition as is
represented by the karcases of the two Witnesses lying dead in the streets of
the great City, it is incredible they should recover again within the space of
three years and an half. To elude the force of this argument, the Remarker
point blank against the description of the condition of the slain Witnesses,
first makes their state more joyous and comfortable than can possibly comply
with that sad Representation of them in the Type thereof. They are slain by the
Beast out of the Bottomless pit, and their dead bodies lie exposed in the
street of the great City. What a comfortable and heart-whole condition is this?
The best that can be said of it is, They are in the state of Death for the
present, but may in time be raised out of it. But for the present time, what
can be more dismal and sad? And the other trick of evading is, That though it
seems so incredible that the Witnesses should recover in so short a time, yet
it is not so that the commencement of their recovery should be within so short
a time. To which I say it is altogether incredible, that it will ever appear
that Popery has overflown the Reformed Nations, States and Kingdoms for that
short space of three years and an half just, and then at the expiring of that
half year the Recovery of the Witnesses should presently commence, the
Apocalypse, as I noted above, having no aim to design such small moments of
time, nor it being at all probable that the Pope and his Hierarchy, having once
again got the reins into their own hands, of Western Christendom should not by
their notable policy and vigilance be able to retain their power entire, for
above three years and an half together. And then in the second place I add,
there is no such distinction discernible in the Vision as to make a difference
betwixt their Recovery, and the commencement of their Recovery: Unless one
would conceive that the spirit of life from God entering into them and their
standing on their feet to be the commencement of their Recovery, and their
ascending into Heaven in a Cloud the Recovery it self. But being their Death
from which they are revived, is a Political Death; so soon as they were alive,
they were Politically alive, and their ascending into Heaven upon a call
thither is but a more full expression of the same state, or may regard more
properly those of the Witnesses that were called to the higher Ranks of
Political Offices and Honors.

d The Expositor's fourth Reason is, That if we restrain the lying dead of the
Witnesses to the three years and an half at the end of their prophesying, there
is nothing in the Vision to represent their Political Death (to which their
Resurrection relates) before that time, though they have been dead in that
sense at least 1260 years already. To which the Remarker answers, That the
Apologer himself makes the Witnesses Political Death to be represented by their
mournful prophesying 1260 days, and it is also sufficiently expressed by
suffering none to buy and sell, and by the cruel War against them. But to this
I reply, That the Apologer of Expositor does not make their Political Death to
be represented by their mournful prophesying 1260 days, but makes it only
synchronize therewith. And for the rest of the Remarker's Answer, it is
impertinent to the Expositor's Reason, who says there is nothing in this Vision
of the Witnesses that sets out their Political Death for 1260 years together,
though it mention their Resurrection. So that this Vision must be wretchedly
maimed according to this false Gloss the Remarker puts upon it. And though
there be war and overcoming, and forbidding to buy or sell mentioned in the
next Vision, yet that Vision is not this, nor is their Death there mentioned,
which is Antithetal to Resurrection from the Dead. And besides, chap. 13. verse.
7. It is only said that it was given to the Beast to make war with the Saints,
and to overcome them, which does not at all imply their Political Death for
1260 years, for they may overcome them only at the last at the end, as in the
letter of the Vision, chap. 11. verse. 7. Nor does the prohibiting to buy and
sell imply that Death of the Witnesses for 1260 years together, there being no
intimation of the extent of time in the business. Whence there is a necessity
that the three days and an half, which is the three times and an half,
equivalent to 1260 days, must denote the Time of the Political Death of the
Witnesses, that the 42 months War, and the Beast's overcoming the Saints, chap.
13. verse. 5. both the victory and war may be expounded accordingly, as equal
to, and coincident with the three days and an half, or three times and an half,
and to the 1260 days. Whence we may understand that this Answer of the Remarker
is most miserably forced, weak, and farfetched.

e The Expositor's fifth Reason is, That being the Witnesses have lain slain in
a Political sense so long, and have been so often slain, even many hundred
thousands of them in a natural sense, before the end of their mournful
Witnessing, it is unconceivable what persecution or oppression in these last
three years and an half different from what they had endured before, should
befall them, or more worthy taking notice of* that the former should be
omitted, and these by the karcases lying three days and an half in the street,
be represented. The answer of the Remarker here is very slim and lank to this
fifth Reason, he acknowledging the persecution and oppression for these three
days and an half, nothing comparable to the severities of that in the 1260 days
of the mournful prophesying of the Witnesses; but discreetly lets slip the
main question, why so gentle a persecution in comparison, and of so small
continuance, should be noted in the Vision, and one more than three hundred
times longer for duration, and more bloody, rude and barbarous for all manner
of cruelty, should be omitted. This he wisely declines to say any thing to, it
being such as to which nothing can be said.

f The Expositor's sixth and last Reason is this, That whereas it is said,
verse. 7. And when they shall have finished their Testimony, the Beast that
ascends out of the bottomless pit shall make war against them, and shall
overcome them and kill them: that unless his sense be admitted, there is till
the end of their prophesying neither any war, nor any overcoming, nor any
killing of the Witnesses, which is point blank against the truth of History.
What says the Remarker to this? His former Answer, says he, is an Answer to
this, if it need any. For this is a different war, says he, from the former,
being not to destroy, but to silence and subdue. And yet this is notified, and
the other omitted. What will not one say that is wedded to a fond opinion? But
the Vision does not only omit the forty two months war against the Witnesses,
and that continued slaughter either Political or Natural above three hundred
times of longer continuance than this slighter distress of three days and an
half, but does naturally import that there was no war against the Witnesses
till they had finished their 1260 days witnessing, if we adhere to the cortical
sense as the Remarker does; which is point blank against the truth of History.
For the Text says, And when they shall have finished their Testimony, (...),
Bestia illa ascendens (so Beza) which S. John had his eye upon, That Beast
ascending out of the bottomless-pit, shall make war against them, etc. Which
implies he came out of the pit just upon the finishing their Testimony, (when
they had said their say) to assault them, etc. As it is said, chap. 13. upon
the wrath of the Dragon against the seed of the woman, and his resolution of
making war against them, that S. John saw (...), a Beast ascending out of the
Sea, which implies the first appearance of him. And the very words, When they
shall have finished their Testimony, the Beast shall make war against them,
does plainly and naturally imply he shall not war against them before, but that
then coming out of the Pit, or out of the Sea, he will presently set upon them.
He that can shut his eyes against such plain truth, I pray God he may not
become blind for ever.

Page 291. Whereas it is supposed there has been such evident proof that the
Vials follow the Rising of the Witnesses, the contrary, I suppose, has been
made sufficiently evident; whereby the fansied Mathematical Evidence, that the
Reformation must be the Rising of the Witnesses, comes to nothing. And the
change by the Reformation was not so vast and stupendous (as it is here said to
be) but that it is sufficiently prophesied of by the second Vial, which does
very aptly signify it, it consisting chiefly in rejecting the Pope's Authority
with some corruptions, which were incident to the owning of it.

Ans. This last Remark is nothing but a Triumph before Victory, he supposing he
has produced such Objections as do enervate the Expositor's arguments for the
placing the Vials after the Rising of the Witnesses, whenas in truth all his
Objections are as weak as water, and as tender as any Cobweb, as I have
manifestly shown; nor is there any unprejudiced eye but will easily discern it,
and consequently that, the Reformation begun by Luther is the Rising of the
Witnesses, is no fancy, as the Remarker reproachfully calls it, but a solid
Truth, and even of Mathematical Evidence and clearness. And whereas he would
lessen that Illustrious passage of Providence the Reformation, (which of a
truth was very glorious and stupendous) by saying it consisted chiefly in
rejecting the Pope's Authority with some corruptions incident to the owning of
it; I say here in England for example, not only the Pope's Authority was
rejected, but all the corruptions of that Church that can be properly called
Antichristian, and such as are described in the Expositor's Idea of
Antichristianism: From the imputation of all which he has solidly and
impartially vindicated the Church of England at the End of his Synopsis
Prophetica, as any one may fully understand that reads that Vindication
without prejudice. So that the Constitution of things as to the worship of God
is reduced to the state of those times that are Symmetral, before the Apostasy
came in. This has the ineffable goodness of God by his Providence brought to
pass, but that we have made no better use of it, of whatever party we are, lies
at our own doors. And a sad reckoning I fear will fall to their share that
grumble and murmur against so laudable a constitution of things, under which
they may live an holy, innocent and Apostolic life here, and hereafter arrive
thereby to eternal glory.

The works of the flesh, says the Apostle, are manifest, which are these,
Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Witchcraft,
Hatred, Variance, Emulation, Wrath, Strife, Sedition, Heresies, Envyings,
Murders, Drunkenness, Revellings, and the like; of which the Apostle tells us,
that they that do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. But the
fruit of the Spirit is Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness,
Faith, Meekness, Temperance. And as to the former he says, That they that are
Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts. And as to
the latter he admonishes; If we live in the spirit, let us also walk in the
spirit.

But now if we crucify the one, and live and walk in the other, shall we not
then be in reality, no conceited and presumptuous Saints, so fansied by our
selves only, or by our own party, but truly become such in the sight of God
and all discerning people? And this assuredly those may attain unto, who under
the dispensation of God's Providence are called unto the Communion of the
Church of England, if they be not wanting to themselves in the use of the
advantages thereof. And if so, what can the cavilling at, and calumniating the
Constitution of things, what the vilifying and speaking contemptibly of them,
and what the Insensibleness of the wickedness of Schisms and Divisions; what
can these proceed from, but from the Spirit of Pride and Hypocrisy, which
would seem some extraordinary thing in Religion, when indeed it is nothing but
its mere self, that is, a proud, Hypocritical, and many times Hypochondriacal
Spirit fermenting and swelling it self into a conceit of its affecting a more
perfect state of Holiness and Saintship than is consistent with communion with
the public Religion established by Divine Providence, here in England suppose;
but in the mean time it self neither crucifying the flesh, nor the lusts, nor
ill humors thereof, as Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Strife, Wrathfulness,
Schismaticalness, Fierceness of Spirit, etc. nor walking in the Spirit of Love,
Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness and Meekness, whenas the Wisdom
that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, etc. And therefore
this is a false satisfaction of a tumid mind, that has no real thirst after
true Holiness and Righteousness indeed, such as the Spirit of God has exhibited
the light of to us in the Scriptures, but this false spirit would cloathe it
self in a counterfeit show of Saintship of its own devising and rellishing,
which being extravagant and out of the road of the established Rule, it fondly
hopes will approve it self to be extraordinary.

And truly this is the ordinary cheat whereby spiritually proud men impose upon
themselves and others that are no wiser than themselves. They think themselves
extraordinarily holy, and singularly Religious for their extraordinary zeal
against, or contempt of the public Religion appointed by the special
Providence of God and the Sovereign Authority of the Nation, and deem it in a
manner profane, because common or public. Whenas if they would but cast their
eyes upon those Texts above cited, that set out so fully and expressly the works
of the Flesh, and the fruit of the Spirit, and examine themselves by that Rule
that is so intelligible, and wherein there is no freakishness nor canting, and
resolve to indulge themselves in no sin (as there is no sin required as a
condition of Communion with the Church of England) and out of a firm faith make
their earnest addresses to God for strength and assistence to overcome all our
inward corruptions, and perfectly to mortify the old man, that we may attain
to that newness of life, through the Spirit of Regeneration, and so be wholly
quit of the works of the Flesh above enumerated by the Apostle, and walk in the
spirit and the fruits thereof. I say, if they would examine themselves whether
they do thus or no, whether they have mortified, or at least do sincerely
endeavor to mortify all those works of the flesh there mentioned, or any
other any way akin to them; and whether they be revived into those fruits of
the spirit there specified, and have a real savor and relish of them, and are
ashamed in themselves, and perceive it a burden to them, to find themselves in
any other Temper, this is the only way for them to discover their own
Hypocrisy, and to bring them into a true method of becoming real Saints
indeed. And this they may be, holding communion with the Church of England, as
I showed above. But to bear themselves high in their own conceit, for their
pragmatically fansying (rather than espying) faults in the Constitutions of a
Church so well established, and to have a huge zeal for a purer external
Reformation of the Public, while that private internal Reformation (upon a
false satisfaction of mind from that zeal for an outward) is so blindly
neglected; this is the most effectual method I know to make them become, and
ever remain haughty and headstrong Hypocrites, and as to all true and real,
spiritual Religion very cold and dough-baked Christians. This high, haughty,
but really empty Schismatical Spirit is the very pest of the Reformed Churches,
and I pray God it may never prove the utter Ruin and Destruction of the
Reformation. And let this serve for a Return to the Remarker's rude and
irreverent scorn and contempt he has cast upon the Reformation; wherein Divine
Providence it self suffers, and his Spirit of Prophecy, who has plainly
declared it to be the Rising of the Witnesses, as has been above demonstrated,
mauger all the pretended Objections of the conceited Remarker.

But now lastly, Whereas the Remarker will have the Reformation sufficiently
prophesied of by the second Vial only, it is a thing utterly incredible that
so glorious a passage of Providence should be passed over with so short and
slight an intimation; which is only this: The second Angel poured out his Vial
on the Sea, and it became as the blood of a dead man, and every living soul
dyed in the Sea. This is all according to him that prefigures this stupendous
passage of Providence; whenas the Victory of the Primitive Christianity over
Paganism is set out most magnificently and copiously at the opening of the
sixth Seal, chap. 6.12. as also again by the victory of Michael over the red
Dragon, chap. 12.7. and there are great Acclamations and Rejoicings thereupon;
But according to the mind of the Remarker the victory of the Evangelical
Christians over Antichrist and horrid Enemy of the Church of Christ, and over
Pagano-christianism consisting of many gross Superstitions, and multifarious
Idolatries, and execrable Cruelties and Butcherings, nothing inferior to those
of the red Dragon; all this is hudled up into two or three lines without any
Acclamations of Joy, Doxologies or Songs of Thanksgiving for such an
inestimable Mercy, which yet to such a vast achievement of Providence,
according to the usual mode of the Apocalypse, ought expressly to have been
annexed. Wherefore though the second Vial may be a Type of the settled state of
the Reformation after some short Reciprocations of affairs after the Rising of
the Witnesses, yet it cannot be in any reason or congruity of sense reputed the
Type of the Reformation it self in its first and fresh appearance, which is
most properly the Rising of the Witnesses, and upon which are those joyful
Acclamations and Doxologies, or Songs of Thanksgiving, chap. 11.15, 16, 17. as
the Expositor by unexceptionable and invincible Arguments has proved.

And then in the second place, As it is incongruous to conceive the second Vial
to be the only Prophetic Type of the Reformation, so it is also impossible it
should be so. For it being so firmly demonstrated, that the Vials, all of them
follow the Rising of the Witnesses, if the second Vial be the only Type of the
Reformation, it will yet follow, that the Rising of the Witnesses (which is
also repugnant to the Remarker's Hypothesis) is already past, the Reformation,
together with the second Vial, according to the Remarker, being already come;
and therefore I demand of him, what event of Providence, which is past, is
prefigured by the Rising of the Witnesses. None certainly can be found but the
fresh appearance of the Reformation before its perfect settlement. It is that
which was prefigured by the Rising of the Witnesses; and the Settlement thereof
by the second Vial. The Interval betwixt is the first Vial, viz. The
intoxicating cup of wrath, envy and dementation on those that had the mark of
the Beast, with their unsuccessfull endeavors therefrom, to extinguish the
Reformation in its first appearance, and in its first freshness and tenderness
to have strangled it, as the Serpents sent from Juno would have done Hercules
in his Cradle. Thus easy is Wisdom to him that understands; But a confused
and prejudiced mind will intricate all things.

But he that has a mind clear and unprejudiced, cannot fail of assurance in
this present point, if in reading the two first Visions of the Opened book, he
closely observe these few things following;

First, That the two Visions begin from the same Epoch (I mean the Visions
comprised, the first of them, in the eleventh Chapter, and the other in the
twelfth, thirteenth and fourteenth Chapters) which that they do has been
demonstrated in my Answer to the Remarks on the place, and granted in some
sense by the Remarker himself; And that they end in the same times, viz. with
the last Vial, which contains a full and final overthrow of Babylon, or the
Beast and false Prophet, which is manifestly proved by me against the Remarker.
So that these two first Visions are Synchronal.

Secondly, That both the first and second Vision contain a War with the Beast,
and that the event of that war is an actual, but partial overthrow of the Beast
or Babylon, called the great City, as is manifest from chap. 11. verse. 11, 12,
13. unto which answers the actual fall of Babylon in the second Vision. Which
must needs be actual, else the Angel would speak an untruth, chap. 14. verse. 8.
and but partial, because it both answers to that in the first Vision, and
precedes the seventh Vial in the second, before which the full and final
overthrow of Babylon is not. And whereas, Prophecy is anticipatory History, and
yet no actual success of the forty two months war, but this fall of Babylon is
prefigured in this second Vision, it is plain that this is the success thereof,
and therefore the very same with the partial fall of the great City and Rising
of the Witnesses in the first Vision. Which was in the last half day of the
three days and an half, or in the last half time of the three times and an
half. Whence the fall of Babylon the Angel brings news of must be so too, and
not before, because the upshot of that war also was not till then.

Thirdly, That forasmuch as the fall of Babylon in the second Vision is the
same with the fall of the great City and Rising of the Witnesses in the first,
and this latter is just at the close of the sixth Trumpet, the former must be
so, viz. the fall of Babylon must be at the close of the sixth Trumpet also.

Fourthly, Forasmuch as this fall of Babylon and Rising of the Witnesses is an
ample Object of Joy and Thanksgiving to the Evangelici, the Witnesses and
sealed Soldiers of the Lamb, against whom the Beast warred, and was too hard
for them all along, though they held out through patience, and faith, and hope
of promised success at last, chap. 13. verse. 9, 10. therefore as there is a
joyful message by an Angel of the actual fall of Babylon in the second Vision,
chap. 14. verse. 8. so it is impossible but those Acclamations in Heaven and
Doxology of the Elders, chap. 11. verse. 15, 16, 17. should respect the partial,
but actual fall of the City and Rising of the Witnesses, it being so ample an
Object of those joyful Acclamations, and of that thankful Doxology, and there
being nothing betwixt but the graceful ushering them in with the sound of the
seventh Trumpet. Whence it is plain they respect that event, as it is also from
that passage in the Doxology it self, verse. 27. where thanks is given to God
Almighty, because he has taken to him his great power, and has reigned, viz.
in that fall of the great City and Rising of the Witnesses; in this he
reassumed a considerable part of his Kingdom which Antichrist had usurped.

Fifthly therefore, We being so well assured that the partial fall of Babylon
and Rising of the Witnesses is the Object of the joyful Annunciation of the
second Angel, chap. 14. and of the Doxology of the Elders, chap. 11. and
meeting in the very next Vision, viz. that of the Vials, with a Song (prefixed
thereto) of praise and thanksgiving by the Victors over the Beast for an
actual, but partial Victory ( actual, because it is said therein, chap. 15.
verse. 4. For thy judgments are made manifest, viz. in this late fall of
Babylon, which yet is but partial, because this Song is prefixed before the
Vials, which are to bring to pass the fall and final ruin thereof) and there
being no precedent actual and partial victory but this in the fall of the City
and Rising of the Witnesses, which may be the Object of this Song of
Thanksgiving, like that of Moses upon the overthrow of Pharaoh at the Red Sea,
it is impossible but this Song must be to the same effect with the Doxology of
the Elders, and synchronize with it.

Sixthly therefore, It is as clear as noonday, That, that Doxology of the
Elders immediately following the sixth Trumpet, this Song of Moses and the Lamb
must immediately follow the sixth Trumpet.

And lastly, All the Vials following the Song of Moses and the Lamb, that they
all follow the sixth Trumpet and the Rising of the Witnesses, and consequently,
there being no part of the two first Visions of the Opened book (which begin
from one Epoch, and end with the seventh Vial) that prefigures that notable,
and indeed stupendous Achievement of Providence in causing so many Provinces,
Principalities, Nations and Kingdoms to cast off the Pope in the late
Reformation, unless this of the partial fall of Babylon and Rising of the
Witnesses (for all the Vials are after their Rising) it necessarily follows
that the aforesaid Reformation is the partial fall of Babylon and the Rising of
the Witnesses, which was the thing to be demonstrated.

And this succinct Master-Reason of the Expositor, as I may so call it, may go
for a more general Confirmation of all his particular Reasonings on this
subject, (though they are sufficiently firm also of themselves) and shows how
skilfully he has allotted the several passages of the two Visions that follow
the fall of Babylon and Rising of the Witnesses, to several of the Vials, which
are certainly in that time after the said Fall and Rising. It shows also the
assuredness of his judgment in making the three days and an half, that the
Witnesses lie slain to be the same with the three times and an half or 1260
days, and that the Expositor's six arguments for it, as they are rational in
themselves, so they conclude a certain Truth, and that the Remarker's Answers
to them are mere Whifling. For the late Reformation being demonstrated to be
the Rising of the Witnesses, all the Remarker's conceits about this matter are
quite out of doors.

These are the genuine Corollaries of this solid Demonstration, as to
speculation, but as to use this one is inestimable, That it naturally gives a
stop, with all that are not out of their wits, to their conceiving any hopes of
Innovations in State or Church from the near approach of the Rising of the
Witnesses, the completion of that Prophecy being so plainly past: And
farthermore, for the quieting of their Spirits does plainly inform them of the
Excellency of the Reformation made by our Reverend and Royal Reformers here in
England, and that therefore to separate from such a constitution so well
approved of by Divine Testimony, is a piece of gross disobedience to the
Magistrate, and hateful Ingratitude to the goodness of God, and his benign
Providence over his Church.

ARITHMETICA APOCALYPTICA, OR A RESOLUTION TO Three main QUERIES Touching the
NUMBERS OF THE Medial-Visions OF THE APOCALYPSE, Added by way of APPENDAGE to
the Answer to the foregoing REMARKS UPON Dr. HENRY MORE HIS APOLOGY.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for Walter Kettilby. 1684.

ARITHMETICA APOCALYPTICA, OR A RESOLUTION to Three main QUERIES, etc.
WHile my Answers to the foregoing Remarks were in the Press, by a lucky
Providence there came into my hands certain Apocalyptick Papers sent me in a
Letter from a friend, who desired my judgment touching them. The Papers were
the more welcome, because the Author of them seemed to be convinced of that
grand truth contended for by Dr. H. M. in his Apology, viz. That the Protestant
Reformation was the Rising of the Witnesses. To which that Author adds also,
that they rose in the year of our Lord 1559, but that their mournful
Prophesying did not conterminate, as naturally it does, with their Resurrection
and Ascension, but was to continue 127 years longer, and to expire in the year
1686. In which year he declares with a strange scheme of Enthusiastic
confidence, that Babylon will be utterly ruined, and all Antichristianity quite
rooted out of the Church. Which looked so like an intended defeat to the
important usefulness of the assurance of the Doctrine, That the Witnesses are
risen already, which is the quieting men's minds, and preventing stirs and
commotions, and the conciliating a good opinion of the present constitution of
things in matters of Government and Religion here in England, that I thought I
was obliged the more narrowly to consider the grounds of so Triumphant a
conclusion; And especially (my friend in his Letter pressing me the most
earnestly thereto) to settle according to my best judgment the Epoch of the
Medial Visions, which the Author of those Papers makes to be the year of our
Lord 426. Which depends upon his making the Epoch of the Sealed-book-prophecy
and the Opened-book-prophecy to be the year 66, in which he supposes that S.
John received those Prophecies in the reign of Nero. Wherefore to demonstrate
the folly of that Enthusiastic confidence in the Author of those Papers,
according to my friend's desire, I have here settled the true Epoch of the
Medial Visions, or of the Apostasy or Reign of Antichrist, the usefulness of
which we shall consider in its due place.

Nor content with this, I have prefixed two other Queries that tend to the
satisfaction of them that urge against the truth of the doctrine, That the
Witnesses are risen, that they are made to rise while the last semitime is but
current, and not expired, as if this destroyed the usefulness of the Prophecy,
by giving so large a latitude of time as the space of 180 years for the
fulfilling its prediction, and were also inconsistent with its synchronizing
with the 42 months and 1260 days, those days not admitting of any latitude, but
necessarily signifying strictly so many years. The use therefore of these two
first Queries for the solving this difficulty, I shall also take notice of in
its due place. In the mean time we shall produce into view the Queries
themselves, of which this is

The first,

Whether Daniel's Three times and an Half, however disguized or varied into 42
months and 1260 days, be not the standing Authentic measure of the
Medial-Visions of the Apocalypse?

The second,

It being granted that Daniel's Three times and an Half is the standing
Authentic measure of the Medial-Visions, what may be the genuine use and
purpose of varying them into 42 months and 1260 days?

The third,

What is the precise Epoch of the Medial-Visions, or of the Apostasy or
Kingdom of Antichrist?

These be the three Queries. And as to the first I say, That Daniel's Three
times and an Half, or seven Semitimes, is the standing Authentic measure of
the Medial-Visions of the Apocalypse. Of which that of the woman in the
Wilderness is one, of whom it is said, Apoc. 12.14. That she was there to be
nourished for a Time, and Times, and half a Time, with which abiding of the
woman in the Wilderness, The Entireness of the Rule of the seven-headed Beast
restored, The Outer Court trodden under foot by the Gentiles, The two Witnesses
prophesying in sackcloth, The entire Dominion of the two-horned Beast or false
Prophet, or of the great Whore or Mystical Babylon, according to Mr. Mede, and
according to the truth, do synchronize. Of all these Visions therefore are
Daniel's seven Semitimes the standing Authentic measure for the computing the
event of any Medial-Vision, however varied into 1260 days and 42 months; nor is
there any more precise restriction as to eventual prediction, than there would
have been, though the expression of Three times and an Half or seven Semitimes
had never been varied into 42 months and 1260 days. And my Reasons for this my
Assertion are these.

First, It looks something absurdly and derogatorily to the Omniscience of the
Spirit of Prophecy, as if he were farther advanced in Knowledge in St. John's
Time than in Daniel's, and as if about 600 years nearer approach to the event
predicted, enabled him to count the duration of the little Horn with eyes in
St. John's time to the punctuality of a year, whenas in Daniel's time he could
count it only according to those large measures of Semitimes, each of which
contains 180 years. This methinks looks very uncouthly and absurdly. Indeed if
he had not counted the reign of the little ruffling Horn with eyes by any parts
of time, but only predicted that such a Polity would appear during the fourth
Kingdom, and then after in the Apocalypse told accurately the time of its
duration, whether 42 months or 1260 days prophetical it would look
unsuspectedly, but things being as they are, they plainly look derogatorily to
that perfection of Prescience in the Spirit of Prophecy, to fancy he foretold
the time of the Event an hundred and eighty times more punctually at 600 years
nearer approach thereto, viz. in St. John's time, than he did at that distance
in Daniel's time, as if he wanted that advantage then which he had afterward.

Secondly, It is plainly suggested by the Spirit of Prophecy, chap. 12. from
those two places compared together, verse. 6. And the woman fled into the
Wilderness, that they should feed her there a thousand two hundred and
threescore days: and verse. 14. And to the woman were given two wings of a great
Eagle, that she might fly into the Wilderness into her place, where she is
nourished for a time, and times, and half a time: It is plainly, I say, hence
suggested, That the expressing of the duration of the Medial-Visions by 1260
days is not for any more accurate account (from some known Epoch) of the time
of the predicted Event; For then the time of the woman's abode in the
Wilderness should have been expressed in the first place by those more general
and lax measures of, a Time, and Times, and half a Time, or seven Semitimes,
but then afterward by that more strickt and minute measure of a Day, as
intimating the event to be predicted even to a set Prophetical Day. But it
being quite contrary, it is a plain insinuation that Daniel's seven Semitimes
is the Prophetical measure to estimate the true time of the events by, and not
those lesser parts of time a Prophetical Day or Month, this measure of Daniel
being placed not only after the 1260 days in this and the foregoing Chapter,
but also after the 42 months there mentioned to be a key to the right
understanding of these Variations.

Thirdly, It is apparent that the variation of the seven Semitimes is not
intended for any more punctually and restrictively predicting the event, for
that the variation would then have been only into 1260 days Prophetical. But
it being also into 42 months, it will entangle the account, and make the
Prophecy seem to contradict it self, and imply things impossible to be
possible, that is, that the Prophecy shall predict true as to time, and not
true at once. For if the Event predicted fall within the last part of time,
suppose, the last Prophetic Month, though but a little after the beginning
thereof the Prophecy is true, but the same or what is necessarily and
intimately Synchronal to it, not falling out in the last of the 1260 days,
according to which expression it should do, it makes the prediction false. And
indeed there is the same reason of the last Semitime. In the fifth month
whereof, if the woman go out of the Wilderness, the prediction is true; but
since it is not in the last month, nor in the last day, it is doubly false.
Whence it is manifest that those variations of the seven Semitimes into 42
months and 1260 days are only Cortical in the external Celature of the Vision,
are mere Numeral Diorisms, not Prophetical Numbers restraining the event to any
closer pinch of time than if the duration of the Medial-Visions had been in
every place expressed by seven Semitimes.

Fourthly, In the Vision of the two Witnesses, who while the Outer Court is
trodden down by the Gentiles for 42 months, do mournfully prophecy 1260 days,
which is the same time in other Terms, the Spirit of Prophecy reducing all at
last in this Vision, Apoc. 11. verse. 8.11. to three days and an half, does
himself set his Seal to this truth, That as to the restrictive prediction of
the event there was never greater preciseness intended, than what that latitude
of numbering by Semitimes did require, which is very lax. And that by three
days and an half, three times and an half, or Daniel's seven Semitimes are
signified, that Assertion by invincible demonstration in the Apology (I mean by
those six solid arguments, which the Remarker as eager and keen as he is upon
the business to invalidate them, has but shown his own weakness in attempting
it) is made good to any intelligent and unprejudiced Reader. Wherefore by the
Reduction, in the close of the Vision, of the 42 months and 1260 days to
Daniel's three times and an half (expounding [Day] by Time first, as it does
most certainly sometimes so signify, and therefore from the abovesaid
arguments, as certainly so signifies here) we may be assured from the Testimony
of the Spirit of Prophecy himself, that the only standing Authentic measure
of the duration of the Medial-Visions, is Daniel's seven Semitimes. But there
is a necessity of reducing the signification of Day to that of Time first,
because a Prophetic day signifies but one natural year, but a Time a
Prophetic year, which is 360 natural years.

Fifthly, The nature of the things predicted to come to pass at the expiration
of the Time of the Medial-Visions is such, that their accomplishment cannot be
effected in the space of a single Prophetical day. Such is a considerable
breaking the entireness of the Dominion of the little Horn with eyes, or of the
two-horned Beast, the false Prophet or Whore of Babylon, the fall of the tenth
part of the City and Rising of the Witnesses, at which such Acclamations as
these are heard in Heaven. The Kingdoms of the World are become the Kingdoms of
our Lord and his Christ, chap. 11. verse. 15. And chap. 15. that Song of Moses
and the Lamb is sung by the triumphant Harpers on the Sea of glass, Great and
mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty: Just and true are thy ways, O King
of Saints: Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy Name? For thou
only art holy, for all Nations shall come and worship before thee, for thy
judgments are manifest. Surely all this must not signify such small
Achievements as can be brought about in one single year. And as Rome was not
built in one natural day, no more could so great a ruin of the Roman Polity or
Hierarchy, though but partial, be effected in one Prophetical day. Which unless
we reckon by Semitimes, must of necessity be the measure we reckon by.
Wherefore it is plain from the nature of the things predicted, though they were
not come to pass, that they are not to be achieved in one single year or
prophetic day, and that therefore the variation of the seven Semitimes into
1260 days was never intended, for so precise an indication of the predicted
event, as to limit it to a single year. And the 1260 days and 42 months being
but the variations of the same seven Semitimes of Daniel, there is the same
reason of the months also, that neither of them imply a greater strictness than
that ancient Authentic standing measure in Daniel, A time, and times, and half
a time. But as I said, if we stick not to this, the only measure is by
Prophetical Days.

Sixthly and lastly, To all this for our farther assurance, that Daniel's
measure is the only measure to measure the true time of the Events of the
Medial-Visions by, we may add, that one real Specimen, which indeed involves in
it all the middle Synchronals, namely, The Rising of the Witnesses. Which,
forasmuch as I have so firmly demonstrated the effusion of all the Vials to
follow, it is as firmly from thence sure and manifest, that the Reformation
begun by Luther, and spreading and propagating it self thorough so many
Countries, Principalities and Kingdoms, is the completion of that Vision of the
Rising of the Witnesses. Which noble Event predicted in this Vision, it is
manifest according to History, was not restrained to a Prophetic day nor month
neither, but fell out simply, as was predicted in the last Half day, or last
Semitime of the seven. But that the Vials follow the sixth Trumpet or Rising of
the Witnesses, and that consequently the abovesaid Reformation is the
completion of that Vision of the Witnesses Rising, I thought it was even with
Mathematical evidence made good in the Apology; but I hope now, whoever
carefully peruses the foregoing Answer to the Remarks, made by so keen a
Remarker, will find that the Answerer has had occasion given him of so fully
and clearly confirming, and invincibly evidencing the forementioned Assertion,
that it will not be in the power of any one that closely attends to what is
written any longer to hesitate about the truth thereof, nor consequently to
doubt of this present Truth, That Daniel's seven Semitimes is the only real
and Authentic standing measure, according to which the Events of the
Medial-Visions are to be computed, and their truth examined from a certain
Epoch.

Which first point being cleared, we are in the next place to enquire what may
be the genuine use and purpose of varying Daniel 's seven Semitimes into 42
months and 1260 days in these Visions of the Apocalypse. For certainly there is
no trifling in so sacred a Writing.

For, to begin with what may seem slightest, first, Daniel's Time and Times,
and half a Time, being so often to recur in the Medial-Visions, if there had
been no varying of them into the 42 months and 1260 days; I may add also into
the three days and an half, the outside of the Visions would have looked more
homely and bald, whenas this variety gives grace and ornament unto them. Nor
can this Reason seem trisling, if we consider that God and Nature in Plants and
Animals does not affect only what is wholesome and useful, but adds also
thereunto what is handsome and beautiful.

But secondly, It seems very requisite, yea even necessary for the Apocalyptick
styles, which describes bodies Politic, which are to continue for many Ages
together by the Symbol of some particular Beast, or single humane Person, man
or woman, which it would be indecorous to declare, they were to continue a
Time, and Times, and half a Time, which either conveys nothing to the mind of
the Reader, or else, if plainly expressed, the space of twelve or thirteen
hundred years, when no particular Beast, nor any single man or woman can be
conceived to live so long; It was, I say, necessary for the Apocalyptick style
to turn Daniel's Time, and Times, and half a Time into 1260 days or 42 months,
that the Cortex of the Visions might keep decorum in those Symbols of living
Creatures, and they not be said to continue so extremely much longer than is
agreeable to the Laws of Nature. Upon which account of Decorum, or adorning the
Cortex with the smooth show of (...), the karcases of the slain Witnesses are
said to lie but three days and an half unburied, though those three days and an
half are the same with Daniel's three times and an half. But to have said
either here or elsewhere for, A Time, and Times, and half a Time, Three years
and an half, had been quite out of the road of the Prophetic style, which
never names a year for a year of years, though a Time signifies such a
Prophetical year, as I may so call it, but it is no where in use, and it would
imply that no less than 360000 years were the space of the Millennium, or
Ligation of Satan.

Thirdly, The denoting Daniel's seven Semitimes, one while by Days, and another
while by Months, and the applying the numbering by days, of which the Sun is
governor to the children of the Day, the truly Evangelical Church, and the
numbering by Months, which respects the Moon, who is the Governess of the Night
to the Apostatized persecutive Church, is a farther piece of instructive
Elegancy, even in the exterior Cortex of the Medial-Visions, characterizing
thereby the Gentiles that tread under foot the Holy City for forty two months,
and the healed Beast with seven blasphemous Heads, to whom it was given to make
War with the Saints also 42 Months, by the infamous Note of the children of
darkness, but characterizing the true Church and unapostatized Evangelical
Christians, who were to be nourished in the Wilderness [ chap. 12.6.] 1260
days, and the mournful Witnesses, chap. 11. that were to prophecy in
sackcloth 1260 days, and to be raised from the dead, after three days and an
half, by the glorious Title of the children of light.

Fourthly, This variation of Daniel's Semitimes into 42 Months and 1260 Days
has not this office only of duly characterizing the two Parties, the
Apostolical and Evangelical Church in commendation of the one, and detestation
of the other; but is farther serviceable to us for the more distinct knowledge
of the Visions, that we do not confound into one such parties as are two, and
notified to be so by this character. And hence it is that Mr. Mede is sound
solidly and judiciously to have distinguished betwixt that woman John saw in
the Wilderness upon a scarlet-colored Beast, chap. 17. and that mentioned
chap. 12. verse. 6. who is said to be fed in the Wilderness 1260 days, where the
numbering by Days does plainly indicate that woman in the Wilderness to be the
pure Evangelical Church, the mournful Witnesses, etc. Whenas the other woman
in the Wilderness, chap. 17. is the apostatized Church, even the Whore of
Babylon, as she is there called. Wherefore this distinguishing the Mulier
Eremicola from the Whore of Babylon by Mr. Mede, is a thing not to be overlookt
or slighted, nor this use of numbering the same time, one while by days,
another while by months, to be contemned, it stearing us off from such mistakes.

Fifthly, It is well known to them that concern themselves in these
Speculations, that the artifice of concealment is a thing driven at in the
frame and contrivance of the Apocalyptick Visions, as well as certainty of
Revealment, as is noted in Book 1. Chap. 2. Synopsis Prophetica, and the
usefulness thereof there intimated. And it is obvious to conceive that
disguising of the duration of the Medial-Visions under so many variations, of a
Time, and Times, and half a Time, of 42 months, of 1260 days, of three days and
an half must needs contribute something to the obscuring of the Visions, and
make them not lie so open and obvious to every eye, but gives a pleasant
exercise to the sagacious and intelligent to find cut the mystery, and to
reduce all to the ancient Authentic measure.

Sixthly, But there is yet a farther usefulness of the varying of Daniel's
Time, and Times, and half a Time into 42 months or 1260 days, and that a
notable one. For, forasmuch as neither the Greek nor Hebrew, though they have
the dual number expresses the word [Times] by it, what assurance have we but
that Times, in [A Time, and Times, and half a Time] may signify more Times
than two, and so it will not be seven Semitimes but nine, whenas seven is the
sacred Number the Apocalypse seems to affect. But that they are seven, and not
nine, or more, the varying of them into 1260 days, or 42 months does fully
assure us, and that by A Time, and Times, and half a Time is understood, Three
prophetical years and an half, or seven half years. Of which,

Seventhly, There is this farther notable use. For though I have made it plain
in my satisfying the former Query, That these variations of Daniel's Time and
Times, and half a Time into 42 months and 1260 days was never intended for a
more accurate computation of the predicted Event from some certain Epoch to a
month, much less to a day; yet it being known by those variations that Daniel's
Number is seven Semitimes, and that those seven Semitimes are seven Prophetical
half years, or seven Spatia semestria, by virtue of these Notices, and by
John's measuring the Temple of God, etc. chap. 11. that is, the Inner Court,
and leaving the Outer Court to be trod under foot by the Gentiles for 42
months; from these Indications of St. John, and from the proportion the Outer
Court bears to the Inner, the precise Epoch of the Duration of the
Medial-Visions is certainly to be collected. For as the Outer and Inner Courts
are two steady and unalterable proportional Terms understood in their full
settled extent or magnitude, so there can be no scruple but that the third
proportional Term, viz. 42 months offered by the Spirit of Prophecy is to be
understood as to this use in its full apparent extent for a steady and
determinate Inference of the fourth proportional Term for a timely discovery of
the entrance of the Apostasy. For no number given for such or such an use, if
that use do not require it, nor there be any thing intimated that way (For the
three days and an half respect the Vision of the Witnesses, not the measuring
of the Temple and 42 months Conculcation) can abate of its full significancy by
any prophetic Synecdoche or Numeral Diorism; much less can it do so, when the
use it serves to, requires the contrary; as here it does, or else the measuring
the Inner Court, and the offering this third proportional Term to infer a
fourth, is to little purpose. But taking this third proportional, 42 months, in
its proper full extent, as the Outer and Inner Court is taken in theirs, which
are as 7 to 2, it will necessarily infer 12 months in the full extent; which
therefore is precisely 360 prophetic days, that is, 360 years, for the
commensurate Time of the Church before the Apostasy came in. And this I think
is no contemptible use of the variation of Daniel's Time and Times, and half a
Time into 42 months or 1260 days. And,

Eighthly and lastly, Though the variation of Daniel's ancient and Authentic
measure into 42 months and 1260 days be not to predict the entire Event of the
Medial-Visions to a precise Prophetic month, much less to a Prophetic day,
yet these variations of Daniel's seven Semitimes into Months and Days, have no
contemptible use, in that they are fitted for the punctual setting down the
particular progresses and spreadings of the predicted Event, which one Day, nor
one single Prophetic Month could contain. We need instance but in that one
example, the Vision of the Rising of the Witnesses, which began with Luther.
The right Epoch of the Medial-Visions being found, from whence the seven
Semitimes are to commence, the Event is not to be expected till the seventh
Semitime be entered into. But then if we would count in a natural and accurate
order, we might say, for example, That Luther appeared first upon the Stage the
fourteenth day of the second month of the seventh or last Semitime. That Queen
Elizabeth came to the Crown on the twenty sixth day of the third month of the
last Semitime, and so of the rest, as we find in History. For still as any
fresh Provinces, States, Principalities or Kingdoms, or any Rulers and Grandees
in them which were Pontifician before received the Gospel, or any Evangelici
before oppressed were advanced into Authority, the Witnesses slain before do in
these revive and ascend into Heaven, and obtain rule and government. For the
suffering Evangelici and the reigning Evangelici are conceived but as one body,
though the succession be for many Ages. And this I think is one considerable
use of varying the phrase of a Time, and Times, and half a Time into 42 months
and 1260 days, and takes them in both together.

But now, which I also noted in my Letter to a friend; In whatever Month or Day
there is an example of the Resurrection and Ascension of the Witnesses, there
their mournful Prophesying cease from that Time in that place. As for
example here in England, A. D. 1559, which is the 26 th day of the third month
of the last Semitime, the time when Queen Elizabeth was advanced to the Crown,
and several Evangelical Grandees in Church and State to high Dignities and
Employments; Upon this Resurrection and Ascension of the Witnesses, their
mournful Prophesying ceased here; and so it was at other times, and in other
places. The close Affinity and Connaturality of the things predicted do plainly
evidence this to any one that does not wilfully wink against the Truth.

In the mean time I think I have made it abundantly plain, that though the
varying of Daniel's Time, and Times, and half a Time into 42 months and 1260
days was not to predict the entire Event of the Medial-Visions to the accuracy
of one Prophetic day, nor yet month, yet the Spirit of Prophecy has not herein
trifled at all, but that there are several considerable uses of this variation,
that no man for the want thereof may obstinately pretend that the other must
needs be the use thereof, whenas yet there is no necessity at all of that, viz.
that the 42 months or 1260 days should signify the full extent of that time,
whenas that full sense is so easily abatable by a Prophetic Synecdoche or
Numeral Diorism, there being given also intimations thereto.

Having thus therefore dispatched the two first Queries, we proceed to the
third and last, the Solution of which I shall transcribe out of the abovesaid
Letter to a friend. Which Solution is as follows.

First, having fixed the Epoch of the beginning of the Church, which, I
conceive, is to be reckoned from the year in which our Savior suffered,
ascended into Heaven, and sent down the Holy Ghost to assist his Apostles,
which is the most indubitable and unexceptionable Epoch that can be pitched
upon, and must needs seem the least strained to serve any design; in the next
place we are to consider, whether the Epoch of the threefold Prophecy of the
Apocalypse, that is to say, The Prophecy of the seven Churches, the Prophecy of
the Sealed book and the Prophecy of the Opened book is not to be fixed in the
self same year that the beginning of the Church is. And that it is so to be
fixed, these few Reasons seem to infer.

First, They are Prophecies all three of them of a large universal extent,
reaching from the time, at least of their reception (which was but a few years
after the beginning of the Church, especially in comparison of the time
succeeding) even till the day of Doom. Wherefore in all likelihood they are a
Transcript of the Divine Decree or Provision of the State of the Church, such
as God foresaw it would be in its general successions, from the very beginning
thereof, to the end of the World, that so the three Prophecies or Visionary
Representations of the State of the Church may be complete and unmaimed.

Secondly, It is acknowledged by such Interpreters that otherwise dissent from
us, that the Prophecy of the seven Churches begins from the very beginning of
the Church, why should not then the other two Prophecies do so too?

Thirdly, The beginning of the Visions of the Sealed-book-prophecy and the
Opened-book-prophecy are naturally applicable to that Epoch of the Church we
have pitched upon, viz. the year when our Savior suffered, ascended, and sent
down the Holy Ghost to assist his Apostles. For what more natural and fit
application can there be of the Rider of the white Horse with a Bow in his
hand, to whom a Crown is given, than to Christ ascended and sending down the
Holy Ghost to assist his followers, to conquer the Roman Empire, and subject it
to the Scepter of the Son of God, that that might be fulfilled which was
predicted by our Savior, Fear not little flock, for it is your father's good
pleasure to give you the Kingdom? And this Rider came from the East, and Oriens
nomen ejus. See the Interpretation of the first Seal in the Exposition of the
Apocalypse. Wherefore this Vision does that right to our Savior as to
represent his glorious and miraculous assistence at the very beginning of his
Church, in the beginning of the Prophecy of the Sealed book. Now for the two
Initial Visions of the Opened book, that comprised in the eleventh Chapter,
which begins with the measuring of the Inner Court, it is manifest at the first
sight how applicable that is to the Church, from the year that Christ suffered,
till the Apostasy came in, and the more Primitive the more applicable; and
therefore here is but justice done to that part of the succession of the
Church, which reaches from the first year of the Church of Christ, to the
Reception of these Visions, that it be as well as the rest of the time before
the Apostasy, noted as Symmetral in this Visionary Representation. And now for
the Initial Vision comprised in the twelfth, thirteenth and fourteenth
Chapters, the Throes of the Church begun in the Head thereof, Christ on the
Cross, of whom it is truly said, There was never sorrow like his sorrow. These
were the pangs so early begun for the bringing forth in his Church a man-child,
that should wear the Imperial Crown at last, the Emperors becoming Christian.
And so the fight of Michael with the red Dragon, the Paganick Roman Power, the
battle was begun in Christ on the Cross, crucified under the Roman Power by
Pilate their Governor. But this strategem of the Captain of our Salvation in
suffering thus himself to be crucified, was the spring and source of all his
Conquests and Victories afterward, as is obvious to observe, and therefore it
were very unfit and unjust to have this left out of the Visionary
Representation; which yet it would be, did not the Prophecy of the Opened book
reach to the very first beginning of the Church, and take in the year of
Christ's Crucifixion.

And fourthly and lastly, Whenas it is observable in Daniel, chap. 7. in that
Set of Visions that represents the four Monarchies by four Beasts, viz. the
Babylonian, Persian, Greek and Roman, that notwithstanding those Visions are
received in the first year of Belshazzar, which is according to Thomas Lydiat,
about 50 years from the beginning of the Babylonian Monarchy, yet merely that
the Set of Visions might be complete, the Babylonian Monarchy is represented
from its very first Rise and Original, though above two thirds of its duration
was then past when Daniel received those Visions. Wherefore the Spirit of
Prophecy affecting, as I may so speak, this completeness in Sets of Visions,
though the Representation be of profane Kingdoms, and we finding no cause of
the Vision reaching into some part of time before its reception, saving that
Intent that the Visionary Representation of such Periods of time should be
complete; we may hence much more be assured, that these Sets of Visions are so,
they so much concerning his Church, and for whose completeness there were such
weighty reasons as were even now alleged, namely, why they should reach into
the very first year of the Church when Christ suffered, ascended into Heaven,
and sent down the Holy Ghost; and being the space of that time to the Reception
of the Visions (though they were received under Domitian) bears nothing that
proportion to the space of the Antemedial Visions, or of the first six Seals,
that 50 years bear to 70, which is above the proportion of two to three, but of
the other the proportion is less than of one to six; I say, he must be a
Sceptick even to stupidity, that is not hence convinced, that all these three
Prophecies I have spoken of, the Prophecy of the seven Churches, the
Sealed-book-prophecy and the Opened-book-prophecy, have the same Epoch that
the beginning of the Church has.

Wherefore to proceed, we being so well assured of this point, we are next to
consider what year of his Age Christ was crucified in, and according to the
above mentioned Thomas Lydiat, whom I conceive to be in the truth, Christ was
crucified about the thirty third year of his Age, he being betwixt twenty nine
and thirty when he was baptized and entered upon his Ministry, and he
continuing the preaching of the Gospel of the Kingdom for about three years and
an half (as the ancient Fathers have delivered) before he was crucified. We
take it therefore for granted, that Christ was crucified in the thirty third
year of his Age.

And now lastly, From the Vision of the measuring the Inner Court, and the
Profanation of the Outer for 42 months, chap. 11. we gather the time of the
beginning of the Apostasy thus. Villalpandus divides the large Square- Area,
upon which the Temple and all the buildings belonging to the Inner and Outer
Court are placed, into nine particular equal Square- Area's. Two of these
Area's are those on which not only the Temple, but all the Porticus's that
belong to the Inner Court are built. With Area of the Inner Court, distributed
into two Squares, has in its Western Square the Temple, on its Eastern the
Altar for Holocausts. But thus the Inner Court taking up just two Squares of
the nine equal Squares, and the rest being allotted to the Outer Court with its
buildings or Porticus's, it is plain that the Area of the Outer Court to the
Inner is as 7 to 2. And the two first of the proportional Terms being thus
invariably fixed, the third proportional 42 is to be taken in such a fixed
invariable sense, without any figure or Diorism, as has been proved above.
Whence the fourth proportional will infallibly be inferred thus; As 7 to 2, so
42 months in the full and fixed extent, to 12 months; which are equal to 360
days prophetical, which is so many years. Therefore the Symmetral Time of the
Church before the Apostasy came in is 360 years. Which 360 years include the
year of Christ's Crucifixion. But there were 32 years antecedent thereto, which
added to 360, makes 392 years. To this very year inclusively, according to this
compute, the Church continued Symmetral. Wherefore the first year from which
the Apostasy is to be computed, is the year 393, seven years distant from the
year of our Lord 400; which for roundness sake is usually made the Epoch of
the Apostasy. And Chemnitius expressly says that the Invocation of Saints began
to be brought into the Church, Non multo ante annum quadringentesimum. And I
think 393 is not much before the year of our Lord 400. This 393 therefore is
the precise Epoch for computation, though the Apostasy came in by degrees as
an Evening Twilight. Where it had been hard for us to pitch an Epoch to a
precise year, if the Divine Providence had not fixed it for us in that Vision,
chap. 11. Which yet is pleased in another place, chap. 17. to make the Epoch
more lax. See the Ioint-Exposition on the 12 th verse of that Chapter, in
Synopsis Prophetica, Book 1. Chap. 14.

Wherefore as the Rising of the Witnesses in the last Semitime may be
distinctly noted according to the number of the month, and day of the month, in
which such particular Risings and Ascendings of the Witnesses happened; so in
the first Semitime of the seven from the abovesaid Epoch of 393, may the more
notable advances of the Apostasy be noted according to the month and day. But
it would be over long to insist on these things. This shall suffice for a
Solution of the three proposed Queries.

And now out of what has been said to the two first of them, it is apparent
that this measuring of the time of the Witnesses Political Death and mournful
prophesying by Semitimes, does not only not destroy the usefulness of the
Prophecy by giving so large a time for the fulfilling the prediction, but is
indeed the most useful way of measuring, as being the most accommodate to set
out the fulfilling of the Prophecy in the Rising of the Witnesses, the nature
of their Rising being not restrainable to the strictness of a single year. Nor
is it at all inconsistent with the Synchronizing with the 42 months and 1260
days upon the pretense that those days cannot admit of any latitude, but must
signify strictly so many years. For these 42 months and 1260 days are simply
such, (as to the computing of the event of the Prophecy) only in the Cortex of
the Vision, it being in that case a Numeral Diorism, but by the Indication of
the three days and an half or seven half days in the conclusion, (which is the
golden Key of the Vision) they are 42 months and 1260 days divided (as a seven
foot Rule by six notable equidistant notches or marks the whole making 84
Inches) into seven equal parts; though thus to have expressed it in the Cortex,
had been too bald and bare, and not agreeable to the external smoothness and
Politure of these Parabolical Visions; nor adapted to the mysterious
concealment of these Prophecies, which is one main scope aimed at in their
frame and contrivance. But any wary and understanding Reader will easily
conceive touching the Medial-Visions (all which Synchronize one with another)
since that their duration answers to that ancient Authentic measure in Daniel,
of a Time, and Times, and half a Time, Apoc. 12.14. or of seven Semitimes (as
in the seven foot Rule above mentioned) and that this is glanced at again in
the conclusion of the Vision by the three days and an half or seven half days;
that this is their real standing measure indeed.

Which Semitimes for farther use and curiosity, being divided each of them into
Hexamenons or six-months-spaces, and after, each month into thirty days, which
makes each Semitime an Hecatonogdoconthemeron or the space of 180 days; a
considerate and observant Reader, I say, will easily gather from hence, that
the single measure of the full space of Time allotted to the Medial-Visions is
a Semitime, an Hexamenon, or an Hecatonogdoconthemeron, and that nothing else
is to be understood by this 1260 days and 42 months, but these seven
Hecatonogdoconthemerons, and these seven Hexamenons. So that the event of the
Prophecy is not tied up to the last month of the 42 or last day of the 1260,
but only to the last Hexamenon or last Hecatonogdoconthemeron; And therefore
these single measures being the measures of this full extent of Time, that as
to the completion of the Prophecy, or the falling out of the predicted Event,
if it be but within the seventh Semitime begun, but not expired (forasmuch as a
Semitime Hexamenon or Hecatonogdoconthemeron is the UNITE in this compute) the
fulfilling the Prophecy is sufficiently exact; nor is there any defect therein,
no more than when a Prophecy foretells such a thing to fall out the hundredth
year hence, (which year is divided into twelve months or 365 days) the
completion therefore is deemed defectuous for the event not falling out at the
very expiration of the year in the last day, or at least in the last month
thereof.

But this being allowed, which is so obvious and ordinarily known, we farther
add, that as the seven Hexamenons, the seven Hecatonogdoconthemerons and seven
Semitimes exactly Synchronize in their full extent, so do they also in an event
that falls short of that full extent, and is before the expiration of the
seventh Semitime. For such an Event is conceived to fall out in such a month of
the Hexamenon of the seventh Semitime, and in such a day of that month, which
is the very same day in reality also in the Hecatonogdoconthemeron of the
seventh Semitime. So exactly is Synchronism observed in computing the Event by
Semitimes, even to that of the day of the month of the Hexamenon, with the day
of the Hecatonogdoconthemeron, and with the eventual point in the last Semitime.

And yet the Event, suppose, of the Rising of the Witnesses is not restrained
to one Day or Month in the last Semitime, but spreads into several Months and
Days, the Rising of the Witnesses, and the ceasing of their mournful
Prophesying still all along Synchronizing one with the other, according to the
partial fulfilling of the Prophecy within a certain compass of the Hexamenon or
Hecatonogdoconthemeron of the last Semitime. The thing I hope by this time is
clear to any one that will not wilfully wink against the Truth, or by heedlesly
confounding the Cortex of the Vision with the Pith or Rind with the Pulp create
to himself needless difficulties. And thus the use of the Solution of the two
first Queries is sufficiently illustrated.

And the Usefulness of the Solution of the third may appear from hence, That
common Epoch of all the three Prophecies, that of the seven Churches, as also
of the Sealed book and of the Opened book being so rationally fixed and
unexceptionably, and consequently the Epoch of the Medial-Visions, or of the
Apostasy or Kingdom of Antichrist; according to this solid compute the 1260
days of the Witnesses prophesying in sackcloth, expired in the year 1652, which
is 34 years before the expiration set down in those Apocalyptick Papers I
mentioned in the beginning. So that all his Enthusiastical hopes and conceits
of the year 1686 vanish. As the Event also I question not but will farther
prove, viz. That his computation is vain and groundless. And the falsness of
his Prediction is the more plainly and precisely discoverable in that he is
forced to compute by Days not Semitimes. And therefore to be out but one
Prophetic day, argues the prediction to be false. And yet he is out above 30
such days already.

But what better can be expected of what is built upon such weak grounds as the
making the Epoch of the Sealed-book-prophecy and Opened-book-prophecy to be
the year of our Lord 66. As if in that year S. John received his Visions under
the reign of Nero, in the Island of Patmos: Whenas both the Epoch is not to be
taken from the time of S. John his receiving the Visions, nor in truth did he
then receive them, viz. in the year 66, but toward the end of Domitian's
reign, and about the year of our Lord 94. This the Current of Antiquity, and
Interpreters agree in. And even those that could wish the Visions had been
received sooner, before the destruction of Jerusalem, that they might with
better plausibility interpret some Visions of the destruction of that City; yet
the force of this truth is so great, that they do not only admit it, but with
all earnestness and confidence aver it, as Alcazar does for example, namely,
That the Apocalyptick Visions were received by John toward the latter end of
Domitian's reign. Read but Ribera, Alcazar and Cornelius a lapide upon this
point, and thou can not but be satisfied of the Truth thereof.

And yet the above named Enthusiast having deduced from this false Epoch 66,
that Babylon will be ruined, the Beast and false Prophet taken, and all
Antichristianity rooted out of Christendom in the year 1686, does not stick to
dance and skip for joy upon this rotten Ground or shaking Quagmire with
Doxologies and Hallelujah's in his mouth, as I noted at first. Who can
sufficiently admire (whether the fraud or fury of) such Enthusiasm? or be so
wanting to the public good as, lest this malady should hiddenly spread, not to
antidote men against it, that they be not shaken in mind nor troubled, as if
any Pretender to the Spirit can make it out from Prophecy, that either the
Witnesses are not risen, or at least, if they be, their mournful Prophesying
does not end upon their Rising till the year 1686. But that then a new Scene of
things will come on, and the Son of Perdition, that man of sin the Antichrist
be blasted at the brightness of Christ's appearing?

For assuredly, as has been noted at the close of the Solution to the second
Query, wherever the Witnesses are risen their mournful prophesying
immediately ceases there; and therefore whoever upon that account fancies
himself or others the mournful Witnesses, if the matter be sifted to the
bottom, they will be found mere murmuring Malcontents, and wretchedly blind
and unthankful to Divine Providence, in that they so slight such an
unexpressible favor to the Reformation, here in England suppose, established
by the risen Witnesses. And though they pretend to a greater Holiness and
Righteousness than is consistent therewith, or than ordinary Reformed
Christians have or (if they neglect not the advantages offered to them) may
have if they will, they do thereby but show themselves to have exceeding much
less, and to be far greater sinners, every sin against the Public as much
transcending a private sin, as the concern of the Public does a private
concern. Which weighty argument I will leave with the Reader as worthy his more
full and leisurely Meditations.

Only let me beg this one thing of him before I take leave, that he would not
mis-interpret this my care and diligence in supporting so certain a Truth as
that of the Rising of the Witnesses and the ending of their mournful
Prophesying where they are risen, that the Prophecy thereof is already
fulfilled in the blessed Protestant Reformation, and that all computing now by
the 1260 days for any fresh accessions to the Reformed Churches or farther
ruin of Antichrist is quite out of doors. But that the only true computation
of the approach of his farther fall, and of the farther advancement of the
Kingdom of Christ is to be taken from the Christian behavior of the Reformed
Churches. By how much more truly holy and humble they become, and instead of
their zeal, every one for the self-chosen mode of Piety in their own way, which
is very smally or nothing to the purpose of true Piety indeed (the heat
concerning which ways is the very fire of Hell kindled by the Devil himself,
the very Mystery of Iniquity and depth of Satan, whereby he subtly endeavors
to extinguish all sincere zeal for the Indispensables of Christianity by
inflaming men's spirits in the behalf of what makes so slenderly to the purpose
of that true and undefiled Religion before God) by how much more, I say, that
instead of this false and Hypocritical zeal (a zeal that only serves to excuse
their consciences from the plain and undoubted duties of a Christian) they
shall grow seriously warm in the behalf of the known, intelligible and
indispensable precepts of life given by the Prophets of old, and ratified by
Christ and his Apostles, that is to say, by how much more just, temperate and
prudent, by how much more meek, self-denying and charitable, by how much more
faithful and friendly they are one to another, by how much more sincerely
pious toward God, and heartily loyal, and tenderly respectfull toward his
Vicegerents here on Earth, and obedient to those that are put in authority under
them, whether in Church or State, so that it become the genuine Character of a
Protestant or Reformed Christian to be inviolably loyal to his Prince, and
cheerfully morigerous to all his lawful commands, by whatever Ministers of his
Power they be enjoined; I say, by how much more this face of things shall
appear, by those degrees, and not by the numbering of the 1260 days of the
mournful Prophesying of the Witnesses will it best be discerned how near, or
how far off the Ruin of Antichrist, or the farther amplification of the
Kingdom of Christ is.

But for people without preparing themselves for so signal a Blessing to sit
counting upon their fingers ends, how many years it is to the expiration of
those 1260 Prophetic days, in expectation of some strange change of things,
which days yet are expired above 30 years ago, what a freak is this? What a
Fanatic dotage, to imagine that yet to come which is already past, and conceit
in the mean time that God will, however they behave themselves, bring what they
would have, to pass, before the expiration of their miscounted years, not
improving what is really already past to those laudable advantages Providence
intended it? For assuredly Divine Providence never freed us from the slavery of
Rome to serve our own lusts, or to serve Him according to our own self-chosen
ways or humors, but to be zealous and faithful in the indispensable points of
his service and worship, and as to indifferent circumstances thereof to be
concluded by the appointment of our lawful Superiors set over us by Him.

Wherefore in very faithfulness to the Public, and to the Reformed Churches, I
have used this care and diligence to undeceive them, and to set before them
more true measures to calculate the approach of the fall of Antichrist by, and
the most speedy method of accelerating it, that is, By laying aside all humors
and animosities, and all heats and scrupulosities about smaller things, and by
endeavoring earnestly and sincerely, in mortifying our own carnal minds to
find and feel the true relish of the plain and indispensable Duties of
Christianity, whether toward God, toward his Vicegerents here on Earth, or
toward one another, and so by the Renovation of our Souls into the living
Image of our Lord Jesus Christ, to become real Members of his body, and
faithful Subjects of his Kingdom.

This is the only true Method of the farther ruining the Kingdom of
Antichrist, and the advancing the Kingdom of Christ. And it must be a people of
this Philadelphian character, (indigitated by those few Names in Sardis) by
whom the affairs of Reformed Christendom or the true Kingdom of Christ is
likely to prosper. Wherefore as many as have any good will toward Sion, let
them leave counting of time on their fingers ends, and doting on an expected
Expiration of the 1260 days, as if it were yet to come, whenas it is already
past, and lay their hand on that work above described, in virtue whereof the
desire of all Nations will come indeed in a more illustrious manner than ever,
and Christ really will consume with the spirit of his mouth that man of sin,
and Son of perdition, and destroy him with the brightness of his appearing, and
upon his ruins raise his glorious Millennial Empire on Earth: Whenas the
Methods of hot Enthusiasts, instead of this expected Happiness are more likely
to bring an Hell upon Earth, and unspeakable disorder and confusion. Which that
it may never be, I have used this faithfulness and open freeness of speech
which I have, being assured no good Christian will ever tax me for it. For I
seek nothing of my own in this but to serve the true Interest of the Kingdom of
Christ, as every good Christian is bound to do.

APPENDICVLA APOCALYPTICA, OR A Brief CONFUTATION OF Mr. SAMVEL CLARK His
Pretenses for the Following of Mr. JAMES DVRHAM, Rather than Mr. JOSEPH MEDE,
IN HIS Explication of the Seals and Trumpets, and of the Inner and Outer Court
of the Temple, IN HIS ANNOTATIONS UPON THE APOCALYPSE.

Levit. XIX. 19. Thou shall not sow thy Field with mingled seed, neither shall
a Garment of Linen and Woollen come upon thee.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for Walter Kettilby. 1684.

APPENDICVLA APOCALYPTICA.
IT was not many days after I had sent the foregoing Appendage to the Printer,
when I was advertized by a friend touching Mr. Samuel Clark's Annotations on
the whole New Testament, and how particularly in his Preface to those on the
Revelation, Dr. More was concerned, and his Exposition in some passages
perstringed. I had therefore the curiosity to send to London for the Book, and
having got it, perused the said Preface, and not so only, but in a cursory
manner read over his Annotations. In which, where he follows his two safest
Guides Mr. Mede and the Doctor, to give him his due, he has done well and
usefully, but in adjoining that third Party so heterogeneous to the other two,
I leave it to his own consideration whether he has not transgressed the
mystical meaning of those Mosaical Precepts, Levit. 19.19. and Deuteronomy. 22.10.
Thou shall not sow thy field with mingled seed, neither shall thou plow with an
Ox and an Ass together. But this only in general touching his Annotations on
the Apocalypse. It is his Preface wherein I am concerned in the behalf of the
Doctor, whom as I have defended so stoutly against the Pretenses of the
Remarker, that those main Usefulnesses of his Exposition might not be defeated
or eluded; so the like occasion again being given, I shall endeavor to acquit
my self with like success here; in the mean time not at all grudging the
Annotatour the praise of what is really commendable in him, though otherwise I
am like enough to be free in discovering wherein he is faulty.

And truly I think he is highly to be commended, that he had that due value for
the Apocalypse (the most admirable Monument of Divine Providence, and of a
Divine or Angelical Wit and Artifice that is extant in the World) as to spend
several years in the study of that Book. In which study he seems to excel,
that his excellent Assistent, as he calls him, Dr. Seaman. Whom I meeting with,
by chance, in a Booksellers shop in London, a little after Dr. More's
Exposition of the Apocalypse was published, he occasionally told me of at least
half a dozen Authors (for he was a noted Pryer into Interpreters of
Prophecies) that held the Epistles to the seven Churches to be a Prophecy as
well as the Doctor. But when I asked him if he had met with any that had
undertook to make it out in particulars, he confessed he had met with none. But
the Annotatour, better versed in this study than his excellent Assistent,
produces one Mr. Bernard of Batcomb (whose Works, he says, praise him in the
Gates, alluding, I suppose, to a key in the door, he having entitled his
Exposition of the Apocalypse, A Key for the opening St. John 's Mystical
Revelation) by whom he says, after he was possessed of the opinion of the
Epistles to the seven Churches being Prophetical (by no less than twenty good
arguments, and an Exposition from top to toe unexceptionably coherent, and
accurately fitted to History) by Dr. More, he was much confirmed therein by his
finding him, the abovesaid Mr. Bernard of Batcomb, of the same opinion long
before, who, he says, takes much the same way that Dr. More has since insisted
on.

But when so accurate a Prophetical Exposition, and twenty firm arguments for
so expounding those Epistles, wanted farther confirmation from Mr. Bernard of
Batcomb's suffrage, I hope it will farther gratify the Annotatour to hear that
Ludovicus Crocius and Balthazar Willius, two famous Divines, do more accurately
than Mr. Bernard agree with the Doctour's Exposition; who both writ long before
the Doctor, and with whose Writings nor with Mr. Bernard's the Doctor was
ever acquainted before the publishing of his own Exposition; in which he had no
pattern to imitate, nor any help but the Scripture it self, and the knowledge
of the Prophetic style and History. Which is no contemptible argument for the
assuredness of the Prophetical sense of those Epistles. See the Doctour's
Preface to his Exposition of the Visions of Daniel, Sect. 39. Wherefore I
commend the Annotatour's caution, that he thinks he cannot be too sure of the
truth of an Exposition of so sacred a Writing, and of so high and vast a
concern. And do farthermore well approve of his judicious Method of gathering
together all the dispersed Notions of such as he conceived had most seriously
and carefully, and with most skill bestowed their pains on any part of this
Divine Volume, amongst which he was pleased to reckon Mr. Mede, Dr. More and
Mr. Durham. For it is a very rash business, and the fruit of a strange
overweening confidence and self-conceitedness to think that by the bare
strength of ones own solitary Wit, Parts, Learning and an overdaring fancy to
master so mystical a piece as the holy Apocalypse.

But now having freely commended what is commendable in the ingenious and
industrious Annotatour, I hope he will the more easily bear with it, if I also
tell him wherein he fails; and it is chiesly in these two points. First, in
that he does not keep himself strictly enough to the proper meaning of the
Prophetic style, such as may be justified either by examples of Scripture, or
by the ancient Indian, Persian and Egyptian Onirocriticks, such as Achmetes
has gathered together (and assuredly not without a special Providence) and such
as to which all sorts of Commentatours do appeal, Grotius himself not excepted,
and many of which are collected into Dr. More's Alphabet of Iconisms in his
Synopsis Prophetica. Secondly, he does not bring a mind freed from prejudice,
or a purpose of serving a Party, or is at least abused into Error by following
such as have warpt the genuine meaning of some parts of the Revelation to a
compliance with that Faction, of which the Writer was, or intended to serve, as
Grotius did the Roman Faction, and so has perverted the true meaning of the
Prophecies of Daniel and the Apocalypse so wretchedly, as no example can
parallel; And it is the misfortune of some, otherwise, pious and learned
persons, to have been trepan'd into his errors by overmuch estimation of his
parts and learning.

But these things which I have thus hinted will be the best discerned in
answering those passages of the Annotatour's Preface which concern the Doctor;
which I will take in order as they lie. First then, Sect. 6. In the Exposition,
says he, of the Seals and Trumpets I have followed Mr. Durham, wherein he
differs from Mr. Mede and Dr. More. I know indeed, says he, what Dr. More
says, That Mr. Mede 's Interpretation of the first six Seals is so solid, that
it is impossible, I think, for any unprejudiced Reader not to be assured of the
truth of them, Mist. of Iniq. p. 224. Here I am concerned for Mr. Mede and the
Doctor at once, who, I can assure you, does steadfastly persist in the same
judgment still, both touching the truth of Mr. Mede's Exposition of the first
six Seals, and that it is in all likelihood prejudice in all those that are not
satisfied therewith. Let us now hear what the Annotatour alleges against this
judgment of the Doctor. But notwithstanding this confident Elogy, both the
Dutch Annotatours, says he, ( who published their Annotations five years after
Mr. Mede 's Comment came forth, viz. 1637, and who take notice of his
Interpretation in their Notes) and also judicious Mr. Durham ( whose solid
Exposition of the Revelation was composed near twenty years after that, yet)
both these, together with others formerly, make 'em relate chiefly to Church
affairs.

The Annotatour here would justify his deserting Mr. Mede by the Example and
Authority of the Dutch Annotatours and judicious Mr. Durham, and others before
Mr. Mede. But for those before him, if they all went the other way, which
cannot be proved, yet their authority is not of much value, Interpreters before
him roving so very much, and writing their sudden fancies rather, (they having
no Cynosura to guide themselves by) than what they had concluded upon more sure
grounds, and due and deliberate Reasons, though by a good Providence, rather
than any great care or skill, they have sometimes stumbled upon what is useful
and true. And now for the time since Mr. Mede, for my own part I have been much
amazed to observe how so truly judicious a Writer came to be so little taken
notice of, especially for his Apocalyptick Lucubrations, and the best Solution
I could find of this strange Phenomenon was, That solid things soonest sink
out of sight when chaff and straws float above on the water. Those things which
are writ with close strick't attention of mind, and accuracy of judgment,
require such a close strick't attention and accuracy of judgment in the Reader
to understand them, and perceive the truth and strength of them, which is a
pain to the generality of men, even to many of them that pretend to be learned,
the minds of most being lax and desultorious, slight and impenetrative; and
therefore what is most overly easy and superficial, is the most generally
rellished and applauded, when things most true and solid are neglected, because
they require better parts and more pains by close attentiveness and
comprehensiveness of mind to receive them.

But for the Dutch Annotatours, that they should balk Mr. Mede's Interpretation
of the Seals, he that considers the Texture thereof and how it is complicated
with the account he gives of the Vision of the four Beasts and four and twenty
Elders with golden Crowns on their heads (which he makes to represent the
Bishops of those happy times there prefigured, as Dr. More the Monarchs) need
no longer wonder that the Dutch Divines, that live under a state that is
neither Monarchical nor Episcopal, should not be willing to admit, that the
best and most glorious times of the Church that are predicted in the Apocalypse
should be Episcopal or Monarchical. Which two orders are naturally linked
together. But now how necessarily Mr. Mede's Interpretation of the Seals is
interwoven with that of the Vision of the four Beasts and four and twenty
Elders, is evident in that the Horsemen that appear upon the opening of the
four first Seals come out of those four Quarters that respect the four living
Creatures, the East the Lion, the West the Ox, the South the Man, and the
North the Eagle, and in that order the four Beasts or living Creatures are
reckoned. From those Quarters, I say, and in that order do the Riders of the
four Horses come. Which answer to the Quarters and Ensigns of the Camp of
Israel. And the fit application of things here to History by Mr. Mede is
admirable and enravishing, and the Providence of God marvellously illustrated
therein, and a Reason obvious occurs why there are only four Horsemen in the
opening of the Seals, viz. for that there are no more Beasts to point at the
quarters they come from than four in the precedent Vision, which whole Vision,
as I said, alludes to the Camp of Israel. But let the Reader peruse the
Interpretation of the fourth and sixth Chapters of the Revelation in Mr. Mede,
or at least in Dr. More, and so judge.

But now for the authority of judicious Mr. Durham, whom the Annotatour chooses
to follow rather than Mr. Mede, who yet undoubtedly much better deserves that
Encomium than the other party. Let Mr. Durham be as judicious as the Annotatour
pleases when he is free, yet who can well assure us that favor to a Faction,
and his affection for the Scotch Presbytery (for even his speech and style
bewray him) has not blinded his judgment in this matter? Indeed before Mr. Mede
had blessed the World with his excellent Interpretation of that Vision ( Apoc.
4.) of the Divine Majesty sitting on his Throne, and of the four Beasts and
four and twenty Elders sitting on Thrones round about him; and of the opening
the first six Seals, chap. 6. for Interpreters to have fumbled in these things
might be a less sign of want of judgment. But for one now, when he had so fair
a copy before him, to interpret ( chap. 4.4.) the four and twenty Elders not so
much as of any Officers or Guides but of private professors, though they are
said to sit on Thrones to be clothed in white soft raiment, such as either
belongs to the Priesthood or to Kings houses, and to have golden Crowns on
their heads, (which in the Apocalypse often occurs and always signifies
Political Sovereignty and Dominion, not Spiritual or Moral.) What is this a
sign of but of a clouded judgment, much blinded by a disgust against either
Monarchy or Episcopacy? The proof that he would bring from the Song of the four
Beasts and Elders, chap. 5.9, 10. makes against him. For whereas they are there
said to reign upon the Earth; the four Beasts indeed as well as the four and
twenty Elders are equally there concerned in that spiritual reign; but if that
was the only reason, either all must have Crowns, or none must have Crowns;
otherwise Crowns here must of necessity denote either Christian Monarchs or
Christian Bishops. It cannot be avoided.

But in that it is said, chap. 4.9, 10. And when those Beasts give glory -- the
four and twenty Elders fall down before him --; and hence there is gathered,
that the four Beasts are the Ministers of the Gospel: What a preposterous
business is this, to make those that wear Crowns to be private persons, and
those that have no Crowns to be Rulers and Governors in the Church? Besides,
that (...) in a good sense, as (...) in a bad, both according to the Prophetic
style signify a body Politic; And these four Beasts undoubtedly allude to the
four quarters of the Camp of Israel, as also may the four and twenty Elders to
the twenty four chief Priests, or heads of the Families, or courses of the
Priests and Levites, if Bishops be understood thereby. But if as the Annotatour
and his Guide, Mr. Durham, would have it from the Text* that the Divine Worship
is begun by the Beasts, that is, by some amongst them, it implies that the four
and twenty crowned Elders are the Monarchs and Sovereigns of Christendom, who
are not the leading Ministers or Priests in the Divine Worship* though devoutly
present at the same; the Bishops themselves, in counterdistinction to the
Christian Sovereigns, making part of the body of the people, and therefore
understood to take their place in that multitude of Subjects that make up the
four Beasts: And in the mean time, though these Monarchs be no Bishops, yet
they being next under Christ in all causes, and over all persons, as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil, Supreme Heads and Governors, they may be looked upon
as so many Patriarchs as well as Kings, or Patres Patriae, that is to say,
Fathers of their Country. This sense of Mr. Mede or the Doctor is easy and
clear, but that of Mr. Durham, unless we will make symbols and words signify
any thing or nothing, incredible, nay impossible. Wherefore Mr. Durham, though
called judicious by the Annotatour, has in this matter forfeited his Title and
his Authority therewithal. Nor can it be a sufficient excuse, nor indeed any
for the Annotatour to have deserted Mr. Mede's way of expounding the Seals from
the example of Mr. James Durham.

But to give the Annotatour his due, he does not support himself only by these
Autorities, but adds what he thinks is reason, for his interpreting not only
the first six Seals, but first six Trumpets also included in the seventh Seal,
of the affairs of the Church rather than of the Empire. Because, says he,
according to Mr. Mede's own interpretation, not only the first Seal, but also
the fifth and sixth too, relate to the affairs of the Church, and the seventh,
says he, contains both the Trumpets and Vials, and the Vials relate to the
affairs of the Church, and therefore three or four of the Seals being clearly
and confessedly descriptive of Church affairs, why should the others be of a
different nature from them? it being the very argument Mr. Mede himself uses
against those that would interpret some of the Trumpets of Heresies, and
othersome of warlike Invasions, and so bring things of a different nature under
one Name. This is the main of the Annotatour's justification of himself for his
deserting Mr. Mede in the Interpretation of the Seals. And

To this I answer, That the true Church of Christ being so mingled with the
body of the Roman Empire, it will be hard to find any thing to fall out on the
one, but it will some way or other concern the other; but the distinction of
sorting the affairs to the one and to the other, is to be taken from the
opposition of the true Church of Christ to the body of the Empire and the
Religion thereof, as counter-distinct to that of the true Apostolic Church.
And therefore those Visions that relate to the state of the Empire so
described, as to a fit object of them, must be the Visions appertaining to the
state of the Empire; but those that in such a sort relate to the state of the
Church, must appertain to the Church, that is to say, The pure Religion of the
Church or its body must be the Object in the one, and the false Religion of the
Empire or its body must be the Object in the other. And this therefore it is I
declare in the behalf of Mr. Mede, that the Visions of the first six Seals and
the first six Trumpets, which are part of the seventh Seal, that is to say,
that all the Visions of the Sealed book, so far as it has pleased the Spirit of
Prophecy to unseal them, before he descends to the Visions of the Opened book,
are rightly said to respect the state of the Empire, remembering also that
Axiom, that Denominatio est a part potiori.

Wherefore I answer, as to the first and sixth Seal, that they do most palpably
and eminently set out the intended Conquest and final overthrow of the impure
Pagan Religion of the Empire, and the Imperial Crown is given to the Rider of
the white Horse, and the success of this Heroes is against the Religion of the
Empire, and the sixth Seal the overthrow thereof, to omit the affairs of the
Jews, and the siege and sacking of Jerusalem, which concerns the body of the
Empire, and is referrible to the Rider of the white Horse; Nor was the
overthrow of the Pagan Religion under the sixth Seal without large effusion of
the blood of the body of the Empire. So that five of the six Seals plainly
respect the state of the Empire as their Object. And if the fifth did not, yet
Denominatio est a part potiori, as I said. But under that Seal, the Christians
being part of the Civil body of the Empire, and the vast effusion of their
blood there intimated (though it was Semen Ecclesiae yet) a weakening of the
Empire, and the Empire threatened therefore, that Seal plainly respects the
Empire also. In brief, the fifth Seal is a most terrible commination of a
dreadful vengeance on the bloody and Idolatrous Empire. So plainly is the
Empire the Object of that Seal.

And for the seventh Seal, the Vials are no part of it, but belong to the
Opened-book-prophecy (the Object of the Vials is the true Churches gaining
ground upon Antichrist till the utter Subversion of his Kingdom) But the seven
Trumpets belong to it, viz. to the seventh Seal, and as they are Martial
Instruments, so they, every one of the first six of them, betoken Invasions,
and war, and spoil, and destruction on the Empire, and Mr. Mede's application
of History thereto is very apposite and fit. So that it is plain that the
Sealed-book-prophecy, so far as it has pleased the Spirit to unseal it,
respects the Fate or State of the Empire in the six Seals and six Trumpets. But
the seven Thunders that succeed in the place of the seventh Trumpet, as the
seven Trumpets did into the place of the seventh Seal; what they uttered, John
is commanded for the present to conceal. So that the Annotatour's reason for
his interpreting the Seals all of them of the affairs of the Church quite
vanishes, and in so doing he must needs find himself in a wrong box, or others
will easily so find him, he not interpreting the Visions according to the
genuine meaning of the Prophetic style, as Mr. Mede does, but according to his
own private fancy. But that I swell not my Appendicula to an undue bulk, I must
not enter, much less insist on these things. We haste therefore to what follows.

In Sect. 7. The first thing that occurs, is his allowing the Doctour's
dividing of the third Period or seventh Trumpet into seven Thunders to be an
ingenious Invention, but withal perstringing it as a Notion that has no ground
in the Text. But what we have answered to the Remarker in his Remarks on the
tenth Chapter of the Apocalypse will sufficiently demonstrate that this
Invention of the Doctor is plainly grounded upon the Text, and confirmed
therefrom, and so is not only ingenious, but also true. To which Answer
therefore I refer the Reader, and proceed to what occurs next, which is his
Assertion that the things prefigured by the Inner and Outer Court of the Temple
do synchronize. The absurdity of which conceit I have abundantly demonstrated
against the Remarker upon chap. 11. Whither I might again refer the Reader. But
because the Annotatour here in his Preface pretends to prove his erroneous
Assertion, which he follows Mr. Durham in, by no less than six arguments I will
briefly hint the weakness of every one of them.

Arg. 1. His first Argument insinuates, that the Coherence betwixt the first
and second verse of chap. 11. is no other ways to be understood than by
allowing what things are signified by the Inner and Outer Court, to
synchronize, V. 1. Rise and measure the Temple -- V. 2. But the Court that is
without (or rather according to the Greek) but the Outer Court of the Temple
(...), cast out, or pronounce to be rejectaneous. For it is given to the
Gentiles, and the holy City shall they tread under foot -- Of which two verses
the most easy and natural coherent sense is this, That John is bid by the
Angel to arise and measure, that is, forthwith to set himself to the measuring
of the Inner Court as denoting the present state of the Church, which he should
find symmetral to the Rule. But as for the Outer Court denoting a state of the
Church to come, that should bear the same proportion of time or duration to the
present state of her, that the Outer Court does to the Inner, of Space, you may
save your labor of measuring of that, but only pronounce it rejectaneous,
Asymmetral or unanswering to the Rule. For Providence has decreed to permit it
to be possessed of the Gentiles, and they shall tread it under foot -- They do
not yet tread it under foot, but shall do after such a proportion of time. Does
not this easy sense make the first and second verse admirably coherent, and
withal plainly imply, that the different states of the Church prefigured by
the Inner and Outer Court do not synchronize, but succeed one another? Let any
indifferent Reader compare the Annotatour's pretended coherence, and this of
mine, and then give judgment.

Arg. 2. If when he measures, all within the Church are included, then none are
left out. And on the contrary, if all are left out, then none are measured,
viz. at that time. Ans. This measuring and casting out concerns the visible
state of the Church, no part whereof is left out, during the time of
Symmetricalness, but it is all supposed to be measured and allowed to be in its
degree Symmetral. But of the Asymmetral times of the Church, no part is
measured, that is to say, is approved as Symmetral, but the visible state of
the Church declared to be all along faulty and Asymmetral, though in different
degrees.

Arg. 3. Outer relates to Inner, and Inner to Outer. But according to Mr.
Mede's way, when the Inner is measured, there is no Outer at all; and when the
Outer is left out, there is no Inner spoken of. Ans. Prius tempore relates to
posterius tempore and vice versa; But when Prius tempore is, Posterius tempore
is not; and when Posterius tempore is, Prius tempore is not. What a piece of
lank Sophistry is this? Things succeeding in time may be represented to our
understanding together, and that by things that are coexistent, and so may be
compared one with another. See my Answer to the Remarker upon this Text.

Arg. 4. The subject here of measuring and leaving out is different as well as
the Actions relating thereto; But according to Mr. Mede there is but one common
subject for both, viz. The visible Church. Ans. But this common subject the
visible Church is distinguished into two different states, the one
unapostatized, the other apostatized, and therefore not only admit, but call
for a different Action, the one of measuring and approving as Symmetral, the
other of casting out as adulterate and rejectaneous. For so (...) will signify.

Arg. 5. How could it be more clearly expressed to relate to the same time than
it is? For the coexistent parts of a Prophetic Representation signify the
coexistency of the things they represent, if nothing be expressly intimated in
the Prophecy to the contrary, as it is in the Vision of Daniel's Statue of
several Metals, and of the seven Heads of the Beast exhibited at once, where
they are in both places, interpreted by an Angel to succeed one another. This
is the sense of his fifth Argument. Ans. It might have been more clearly
expressed to relate to the same time if it had run thus: Measure the Inner
Court, because true Jews worship there, but measure not the Outer Court,
because it is trodden under foot by the Gentiles. This, though it does not
necessarily exclude two successive conditions of the visible Church, yet it had
been more favorable to the Annotatour's way than as things are set down in the
Vision, where John is bid to rise straight and measure the Temple, and those
that do worship therein, (which implies they were then worshipping when John
was to measure them) but is bid to cast out the Outer Court of the Temple,
because the Gentiles shall tread it under foot. Which plainly insinuates that
this will be done after the time of the true Worshippers in the Temple --. But
then for the other part of the argument, I answer, 1. That parts of a
Representation at once are sometimes to be understood of succession, though
there is no express intimation thereof in the Prophecy it self by an
Angel-Interpreter, so as in the case of Daniel's Image and the seven Heads of
the Beast, v. g. As in the seven coexistent Churches of Asia, which are yet by
reason concluded to signify seven successive Intervals of the Church, and the
Annotatour cannot deny it. 2. That which I intimated before is a fair assurance
that the right Worshippers in the Temple and the polluting Gentiles in the
Outer Court succeed one another; Not to add here, that this Vision in the
eleventh Chapter is the first of the Opened-book-prophecy, and therefore must
commence with the highest Epoch of the Prophecies, unless we will make the
Opened-book-prophecy to be (...). Which is so exceeding absurd, that no one
whose Intellectuals do not labor under some strange callosity, or who is not
hugely benumbed or blinded with prejudice can endure as tolerable, but must
feel or discern the extreme harshness or ugliness thereof. But this point I
think will occur again in his Preface.

Arg. 6. Mr. Mede himself does grant, that when the Representation consists in
Motion and Action, things done together in Vision are to be expounded of things
to be performed together in signification; but, says the Annotatour, the
Essence of the Type here consists not in the frame of the Temple and Courts,
but in Motion and Action, viz. measuring the Temple and casting out the Court,
and therefore they are to be expounded of things to be performed together, and
so to synchronize. Ans. No ingenuous Reader can understand Mr. Mede's grant to
reach any farther in Representations by Action and Motion than such Actions and
Motions as either require or admit of a simultaneous performance, as well as of
a simultaneous Representation. But here in this case the Actions or Motions are
not simultaneous, nor so represented. For John's measuring the Inner Court is a
Representation preceding his casting out, or rejecting the Outer; And his
declaring the Outer Court rejectaneous, reaches the whole Court, and that whole
time of the state of the Church represented thereby; and John must needs have a
Representation in his mind of both the Courts, while he measures the one, and
declares the other rejectaneous. And these two Courts, the one unpolluted, the
other polluted with Gentilism, representing the twofold state of the visible
Church, the one succeeding the other is rightly enough termed by Mr. Mede the
Essence of the Type, and the Object of John's examining them. So little is
there in this sixth or last, and in all the five foregoing Arguments; And so
plain is it, that there is not the least Incongruity or distortedness, (which
these arguments would fain charge it with) in Mr. Mede's way; Nor any
comparison for clearness and strength betwixt those arguments which Dr. More
produces for the fetching the rise of this Vision, chap. 11. from the first
Epoch of the Church, and these of the Annotatour which I have confuted. Let
the Reader peruse Dr. More's arguments, Synops. Proph. lib. 2. cap. 6. sect.
10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. and then freely judge. It is not a probable
business, but to the intelligent and unprejudiced plain demonstration.

The Annotatour's last attack is upon Mr. Mede's Notion of a twofold Series or
Systeme of Prophecies, (which he says is his chief argument whence he would
infer, that the time of the Inner Court precedes that of the Outer) viz. the
Systeme of the Sealed book, and that other of the Opened book, which latter,
says he, he fancies must needs begin ab ovo again, and commence from the Epoch
of the Seals, etc. To which the Annotatour answers, (1) That there is no
necessity of such a division of the Prophecies into those of the Sealed book,
and those of the Opened book, as he could show by several arguments. Or, (2) If
there were, yet what necessity is there that this latter must needs commence
from the same starting place with the former? Or yet (3) if there be, then I
say this is done, chap. 12. where the woman clothed with the Sun is the
Primitive Apostolical Church.

But to the first I reply, That there was indeed no necessity at first that
constrained the Divine Wisdom to frame the Apocalypse thus as it is, (this
part I mean we speak of) into this twofold Series of Prophecies, is true. But
now it is thus framed as it is, it is surely want of Wisdom in us not to
discern it to be so. That it is so, I need produce no new arguments here, but
refer you to Dr. More's Synopsis Prophetica, lib. 2. cap. 6. in the above named
Sections, 10, 11, etc. To which you may add what I have answered to the
Remarker on the 10 th and 11 th Chapters. But for the several arguments the
Annotatour could produce to show, that there is no necessity of conceiving
those two Series of Prophecies, if they be no better than the six arguments in
the other cause, he does well to conceal them; but if they be better, why did
he not produce them? I am sure Mr. Durham's arguments are very weak and
sophistical, p. 465. and built all upon that passage, chap. 11. verse. 14, 15.
The second Woe is past, and behold the third Woe comes quickly; And the seventh
Angel sounded -- The former part of which does not continue the Vision hitherto
in this 11 th Chapter, to the sixth Trumpet; So that all that is hitherto
herein said, must belong to the Sealed-book-prophecy, because the exitus of the
second Wo-Trumpet, or sixth Trumpet, is here mentioned, no more than all that
follows the sounding of the seventh Trumpet, to the end of the Apocalypse,
belongs to the seventh Trumpet, and so is to appertain to the
Sealed-book-prophecy; But in these two verses there is a mavelous artfull
Intimation of the Coincidence of Time, viz. That this Vision ( chap. 11.) of
the Rising of the Witnesses and falling of the great City ends, as to time,
with the second Wo-Trumpet. In virtue of which Intimation the Visions of the
Opened book and Sealed book are reduced into clear and useful Synchronisms;
and we are assured, that what follows in chap. 11. after the seven Trumpets
beginning to sound, follows the sixth Trumpet, and belongs to the time of the
seventh, etc. But to infer from the Time of the Exitus of the sixth Trumpet
falling in with the Time of the Rising of the Witnesses, that this Vision must
belong to the sixth Trumpet, which appertains to the Sealed-book-prophecy, when
it is so plainly and expressly, from the Text, a Prophecy of the Opened book is
so weak a reasoning, and so absonous, as nothing can be more. And this weakness
and mistake makes both Mr. Durham and the Annotatour give such an odd and
incongruous sense of that passage, chap. 11.11. Thou must prophecy again -- as
if it concerned the preaching of the Gospel, taking prophesying in so large a
sense that it may signify preaching, whenas the word (again) plainly intimates
that the prophesying must be of the same kind as before, that is, Predicting of
things to come. But how strangely does prejudice blind the understandings of
men?

To the second I answer, That there being two Series of Prophecies
acknowledged, the one chiefly respecting the affairs of the Empire, the other
of the Church; there is a necessity, unless we will be very absurd, and
conceive that the Spirit of Prophecy will not be as punctual at least, in
prefiguring from the beginning the affairs of the Church, as those of the
Empire (as if he were more curious in things extraneous than in things more
nearly concerning himself, and as it were domestic) to acknowledge that some
Visions commence as high as the Vision of the Seals. Which is a plain
demonstration that the woman in the Throes of childbirth and the fight of
Michael with the Dragon begins as high as the first Epoch of the Church. See
what we have answered the Remarker upon chap. 12.

And to the third and last I answer, If this be true that the second Vision of
the Opened-book-prophecy, viz. the woman in the Pangs of childbed began so high
as the Epoch of the Seals or commencement of the Church, any one whose
perceptive faculty is not grown insensible by callosity or gross Prejudice must
needs feel, perceive and abhor such an ugly and harsh piece of preposterousness
in placing thus this headless Vision first that falls short of the Epoch of
the Church by the space of the first six Seals, or of betwixt three and four
hundred years: Whenas it is so fitly placed to show, in Mr. Mede's way, the
Purity and Unapostatizedness of the Primitive Church, and the continuance of
that State, as the woman in the pangs of childbearing and the fight of Michael
with the Dragon to set out the Churches sharp sufferings and conflicts in
endeavoring to propagate the Gospel, and subdue the Roman Empire to the
Scepter of Christ.

Wherefore all things being so easy, natural, smooth and coherent in Mr.
Mede's way, as to these things we here speak of, it would amaze a man, that
after things are made so plain and convictive, that either Mr. Durham the
Guide, or Mr. Clark his Follower should have their eyes so held, that they
should not see so clear and manifest a truth. I must confess I was very much
astonished at it till I considered the power of Prejudice from education or
faction, and espousing the cause of a Party. And the Annotatour does here in
the conclusion ingenuously confess the Malady he labors under. His dear regard
to Presbytery and disgust against Episcopacy, this has made him not content
with the faithful conduct of Mr. Mede and Dr. More, but he must have another
light to guide him out of the paths and tracts of solid ground, in which they
would have safely led him, to be carried into Fenny and Marish places. And
prejudice has so hoodwinked his judgment, that notwithstanding all his
arguments against Mr. Mede's way in these points are thus unconclusive, as I
have demonstrated, yet he most triumphantly concludes; This then being evinced,
That the Temple and Altar measured and the Court unmeasured do synchronize, all
those Inferences which Dr. More so frequently deduces from his opinion will of
themselves fall to the ground, As, Episcopacy simply in it self is not
Antichristian, Presbytery is not jure divino, Pref. to Mist. of Godl. p. 19.
And elsewhere concerning the Office and Dignity it self (of a Bishop) It cannot
sink into my mind, That that Order of the Church which was instituted and in
practice in those Ages thereof which were Symmetral, can with any face or
conscience be judged Antichristian, Mist. of Iniquity, p. 472.

But why has the Annotatour noted that Inference of the Doctor also, that the
Doctrine of the Divinity of Christ, and Triunity of the Godhead is in this way
confirmed by Divine Authority against the Socinians, who admit of no other
authority but such, and by tricks and quillets think they can shuffle off other
places of Scripture that are produced for those Doctrines? Had he rather that
this Inference also should fall to the ground, than that Presbytery should not
perk up and prevail in the world against Episcopacy? But I will rather
charitably surmise he did not think of that; And declare, that it is great pity
but that a person so active and industrious to communicate truth to the World,
as the Annotatour is, should light upon any other Guides but such as are both
skillful and faithful. And lastly, I will not despair, but that he seeing so
plainly all his Pretenses of evincing, That the Temple and Altar measured, and
the Court unmeasured, do synchronize, to be utterly routed and vanish, and the
Doctour's Notion of the Symmetral Times of the Church antecedent to the
Asymmetral, to stand firm and unshaken, that he will admit or rather embrace
the Inferences the Doctor deduces therefrom, That neither Episcopacy is
Antichristian, nor Presbytery jure divino.

FINIS.

