AN ANSWER TO A LETTER From A Freeholder OF Buckingham-shire: TO A Friend in
LONDON, CONCERNING The Election OF THE KNIGHTS of the said COUNTY.
SIR,
I Thank you for the Account you gave me of the Election of the Knights of the
Shire for the County of Buckingham; It was very particular as I could have
desired, and shows an hopeful and forward Zeal in the Duke of Buckingham, the
Lord Pagett, and some others, to bring us again to the same happy Days which I
remember from the same beginnings in the same County, in the year 1640; and
when Worthy Gentlemen of the very same Names were Chosen for the
Representatives of that Shire, whereof one of them had the Honor of being one
of the Five Members: I suppose these Noble Knights may be of the same Families,
but cannot be their Sons, because the Fathers of those I mean happened to be
Traitors; which I perceive the Country would not endure, by their Crying so
exceedingly, they would have no Traitors Son.

There are many things in your Letter I must pray to have explained; As who you
mean by Sir Timber T. Sir Ralph V. and A. Sir Anthony C. Had it been Sir
Anthony A. C. I should have understood you; though I should have wondered that
he had no more of that Company for him.

I am glad to hear that the County (besides their good will for the Old Cause)
is in so good readiness for it is Defense, as to have 6000 Horse, Drums,
Trumpets, Wagons, etc. so well Disciplined as I know they will be by his Grace
the Duke of Buckingham; but when there shall be any Military occasion for them,
I shall rather advise our Countrymen to make use of Sir Richard Ingoldsby for
their Commander, both because he knows how to keep good Order at an Execution,
and because his Grace is often ill of a Fall from his Horse by an accidental
mistake of Prince Rupert. Besides his Grace is apt to Change his Mind out of
good Nature: It was that which, when he had Killed the Husband, made him Live
so kindly and publicly with the Wife, to the Neglect of his own. It was an
effect of the same Virtue that made him search the King's Cabinet in Scotland,
for fear his Master should have left any Papers behind him which might have
been Dangerous; And as his good Nature made him do these things for a Friend
and a Master, so it made him do as much for his Country too, in being the
Messenger to the French King for breaking the Tripple League, and making the
War with the Dutch, by which he saved us from having our Trade destroyed by
those Butter-boxes, and for which he had a Diamond Sword given him by the
French King, although he has not had his Reward here as he deserves: I say,
though these be all very great recommendations and eminent Proofs of his
abilities as well as his good nature, yet they are such over-Politick ways of
proceeding for our Country understandings, that when I did read of such Numbers
of Horse with Drums beating, and Trumpets sounding, led by his Grace the Duke
of Buckingham, methought I rather wished him at Colledge-Hill, where they know
him so much better than we do in the Country: For I considered, That if we
should have occasion to fight against the French, that Diamond Sword would be
remembered; and if against -- good Nature would Come in again, and he would
either remember that his Father from a private Gentleman had been made a Duke;
or that the King had forgiven him so many faults, and given him his life so
often, that he would have found some odd way at last of saving Buckinghamshire,
by giving us up to be Governed again by the Established Laws of England.

I like well the Shouts and Crying out, One and all, One and all, round the
Country, because you know what that signifies, both in Fleets and Armies; and
if our Militia be not Trained to it beforehand, they will no more understand
what that means when there is occasion, then they do the Words of Command. I
like also extremely those Names of Pensioners, Papists, and Betrayers of their
Country, to be used upon these occasions, because they will serve very well to
amuse the People, and may be applied to whom we please. For the first will
certainly serve to be employed against all Courtiers; the second against all
Conformists to the Church of England: and the third against all assertors of
Monarchical (that is to say Arbitrary) Government.

It was very well done to discountenance that Malignant Town of Buckingham,
who, as you say, have made so bad a Choice, that I hear they have Chosen two of
the King's Servants, and one of them not only a Traytor's Son, but for ought I
know, he may be as bad himself; for they say he is a Gentleman of the King's
Bedchamber: But you must remember either to keep that silly loyal Town down,
now you have begun, or (if ever the King have power to show it) it is two to
one, but he will be kinder to them, then ever he was.

We hear they have behaved themselves very well also in Essex, though not so
well as by the Conduct of Major Wildman it has been managed amongst you,
because Young Mr. Ireton has not yet the experience to advise my Lord Gray, as
the Major has the Duke of Buckingham. But I assure you, Major General Ireton's
Head upon Westminster Hall had not a better Heart belonging to it, to do his
Country Service, then this Young Gentleman; and the Lord Gray is as likely to
inherit all his Grandfather's Talents and Principles: I confess there was
lately some danger of his being misled with too much fondness which he and
some of his Relations had for a Certain Duke; but thanks be to God he has found
it by experience to be but a Court Friendship, which too nearly touched his
Copy hold; and I hear, that as matters have fallen out with his Lordship, (who is
a true maintainer of Property) it will turn extremely to the advantage of our
Cause.

FINIS.

