AN ANSWER TO A LIBEL ENTITLED, A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Dr. H. C. and a
Country-Gentleman.
HAving lately seen scattered up and down in Coffee-Houses, an Inssipid yet
Malicious Sheet, entitled, A Dialogue between Dr. H. C. and a
Countrey-Gentleman; and having taken the pains to peruse it, I found it so
false and senseless a Trifle, as not to deserve the Regard or Notice of any
Understanding Man. But being informed that the Author's Partisans hugged
themselves up with the Imaginary Victory, gained by this Doughty Tool; and
because some, ignorant of the Nature of the Doctor's Great Design, might
possibly be misled by this Trifler into wrong Idea's of it; and partly, that
this pert Dialogue-Monger may not Triumph in his little Nonsense, and think his
Scribble unanswerable, because it was despised: I am content for once to rake
in his Dunghill, and to set That in its True Light, which he has so
maliciously, yet weakly, endeavored to Obscure and Deform.

The Author designed it a Libel, as it appears by the manner of its coming
Abroad, having been plentifully dispersed in Town and Country, without either
the Authors or the Printers Name; and the Author has thus far succeeded, that
he has shown enough of the Malice, though none of the Wit, of a Libeller. But as
Jo: Briscoe says, in his Answer to the Usurer, Not knowing what Impressions the
same may make on such, who may read it over superficially, but will not spare
time to examine into his Arguments, I shall with what brevity I can, detect
their Fallacy: And shall not therefore insist on his silly Quibbles and
impertinent Tautologies, but first take notice of his charging the Doctor
falsely, viz. Dr. How come you to pretend to be the first Proposer of a Bank in
England? For now you put me in mind on it, you laid claim to the Bank of England
as yours: And in the Margent quotes Useful Reflections, etc. page 3. To which
place I turned, and there find it thus expressed, viz. But yet notwithstanding
I do for diverse Reasons think any Bank is better here than Money-Banks. But
such as are for founding Banks Originally upon a Revenue, or Goods, must rob
the Doctor of the Fruits of his Labor, Charge, and Invention, if they do not
consider him accordingly. -- And all this is writ by a third Person.

Wherein now does it appear that the Doctor challenges this Bank as his, or any
part of it? Save that he says, he was the first Inventor of Banks Originally
upon a Revenue or Goods, but altogether condemns this of Money: And to my
certain knowledge, did use many Arguments against all the Prejudices and
Inconveniences, which he foresaw would be the sure Consequences of this Bank,
and which the People have since most sensibly felt. But our Falsifier a little
after proceeds in answer to the Doctor's Notion of first giving a Credit upon
Land, viz. Excuse me, good Doctor, if I differ from you; That Notion was in the
World some hundred of years before you or they were born, and therefore neither
you nor they can pretend to be the Authors of it: And in the Margent he
observes that every Mortgage is a Credit upon Land, and every time a Mortgage
is assigned, it passes in payment for so much Money as it is assigned for.

Here our Junior Soph has notably contrived to confound the Doctor's Notion of
issuing out Bills of Credit on Land, with that of Mortgages, which is indeed a
Credit on Land likewise, but much different in the manner: For the Bills of
Land-Credit designed by the Doctor, are after a more useful Method, of dividing
a Mortgage into so many lesser sums, and making them payable as Money to any
Man, without the tedious Trouble and Expense of all Parties meeting together,
treating, consulting, and assigning, as is always done in the borrowing Money
on a Mortgage; neither can a Man be always readily and easily supplied with the
whole Sum due on a Mortgage, when he has an occasion for that Money again; or
will he part with it, unless the whole be paid down; which if the Sum be large,
may be offered to fifty, before he meets with one, that may answer his ends:
From which follows this destructive consequence to so many Mortgagers, that
oftentimes for want of paying or procuring part of the Principal or Interest,
they are prosecuted for the whole; whereas if their Lands were mortgaged to
Trustees of a Bank, and Bills of Credit given out thereupon, those Bills would
in all respects be as serviceable a Money in specie, and no Man could then be
ever so straightened as before: And this is that sort of Credit upon Land, which
the Doctor pretends to be the first Inventor of, and which was so well approved
of by two Committees of Parliament, that one of them had agreed to Report it,
but the other actually did Report it Profitable and Practicable; the latter
Report having been actually made to the House, is to be seen in the Printed
Votes of the fifth of February, 1693. but the first Report, though agreed by the
Committee, was not made to the House, being hindered by a too speed die Rising of
that Session, yet can be made out by diverse worthy Members, beyond the
Contradiction of this Defamer, or any of his Adherents.

The next thing observable is, where he makes the Doctor say, And I propose to
issue out Tickets to 10000 l. value, upon the aforesaid Security; there is a
Notion for you. Gent. answers, A Notion indeed, Doctor; but what Security, I
pray, have those who are to receive your Tickets in payment? for if your Fund
be bad, your Tickets will not be current; and 150 l. a year is not a Security
for 10000 l. In the Margent is ibid, id est, Bank-Dialogue, page 3. which I
have read over, and cannot find the Doctor says any such thing there, though he
does so elsewhere; but it is thus expressed: I never yet heard it was a Crime for
any Person to lend 10000 l. upon 100 l. a Year Security; nor for any one to
borrow so much, if he could. But this Notion is more at large treated of, in
the Rod for the Fools Back; only the Author did not care to quote it right,
lest the same Rod that corrected there, should turn upon this Kn -- as well as
that Fool. Since our Caviller will not comprehend this Notion aright, therefore
he would not have any body else understand it, better than himself would seem
to do; the Security he questions to those who are to receive the Tickets, is
not fairly stated by him; for he goes on this Supposition, If the Fund be bad,
your Tickets will not be current; true, but then vice versa, if the Fund be
good, the Tickets will be Current, according to his own way of reasoning. But
that the Fund is bad, hardly any rational man, especially conversant in Trade
or Business will, if unbyassed, admit; unless it be supposed that no Land in
England has any good Title to it, since the Fund proposed, is the Estates of
Landed Gentlemen in England; and though one or two prove bad, it does not follow,
that all must be so; and it is much if the badness of the Title be not
discovered upon so strickt an enquiry as will be made; so that, if any other
can show a better Title, the present Subscriber shall not be admitted, and if
the fraud be discovered before four Years are expired, then there will
presently be a stop put to the Bills on that Estate; but suppose that some few
Titles prove bad, yet there will be enough besides to make all good, there
being an allowance for bad Titles, as Merchants allow for Ware and Tare, Losses
at Sea, and Bad Debts. So that I hope here is enough said for the badness of
the Fund, in respect to its Title: Then it remains only to speak to its
badness, in respect of its insufficiency; viz. that 150 l. a Year is not a
Security for 10000 l. and he makes the Doctor to answer, I don't say it is so,
do I? and quotes the Rod for the Fools Back, page 6th. in which Page, I find it
thus expressed. For neither the Doctor, nor the Author do any where affirm, that
2000 l. Fund or Value in Land is a Security for 10000 l. as you say they do, to
sell at the Market-Price as it now goes. This was said in Answer to a
Scurrilous Pamphlet against the Doctor put forth by one Blake a Scrivener (as
it is reported he bragged) by advice of Jo. Briscoe, and a little after, the
Doctor's Proposal it self is set down, which says, That 150 l. a Year, together
with the 2000 l. Stock in Trade, is a sufficient Security for the Payment of a
Rent of 100 l. a Year to the Office, which does not amount to that great Sum of
10000 l. till 100 Years are expired. And a little lower it follows thus, That
the 10000 l. is not to be borrowed at Interest of any Private Person, or
Public Society; but to be made out of the Mint, and Lent to the Subscribers,
and other uses aforesaid, and to be repaid, but not all at once, with Interest,
as in the Case of all other common Mortgages, where the Creditor can call in
both Principal and Interest when he pleases; but to be a hundred Years in
paying, at 100 l. a Year only, which in the end makes up 10000 l. and thus the
150 l. a Year, and Stock, may be Security enough.

When this Book was Printed, it was hoped and endeavored by Dr. Chamberlen to
prevail with the Parliament to make the Tickets, for want of Money, to pass by
an Act, as ready Money in all payments; so that then there would not have been
any need of a Sum in specie in the Office to circulate them, and therefore the
said Security was in all respects very sufficient to answer 10000 l. in such a
length of time, as the Doctor proposed it should be repaid, though not all
presently, as if the Estates were to be sold at the present Market Price.

And whereas he makes the Doctor speak thus, viz. I say they will have 22500 l.
Security for every 10000 l. Tickets that will be delivered out; which has
occasioned one whole Column of Scribble in the said Dialogue; In Answer, it is
necessary to let you know, that Mr. Impudence, the then Objector, did then, as
our present Dialogue-monger does now, make no difference between a Fund of
Land, settled for the payment of 10000 l. presently, as they understand it, and
10000 l. to be an hundred years in paying, it being in no sort equal, or the
same thing, or of the same value, as they fallaciously represent it; and
therefore it is thus expressed in the Rod for Fools Back, Page 10th. I would
ask both Blockhead, and Briscoe this one Question, suppose they had 10000 l. to
dispose of, and here are two Offers made them, one of 500 l. per Annum to be
sold for such a Sum, and another of 150 l. a Year to be Mortgaged for 150
Years, the Profits whereof do plainly amount to 22500, at the end of the said
Term (and as so much ready Money according to their Notion is to be valued)
which of these two Offers will they let go their 10000 l. for? No doubt they
would think it an hard Bargain, if they were forced to take the 150 l. per
Annum for their Money, though according to their own way of reckoning it will
raise 22500 l. and on this score, and for this Reason it was so expressed in the
Bank Dialogue.

But to proceed with the Pamphlet in Hand, Make out that, Doctor, (says our
nameless Libeller) and you do your Work; for I do not find any more than an 150
l. per Annum Security for 10000 l. page 2. I find this Jack Nubibus is not so
very lucky as he thinks himself, at Bantering', or at making Objections; or
else he would have said, That though the Office does not, like a common Mortgage,
oblige the Subscriber to pay in all his 10000 l, presently, or on half a years
notice, yet other People will bring in the Bills, and will expect either to
have their Money presently paid, at sight of the Bills, or will not take the
Bills, because the Security of 150 l. per annum, is not sufficient to answer
for them presently; which I take to be the weightiest Objection: And yet take
it which way you will, it is not truly stated; for as the Doctor has now
proposed it, there is 3000 l. deposited in the Joint Stock, besides the 150 l.
per annum, to be Security for the 10000 l. and is very sufficient, according to
what Jo. Briscoe, one of the Doctor's principal Adversaries, has affirmed, in
his answer to the Usurers Objection, viz. But I propose a way to the
Freeholder, how he may have 1500 l. on 100 l. per annum, for 3 l. per Cent.
being no more than 45 l. per Cent. per Annum, and that without any further
charge; and if he will sell his Estate, after such Reduction of Interest, he
shall have 40 years Purchase for it, ( for Land will be worth 40 years
purchase, if Interest be reduced to 3 l. per Cent.) I fancy our Usurer will not
be able, with all his Rhetoric, to persuade the Freeholder that this is but an
Imaginary, and not a Real Improvement of his Estate, and that he is never a
whit the richer.

And the Methods, by which he proposes the Reduction of Interest, are by Bills
of Credit, which he confirms in all his Papers; and particularly in his Queries
at the end of the said quoted Print, which he desires the Usurer to answer.
Query 2d.

If there be not Money in Specie sufficient for our Trade, whether we must not
make use of Credit to supply that Defect, or must leave Trading? And a little
lower,

If Credit supplying the Defects of Money, abates the Interest of Money, why
may not the Freeholders of England have a Credit upon their Lands, as well as
others upon their bare Notes, without paying 6 l. per Cent. per Annum for the
same?

Then I say, Since it is fairly granted, (and indeed warranted by continual
Practice) that Bills of Credit can supply the want of Money, and that by giving
out Bills of Credit to the value of 15 years Purchase on an Estate, it will
reduce Interest of Money to 3 l. per Cent. and consequently advance Land to 40
years Purchase; it must by the same Rule of Reason follow, that raising above
treble the value in Credit on an Estate, will lower Interest to 2 l. per Cent.
and so advance Land to 60 years Purchase; and then 150 l. per annum will be
worth 9000 l. which with the 3000 l. in Stock, makes 12000 l. which sure will
pass for a very good Security for 10000 l. And at 40 years Purchase it will be
worth 6000 l. which with the 3000 l. Stock, makes 9000 l. And this comes
something near the matter; and 1000 l. extraordinary more than what such an
Estate will yield, may be allowed to be raised thereon, as well as to trust any
Man with 100 l. or 1000 l. on his bare Note only, without other Security; for
that the Estate in time will certainly pay it off, and in a few years bring it
to the fore said Security of 9000 l. But the Personal Credit is very hazardous,
and has often proved Fatal, as many Gentlemen too well know, by Woeful
Experience of several Banking Goldsmiths.

But suppose that every 10000 l. had 600 l. per annum tied to make it good, and
such a Security, I find, would satisfy this Man of Censure, and make him, and
all such scrupulous Objectors, (like him more Nice than Wise) allow the Bills
to pass for good; and suppose too, that they were to be bought all up at 100 l.
a year; are the Bills the better, for that there is more Land tied to make them
good, since there will be still the same length of time, before they will be
all bought up, as the 100 l. a year of the 600 l. will annually do? And
notwithstanding but 150 l. a year is tied, and that the Office does want Moneys
to exchange the Bills, must the Estate be presently sold any more the sooner,
than if there were 600 l. a year to answer 10000 l. in which case it is possible
the Office on some emergent occasions may equally be under the same wants of
ready Cash? No certainly, for the Bills will perform their Office of paying
Debts, as well then, as before, when there was Cash to exchange them; and like
a Gentleman's Rents, the next Week or Quarter, more Money comes in, to supply
that defect; and it is much better to know the utmost Credit that will be given
out on an Estate; and the certain times when it will be discharged; than do as
the other Banks, that pretend to grant but 15 years Bills of Credit, yet
privately give out 2 or 300 years Credit, without Notice, Leave or Limitation.

By all which Premises it appears plainly, I think, that the Doctor's proposed
Security can answer fully as to length of time, and otherwise also, according
to his Adversary Briscoe's Judgment, on the account of raising a large Credit
thereupon; for that he proposes to lend 500 l. more than any Scrivener or
Usurer will commonly lend on 100 l. per annum.

It only remains to satisfy the World, That the Bills shall be all answered
with Ready Money, and then this Dialogue is fully answered, and its Malice will
be of no force: Let it then be considered, that though 10000 l. be raised on 150
l. per annum, yet not all at once, and not till four years are completed;
there being to be delivered out the first year but 1000 l. in Bills, to
circulate which, besides other provision of Money, 400 l. in specie is paid in
by the Subscribers, or some others for them; a year after, 1100 l. in Bills,
and 300 l. in specie paid in; two years from thence, 1200 l. in Bills, and 200
l. in specie: So then, the Bills in all, without the Money to exchange them,
will be 2400 l. And certainly 150 l. per annum will be full Security for so
many Bills, and 900 l. in specie, sufficient to circulate 2400 l. in Bills
(which is more than other Banks have ever yet allowed:) In the mean time, the
Bills will be scattered all about in the Nation; and in all probability, will
gain such a Reputation as may make them unquestionable for the future;
especially when it shall be known that many other great moneyed Persons, as
well as the Subscribers, have assured the Doctor and his Managers, That they
will deposit all their Cash, and order all their Rents and other Payments, to
be made and brought into this Office, as now they do in Goldsmiths hands; and
take our Bills of Credit, as now their Notes; being satisfied with this
consideration, That though it should happen (which is very unlikely) that all the
Cash should be exhausted at any time, yet the Land is obliged annually to buy
them up, so that they shall not, nor can be Losers. And supposing the worst,
yet the Returns of the Joint Stock in Trade, together with the Rents of the
Subscribers and others, cannot let the Office be long out of Cash to answer the
Bills. The third year there will be above 3000 l. paid to the Subscriber, but
before that time the Joint Stock will be in motion; and as the Governors of
the Stock pay away their Bills for Goods, so they will agree to take the Bills
again as readily as Money in specie, for all their Goods as they trade in,
which will circulate the Bills as well, as if they were changed for ready
Money: Besides, the Subscribers agreeing to take them in Rents, and Fines, as
well as all other Payments, will encourage their Tenants to receive them; so
that Men need not trouble themselves always to go, or send to the Office, to
exchange their Bills; because there will be so many Persons scattered all over
the Nation, who will receive or change them as well as the Office. Credit does
always beget Credit; or else how comes a young Goldsmith, not worth above 500
l. in about three or four years, if careful, and exact in his Payments, to be
trusted with above 10000 l. and give out Bills to 4 or 5000 l. at least, though
never any Goldsmith did settle any Land or Fund for all this Money or Credit?
And thus he shall have a far better Credit than a Gentleman of 2000 l. a year
in Land: There can be no other Reason, than that such Gentlemen mind their
pleasures, and spend their Money more profusely, not caring to be so exact in
their Times and Payments, but think they may do Business at their leisure;
neither have they occasion to deal with so many Men of Business in the World,
or endeavor to increase their Estates, as appears by so vast a Multitude of
Estates so deeply Mortgaged, which has brought Landed Men in general out of
Credit. Add to this, That while Gentlemen have the Disposal of their Estates,
and can privately engage them to others for Debts, no Man can be so secure of
dealing with, or trusting any Landed Man.

If then it be so, that Diligence, Carefulness and Exactness, be the real and
true Cause of increasing and supporting Credit, then it must follow, that when
Gentlemen's Estates are publicly made oyer in Trust to an Office of Credit, for
so many years certain, to answer all Bills of Credit issued thereupon, or any
Sums of Money deposited therein, and that this Office be exact in their Times
and Payments; the Credit of this Office must, in Proportion, far exceed that of
any Goldsmith whatsoever, though never so careful; because the Land is the best
and surest Fund (and so, much the better, when assisted by a Stock in Trade as
aforesaid) neither can the Land be ever alienated or appropriated to any other
use, than to make good their Bills and Payments.

There will be more Care, Exactness and Diligence used for Improvement of the
Joint Stock, than can be by any particular Trader whatsoever; and a large
Control to hinder or correct whatsoever is done amiss. Besides, the Books and
Accounts will lie open to the view of all Men, which a Shopkeeper will not
discover; and if he Breaks, or Dies, as too many have done, where is the
certainty of the Fund, or what hopes that ever you shall have your Money again?
Whereas the Office cannot die.

At the end of the 4th Year, the whole Sum of 10000 l. will be given out on
every 150 l. per Annum, and before that, will begin the time of Recalling and
Cancelling the Bills yearly for Rent to the Office, and will be continued every
year till the time expires; by which Method the number of Bills will yearly be
lessened, and the Security will thereby become every year the better. And the
Bills having been thus dispersed amongst not only the Subscribers, but their
Tenants and Friends, and likewise to the Joint Stock, and Charges of the
Undertaking, the 10000 l. can never be supposed to be brought in all at once to
be Exchanged for Money, any more than any Goldsmith's or Bank of England's
Notes, whose Fund few questions, though not near so certain, or are unwilling to
give them Credit; and why more should be expected of this Office, than of any
other in the World, is very unreasonable to imagine; but all Men will not be of
one and the same mind with our Dialogue-Monger, it being not Case of a
Mortgager, that has to do but with one Man, who will have all his Money called
in at once.

The Joint Stock in Trade will likewise greatly assist to keep the Bills in
Motion, and possibly as well as if they were all presently turned into Money:
Since therefore all these aforesaid Persons do agree to Encourage and Promote
the passing of the Bills, to be sure they will not bring, nor send any more to
the Office, than just to serve their Occasions for Market or Pocket Expenses;
so that they will not, nor indeed can at once all be brought in for Money to
prejudice the Office; nor can the Office fail, as this Author hopes and wishes,
though he and some others of his Malicious Crew may bring in as many Bills as
they can, to endeavor the Destruction of it, because their number may be but
few and inconsiderable; and as long as there are Landed Men and Traders enough,
who will approve the Security, and promote the Bills, and supply the Office
with Cash, and that with much more than the Office may have occasion for, we
need not trouble our selves about such shallow-Brain'd Fellows as this
Dialogue-Monger. For it is not expected, that in its Infancy every body will
approve of it; as for Example, all timorous Men that will neither trust
Goldsmiths, Banks, or any body else, Subscribers in other Banks, obstinate
Blockheads, that will not understand the way of either, and prejudiced Persons,
such as our Dead-doing Dialogue-Monger, may Foolishly or Maliciously Reject it;
yet if we meet with as many more other sort of People that will, of which the
Dr. has reason not to doubt, it will still sufficiently answer all our Ends:
For no Man that opens his Shop, can expect all People will buy of him; but if
so many do, as he is enabled thereby, to keep his Family, pay his Rent and
Debts, it is all he desires. This, I hope, will satisfy any Rational Man, that
the Bills cannot, nor is there reason they should, be brought in all at once to
the Office, nor can there be any want of Money to answer those Bills that are
brought, as this Dialogue vainly suggests. To proceed then with our Punner,
after he has made the Dr. answer what he pleases, he tells him, That he makes
a Part to be greater than the Whole, and a Term to be more worth than a Fee
Simple, which is simple all over. But how Impertinent he is to make the Dr. who
never assirmed any such thing, to speak thus absurdly, is already showed, where
mention is made of the 22500 l. being Security for 10000 l. Besides, it is not
very strange for one Person by his Industry, to improve a Part so, as to yield
more, than others have made the Whole at any time before.

The next thing therefore to be observed, is, our Malapert Squires Remarks on
the little Sum the Dr. has proposed to circulate the Bills: And here, though at
first he has repeated the Dr's Method of raising more plenty of Money, than
any other Bank does allow, to circulate the Bills; yet at last he would have
all Men take special notice, that there neither is in the Office, nor ever will
be, any more than just 100 l. to circulate 1100 l. in Bills; and slily
insinuates, as if all this 1100 l. in Bills were in one Man's Hands, or in
several, that should agree together to keep the Bills four years together, and
then carry them all at once into the Office to be presently Exchanged for Money
in Specie, and then concludes, that without the Spirit of Prophecy he foretells
this Bank will soon be at an end; ay, I warrant you, before it be begun. But
how does this Mr Foresight know it will all fall out so exactly as he says? For
as he does not tell this by the Spirit of Prophecy, so neither do I take him to
be any great Conjurer, or else he might have foreseen, that all his Fallacy
would easily be Detected, and his Objections Answered, and then would have
saved all the Pains and Charges of making and printing this Senseless Dialogue.

I hope, that to any Unprejudiced Attentive Reader, I have showed plainly
before, that it is impossible that all the Bills should be brought in at once,
as this Country Squire would have it; and likewise that it is highly probable,
that this Office may, and will be trusted with as much or more running Cash,
besides what the Dr. proposes to be deposited by the Subscribers, as any
Goldsmith or other Bank now is, or can be; if so, as there is little doubt,
then will this Office have much more than 500000 l. in Money to Exchange what
Tickets shall be desired. But says our Gent. (after he has so Fallaciously
stated the State) Those who have so little Wit as to settle their Estates in
such a Bank, will deserve to have their Estates begged, if they do not make a
sure Game on it, for to be sure, first come, first served; and how simply will a
Man look, when he comes with his Tickets, and finds the Birds flown, his Money
gone, and no Security remaining for his Money -- This Gent. would have every
body understand the Dr's Bank after his manner only, and no better than as this
thick Scull'd Animal (to use his Terms) does himself, not considering, that all
his Objections have been already made, fully answered, and rightly understood,
by all such as are concerned, before they Subscribe their Estates to it; who,
it may well be presumed, are so thoroughly sensible of the greatness and
goodness of the Design of it, as to have a little more Wit than either to be
ashamed, or to repent, or be frighted out of their Subscriptions on sight of
this insipid Scribble; insomuch that since this Dialogue has been dispersed,
most of the particulars of their Estates have been sent into the Agent in order
to their Settlement; and do understand before hand, that such a Game cannot be
played as this sharp Gent. would have them, there being not Bills to the value
of the Estate given out at first; for this is an Office of Land Credit, and not
like Brisco's, Barebone's, or Royal Bank, or any other Monied Bank, that has
no other Fund to answer its Bills of Credit, but what is deposited in Specie,
which as soon as ever it is all drawn out, does presently put an end to the
Bank it self; even as the old Banking Goldsmiths in Lombard street were ruined
when the Exchequer was shut up; they having settled no Fund of Land to answer
so many Bills as they had given out, so that only those were paid, who came
first for their Money, and many others left unpaid to this day, to their Ruin:
Whereas if Estates had been settled after the Dr's manner for the Payment of
the Bills, they would never have crowded so fast for their Money; and all their
Bills might have been paid off before this time, by an Annual Payment out of
the said Estates; and suppose the worst, that it should be the Case of this
Bank, as this Prevaricating Gentleman would have it, that all the Birds are
flown, and his Money gone, yet still the Bills, for which his Money was paid,
will be found there; and those Bills will be so well secured, as either to be
readily curernt, or be certainly answered by Virtue of their Land Security; so
that if a Man brings Bills, and misses ready Money for them just at that
instant (which is unlikely to happen) he is not presently undone, neither has
so much cause to look simple, because he keeps his Estate, which is the
Security for the Bills, in his own Hands, and pays his Rent or Annuity in the
Bills that lie by him, according to the Proposals; For his Estate is not lost,
or to be sold, or foreclosed, having no Debts to pay, else he cannot bring in
all the 10000 l. Bills at four years end to be Exchanged: If he has Debts, then
certainly they will be paid by the Office in four years time, there being Money
and Bills of Credit sufficient (as in other Banks) in that time, and for that
purpose; but if after all, this Bank must be at an end, by reason of the Bills
being all at a glut called for, to be changed into Money presently; why then
there may as well be an end of all other Bills of Credit also, upon a like run
upon them for Money; since all our end of Credit was only or chiefly contrived
to supply the want of Money; and so there would be neither Goldsmiths or Bank,
or other Credit whatsoever, nor could any Banks in the World subsist, if all
their Credit must be paid off at once, and that as soon as given out. It ought
to be a great satisfaction to the World, that Estates are tied to make good all
Bills of Credit in such a certain term of years, in a manner sufficient to make
good what is undertaken. And therefore the Bills may very well be current in
the mean time. As for his adding; After his Money is gone, and no Security
remaining for his Money; it is Nonsense, and Contradiction to say that, when
just before he called them Fools, for tying their Estates to such a Bank; for
if any Estates are tied, then there is a remaining Security. In the next place,
such affirming, there is no Security, is not an Objection to the Dr's Bank, but
a direct giving himself the Lie, having (as just before) confessed the
contrary, that the Dr. does Propose, that Estates shall be tied for so many as
100 years certain, to pay yearly for the Bills. This is not like Brisco's or
Barebone's Banks, where they Propose to lend 1500 l. on 100 l per Annum, and
further give out Bills of Credit upon the same Estate, and the Gent. take leave
to pay in his Money at any time, and redeem his Estate; and when these said
Banks are repaid all the Money they have lent on many Estates, and delivered up
the Deeds, if they should run away with the Money; pray who should answer for
the Bills, when the Estates that were the Security are released, they being not
tied for any years certain? Or what an hopeful Bargain shall such have, who
deposit their Money as running Cash in such Banks, where the Security is so
uncertain?

But again, Supposing there is no Money left in the Office, yet it can never
Break or be Ruined, or any Man be undone by it; for that the Land is tied to
bay off, in order to be Cancelled, so many Bills every year, of any Person that
has them, so that by degrees they will all be paid for; the Dr's Proposal being
to set up an Office of Land Credit, and not a Money Bank, though Money will not
be wanting to assist the needful Circulation of the Bills of Credit.

Our Civil Country Gent. makes the Dr. Correct him for his unmannerly
Expressions, which though he designed a Jest, yet may be applied in earnest,
and cause enough, when he so ungentlemanly questions the Verity of Great Men's
being at all concerned in the Dr's Undertaking, and accuses the Dr. of
unwarrantably making use of the Names of Persons of the first Rank, as
concerned with him in his Bank; whether the Dr. have so done, any Man may see
by their Subscriptions, and when the Constitution of the Bank is Published, it
will appear beyond Contradiction. But still the Gent. harps on the same string,
and like a Brother of Jerry Squirts, must repeat the same thing over and over
again. Doctor, I say your Bank must fall, because you have no Security. For
which, Mr Thick-Scull, we have only your bare word; but just after the same
manner, did Scrivener Blake repeat the same thing several times, which was
fully answered in the Rod for the Fool's back: But that Book falling into but
sew Hands, I shall therefore answer it here again, by repeating the answer
there given, viz. The Doctor never affihmed it to be a Security, for all the
Credit to be paid off in one Sum, as when Estates are proposed to be sold;
there being no such Design here: nor is it possible to bring in all the Five
Millions of Credit to be Exchanged, because the Stock will always have a large
Sum for their use; and nothing can possibly make the Bank fall, unless the
Subscribers and Governors of the Joint Stock will all agree together to destroy
that, which they have taken so much care all this while to set up, and which if
not encouraged, will certainly be the Ruin of many of them, whose Estates are
deeply engaged, there being not Money enough by a tenth part to be had in the
Nation to free their Estates; which otherwise will be devoured by the Monied
Persons and Usurers, who are so Merciless as to Imprison their Debtors, Seize
their Estates, foreclose the Equity of Redemption, and leave the Landed Men and
their Families to starve; and except killing them, our Enemies the French can
do no more: And therefore its the Interest of all other Landed Men, as well as
the Subscribers to this Office, to promote the Bills of Credit on Land, since
Money cannot be had, for the better support of their Families, and the
preservation of the Value of their Lands, and in their own Defense to run
Counter to all unfair Dealers in Money, and shake off their heavy Yoke of
Bondage, by engaging their Lands after this manner, and making it perform the
use of Money, as well as Gold or Silver when Coined; and thus to buy off the
Bills by an Annual easy Payment; and for other reasons likewise, as that there
are more Landed Men than Monied Men in the Nation, and a greater Value of Land
than Money, which Money is but the Product of this Land. The Landed Men have
chiefly contributed to the support of this War, do want Money most, and are
least esteemed; the Land remains a sure Fund, when Money or Commodities are
carried away, worn out, or perished; and the Trader may better afford to take
the Bills, than let any Person run in Debt on his Book three or four or more
years, and then receive a part, and trust for more, which if the Debtor dies,
the Debt is hazzarded, and many times lost, and as often put to the trouble of a
Law Suit, but the Office will not die, and his Account will no more be with the
Debtor, but with the Office, which will either satisfy him, or take care to
make the Land do it. Therefore I tell you again, that it is a good Security as
the Dr. has proposed it, for all the Credit that will be given out thereupon;
and will answer all that will be brought to the Office for Money. But what
matter is it what such a sorry sharping Fellow as this says, that has neither
Name or Sense? And yet, for that it is possible, that such Creatures, like
secret Villains, may do a great deal of mischief, though never any good;
therefore it is convenient to give an answer, both to cure and prevent the Evils
he endeavors to Promote; for so he would hinder all Persons from giving any
the least Credit, or depositing any Cash, when he tells you, that he who pays
100 l. into your Bank, will have a hopeful bargain of it; since he does not
like it, he should have told us what Goldsmith or Bank gives a better Security,
or where all Men should put their Money safely: But why is this Gent. so much
concerned that Men should not trust their Money here? If he does not like it,
he may keep his Money, for there is no compulsion on him to bring it hither;
and yet I think those Men do much more deserve to have their Estates begged,
who will subscribe to any other Bank that will lend them but 1500 l. on 100 l.
per Annum, which they cannot repay in so many years; when this Bank will supply
them with so much more than will pay their Debts, and as much again to Trade
withal: But suppose now, that there is a Million of running Cash in
seve-Goldsmiths Hands, and other Banks in London, may it not be with as much
safety put in here, where an Office will be more regularly formed than any
where else? And may not the Bills of this Bank, which cannot be so easily
counterfeited as any others, be as good to give for that Cash as any they give?
And is not the Security much better, since the Land is tied for so many years
certain, to answer the Bills, if any accidental loss should happen? Does any
Goldsmith give you any other Security than his bare Note, and that without
Interest too, for what Cash you pay him? And may not this Office, that has so
many Landed Estates to secure their Bills, thrive as well, and be as
responsible with the running Cash it shall be entrusted with, as any particular
Trader whatsoever? But to proceed, he makes the Doctor say, The Subscribers
will favor the Bank: Well, and what then? If they do, it will be more than
this Sharper, joined with all the Crew of his Malicious Companions, can do to
hinder them, or destroy the Bank, because the Bills will be all in their own
Disposal and Management; but says our Sharper, What do you talk of favoring
the Bank? We live in a sharp Age, wherein every one will favor himself, and
will secure 80 years Purchase for 100 l. a year if he can get it; I told you
what a Sharper we had got, this looks so exactly like Jo. Briscoe, that one
would swear 'twas his nown very self; and perhaps there may be three or four
such Sharpers crept in amongst our Subscribers, that may draw out what they can
on their Estates; which if they do, that will not break the Bank: But they
cannot make so sure a Game on it as he imagines, for the Subscriber can have but
fifty years Purchase, if he raises the Circulation Money, and but forty if he
does not; and for that he must stay four years first, the rest being in Stock,
etc and afterward let him do his worst, for by that time the price of Land
will advance to more than forty years Purchase; so that he may not be able to
mend himself after he has his Money, however his Estate will be secured, which
is as much as the Office expects. And though these Sharpers draw out all the Cash
they can, may it not be allowed that other fair dealing Men and Approvers of
the Bank, (and perhaps those to whom the Sharpers pay Money too) may bring in
as much running Cash to assist the Bank as well, and as is done every day in
Goldsmiths Shops? Or must they first ask our Sharpers leave, whether they shall
bring it hither or no? However, to prevent falling, he makes the Doctor say, No
more Tickets shall be delivered out than there is Money to Answer: Of what use
then, says our fine Gent. will the Bank be? O Sir, by your leave, of very
great use, even such as young Goldsmiths make, viz. to beget a good Credit with
all People, for that trick will be played at first, that all timorous Persons,
as well as Traders, may be assured there is safe dealing with the Office and
their Bills; and to prevent all such Sharpers, as you are, from making us to
fall, as but now you said we must; and afterward when we know it is out of your
power to hurt us, then in imitatation of all other Traders and Banks, we will
give out the rest of our Credit; but yet, not more than is allowed by Proposal,
though all others do. But says the Gent. Pray, Doctor, what necessity was there
for you to exceed your Fund by Issuing out 10000 l. upon 150 l. a year? Why
truly Sir, the reason of exceeding the Term, for the Fund is not exceeded, is,
that every Subscriber should be so well gratified for engaging his Estate to
make good the Bills of this Office, for so long a Term, as should enable him
not only to pay all his Debts, and provide well for his Family; but to lay by
enough for a Joint Stock, the Profits whereof will repay the whole easily, both
Principle and Interest, and all this without any fear or danger of being
Arested, Imprisoned, Foreclosed, or Estates seized and sold; being a most Noble
Design to free Landed Men out of the Clutches of griping Usurers, Attorneys,
Scriveners, Bailiffs and Goal-keepers; who, as a Gent. has described in his
Character of the Devil in Masquerade, are worse than Turks and Pagans to the
Debtor, because they cannot do Impossibilities, and pay great Sums out of
nothing; to which Difficulties many are reduced by the several Alterations,
Misfortunes, and Accidents in our Government, at the same time when we want Men
in the Country to Till the Ground and gather in our Harvest, to supply our
Armies and Navies, when there are above 30000 able Men Prisoners in several
Goals; but twice the number of little Petty Foggers and their Attendants of
Catch-poles, Gaolers and their several Hangers on, who all suck the very
Heart-blood of these miserable Captives, and the Cruel Creditor never the
better, but still pursuing his Severity, till these Harpies has emptied his
Pockets, and reduced him to the same wretched Condition; and besides, pray
consider what an ill Custom we have, when a Landed Man in necessity, Mortgages
150 l. a year for 1000 l. that on half a years notice at any time after its
become due, on non-payment of Interest, or Caprice of the Mortgagee, all this
Money shall be called in, and if not paid, though not to be procured, then
presently to Imprison, Foreclose etc. when as the Mortgagee is as much obliged
to the other for the Interest, as the Mortgager to him for his Money; but this
Office will put an End to such Abuses, and also raise the Value of Land; ay,
and will also undertake to pay off the 1200000 l. to the Royal Bank in Earnest,
and make good all the Clipped Money too, though our Gent. makes but a Jest on it, if
a little more be added to the Fund made to the Royal Bank. But the better to
show the Necessity of so large a Credit, I will present you with a view of
something like the present state of the Nation,

In Charles the Second's Days, the Number of Families, according to the
Accounts of the Books of Hearth-money, were 1300000, of which, 500000 were
poor, and could not pay Taxes; so that the Burden lay wholly on the remaining
800000; of these it may be reasonably computed since this War, that 150000 are
either become incapable of paying their proportions, as before, or make an hard
shift to pay more than they can well spare, to keep up their small Credit, and
in a little time may fall into the same Number of Poor; so then remains but
750000 Families to pay Taxes, which is but one half of the Nation; of these it
may again be considered, that 450000 are indebted, and have mortgaged their
Estates to the remaining 300000 Families, who make the others pay all Taxes on
their Lands and Moneys borrowed; and now since Money is not to be had, the
Mortgagees take Advantage of the present Necessity, and imprison the
Mortgagers, fore close, etc. to the ruin of many a Family; there being no
Remedy left, but raising Credit on Land. For if Peace were now proclaimed, it
is a question if all the Creditors will wait for their Money till it be brought
in by plenty of Trade; but at the last, what shall become of Prisoners, and the
Poor, that have nothing to pay? Now let it be considered, that the greatest
part of Trade is carried on by Credit, there being not above 50 l. or 100 l.
paid down, when 1000 l. at least is left to be paid six, 12, or 18 Months
hence, for which the Seller has no other Security or Assurance, than the
honest Word and Credit of the Chapman; who sometimes fails, or continues a long
Account, which perhaps is left to be ended by his Executors. And since the
greatest part of Traders, as well as Landed-Men, are necessitated to use
Credit, how much safer is it to use Bills of Credit, thus safely secured, which
might presently be given, and thereby put an end to all long Accounts?

Further, You shall hear what Jo. Briscoe's Opinion is, in answer to Usurer, p.
3d. Can any thing be more just and honest, than for Gentlemen to meet together
to consider which way the Freeholders of England, (who have upon all occasions
contributed largely toward carrying on the War, and support of the Government,
while the Usurer has paid little or nothing for Taxes) may be able to pay
their Debts, and clear off their Encumbrances, by raising a Credit out of their
Freehold Estates? And may they not as reasonably expect a Credit should be
given them upon such their Estates, as others have upon far less Securities,
and thereby rescue themselves and Families from impending ruin? But our
Gentleman being of another Opinion, does ask, What if but 10 or 15 years,
instead of 100 years Purchase, had been issued out upon Estates? By this
Question, I should judge Briscoe, or his Friend Mr. West, or one of their
Directors, to be the Querent, and that he is afraid the Doctor 's Great Bank
should swallow up his Little One: But however, to satisfy him, I answer, That
to raise but 15 years Purchase, is to supply a Man but by halves; as when a
Friend lends a Trader 1000 l. to pay his several Creditors, it makes him easy
for the present; yet afterward the Trader will find it as hard to repay this
Friend, as the Creditors before; but if his Friend lends him 2000 l. he will
then have a commanding Stock, be able to buy Goods at the best rate with ready
Money, and give longer Credit; and so will be better able to repay the 2000 l.
than ever he can the 1000 l. And therefore your Proposal of 15 years purchase,
is but shifting the Burden from one Shoulder to the other; or rather it is a
plain design to keep the Freeholders Necks still under the Yoke, for the
increasing the Loan of the Principal to five years Purchase more than is
usually lent, is equivalent to 6 per Cent. Interest, when it comes to be
repaid; and so both Barebone's and the National Land Bank, will be equally as
prejudicial in the end, as the Usurers before; for if you do not pay your
Interest exact, though but small, then they will sell your Estate; neither can
they afford to let their Money out at 3 per Cent. without the help of Bills of
Credit; and if they let out Bills to all the Freeholders that would borrow,
then they will not have Money enough to answer them, and their Banks must fall
as the Gent. says the Doctor's must; but if under a Color they give but 15
years Purchase, the better to gain their Bills a Credit, because the Security
is judged sufficient, and thereupon issue out Bills to 2 or 300 years Purchase,
without Limitation, having no Check upon them, then they will be worse than the
Doctor's Office, the utmost of whose Credit is known, and they may prove in the
end fatal to the Government: If all their 15 years Bills be brought presently
to be exchanged for ready Money, as is objected against the Doctor of his 10000
l. Bills; then this Objection lies as strong against their Banks as the
Doctor's, and there is an end of Credit; and then there will not be sufficient
to pay the Charges of the Rent, and Sallaries of the Offices; and no Man will
lend his Money at 3, when he can make 5 or 6 per Cent. of it.

Besides, since its necessary to raise Credit, to supply the want of Money, its
convenient to fix on a certain Term of Years that may raise so much Credit as
may pay the Debts due, and likewise keep a Man from running into Debt again,
and a little to provide for his Family; which 15 years Credit will not do, and
pay the Charges of the Office: And in comparison to the vast Credit Goldsmiths
and and other Banks give, beyond their Value or Ability to pay, this may be
judged but a moderate Credit, which in a reasonable time may be answered by
Trade, as well as made good by Land; and if more Credit were advanced, by
extending the term 50, or 100 years longer, then so many Persons could not have
the benefit thereof. The great difference between this Office and other Banks
and Goldsmiths, as to Credit and running Cash, consists in this, That those
latter lie scattered about the Town, and give only their bare Notes for Money,
which is Personal Security only, without any other Fund, and their Bills are
without limitation: Whereas this will be a well-regulated Office, contrived to
do all their Business with much more Care and Exactness, will have an
Unquestionable Control and Check upon them, to prevent giving out any more
Bills than are to be according to the Proposals; and will also have a sure Fund
in Land, which cannot be released, till all the Bills given out thereon are
bought up and cancelled. But our Gentleman being very cunning, at last has
found out, That the Doctors chief Design was, after he had made his Bank
profitable to those concerned in it, that then it should be so to himself: Well
devised, Old Nostradamus! And if the Doctor had not so contrived it, I should
have taken him for a more Thick-Scull'd Animal than this our Gentleman, who so
much envies the Doctor's Gains, as he would willingly make that Objection
sufficient to hinder any Subscriber from coming into the Doctor's Office: And
though the Doctor gets never so much, yet the Subscriber's Advantage will be five
times greater in this Office, than he can hope to get in any other Bank
whatsoever.

He is pleased to reproach the Doctor, as guilty of the greatest Act of
Presumption, for insinuating, That such Persons as Ministers of State, should
come to him for Wages, as if they were his Journeymen or Lacquies; and this in
print too: Why truly, Sir, This Reproof should have come a little sooner, for
now the Jest of it is quite spoiled, because some of them did well approve of
the Proposal before your Dialogue came abroad, and others of them since have
given it their Approbation; and think it not unbecoming their Dignities, to see
that so great and public a Good be rightly managed and applied: So, Sir, I
hope you will not be much offended at the Doctor, since they are pleased. All
this it seems was fully answered in the Rod for the Ecols Back, as this
Gentleman is sensible by his Quotation, and so needed not be repeated by him
again, but that I find he is of the same humor with the Irishman, who when
asked if he did not see the Kings Flag on top? Answered, Ish by my Shoul, dear
Joy, Ish did see it plain enough; but Ish would not see it. He makes the Doctor
to speak after his manner, and patched up a Discourse with a piece out of one
Book, and a scrap out of another, to make it serve for his purpose, well
knowing that few Persons have those Books (which he has quoted) by them, or
that they will give themselves the trouble to see how he had dis-joynted the
Discourse, and made the Sense of it imperfect, by leaving that behind, which
would otherwise be a full Answer to his Objections. Next, he will needs make
the Doctor resolve to have him subscribe his Estate in his Bank, which in good
manners he refuses, for that he knows better things: And if the said
Gentleman's Name was known, I believe that neither the Doctor nor his Managers,
would desire such a Thick-Scull'd Animal to come amongst them; Notwithstanding
he pretends to have 150 l. per annum, as good as ever Crow flew over, which
perhaps is only in Nubibus neither; I scarce believe he is Owner of a
Dog-Kennel, rather of nothing at all. As for his pleasant Romantic Discourse
of improving his Estate to an hundred times more than the Doctor's Proposal
offers, and his making the Doctor to offer to scour his Kettle for being
delirious; I do not indeed take him to be so, but rather that Monkey-like he
prettily endeavors to Ape the Doctor, and may be as fitting a Person for a
Jack-Pudding to a Puppet-Shew, in Bartholomew-Fair, to draw the Mob to the
Door, as ever I heard of; for their Discourse is exactly of a piece with this,
and after the very same manner; and least he should want a livelihood in the
mean time, I Will speak to the Doctor that there may be a place reserved on
purpose, and a small Sallary for him, that this Ridiculer of what he wants
Brains to understand, may find so much favor from the Doctor's Generous Hand,
as (instead of Punishment for his lewd Scurrility) to be pardoned, and admitted
Buffoon to the Bank.

POSTSCRIPT.
Just now I hear that Mr. National Briscoe and Dr. Barebone are joined
together: A very great Union indeed! It seems to argue that neither of them did
well know how to proceed alone; or rather, that they were afraid Dr.
Chamberlen's Office of Land Credit would swallow them both up, and so I believe
it will, notwithstanding all their Craft and Subtilty, with their Purses joined
together. But its worth while to reflect a little on the past Actions of this
pair of Bankers -- Dr. Barebone first sets up a Land-Bank, pretending to help
the poor distressed Freeholders; which when Briscoe saw, he presently tells the
World that Barebone stole his Proposals from out of his Book, which is very
unreasonable; and therefore he will now set it on foot, and call it a National
Land Bank: Barebone, to destroy that Project, puts forth another Paper, and
calls it, The Freeholders Answer to Briscoe 's National Land Bank, to which
Briscoe Prints a Reply; in both which Papers they reflect on each others
Reputation; and what Cause they had so to do, I am sensible the World in part
understands; and enough was said to let the World see plainly they were Birds
of a Feather, and therefore in all Probability would not be long asunder. But
thus both these for a considerable while have pretended to be the first Setters
up of a Land Bank, when all the World knows they are both a Brace of Notable
Plagiaries, and have built on Dr. Chamberlen's Foundation, only both of them
find it difficult enough to set up, form, or manage so great a Concern as a
Land Bank, and that made them unite together, to try if they might then do any
better Feats, for that they understand Dr. Chamberlen's Office is coming on by
degrees to be too hard for them: But after these aforesaid Plagiaries have been
so long exposing and ridiculing each other; at last Briscoe begins to sneak to
Barebones for shelter, finding that his Subscribers of both Land and Money,
could not agree; and Dr. Chamberlen's Printing Briscoe's Letter, formerly writ
in Commendation of his Bank, did not further such Agreement; so that instead of
having 1000 l. per annum during Life, and a large round sum besides, he must be
glad to accept of a Salary from Barebone, perhaps of 40 or 50 l. per annum: And
last of all, after they have both bemoaned and exposed the sad and deplorable
Condition of the poor Freeholder, with large Assurances of Assistance, they
both have agreed to supply the Government with Two Millions for a Branch of the
Revenue, and so leave the poor Freeholder in a more wretched ruinous Condition
than before, to make his Peace with his Creditors as well as he can.

Well! It Is pity but they should always be joined together, and how well soever
they may deserve of the Government for their good Service, yet if they do not
likewise supply the poor Freeholder, after all these large Promises, and bustle
made, why then I think that the very sight of these two Whimsical Plagiaries
will be a Cause sufficient for every Freeholder to spue them out of their
company: And for the Freeholders Comfort, Dr. Chamberlen's Office will be
settled, and put in a Condition fully to help them out of all their Engagements,
according as his Proposals do set forth.

WHile I am writing this, out comes another Proposal of a Crown Bank, being a
very safe and easy Method for supplying the want of Coin to serve the Public
Occasion; humbly offered, etc. Ay sure! But as to private Occasions, it is no
matter what becomes of the People; if they are all imprisoned or starved,
that is nothing; for so a Man would judge, when he says at the latter end, This
has its certain Limits, and reaches no farther than the Necessities of the
Public require: And this Author fancies himself, I believe, the first Proposer
of this refined Method; but I can tell him of one Mr. William Killegrew, that
put a Proposal in Print of the same nature, some years ago, from whom this Man
has stole his, after the same manner as Briscoe has done his National Land
Bank from Dr. Chamberlen.

By his Remarks on the other Banks, he seems to understand neither of them very
well, but especially that of Dr. Chamberlens, which he calls a Mystery at
first, and so he may very well; for, by his misrepresentation of it, it seems
to be much above the Capacity of his weak Noddle to comprehend, and therefore
to him is a great Mystery.

John Briscoe perceiving there were a great multitude of such shallow-brain'd
Creatures in the Nation, did therefore contrive his Proposals on purpose for
them, and called it A National Land-Bank, and this Author (as I am informed) is
one of Briscoe's Subscribers (as his long Discourse in praise of Briscoe's Bank
does seem to imply) and yet, as fair as he has represented it, in Page the 7th,
in his Remarks to Object. 2d, he says, For if neither can extend its Credit
beyond the Money in Bank, or advanced in specie, it were to no purpose to
pretend to a Bank of Credit; and this he will allow to be done in Briscoe's
Bank, that proposes no Limits to his Bills; but not in the Doctor's, whose
Bills are limited: And yet in the beginning of his Pamphlet, does presume that
the Parliament will give a Check to that endless increase of Bills of Credit,
which upon the Failure of any of the Banks to answer in specie, when generally
called for, may prove a greater mischief than that which they would remedy:
Which tacitly condemns Briscoe's Design, to give out Bills without number, as
he says of the Bank of England, That it extends its Credit at home beyond the
real Fund.

He confesses at first, The Doctor has proposed that 400 l. is to circulate
1000 l. In Page the 3d, says, He is so far from supposing that these Bills will
be paid in specie, that he makes no manner of Provision for it, and that the
Bills aere to carry themselves from the Bank and to the Bank, without any
Circulation or Profit. In another place, page 4. he says, But if a Man owed
1500 l. he is excluded from all benefit of this Bank. And at last he concludes,
That, it is needless here to object the want of Certainty, that the Governors
of this Bank shall not mismanage in several particulars, which might require
Parliamentary Provisions: Not to mention any more of his senseless stuff, about
the Borrower and the Lender, any man that ever was at the Office to subscribe,
may presently see that he is wholly ignorant of the Doctor's Bank; and then let
the World Judge what an impudent abusive Fellow this must needs be, that will
pretend to give so false an Account of a Bank that he does not understand, when
it is so easy for him at any time to go to the Office every other day in the
week, and be rightly informed: But this is like one of Briscoe's Hirelings, set
on purpose to exclaim against others, and commend only his National -- Bank,
which is the very worst of all, and as yet no better than a What-d'-ye-call-'em
Hodge-Podge-Bank, (composed more by the multitude of Hands, than the Wisdom of
Heads) which themselves cannot tell what to make of, it is so much altered and
disguised from Briscoe's first Proposal; and yet this seems to be the most
practicable Scheme of all; Insomuch that he cannot apprehend any Difficulty in
settling Estates upon Trustees, to be subject to its proportion of Loss and
Gain: Whereas if Estates must be settled, there shall never want large Accounts
of Losses and Charges, as long as those Estates are liable to make them all
good.

But at last it is very observable, that notwithstanding this Author has so much
praised Briscoe's Bank, yet at the same time he has proposed another of his
own, as much more excellent and preferrable of the two, which is just such
another Treacherous Trick as Briscoe served Dr. Chamberlen, first to write
largely in Commendation of the Doctor's, and contribute 150 l. to the carrying
it on in Scotland; and then to dedicate another Senseless one of his own to the
King, and and offer it to the Parliament to pass it into an Act.

If this Author had showed himself a Man of Sense, he should have been answered
in all particulars; but it is endless to reply to all the Nonsense that is
offered in Print: And therefore I think this little Fisking Curr is not worth
any Man's Notice.

London, Printed and Sold by T. Soul in White-Hart-Court in
Grace Church Street, 1696.


