AN ANSWER TO PEREAT PAPA: OR, A Reply by way of Letter FROM A GENTLEWOMAN to a
Person of QUALITY; Commending to her consideration a Paper Entitled PEREAT
PAPA; Or, REASONS why POPERY should not inherit the CROWN.
Answer a Fool according to his Folly.
SIR,
HAD the Paper you sent me, entitled Pereat Papa, or Reasons why Popery should
not usurp the Crown, come accidentally to my hands, and had not been seriously
recommended to my observation by you, I should have concluded its Author had
jocularly intended, or to, use his own phrase, conceived, and that very
heartily, such Reason^ proper to Burlesque, a late Design for altering the
Succession, on account of that so often baffled a Cause called Popery. But
instructed by your Letter from so wild a Reflection, I begin to consider it as
the Labors of some Grand Sage -- Ignoramus of the Common Law, which furnishes
its Students with Reasons intelligent to none but themselves; but Reasons,
since he is pleased to call them, so let them be; for should a filly Woman
venture to question that Title, she might perhaps anger some terrible Judge
that daily deals out Death with the like Logic.

Therefore with humble submission to such powerful Disputants, who can destroy
by president those they cannot confute, I will give you my Observations
thereupon, and first upon his Preamble, in these following words.

It is conceived, and that very heartily, without prejudice to others
Judgments, or troubling our selves with that so often baffled a Cause called
Popery, That a Papist ought not to inherit or succeed to the management of the
Crown.

ANS. Now as to his candid conceiving, without prejudice to his Judgment, I
humbly conceive, That those quaint words, and all the rest so ill put together,
are mere Nonsense; and that without the help of his Title it would be hard to
find out his meaning to be, That a Papist ought not to succeed to the Crown:
His first pretended Reason is,

R. 1. In strictness of Law, because one so qualifyed has wilfully disabled or
rendered himself incapable of that Benefit which the Common Law (after the
usual course of descent) does positively require, for it is presumable, That he
that succeeds in the Office of the Crown should be legally adopted to execute
so great a trust; and therefore if Minus Idoneus not sufficiently ballasted
with the Notions and Intrigues of State, others are to govern in aid of him, as
in case of Ideocy, Lunacy, or the like, and the Parliament is bound (as trusted
to redress Grievances and secure the Nation) to place it where Religion and
Property shall be adjudged most safe.

ANS. Here he would be thought a Lawyer, a Calling I have not professed, because
I observe Women are rarely made Judges; but yet I am not so ignorant of the
Common Law, but that I have heard it defined to be right reason, guided by
ancient usage: Therefore if this Gentleman had brought but one President where
a Papist had been put by the Crown, merely for being such, he had saved himself
and his Readers much trouble in composing and observing so many nothings, as
his eight unintelligable Reasons amount to: But in the name of Wonder, how does
a Papist Prince incapacitate himself for the Crown by the Common Law, (after
the usual course of descent) when from the time of the Conqueror there has
been one and twenty of that Religion, and but five of the Reformed Church, have
worn the Imperial Crown of this Realm; but to speak to the purpose, it is plain
that the Common Law alters not the Succession on account of Religion, nor
indeed on any account whatsoever, no not if the King be Minus Idoneus, Infant,
Idiot, or Lunatic: for right reason, continual usage, with numberless
Presidents in this and other Her^ditary Monarchies, teach us. That such
alterations would do more harm to Religion and Property, than any of those
Temporary Inconveniences, so that the Common Law, both by President and right
reason, abhors his Reason: and what the Power or duty of Parliaments in this
Case is, I am sure is a Theme too high for him or me to define; therefore I
will pass on to his 6 pretended Presidents of that nature, and if any of them
proves the least part of his purpose, I will submit my Reason to be the Slave
of Incoherency for ever.

President the 1st. Edgar Ethling, (as Stories agree) was the undoubted Heir,
yet William the Norman, commonly called the Conqueror, was called in to
oppose Harold, and invested with the Crown, and Ethling for ever an Exile and
disinherited.

2dly. After him succeeded his second Son, William Rufus, and not Robert the
eldest.

ANS. By his leave, Stories do not agree, that William was called in, though
Edgar the right Heir it is true was put by, but it is as true (that Stories
agree) that Liberty and Property were thereupon destroyed; for William divested
whom he pleased of their Lands, to gratify his Fellow Conquerours: Nor did the
second William deal Kindlier with any whom he suspected had the least Eye to
his Brother Robert's Signiority; nor was the Nation freed from this Tyranny
until the Blood of the right Saxon Heir Edgar was again inocculated into the
Crown by the Wife of Henry the First. Would any Man then in his right wits
write such Presidents in order to preserve Religion and Property?

3dly. King John not only laid aside Arthur Plantaginet, his elder Brother's
Son, but likewise put him to death.

ANS. By this President Ignoramus discovers his Morals; For that King John
usurped against his Nephew Arthur none denis; and that thereupon ensued Bloody
Intestine Broyls, with the loss of Normandy etc. with other National Miseries,
the constant consequences of such mutations, but that he murdered his Nephew
he ever denied; though had our Lawyer been of his Council, he might have
boasted it, because it is two to one, the young Prince stood Popishly affected.

4thly. In Cicily there was lately a great Contest between the two Sons of
Charles the Second, Martellus and Robert, and I find the Crown awarded to
Robert the youngest, as, Magnus dignus ad Regandum.

5thly. Alexander was demanded to whom he would bequeath his Scepter, he said,
To the worthiest, and to him whose Sword has the sharpest point; meaning, to
him whose Virtues were most Luculent, and of the brightest Integrity, according
to the disposition of Jacob, passing by Manasses, and conferring the Blessing
on Ephraim the younger, as most deserving and acceptable to God.

ANS. Now would I defy your Author, or the most cunning Sophister on Earth, to
make these two Presidents, or any part of them, to quadrate in the least with
his Title to them: There are several Presidents of this nature, but he is
extreme lucky in his choice, both of words and matters which are nothing to the
purpose, and above all in the next.

6thly. The State of France rejected the King of Navarr, and appointed Henry
the Fourth to reign over them, because of another Religion, in leaving God, and
complying with their Church, to gain a Crown, with what a Tragical end did they
reward him?

ANS. Would not this President give me just cause to believe, That the
Gentleman was burlesqueing his Cause; for who could think a man so ill verst in
History, should pretend to quote Presidents from it; They rejected, says he,
the King of Navarr for Henry the Fourth; and why could he not have said, They
rejected again Henry the Fourth for the King of Navarr; and so it had been a
noble President to such as did not know that Henry the 4th, and the King of
Navarr, were one and the same Person: But why should I concern my self with so
impertinent a Paper; for indeed all his Presidents are as much to the purpose,
as the reply to ones demand, Why the Devil was generally painted with Horns?
how says the other, did you never read in Scripture, that the Devil goes about
like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. Therefore, not much to combat
a Nothing. I will only observe the Gentleman strangely forgot one President,
proper indeed to his Principals and Morals, that is, the Deposal and Murder of
Charles the First, on pretense, amongst other Falsehoods, that he favored
Popery; This truly, as to his design, is worth a thousand such as he has
quoted.

Reas. 2. Can it be thought but that he that succeeds in the Crown, should not
succeed Concurrentibus his qui in jure requiserunt, as the Civil Law expresses
it, That in all the concerns thereof, which are the Laws, principally those
that relate to Religion, and not for one man led away with a purblind
perverseness, renouncing the Religion he knows not why, (and so wilfully
attainting himself) to inthrall the Nation in Superstition and Tyranny; for
regularly in all parts, where Popish Lords are in the Church, there Tyranny of
course rages in the State.

ANS. Can this be thought to look to any reasonable man like Reason, for,
except a scrap of Latin, (whereby the Gentleman pretends to the Civil Law, of
which he understands as much as of the Common, or History) there is not one
word to the purpose; for, what can purblind perverseness, or wilfully
attainting himself mean more than malice, as the whole Sentence indeed is
intended for, concluding with a positive falseness, since it is well known we
owe our thanks for Magna Charta, and other Franchises to Popish Princes.

Reas. 3. It Is a Maxim amongst Lawyers, that, Lex facit Regem; and Maxims must
not be denied; if so, then to speak out after the true intendment of the Law;
he that comes not to the Crown satiatim, as the Law notifies, and prescribes,
it is no lawful Succession, but downright usurpation, and without scruple it is
in the Devoir of every good Christian to withstand an Usurper, it being
undoubtedly more pleasing to God to put one man by who thus wilfully disables
himself, and withal most shamefully usurps, than expose Millions of Souls to
Damnation, and the Streets to flow with Blood, by suffering that Religion to
creep in, whose Reformation (at the milder rate) will certainly prove Fire and
Faggot.

For this very cause Mecha was removed from being Queen, by her Son King Asa,
for making an Idol in a Grove, incited thereunto by the Prophet Azariah.

ANS. I will believe it is a Maxim, and by it is only meant: That by the Law,
the next of blood, is made King; for as to his inference, it is malicious,
Traiterous, and Ridiculous, setting up in every pretended good Christian, a
power to depose any Prince he pleases to call an Usurper; for his Fire and
Faggots they are merely Wildfire in his own Brains, as his Example of King Asa
is, who only took from his Mother the dignity of a Queen: for the Regal Power
was before in himself, and sure he had reason to suppress in his first Subject
so great an Example of Idolatry.

Reas. 4. The succession of the Crown and a common descent much differ, for if
an Heir that is a subject prove loose and debauched it little damnifies the
Public, more deserving persons may happily step into his Possession, and be more
serviceable to the Public; the damage is still but private to his own Family.
But in case of the Crown, there is none so senseless but must needs conceive
the damage most fatal, because universal, the whole Nation must inevitably
suffer, Religion be subverted, and Property destroyed, and the whole people in
danger of their lives.

It Is well known in the private case, the Heir is usually thrown off and
dis-inherited, if an Entail, it may be destroyed, and the Law justifies it. The
like in the public of the Throne (the Grand Inquisitors of State and
Conservators of the Liberties of England) the Parliament may for weighty Causes
refuse the Heir presumptive, and for the safety of the Nation, settle it where
they in honor and prudence conceive most proper.

ANS. What shall I say more to all this New-Nothing, but that it is not fit he
or I should limit the power of the King in his Parliament; but it is to be
supposed that they will know best how to obey new Laws, who are not factious
against the Old, as your Author most impudently appears to be, notwithstanding
his Golden Rule.

Reas. 5. We read in Scripture, which is the Golden Rule we must walk by; That
Libnah revolted from Jehoram because he had forsaken the God of his Fathers,
and so we had better forsake man and adhere to God in keeping our Religion,
than trust to man and lose God, to be unavoidably destroyed here, and hereafter
irrecoverably damned in serving Baal, and parting with the Divinity now
established.

ANS. This might have past as well for a President, as a Reason, but that he
infers from it a necessity to revolt from the worship of Baall, for the
Divinity established, which privilege by my consent no body shall deny him,
since he has already made a revolt from Common-sense and Humanity, by so many
vain and Chymerical suppositions as are put together in this and his next
Reason.

Reas. 6. When Rehoboam had prepared a huge Army to reduce the Israelites, he
was forbidden by the Prophet, Thus says the Lord, ye shall not go up nor fight
against your brethren, for this is for me, mark, he calls them Brethren not
Rebels.

Passive Obedience therefore is simple and fit for tame Owls that know no
better, now God has discovered the Snare and the Pit of Ruins that the Pope and
the Devil has prepared for us, if we do not timely countermine it by cautionary
Laws to suppress those that dig'd it, we may in a short space be thrown into it
headlong and no one pity us.

But the Right Line with some shallow pated talkers, is a Noli me tangere, so
sacred forsooth, that we must venture Body and Soul in subjecting our selves to
all the curses imaginable that Hell it self can inflict on us, rather than in
the least alter or control it, a very frivolous Caveat, and not to be heeded,
humane examples, as I showed before, have voted against it, and the Scripture
warrants it, Samuel foretold in the Case of Saul that he would be rejected for
his disobedience, though not his Person degraded or Deposed, yet that the
Kingdom should both be removed from his Line and Tribe, which was done
accordingly, and transferred on David.

This proves very fully that Heirs, or next in Succession, are not so
immoveably placed, but that they may lawfully (on just Cause) be displaced, if
not legally Quallified, and others put up for Gods glory in their Rooms.

God raised Jehu to purge Idolatry against the House of Ahab, all the Sons of
Ahab were beheaded, and in a manner his whole Line cut off, for his good
Service he had a Promise of a special Blessing for his Issue to continue the
Throne to the fourth generation, several other instances I could give, but this
may suffice.

In brief there is no Reformed Church, from the first Waldenses of Lions and
Languedock to this very day, but have held it lawful.

ANS. Through all the railing and no Reason of this long Reason, I will only
pick out these Observations; First, That the Author is no true Son of the
Church of England, who has always taught her Children Passive Obedience at
least, for which they are by our mannerly Statists branded with the Titles of
Tame Owls and shallow pated Talkers.

Secondly, That he has cast an Aspersion on all the Reformed Churches, from the
first Waldenses, etc. to this day, for holding his Wild Principles and bloody
Examples lawful.

Thirdly, What greater advantage he could have given the Jesuits, falsely
charged with such Principles, to retort them on the Reformers, I cannot tell,
but this am sure, if it be true, it is a fair Caveat to all Princes, not
subject to such Doctines, to be careful of their spreading in their Dominions,
for at worst it is less dangerous to have one Mad Deposer, called the Pope, at a
distance, then to have every Town in ones Dominions crowded with such Sovereign
Judges, whose Sentences may be executed according to this Divinity by every
desperate hand.

Reas. 7. It Is conceited by half-witted Statesmen, that Restrictive Laws may
prevent all mischief, and secure the Protestants: A very vain Opinion, and most
fallacious; for Laws will never bind, but more enrage, shackle him as you will,
and load him with never so many Laws, when King, he and his Party will be
restless, till they have set themselves at liberty, and to have the Protestants
under; when King he is not Impeachable, and the posse Regni will then be at his
disposal.

When the Wolf is Shepherd, the Flock is very safe indeed, and like to be well
looked to; after all denounceable at will; for if his Party now commit such
outrages, that no Age can parallel, what will they do then? now no man safe in
his Bed, then none safe at all; they will adventure to murder people covertly,
and in their houses, for they hold it no more sin than to kill a Dog.

ANS. The Gent. might have been more mannerly in his Character, if it be
considered what Statesman has lately in Council, or rather to the Parliament,
declared his Opinion for the Restrictive Laws under a right Succession; whose
Declaration ought to have made that matter, A noli me tangere, at least to any
private person: But he that dare speak evil of Dignities, and brand Superiors
with the Title of half-witted Statesmen, would, had he but half the courage
that he has malice, commit greater outrages, than Fancy can make the others
guilty of.

Reas. 8. In fine, be sure he and his Party (which will daily increase, and the
Protestants decline) will soon get an opportunity, either by Stratagem, or open
force, to avoid all Laws, though they are never so strong and wary, and so
impossible to be safe without a Protestant Successor.

ANS. This Prophetical Reason, in fine, is at best but one Doctors Opinion,
and, I doubt me, but a mere Mountebank at the Pulse of a Kingdom: of which I
will assure you, Sir, I perceive by his Paper he knows so little, that a better
Discourse often comes ex tempore from a good Woman at a Gossiping upon the same
Subject. For the whole, it is an unconnext Rapsody of mere words, interlaced
with scraps of Latin, brought in to as little purpose as his Presidents; so
that if he be your Acquaintance (for Friend he cannot be to so worthy a Person)
persuade him to keep his Ignorance out of Paper hereafter; and his Impudence,
to treat of Subjects so much above his comprehension, will pass off well enough
in Coffee-Houses, where to rail sufficiently against Popery, is policy to the
purpose: To which Crowds of unthinking Praters, I freely bequeath him, as I do
my self, to be for ever,

Yours.

SIR,
SInce my Answer to yours, in slight observations, on Pereat Papa, I find the
Author so fond of his folly, as to put it in print, though with a little
alteration, I suppose by direction from the Printer, for he has changed his
first President; not into better sense, nor a jot more to his purpose, but into
something that shows he has been told by some body, that Henry the Fourth of
France, was the rejected King of Navar; but his Historian, it seems, could not
inform him, that the Crown was settled on his Head, and that he had a long,
glorious, and prosperous Reign, till assassinated by a desperate, barbarous,
and irreligious Villain, upon a private revenge as was ever believed, and has
been since confessed by Ravillacks Brother on his Deathbed in Germany. The
Printer too had the manners, I suppose, against the Authors will, to leave out
the witty Epithet of tame Owls, given to the passive obedience in his sixth
Reason; other material change there is none, and you must pardon this, being
printed since: It Is pity the World should see the Coxcomb uncorrected, and that
by the hand of a Woman, the provocation whereof, I suppose, made him appeal to
the more Judicious in print, and has forced me to do the same, with this
addition to my first Sentence -- Bray a Fool in a Mortar, and he will not
return from his folly.


