AN ANSWER TO Mr. STEPHENS's Sermon, Preached before the Honorable House of
COMMONS, AT St. Margaret's Church in Westminster, January the 30th. 1699/1700.
By a Gentleman who took the said Sermon in Shorthand.

LONDON, Printed for the Use of the Calves-Head Club, in order to their
Conversion.

Price Two Pence.

AN ANSWER To Mr. Stephens's Sermon, etc.
AMONG all the various kinds of Seditious People, that from time to time have
Plagn'd our English Nation, there have been none so dreadfully Pernicious and
Troublesome to the Peace of England, as our Government Menders, who always find
something that they think ought to Altered, Amended, or Abolished, and are so
fond of their own Enthusiastic Notions, which rather proceed from Overheated
Brains, than Solid Judgments, that they can neither be at quiet themselves, nor
suffer any Societies of Men to be so, that will but hearken whilst they are
communicating their own fansiful Delusions, and Whims that have no other Design
than to distract the Body Politic. These Practices have been formerly
Arraigned, as the Crimes of particular Laymen that Courted Preferment by
setting up themselves as professed Enemies to every Administration; but now to
find this Course pursued by a Man that has the Reputation of Learning, a
Bachelor in Divinity, and Beneficed in the Church of England, is so Abominable
and Amazing, that'tis enough to startle Men of Temper and prudence, to think
the Church should harbor such a Viper in its Bosom, as is'gnawing his way to a
Name, by Methods directly opposite to his own Oaths of Fidelity, Canonical
Obedience, and the purity of the Churches Doctrine, which unhappily came to
pass after this manner.

Mr. Stephens being ambitious of getting a Name among a Party that never wished
well to the Monarchy, or the Church of England, knowing the Honorable and
Loyal House of Commons did Annually meet at St. Margaret's Church in
Westminster, on the 30th of January, to bewail a Crime so detested by God and
Man, as the Murder of a King is, he procured the Favor of Preaching before
that Honorable Assembly on that Solemn Day of Humiliation, in which so black a
Crime was committed, which had it not long since been publicly appointed by
the Voice of the whole Nation, that we, and our Posterities after us, should
Yearly bewail the Guilty Memory of it, it would have remained an Indelible
Disgrace to the present Age, and to the whole English Name, and yet the reason,
as it is credibly reported, why he coveted the Honor of Preaching before this
August Assembly on that occasion, was, Because he thought himself able, to give
that Wise and Illustrious Auditory, sustcient Reasons for for the
Non-observance of it any longer.

A Bold, Saucy, and Daring undertaking, to Preach against a Law in force,
before our Legislators; as if they knew not what was fit to be Retained or
Abolished, without the Directions of a Pragmatical Preacher, that like a Blind,
and Bewildred Traveller, seems to have lost his way; and whilst he affected to
Dictate so magisterially out of the Common Road and Duty of a Preacher, he fell
in a Complication of Absurdities: Each of which was a most intolerable Blunder
in his Politics, and may chance raise a Storm upon him, that all the Friends
he has will never be able to pacify.

Of all Men living, mr. Stephens, considering his own Circumstances, had the
greatest reason in the World to have worn out his Days in the greatest
Obscurity, and it not only accuses his own Discretion, but the Common Prudence
of all his Advisers, to revive the Memory of his former (and almost buried)
Crimes, by setting him up in such a Celebrated Auditory, which would carry the
Discourse of them into all the Countries and Corporations of England, had he
behaved himself never so cautiously in the Pulpit: And what then might he
reasonable expect, when he resolved to Affront the Laws, and run counter to the
Sentiments of the whole Kingdom; but that his Ahominable and not to be named
Crimes, with which he was accused by his Scholars, when he was Schoolmaster of
Bristol, and for which he run away from the City for fear of being Prosecuted,
should be revived to his Eternal Infamy, and Hatred of all Mankind. Which if
his Advisers had considered, they would never have cast such an Odium up on
their Tennets and Politics, as to have published them by a Man of Mr.
Stephens's Character.

However, up he comes with his Usual Confidence into St. Margaret's Pulpit, and
having named his Text out of Titus the 3d, Verse the 1st, Put them in mind to
be subject to Principalities and Powers, to obey Magistrates, and to be ready
to every Good Work: Which Text in its genuine Interpretation imports nothing
else, but that all Christians should Peaceablv submit themselves to the
Government under which they live: Yet he that always had the Ill luck to spy
more in a Text than all the rest of his Breathren, endeavored to prove (though
with very ill snccess) the Doctrine of Disobedience to Princes, from the same
Text that Preaches up Obedience to Authority, as the Indispen^sble Duty of
every Christan.

I do not say he urged Resistance in Express Words, for there was a vein of
Crasty and Ambiguous Sense and Expression, that run through the whole Sermon,
which might have fitted the Mouth of a Knox or a Mariana but ill became one
that would be thought a Minister of Jesus Christ, and true Son of the Church of
England. He has indeed a peculiar Knack at wounding with Sly, Oblique, and
Paltry Suggestions; at Stabbing and looking another way, as if he were wholly
Innocent a^^ Unconcerned, which might pass at a Tables end over a Bottle
amongst his Cronies of the Faction; but he was mightily mistaken, to think he
could Top upon a whole Parilament, or so disguise his Notions, that they could
not apprehend that his Raking up the pretended faults of Afficted Majesty, was
a Base and Cowardly Assault, somewhat more than Barbarous and Inhumane; and his
Leveling the Supreme Authority below its just Rights, was but a trick to usher
in Confusion, or which is worse, beget a misunderstrnding between the Royal
Head and Loyal Members, as if they would incruach upon the Sovereignty, and
therefore those great Men put such a Slight upon this Confident Prevaricator,
as would have broken any English Man's Heart, but Mr. Stephens's, or at last
have made him follow his Bristol Brother in Iniquity Emanuel Heath, into
Jamaica, who both fled form Bristol almost at the same time, and upon the very
same accasion.

It cannot be imagined I should answer every Heterodox Notion in his Sermon; I
shall therefore only reflect upon the main Design, and be indebted to him for
the rest, till he Prints his Sermon.

His Flurting at the Doctrine of Passive Obedience, was only putting Swords
into the Hands of Madmen, who know on other use of it, but either to destrov
themselves, or the Peace of the Kingdom; for no Man can have any honest Design
that Preaches against it. It Is true, the Words were abused in the late Reign,
and is at all times when employed to countenance an Insupportable Tyranny, and
that has made the Words generally distastsal to English Men since the
Revolution; which all Antimonatchists being sensible of, when they have a mind
to inveigh against Obedience to Authority, it is but Tacking the Word Passive to
Obedience, and their Work is d^ne: For it creates an Aversion in unthinking
People, who cannot distinguish between the ^^e and the Abuse of things; and
because 'twas once appled to ill Purposes, run away with that mistaken ad
infinitem, and think the Men that inveigh against Passive Obedience, are the
only Asserters of true English Liberty: Which is a grand mistake, and instead
of lulling Men asleep in an Error, so pernicious to the Peace of the Kingdom,
ought to Allarm this Stupid Humor into a sense of Danger, or the Folly will be
as unaccountable, as the Mischiefs will be insuportable, if ever this Seditious
Hotheaded Crew of Republicans, be once more suffered to have the Steerage of
Public Affairs; who are a Proud and Ambitious sort of People, only valuable in
their Conceits, and now Herd with the Jacobits only to reduce us into a State
of Anarcy.

Some Men through Ignorance might imbibe Notions of Disobedience, as others
think it lawful upon extraordinary Occasions, where Sic Volo sic Juber is a
Law, and the King's Will is made the Political Standard; but for a man of mr.
Stephens's Learning, to Preach up the Doctrine of Resistance in a time of
Peace, when there is no occasion to blow the Coals, when we have a King of our
own choice, whom the Nation entirely Love and Honor, as being a Valiant and
Brave Prince, undoubtedly the greatest Hero of his Age, and has a Soul large
enough to Animate more than theree Kingdoms, was such an Ungenerous, Dastardly,
and creeping Innuendo against him, and carried such a rude threatening of His
Majesty, if he should happen to disoblige the Faction, that the Preacher ought
to be treated with a Scorn, and Contempt, answerable to the Baseness of the
Enterprise: Since he cannot but know, that the Doctrines of Passive Obedience
and Non Resistance in their just Latitude, and Evangelical Importance, are
Truths as Sacred as any other Humane Duty in the Bible, and without the Belief
and Practice of it, the World will be no better than a Savage Wilderness, and a
Habitation of Wolves and Tigers in Humane Shape, Rending and Devouri^^ ^ne
another.

To accomplish this wicked End must needs be the great Design of our Popular
Orator; for though he so fluently harangu'd about the tremendous Consequences of
Passive Obedience, he studiously concealed the fatal Consequences of Rebellion,
which will be ever found to be more Duraable and mischievous. This St. Paul
well knew, and therefore founded this important and Inviolable Duty, upon
Reasons that are perpetual and unalterable, as namely, that the Supreme
Magistrate is the Ordinance of God; His Power is ordained of God; He is the
Minister of the great Immutable God, and not of the Giddy and Capricious
Multitude: Now these Reasons hold good equally at all times, subsist under all
the Alterations of the World are the same now in England that they were
heretofore at Rome, and consequently the Duty of Obedience must be the same,
Yesterday, to Day, and for ever. And yet what pains has mr. Stephens taken to
lessen, if not encourage (by slant Strokes) the Crying and Diabolical Sin of
Reb^l^ion, which is so Dangerous, and infinitely encroaching, that if it be not
stifled in its Seed and Principle, it will when kindled bid defiance to all
Control, and run along like an irresistible Conflagration: And though the
Preacher employed all his Art in Mi^cing and, Palliating the Matter, 'twill be
found a Maxim of Eternal Varity, that whosoever gives Power to any Subjects to
rise up against a Good King or Preach it up as lawful so to do, gives License
to others to re-act the same doleful Tragedy which the whole Land mourns for
every Thirtieth of January.

The Preachers next Design was to assert the Liberty of the Subjects, an
excellent thing when Honestly used, and Peaceably intended; but to what purpose
he insisted upon that Topic now, when blessed be God we have a Prince that
neither does, nor intends to infringe our Privileges, or Deprive us of our
Rights, but has given us all the Legal Securities a Parliament could ask for
our future Peace and Happiness. When there are no Complaints that our Rights
are Invaded, our Properties Usurped, or our Liberties Infringed, and the whole
Nation sit under their own Vines in Peace and Tranquillity, I cannot imagine,
unless he intended to Introduce a Belluine Liberty, for Men to say and do what
they please: A Liberty of affronting the Government (...) of improving and
practicing upon invented Fears and Possibilities, (...) ^^ey have brought us
into Vassalage to their own Party.

Now to Antidote this Venom, and to shield our selves from the Danger and
Delusion, so artificially Insinuated by our Bisarious Predicator, is to judge
of the Designs by the Men that promotes them; for all the Arts employed by our
Enemies, though never so cunningly disguised, are but the Sly Impositions of
Cunning Knaves, to advance their own Party: And therefore when we see ill Men
take up a fit of pretended Zeal, and Kindness for their Country, and appear
better Natured than consists with their Principles and avowed Interests, it is
time to suspect a Fraud, and weigh their Words with their Practices, before we
believe them further than consists, with the safety of the Government, for the
Men and their Designs can never be parted.

Liberty is the greatest Glory of a People yet if it be not bounded by the Laws
of Reasons and Religion, it is the greatest Makebate in the World: and tends
directly to the Ruin of every Community, by the known Rule, That the best
things corrupted become the morst. Liberty perverted into Contention for
Superiority, is but Trapanning and Deluding Men into Slavery; Catching them
with Words, and decoying them into Nets and Snates: 'Twas the Affectation of
this, that made our first Parents Rebel against God, and prompted Seditious
Men, to Rebel against his Vicegerents on Earth: 'Twas a Sin of this
Complexion, that occasioned the Unparalled Murder of Charles 'the First,
for which our Land mourns at this very Day, and which feems like the first
Transgression, to continue a lasting Curse and Debt upon Posterity.

Another Obliging Instance of his Dear Respects to Monarchy, was Investing the
Sovereign and Supreme Power in the People, and how that consists with his Duty
as a Subject, or with his Repeated Oaths as a Clergyman, I leave him to
Consider, and Repent of, least he falls under an Ecclesiastical Censure also.

Sure Mr. Stephens when he was advancing the Imaginary Power of the People,
thought he was Preaching at Wootton-Under-Edge in Gloucestershire, where he
used to Vend these Popular Notions by Wholesale, with now and then a Gird at
the Established Church, to make his Discourse more Palatable to the Carders and
Spiners, and not in St. Margaret 's Church at Westminster, whose Auditors were
not accustomed to such Disloyal and Republican Discourses, till their Ears were
Violated by this Imposter, who could design nothing but mischief by it; for in
a Monarchical Government, God's Vicegerency ought not to be- delegated to any
other Head but what is Anointed, nor unaccountably scattered among the
Multitude: For as Dividing a Power which is only safe by being Entire,
derogates from the King's Supremacy; so it is destructive to the Peoples
Liberty, as it Intoxicates them, and makes them stagger from one Form of
Government to another, till their Divisions, as a Punishment for their
Fickleness, sinks them at last under an Absolute Monarchy.

This Pretense of Exalting a Popular Power, could have no other Aim in the
Preacher, than to create Jealousies between the King and his People: For as
they cannot allay the false ^ears they are decoyed unto, without Undutiful
Resentments: So the King cannot brook Competitors in Power and Prerogative; and
therefore the Preacher in paying the Inserior Members against the Head, could
have no design but the Destruction of the whole Body: For this is an
Infalliable Maxim, That they who endeavor to submit Kings, rather than
themselves, are laying the Foundation of Slavery and Confusion.

One Argument our Case-harden'd Predicant made use of, to prove the Power was
in the People, was from Jethro's Advising Moses to Ease himself; by appointing
Inferior Magistrates to Hear and Determine lesser Differences among the
People: Which is such a positive Contradiction to what he was adva^^^ng, that
in the whole Book of God, he could not have found an Instance more directly
Opposite to his Notion, than the Absolute Authority that Moses exercised over
the Tribes of Israel: And at this no wise Man will wonder, for Scripture is so
much out of our Preachers way, as he never Blunders more, as when he thinks to
support his sinking cause from those Sacred Oracles; so that unless he acquit
himself better for time to come, than he either did at St. Mary le Bow, Jan 30.
1693. or at St. Margaret's Westminster, Jan. 30. 1699. he will scarce be
capable of any better Preferment, han Chaplain in Ordinary to the Galves-Head
Club, that Feast, and Rejoice, in Memory of the most Barbarous Murder that the
Sun ever saw or Men or Devils were capable of committing.

Sermons generally beget or lose their Esteem, by their being suited, or running
Counter to the Occasion for which they were intended, and how our Preacher
acquitted himself in this particular, is apparent. It was a Day of Humiliation
for the Murder of a King by Rebellious Subjects, and instead of humbly
persuading his Auditors to be Zealous in the Discharge of that Duty, he
Preaches up the exploded Opinions that were the Occasions of that Bloody
Tragedy, a Lawless Liberty, and the pretended Power of the People began the
War, Murdered the King, and brought the Nation under a Cruel and Barbarous
Vassalage to the Meanest of their Fellow Subjects, and his knowing the same
Causes will for ever produce the same Effects, made these the main things he
insisted upon on the Thirtieth of January, whereon nothing like a Christian, or
indeed a Man, besides his wretched self, could have played the Buffoon and
Incendiary at so malicious a rate, upon so Solemn and Sad an Occasion, as
brought together that August Assembly before whom he Preached; though as another
Specimen of his Defense, he was pleased, for Reasons best known to himself, to
omit praying for the Parliament, and every Branch of the Royal Family, which I
believe, was scarce omited upon that Day by any Preacher in England besides
himself.

But it seems our Preacher's great Design, was, to Preach down the Observation
of the Day; and therefore instead of Declaiming against those Black Counsels
and Accursed Practices, which finished the last part of this Blessed Monarchi's
Tragedy, and humbly persuading his Illustrious Auditory, as the Representatives
of the Nation, to be most Industrously Watchful, that the same Chimerical
Designs and Antomonarchical Principles, which then Inspired so many Ill Men,
Misled so many Good Men, and cost a Good King so Dear; might once more Rivive,
and Insinuate themselves again, under the same, or Newer, and Craftier
Disguises, and find an opportunity to attempt the like Mischiefs, he would have
persuaded his Honorable Auditors, That the Observation of this Fast, which has
always been Religiously observed by all Parliaments, should be utterly
Aholished and Raced out of the English Calender.

A Bold and Presumptious Undertaking, to Dictate to that Wise and Honorable
Assembly; and whilst he was performing his part of the Office appointed for the
Day, to declaim against the Observation of it: Least Guilty Consciences should
be disturbed, by the Remembrance of this Eternal Reproach, which though an
Indemnity has Pardoned, no Oblivion will ever be able to Deface, is so
unaccountable, that none but himself can assign a Reason for!

What could Mr. Stephens read in the Faces of these Wise and Loyal Senators,
that could tempt him to such an Extravagant Conceit, that they would harken to
such an Infamous Proposal? What one thing have they ever done that might
Countenance such a Presumption, that none but a Man of Mr. Stephens's Forehead
durst have offered to a Parliament, without expecting to be made an Example to
Posterity?

Had our Presumptuous and saucy Holder-Forth but consulted with our English
History, he might have found that a Parliament had the Memory of Charles the
First in such a great Esteem, that they Voted Seventy Thousand Pound to build
him a Monument, and to pay, the Charge of Removing his Body from Windsor to
Westminster * Vid. just. Defense, p. 202.
by which it appears, that the whole Kingdom thought nothing too much for
expiating the Guilt, and Honoring the Memory of that ^xcellent Prince, which
had been so Barbarously treated: And though the Bill did not pass for the
Monument, yet the same Parliament had done another thing before, which in
spite of all Mr. Stephens's Arguments against it, may out-last all of that
Kind in Westminster, or elsewhere in the whole Nation, viz. Enated, That the
Day of that horrid Particide. be observed as a solenm Fast through the whole
Kingdom for ever. And doubtless could they have foreseen, that any Person would
have taken the Confidence to Asperse his Memory, or to have given Reasons for
the Non Observance of this Fast, it would have been Voted no less Treasonable
that his Murder. But let us hear Mr. Stephens's Reasons for its Abolition. And
the first was,

Because it creates Animosities among the People; which is a very weak
Argument, since the very Abolition of the Fast would have furnished them with a
Subject to keep up the Popular Animosities, greater than ever the Observation
of the Day can pretend to. In which no question but Mr. Stephens will have his
Share, for endeavoring to obliterate the Remembrance and Detestation of a
Crime, that the Wisdom of the Nation have Enacted to continue for ever, and
peradventure he may live to be pointed at in the Streets, saying, That is the
Man that Attempted to put down the Aniversary Fast for the Murder of Charles
the First, and by this means like Erostratus may be remembered till Time shall
be no more; besides, could our Preacher have obtained his end, an almost Twenty
Years Rebellion, with the Miseries, Calamities and Desolations that accompanied
Us, will for ever keep up Animosities, though there were no such Day in the
Calender as the 30th of January: And therefore with Respect to Mr. Stephens's
Project, I think the best way to extinguish the Memory of that Guilty Day, Is
to abhor and Utterly forsake the Principles, that prompted Ill Men to Commit so
Inhuman and Barbarous a Crime; for as long as Men will be Arraigning
Governments, Trampling upon the Power of Kings, and making all public
Distractions, concur in making way to their beloved Tyranny and Usurpation,
others will upon better grounds Reply, That God is making Inquisition for
Blood, and that the Murder of our late Sovereign is Required, and Visited upon
this present Generation.

Another Reason assigned by our Preacher sor the Non-Observance of this Day of
Humiliation, was, because all the Bloody Actors in that Fatal Stroke were Dead,
and the Memory of their Crimes ought to be Buried with them: Which Argument is
as Weak and Feeble as the Other, unless he could prove, That the Principles by
which those Regicides Acted, were as surely Damned to all Eternity, as the
Authors of them are Dead: For till then, the Fast ought to continue, like a
Bush stuck up by a Charitable Traveller in a Quick-Sand, to Warn Men os the Sin
and Danger, which those Ill Men by espousing Ill Principles, were led into;
for, as I have said before, what has been done, may be done again, and the same
Causes will for ever produce the same Effects.

Now to show that these Accursed Principles are at present more predominant
than they were 1642; which I can ascribe to nothing but the Looseness and
Irreligion of the Age, I would ask Mr. Stephens, Whether the Commonwealth Party
are not now more Numerous, Insolent, and since they joined with the Jacobites
mor formidable too, than in any King's Reign whatsoever? And also I would know,
Whether they do not take the same Methods, to Undermine the Present Government
under William the Third, as their Predecessors did under his Royal Grandfather
Charles the First? And I heartily Wish this Evil be not so long neglected tell
it be grown past Redress, or Cure.

Are not our Republican Scriblers the Common Authors of all the Virulent
Pamphlets against the Government? Who by Reporting what is False, and
Preverting what is True, are forcing Unsteady Men upon the Rock, on which their
Fathers were Shipwrackt.

Has not a Bold Rennigado Irish Popish Priest Written Milton's Life, who
Vindicated the Murder of the Lord's Anointed, and gives that Wretch many high
Elogiums, that once occasioned several Hours Debates in the House of Commons:
Whether he should not be Hanged for what he had Written, in Justification of
that Abominable Parricide, and had some of his Now Admired Books Burnt by the
Hands of the Common Hangman.

Are not all that Vile Man's Works now Reprinted? And for fear they should not
do Mischief enough that way, Is not an Abridgment of the most Poisonous
Passage, put all together in the Account of his Life?

And which is no less observable than all the rest; Are not all these
Collections made by a Priest in Romish Orders? And who, for ought we know, though
he Acts the Part of a Republican, may be a Romish Emmissary, sent hither on
purpose to Embroyl our Affairs, and to Divide us among our Selves, that at last
we may become a Prey to the Common Enemy of our Nation and Religion; for this
is but the Old Game Renewed, and 'twould be a Wonder, while some are Rending
our Government to pieces, if the Papists should not have their Wolves in Sheeps
Clothing among us, to hasten our Ruin.

Further are not Ludlow's Letters, and Harrington's Commonwealth (...) Oceana,
in every Hand? And is any thing so common as Calve^ Head^ Clubs of
Commonwealths Men, who Nightly Assemble to promote that Interest? Which, I
think, if seriously considered, there is as much Reason now as ever, to
Antidote this Infection, and not to Gratify the Preacher in his Intolerable
Impertinencies.

But to turn the Tables upon Mr. Stephens, who suffered himself to be made a
Property for the Service of a Faction; there can be no greater Argument, That
the Republicans are very busy in setting up their Good Old Cause, than what
relates to himself: For some of his Party, as soon as he had leave to Preach
before the Honorable House of Commons, Industriously spreading a Report, What
Wonders Master Stephens would perform, in Order to Quash the Observation of the
Fast upon the Thirtieth of January.

He sold the Copy of his Sermon to a Bookseller, before it was Preached, as I
am Credibly Informed, for Five and Twenty Pounds: Far fetched and Dear bought,
are only fit for Ladies and Commonwealths Men, who never stick at the Price of
any thing that may be serviceable to their Faction, which if the Bookseller is
not well assured of, he has certainl^ caught a Tartar; for never Man heard of
such an Extravagant Rate given for a Single Sermon, which can only make him
amends by the Badness of it. But now as Matters are Circumstantiated, and the
Preacher finds himself mistaken in the Strength of his Faction, it may so sink
the Value of his Sermon, that like the rest of their Republ^can Pamphlets, it
must at last-be Printed by a Contribution.

Thus have I as Briefly as I could, Animadverted upon this Twohanded Sermon, in
which I had been more particular, but for two Reasons.

First, Because that Reverend, Pious, and Learned Prelate, His Grace the Lord
Archbishop of York, Preached the same Day, and upon the same Text, before the
Right Honorable the House of Lords, in Westminster. Abbey; and the Lords having
desired His Grace to Print His Sermon, you will find in that Discourse the Duty
enjoined in the Text* and the Religious Observation of the Day, Rescued from
the Impertinent, Clandestine, and Dangerous Surmises of Mr. Stephens.

Secondly, Because the Honorable the House of Commons, before whom his Sermon
was Preached, have showed their Resentments of it, in a Vote and Resolve worthy
of Themselves and Eternal Remembrance. To which I refer you.

FINIS.

