AN ANSWER TO THE Athenian Mercury, VOL. 4. NUMB. 14. CONCERNING
INFANT BAPTISM. With an Account of diverse QUERIES Sent by the Author (and some
others) to the Athenian Society, Which they have not yet answered. To which are
added, some REMARKS by way of Reply to their Mercury on the same Subject, Number.
18. published November. 28.

London, Printed for the Author, and sold by John Harris at the Harrow in the
Poultry. MDCXCI.

AN ANSWER TO THE ATHENIAN MERCVRY, VOL. 4. NUMB. 14. CONCERNING
INFANT BAPTISM. With an Account of diverse Questions sent by the Author (and
some others) to the Athenian Society, which they have not yet answered.
Gentlemen,
WHO he was that sent you the first Questions about Infant Baptism, I know not;
whether he was an Antipedo-Baptist, or a Pedo-Baptist* is a Question: but your
calling upon all who had any Doubts about it, to send in their Objections,
argues a great degree of Confidence of your Ability, of doing more than all
before: For it is strange you should attempt to call for all our Objections,
when it appears you intended to write but one half Sheet of Paper in Answer to
them; as if you could do that in a few Lines, which others, as learned as your
selves, could never yet do in great Volumes; this savours (as some judge) of
great Pride, and casts much Contempt upon you, and lessens your Reputation
among wise Men who are for Pedo Baptism, as well as others. And yet after all
the great and mighty noise, you have not so much as in the least touched the
chief Questions, which, to my knowledge, were sent you near a Fortnight before
your said Mercury came forth. And therefore to show how disingenuous you have
been herein, I thought it might not be amiss to spend two or three spare hours
upon your Mercury.

1. The first Question you pretend to answer is this, i. e. Whether Baptism (as
it is commonly taught) is the proper and natural Antitype of Circumcision?

Reply. As to what you speak of the Customs of Nations. Languisms, and of Men
being ignorant of Radixes, or Original Significations in Langages, seems remote
to the business, and serves for little else than to blot Paper, or rather to
darken Counsel: Certainly the Ordinance of Baptism, one of the two great
Sacraments of the New Testament, does not lie so obscure in God's Word, either
what it is, or who are the proper Subjects thereof, that Men must be at a loss
about it, unless they understand the Radixes, or original Significations of
Languages. But to proceed, you would, it seems, have Baptism to be the proper
Antitype of Circumcision in some respect and not in others.

First, From the Customs of the Jews in proselyting the Gentiles into their
Religion: so far you say indeed Circumcision was not a Type, but a continuance
of a Custom. Now how absurd and ridiculous that is which you affirm upon this
account, may appear to all. Will you assert and stand by it, that Baptism was a
Jewish Custom, and so no pure Gospel-Institution? Doubtless, if so, the
Pharisees might have soon given our Savior a ready Answer to his great
Question, viz. The Baptism of John, whether is it from Heaven, or of Men? Mat.
21.25. Certainly there was no Baptism of this nature of Divine Institution,
before John received it from Heaven: But, say you, If John Baptist undertook
any new way of proselyting the Jews into the Gospel, they had not only
struggled with the Opposition of his new Doctrine, but also of his new
Practice; therefore (say you) it was that this Custom was continued, and had
the Super-addition of the full force of Baptism, viz. a Consignation or Seal of
the Covenant.

Reply. As you confess his Doctrine was new, so was his Baptism no doubt; for,
as our Annotators observe, his Baptism was part of his Doctrine. Pray, what was
the Doctrine he preached? was it not Baptism of Repentance for the Remission of
Sins? Mark 1.4. Moreover, we do not read they were more displeased with his new
Doctrine, than with his new Practice.

2. But what Authority have you to affirm, Gospel-Baptism was but the
continuance of a Jewish Custom, or was a Legal Rite, or rather indeed a human
Tradition? for it is evident the Jews were not required, or commanded of God to
baptize their Proselytes, or others; for Circumcision was the only Rite by
which Proselytes (who were Males) were added to the Jewish Church, as we find
God commanded Abraham. And if Baptism had been so frequently practiced amongst
the Jews, as you assert, wherefore did the Pharisees say to John, Why do thou
baptize, if thou art not that Christ, nor Elias? John 1.25. Moreover, Baptism
is directly called a Principle of the Doctrine of Christ, Heb. 6.1,2. which
Doctrine our Savior says he received from his Father. If it be a Principle of
the Doctrine of Christ, it follows undeniably, he instituted it, and gave it
forth. Furthermore, if Baptism was practiced all along among the Jews, I argue,
either they practiced it as a Mosaical Rite, or else as a Tradition of their
own; not, say I, as a Mosaical Rite, because Moses never commanded them so to
do; for he speaks nothing of it, and yet declared all things God commanded him;
and did every thing according to the Pattern showed him in the Mount. And if it
was a human Jewish Tradition, what is become of one of the great Sacraments of
the New Testament? Must it be looked upon from henceforth to be nothing else
than the continuance of a Jewish Tradition taken out of their fabulous and
erroneous Talmud? What kind of poisonous Stuff is ^is you trouble the World
with? What tho the Jews, who had made the Commandments of God void through
their Traditions, did practice some such thing; Must you affirm Gospel-Baptism
in its Rise and Original sprung from their Custom? And because they baptized
Proselytes both Men, Women and Children, must Christians do so too? Sure the
Custom of the Romish Church in baptizing of Infants, as a human Tradition, is
every way of as good Authority to warrant us so to do, as the Custom of the
unbelieving Jews. But pray take what a Learned Pedo-Baptist, and a Son of the
Church of England, has said in answer to this vain Conceit; it is Sir Norton
Knatchbull, in his Animadversiones in lib. Novi Testamenti, page 313. Ac cum
videam summi judicii viros in his temporibus and Rabbinis fundament a petere
veritatis, etc. But when I see in these times some Men of the greatest Judgment
to setch the Foundation of Truth from the Rabbis, I cannot but stick at it:
for whence was the Talmud sent to us, (they are the words (says he) of Buxtorf
in his Synagoga Judicia) that we should give so much Credit thereto, that we
should believe that the Mosaic Law either was or ought to be understood
therefrom, much less the Gospel, to which they are professed Enemies? The
Talmud is called a Labyrinth of Errors, and the foundation of Jewish Fables; it
was perfected and acknowledged for Authentic five hundred Years after Christ,
and out of it Maimonides drew his Doctrine, at all the rest of them; therefore
we cannot acquiesce in such Testimony -- Gentlemen, either answer no more
Questions about Religion, or take more heed to what you say: for your pleading
for Infant Baptism, from such grounds, all may perceive tends to cast an Odium
and Contempt on the Christian Religion: Therefore I infer, your Proof for this
Practice from the Custom amongst the Jews about baptizing of Proselytes both
Men, Women and Children, proves nothing; you were better, for the Authority of
it, to urge the Decrees of Popes and General Councils; a Popish Innovation is
as good as a Jewish one.

But however, you do allow that our blessed Savior did add something to this
pretended Jewish Custom, and ^th not only put it in full force, but also made
it a Consignation or Seal of the Covenant; and this, say you, is further
strengthened by several undeniable Texts of Scripture, which Anabaptists
themselves can never get clear of; and ask them, they must either be silent, or
give such a Paraphrase as we do. The Texts are these: First, Col. 2.11,12. In
whom also ye are circumcised with the Circumcision made without bands, in
putting off the Body of the Sins of the Flesh, by the Circumcision of Christ.
Buried with him in Baptism, etc. The second, that of baptizing the Israelites
in the Red Sea, 1 Cor. 10.2. The last is the saving of Noah and his Family in
the Ark, 1 Pet. 3.21.

Reply 1. But is it so indeed? did our Savior in instituting Gospel-Baptism do
no more than put a Jewish Custom to be in full force, and make it a
Consignation or Seal of the Covenant? Were. you not learned and ingenious Men,
I should not so much admire at your Notions.

2. But the Truth is, in the second place, if you had not told us in your next
words, to what purpose you mention those Scriptures, we should have been at a
great loss about it, or not well have understood your Intention; but you, like
the ingenious Painter, soon inform us, and tell us what it is -- i. e. you tell
us, you urge not these things to prove any thing else, but the Parallel betwixt
Circumcision and Baptism, or to speak (say you) more properly, the necessary
continuance of the old Manner amongst the Jews of continuing their way of
proselyting the Heathen.

3. Was it necessary then, that a human Tradition of the Jews should be
continued? I thought the Apostle tells you that Christ nailed all the Jewish
Ceremonies of the Mosaical Law to the Cross, and that they all ceased when the
Antitype was come; and besure had the Baptism you speak of been indeed a
Mosaical Rite, I mean appointed or commanded of God, it had vanished with its
Fellows: But it is hard Christ should abolish all Legal Customs, or Ceremonial
Ordinances, and yet confirm, with some addition, a Custom of the Jews own
inventing.

4. You do not seem to distinguish between your twofold Answer to the Question;
I thought you had brought those Scriptures to prove Baptism the proper Antitype
of Circumcision; but you urge the former old Custom again, so that here is no
Scripture nor Argument brought by you to prove the thing in hand. As touching
what you say of the Parallel betwixt Circumcision and Baptism signifies
nothing; if in some things there should be a Parallel, it does not follow
therefore Baptism was the Antitype of Circumcision. What tho Circumcision was
the initiating Ordinance of the Male Children into the Jewish Church, and
Baptism is that initiating Ordinance into the Gospel Church; this does not
prove the one the Type of the other.

5. But pray, what is it that the Anabaptists can never get clear of, or being
asked the Exposition, they must be silent, or give such a Paraphrase as you do?
I must tell you, I know no Text more full for our practice of baptizing
Believers, than that in Col. 2.11,12. We say from thence, that the proper
Antitype of Circumcision in the Flesh, is the Circumcision of the Heart; and
therefore not Baptism; tho it is granted by us, that in Baptism there is a
Representation of the new Birth, and Mortification of Sin, which Circumcision
was the express Type of: And this cannot weaken nor silence us, but rather
strengthen our hands. All that can well be inferred from this Text, Col.
2.11,12. where the Apostle mentions Circumcision and Baptism, is no more than
this, viz. where Baptism is administered upon a proper Subject, it represents
the Spiritual and Mystieal Circumcision of the Heart, i.e. that the Soul is
dead to Sin, or that he has put off the Body of Sins of the Flesh by the
Circumcision of Christ; which may refer to the Power of his Death in the
Effects thereof, by the effectual Sin-killing Operations of the holy Spirit on
the Heart: And as we being dead to Sin, we are also buried with Christ in
Baptism, both in the Sign, i.e. covered all over in the Water, which resembles
in a lively Figure his Burial, and also in Signification, i.e. the Power and
blessed Effects of his Death, having been the Death of the old Man, or that
Body of Sin in us; wherein also in like manner we are also risen with him
through the Faith of the Operation of God; and this is likewise held forth both
in Sign and Signification in true Baptism.

Now if this be not your Paraphrase on this Text, we cannot help it. I know
many Learned Man who own Pedo-Baptism speak to the same purpose, nor is there
any reason for you to say we must be silent, etc. as if we knew not what to say
to this Text: But what is this for Infant Baptism, or to prove Baptism the
Antitype of Circumcision? Does Sprinkling represent a Burial? does the Sign or
Figure of Christ's Burial appear in sprinkling a little Water on the Face, and
as it is done to an Infant, in whom Faith and Regeneration is not wrought? what
does there appear in Signification? Does not the Church of England say, that
Baptism is the outward Sign of an inward spiritual Grace; sure that is but a
mock-Baptism, where there is neither the Sign or Figure of Christ's Death and
Burial, etc. nor tht inward Work wrought upon the Person baptized, which is
signified or ought to be signified thereby, viz. That the said Person is dead
to Sin, and raised up by the Faith of the Operation of God to walk in newness
of Life.

But alas, this it seems is not the thing; it is not so much to prove Baptism to
be the Antitype of Circumcision, as it is to prove Baptism to be the
continuation of a Jewish Custom: for to speak more properly, you intimate, that
to this purpose, you mention these things. Sure all understanding Men, as well
Pedo-Baptists as others, must needs loath your Notion; but I know you are not
alone herein there are some others who have asserted the same thing; which
perhaps encouraged you thus to write: But to correct your Rashness, and silence
you and them to, consider what I and the forementioned Gentleman have said. Is
it not enough that Infant Baptism should be built upon no better a Foundation
than the Tradition of the Apostate Gentile Church, and the Decrees of Popes and
General Councils, but that it must also be grounded on the erroneous Customs of
the Jewish Talmud? But to proceed, that Circumcision may answer, or run
Parallel with Baptism, you bring in the Practice of some Heathen Nations who
circumcised their Females; we shall have it anon; the truth is, the Proof and
Explanation of Infant Baptism shall be sufficiently made out before you have
done; if fabulous and erroneous Traditions of Jews, Heathens, and Apostate
Christians will do it; but if no better Authority or Proof can be brought for
it than what is contained in your Mercury, it is time for all good Christians
with Shame enough to cast it off. Should I tell my. Reader why some Heathens
circumcised their Females, it might greatly expose you. But to close with your
first Question, take what Dr. Jer. Tailor, late Bishop of Down, has said upon
this Conceit, i.e. that Circumcision figured Baptism; there are his words, viz.
The Argument, says he, from Circumcision is invalid upon infinite
Configurations: Figures and Types prove nothing unless a Command go along with
them, or some Express to signify such to be their purpose: for the Deluge of
Waters and the Ark of Noah were Figures of Baptism, says Peter. If therefore
the Circumstances of the one should be drawn to the other, we should make
Baptism a Prodigy rather than a Rite. The Paschal Lamb was a Figure of the
Eucharist, which succeds the other, as Baptism does to Circumcision: but
because there was in the Manducation of the Paschal Lamb no Prescription of
Sacramental Drink, shall we thence conclude that the Eucharist is to be
administered in one kind? And even in the very instance of this Argument,
suppose a Correspondency of the Analogy between Circumcision and Baptism, yet
their is no Correspondency of Identity; for tho it be granted, that both of
them did consign the Covenant of Faith, yet there is nothing in the
Circumstances of Children being circumcised that so concerns that Mystery; but
that it might very well be given to Men of Reason, because Circumcision lest a
Character in the Flesh, which being imprinted upon the Infant, did its work to
them when they came to Age; and such a Character was necessary, because there
was no word added to the Sign; but Baptism imprints nothing that remains on the
Body; and if it leaves a Character at all, it is upon the Soul to which the
word is added, which is as much a part of the Sacrament as the Sign it self;
for both which Reasons it is requisite that the Party baptized should be
capable of Reason, that they may be capable both of the Word and of the
Sacrament, and the Impress-upon the Spirit: Since therefore the Reason of the
Parity does wholly fail, there is nothing left to infer a necessity of
complying in the Circumstance of Age, any more than in the other Annexes of
Types: Then the Infant must also precisely be baptized upon the eighth day, and
Females must not be baptized at all, because not circumcised; but it were more
proper, if we would understand it a right, to prosecute the Analogy from the
Type to the Antitype, by the way for Letter and Spirit, and Signification; and
as Circumcision figures Baptism, so also the Adjuncts of the circumcised shall
signify some thing spiritual in the Adherence of Baptism; and therefore as
Infants were circumcised, so spiritual Infants-should be baptized, which is
spiritual Circumcision; for therefore Babes had the Ministry of the Type to
signify that we must, when we give our Names to Christ, become Children in
Malice, and then the Type is made complete. Thus the worthy Doctor has
answered your Question, and you too. If Circumcision must be a Type of Baptism,
he has showed how, and how not, if it be so taken; but the truth is, all Types
cease when the Antitype is come, the one must give way to the other; but
Circumcision did continue in full force some Years after Baptism was in full
force; for Circumcision ended not till Christ nailed it to his Cross; therefore
it could not be the Type of Baptism: but how a Shadow or Sign should be the
proper Antitype of a Shadow I see not. But enough has been said to this, and I
should not have said so much to it, but because you Notion seems new to some.

As touching the other two Scriptures you mention, viz. that in 1 Cor. 10. it is
very impertinently cited for your business, to prove Circumcision the Type of
Gospeil-Baptism; but this Text speaks nothing of that in the least, nor no more
does that in Peter. Suppose the Red Sea was a Figure of Baptism, and so also
the Water and Ark of Noah; what of all this, if you had urged the Fathers and
Children were baptized to Moses in the Sea and in the Cloud, and therefore
Children may be Baptized? I would have answered you that was but a figurative
Baptism, and proves nothing; besides, it would prove Unbelievers may be
baptized also, because there was a mixed Multitude as well so Baptized, as were
the Fathers and their Children; besides, much Cattle were with them in the Sea,
and under the Cloud.

Quest. 2. What certain indubitable Grounds can we have for the Practice of
Infant Baptism.
You answer, The certain Ground is from the Scripture, and first from the Words
of the Commission, Matthew. 28. (...), disciple all Nations; and then follows,
Baptizing them in the name, etc.

From the order of which words (you say) Infants are not excluded from Baptism,
as is generally believed by Anabaptists; a Person may be Baptized before he is
taught; for say you (...), Mathetusate, signifies, to disciple all Nations
personally and subjectively; being a general word, it contains the other two
that follow, viz. Baptizing and Teaching, it being a word of the imperative
Mode, and the other two only Participles; so that the Commission of it is that,
and the Mode of it these: but in the Mode, Baptizing them preceeds Teaching
them to observe all things, etc.

Reply. Because there is a Teaching follows Baptism, does it therefore follow,
according to the Order of the sacred Commission, there is no Teaching
indispensibly to go before the Person is baptized? You have cause to tremble
for trifling and basely inverting the order of the Commission of our Blessed
Savior; what though the Greek word Discipliz, or make Disciples, be a word of
the imperative Mode; O strange! have you found it out, will this do your
business, does it therefore contain the other two? I ask you whether a Man may
not be made a Disciple, and not be Baptized, or be Baptized, and yet not be
discipled? Matthew. 13.52. it is (...), in Matthew. 28. it is disciple ye; here it is
discipled, instructed, or that is taught, and it is from the same Verb with the
other: It Is evident notwithstanding all your Flourish, tha Teaching, according
to the Order of the Commission, goes, and must go before Baptizing, though the
Person baptized is to be taught afterward; also, all things that Christ
commanded his Disciples, both as to Doctrine and Practice, that so they may be
faithful Followers of Christ unto the end. This Teaching after Baptism indeed
the Baptists cannot deny, unless they should be so foolish as to say, a
Baptized Believer needs no further teaching, etc. but you know in your
Consciences, we deny, and that too by the Authority of the Commission, that any
ought to be Baptized, but such who are made Disciples by their first being
taught. Does Baptism, Sirs, make either Children or others Disciples? if you do
not assert that, what do you say: and if all Nations, or any in the Nations,
are to be Baptized before they are taught or made Disciples, why may not a
Minister, by the Authority of the Commission, baptize Turks, Pagans and
Infidels, with their Children, as well as the Infants of Christian People?

Moreover, if so be Baptizing may go before Teaching, or Persons being made
Disciples, why did Philip answer the Eunuch after that manner, when he asked
him why he might not be Baptized? the Answer is, If thou believe with all thy
Heart, thou may; intimating, unless he so believed he might not. Also why
did Christ make Disciples first, and then baptize them? Joh. 4.1. I must also
tell you, that your Exposition of the Commission in Matthew, does tend to
invert the Order of the same Commission in Mark 16.15,16. where our Savior
commands his Disciples to go and preach the Gospel to every Creature, and then
says, He that believes and is Baptized, shall be saved; it is not he that is
baptized and then believes; but to give diverse godly and learned Pedo-Baptists
their due, they I find dare not attempt to invert the Order of the Holy
Commission, as you seem to do, thought it shakes the Foundation of their own
Practice: See Reverend Mr. Perkirs on these Words, Teach all Nations, baptizing
them; says he, I explain the former thus; First of all, it is said, Teach
them, that is, make them my Disciples by teaching them to believe and repent:
Here we are to consider the Order which God observes in making with Men a
Covenant in Baptism; first-of all he calls them by his Word and Spirit to
believe and repent. Then in the second Place, he makes a Promise of Mercy and
Forgiveness. And then thirdly, he seals his Promise by Baptism: They, says he,
that know not nor consider this Order which God used in covenanting with them
in Baptism, deal preposterously, over-slipping the Commandment of repenting and
believing, and is the cause of so much Profaneness in the World. Much to the
same Purpose says Mr. Baxter, Right to Baptism, p. 149, 150. speaking of the
Order of this Commission; Christ gave to his Disciples, their first Task (says
he) is to make Disciples, which are by Mark called Believers.

The second Work is to baptize them, whereto is annexed the Promise of
Salvation.

The third Work is to teach them all other things which are after to be learned
in the School of Christ. To contemn this Order, says he, is to contemn the
Rules of Order, for where can we find it if not here? I profess my Conscience
is fully satisfied from this Text, that there is one sort of Faith saving, even
Saving that must go before Baptism, the Profession whereof the Minister must
expect.

Your second Scipture-Ground is that of whole Families being baptized.

Reply; You cannot be ignorant that this Proof has been often invalid: How
many Families are there in this City, in which there is not one Infant.
Besides, it is said, Paul preached the Word to the Jailor and to all in his
House: also it is expressly said, He believed in God with all his House. We have
as much Ground to believe, in these Families there were some Servants or
Children who were Unbelievers, as to believe there were little Babes; and
because whole Households were said to be baptized, therefore unbelieving
Servants, Sons and Daughters, as well as little Children: Others may infer
ungodly Servants and unbelieving Children that were grown up to be Men and
Women, were baptized also in those Families. In Jailors Families now adays
it is evident there are too many wicked and ungodly ones; and this Jailor was
none of the best before converted, it is plain. Besides, whole or all, does not
comprehend always every individual Person, as 1 Samuel 21.28. Moreover, Dr.
Hammond says, That to conclude, Infants were baptized, because Households are
mentioned so to be, is, says he, unconvincing, and without Demonstration, it
being so uncertain whether there were any Children in those Families: His
Letter p. 471. Sect. 21.

Your third Scripture-Ground is that of the Promise (you say Covenant) made to
you and your Children.

Reply; How often have we showed that this Text proves not that any Children
quatenus, as such, should be baptized, nor, as such, that they are in the
Covenant of Grace, or have the Promise made to them; the Promise runs to the
Jews and to their Offspring, and not to them only, but to Gentiles also, who
were said to be afar off: But pray observe, it is to no more of the Jews and
their Children or Offspring, and such who were afar off, than the Lord shall
call or make Disciples by the Word and effectual Operations of the Holy Spirit.
My Sons and Daughters are as much my Children when they are twenty or thirty
Years old, as well as when Babes. Dr. Hammond also grants, Children in this
Text does not refer to Infants as such, but to the Posterity of the Jews, p.
490. Sect. 81. If ye be Christ's, then you are Abraham 's Seed, and Heirs
according to the Promise. The Children of the Flesh, says Paul, these are not
the Children of God; but the Children of the Promise are accounted for the
Seed, Romans 9.8. Not if you be the Offspring of Abraham according to the Flesh,
or Seed of Believers.

Your fourth Scripture Proof is, that of such is the Kingdom of Heaven.

Reply. This proves no more Children ought to be baptized, than they ought to
receive the Lord's Supper, Baptism being a mere positive Precept, and only
depends upon the Will and sovereign Pleasure of the great Lawgiver Jesus
Christ. A thousand such Instances prove not they ought to be baptized, except
there was a Precept annexed, or Precedent for it in God's Word. Besides, of
such, etc. (as one well observes) may intend such and such that have like
Qualities, viz. harmless, meek, etc. as Children: Therefore the Anabaptists (as
you call them) are not uncharitable, who say, Infants have no more Right to
Baptism than unreasonable Creatures; for what can give them Right thereto, but
the Authority of God's Word?

You ask what Privilege the Children of Believers have above Unbelievers? We
answer, They have the advantage of their Parents Prayers, Instruction, godly
Education, and good Example.

But, say you, they are holy.

Answ. We deny it intends federal Holiness, such as qualifies Children for
Baptism. We read in Mal. 2.15. of Marriage, and that Children begotten in
lawful Wedlock are called a godly Seed, in opposition to their being
illegitimate. Now that it was about Marriages the Corinthians wrote to S. Paul,
is evident, they doubting of the Lawfulness of abiding with their unbelieving
Husbands and Wives: And to satisfy them about this Matter, he tells them, the
unbelieving Husband was sanctified by (or rather to) the believing Wife, etc.
that is set apart or consecrated to each other in lawful Marriage, (for it is
doubtless no other Sanctification) else were your Children unclean, that is,
Bastards; but now are they holy, that is, lawfully begotten. And we find diverse
Learned Men give the same Exposition on these Words. See Beza; That the Word,
says he, is not to be understood an Adverb of Time, but a Conjunction that is
wont to be used in the assumption of Arguments; and so the Sense is [But now],
that is, Forasmuch as the unbelieving Husband is sanctified to the Wife, your
Children are holy, that is, lawfully begotten and born. We read in Zachary,
that the Bells and Pots of the Lord's House were holy; may be the Papists from
thence presume to baptize Bells, and they have as much reason so to do, as
there is by the Authority of God's Word for any to baptize Infants. As touching
what you speak of little Children coming to Christ, that the Original or Greek
Word is the same with (...) to proselyte, what signifies that? how often is
that Word mentioned in other Places, to signify any manner of coming to? etc.
It Is a strange way of proselyting Persons, and never to teach or instruct them.
See these Scriptures where the same Word is used: (...), Mat. 26.7. There came
unto him. Mat. 26.17. The Disciples came; Gr. (...). Mat. 26.49. Forthwith he
came to Jesus; Gr. (...). Mat. 26.69. There came unto him (a Girl or) a Damsel;
Gr. (...). Mat. 26.73. And after a while (or a while after) came unto him they
that stood by; Gr. (...).

But you proceed further to prove Infants ought to be baptized, and that from
the Universal Consent of the Churches in all Countries: For (as you say)
Tertul. de praescriptura haeret. chapter 28. Ecquid verisimile, etc. Had the
Churches erred, they would have varied, etc.

Reply. If you cannot prove Infant Baptism from Scripture, you are gone for
ever; for this Argument of yours to prove it is like that of the Papists, to
prove their Church the true Church, viz. Universality and Antiquity, etc. it
was not the Practice of the Churches first planted by the Apostles, that is
plain; and it is as evident other Errors were as universally received, and some
very early too; besides, you cannot be ignorant how the Greek Church varies from
the Latin.

But pray take what Dr. Barlow has said to this, a worthy Bishop of the Church
of England. I believe, and know, says he, that there is neither Precept nor
Example in Scripture for Pedo-baptism, nor any just Evidence for it for above
200 years after Christ; that Tertullian condemns it as an unwarantable Custom,
and Nazianzen a good while after him dislikes it: sure I am, that in the
primitive Times, they were Catechumeni, then Illuminati or Baptizati, and that
not only Pagans and Children of Pagans converted, but Children of Christian
Parents: The truth is, I do believe Pedo-Baptism, how or by whom I know not,
come into the World in the second Century, and in the third and forth began to
be practiced, though not generally, and defended as lawful from the Text, John
3.5. grossly misunderstood upon the like gross Mistake, John 6.53. They did for
many Centuries, both in the Greek and Latin Church communicate Infants, and
give them the Lord's Supper; and I confess they might do both as well as
either, etc.

Thus both your Arguments from universal Consent and Antiquity, the Learned
Doctor has sufficiently answered. And I rather let him answer you than to
answer you in my own words, thinking what he says, may be more regarded by some
than what I say. But you to prove from Antiquity, that Infant Baptism was
practiced inth first, second and third Centuries, you say you are able to
demonstrate, that there was never any particular Congregation of Anabaptists
till about three hundred years after Christ; and seem to build much upon these
three last Arguments.

Reply. If you had said there were no Baptized Congregations, i. e. such who
only baptized Believers, you had asserted a great Untruth, since all the
Primitive Apostolical Churches were such, none being admitted to Baptism for
the first and second Centuries, but the Adult, i. e. such who professed their
Faith, (as in due time may be sufficiently proved) notwithstanding all your
Flourish or Pretenses; but suppose it be granted there were no Congregations
till then called Anabaptist, what does that signify? it was because there were
not till about that time any (as Dr. Barlow and diverse others say) who
practiced Pedo-baptism: Baptists could not be called Anabaptists or
Re-baptizers till there were some who held for Infant Baptism; so that this
directly makes against you. Moreover, many Rites which you disown as human
Traditions, crept very early into the World, and were practiced generally too
in the Apostasy of the Church.

Quest. 3. Whether Infant Baptism is to be found in the Scripture?
You answer, not expressly in the Letter, but from necessary and unavoidable
Consequences, as you say you have already shown.

Reply. It Is a hard case that one of the great Sacraments of the New Testament
should in your Thoughts, lie so dark and obscure in the New Testament, that it
cannot be proved from it but by Consequences; but harder that Learned Men of
your way, should affirm that your Consequences for it, drawn from those Texts
you mention, are not natural, and prove nothing; besides, you cannot be ignorant
that the first Asserters of Infant Baptism never undertook the proof of it from
such Scripture-Grounds or Consequences, but from the Authority and Power of the
Church; for as you think the Church has power to change the Act of Baptizing
unto Sprinkling, so they affirmed she had like Power to change the Subject, and
instead of Believers to baptize Infants who have no Understanding. Pray what
Precept of the Mosaical Law lay so dark or obscure, that it could not be proved
without Consequences? Did not Moses make every Law, Precept or Command plain,
that he that run might read it? and yet Christ is said to exceed Moses, being
faithful as a Son over his own House, Heb. 3. Those Consequences you have
drawn, all impartial Men may see prove nothing.

Moreover, what you speak about those great Articles of the Christian Religion,
as if they could not be proved without Consequences, must not by any means be
allowed; nor can I take it to be true. Cannot we find the Doctrine of the
Trinity in the Scripture, and that Christ is God and the second Person, and
that he was born of the Virgin, without Consequences? Is it Wisdom in you in
such a corrupt Age as this is, to lay down such Assertions? Were those things
the Matter of Controversy between you and me, you should hear what positive and
plain Scripture Proof might (as you know has often already) be brought upon
that account; but to pass by this, I affirm the Baptism of Believers lies plain
in God's Word, but Infant Baptism is not to be found therein.

Quest. 4. Why was not Christ baptized before he was thirty Years old?
You answer, From the same Reason that the Jailor, the Eunuch and St. Peter's
Converts were not, viz. there is no adhering to a Doctrine before it is
instituted or preached; but say you Infant Baptism was much before our
Savior's time, as amongst those of riper Years since, and that you say is
Proof enough.

Reply. It cannot be Proof enough to answer the Question, and as to prove
Infant Baptism it utterly fails; but if Infant Baptism was much before our
Savior's time as an Institution of God, there was no Want of an Institution
when he was a Babe; and therefore your Reason why he deferred his Baptism is
gone. Was it in being long before, and yet not instituted or appointed by
Jehovah? Do you not herein implicitly confess that Custom amongst the Jews was
human? Nor will it serve your turn to say, it was instituted anew as a
Gospel-Ordinance, because you affirm Baptism under the Gospel was the
Continuation of that old Custom, with the Super-addition of the full Force of
Baptism, viz. a Consignation or Seal of the Covenant. Do you not intimate it
was not instituted a new, but rather a Custom continued? upon which you (with
that Addition and some others before you) seem to lay the great Stress of your
Infants Baptism. And if some Additions were made to the old Custom, why might
there not be some Diminutions also? and if it were anew instituted, it is all
one as if it had never been in being before; for the Right any have to Baptism
and manner of Administration, and all things appertaining to it, must of
necessity wholly depend upon the new Institution or Law of Christ: If therefore
Gospel-Baptism wholly depends on the new Institution, then the old Custom is
gone for ever (had it been a Mosaical Rite) like a Legacy bequeathed in a Will,
made void by the Testator's last Will and Testament; though some part of the
same thing may be repeated in the last Will, that was in the first, yet the
last must decides the Controversy: but in Christ's last Will and Testament,
Infant Baptism is not to be found, nor was it indeed an Ordinance ordained of
God before Christ's time. See my Answer about this in Answer to the first
Question.

2. Certainly had it been the Will of God, Children should have been baptized
as such, Christ had been baptized when in his Infancy; no doubt God who is a
free Agent could not want an Administrator; he could have sent John into the
World sooner, or have commissionated some other Person to have done it. But
since the Holy Ghost in the Gospel relates the time of his Baptism, and that it
was not till he was about thirty Years old, it clearly shows us that adult
Persons ought to be admitted to that Ordinance only, and not Babes: By which
Example of his he has strengthened his Commission, or at least wise showed the
Congruity or sweet Agreement there is between his Precept and his own Practice.

Question 5. Why Sprinkling, and not Dipping? You answer, Our Church denies not
the latter, (that is, dipping) but looks upon it as a clear Representation of
our Savior's descending into the Grave, abiding there, and rising up again,
etc.
But say you, the Church has power to dispense with Circumstantials and manner
of Acting, tho not with the Act it self, etc.

Reply. What your Church is I know not; the Church of England does acknowledge,
I must confess, that Baptism is Dipping, but I never heard they have of late
times so practiced. But how dare you say, the Church has power to dispense
with Dipping, and change it into Sprinkling? Who gave her such Power? Where do
you read of it? You call it a Circumstantial, but I am not of your Mind; I must
say it is an Essential; nay, it is no Baptism at all, if not Dipping, for Baptize
is to dip, which to confirm I could give you a Cloud of Witnesses learned in
the Greek Tongue; therefore it is not the manner of the Act, but the Act it
self; to baptize is one Act, and to rantize or sprinkle Water is another; the
manner of the Act of dipping, or baptizing, is to put the Body into the Water
backward, or forward, or side-ways, or with a swift or gentle Motion. Dipping
is dipping, and sprinkling sprinkling, which Act will never be baptizing whilst
the World stands. You say well, dipping or burying the Body in the Water, is a
clear and lively Representation of the Death, Burial and Resurrection of
Christ. And hence it is said, that such who are indeed baptized, are buried with
Christ in Baptism. To which you might have added, it is also a Sign of our being
dead to Sin, and of our being raised up with Christ by the Faith of the
Operation of God, to walk in newness of Life.

And hence I infer, Infants ought not to be baptized, because there does not,
cannot appear in them that glorious internal Work of the Spirit which ought to
be signified thereby; and as they for this reason cannot be the proper Subjects
of Baptism: So likewise it cannot be done by sprinkling, because that Act
cannot represent those Signs and Gospel-Mysteries, which the Lawgiver intended
should be held forth in that holy Administration.

But why do you say this is a circumstantial Thing? Was not Nadab and Abihu's
Transgression, and that of Vzzah's more like Circumstantials than this is? and
yet their Error cost them their Lives. Or, has the Gospel Church a greater
dispensing Power in such Cases, than the Church had under the Law? -- Suppose
the Jews should have changed Circumcision, or cutting off the Foreskin of the
Flesh, to the paring the Nails of their Children, or to cut off a little Skin
off of the Fingers Ends; would that have been Circumcision? no doubt a better
Circumcision than Sprinkling is Baptism. Gentlemen, will you call any Part, or
Branch, or Thing that appertains to a positive Precept, a Circumstance which
the Church has power to dispense with? If you should, whither would this lead
you? You may after that Notion strangely curtail Christ's Institutions in other
respects.

Question 6. What think you of those that die in Infancy unbaptized?
You answer, Of such are the Kingdom of Heaven.

Reply. So says our blessed Savior, but they have, say I, no Right thereto,
or belong unto the Kingdom of Heaven, because sprinkled with a little Water;
nor would they have any further Right, should they be indeed baptized, since
there is no Command of God for it.

Quest. 7. If Children be saved whether baptized or not, what signifies Baptism?
You answer, it is a Badg of Christ, an evident Note of Distinction from the
Children of Infidels: and as we come to the Knowledge of spiritual Things by
Sense, so it is an Evidence of a greater assurance of the Favor of God to them,
being invisibly introduced into the Covenant of Grace.

Reply It Is no Badg of Christ besure, because he never gave it to them; and if
it be an evident Note of Distinction from the Children of Infidels, it is wholly
of Man's making. You know what wonderful things are ascribed to Chrism by the
Papists who use Salt, Oil and Spittle, etc. in Baptism, and to other devised
Rites and Ceremonies used by them; and I have as much ground from God's Word to
believe what they say, as what you say, who affirm and prove not; why, do you
not say they are thereby made Members of Christ, Children of God, and
Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven? Pray, what an assurance can that give them
of the Favor of God, unless he had appointed it, and imparted some spiritual
Grace thereby to them? Nay, and what Arguments do you bring to prove they
thereby are introduced into the Covenant of Grace? Can any outward Act bring or
introduce People either young or old into the Covenant of Grace, if they are
brought thereby into the Covenant of Grace? I hope they shall all be saved that
are baptized (as you call it) I hope you are not for falling away; or that any
Soul who is in the Covenant of Grace shall perish eternally. Moreover, how can
they come to the knowledge of spiritual Things by Sense? indeed in the case of
Circumcision, which left a Mark in the Flesh, they might more probably
understand by the sight of the Eye, those spiritual Things signified by it; but
Baptism leaves no such Mark: Nothing appears to their Senses when they come to
knowledge that can have any such Tendency; I fear rather it is a great means
when they are grown up, to blind their Eyes, and cause them to think (as many
ignorant People do) that they are made thereby Christians, and so in a saved
State, and never look after the Work of Regeneration.

Quest. 8. Whether have Children Faith or no; since Faith and Repentance are
Pre-requisites to Baptism?
Your Answer is. That you have showed, that according to the words of the
Commission, Baptizing goes before Teaching; therefore there is not such a
Pre-requisiteness as some dream of; you have said so I must confess from the
Commission, but have not proved it, but rather made work for Repentance, by
striving to invert the Order of the sacred Commission of our Savior, etc. But
say you admit Faith as pre-requisite to Baptism; we could answer, that Children
have Faith potentia, tho not in actu visibili: As an Artist when he is
indisposed or asleep, is potentially an Artist, tho not actually. --

Reply. Strange you should attempt to affirm Children have Faith potentia; who
told you so? when was this imaginary Faith infused into them? it must be either
by Nature Art, or Grace or else your Simily is lost. You are looked upon indeed
to be Philosophers, but this is above my Understanding, or your own
Demonstration; but you suppose that Passage in Matthew. 18. does your business:
whereas it is evident that our Savior speaks there of such little ones who were
indeed capable to believer; it was not such a little one as you would have
baptized. We doubt not but God does oftimes insuse Grace very early in the
Souls of some very young, and calls them to believe, and to the knowledge of the
Truth; but what is this to all Infants in general? But more fully to answer
what you say about Children having Faith, take what Dr. Tailor has wrote upon
this Conceit. Whether Infants have Faith or no, is a Question (says he) to be
disputed by Persons that care not how much they say, and how little they prove.

1. Personal and actual Faith they have none, for they have no Acts of
Understanding: and besides, how can any Man know that they have, since he never
saw any Sign of it, neither was he told so by any that could tell?

2. Some say they have imputative Faith, but then so let the Sacrament be too;
that is, if they have the Parents Faith, or the Churches, then so let Baptism
be imputed also by derivation from them, and as in their Mothers Womb; and
while they hung on their Mothers Breasts, they live upon their Mothers
Nourishment; so they may upon the Baptism of their Parents, or their Mother the
Church: for since Faith is necessary to the susception of Baptism, and they
themselves confess it by striving to find out new kinds of Faith to daub the
matter up; such as the Faith, such must be the Sacrament; for there is no
Proportion between an actual Sacrament and an imputative Faith, this being in
immediate and necessary order to that. And whatsoever can be said to take from
the Necessity of actual Faith, all that and much more may be said to excuse
from the actual susception of Baptism. The first of these Devices was that of
Luther and his Scholars; the second of Calvin and his; and yet there is a third
Device which the Church of Rome teaches, and that is, that Infants have
habitual Faith, but who told them so? how can they prove it? what Revelation or
Reason teaches any such thing? are they by this Habit so much as disposed to an
actual Belief without a new Master? Can an Infant sent into a Mohammedan
Province, be more confident for Christianity when he comes to be a Man, than if
he had not been baptized? are there any Acts precedent, concomitant or
consequent to this pretended Habit? This strange Invention is absolutely
without Art, without Scripture, Reason or Authority, but the Men are to be
excused unless there were a better.

And again to this purpose, page 242. And if any Man runs for Succor to that
exploded Cresphugeton, that Infants have Faith, or any other inspired Habit of
I know not what or how, we desire no more advantage in the World than that they
are constrained to answer without Revelation, against Reason, common Sense, and
all the Experience in the World. As to what you speak as to those young
Children you mention, it proves nothing; and some of your Stories seem
childless, and do not look as if they came from Men of such pretended Ingenuity.

But to close all; We have the worst of you at the last, wherein you in a very
scurrilous manner cast Reproach upon a great Body of Godly People (who differ
not from other Orthodox Christians in any Essentials of Salvation, no nor in
Fundamentals of Church-Constitutions, save in the Point of Baptism) and will
you by reason of the Enormities of some who formerly bore the Name of
Anabaptists, mentioning the old Munster Story, condemned as such, all that bear
that Name?

In Answer to which I ask you, whether the like Reflections might nor have been
cast on Christ's Apostles, because they had a Judas among them? or on the
Church of the Corinthians, because of the incestuous Person? Besides, you know
not but in may be a Lie raised upon those People by the envious Papists, who
have rendered Calvin. and Luther as odious as you do these Anabaptists. You
would think it hard, if I should ask you what sort they were that Ralph Wallis
used to expose, and fill his Garts with? or of those Clergymen who were
Pedo-Baptists, yet were for filthy Crimes executed.

To conclude, I wish that all Bitterness of Spirit was expelled, Love and
Charity exercised toward one another, tho in some things we may differ from
one another.

Queries for the Athenian Society to Answer, some of which were formerly sent
to them, but were passed by in silence, 1. On Infants the Subjects of Baptism.
And, 2. What Baptism is.
First; WHether there was not a twofold Covenant made with Abraham, one with
his Fleshly Seed, and the other with his Spiritual Seed, signified by the Bond
Woman and the Free Woman, and their Sons Ishmael and Isaac?

If so, I query, Whether Circumcision was an Ordinance that appertained to the
Covenant of Grace, and was the Seal of it? 1. Because it is contradistinguished
from the Covenant of Grace, or free Promise of God, Romans 4. 2. And it is also
called a Yoke of Bondage. And, 3. It Is said also, that he that was circumcised,
was a Debtor to keep the whole Law. And, 4. Because Ishmael, who was not a
Child of the Covenant of Grace with Esau, and many others, yet were required to
be circumcised as well as Isaac. And, 5. Since it is positively said Faith was
imputed to Abraham for Righteousness not in Circumcision, How was it imputed
then? when he was circumcised, or uncircumcised? not when he was circumcised,
but when he was uncircumcised, Romans 4.10.

Secondly; Whether the being the Male-Children of Believers, as such, gave them
right to Circumcision, or not rather the mere positive Command of God to
Abraham; since we do not read of any other Godly Man's Seed in Abraham's days,
or since, had any right thereto, but only such who were born in his House, or
bought with his Money?

Thirdly; Whether Circumcision could be said to be the Seal of any Man's Faith
save Abraham's only, seeing it is said, he received the Sign of Circumcision, a
Seal of the Righteousness of the Faith he had [mark] yet being uncircumcisied,
that he might be the Father of all that believe; which was the Privilege of
Abraham only: for how could Circumcision be a Seal to Children of that Faith
they had before circumcised, seeing they had no Faith at all, as had Abraham
their Father, they being obliged by the Law of God to be circumcised at eight
days old?

Fourthly; What is it which you conceive Circumcision did, or Baptism does seal
to Children, or make sure; since a Seal usually makes firm all the Blessings or
Privileges contained in that Covenant it is prefixed to? Doubtless if the
Fleshly Seed of Believers, as such, are in the Covenant of Grace, and have the
Seal of it, they shall be saved; because we are agreed, that the Covenant of
Grace is well ordered in all things; and sure there is no final falling,
therefore how should any of them miss of eternal Life? and yet we see many of
them prove wicked and ungodly, and so live and die; if you say it seals only
the external Part and Privileges of the Covenant of Grace?

Fifthly; I demand to know what those External Privileges are, seeing they are
denied the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, and all other External Rites
whatsoever? if you say when they believe they shall partake of those Blessings,
so, say I, shall the Children of Unbelievers as well as they.

Sixthly; If the Fleshly Seed, or Children of believing Gentiles, as such, are
to be accounted the Seed of Abraham; I query, Whether they are his Natural
Seed, or his Spiritual Seed? if not his Natural Seed, nor his Spiritual Seed,
what right can they have to Baptism, or Church Membership, from any
Covenant-Transactions God made with Abraham? --

Seventhly; Whether those different grounds upon which the Right of
Infant Baptism is pretended by the Fathers of old and the Modern Divines, does
well agree with an Institution that is a mere positive Rite, depending wholly
on the Will of the Legislator, does not give just cause to all to question its
Authority?

1. Some Pedo-Baptists asserted, It took away Original Sin, and such who denied
it were anathematized. 2. Some affirm, That Children are in the Covenant; and
being the Seed of Believers, are fedorally Holy, therefore ought to be
Baptized. 3. Another sort of Pedo-Baptists say, They ought to be Baptized, by
virtue of their Parents Faith. 4. Others affirm, They have Faith themselves,
and are Disciples, and therefore must be baptized. 5. Another sort Baptize them
upon the Faith of their Sureties. 6. And another sort of Pedo-Baptists say, It
wholly depends upon the Power and Authority of the Church. 7. Some say, It was
an Apostolical unwritten Tradition; but others deny that, and affirm, It may be
proved from the Word of God.
Sure, if it was of God, or his Institution, the Pedo-Baptists would not be
thus divided and confounded among themselves.

Eighthly; Is it not an evil thing, and very absurd for any to say, Baptism is
a Symbol of present Regeneration, and yet apply it to Babes, in whom nothing of
the things signified thereby does or can appear? And also to say, I Baptize
thee in the Name, etc. when indeed he does not Baptize, but only Rantize the
Child? and to say Baptism is a lively Figure of Christ's Death, Burial, and
Resurrection, and yet only sprinkle or pour a little Water upon the Face of the
Child?

Ninthly; Whether that can be an Ordinance of Christ, for which there is
neither Command nor Example in all the Word of God, nor (...) Promise made to
such who do it, nor Threats denounced on such who neglect it or do it not? For
though there are both Promises made to Believers Baptized, and Threats
denounced on such who neglect it, yet where are there any such in respect of
Infant Baptism?

Tenthly; Whether a Pagan, or Indian, who should attain to the knowledge of the
Greek Tongue, or of the English, or any other Tongue into which the Original
should be translated, by reading over the New Testament a thousand times he
could ever find Infants ought to be Baptized; if not, how does it appear the
Faith of People about Pedo-Baptism stands in the Power of God, and knowledge of
his Word, and not rather in the Wisdom of Men, who having endeavored, with all
the Art and Cunning they can, to draw pretended Consequences for it, tho after
all they do not naturally and genuinely follow from the Premises to which they
reser?

Eleventhly; Whether Christ having expressly mentioned the Qualifications of
such as are to be Baptized, viz. actual Repentance, Faith, and the Answer of a
good Conscience, etc. does not thereby exclude all those who are not capable of
those Qualifications?

Twelfthly; Whether it does not reflect upon the Care, Wisdom, and Faithfulness
of Jesus Christ, who as a Son over his own House, exceeded the Care and
Faithfulness of Moses, to affirm, Infants ought to be Baptized, and yet it
cannot be found in all the New Testament? Can it be thought it should be a
Gospel-Precept, nay, a Sacrament, and yet Christ speak nothing of it? or could
it be in the Commission, and yet the Apostles never to mention it, but
contrariwise, require Faith of all they admitted to Baptism? Paul says, He
declared the whole Counsel of God, and said nothing of it in any of his
Epistles, nor no where else. How many thousands of Children were born to
baptized Believers, from the time of Christ's Ascension, to the time John wrote
the Revelations, but not one word of any one Child Baptized?

Thirteen; Whether in matter of positive Right, such as Baptism is, we ought
not to keep expressly and punctually to the Revelation of the Will of the
Lawgiver?

Fourteen; Whether the Baptism of Infants be not a dangerous Error, since it
tends to deceive and blind the Eyes of poor ignorant People, who think they are
thereby made Christians, and so never look after Regeneration, nor true
Baptism, which represents or signifies that inward Work of Grace upon the Heart?

Fifteen; Whether the Ancient Church, who gave the Lord's Supper to Infants, as
well as Baptism, might not be allowed as well to do the one as the other, since
Faith and Holy Habits are as much required in those who are to be Baptized, as
in such who come to the Lord's Table? And all such in the Apostolic Church,
who were Baptized, were immediately admitted to break Bread, etc. And also the
Arguments taken from the Covenant, and because said to be Holy, and to belong
to the Kingdom of Heaven, are as strong for them to receive the Lord's Supper,
there being no Command nor Example for either, and human Tradition carrying it
equally for both for several Centuries.

Sixteen; Whether Nadab, Abihu, and Vzzah's Transgressions were not as much
Circumstantials, and so as small Errors, as to alter Dipping into Sprinkling;
and from an understanding Believer, to a poor ignorant Babe? And whether to
allow the Church a Power to make such Alterations, be not dangerous? see Rev.
22. And does not this open a Door to other Innovations?

Seventeen; Whether there is any just Cause for Men to vilify and reproach the
People called Anabaptists, for their baptizing Believers, and denying Infants
to be Subjects thereof, seeing they have the plain and direct Word of God to
warrant their practice, i.e. not only the Commission, but also the continual
usage of the Apostles and Ministers of the Gospel all along in the New
Testament, who Baptized none but such who made profession of their Faith? And
the Church of England also says, Faith and Repentance are required of such who
are to be Baptized. We dare not Baptize our Children, because we cannot find it
written, it is from the holy Fear of God, lest we should offend and sin against
him, by adding to his Word.

Eighteen; What should be the reason that our faithful Translators of the Bible
should leave the Greek word Baptism, or Baptisma, and not turn it into English,
seeing the Dutch have not done so, but contrariwise translate, for John the
Baptist, John the Dooper; and for he Baptized, he dooped, or dipped them?

Nineteen; Whether those who translate out of one Language into another, ought
not to translate every word into the same Language into which they turn it, and
not leave any word in the same Original Tongue, which the People understand
not, and for whose sakes they undertook that Work; and not to translate every
word, but also to give the right, literal, genuine and proper signification of
each word, and not the remote, improper, or collateral signification of it?
Which if our Translators of the Bible had so done, I query whether the Doubt
among the Unlearned, concerning what the word Baptisma signifies, had not
ceased?

Twenty; Seeing the Greek Church uses Immersion and not Aspersion, may it not
be looked upon as a great Argument against Sprinkling, especially seeing they
disown the Baptism of the Latin Church, because they use Sprinkling; for
doubtless the Greeks best knew the genuine and proper signification of that
word, that Tongue being their own natural Language in which the New Testament
was wrote?

21. Whether if a Minister should administer the Lord's Supper in one kind
only, and so doing, it cannot answer the great Design of Christ the Lawgiver,
i.e. the breaking of his Body, and shedding of his Blood, would not profane
that Holy Institution? If so, whether such, who instead of Dipping the whole
Body, do but sprinkle or pour a little Water on the Face, do not also profane
the holy Sacrament of Baptism, since it is not so done to represent in a lively
Figure the Death, Burial and Resurrection of Christ, with our Death unto Sin,
and vivification unto newness of Life? Romans 6. Col. 2.11,12.

22. Whether all such who have only been sprinkled, ought not to be deemed
Unbaptized Persons, since Aspersion is not Immersion, or Rantizing not
Baptizing; for though the Greek word Baptizo, in a remote and improper sense
may signify to wash, yet, as the Learned confess, it is such a washing as is
done by dipping, swilling, or plunging the Person or Thing all over in the
Water?

23. Since you say Children have Faith potentia: I query, Whether Unbelievers,
and all ungodly Persons, have not also the like Faith potentia as well as
Children, and so the same Right to Baptism? We grant they may have Faith
hereafter; What tho?

There is one Assertion and Argument laid down by you, which I omitted in my
Answer; which as it is New, so it must needs expose you, viz. If God be pleased
to radiate or shine upon the Souls of Children in Heaven, and they do behold
the Face of God, as our Savior says; then it follows that they have Faith in
Heaven, and why not on Earth? see Heb. 11.27. These are your very words.

Reply; I had thought that in Heaven the Faith of the Adult ceases, i.e. the
strong and saying Faith of Believers: Does not the Apostle say, Then we come to
receive the End of our Faith? And is not Faith turned there into Vision? Is not
Faith the Evidence of Things not seen, and the Substance of Things hoped for?
Heb. 11.1,2. Divines say, Faith, Hope, etc. cease then, and that it is only Love
that continues. What is it they have not received in Heaven, which they trust
in God for? Nor is your Conclusion good, Had they Faith there, they may have it
here. The Text you cite, Heb. 11.27. refers to that Faith Moses had on Earth,
who saw him who was Invisible: God seems so to us here; but what a sight we
shall have of him in Heaven, we know not. Does not the Apostle say, we shall
behold Face to Face; and the pure in Heart shall see God? Shall that be such a
sight that Moses had whilst on Earth?

Questions relating to the Fathers, with respect to the Controversy about
Infant Baptism.
First; WHat reason can be given why Nazianzen, an eminent Greek Father, should
counsel the deferring the Baptism of Infants, until the third or fourth Year of
their Age, (except in danger of Death), if it were in Nazianzen's Time, as some
suppose it was, the Opinion of the whole Church, as also his own, that Infants,
by an Apostolical Tradition, were to be baptized as such, that is, as soon as
born?

Secondly; Whether all the Fathers of the third and fourth Century, both of the
Greek and Latin Church, who have wrote any thing about Infant Baptism, do not
unanimously give this as the Reason why Infants should be Baptized, viz. the
washing away Original Sin, or the putting them into a Capacity of Salvation;
and some of them, particularly St. Austin, sentencing Infants to Eternal
Damnation if not Baptized?

Thirdly; If so, Whether the Fathers might not be mistaken in the Right of
Infants to Baptism, as well as in the Judgment of most Protestants they are, in
the Reason why they should be Baptized?

Four other Queries.
1. WHether God has allowed or enjoined Parents to bring their little Bzbes,
of two or ten days old, into a Covenant with him by Baptism, since it is not to
be found in the Scripture he either has allowed or enjoined them so to do?

2. If it cannot be proved he has required any such thing at their Hands,
Whether that Covenant can be said to bind their Consciences when they come to
Age, especially since they gave no Consent to it, nor were capable so to do?

3. If this pretended Covenant was not of God's Appointment, I query, how these
Children who refuse to agree to the-said Covenant when at Age, can thereby be
guilty, 1. Of rejecting Christ, 2. Of renouncing the Blessings of the Gospel,
3. And that it is Rebellion continued against their Maker, 4. That it is
Ingratitude and Perjury to their Redeemer, 5. Gross Injustice to their Parents.
6, That it is self killing Cruelty to their own Souls, 7. And a damning Sin?

4. I query, whether this be good Divinity, not rather a strange Doctrine? And
whether unwarrantable Articles of Faith, taken out of the Jewish Talmud, or
Turkish Alcoran, may not by as good Authority be put into a Christian
Catechism, as such Assertions as these?

Four Queries sent by another Hand to the Athenian Society.
Gentlemen,
I Humbly conceive, that no Man knows what is a Duty but by the Scriptures:
And since Pedo-Baptism cannot be proved by the Word of God, as every Man may
know, and is generally acknowledged by the most Learned Assertors of that
Practice; it therefore plainly follows, in my Judgment, that Infant Baptism
is no Ordinance of God's Appointment, but an Innovation.

I therefore seriously query; I. WHether Tradition; Jewish Talmuds, the Opinion
of private Doctors, Schoolmen, etc. be a sufficient Warrant for the Churches to
est ablish such a Practice, that has neither Precept nor Example in the Holy
Scriptures? II. Since the pretended Foundation of Infant Baptism, ( viz. its
absolute necessity to Salvation) proving to be a Mistake of the Text, John 3.5.
as is generally acknowledged by Protestants, Whether the Structure ought not to
fall with it, as it did in the Case of giving the Child the Eacharist? III.
Whether the Faith of the Parent, or Gossip, on the Child's behalf, be required
of God, or will be imputed to the Child by God? If not, why ventured on, and
not rather a waiting for Faith in the Subject, as required in Holy Writ, by the
Apostles and Primitive Churches, and seemingly by the Church of England in her
Catechism? IV. Whether the Church has a good Warrant that will justify her
before God, in changing the Mode from Dipping to Sprinking? and whether that
Alteration does so well answer the Design of the Holy God, as that Ceremony
which himself appointed?


Gentleman,
I knew nothing of that Gentleman's Animadversions, or that he, or any Body
else, intended to take notice of your Mercury, till I had wrote what I intended
to say, tho when it was too late I saw it.

POSTSCRIPT. Containing some Remarks upon the Athenian Mercury, Vol. 4. Numb.
18. published Saturday, November. 28. 1691.
Gentlemen,
JUST as my Answer to your first Mercury about Infant Baptism was finished, and
almost printed off, your second Paper on the same Subject came to my Hand: And
tho I was not concerned in the Paper called, Animadversions on your other
Mercury; yet, till a furthet Answer is prepared, I shall make some Reflections
upon what you have said in your pretended Reply to that Gentleman, etc.

1. Sirs, You go too fast to conclude, you by that Paper understand wherein our
strength lies, as (by this time) you may perceive, nor don't conclude you have
it all yet.

2. What you say about your pretended Proof of Infant Baptism, from that
unscriptural Tradition or Custom among the Jews of proselyting whole Families
to the Jewish Religion by Baptism, you may see fully answered before I saw your
last Mercury. Have you proved that Custom among them was Jure Divino? or, if
so, that it remained and was continued by Christ?

Secondly; What you have said about Baptism, being the proper Antitype of
Circumcision, is also answered: Nor does what you speak of, Types and
Antitypes, not agreeing in every thing, help you. Have not we showed the proper
Antitype of Circumcision in the Flesh, is that of the Heart?

Thirdly; As to you Logical Argument, ( viz. An Ordinance once enjoined, and
never repealed, is always in force; but the Ordinance of Childrens in
covenanting, was once in the Old Testament enjoined, and was never repealed.
Ergo).

We answer, If the Ordinance of Children in Covenanting under the Law, was
Circumcision, that Ordinance is repealed; Is not Circumcision repealed?

2. If you say notwithstanding, Children of the Flesh, or the natural Seed,
being once in the Covenant, and never cast out, (by reason that Law or
Covenant, for their incovenanting being not repealed) is always in force.

Reply 1. That the Old or first Covenant, for their Incovenanting is repealed
is plain; he took away the first, that he might establish the second.

2. Also it is said, that Hagar and her Son are cast out, viz. the legal
Covenant, and fleshly Seed, and no new Law is added to bring them into the
Gospel Church by Baptism, i.e. the fleshly or natural Seed, as such. Now is the
Ax laid to the Root of the Trees.

Fourthly; Your citing Heb. 8. and Jer. 31. to show what Baptism seals to
Infants, proves nothing. We deny not, but all who are actually in the New
Covenant, viz. by Faith ingrafted into Christ, have right to Remission and
Salvation; and that that Covenant secures and preserves them to Eternal Life;
therefore the Children of Believers, as such, are not in it: And if they are no
otherwise in it than conditionally, that is, if they repent, believe, etc. I
ask you what Privilege that is, more than what the Children of Heathens and
Infidels have? for if they believe and repent, shall they not have the same
Blessings and Privileges of the Covenant also? As to the Adult Professors, we
say, if they fall finally away, it shows they never indeed were in the Covenant
of Grace. As to Adult true Believers, the Holy Spirit seals Remission and
Salvation to them, and they shall be saved: a sign of what is actually in them,
is held forth in Baptism, there being nothing signified by that Ordinance as to
a Death unto Sin, but what they experienced wrought on their Souls before
Baptized; tho, it is true, they thereby, for the time to come, covenant to walk
in newness of Life.

Fifthly; As touching the great Commission, Mat. 28. where you urge Baptizing
goes before Teaching, we have fully answered you in the precedent Reply; we
prove, there is a Teaching goes before Baptism, and yet also a Teaching after.
Why do you attempt to blind the Eyes of the unwary Reader?

Sixthly; To what purpose do you mention Jairus's Daughter? do we deny but that
the Parents Faith and Prayer, may procure outward Blessings, nay, and spiritual
Ones too; and as much perhaps for their poor carnal Neighbors and Friends? My
Servant Job shall pray for you. The fervent Prayer of a Righteous Man avails
much, but it does not give Right to their Friends or Children to Baptism.

Seventhly; As to your Syriac Translation, that the Jailer and all the Sons of
his House were Baptized: I argue, All his Sons, no doubt, were grown up to Age,
because it is said, he believed, with all his House. If he had Sons grown up,
and yet did not believe, then, by your Argument, Unbelievers may be Baptized;
but to this see our Answer.

Eighthly; As to your proof from that Passage, i. e. Suffer little Children to
come unto me. Take the words definitely or indefinitely, it proves nothing for
you; for Christ Baptized no Child, for with his own Hards he Baptized no Person
at all; Joh. 4.1,2. 'twas to lay his Hands upon them, not to Baptize them.
Moreover, I have before told you, those little Ones, Mark 9.42. were Adult,
Whosoever shall offend one of these little Ones that believe in me: I affirm,
our Savior speaks only of such little Ones as were grown up to such Age, as in
very deed did believe in him, and not Babes of two or ten days old. But, you
say, you would have no Children proselyted, but such as Timothy, etc. To which
you answer, That according to the Original, those Children that did (...),
which word we have showed signifies any common coming, (and may be such who
come in their Parents Arms). Let Babes come to Christ, this way or that, he
baptized none of them: I may infer as well, because little Children come or
were brought to Christ, and of such are the Kingdom of Heaven; therefore they
may partake of the Lord's Supper, as you infer they may be Baptized.

Ninthly; Tho the Gospel did not spread into all Nations, etc. yet sure you
conclude all were to be baptized in all Nations wheresoever the Gospel did
come, or was preached; or else, as we say, none in those Nations, but such who
were made Disciples, i. e. did believe and repent: for if but some in those
Nations where the Gospel comes, were to be Baptized, and not all, and yet more
ought so to be; then such who are discipled first: Pray who are they, or how
shall we know them to be included in the Commission? For, as Mr. Baxter says,
If we have it not here, where have we it? this being the great Rule or Charter
of the Church for this Rite, unto which we ought to adhere in this Matter.

Tenthly; What signifies what some of the Ancient Fathers believed, i. e. That
Federal Holiness of Parents made Children Candidates for Baptism? They said,
other things too that you decry as well as we, many Errors being early let into
the Church: Besides, we have Tertullian against Tertullian, or one Father
against another, which is ground enough to believe you abuse Tertullian, or to
doubt of the truth of your History.

Eleventhly; You ask whether Children have not as much right to their Baptism
as that of Adult Females? for it is no where said, she that believes, and is
baptized; where have we one Instance of Female-Baptism?

Reply. We ak you whether Male and Female is not intended in Mark 16.16. he or
she? and so John 3.3. Unless a Man be born again; the Woman is included; or,
have Women no Souls? Did you never read of the Figure Sylepfis, or Conceptio,
that comprehends the less worthy under the more worthy, indignioris
sub-digniore? as for Example, Quid tu and soror sacitis, ego and matter miseri;
perimus tu and uxor qui adsuistis testes estote? and it is no less true in
Divinity; see that full and never to be baffled place, 1 Cor. 6.16. (...). See
Genesis 5.2. And he called their Name Adam, they two shall be one Flesh. Moreover,
do we not read Women were made Disciples as well as Men, and so had the same
right to Baptism from the Commission?

But to detect your Ignorance of the Scripture, pray see Acts 8.12. When they
believed Philip, preaching the things concerning the Kingdom of God, and the
Name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized both Men and Women. Also Acts 16.15.
it is said Lydia was baptized; I thought she had been a Woman. Gentlemen, you
show you are but younger Brethren, and will do the Pedo-baptists no Service;
show such a Proof for the Baptism of Infants, and your work is done.

But tho Children lose no spiritual Right by Christ's coming, yet they may lose
some Legal Rites. As Ministers Sons now are not born to the Ministry, as they
were under the Law, as well as their Fleshly Seed had right, as such, to their
Jewish Church Membership.

Furthermore; because Believers are made holy by the Operations of the Spirit,
are all their Children made holy in like manner also? Blush for Christ's sake!
The Blessing of Abraham, Sirs, only comes upon the Gentiles through Faith, not
by natural Generation, as you imagine: As the Blessing runs to the Parents,
viz. through Faith, so to their Children; they must believe also if they would
be the Children of the Promise, or Spiritual Seed of Abraham, Gal. 3. ult.

Twelfthly; As touching what you say further, as to universal Consent of the
Ancient Churches, it proves nothing. Should we believe your Histories, as
firmly as we do believe there was an Alexander the Great, or a Cato, etc. if
there is no Infant Baptism in the Scripture, it is utterly gone: yet we
challenge you to show from Authentic History, that one Infant was baptized in
the first or second Centuries, which we are not able to disprove by as good
Authority.

Thirteen; If there was not a Congregation called Anabaptists till 300 Years
after Christ, it signifies nothing, as we have showed. Moreover, we affirm,
that all the Apostolical Primitive Churches were Baptists, i. e. such who only
baptized Believers, and so continued till the Apostasy. See our further Answer
to this to your first Mercury. We can prove there was a Testimony born against
Infant Baptism before 380 Years after Christ; nay, before the end of the third
Century. See Tertul. in his Book de Baptismo, c. 18. who opposed
Infant Baptism, 1. From the mistake of that Text, Mat. 19.14. Suffer little
Children to come unto me; the Lord says, says he, do not forbid them to come
unto me; let them come, therefore when they grow elder, when they learn, when
they are taught why they come, let them be made Christians when they can know
Christ.

He adds six Arguments more; and to confirm this Testimony of Tertullian, see
Dr. Barlow; says he, Tertullian dislikes and condemns Infant Baptism as
unwarrantable and irrational.

Daille also says, that Tertullian was of an Opinion, that Infants were not to
be baptized; the like say diverse others, as Mr. Danvers shows, which his
Opposers could not refute.

So that it appears you are ignrant both of Scripture and History too, and do
but abuse your selves and the World also in this matter. Gentlemen, you were
better give over, than a-fresh to blow up the Fire and Coal of Contention. You
mistake in your third Column, we are not to prove a Negative, i. e. That no
Infant was baptized in those Churches, you must prove they were.

Fourteen; Your Reply about our Savior's not being baptized till thirty Years
old, it was because he was a Jew, and proselyted Heathens were only baptized
when young, is a Fig-leaf, still insisting upon the old Jewish Custom; to which
we have given you a full Answer.

Fifteen; What you say about dipping, and mention (...), and that Authors show
that it signifies only a bare and slight washing, and that paunging and washing
are very distinct: This word comes from the same Verb you say signifies to dip
or plunge. And whereas you hint, that Beza would have us baptize them, but not
(...) them; you are resolved to prevent that danger, who only Sprinkle or
Rantize them.

I affirm, Dipping or plunging, all learned in the Greek Tongue, and Critics,
do generally assert, is the literal, proper and genuine Signification of the
word (...); and if it any where refers to washing, it is to such a washing as is
done by dipping or swilling in the Water: all sorts of washing are not distinct
from dipping; and that (...) to baptize, is to wash, unless it it be such a
washing as is by dipping, we deny: is it not the same with (...)? also the
Septuagint do render the word Tabal by (...), and which all Translators, says
a good Author, both I atin, Dutch, Italian, French and English, do translate to
dip, and always signifies to dip, as Genesis 37.31. Lev. 4.6. Numb. 16.18. 2 Kings
5.14, etc.

Grotius says it signifies to dip over Head and Ears.

Pasor, an Immersion, Dipping, or Submersion.

Leigh in his Critica Sacra says, its native and proper Signification is to
dip into th e Water, or to plunge under the Water; and that it is taken from a
Diers Fat, and not a bare Washing only: See Casaubon, Bucan, Bullinger, Zanchy,
Beza, etc.

To close; have we not cause to affirm you reproach us, to say our Ring Leaders
come to ill Deaths. What signifies your Story of John Bocold of Leyden, and as
if Erasmas, etc. had an ill Opinion of the Anabaptists of his time, does it
follow you may vilify the Baptists of these times from thence? they might hold
some Errors, and so may some so called now adays, as well as some
Pedo-Baptists, who are Papists, Arians, Antitrinitarians, Socinians, and what
not; and some of them debauched Livers, and made as shameful Ends; these things
cannot be undknown to you, but how base it is in you thus to write, let all
sober Men judge. Your pretended Zeal will not acquit you from a slanderous
Tongue, and speaking Evil of them you know not. Are not the Papists
Pedobaptists, and some of the first and chief Assertors of it, and what an
erroneous Crew are they? do you think we cannot paralled John of Leyden amongst
some of the Pedobaptists. Were those Stories true of him and others? -- are
there not some bad Men of every Persuasion as well as good?

I exhort you to consider what account you will be able to give, for asserting
Babies Rantism, or Infants Sprinkling, since it is not commanded of God, etc. in
the dreadful Day of Judgment: or how dare you affirm we disturb the Church of
Christ with false Doctrine, who assert, Believers only are the Subjects of
Christ's true Baptism, and that Baptism is Immersion, i.e. Dipping, since both
lies so plain in the Word of God? We fear not our appearing upon this account
at Christ's Triounal: And for all your great Confidence, your Practice we doubt
not in the least will be found to be no Truth of the Gospel, but an
unwarrantable Tradition. What tho Sir Tho. More, a Papist, was glad he had not
proselyted Persons to his youthful Errors; must we therefore be afraid to
promulgate a positive Truth of Christ?

Is it not said, This Sect is everywhere spoken against?

If you had called for Syllogistical Arguments, you might have had them, but
you ask for Queries; you may have Logical Arguments enough if you please, but you
had better desist.

To conclude with your Postscript.
I Cannot see Mr. Eliot has done the Pedo-Baptists any Service, or that any
Honor redounds to him for that Work of his.

How in the Gospel-Church-State, the Promise runs to Believers and their
Children, or Offspring, we have showed; And that Babes of two or ten Days old,
are or can be said to be Disciples, is without proof and irrational: What
though they may belong to the Kingdom of Heaven, or be saved, Baptism is of a
mere positive Right; that Argument, I tell you again, will admit them to the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, as well as to Baptism. And as for Antiquity, we
deny not but that it was received by diverse as an Apostolical Tradition, a
little time before Nazianzen or Austin; yet that it was preached as necessary
to Salvation, before Austin did it, you cannot prove, though we deny not but
'twas practiced before Austin's Days. See Dr. Tailor, Lib. Proph. p. 237. And
the truth of the Business is, (says he) as there was no Command of Scripture
to oblige Children to the susception of it; So the necessity of Pedo-Baptism
was not determined in the Church till the Canon that was made in the Milevetan
Council, a Provincial in Africa, never till then. I grant, (says he) it was
practiced in Africa before that time, and they, or some of them, thought well
of it; and though that is no Argument for us to think so, yet none of them did
ever pretend it to be necessary, nor to have been a Precept of the Gospel. St.
Anstin was the first that ever preached it to be necessary; and it was in his
Heat and Anger against Pelagius, who had so warmed and chafed him, that made
him innovate herein. Thus far the Doctor.

As to Clemens, Ireneus, etc. you make such a stir about, is contradicted by
History. Clemens asserts who are the right Subjects; and in what order they
ought, after due Examinations and Instructions, to be baptized. See Jacob
Merningus, in his History of Baptism, p. 2. upon Cent. 2. p. 209. out of Clem.
Epist. 3. also Dutch Martyrology.

Ignatius, in his Discourse about Baptism, asserts, That it ought to be
accompanied with Faith, Love and Patience, after preaching; see H. Montanus, p.
45. and Jacob Dubois, p. 16, to 22. and Dutch Martyrology, where Ignatius's
Letters are mentioned to Polycarp Traliensis, and to them of Philadelphia.

All that we can find of Ireneus, is, Lib. 2. cap. 39. adv. Haeres. That Christ
did sanctify every Age by his own susception of it, and similitude to it, all,
I say, who by him are born again to God. In all which is no word of
Infant Baptism: Unless you wiredraw Consequences from his words, as you do from
the Scripture, to support a tottering Structure, built on a false Foundation.
That Ireneus, or any other but Origen's Testimony was in the case; You have Dr.
Tailor, in his Dissuasive against Popery, p. 118. printed 1667, one of his last
Pieces, saying thus, viz. That there is a Tradition to baptize Infants, relies
but upon two Witnesses, Origin and Austin; and the latter having received it
from the former, it relies upon a single Testimony, which is but a pitiful
Argument to prove a Tradition Apostolical: He is the first that spoke it, but
Tertullian, that was before him, seems to speak against it, which he would not
have done, if it had been a Tradition Apostolical; And that it was not so, is
but too certain, if there be any Truth in the words of Ludov. Vives, saying,
That anciently none were Baptized, but Persons of riper Age.

And as to Origen's Works, there is cause to question, whether they are to be
regarded? for Mr. Perkins and others doubt about them, because no Greek Copies
thereof are extant. And Dr. Tailor says, that many of his Works are Corrupt
and Erroneous, particularly in the Point of Baptism, and fell into ill Hands,
etc.

To conclude, the Learned Curcelaeus, Instit. lib. 1. cap. 12. thus says,
Poedobaptismus duobus primis a Christo nato seculis fuit incognitus, etc.
Pedo-Baptism was unknown in the two first Ages after the Birth of Christ, but
in the 3 d and 4 th it was approved of by a few; in the 5 th and the following
Ages, it began to be generally received. And therefore (as afterward he says)
this Rite is indeed observed by us as an ancient Custom, but not as an
Apostolical Tradition.

The same Author, De peccato Originis, Numb. 56. says, Morem Infantes
baptizandi non coepisse ante tertium a Christo nato saeculum, etc. That the
Custom of Baptizing Infants, did not begin till the 3 d Age after Christ; but
in the two former, no footstep of it does appear.

And afterward, (says he) Sine ipsius [Christi] mandato introducta est. It was
introduced without the Command of Christ.

Now let the Reader confider, if our Authority is not greater than the bare
Testimony of Zuinglius, a late prejudiced Writer.

Gentlemen,

Many Eyes are upon you, and diverse discreet Men think you have not done well,
to reflect upon so great a Party of pious Christian-People; nor do they look on
you as fit Persons to meddle with Sacred Things after this manner: They judge
you are better skilled to answer Love-stories, etc. than Points of Divinity.
Certainly no wise Man can justify your Essay, to answer such Questions as
concern this Controversy, etc. which tend to stir up Strife and Contention
among us; nor blame us to vindicate our Selves and Principle, when reproached
and challenged after such a sort. But take your course, it is better to provoke
to Love, Peace and Unity amongst one another.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 8. for et, read ex. P. 3. l. 15. f. Judicia, r. Judaica. P. 5. l.
21. f. Configurations, r. Considerations. P. 6. l. 40. f. Mode, r. Mood, and l.
42. f. Mode, r. Mood; and col. 1. l. 8. f. but, r. for. P. 7. l. 9. col. 2. f.
invalid, r. invalidated. P. 10. col. 1. l. 8. f. run, r. runs, and col. 2. l.
31. f. decides, r. decide. P. 13. col. 2. l. 9. f. childless, r. childish; and
l. 22. f. condemned, r. condemn. P. 15. col. 2. l. 36. f. no where else, r. any
where else.


