AN ANSWER TO THE City-Conformists Letter, FROM THE Country Clergyman, About
Reading His Majesty's DECLARATION.

With Allowance.



LONDON, Printed by Mary Thompson, at the Entrance into the (...) near
Charing Cross, 1688.

The Country Clergy-Man's Answer to the City Conformists Letter, etc.
SIR,
YOU tell me you do not wonder at my Concern for finding an Order of Council
published in the Gazette for reading the King's Declaration for Liberty of
Conscience. But I must assure you, that when I heard that the London Clergy
refused to read it, I could not forbear Wondering.

That there was an Order given for the Reading it, did at first surprise me;
for the Reasons of it did not immediately occurr to my Thoughts: But that any
of the Clergy, especially the Right Reverend Fathers the Bishops, decline the
Publishing of it, surprises me more; and the Reasons they give, most of all.

There is (I confess) a great deal in what you have on the entrance of your
Letter suggested. For to read the Declaration, is not to read the Mass, nor to
profess the Romish Faith; and therefore no hurt in reading it; and to suffer
for such a Refusal is not to fall like Confessors, but to suffer as Criminals,
for disobeying the lawful Commands of our Prince. Thus much, you think, will be
the sense of some: And there is so much cause to move the considering mind to
conclude thus, that I think you right in your Notion of it: and do further
believe, that not the Complying, but the Refusal to comply with this Order; on
the Grounds you do, will provoke all Good Men to despise and hate us. For,

1. Hitherto the Government has been a Screen between our Clergy and the
Censures of the People. There are Laws against Dissenters, we could say, and
Laws must be observed: We had no hand in the making of those Laws, and could
wish 'em altered, but 'twas not in our power to do it. This has been the way we
were forced to take, to the end we might be secured from the Peoples Rage and
Clamor; which by this means always past over us, and lighted on the
Government. But now the Government being for a Remove of those Laws, the
Clergies stickling so very much for their Continuance, exposes us; and we shall
not be able to say, it is the Government; but 'twill be said, it is the Clergy
that were for the Making, as well as Execution of Penal Laws. Besides,

2. You do hereby put us out of a Capacity of vindicating our selves from the
Reproach of being Persecutors. Hitherto we have been able with some
plausibleness to say, That none were punished for their Religion, or their
Consciences; but for their Faction, their Sedition and Rebellion. Our Laws
declared the matters Religious for which any fell under their Lash, to be a
Crime against the Civil State. And 'twas for that, the Papists and Phaenaticks
suffered. His Majesty's Grandfather, of Blessed Memory, insists on this; and
so did Sir Edw. Coke. But now His Majesty distinguishing between matters of
mere Religion, and those other Religious matters that are so blended with the
Civil State, that the Error in Religion is a Crime against the Government, is
resolved to do his part, toward the separating the one from the other, and to
extend Liberty to all in matters of mere Religion, but no further. Our
opposition therefore unto this, will insinuate into the minds of the People,
that we do in good earnest desire, that Laws may be continued in force against
men for matters of mere Religion: whereby we shall be inevitably involved in
the odious Reproach of being Persecutors of Godly Conscientious Men. But,

3. The insisting on the Illegality of the Dispensing power, as a Reason of the
Refusal, is one of the most impolitick things in the World. For,

1. We have hereby lost that Interest we had all along in the favor of the
Prince. If we will be just in our acknowledgments, we must confess that we had
been long ago a lost Church, had we not the Crown on our side to support us. It
is the Monarch that has been the Bulwark of the Church of England, and we by
asserting the Prerogative, which comprehends within it the Dispensing power,
gained an Interest in him, who on all occasions hazarded himself for our
Defense. The Bishop asserted the Prerogative, and the Prerogative preserved the
Bishop. And the Bishops by opposing Prerogative, have broke down the Bulwark of
our Church. And though with Grief, yet in Truth, we may say: Our Glory is gone,
our Strength is departed. You have now made a Divorce between the Crown and the
Church of England-Mitre; and must never more expect to be the Darling of a
Crown'd-Head. No Prince can take pleasure in those that have contrary to their
avowed Principles, without any just provocation, as you have done, broke the
Crown in pieces.

2dly. We have Condemned our selves, and justified the Dissenters in this. The
Reason why we have for many years together Represented the Dissenters, even
from the Pulpit, to be Men of Factious, Seditious and Rebellious Principles,
was grounded on their Narrowing the Prerogative, and Limiting the Monarchy:
which we said, they did, by refusing to Declare, that they would not value such
Commissions as were granted by the Imperial Power, the Prorogative, more than
the King's Authority, which is the Laws of the Land. We were sensible of the
Mischief of the old Puritanick Doctrine, that made the Law to be the Mouth of
the King, and held, that the King was Obeyed and Fought for, when 'twas against
His Person, if 'twas in Defense of the Politic Laws. and we clearly saw, that
there was no other way to obviate the Mischief of this their Seditious
Doctrine; but by inventing and imposing the Declaration of Abborrence, which
all the Clergy Subscribe, and in which they Declare: That those Commissions
that are given out by the Imperial Power, contrary to the Law, must be much
more deferred unto, than the Law of the Land; and that all those that hold the
contrary, are for the Traiterous Position.

But by this Opposition to His Majesty's Declaration, we regard not the
Imperial Law; no, nor the Exercise of the Royal Power, though agreeable to our
Laws: And contrary to our Solemn Vows and Declarations, have set up the King's
Authority above His Regal Power; and as one of our Divines very lately, do make
the Law, the Mouth of the King; and aver, That our Obedience must not be to the
Private, but Public Declaration of His Will; whereby we run so far, as to
justify that Parliament, which Fought against His Majesty's Royal Father; whom
notwithstanding His engaging to the loss of His Life, in our Quarrel, we now
condemn; and Publish to the World; That the Dissenters were all along in the
right. We cannot now say, that the Dissenters were Factious, Seditious, and
Rebellious heretofore, but by Condemning our selves for such at this time.

4ly. In a word, you have by this Act, exposed our Ministry to the greatest
Scorn and Contempt. For how can any wise Man reflected on what has been the
burden of our Preaching, for many years together, in the Defense of the
Prerogative, and see how we have at once given the Lie to all, and regard us
any more? That we have, as the Ambassadors of Christ, and in the Name of the
Lord, Published so very much in the Exalting the Prerogative, under the Notion
of Divine Truth; and now pretend, that we are bound in Conscience, boldly to
contradict all; is such a Soliscim, as will render it impossible for Men of
Candor and Integrity to entertain any tolerable Thoughts of us or our
Ministry. And those very Gentlemen which have wheedl'd you into this Snare,
will neglect and scorn you.

The Reasons you give for your Refusal, make our Case the more deplorable. You
in the first place, take it for granted, That no Church- of-England-Man can
approve of the Declaration. And then add: That Reading it, is an Overt Act of
Approbation. And to declare otherwise, is, Protestatio contra Factum. And the
very Reading it will influence the Multitude, to do their utmost that Penal
Laws and Tests be taken off, and do what will Reflect on those Noblemen and
Gentry, that have lost their Places for being against it. This is the Sum of
what you say: To which I will distinctly Reply.

1st. To what you take pro confesso: None of our Clergy approve of the
Declaration. I Answer, That many sober Men amongst us do approve both of the
Liberty of Conscience, and of the Dispensing-Power. And there is not that
Clergyman this day in England, who has not Exalted the Regal Power much higher
than the Law of the Land, and are bound to regard the King's Private Command,
as they do His Private Commission, more than His Authority; or, (which is the
same) the Law of the Land. Thus much all our Clergy, before their Institution
and Induction, have solemnly declared. And no other Reason can be assigned for
our dislike of the Declaration, but this; That we are against Liberty of
Conscience. It is the King's Dispensing with those Laws that are made against
Dissenters, that displeases you. And seeing, when a Law is made, it must be put
in Execution, or there must be a Suspending the Execution by a
Dispensing-Power, or a Repeal: Those who are against the Repeal, as you
undoubtedly are, and also against the Dispensing with those Laws, must be for
their Execution, i. e. for the filling of our Goals with Dissenters, Riffling
their Houses, Ruining their Families, and destroying their Persons. This must
be the thing aimed at by those who cannot approve of the King's Declaration for
Liberty: And seeing this is the thing you would be at, how can you expect the
Dissenters should trust you? Or how can you, without blushing say, you are for
due tenderness to Dissenters, even when you will rather suffer your selves,
than that the Dissenters enjoy the least ease?

2dly. To the Second, Reading is not an Overt Act of Approving: Don't you
remember, how many invidious Excommunications have been sent down unto us to
Publish; which we have done, without making our selves a Party: Or can you
forget the Distinction we have used to escape the Censure of the Phanaticks,
about being Consenters to every thing that we Subscribe unto? We consent to the
Use, but not the Sayings. And if Using the Common Prayer Book, which is done by
Reading, be not Consenting; how comes it to pass, that Reading, in the present
Case, must be Consenting. Furthermore,

3dly. To Read it, and at the same time to Dissent, is not Protestatio contra
Factum. There is a difference between Reading, that is the Factum; and
Consenting; and Protesting against Consenting, is not Protestatio contra
Factum. To Read it, and Protest against Reading, is Protestatio contra Factum:
But to Read, and Protest you do not Consent, is not such a Protestation. But,

4ly. Reading the Declaration, will influence the People from taking off the
Penal Laws and Tests: And I am of your Opinion in this: for, let the Multitude
but understand, that the Test-Laws shall continue until we have better security
for our Religion, our Civil Rights and Properties, which is the thing His
Majesty declares, and it is not to be doubted, but every Man of Sense will be
for taking off the very Tests. But you mistake, when you add; That the taking
off the Test, is opening the door to let in Popery, to the Ruin of the Church
of England. For we need not fear Popery, unless the Papists have Power enough
to drive us to their Religion by Persecution. And the taking off the Tests, on
the Terms His Majesty Proposes, will give us greater security against
Persecution, than now we have. A Legal Establishment which His Majesty offers
our Church, will give us such a Security, as will please this whole Nation. At
present our Security is erected on the Spoils of a great part of the Kingdom;
who are hereby disquieted. For, our Safety lies in this, That no one, but a
Churchman be legally interested in the Favor of his Prince, or in the
Advantages of the Government. All others must, for their Consciences be in
constant Danger of inevitable Ruin. On which occasion, we have been looked on
as the Common Enemy to their Peace. But let our Security be such, as hurts not
the Consciences nor Estates of others, which may be, by taking off Penal Laws
and Tests, the Bond of Contention will be removed, and what is frightful in our
Church, will disappear. We shall be looked on as a Sister, and be Treated
accordingly. And to the end that we may be Secured from any Dangers that may be
supposed to arise from the Roman Catholics, we shall have a double Advantage.
In the first place, we shall have a new Law, confirming us in the free Exercise
of our Religion, and full Enjoyment of our Possessions. And in the next place,
By putting it out of the Power of any one Party to Persecute the other, we
shall be out of the Power of Popish Persecutions. And to prevent any change on
this Law, we shall have the help of all the Dissenting-Protestants to join with
us, who will be afraid any Alteration should be made on it, lest thereby they
also lose their Security. Which Security, once obtained, will be most grateful
unto the Nobility and Gentry you mention.

Thus Sir, I have freely opened my self unto you; Praying Almighty God to give
our Right Reverend Fathers more Wisdom, that They may not be imposed on by
those who love 'em not, but may suddenly be brought to that Temper, which is
necessary toward the Healing our Breaches, and the Establishing the Peace of
our Israel.

FINIS.

