AN ANSWER To a late Pamphlet; Entitled, A CHARACTER OF A Popish Successor,
AND WHAT ENGLAND May Expect from such a One.

Virtus repulsae nescia sordidae,
Incontaminatis fulget Honoribus.
Nec ponit aut sumit secures,
Arbitrio Popularis aurae;
Virtus negata tentat Iter via.
Hor. LONDON, Printed by Nathaniel Thompson, and are to be sold at his House
next the Cross-Keys in Fetter-Lane, Anno Domini, 1681.

AN ANSWER TO THE CHARACTER OF A Popish Successor.
HAving intended to make some slight Reply, (such as my own weakness could
produce, and my Adversaries did require,) to a late Pamphlet, called, The
Character of a Popish Successor: I thought I was bound to do him so much
Justice as to let our Reader know, that however incoherent and contradictory
his Discourse or his Reasonings are, yet his Principles are not so; but that
they are quite through the same, and maintain a most exact and close agreement
between themselves. This will appear by considering how truly the parts of his
whole Book correspond to one another, to represent (as in a Picture) the late
Rebellion, to which it bears the exactest Resemblance; For like that it begins
(in the very first Page,) with Fears and Jealousies, of Religion, Liberty and
Property; and like that too it continues, (p. 16) to Murmur and Revile the
Imperial Root, and not only to stiffen the knees that would bow to a Crowned
head, but also to arm against it the hands that should defend it, by exhorting
the people (p. 34.) not to be subdued like less then English- men, but to
Resist and Repel a King under the Name of an Invader. And like that too would
it end, if these men who appear so Jealous and so Fearful could either prevail
upon the Credulity of the Vulgar so far as to make their Jealousies appear
Just, or could themselves bring to pass all their own Fears, that so they might
be indeed (as our Author supposes them) Prophetic. For truly in this sense
they are likest to be so, and our State Prophets will appear like Nostradamus
his Son, (a pretender to his Fathers Art) of whom the Story goes, that he was
caught one night a Firing that City which He himself had Prophesied should be
Burnt. And yet these are the Wise, and these are the Great, whom our Author
would have us take delight to behold the restless and uneasy rolling about our
troubled Sea-like Porpoises to forewarn us of a Tempest. But is not our Author
mistaken in his Simile? Alas these are not the forewarning Porpoises, but the
Leviathans themselves, that sport and take their pastime in our troubled deep,
whose restless and uneasy rolling does not foretell, but is it self the Storm.
A Storm which once more is ready to shatter this (Royal Vessel the British
Kingdom) into pieces; O navis referent in mare Te novi fluctus. These O England
are the same Disturbers of thy Calm Waters, which the second time are like to
raise the Waves so high as to break all thy Anchors, loosen all thy Cables, and
force thee our again into that Red Sea of Blood in which so lately thou have
suffered Shipwreck; unless in the cause of its Image here on Earth, the Majesty
of Heaven it self hasts to our assistance; unless He, (as himself speaks to his
Servant Job,) Put a hook into the Jaws of these Leviathans, and draw them out;
unless He exert those Two mighty effects of his Divine Power, which the
Psalmist joins together as the highest proofs of his Omnipotence, viz. Unless
he stills the rage of the Sea, and the madness of the People.

And amidst this our evident danger, I must needs confess with our Pamphleteer,
that I cannot choose but account those persons very little our Friends, nay
indeed void of Humanity it self, that would lull us asleep in the sight of
approaching ruin and destruction. But on the other hand I can by no ways
approve of those for our Physicians who use such violent means to wake us out
of our Security, as if there were no Cure for a Lethargy but casting us into a
Raving Frenzy. And indeed such has been the Physic of our State Mountebanks;
and since they have possessed the people with so desperate a madness, and raised
such dismal apprehensions in the minds of the undiscerning multitude; I thought
it the duty both of a Christian and an Englishman, to use the most effectual
means of restoring us once more to our Wits again, and to rescue, (if
possible,) the Nation, out of that most miserable condition which David has
reckoned among the grievousest Plagues of the wicked, of whom he says, They
were afraid where no fear was: In order to which, I shall rally again those
Arguments which some have raised to save us, and which our Author has to his
power confuted to destroy us.

P. 2. As first they say, Why should we stand in fear of Popery, when in the
present Temper of England it is impossible for any Successor to introduce it? Ay
why indeed? The Gentleman is at a stand, and is loath to venture his Serpents
Teeth against the File; so leaves this Argument and away to the next. Though I
cannot see why the same man, who presently after has the courage to undertake
the proving that the four Cardinal Virtues are more dangerous in a Prince than
their four opposite Vices, should here want the same fool-hardiness to justify
the fears even of impossible things.

The next Argument (which he undertakes to overthrow, and which yet stands firm
and unshaken by all his empty batteries and airy assaults,) is drawn from the
consideration of the Personal Excellencies inherent in that Prince, whom God
and Nature, and the Laws of the Land have pointed out to Us as the
unquestionable Lawful Successor of the Crown and Virtues of his Royal Brother.
And if these are such, and so many as neither his Friends can express, or his
Enemies deny; If the Royal Blood, (as often as his King or Countries Honor or
Safety have called upon him,) has been as dangerously and as freely exposed as
that which fills the Veins of the vilest Plebeian; If his Success has been so
equal to his Courage, that his Arms when (employed abroad,) have ever been the
love and wonder; and when at home (for such to him was once the British Ocean)
the Dread and Terror of the neighboring World; If his Friendships have ever
been as firmly maintained as they were judiciously chosen; If his Mouth and his
Heart have always been so true to one another, that his Word has ever been as
inviolate as the Oaths of others; And if this Noble Constancy of Truth has been
in him the effect as much of his Honor as his Conscience; And if in a Lie he
has ever thought as much to be detested as the Baseness of a Coward, as the
Impiety of a Villain; If his Justice has been acknowledged almost Divine, in
this especially, that it has never excluded all those milder Virtues that might
adorn a Crown, and make Majesty as amiable as it is Great: If all this be true,
as none of his Adversaries can deny, and some of his most inveterate Enemies
have been forced even to confess; I hope I shall be excused by my Readers, if I
have so just a value for them, as to think that it would be an Affront in me to
suspect their Judgments, so much as to spend time in evincing to them how
improbable a thing it would be, how contradictory to reason and common sense,
that the difference of a man's Opinion about some few disputable matters of
Faith, and not very material Ceremonies of Divine Worship, should on a sudden
ruin and efface all those good Characters of Magnanimity and Justice, of
Generosity and Goodness, not slightly traced, but deeply engraven in his
breast, so early engraven by Nature it self, that like Letters cut in the
tender Bark, they have not been worn out, but rather enlarged by the growth of
the Tree, nor are ever likely to disappear till the Trunk it self that they
adorn shall be no more. And yet if we will be pleased to believe our little
Impertinent Rhetorician, all this and much more must necessarily follow; When
Popery has got the Ascendant, and Rome has once stamped him her Proselyte. For
what then signify all the great past Actions of a Princes Life? And how little
an Impression will all the recorded Glories leave behind them? (p. 2.) No track
of 'em it seems is left, all his Virtues are fled; or which is worse, if they
still remain, There is not one of 'em that shall not be a particular Instrument
of our Destruction. Now in the name of all that is good, what does our Scribler
mean; do Virtues themselves turn Vices in a Roman Catholic? And do they become
so really, even in contradiction of our senses and experience that tells us to
the contrary? This is such a Miracle as would stagger even a Popish Faith: such
an absurdity as would make a Priest Blush; and which equals, if not outgoes,
even Transubstantiation it self, the Scripture therefore has a peculiar
denunciation of Judgment against the Coiners of such false notions, and loudly
cries out, Woe unto those that call evil good, and good evil. But to espouse a
while the cause of the injured Virtues, all which our false witness is ready to
Swear into the Plot of our destruction; let us examine whether we have not much
greater reason to rely upon them as our only Bulwark and defense when they are
placed in that Prince to whom he is pleased out of his excess of bounty to
grant them all, because he could not deny him one, than to look upon them as
dangerous and pernicious, and as his own Evidence against them runs, The
Instruments of our destruction. Let us therefore allow him Fortitude, that
which is the first in the rank of all the Virtues, and which stands there
boldly in the front, as if designed for the Protection of all the rest; and
without which a Prince is as contemptible in himself, as he is useless to his
People: Can a Nation be more blessed than in the security which the matchless
Valor of such a Prince ought in all reason to create, or can any man that has
the least share of understanding entertain so vain an imagination, as to think
that that invincible Courage which he has so often and so eminently exerted in
the defense of the English, when they were his Fellow Subjects, and when but
his own single share of Glory redounded to himself, should otherwise employ it
when advanced to a Throne, when all those that he protects are his own people;
when all the Renown shall be wholly His, when every Subjects Honor that he
vindicates shall increase the luster of his own; and every Englishman he
saves, add to the largeness of his Empire.

But because our Author maliciously suggests that this Virtue may be employed
in making him more daring for the Cause of Rome; I would advise him to consider
whether the Virtue of Fortitude in his Ethics, (if he has ever read any,) be
not as equally distant from Temerity and Rashness, as from Fear and Cowardice;
and then whether the attempts of an impossible thing, (which as yet by his
silence he has allowed the introducing of Popery to be,) don't wholly overthrow
that Virtue on which this very Supposition is built. He might also have been
informed that all the Virtues have so close an Affinity between themselves, and
so near a dependence upon each other, that not one can act without the
allowance of all the rest; so that whatever is against Justice cannot be the
object of Fortitude. If then he be a Man of Justice, this still should produce
in Us the greater assurance that his Courage shall be no otherwise exercised
but for their Safety and Honor, to whom all his endeavors by all the Laws
both Humane and Divine are most due; This will make him maintain the Just
Rights of his people, to which by his Oath he will then be most solemnly and
strictly obliged, much more inviolably than that imaginary Right of the Pope,
which none can be certain that he allows, and to which it is most certain he
has no such obligation, or ever was Sworn. Then if he be a Master of
Temperance, what is that but a bridle upon all his Excesses, a perpetual bosom
Monitor that will withhold his hand, and allay his heat, that will curb the
very first motions of Cruelty or Revenge, which the malice of his opposers
might else have some grounds to fear? This is that Virtue to which we owe
Pardons and Acts of Oblivion, This is that which will make him ascend the
Throne, though never so much injured, with the same Moderation and Clemency as
did his Brother before him. Lastly, if he has Prudence, that will teach him not
to exasperate a people of so stiff a neck, not to lose the hearts of his
Subjects for their difference of Opinion; that will lay before him the many
useful examples of those Princes that have unhappily strove to change the
ancient Laws of their Government, who endeavoring to remove the Old
Landmarks, have lost their whole Possessions; who striving to alter the
building of the State to their own Humor, have brought down the whole Fabric
upon their heads, and perished in the ruin of their falling Kingdoms. Thus I
think I have in some measure justified the four Moral Virtues from the severe
charge of their being Instruments of our Destruction, not without some wonder
and indignation too, that any man should speak so ill of things he did not
understand, or treat strangers so uncivilly: For indeed such they are to our
Author. Had he any Courage he would have scorned to insult over the present
misfortune of the bravest of Men; had he any Justice he would not have appeared
so earnest against that Succession which is grounded upon all the Laws of God
and Man; had he any Temperance, he would have spared his Malicious Invectives;
and had he any Prudence, he would have burnt his Book, and saved the Hangman a
labor. But stay, let us be as favorable to him as we can, let us try if we
can excuse him his ill treatment of the Virtues; perhaps he railed at them only
to bring in his Quibble, and because Cardo is Latin for a Hinge, therefore the
Cardinal Virtues were to be the Hinges to open the Gates to Popery, or what if
his Picque against them be their having some Name-sakes in the Church of Rome,
since his Friend Merry Andrew in that excellent piece of Smithfield Drollery,
The Rehearsal Transprosed, has been pleased to call them, The Red-hatted
Virtues. Well, whatever his quarrel be, I am sure His Royal Highness has reason
to be not a little satisfied to see that the defense of the Duke of York, and
of Virtue it self is the same cause, and that whoever opposes the Justice of
his Succession, must forfeit his Morality as well his as Allegiance.

But then the Notion of such a Popish Successor, such a one as shall maintain
the Constitution of the present Government, (and in that the public Worship of
the Church of England is included) without any alteration, puzzles the
Gentleman strangely; Nor can he make it consist with reason, no not he, nor
with the least shadow of possibility. And where is the difficulty? where is the
unreasonableness? Why forsooth, he must suppress the potent and dangerous
enemies that would destroy the Protestant Worship, Peace and Interest: And the
Wisdom of several successive Monarchs, and a whole Nations unanimous prudence
has declared Popish Priests to be these potent and dangerous enemies. Have they
so? then there are Laws to secure us against them, then why are we in such
fear? Then what is left to any Monarch that succeeds, but to execute the Laws
he finds? derived down to him to maintain and preserve together with his Crown
and Dignity? And since by the prudent zeal of both our Kings and People, our
Religion has so strong a fence built round about it, since this Vine is so
hedged in, that neither the Wild Boars out the of Wood can root it up, nor the
little Foxes devour it; why do we torment our selves with any further disquiet,
why do we not rather sit down under the shadow of it; and bless him whose right
hand has planted it? But alas, under the Reign of an English Papist, the case
will not be the same; But we shall be in much greater danger, by reason of the
multitude of their Roman Emissaries, and those too emboldened by hopes of
Connivance and Mercy; and if ever the Protestant Religion want a Defender, it
will be then.

Truly I am so far from thinking that the Reign of a Popish King can be any way
advantageous to the designs of the Jesuitical Instruments, that I rather
believe it will of necessity be the greatest occasion of their destruction;
especially since it is in the Power of every Subject in the three Kingdoms to
be a Defender of the Protestant Religion if it want it. And if people shall
think so, as naturally then they will, to be sure no Information, no Conviction
of Recusants, no Administration of Tests or Oaths to the least suspected shall
be wanting, no diligence spared which is backed by the Laws of the Land, which
then more then ever will be wakened against them, and which cannot be dispensed
withal, must needs be effectual to the utter ruin of the whole party. This our
Author himself seems to be sensible of, and to allow; and this is one of his
pretty Chimara's, and mismatched incongruous, Ingredients; as he elegantly
Phrases it, that must go to make up the Composition of a Popish King; and can
He then, or the most violent opposers of the Church of Rome, desire any thing
beyond this to gratify their utmost malice upon the Members of that Church,
than to be assured that a Prince of that very Religion shall be the cause of
their destruction, suis and ipsa Roma viribus ruet. For indeed all this a
Popish King must do, or suffer to be done, and all his Apology to them must be
what the Phamphleteer says, We must expect to be made to us, He cannot help it,
( p. 20.) He cannot help it, that is, if the Law will have it so, his duty is
to see that the Law have its course, and whatever his private opinion may be,
whatever tenderness he may bear to the very persons, he shall punish; yet to
remember his obligation to the public, so far as to give them up to the hands
of Justice, with the same constancy of mind, with the same applause of the
present, and commendation of all succeeding Ages; that the immortal Brutus
delivered up his darling Sons to the Rods and Axes of the Lectors. This, had
our Author considered, he would not have so far betrayed his Morals, as to have
styled a Prince, in every thing else brave to admiration, (abject and
deplorable Coward,) for not daring to undertake either unlawful or impossible
exploits, nor been so out of his Politics, as to call governing by Law,
sneaking on a Throne. But alas! good man he has a fit of kindness on the
sudden come upon him, he is infinitely concerned for that Scene of war, and
restless inquietudes such a Prince must have within himself, who to spare a
Fagget at Smithfield, must walk on hot Irons himself, and have only Good Friday
entertainments on a Throne; and with such like, no doubt prevailing pieces of
Rhetoric, would persuade us, that a Crown to him would be so uneasy a thing,
that he had better be without it. Alas! he would not have the Duke undergo that
torment for all the world, not he; but this is only a flourish of his style, in
imitation I suppose of a Brother Sir Formal of his, who Labored as much as he
could, to prove that the Bill was for the Duke's good, and undertook by dint of
Argument to make it appear that the Exclusion of his Royal Highness, was an act
of Grace.

Let us come now to an Argument of some moment, and consider what weight so
solemn a Protestation and so sacred an Oath as a King of England is obliged at
his Coronation to take, is likely to have with a Prince that has any sense at
all either of Honor or Religion: Why truly our Characterizer says none at all,
and tells us, That some can give us smart reasons for it: He gives us but one,
which we will examine and try, if we can produce as smart ones against it. If
he keeps his Oath, says he, we must allow that the only motive that prompts him
to keep it, is some obligation that he believes is in an Oath; Yes, we will
allow it, there is a double obligation of Nature and of Religion. Well what
then? But considering he is of a Religion that can absolve Subjects from their
Allegiance. And are you sure he is of such a Religion? We hear the Roman
Catholics Protestations against that Doctrine daily sounded in our Ears; we
are told by many of them that they abominate the Position, and must needs be
convinced, that granting many of the Doctors of their Church to be of that
opinion; yet it is a Doctrine never universally received, and that even they
who believe, do not preach to all, and therefore very unlikely it is if they
hide it from any; that it should be used as a Bait for the Conversion of any
Prince, from whom in all probability they would studiously conceal such a
point, as would put him in danger of the loss of his Kingdoms, as often as his
holy Father the Pope should be teasty, or call him Heretic. Well, but
considering him to be of such a persuasion, why may not his Religion release a
King from his Faith to an Excommunicated and Heretical People? Ay! there is the
mischief on it, these Absolutions, and Dispensations, and Jesuitical Loopholes
can do any thing. But now let us a little consider and weigh the probability of
these poor shifts and evasions, ever being made use of to our prejudice by his
Royal Highness: Can it be believed that He who only out of the Conscience that
he made of an Oath, and the Obligation that he thought was in it, has already
parted with the places of the greatest Honor and Profit in the Kingdom, is
ever likely to have a less Veneration for that most Religious one that he then
must take? Or can we imagine, that if he thought any power whatever could
absolve him from such a tie, he would ever have scrupled at the swallowing that
which he could with so much ease have disgorged again? Especially when such a
proceeding had removed all Suspicions and Jealousies concerning his Religion,
and facilitated his way to the Throne, wherein he might establish it before the
people had warning enough to make any opposition. Had this been his Principle,
then had been the time to make use of it, and the easy ascent thereby to a
Throne had been the best plea for his breach of Faith, then if ever it was
necessary; for, si violandum est jus regnandi causa violandum est. But to
strengthen this Argument our Author will give the World an instance of the
power of an Oath with a Roman Catholic King. And that is, His most Christian
Majesty, (the Famous Gentleman on the other side the water) who contrary to his
Oath upon the Sacrament, has Invaded Flanders. And must all of that Religion be
Vow-breakers and Perjured, because one Ambitious Prince has violated at once
his Oath and his Religion too? Besides, how far this Perjury of his is to be
imputed to the Romish Faith, and how Zeal us a Son he is of that Church, his
quarrel even at this instant on foot with the Pope, is sufficient to inform us.
If a man has born in him those Seeds of Ambition, and that Lust of being Great,
it is not the fault of the Religion that he professes, but the Viciousness of
his Nature that makes him sacrifice his Conscience to his pride. If a man be
naturally inclined to Virtue or Vice, let his Faith be what it will, his
Morality will be the same; and he that has learnt from the great Law of Nature
how Sacred the tie of an Oath ought to be, let him be in what Church he will,
shall very hardly be brought to think that this Gordian knot can be untied by
every juggling Priest. Again, if Oaths will not bind Papists, if they come up as
easily as they go down; why do we betray our folly so palpably as to think to
secure our selves by administering them to Roman Catholics? Why are the
Allegiance and Supremacy Oaths tendered to them? and why do they refuse them?
Why are new Tests devised that may be taken as harmlesly with a Dispensation in
the Pocket; as the Mountebank does poison with his Antidote by? Why is the
Wisdom of the whole Nation thus arraigned, and the High Court of Parliament it
self accused of the Goatham Policy, in building the Hedge to fence in the
Cuckoo: For this must be the very top of their sage forecast, if they did not
think that these Oaths did clip their wings, as well as build the hedge about
them: And that if they can do, not only the little suck-egge Cuckoo Priest, but
the Imperial Eagle it self may be kept within the Fence.

I designed (in pursuance of my first undertaking) to be on the Defensive part
only, and not to have at all meddl'd with the opposite Faction: The Tale of
Forty One and Forty Eight has been long enough the Theme to be better made use
of than it is. But here is an unlucky harrangue of our Author's, against
Religion, immediately follows, that is enough to make the Old Rebellion rise
again, even out of its Grave of the Oblivion Act. I will therefore join with
him in his railing at that desperate Incendiary of all Nations, Religion: (I
hope he means honestly, and understands the pretense and masque of it by that
Name) as heartily as himself; I will bring him in my share of ends of Verse,
and Sayings of Philosophers; I Will muster all Lucretius's scraps against it; I
can tell you of Tantum Religio, and Religio peperit sceterosa atque impia
facta; and all this I can make out too; Religion was the Gospel-trumpet that
first sounded to Battle, and whetted our Fears and Jealousies into Courage and
Rebellion; Religion that first kindled the Flame, maintained it with Fuel; The
Fight against the Lords Anointed began still with a Psalm, and ended in a Hymn;
Religion was the Song; Religion was the burden of the Holy Ballad-singers, when
the Scots came tweedling it over, with the praise of God in their mouths, and a
Two edged-sword in their hands. No matter then, if we must be ruined, whether
St. Ambrose's or Robert Wisdom's Te Deum be sung for the Victory, whether the
holy Io Paean goes to David's or to Nero's Harp, to the Church-Organ or the
Scotch-Bagpipe. And see, our Author is already at it; he is sounding a
Parliament-Armies Epinicium, or rather holding forth in a Thanksgiving-Sermon,
and in the insulting Language of the prosperous villainy of the late times
crying out, To vow and Covenant, and with a Solemn League forswear three
Kingdoms out of their Liberties and Lives, that is Illustrious and Heroic:
There Is Glory in great Achievements, and Virtue in Success: Come on then! Let
us the mighty Nimrods hunt for Nobler Spoils, and fly at a whole Nation,
Property and Inheritance. That is as he explains himself in the 29 page. Let us
never leave, till we have hunted the Imperial Lion down. But now he is out of
breath, and his Glass is run, and therefore so much for this time.

But now to the main Objection: Some people will tell us, (says he) That it is
wholly impossible for any Popish Successor, by all his Arts and Endeavors
whatsoever, to introduce Popery into England. Yes indeed will they tell you so
again; For if you remember they told you so already, in the second page of your
Pamphlet, and indeed I am of opinion that it ought then to have been
considered; for till you had removed this great bar of impossibility out of the
way, I see but very little hopes of making any further progress, that you could
reasonably have. This argument lay before you just as you set out; and being
sensible that this must be o're-passed before you could proceed in your
journey, you came on indeed with very great briskness and assurance, as if you
designed to have leapt the Ditch; but your heart failed, and made the Cowardly
Rhodian buggle just upon the brink: But now, since you are forced to it, and
necessity has given you courage to take the leap, it is some pleasure to the
standers by to see you fallen in the midst of it, and so plunged in the mire,
as not to be in any visible likelihood of getting out. But let us see how the
poor foundered Jade struggles to work it self out of the Bog. If he is a Papist
that says so, he knows he belies his Conscience; For our late Hellish Plot is a
plain demonstration that their whole party believed it possible. Now the sport
of it is, this flouncing does but make him stick the faster. For what if he
that says so be as good a Protestant as the Author, as I am sure a great many
are that both say and believe so too? why then they may even say so, and
believe so still for all him: He has nothing to say to the contrary, unless
they are Papists that say so; and for them, mark how shrewdly he is provided.
First he gives them the Lie, and justifies it thus; Their whole Party believed
it possible, and therefore it was possible, for so he must infer, if he means
to prove any thing against the foregoing Argument. And is it so then Mr.
Characterizer? because they believed it possible, therefore was it so? Come,
come, you are a dangerous Man, and I wish people knew you, that they might have
a care of you: You, forsooth, (under the notion of running down a Popish
Succession) are proving the verity of the Popish Faith, and asserting every
thing to be true that is believed by a Papist. Well, I am glad I have found out
our Scribler, for none could sure have written such stuff, but a disguised
Priest, or at least, a Papist in Masquerade. But after all, granting the Belief
of a Roman Catholic, that the introducing of Popery was so feasible, according
to our Author's opinion, to be a certain argument that it was so, and that this
was once the Belief of the whole Party, yet how does it follow that it is so
still? If they be that cunning and politic People as he soon after says they
are, I am sure they have very little reason to think that that Design, which
was in so hopeful a forwardness, as never since Queen Mary's days could be
boasted of, carried on with all the Art and Contrivance, all the Secrecy and
Cunning of a most diligent and active Party, favored by several of the
greatest Persons of the Kingdom, and those most eminent for their Riches and
Interest, to support the Cause, the universal security of the whole Nation,
that then not so much as dreamt of the Mine that was ready to take Fire,
conspiring together with those Sons of darkness, in the great work of our
Destruction; and yet, after all this, was brought to naught, should ever at all
(or at least in this Age) be effected, when all their measures are broken, and
all their wicked contrivances laid open, and the whole Scene of that Religious
Villainy displaid to public view, when the whole Nation is still kept awake
with continual Fears, and fresh Allarms against them, while the very meanest of
the people are as diligent in this cause, as the great ones that descend to
join with them in it and when (to prevent any surprise from the Pope or the Gaul)
there is not a Goose but cackles for the preservation of our Capitol. Alas!
such projects as these, when once discovered, are for that age defeated; and
when so great a design is to be hatched anew, it ripens as slowly as China does,
that must be buried an Age under ground before it come to perfection, and then
too is very often as brittle as that, and as easy to be dashed in pieces. Thus
we see how impossible a thing it is, that in the temper which now runs quite
through the whole English Nation, that Idolatrous Superstition should ever be
here re-established, which by so unanimous a consent of so many of our wisest
Princes, and all our people, has been rooted out from among us. But is not the
people of England highly beholding to our Author, that in this seeming
difficulty has found an expedient for the introducing of it again? This Sir Pol
of ours is a notable Headpiece, let him alone, and we shall see as shrewd a
piece of contrivance, as the bringing over an Army that shall cross the Narrow
Seas dry-foot by the help of Cork-shoes. Let us see this project of setting up
Popery; Why, first the Foundation of it must be laid, of my word that is but
reasonable, and the first Foundation of Popery is Arbitrary Government. Ay
marry Sir, now he says somewhat, only make this an Arbitrary Government, a
small piece of business, a trifle that; and then Popery follows as naturally as
the Fox's body did, when he had got his head in at the hole.

But how must this be done? Why, Would be shall tell you. If a Papist reign, we
very well understand that the Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, and all the
judiciary Officers are of the King's Creation. Yes; and are they not so when a
Protestant reigns? Yet even such a Prince whose Religion does not in the least
render him obnoxious to his people, but whose consent with them in the first
and chiefest duty of humane Life, the Divine Worship, should rather make both
Prince and People of one Soul, and one Mind; Let him have all the advantages,
not only which a Papist must of necessity lose, but which a Protestant may wish
or imagine, would find it so difficult a task to set up for this Arbitrary way
of Government, which our Author makes so easy a piece of business, that I
shall not need to tell the consequence of such an Attempt, since the
impossibility of succeeding in it will never suffer it to be made. If then
Arbitrary Power be the Foundation of Popery, there is very little fear of ever
seeing that great Idol reared, whose Basis can never be laid. And of this we
shall be so much the surer under the Reign of a Popish King, by how much less
opportunities he will have to set up this new Model, and by how much greater
opposition, and indefatigable diligence, and watchful suspicion, the whole
Nation will employ, lest this vast Trojan Horse, Arbitrary Government, big with
Popery and our utter Destruction, should first make us break down our Walls to
let it in, (for the Gate of the Law is too narrow for its reception,) and
afterward admit it into the Palace.

It Is not in the power of Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, or of Judges, let
them be as corrupted, or of as base a constitution as our Author would have
'em, to work so extraordinary a change: For if they are of base constitutions,
as he phrases it, the hopes of preferment on one hand shall not work upon 'em
so far as the fear of punishment on the other; nor will they be like to use the
Laws with the Cruelty of Procrustes, who must needs by experience be assured
that our Country does not want those Publick-spirited Patriots, who with the
Justice and Strength of Theseus can make 'em suffer by their own Barbarity.
Nay, how great an influence this fear of disobliging the people, has over low
Spirits, even in the highest Offices, we have very fresh instances; When by
some of 'em, even Justice has been denied, where it might give distaste to the
Representatives of the Nation.

This is indeed an action very unaccountable, but sufficient to make it appear
to the world how much stronger the Peoples Interest and Party is, than any
Popish Princes can ever be, by how much more formidable that is than this, even
to the Tribunal of Justice it self which should never fear. If this then will
not do the work, and the Pope is not absolute, there wants a standing Army to
Crown the work: And he shall have it? Shall he so Sir? of my word we are much
obliged to you for granting a standing Army; but stay, he comes off with, who
shall hinder him? Nay that is another matter; then pray Mr. Bays be pleased to
inform us where is this standing Army, is it in disguise? and does it lie
concealed as your the other did at Knights-bridge? Indeed, indeed that is
dangerous, for an Army in disguise is full as bad, nay much worse than a Papist
in Masquerade. But yet I have some hopes, that since this Popish Successor has
not traveled the Rode so much as others, has not been so great a Journey-taker
about England, nor made so many Western Progresses, the Innkeepers will not be
so much his Friends as to hide all his Horse and Foot, and Ammunition, and
other odd things that go with an Army; and then all this great Project is like
to be defeated, and fall to nothing. Or if this Army is not yet raised, and
don't lie hid in the place we were talking of, or in the Celler in
Worstershire, how shall it be raised: You know you have told the Popish
Successor that he shall have a standing Army, and I Will assure you he will expect
you should be as good as your word. Why then if you would have this Army
quietly raised some honorable pretenses must be found: Truly that is well
thought on, for if that had been forgot, and Drums had beat up through the City
for Volunteers to set up Arbitrary Power and Popery, it is ten to one but all
the Fat had been in the Fire. Well let us get a pretense then, and when we have
one, if it be only a pretense, though never so Right Honorable, Suppose the
people should smell it out, and be very unwilling to be raised for any thing
but their own defense: This were indeed somewhat like Rebelling, but not quite
so improbable, but that a wise Prince would foresee and avoid it, and we may
very well suppose it. Suppose? quoth, a, I am not at all mortified at your
suppose, not I Sir, I tell you if we have a Popish Successor, he shall bring in
a standing Army, and that standing Army shall bring in Aribitrary Power, and
Arbitrary Power bring in Popery; and then what becomes of your Suppose? Suppose
quoth a? -- Mr. Bays, I beg your pardon for offending you, I am convinced, I
yield, and must own, that though you have introduced Popery with so much ease,
you are the only man in the world that could have so brought things about, and
deserve to be General at least of that Army which you have been at the whole
trouble of raising.

But enough of this trifling, let us be a little Serious, and leave off our
Laughter, which could not be avoided in Discourse with this Impertinent, grave
conceited Politico, this florid Oratorical Buffoon, with his Ragioni det Stato
of Sr. Poll, dressed up in the Eloquence of Sir Formal. There is none can be so
great a Stranger to the Affairs of this Country, as not to see how strong the
Tide runs against Popery; a Tide so impetuous, so strengthened and swelled up
with the flowing in of almost all Interests against it, that it can never be
stem'd by the small resistance that the most vigorous Prince can make in the
head of so ruined, so weak and inconsiderable a party; 'twere folly to attempt
it, and extreme madness to hope to effect it. So young as the Reformation was
in the Reign of Q. Mary, it might indeed with some ease be plucked up e're is
had taken root, or spread it self over half the Kingdom: The number of Papists
in those days being equal at least if not exceeding that of Protestants, and
they (as in all reason we must allow) all longing for the restoration of their
Religion: But now that this Idolatrous Superstition has been so long worn off
of the minds of the people, and the Reformation so deeply and so strongly
rooted in the reigns of four most Religious and prudent Princes; the Church of
England so firmly established, and that as much by the purity of its Doctrine,
the decency of its Discipline, and the Innocence of its Principles, as by the
Authority of the public, and the Laws of the Land. The Romish Church so
detested both for the dangerous Innovations of its Doctrines, and the Idolaty
of its Ceremonies, and so odious in the eyes of the people for its pernicious
principles expressed in the Villainous practices of its Professors, in Massacres
and Plots all detected, and at last defeated to their utter confusion that
engaged in them: Things I say being in this state, it would be a greater
Miracle than the most Romantic Legends of that Church has yet to boast of,
should it ever be restored in the English Nation. And this our Author himself
well enough knows; for though he would persuade the people all along that
Popery is just coming in, yet this false Satyr can blow cold and hot with the
same Breath, and cannot help owning, That the stubborn English Genius will not
bend to the Superstitions of Rome. (p. 39)

Thus far our Author tells you, he has given you the Portraiture of a Popish
King; and indeed it is well he tells you so, for he has drawn such a horrid
Figure, so Monstrous and disproportioned a piece, that it was but reason that
he should write under the Picture, This is a Popish King, that we might know
what to make of it. And now he is for taking a draught of his Features in his
Minority, whilst he is only Heir apparent; and this he performs with such fine
touches and masterst-roaks, that you may easily perceive it to be the same hand.

And here for three or four pages we have him only Imagining then, and
Imagining likewise, and Supposing now, and Supposing likewise, and supposing
moreover, at so extravagant and wild a rate, that his Brain must be very hot
that can keep pace with him in his mad carreer of Fancy. We may only observe
that in his overhasty zealous fits of imagination, he forgets himself often,
so far as to betray the very grand secret of the party, the ground of all their
Popular railing at Popery, and that is no other than their being weary of
Monarchy. This is the color for all the cry against Kingly Government and
Right Succession; and as he tells you, this is that makes the Subjects knees so
stiff and so stubborn; this makes them in studying to prevent Tyranny, grow
jealous of Monarchy; this is that which makes them so far from supplying the
real and most pressing necessities of His Majesty, that they triumph in his
greatest wants, even when his nearest Safety (mark that) calls for their
Assistance; And this is that which in the Language of the late Address gives
pretense to that Insolent Threat of breaking the whole Chain of Royal
Succession in pieces, (p 23.) So that it is plain, though the triple Mitre is
struck at, the three Crowns is their aim, nor would they be so violent against
Popery, which they can have no ground to be afraid of, unless by very fresh
experience, they knew that that was the powerful charm to bring in the people
to the ruin of Monarchy, which by this only means is to be destroyed; knowing
the multitude to be not unlike the Beasts or Cattle in the Hold of a Ship,
which in any Storm that is raised, if they are made apprehensive of the Vessels
sinking on one side, run immediately with such a violent panick fear to the
other, that they over-set the Ship, and quite overwhelm both themselves and it
in ruin and destruction.

Come we now to the next Argument, which he says a Critic will make use of.
Suppose this Popish Heir undoubtedly believes, that there is no way to Heaven
but his own, should any consideration upon earth make him to renounce his
Principles of Christianity? Why truly I am so far of this Critics mind, as he
calls him, that I should think it very unreasonable that the Prince alone
should not have the benefit of Liberty of Conscience, which every Subject in
his Dominions takes very ill to have denied to himself. But he goes on, And
then if all the grievances of a Kingdom lie at his door, it is his unhappiness,
and not his fault. Very right if some Factious Spirits set the Nation on a
flame, and then first cry out Fire, and convey their Fireballs into his
Pockets, if they make us miserable, and then lay it at his door, it is his
unhappiness indeed, but not his fault. But see what use our Author makes of
this: And so says he, When this Popish Heir comes to the Crown, And promotes
the Romish Interest with all the Severity, Injustice, Tyranny and Religious
Cruelty can invent -- Hold hold, not so fast: You are an excellent Disputant,
whose strongest Argugument is begging the Question. You take for granted that
all this Severity, and Injustice, and Tyranny, and Religious Cruelty shall be
then excercised, and are forsooth chiefly employed in finding out an excuse to
put into this Princes mouth for doing so; and you have furnished him with a
notable one; His answer will be, he cannot help it. Come, come, speak your
Conscience, do you really believe this will be his Answer? Yes; a Prince who
can do all these mighty things, and act with so Arbitrary and unbounded a power
as must be necessary to enable him to all this, after all his Severity, and
Injustice, and Cruelty, shall cry Peccavi to his people, with the School Boys
Apology, Indeed I could not help it. But such stuff as this may be allowable to
our Mr. Bays, that seems to have very little knowledge of any Kings but those
of Branford.

Well, but to make us amends, we have him immediately exercising his Talent in a
most Pathetick piece of Rhetoric against Merit, and truly he is in the right
of it: For Merit I am sure is never like to do him a kindness; and then
presently follows as sharp a fit of Railing at the Romish Religion, a Topic
that I cannot choose but confess my self extremely delighted with, especially
when handled by our Author, who manages it so dexterously, that all his
Invectives against that, fall as heavy upon the turbulent Fanatics, and so
wounds two of our most dangerous enemies at once. For thus he describes Popery,
(shall I say) or Presbytery! A Religion that does not go altogether in the old
fashion, Apostolical way of Preaching, and Praying, and Teaching all Nations,
but scourging, and wracking, and broiling them in the fear of God: A Religion
that for its own Propagation will at any time authorize its Champion to divest
themselves of their humanity, and act worse than Devils to be Saints. If a man
were to transverse this Character of Religion, could he do it more appositly
than in these Lines of Hudibras.

'Twas Presbyterian true Blew,
For he was of that stubborn Crew,
Of Errant Saints, whom all men grant,
To be the true Church Militant.
Such as build their Faith upon
The Holy Text of Pike and Gun:
Decide all Controversies by
Infallible Artillery.
And prove their Doctrine Orthodox,
By Apostolic Blows and Knocks.
Call Fire and Sword, and Desolation,
A godly-throw-Reformation
Well, after this short breathing himself, upon a subject, which he, nor any
body else can ever want some fine shrewd thing or other to say, he proceeds
thus; I, but (say the wisest Critics we have met with yet) if these be the
dangers of a Popish King, why have we not such strong, such potent Laws made
before this Popish Heir come to the Crown, that it shall be impossible for him
ever to set up Popery, though he should never so much endeavor it?

Indeed I am mightily rejoiced at our Author's unexpected civility, in allowing
this to be the expedient of the wisest Critic he has met with yet, for it is no
less a Person than His most Sacred Majesty's own Proposal and gracious Offer to
his two Houses of Parliament, in those several Declarations that he has made to
'em, of his most vigorous assistance in this wise provision for the good of
Posterity: An Act becoming both the Justice and the Goodness of such a King,
that will neither debar his Brother from that Right by which himself reigns,
not leave his people in danger of the loss of their dearest and most sacred
Birthrights, their Liberty and Religion. But let us hear what our Politician
says to this: I answer (says he) To endeavor to set up Popery by Law, even
with the Laws that we have against it, is impossible, p 21. But if you remember
Sir, no further off than the 13th. page; You were afraid that even the
Protestant Laws themselves might be made to open the first Gate to Slavery, and
so to Popery, by the help of those Procrustese's that you were there talking
of. And granting this, it would not be so impolitick a piece of work to make
such other Protestant Laws, that should not be possibly shortened or stretched
by e're a Procustes of 'em all, and then this projection will not deserve to be
accused of Nonsense. Nay we have your self presently confessing, That a Popish
King may be totally restrained from all power of introducing Popery, by the
force of such Laws as may be made to tie up his hands. And who is so
unreasonoble as to desire any more? Surely Romes Dagon (as elsewhere you phrase
it) will not be so formidable, when like that Egyptian one of old, both its
hands shall be broken off, and the power of hurting the true Israelites, the
Church of England, wholly taken away. Ay, but then these Laws must be such as
must ruin his Prerogative.

This does not necessarily follow, and I believe His Majesty (in His own
Princely Wisdom, and by His Councils Advice) was well enough satisfied that
such Laws might be made, as might not quite ruin the Prerogative of his
Successor, though they might abate much of his Power, in matters relating to the
Protestant Religion.

Besides, granting even thus much, what you infer from this is doubly
ridiculous. First, That no Monarch would thus entail that effeminacy on a
Crown, as shall render the Imperial Majesty of England but a Pageant, a mere
Puppet upon a Wire. For these Laws that bind up a King so strictly, suppose him
a Popish King, such only being to be restrained; This is not therefore an
entailed Effeminacy, but rather a short eclipsing of the full Splendour of a
Crown, which in the next Protestant Successor is to shine forth with the
greater Luster for its former obscurity. And secondly, considering none but a
Popish King, is thus to be limited, Is it not foolish enough that you should
here be offended at the smalness of his power that would have him utterly
debarred the Throne, and so have no power at all.

As for this Statute, that seems to make such a bluster, with the Tall
Capital-Letters at the top, it is as little to his purpose as any thing that he
says; For even the strictness of that reaches none but those that are lawfully
Convicted, and therefore concerns not his R. H. or if it did, the dispute being
about the Right of Succession, and no Succession to the Crown being possible
till after the Death of the Predecessor, this at that time can be no obstacle
to the next Heir, when (according to the whole tenor of the Law) all
Attainders cease. Therefore, to urge more forcibly the Exclusion of the Duke,
he is insinuating to the people, That if ever a Papist mounts this Throne, then
all their Petitions, Protestings and Association-Votes will be remembered to
purpose. That is exactly Catiline: The ills that we have done cannot be safe,
but by attempting greater. But I am sure there are some men have reason to
remember that a King that has had the greatest opposition has been the most
gracious Prince that ever reigned, and been so far from remembering to purpose
the Traitors that opposed him, that he has forgot'em, even by Act of
Parliament. So far is it from being generally true what he says, That he who
has gone a long and tiresom journcy through Brakes and Briars, to a splendid
Palace, will be sure to send out to root'em up. That the last instance that we
have had of such a case makes it appear, that even those little pliable
Brambles and Briars that bent and yielded to every blast, let it blow from what
quarter it would; and those Brakes and Thorns that stuck so sharply in the
sides of Majesty, have not only been retrieved from their due fate of being
utterly rooted up, but been admitted into the Palace it self, and made to vie
with, and indeed almost to overtop the tallest Cedars themselves, that with
unshaken constancy partook in the sufferings of the Royal Cause, and without
bending, withstood the force of the whole Storm.

But now follows a very wise Discourse against the Right of Succession; and to
prove that not to be so inviolable as some vehemently assert, we are referred
to our own Chronicles. Remember Sir what it is you are discoursing of; the Right
of Succession, as I take it, and then you shall refer me whither you please.
Well then, I take up my Chronicle and fall a reading, and there indeed I find
some Kings Murdered and some Deposed, the true Heir sometimes deprived of his
Succession by the power of a more prevailing Pretender to the same Right, the
Crown bandied about between the Factions of two Houses, laying equal claim to
it, and scarce ever firmly settled for any considerable date of years. But all
this while I am learnt to distinguish between matter of Fact and matter of
Right, and know that they are very often opposite to one another; and that no
precedent can alter the Nature of an unjust Action, or make it allowable now,
because contrary to right it was done some hundred years ago. I am sure the
known Statutes of the Land ought to be the Rule of our Duty and Allegiance,
rather than our Chronicles; men being to be governed by Law, and not by
History, And as for those Acts of Parliament which we find ordering and
disposing of the Succession, we shall see how little they make for the purpose
for which they are produced. We must therefore note that all these Acts of
Parliament, both of Henry VIII. and of Queen Elizabeth, are not made at all to
alter the Right of Succession: far from it; nay, rather to establish it; for
they are only designed to declare in whom this Right of Succession was, and
therefore were indeed necessary both in the times of H. VIII. (whose often
Marriages and Divorces, and attainder of his Wives, might make this Right
disputable among his Children) and in Queen Elizabeth's time, who being without
Issue, had several others that pretended to the Right of succeeding her. These
Acts of Parliament (I say) were absolutely necessary, when the Title to the
Crown might be dubious, but for the same reason very ridiculously and weakly
urged, when it is clear to the blindest Apprehension, who is the true Successor.

After this no table bout of Law, and a few Statutes and Acts of Parliament,
borrowed from some Case-splitter or another; for his style (for all its
dullness) is too florid for a Lawyers; He is flusht enough to think that he may
venture to fall upon that which he calls the strongest Argument for Succession.
If the Son of a private Gentleman, though a Papist, shall inherit, and quietly
possess his Hereditary Estate, is it not hard, nay barbarous Injustice, that
the Son of a King, and the Heir of a Crown, should lose his Patrimony of three
Kingdoms for being a Papist? Indeed I must confess that in my opinion it is
very hard, barbarous and unjust, especially when such provision shall be made
that we may not be in danger of suffering any thing by his Opinion. But our
Author says we are in danger of this; and I say No; and so I find this is at
the bottom no more than the former Argument concerning the possibility of
Arbitrary Government and Popery ever coming in upon us. And this I think has
sufficiently been considered in its place.

I cannot choose but smile at the next undertaking of our Sir Formal, who I
perceive has the vanity to believe his Rhetoric can do any thing: He has
therefore spun out a most fine Harangue, to persuade the Duke to quit (of his
own accord) his pretentions to a Crown, and indeed as to that I have little to
answer, but must leave it to be as his Royal Highness and he shall agree upon
the matter: Only I must by the way take notice of one o the Arguments he makes
use of to this purpose, and try if I can make it as serviceable to another. If
then (p. 30.) the little disparity of their years be considered, and the
distance and uncertainty of the Duke's ever coming to the Crown duly weighed,
surely those men are highly culpable, nay, the greatest Enemies of the public
good that can be imagined; who thus for an uncertainty ruin a Kingdoms Peace
and Prosperity, and make us run into those ills which we are sure to suffer, in
avoiding those which we neither know, or are certain we shall be ever so much
as in danger of.

There is another very remarkable passage in this last Discourse, which (for
its extraordinary quaintness of expression, and delicacy of style) ought by no
means to escape us. It is a story of a Noble Roman, who, by the description
that he makes of him, can be the pattern of no other than the most deservedly
beloved Darling of the People, and who might, for ought we know, do our Nation
as much service in the same kind as the other did: He is thus therefore
described in blank Heroic Meetre, as the dignity of this Subject required.

When along Plague had reigned in Rome, an Earthquake
Had opened a prodigious Gulf in the
Midst of the Forum; their consulted Oracle
Told'em, That neither should the Plague be stopped,
Nor the breach closed, till the most Noble Victim
In Rome appeased their angry Deity.
When Curtius, a Noble Youth of Rome,
OF the best and highest Roman Quality,
Princely adorned, and mounted gallantly
On Horseback, with a look so gay, so cheerful,
More like a Bridegroom than a Sacrifice,
Amidst a thousand wondering tender Eyes
Of all his Friends, the Rabble round about him,
Rode headlong down into the yawning Pit.
page 19. Whoever can guess by this lively description of the Authors, who our
English Curtius, this Charmer of the People, this Gallant Person so bravely
mounted, and so like a Bridegroom is, would do very well to use what Interest
he can to persuade him to do as noble an Action as the Roman Curtius did, and
try whether by his being a Sacrifice, our Plague that reigns among us would
cease: But if this Curtius cannot be found out, to be even with our Author I
will tell him a story somewhat like his; and though possibly not in such
exactness of Meetre, yet as true, and of as good Authority as that, desiring
him and his Friends to consider of it, because I have a fancy that Moses, in
this case, is likely to give as good Instruction as Livy. There were certain
turbulent Spirits among the Children of Israel, that had stirred up the people
to rebel against their Guide Moses, and their High Priest Aaron, which was then
all their Church and State: Upon this the Earth opened a prodigious Gulf in
the midst of their Tents; but here one single Victim would not satisfy,
neither would the mouth of the Earth (that was opened) be content with less
than the Ringleaders of the Sedition, with all that adhered unto 'em, who
together went down quick into the Pit; (Numb. 16. v. 30.) and so as the
Psalmist says, The Earth opened, and swallowed up Dathan, and covered the
Congregation of Abiram.

And now I think we are at last come to that which is indeed Ratio ultima, and
find our Author justifying the Rebellion of Subjects against their Prince: An
Argument which I take the public Ministers of Justice more concerned to answer
than my self; for he who don't know who the Lords Anointed is, and who it his
Native Sovereign, (p. 31.) in my opinion ought no otherwise to be convinced.
But because at last he is for summing up all, (p. 34.) Let us fee what is the
utmost strength of his reasons for Rebellion; why that is this, That a Popish
King is guilty of a greater sin in bringing in Popery and Tyranny, than the
People that take up Arms against him, (p. 34) Is not this excellent arguing;
supposing even this Proposition to be true? Because a Prince is guilty of a
sin, must the people be guilty of another? Ay, but he is guilty of a greater
than they: Suppose then a Prince should commit Incest, may his people by this
be warranted to commit Adultery or Fornication, because their sin is not as big
as his? Or to our purpose, if a Prince be enticed into the Witchcraft of Rome,
as our Author elsewhere calls it, will this Authorize the Peoples Rebellion,
which the Scripture tells us is mighty like that very sin, the sin of
Witchcraft? This is so absurd and so foolish a defense of so abominable and
pernicious a Position, as deserves both the Rods and Axes of the Magistrate,
the Rod for the Fools back, and the Ax for the Traitors head, if it be not too
great an Honor.

And now because the writer of the Popish Character has had the boldness to
Address his Libel to You the most Noble Lords and Worthy Patriots of the two
Houses of Parliament; I likewise at last take the Confidence to throw this
Answer of mine at your Feet, with my humble Petition in the behalf of almost a
whole Distracted Nation: That in your great Wisdom you will take such moderate
courses as may once more make us a happy people, that you would secure us
against Popery without destroying Monarchy, or which is the same thing, making
this an Elective Kingdom, which has ever been Hereditary; that you would take
care of that Church which is so miserably beset with enemies on both sides, and
which is so firm a friend to the State, that they have ever both risen and
fallen together. Lastly I must conjure you by the Spirits of all those
Englishmen, that in our last unnatural Wars fell on both sides, by the Heroes
of Edgehill, of Naseby, of Worcester, and of all those Fatal Fields that were
then Fought, by the Cries of the Widows which then were made, and the Curses of
those Mothers which that Cruel Scene made to be so no more, by all the Miseries
we remember, and all that we can fear or expect: And lastly, by the blood of
that Royal Martyr, whose memory we to this day celebrate, I conjure you as you
expect to answer it to God and a whole Nation, to take care above all things
that we have not a Civil War entailed upon us, to sweep away what the former
has left: that we may never more run into that extremity of Madness, which not
long since made one of the most Powerful and Happy Kingdoms in the World, the
pity and contempt of all the Nations round about her.

And having made this most humble Address to your Honorable Assembly, I shall
take my leave of my Reader, in an Ode of Horace to this purpose, a very little
altered; It Is his 17th. Epod to the people of Rome, his Contrymen, dehorting
'em from engaging in a Civil War twice in one Age, where by the easiness of the
application of it to our present times and Nation, we may find that the people
of England have learnt somewhat else from Rome besides its Religion, which is
at least even as destructive as that.

Ad Populum Anglicanum detestatio Belli Civilis. Hor. Ep. 7.
QVo, quo scelesti ruitis? aut cur dexteris
Aptantur enses conditi?
Parumne campis atque Neptuno super
Fusum est Britanni Sanguinis?
Non fastuosas invidae Lutetiae
Vt Anglus arces ureret,
Iterumve Rex ut Gallicus descenderet
Nostris Catenatus viis,
Sed ut, secundum vot a Gallorum, sua
Gens haec periret dextera.
Neque hic lupis mos nec fuit leonibus
Vnquam, nisi in dispar, feris.
Furorne caecus, an rapit vis acrior?
An culpa? Responsum date.
Tacent and ora pallor albus inficit
Mentesque perculsae stupent.
Sic est: Acerba fata Brittones agunt,
Scelusque Regiae necis.
Vt immerentis pegma tinxit Caroli
Sacer nepotibus cruor.
To the People of England; A Detestation of Civil War, out of Horace 's 7th.
Epod.
OH! Whither do ye rush, and thus prepare?
To rouse again the sleeping War?
Has then so little English-Bloud been spilt
On Sea, and Land with equal guilt?
Not that again; we might our Arms advance,
To check the insolent Pride of France.
Not that once more we might in Fetters bring
An humble Captive Gallic King:
But to the wish of the insulting Gaul,
That we by our own hands should fall.
Nor Wolves nor Lions bear so fierce a mind;
They hurt not their own Savage kind
Is it blind Rage, or Zeal, more blind and strong,
Or Guilt, yet stronger, drives you on?
Answer; but none can answer; mute and pale
They stand; Guilt does over Words prevail.
It Is so: Heavens Justice threatens us from high;
And a King's Death from Earth does cry;
E're since the Martyrs Innocent Blood was shed,
Upon our Fathers, and on Ours, and on our Childrens head.
FINIS.

