AN ANSWER TO Mr. LANGHORN'S SPEECH.
Wherein he asserts his Loyalty and Innocence, contrary to plain Evidence
against him in open Court, the Verdict of an Impartial Jury, and the declared
Sense of the late PARLIAMENT in relation to the late horrible and Bloody PLOT.
THough the falsity of those Principles, which move these infatuated men, by so
solemnly denying of Truth, to renounce the God of Truth, is already clearly and
sufficiently demonstrated to the World, by late Authors of most unspotted
Integrity and profound Learning, that they would neither abuse us, by imposing
or mis-quoting such Roman Catholic Authors, from whence those Principles are
apparently derived, nor could they from want of judgment commit any Errors;
yet such is the force and power of the last words of dying men, and such the
great charity of living Protestants, that we are more apt to credit and favor
them in their last Speeches, than by a severe Sentence (supposing their words
evasive and delusory) condemn 'em to eternal torments. That the great charity
of such modest and conscientious Protestants may not be abused, by any Tricks
and Impostures, which are constantly made use of by the Papists, I shall
endeavor, by this present Answer to Mr. Langhorn's Speech, (as it is called)
to convince the World and all good People, that as in their Lives they were
guilty of most heinous Treason, so at their Deaths of most notorious
Prevarication.

I shall begin at the latter end of his Speech, where he has these words:

1. I take it to be clear, That my Religion is the sole cause, which moved my
Accusers to charge me with the Crime, for which upon their Evidence I am
adjudged to die; and that my being of that Religion, which I here profefs, was
the only ground which could give them any hope to be believed, or which could
move my Jury to believe the Evidence of such men.

2. I have had not only a Pardon, but also great Advantages, as to Preferments,
and Estates offered unto me, since this Judgment was against me, in case I
would have forsaken my Religion, and owned my self guilty of the Crime charged
against me, and charged the same Crimes upon others: But blessed be my God, who
by his grace has preserved me from yielding to those Temptations, and
strengthened me rather to choose this Death, than to stain my Soul with sin, and
to charge others, against truth, with Crimes, of which I do not know that any
person is guilty.

As to the first, Though Mr. Langhorn has said it, no person will believe him,
though in the Speech of a dying man. That he was only charged with Crimes,
(though they were most evidently proved against him) which had no other ground
or foundation, but from the venom and malice of his Accusers, and they no other
Reason for this so great malice, than that he was a professor of the Roman
Catholic Religion.

First, It cannot appear rational, that their malice, as he pleases to miscal
it, should be levelled particularly against him, either as to his Person or
Religion, being a Roman Catholic, since those of that Religion have all along
been most tenderly and mercifully dealt withal by the superior Magistrates, so
long as they lived peaceably and quietly under Government, and did not design
and act Treason against the Prince, or Destruction to the People, and
Subversion of the Government. Nor was there after the Gunpowder-Treason, any
Roman Catholic prosecuted purely for his Religion; nay, those who did incur
the Penal Statutes, as they were Priests, were yet more favorably used than
perhaps they merited in themselves. So that to offer such a criminal Charge and
prosecution, either against Mr. Langhorn, or any person else, and at the same
time really false, from a difference in Religion only, is no practice amongst
Protestants, nor ever was, but is notoriously known to be allowed, encouraged,
and commanded, in the Principles and Practices of the Papists, against all (and
with the extremest severities) who are of a different opinion from the Roman
Church.

Of this, in Queen Mary's Reign, we have voluminous Instances, of their bloody
Cruelties against Protestants, not for Treason against the Prince, nor for
endeavoring the Subversion of Government, but only for being Protestants and
not Papists.

Secondly, It is no wonder if he charges his Accusers with malice, and that
with so much confidence and untruth; for now he proceeds to as high Reflections
against his Governors, That he was offered by them not only a Pardon to his
Life, but Promotions, and all worldly Advantages, would he have deserted his
Religion, and acknowledged those Crimes to be true he stood charged withal, and
charge them upon others, who by his inference must be supposed innocent.

That Mr. Langhorn, from the unbounded Clemency of his Prince to all his
Subjects, might presume upon the same mercy others have received, I do believe;
but then upon those terms on which God Almighty pardons, a sincere Confession,
and humble Contrition. Or if ever such a mercy was offered to him, never was it
more abused, never more betrayed; when what was offered, was in no other sense,
and for no other reason, than that he would discover the naked truth of what he
knew, what he acted, that those Mischiefs which impend over King and Country,
might be prevented, and they who were those devilish Engines, either by
inventing or promoting of them, and yet lay undiscovered, might be known, and
brought to public Justice. I could not have believed, that so great mercy
could have met with so base ingratitude, that after so noble and generous
Offers, which, he says, were tendered to him, he should make returns of so high
injustice, and place the reason of those merciful Offers to no other account,
than that by preserving of him, and his charging of others, who were innocent,
they might have a fair opportunity and color of Justice, to massacre the whole
Flock of Roman Catholic Professors. As no moderate person, or who is Master of
common sense, but can easily discern the malicious Interpretation he has made
of these merciful Tenders, so will he at the same time confess, he has most
deservedly suffered for those notorious Treasons he was found guilty of, and
condemned for.

As to the other parts and members of his Speech, he says no more in sense,
than what was said before by the five Jesuits, his Predecessors in punishment;
only as theirs savored more of Oratory, his answerable to his profession; is
penned with that complication and repetition of words to the same sense, in
Lawyers phrase, that had it been, as his last Speech, his last Will and
Testament, it could not have been with more care and regard to his true sense
and meaning, transferred to Posterity. This may seem a very prevalent and
tempting Argument, to believe, that as he particularly studied by his
expressions to be rightly understood, so he did at the same time speak the
naked truth from the bottom of his Soul, without any fallacy or collusion
whatsoever.

That he did not so, the proof in Court so evident against him, is a most
convincing Argument.

The next Quere to be answered, is, How he, or any person or persons can expect
to be saved, when at the instant of death, they do so obstinately deny the
truth of what in their Consciences they are convinced is so, and not only this,
but to imprecate eternal punishment upon their departing Souls, if they have
not faithfully and sincerely discharged themselves of the truth to their utmost
knowledge.

The Reasons why they do so peremptorily deny all Treasons, Murders, or
whatever may be, or is positively and directly proved against them, is, in that
they receive their Absolution upon such terms, that they are obliged to die not
only concealing them, but utterly denying; otherwise they not only forfeit the
whole benefit of their Absolution, but are ipso facto excluded the Pale of the
Church, and, as Renegadoes, all future hopes of Salvation. It has been
publicly reported by a person concerned in the Murder of Sir Edmondbury
Godfrey, that could he in Prison have procured an opportunity for a Priest to
come to him, and to have absolved him, he would never have acknowledged, what
he has since publicly confessed before Authority, though he had been courted,
and offered a greater temptation, than Mr. Langhorn had, an earthly Crown for
his Reward; so great power and awe has the Absolution of the Priest, over the
Sense and Consciences of their Votaries, and strictest Professors.

Secondly, From the Doctrine of their Church, to Equivocate is no sin, no not
at the hour of Death, if it is to an Heretic, or for the Service of the
Catholic Cause: This, sufficient proofs from their own Authors, have avowed to
the World. Causabon, page 202. speaking of Garnet's Opinion of the lawfulness
of Equivocation at the hour of Death, in his Papers communicated to King James,
says, Since it is lawful (and he concludes it so) to use this in the course of
his Life, why may it not be used also by a dying man?

Nor do they only Equivocate, but by completing the sense in their own
thoughts, by a mental Reservation, paralogize upon their Auditors, Equivocate
upon their own Equivocation; of so doubtful sense are their best expressions in
the extremest Agonies of Death.

To conclude, Though I cannot heartily believe this to have been the genuine
product of Mr. Langhorn's thoughts at the hour of Death, but rather penned by
the Wily Priest, to cajoll the World, and conciliate a Reputation to that
Cause, which has of late suffered so much; yet admit it to be so, I must agree,
though a profound Lawyer, I am not of his sense, but think his last, the worst
Conveyance that e're was drawn.

FINIS.

