An Answer to a LETTER Written by a Member of Parliament in the Country, upon
the occasion of his reading of the Gazette of the 11th of December, 1679.
SIR,
I Received your Letter, when I was engaged in much other business, which will
excuse me that I have not returned an Answer sooner, and that it is done no
better now: You desire me to let you know what that Judgment is which my Lord
Chancellor acquainted my Lord Mayor and his Brethren with, and what my thoughts
are upon it: and that I may obey you in both, I will first Transcribe that
Case, as it is reported by Justice Crook, that being already put into English,
whereas the Case in Moor is in French.

MEmorandum, That by Command from the King, all the Justices of England, with
diverse of the Nobility, viz. the Lord Ellesmere Lord Chancellor, the Earl of
Dorset Lord Treasurer, Viscount Cranbourn Principal Secretary, the Earl of
Nottingham Lord Admiral, the Earls of Northumberland, Worcester, Devon and
Northampton, the Lords Zouch, Burghley and Knowles, the Chancellor of the
Duchy, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of London, Popham Chief
Justice, Bruce Master of the Rolls, Anderson, Gaudy, VValmesley, Fenner,
Kingsmil, VVarberton, Savel, Daniel, Yelverton and Snigg, were assembled in the
Star Chamber, where the Lord Chancellor after a long Speech made by him
concerning Justices of Peace, and his Exhortation to the Justices of Assize,
and a discourse concerning Papists and Puritans, Declaring how they both were
disturbers of the State, and that the King intending to suppress them, and to
have the Laws put in Execution against them, demanded of the Justices their
Resulutions in three things: First, Whether the Deprivation of
Puritan-Ministers by the High Commissioners, for refusing to conform themselves
to the Ceremonies appointed by the last Canons, was Lawful? Whereto all the
Justices answered, That they had conferred thereof before, and held it to be
Lawful, because the King has the Supreme Ecclesiastical power, which he has
delegated to the Commissioners, whereby they had the power of Deprivation by
the Canon Law of the Realm. And the Statute of 1 Eliz. which appoints
Commissioners to be made by the Queen, does not confer any new power, but
explain and declare the ancient power. And therefore they held it clear, That
the King without Parliament might make Orders and Constitutions for the
Government of the Clergy, and might deprive them if they obeyed not. And so the
Commissioners might deprive them. But they could not make any Constitutions
without the King: And the divulging of such Ordinances by Proclamation is a
most gracious Admonition; And for as much as they have refused to obey, they
are Lawfully deprived by the Commissioners ex Officio, without Libel Et ore
tenus convocati. Secondly, Whether a Prohibition be grantable against the
Commissioners upon the Statute of 2 H. 5. if they do not deliver the Copy of
the Libel to the party; Whereto they all answered, That that Statute is
intended where the Ecclesiastical Judge proceeds ex Officio and ore tenus.
Thirdly, Whether it were an offense punishable, and what punishment they
deserved, who framed Petitions, and collected a multitude of hands thereto, to
prefer to the King in a public cause, as the Puritans had done, with an
Intimation to the King, That if he denied their suit, many thousands of his
Subjects would be discontented? Whereto all the Justices answered, That it was
an offense finable at discretion, and very near to Treason and Felony in the
punishment. For they tended to the raising of Sedition, Rebellion, and
discontent among the people: To which Resolution all the Lords agreed. And then
many of the Lords declared, That some of the Puritans had raised a false Rumor
of the King, how he intended to grant a toleration to Papists: Which offense
the Justices conceived to be heinously finable by the Rules of the Common Law,
either in the Kings Bench, or by the King and his Council; or now since the
Statute of 3 H. 7. in the Star Chamber. And the Lords severally declared how
the King was discontented with the said false Rumor, and had made but the day
before a protestation unto them, that he never intended it, and that he would
spend the last drop of blood in his body before he would do it; and prayed that
before any of his Issue should maintain any other Religion than what he truly
professed and maintained, that God would take them out of the world.

I doubt not but your self, and every English Protestant will join with this
Royal Petitioner, and will heartily say Amen.

But you desire to know if I think that the Resolution of the Judges in this
case ought to deter us from humbly Petitioning His Majesty, that this
Parliament may effectually sit on the 26th day of January next. In order to
this, give me leave to observe to you, As it is most certain, that a great
Reverence is due to the Unanimous opinion of all the Judges; so there is a
great Difference to be put between the Authority of their Judgments, when
solemnly given, in Cases depending before them, and their sudden and
extrajudicial Opinions. The Case of Ship Money it self is not a better proof of
this, than that which you have now read, as you will easily see, if you
consider distinctly what they say to the several Questions proposed to them.

As to their Answer to the first Questiom, it much concerns the Reverend Clergy
to enquire whether they did not mistake in it? and whether the King by his
Proclamation can make new Constitutions, and oblige them to Obedience under the
penalty of Deprivation? Should it be so, and should this unhappy Kingdom ever
suffer under the Reign of a Popish Prince, he might easily rid himself of such
obstinate Heretics, and leave his Ecclesiastical Preferments open for men of
better Principles: He will need only to publish a Proclamation, that Spittle
and Salt should be used in Baptism, that Holy water should be used, and Images
set up in Churches; and a few more such things as these, and the business were
effectually done. But if you will believe my Lord Chief Justice Cook, 12. Co.
19:
he will tell you that it was agreed by all the Judges upon Debate, Hill. 4 to
Jacobi, and that it was resolved by the whole Court of Common Pleas, Trin. 6 to
Jacobi, 12. Co. 49:
that the King cannot change his Ecclesiastical Laws; and you may easily
remember since the whole Parliament declared, that he could not alter or
suspend them.

I have the uniform Opinion of all the Judges given upon great Deliberation,
Mich. 4 to Jac. to justify me, Co. Mag. Char. 616.
if I say that our Judges here were utterly mistaken in the Answer which they
gave to the second Question. I will not cite the numerous subsequent
Authorities, since every man knows that it is the constant practice of
Westminster Hall at this day to grant Prohibitions, upon refusal to give a
Copy of Articles, where the Proceedings in the Ecclesiastical Courts are ex
Officio.

You see there was a kind of ill Fate upon the Judges this day, as usually
there was when met in the Star Chamber, and that they were very unfortunate in
answering two of the three Questions proposed to them; let us go to on to
consider what does principally concern us at present, their Answer to the last
Question.

You have just done reading it, and therefore I need not repeat to you either
the Doubt or the Solution of it; but one may be allowed to say modestly, that
it was a sudden Answer: It Is possible the Lords then present were well enough
informed, when they were told that such kind of Petitioning was an offense next
to Treason and Felony; but I dare be so bold as to say, That at this day not a
Lawyer in England would be the wiser for such an Answer; they would be
confounded, and not know whether it were misprision of Treason, which seems an
offense nearest to Treason, or petty-Larceny, which seems nearest to Felony.

You will be apt to tell me that I mistake my Lords the Judges, and they spoke
not of the nature of the crime, but of the manner of the punishment; but this
will mend the matter but little; for since the punishments of those two Crimes
is so very different, you are still as much in the dark as ever, what these
ambiguous words mean.

Well, but we will agree, that the Crime about which the Enquiry was made, was
a very great one. When men arrive to such insolence, as to threaten their
Prince, it will be but little excuse to them to call their Monaces by the soft
and gentle name of Petitions.

But you would know for what, and in what manner we are at present to Petition;
and I will give you a plain and an infallible Rule. 13. Car. 2. c. 5.
It is the Statute 13. Car. 2. c. 5.

Be it enacted, etc. that no person or persons whatsoever shall solicit,
labor, or procure the getting of hands, or other consent of any persons above
the number of Twenty, or more, to any Petition, Complaint, Remonstrance,
Declaration, or other Adresses to the King, or both, or either Houses of
Parliament, for alteration of matters established by Law in Church or State,
unless the mattet thereof have been first consented to, and ordered by three or
more Justices of the County, or by the major part of the Grand Jury of the
County, or Division of the County, where the same matter shall arise at their
public Assizes, or general Quarter Sessions; or if arising in London, by the
Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons in Common Council Assembled; and that no
person or persons whatsoever shall repair to His Majesty, or both, or either of
the Houses of Parliament, upon pretense of presenting or delivering any
Petition, Complaint, Remonstrance, or Declaration, or other Addresses,
accompanied with excessive number of people, not at any one time with above the
number of ten persons, upon pain of incurring a penalty, not exceeding the sum
of 100 l. in money, and three months Imprisonment, without Bail or Mainprize
for every offense; which offense to be prosecuted at the Court of King's Bench,
or at the Affizes, or general Quarter Sessions, within six months after the
offense committed, and proved by two or more credible Witnesses.

Here you observe the Parliament, who set themselves directly to obviate all
the inconveniences which might arise to the Government from tumultuous
Petitioning, will not allow that great Numbers should join in Petitions for
alteration of the Laws (because it is possible ill men might abuse such a
liberty), unless the mattet of the Petition be consented to in such a manner as
the Act directs; but in all other cases, they leave the Subjects to their
undoubted liberty, as well knowing that from thence there could arise no
possible inconvenience; but on the contrary, that to bar the people of that
humble way of making their wants known, might force them upon worse ways of
doing it.

And therefore I must tell you, that you do my Lord Chancellor great injustice
if you think his Speech tends to deter men from all manner of Petitioning: No,
that wise and eloquent Lord, who receives every day so many Petitions, will, I
suppose, be content the King should receive some too. It never yet was thought
seditious or tumultuous in any Government, for the Subjects in an humble manner
to beg, That he who has the only power to do it, would redress their
Grievances: It Is the way by which we apply our selves to the King of Heaven,
who knows all our wants, and yet expects from us that we should daily express
them to him in humble Petitions. And the Wisdom of the Church, which has
appointed Liturgies. and forms of Common Prayer, seems to instruct us, that God
is pleased when huge Numbers join in the same Petition. Why should not then
suppliant Subjects, with like humility, and in like manner address themselves
to the Gods on Earth? especially since Kings cannot know our Desires, or our
Grievances, till we our selves inform them what they are. Dan. chapter 6.
I remember some wicked Counselors of Darius did once obtain a Law to be made,
that none should Petition any one but the King for Thirty days; but there never
yet was found so absurd a Statesman as to advise a Law, that Subjects should
not supplicate their Prince. It Is probable it would be well for some
Favorites, who are near a King, if such a right could be taken from the
people, for then all their false suggestions and informations might pass
undiscovered; but it is impossible that a King should long be safe in such a
condition. I will suppose a malicious Statesman, intending to raise a jealousy
in the mind of the Sovereign, should inform him in dangerous times, that he was
not beloved by his people, and that he was not to trust them: How could the
Subjects in such a case recover the Princes good opinion, in the absence of a
Legal Representative, but by humble and affectionate Addresses? Or suppose some
good Protestant Prince should be so unfortunate, as to have some Counselors
near him who are concealed; and others, whose Crimes make them fear
Parliaments; it is easy to suppose, that the one sort will be filling his ears
with Stories, that a great part of his Kingdom are inclined to Popery; and the
other sort, that the best of his Subjects are quite out of love with
Parliaments, as factious and seditious Assemblies. Into what unfortunate
circumstances would such a Prince be apt to fall, if his people were precluded
from addressing themselves, and opening their desires to him!

I might go on to trouble you with infinite Instances of this nature, but there
is no want of any in so plain a case: It Is the Doctrine of our Church, that the
only Arms of Subjects, are Prayers, Petitions, Supplications, and Tears; and
they are no friends either to the King or Church, who would disarm us of these.
My Lord Chief Justice Hobbart tells us, Hob. 220. Wrenhams Case.
That it is lawful for any Subject to Petition to the King for redress in an
humble and modest manner; for (says he) access to the Sovereign must not be
shut up in case of the Subjects distresses. Vet. Magn. Chart. Exil. Hugi. De
Spencer 51.
It was one of the Crimes for which the Spencers were banished by Parliament,
that they hindered the King from receiving and answering Petitions from great
men, and others.

And as it is our unquestionable Right, so in all ages the usage has been by
Petition, to inform our King of our Grievances. In the Reign of King Ed. the
II. and Ed. the III. Petitions were frequent for Redress of public Grievances,
and for Parliaments, especially out of Ireland (though that is a conquered
Nation), as may be seen in the close Rolls of the Reigns of those two Kings.
One instance I will give you for your satisfaction, but I will tire you with no
more, for that would be endless.

It Is Claus. 10. Ed. 2. M. 28. intus Pro communitate Hiberniae. Rex Dilect.
Claus. to. E. 2. M. 28. intus Pro communitate Hiberniae!
and fidelibus suis Justa. Cancellar. and The saur. suis Hib. salutem ex parti
populi nostri terrae predict. per Petitionem suam eoram nobis and Concillio
nostro exhibitum nobis ese cum instantia supplicatum, quod cum, etc.

In the 5th year of King Richard the II. Coke Jurisdiction of Courts, p. 79.
Burarts History of the Reformation, page 231. Procl. Dat. 7. Feb. 11. Jac.
the whole body of the Realm Petitioned, that the most wise and able men within
the Realm might be chosen Chancellors.

King Henry the VIII. told his Subjects then in Arms against him in York shire,
that they ought not to have Rebelled, but to have applied themselves to him by
Petition.

King James by a Proclamation published in the 12th year of his Reign, begins
thus: The complaints lately exhibited to us by certain Noblemen, and others of
our Kingdom of Ireland, suggesting disorders and abuses, as well in the
proceedings of the late begun. Parliament, as in the Martial and Civil
Government of the Kingdom, We did receive with extraordinary grace and favor.

And by another Proclamation in the 12th year of his Reign, Procl. 12 Jac.
he declares, That it was the right of his subjects to make their immediate
addresses to him by petition; and in the 19th year of his reign he invites his
subjects to it.

And in the 20th year of his Reign he tells his people, Procl. dat. 10th July.
19. Jac. Procl. dated 14 Feb. 20. Jac.
That his own, and the ears of his Privy Council did still continue open to the
just complaints of his people; and that they were not confined to times and
meetings in Parliament, nor restrained to particular Grievances; not doubting
but that his loving subjects would apply themselves to his Majesty for relief;
to the utter abolishing of all those private whisperings and causless rumors,
which without giving his Majesty any opportunity of reformation by particular
knowledge of any fault, serve to no other purpose but to occasion and blow
abroad coffeehouse.

It appears that the House of Lords both spiritual and temporal, Lords Journal
An. 1640.
nemine contradicente, voted thanks to those Lords who petitioned the King at
York, to call a Parliament.

And the King by his Declaration printed in the same year, Declar. 1640.
declares his Royal will and pleasure, That all his loving subjects who have
any just cause to present or complain of any Grievances or Oppressions, may
freely address themselves by their humble petitions to His Sacred Majesty, who
will graciously hear their complaints.

Since His Majesty's happy Restoration, Temp. Car. 2.
the inhabitants of the County of Bucks made a petition, That their County
might not be overrun by the Kings Deer; and the same was done by the County of
Surry on the same occasion.

It Is time for me to conclude your trouble: I suppose you do no longer doubt
but that you may join in Petition for a Parliament, since you see it has been
often done heretofore; nor need you fear how many of your honest Countrymen
join with you, since you hear of Petitions by the whole body of the Realm; and
since you see, both by the opinions of our Lawyers, by the Doctrine of our
Church, and by the Declarations of our Kings, That it is our undoubted right to
petition. Nothing can be more absurd than to say, That the number of the
Supplicants makes an innocent petition an offense; on the contrary, if in a
thing of this public concernment, a few only should address themselves to the
King, it would be a thing in its self ridiculous; the great end of such
Addresses being to acquaint Him with the general desires of His people, which
can never be done unless multitudes join. How can the complaints of the
diffusive body of the Realm reach His Majesty's ears in the absence of
Parliament, but in the actual concurrence of every individual person in
petition? for the personal application of multitudes, is indeed unlawful and
dangerous.

Give me leave, Stat. 13. Car. 2. c. 5.
since the Gazette runs so much in your mind, to tell you (as I may modestly
enough do, since the Statute directs me) what answer the Judges would now give
if such another Case were put to them, as was put to the Judges 2 Jacobi.

Suppose the Nonconformists at this day (as the Puritans then did) should
solicit the getting of the hands of multitudes to a Petition to the King for
suspending the execution of the penal Laws against themselves; the present
Judges would not tell you that this was an offense next to Treason or Felony,
nor that the offenders were to be brought to the Council Board to be punished;
but they would tell you plainly and distinctly, That if the hands of more
persons than twenty were solicited or procured to such a petition, and the
offenders were convicted upon the evidence of two or more credible Witnesses
upon a prosecution in the Kings Bench, or at the Assizes or Quarter Sessions,
within six months, they would incur a penalty not exceeding a hundred pounds,
and three months imprisonment, because their petition was to change a matter
established by Law. But I am sure you are a better Logician than not to see the
difference which the Statute makes between such a petition which is to alter a
thing established by Law, and an innocent and humble petition, That a Parliament
may meet according to Law, in a time when the greatest dangers hang over the
King, the Church, and the State.

FINIS.

