An ANSWER to a late Pamphlet, Entitled, A Short Scheme of the Usurpations of
the Crown of England, etc.
THE World may very justly wonder at severa passages in this ill-designed, and
as ill-writ Pamphlet, which the Author has taken the pains to collect from some
petty Grubstreet Chronicle. Henry II. is called an Usurper ( page 4.) because
he accepted of the Crown of England in his Mothers Lifetime; though by her not
opposing his claim, it may very reasonably be concluded, that she freely
consented to his promotion, as the most effectual means to secure the Crown to
her Posterity.

But we are told, that a Crown is no Estate to be made over in Trust: if our
Author's meaning is, that a Crown is an Estate which the Possessor cannot
divest himself of by a voluntary Resignation, both Reason, and a multitude of
examples in several Ages, and Nations, prove that the Principle our Author has
laid down, is founded on a gross mistake. Therefore if our Author designs to
publish any more Schemes of Usurpation, let him first inform us what it is, and
how far it extends, lest the World should accuse him of having as notoriously
usurped to himself the Title of a Writer, as any of our Princes ever did the
Crown of England. He would persuade his Readers to believe that God punished
King Edward III. and King Henry V. for their Usurpations, with frequent and
unexpected Victories, in the acquisition of which, though there was some English
Blood shed (as it was impossible it should be otherwise) yet the Enemies paid
an excessive price for it; after the defeat of their great Armies, and the
Imprisonment of their King, they being forced to buy their Peace upon such
Terms, as our conquering Usurpers pleased to impose. Nor did ever any
well-wisher to the English Nation deny, that these Two Princes were the Glory
of their Age, and of our British History. If I should reckon up all the evident
mistakes and false inferences in this Libel, it would be too tedious, since a
careless Eye cannot easily overlook them.

If the Pamphlet finds so undeserved a reception in the World as to need a
Second Impression, the Author is desired to add to it this Postscript; which
being founded on the Principles asserted by him, will show the World that he
has wilfully, and perhaps partially forborne to speak of as notorious an
Usurper, as any that are mentioned in his Scheme.

Queen Mary, the Offspring of an Incestuous Marriage, had no other
unquestionable Divine Right to the Crown of England, than what was given her by
an Act of Parliament, made in her Father's Reign, and the common consent of the
Nobility and People after the Death of her Brother King Edward VI. whose
disposal of the Crown by Letters Patents under the Great Seal, being directly
contrary to the former entail of it, limited by a higher Authority: his Sister,
the Lady Mary, was acknowledged Queen. Therefore, according to our Authors
abstruse Notions, She (as well as her Grandfather Henry VII.) must be reckoned
among the Usurpers of the Crown of England. Let us now see what success
attended her, and whether the Nation was happy under her Government. As soon as
She saw her self fixed in the Throne, She imprisoned and deprived several of
the Protestant Bishops, contrary to the then Established Laws of the Realm: She
intruded Popish Bishops into the Sees, thus declared vacant; the small
remainder of the Protestant Bishops, who had been called to Parliament by Writ,
were, nevertheless, violently thrust out of the Parliament House, for refusing
to Worship the Mass. The Members of the House of Commons, in her First
Parliament, were chosen by force and threats: the Freeholders were hindered by
violence from exercising their right of choosing Representatives: false returns
were made; and those who were for the Reformed Religion, though duly elected,
were by force expelled the House. So that we cannot wonder at the Statutes made
in this pretended Free Parliament; which was in every thing influenced by the
Court-Party. Shortly after, her Marriage with the haughty jealous Spaniard (of
which She her self felt the ill consequences) was justly disliked by the
Nobility and Commonalty. Her base design of setting up a suppositious Child for
the Heir to the Crown, was not only happily defeated, but deservedly exposed to
the censure of the Nation: Her Design to erect the Spanish Inquisition in
England was disappoined. Calais (after having belonged to the Crown of England
about Two hundred and Eleven Years, and which was gained with great difficulty,
after Eleven Months Siege) was in the depth of Winter lost in a Weeks time: and
quickly after, all the English Territories were with small difficulty recovered
by the French. We must not forget how exactly She put in practice the base,
treacherous, and destructive Principles of the pretended Catholic Religion, in
these remarkable particulars. She barbarously used her only Sister, the Lady
Elizabeth, and designed to have taken away her Life, for no other cause, but
her firm adherence to the Protestant Religion; She imprisoned and burnt
Archbishop Cranmer, who had formerly sheltered her from her Fathers fury; She
deprived and imprisoned Judge Hales, who alone resolutely opposed King Edward
the Sixth's Will; and preferred Judge Bromley to be Lord Chief Justice, though he
had without any reluctance prepared the Letters Patent for her Exclusion. The
Inhabitants of Norfolk and Suffolk, who were the first that took up Arms for
her (upon her Promise to permit them the Exercise of their Religion) were the
first that suffered persecution under her. And after She had put to Death near
Three hundred persons (without respect to Quality, Age, or Sex,) it pleased God
to put an end to the Romish Cruelty and Idolatry, by her unexpected and
unlamented Death. Nor is her Memory preserved from Oblivion by any thing, but
her repeated acts of Cruelty and Injustice. This was the success that attended
her, this the happiness, the Liberty, the Religion established in the English
Nation, during her five Years Tyranny.

That I may not detain the Reader any longer, I will conclude this advice to
our Learned Pamphleteer; That for the future he do not so positively ascribe
all unhappy accidents, a frequent Wars, and Rebellions, the Effusion of English
Blood the unfortunate end of some of our Princes, to the Divine Vengeance upon
them, for the Usurpations he accuses them of since, if he will consult our
Historians, he may find that Edward II. Richard II. and the Incomparable
Prince, King Charles I. though their Title from William the Conqueror is
indisputable, were far unhappier than any of the Usurpers he mentions. That in
Edward the Fourth's, and Henry the Eighth's Reign, a great deal of English
Blood was shed both at home and abroad, though their right was unquestionable,
and universally acknowledged. And that as to the promiscuous good or ill
success of all Affairs in this lower World, the observation of the Wisest of
Princes, and of Men, is very often exactly verified. There is one event to the
Righteous and to the Wicked: To the Prince who ascends the Throne by an
unquestionable Right, and to him that ascends it by Violence and Usurpation. To
the Prince that religiously performs the Solemn Oath taken at his Coronation,
and to him that wilfully breaks through all the Obligations he is under, and
endeavors by the most base Methods to dissolve the Established Government.

FINIS.

