An Answer to a Paper Published by one BATEMAN AGAINST THE MINE-ADVENTURE.
By a New Adventurer.

THE best way to discover the Naked Truth, is to lay aside all Reflections, and
come to the matter of Fact; it is an easy matter to be satirical, and to abuse
the best of Men, but it is not so easy to carry on such a Design to the end of
the Chapter; some unlucky accident or other generally falls out to the Eternal
Shame and Disgrace of the Author, as it happens in this very case.

For I must confess, That being at first surprised to read such a Paper, so
highly Reflecting on a Gentleman, whose Character was one great Motive which
induced me to become a Subscriber, I made a very strict and full Enquiry into
the matter of Fact, of which he stands accused in this Paper (for as to the
rest of the Partners, I am satisfied they had no Concern in this Undertaking,
but either to take Money or Tickets for their Shares, at the Price proposed)
and being fully informed how matters stood, by undeniable Proofs, and finding
other Persons (who were more able) too busy at this time to engage in a Paper
War, I have presumed to state the matter of Fact to the World as I found it;
and am persuaded the same will give entire Satisfaction to all unbyassed
Persons, that will take the pains to read it.

And this I have done for two Reasons, first to discountenance Malice, and
distinguish a Man, whose subtle Parts might otherwise make him capable of doing
more mischief in the World; and Secondly, to Vindicate the Honor of a
Gentleman, who has taken so much pains for the Public Good of all the
Partners, and indeed of the whole Kingdom.

And because the scope of this Paper is to show that this Mine is worth
nothing, and that Mr. Bateman was always of the same Opinion in that matter: I
shall begin with a Letter under the Author Bateman's own hand Writing,
remaining (amongst the other Writings) in the Custody of Anthony Forty, and
Francis Pigot, Gent. Secretary and Accountant to the Company; the Letter is set
forth (...) the very words thereof, Paragraph by Paragrap^; and is directed
thus:

Note, Sir Christopher Wren, was then Chairman of the Committee, and that
Bwlchyr Eskir her, is the place where the Mines do lie.
To Sir Christopher Wren in Scotland-Yard, White Hall.
Bwlchyr-Eskir her May 9. 1694. Honored Sir,
PErmit me your hand to present the Committee the enclosed Papers, which
contain what I have observed, and can remind to be useful in the Affair wherein
you recommend my Service.


Observa. The said enclosed Papers under his own hand writing, are to be seen
in the custody of the said Secretary and Accomptant; and by this Paragraph I
should think, that what he observes therein, was de^igned to relate to that
Mine he was sent down to ^iew, and not to any other in the North of England,
^he would insinuate in his Paper; and also, that his ^^rvice was recommended in
this affair to the Com^ittee by Sir Christopher Wren (which he now de^^es) though
he told the Workmen in the Country, he ^as to come down Four times a Year, and
several ^^^sons recommended him to the Committee for that purpose; and as they
then said, at his desire and request.

Letter. And I hope too you will find a Return to what I was charged with
particularly, except Treating with Mr. Covey; and I leave it to Mr. London, the
discussing and excusing that Clause.


Observe. There is nothing material in this Paragraph, then that he was very
cautious of observing the Order of the Committee, which he was charged with;
but as he would have it; it was only as a Friend, and not in hopes of an
Employment under them.

Letter. I have imparted to Mr. Waller the Methods I propose for the Management
and Accounts, and he is pleased to comply with them.


Observe. I admire so Judicious and ingenious a Person as Mr. Bateman, should be
at the trouble to recommend a Method of Management and Accounts for carrying on
a Mine, when in his Paper he tells us, that it is plain, if the Royalty were
bestowed on any Body Gratis, 'twere not worth the Working, and that he was
always of the same Opinion; and if you would but take the trouble to read his
Method at large under his own Hand, you might better Judge, whether it was fair
and honest in Mr. Bateman, to recommend such a Chargeable Management to the
Partners, that paid him 40 l. for his Journey, and put an entire trust in him,
if he then thought the Mines were worth nothing. But mark what follows!

Letter. I Am in hopes all the Gentlemen in Partnership will do so, to raise
successive Funds, as requisite for making constant pays, without which Hands
will not be procured, and without Hands nothing can be brought in; --


Observe. Hey dey; What Is this! Certainly this cannot be Mr. Bateman's Letter,
it must be some cursed Cheat that has Counterfeited his Hand; it is impossible
a Man of Mr. Bateman's Character can so vary from himself! What, can Mr.
Bateman hope the Partners will raise successive Funds to be thrown away upon
such an unprofitable Mine as this? is it possible? O no! this is a great
mistake; he does not mean that the Partners should Raise successive Funds to
Carry on this Mine, but some other Mine in the North of England, that they had
nothing to do with; as you may Observe from his Construction of the next
Sentence.

Letter. since the more is laid out in an undertaking that bears a prospect of
success the more considerable will the return be.


Observe. This (says he) is true, I did say so, and I say so still, but without
Application; he Dates his Letter indeed from this very Mine called
Bwlchyr-Eskir-hyr, and went down on purpose to View it, and give his Opinion of
it, but yet did not Write about this Mine, but about some other in the North of
England; O horrid impudence! I protest I have much ado to forbear calling him a
prevaricating Kn -- ve, but he says he has given a Reason for Working the Mine
before; and what was that, why truly because they might probably come short of
Interest Money and sink the Principal: Excellent advice, an honest Counceller; a
Man fit to be Employed and trusted; -- but how does this agree with what
follows.

Letter. This Concern is Weighty.


Observe. How so? What do Men usually mean by such an Expression? do they mean
by it that the concern they speak of is worth nothing? No certainly, all plain
Dealers intend by such an Expression that the Concern is of great value, weight
and moment: But however you must take Mr. Bateman in what Sense he pleases, and
he only said it was Weighty, because it was Valued then at Seventy Thousand l.
per Annum, and afterward at above One Hundred and Twenty Thousand per Annum.
which he says was too Weighty for the Mine to bear: This is such stuff that I
protest I am a weary of this Subject; but however I must have patience to go
through the Letter, and the next Clause is.

Letter. But it better Comports with great Minds and Purses.


Observe. What to do? to throw away their Money? so it seems, and for this end
says he in his Paper. I annexed the aid of Noble Minds and Purses, because they
are sure remedies for disappointments, a rare Spark: I hope his Patron (if he
has any) will take Notice of this prudent and Conscientious. Advice, which may
be very serviceable to him; -- but to proceed, the next Sentence is, that.

Letter, It requires great Skill to carry it on to the best and most Advantage.


Observe. I thought there had not been so much Skill required to throw a Man's
Money away, or at least, that no Skill could make a Mine advantageous; that was
worth nothing, but this is a singular Virtue and Excellency in Mr. Bateman,
That he can make a Mine valuable or not valuable when he pleases, had he been
Supervisor, no doubt it would have been wrought to the most Advantage, but
without that, it was worth nothing at all, and yet he tells us,

Letter, And that suits well with Mr. Waller 's Capacity.


Observe. How has Mr. Waller any Capacity to manage a Mine? Yes at that time he
had, because Mr. Bateman only desired to be a riding Surveyor, and to go down
four times a Year to inspect the Management, and to have Forty Pound a Journey;
but afterward that Motion being laid aside, upon Mr. Waller's Information,
That he had no manner of Skill in mineral Works; now Mr. Waller has neither
Honesty nor Skill, but is the greatest Cheat in the Kingdom, though he has four
Affidavits on his side, and none yet against him.

Letter, I heartily wish Prosperity to it.


Observe. I thank you heartily for your good Wishes, as long as you were in
hopes to get any thing by it; and I am sorry you have given me this Occasion of
making Mr. Bateman at Enmity with himself, but I know none so fit to deal with
him as himself; for he knows the Secrets of his Heart, which I shall never be
able to fathom any other Way.

Letter. As,

SIR, Your most Obedient, Humble Servant, Tho. Bateman.


Observe. This Mr. Thomas Bateman was very obedient and very humble to Sir
Christopher Wren, as long as he wanted a Place, but now he values neither him
nor any Body else; for Sir Christopher Wren, who is a Person of great
Reputation and Worth, declares one thing, and he another; I appeal to Sir
Christopher Wren, and all the General Meeting, for what Sir Christopher
declared publicly in the Presence of a great number of the Partners at
Garraway's-Coffee-house, and to the minutes taken by the Secretary, and
afterward publicly Read and approved which were as follows.

Whereas there has been a Scandalous Report made of the Mines late of Sir
Carbery Pryse Barronet by one Mr. Thomas Bateman lessening the true Value and
Goodness thereof, whereupon several Affidavits were Read attesting the
Largeness of the Veins and Goodness of the Oar thereof, and Sir Christopher
Wren being present, did declare that Mr. Bateman denied to him that he had ever
made any such Report; and that he said he was wronged in the said Report, and
desired to be Excused, and that the said Mr. Bateman would wait upon Sir
Humphry Mackworth at his Chambers to declare the same.

And I appeal to Mr. Bateman's Printed Paper for what he says, whose Words are
these, I think it becomes me to clear first the last Article that Names me,
wherein they say I have denied by Sir Christopher Wren's Mouth that ever I
spoke against the Mines; I never yet denied what I at any time said of their
Mine, nor did I ever speak by proxy of it.

This Declaration of Mr. B. gives his Old Master Sir Christopher Wren a very
fair Broadside.

Now which is the honester Gentleman the Master or the Man I leave to the World
to Judge; for my part I have a great Honor for Sir Christopher Wren, and after
so many Convictions of the other, cannot think it difficult to Censure him in
this also.

And Whereas he says his Computation of One Thousand Eight Hundred Seventy Five
Tuns of Oar yiedling One Thousand Two Hundred and Fifty Tuns of Lead, or
Fifteen Thousand Tuns of Oar yiedling 10000 Tuns of Lead was not said by him of
the Partners Oar, but of the Northern Oar, this is Just like all the rest, for
this Paper is Dated from Bwlchyr-Eskir-Hir where the Mines Lie and enclosed in
the said Letter, and is in these words following.

Bwlchyr-Eskir-Hir; 9th. May, 1694.

No Water Courses that can be depended on for constant supply, are nearer the
Mines than Tallabont, which is Three Miles from them, and One Mile from a small
River that Runs winding into the River Dovey, It has the Tides, but at such
disadvantage that (I Am told) they discontinue from May to August; But I think
this inconvenience is removeable, and constant Tides may be procured by a
sloping Cut over the Common into Dovey, Mr. London has taken and will produce a
Draught and Estimate of in Sir Carbery Pryse is Lord.

At Tallabont Mr. Waller has designed a Smelting-Mill, cut part of its Raze,
and is under some Contract with Mr. Covey for building it.

Very near this place, upon the same River, stands a Mill that pledges forty
Shillings per Annum to the Lady Pryse, the Situation is very convenient for a
Smelting-Mill; and no doubt, but Sir Carbery may secure it, by taking upon
himself for account of Company what is charged upon it.

This Advantage attends these Mills, that no Huts need be built for the
Smelters, the Town of Tallabont (whereof Sir Carbery is Lord) being capable to
receive them.

The Silver Mills are about four Miles from the Groves, and a Mile from Dovey,
that is constantly navigable; they are very conveniently situated, yet I think,
That taking down and rebuilding them will be more advantageous in the
Consequence; for I do not approve their present Erection for Lead; besides,
there are now only five Hearths, but two new Mills may be built with four
Hearths a-piece, the Materials and Appurtenances are good so far as we could
view them, but the Doors being locked, we could take no particular Estimate,
the Houses about, and adjoining 'em, may best be purchased with 'em, as capable
to receive the Smelters.

No more Places for Mills could now be found, or heard of.

The Country not furnishing with Coal, the Oar is to be melted with Chop-wood.

The most that a Mill of four Hearths can me^ in a Year, at double shift, is
One Thousand Two Hundred and Fifty Tuns, which may proceed from One Thousand
Eight Hundred and Seventy Five Tuns of Oar, so Fifteen Thousand Tuns of Oar, or
Ten Thousand Tuns of Lead will require Thirty Two Hearths, or Eight Mills, and
Sixty Four Smelters, with as many Sarvers. Proposed.

1. That there be as many Bing-steads, or Repontories, for Ore, as there are
Smelters, that by it may be discerned who works the best, and makes the most;
this Method induces the Smelters too, to take more Care and Pains, to strive to
outdo one another, to be watchful over each other, that one go not Oar from
another, and so see that the Oar be well dressed; for as all Deficiencies (they
know) in the Proceed, will be charged upon em; it behooves them to examine every
thing to hand.

2. That a Steward be allotted to every Lead-mill, he will have full Employment,
for this Reason it may not be convenient to choose any place for melting that
has not Room and Convenience for two Mills; because one Steward may manage two,
when they stand very near together, but he cannot when they are any considerable
space distant.

3. That each Pig (or piece of Lead) weighs one hundred, where Carts or Wayns
can pass with it from the Mills, for this Reason, Smelting, Carriage,
Porterage, Freight, etc. are rated at so much per Pig, let the Weight be what
it will (Sows are double) Merchants too commonly prefer Lead of this Weight
per Pig, as saving in Freight of what they pay for Lead of the common Weight
per Pig.

Now I desire the Reader to consider, whether it might not rationally be
supposed, That he intended the said Calculation to be of the Produce of these
Mines, which were the subject of his Letter, and his whole Business into that
Country, rather than of any other Mine; you may perceive by his printed Paper
(if he writ it without help). That he does not want a Satirical Wit and Nice
Observation; and therefore I desire to know why he should tell the Committee,
That Fifteen Thousand Tuns of Oar required so many Mills, Hearths, Smelters and
Servers, if he had not the least Thought, That so much Oar could be raised out
of their Mines? To what purpose should they be at all that Charge for-nothing?
Or to what end did he mention such things? If he had thought otherwise,
certainly he would have told them, That he did conceive, that they could not
raise but such or such Quantities of Oar, and that therefore two or three Mills
would be sufficient, but whilst he confesses, the Committee had thoughts of
building but two Lead-mills; he on the contrary writes to them of building
Eight, and at the latter end of his printed Paper, he forgets that he had writ
to the Effect above mentioned, but says, he only made a Remark as he was going
with Mr. London to the Mines, of the Inconsistancy of the first Proposals;
which was to him an Argument, that their Oar was not to be tried by Fire.

I wish this Gentleman may not undergo a fiery Trial one time or other, for
such Confidence and Prevarication, I have hardly ever met with before in all my
Lifetime; but for a farther and final Answer to this piece of Sophistry, I was
lately presented with another Paper under Mr. Bateman's own Hand-^^iting, and
signed by him, where he has these very Words, viz. The Oar is very good, and no
doubt, will yield well: Now I know this Gentleman will answer me presently, and
say this is true, I say so still, but without Application; for I did mean the
Oar in the North; but hold Sir, I find you must be chained to the Block, or
else there is no laying hold on you; and here I have you fast again; for your
Paper is dated from these Mines at Bwlchyr Eskirhyr, and Entitled some Remarks
upon the Mines here; and the first Article is, That the Oar is very good, etc.
Now let us see how you will get out of this Nooze, I perceive you have more
Tricks than a Dancing-Bear, but yet you may be caught some times as well as
another.

The next thing that seems material to answer, is his Calculation of the Value
of the Oar in 1696. though that is really done already in the Answer to the
Objections, where the Author fully tells him, That in 1696. there was a
Mismanagement in the smelting of the Oar, that the Oar was not half smelted,
and that the slag (or dross) of that smelting when beat and washed, does look
as bright and rich as the Oar it self, and must be smelted over again to have
the full produce thereof; this mismanagement Mr. Waller after complained of by
Letter to the Committee, (...) therefore it ought not to be objected against
him, and no fair Objector would give a particular accident for a standing Rule,
or insist on the Unskilfulness of one single Artist as an Argument against the
Richness of the Oar, without taking notice of this Answer in the same Paper he
is writing against; for though ^e styles his Paper an Answer to the Postscript,
yet he really objects against all that has been writ of (...) of these Mines.

However to give a more particular Answer to this Objection; I will State it
First in his own words, as follows (Viz.)

Anno 1696. The value of the Lead-Ore Bwlchyr-Eskir Her in Cardiganshire,
computed from the smelted produce thereof.
nbsp Tuns. C with. qu. l. nbsp 41 1 0 0 of Ore As by the Mill-Stewards Letters
to Mr. L-n, one of the partn. Yielded 16 19 1 11 of Lead

Which is 8 C. of Lead per Tur. ( or 20 C.) of Ore.

Suppose Lead at Bristol (the nearest Port) to be 9 l. per Tun, which is there
a good rate.

nbsp s. d. Carriage from Tallabont Mill to Tredal, is 2 6 per Tun Thence to
Aberdovey. 1 6 per Tun Agency at Aberdovey. 0 3 per Tun Freight to Bristol (the
Seas being open) 16 0 per Tun Wharfage, porterage, cellerage and factorage. 4 9
per Tun

l. s. d. l. Total Charge from the Mill to the Sale is 1 5 0 9 Which reduces
the neat worth of the Lead at the Mill to 7 15 0 l. s. d. The neat worth at the
Mill then of 8 C. of Lead (or of so much as comes from a Tun of Ore) is 3 3 11

Suppose this Tun of Ore laid at the Mill, the converting it into Lead requires
this Charge, viz.

For Smelting a Tun of Lead. Chopwood, Lime, and Shells come to 1 0 0 Smelters
wages by Agreement, 1 2 0 Mill-erection and furniture with repairs and Stewards
Sal. may be reckoned at 0 2 6 2 4 6

Pro rata the Smelting of 8 C. will Cost 0 18 4 This Remainder is the neat
worth of a Tun of Ore at the Mill, viz. 2 5 7 From which deducting the Carriage
from the Mines to the Mill, viz. 0 8 0 And there is left for the neat worth of
the Ore to the Mines. 1 17 7

Which is about 15 s. per Bing of 8 C.

No doubt but Mr. Bateman thinks he has now knocked the Nail on the head, for
if he can make the World believe that the Oar did yeiid no more than 1 l. 17 s.
7 d. per Tun clear Profit in the Year 1696. He supposes his Design is
Accomplished. But alas he is mightily mistaken, for this Objection may be
easily Answered several ways.

And first we'll take the weakest Answer, and suppose the Worst, that this
Caculation were as True as it is really False, yet Considering the quantities
which may be Raised from these Mines; and which Mr. Waller with good Reason
Conceives may be Fifteen Thousand Tun from the great Vein, and Five Thousand
Tun a piece from the 5 Lesser Veins, in all Forty Thousand Tuns, this will
amount to Seven and Fifty Thousand Pounds a Year Clear Profit above all
Charges, according to Mr. Bateman's Computation; But suppose we Raise but one
Half of that Oar, it will be sufficient to Answer vast Profit to all the
Adventurers, and One Quarter amounts to more than Sir H. M. has Valued the
whole Mine; and since we have Four Affidavits on one side to prove the Largness
and Wideness of the great Vein in Oar, and Mr. Bateman dares not venture to
make one against them. I hope our quantity will not be Questioned by any
indifferent Reader.

The second Answ. shall be from matter of Fact known to all the Partners, and
appearing upon their Books, and that is, that the hard Oar was sold for 4 l. 5
s. a Tun at Dovey; Now if the Oar be worth four pound five shillings per Tun,
without farther Charge, how comes the same manufactured to yield but one pound
seventeen shillings and seven pence, O, but Mr. Bateman will tell you, that the
person that bought it had so hard a bargain, that he lost by it, and would
never deal again with them, no, that is also denied, for the same Person who
did smelt that Oar and had full Experience of it, has lately bought of the
same Oar from Mr. Pryse and from the Lady Pryse, and would buy all the Partners
Oar on the Bank, if he might have it; this Mr. Bateman, perhaps, will have the
Confidence to deny, and challenge us to name the Person. though he has made
frequent References himself without naming any; and expects to be believed by
his ipse dixit, yet we must not presume to take that Liberty, well, in hopes he
will follow a good Example, we will name the Person, who is Mr. Dan. Peck, a
Man of great Skill in the smelting and extracting of hard Oars in Wales, and
has a noted smelting-mill in Flintshire.

3dly. But what will Mr. Bateman say, if this very Gentleman has offered three
pound per Tun for the very slag or Dross of that Lead smelted in 1696, will he
then believe that the Oar will yield a better produce if smelted with Art and
Skill, certainly if the Lead be left in the slag it is the same thing as to the
Richness of the Oar, as if it had been smelted out, for if an unskilful Artist
for want of a proper Flux, and good firing smelts but half the Lead out of the
Oar, is that single instance an Argument that the Oar will yield no more
afterward? But because we have a Critical-Gentleman to deal with, very full of
Evasions, I have obtained a Person of great Credit and Reputation, to
condescend to tell us the Truth by way of Affidavit, for the entire Confutation
of the Objectors, and Satisfaction of all the new Adventurers in this
particular, --

The Affidavit of Edward Pryse, Esquire. Edward Pryse of Gogarthen, in the County
of Cardigan, Esquire makes Oath, That several Tuns of the hard Oar of Bwlchyr
Esgair-hyr in the said County of Cardigan was sold to Paul Docminique of
London, Merchant and Commissary Shales, at the rate of four pound five shilling
per Tun; and that Daniel Peck of Flint, Gent. owned, that he bought part of
that Oar and smelted it, and that it gave him such encouragement, that within
the space of three Months last past, the said Mr. Peck came over to this
Deponents House at Gogarthen aforesaid in the County of Cardigan, and bought
all the remaining parcel of the said hard Oar, which this Deponent and the Lady
Pryse had power to dispose of, and offered to buy the Oar on the Bank belonging
to the Partners and the Lead, and among other things the said Daniel Peck
particularly offered to this Deponent upon the place at Tallybont. to give
three pound per Tun for the slag (or dross) of that Lead which now lies at
Tallybont, and was the Lead which was made there in the Year 1696, from the
hard O^r of Bwlchyr Eskir-hyr, but this Deponent did not accept of the same,
having no Power from the Partners to dispose thereof.

And now I desire to know what can be said against the value of this hard Oar?
If this matter of Fact will not convince, if Mr. Bateman is a man of that
Credit in the World, that his bare suggestions will pass against all sorts of
Evidence, it is in vain to spend more Ink and Paper.

But however, for farther Demonstration of the Truth in this particular, I will
answer every Item of his Calculation.

And as to the Produce of the Lead in 1696. that is confessed, as aforesaid,
and the reason is given, because the Smelter was unskilful, used no other Flux
but the Earth of the Fallow Ground, and did not give it half Firing; by all
which a great part of the Lead was left in the Slag, for which Slag we are now
offered 3 l. per Tun.

As to the Voyage to Bristol, and all the Charges thereof, we altogether reject
that Notion, as a mere contrivance to enhance the Reckoning; for the Lead may
be sold at 9 l. per Tun at Dovey, or at least sent up to London for less then
20 s. a Tun, and sold for 10 l. per Tun, and perhaps by carrying Corn from
Pembrook-shire, or fish from Aberystwyth, the Freight may be more then paid for
that way.

And then as for the Charges of Smelting, whatsoever it cost that unskilful
Pretender in 1696. we know no reason why it should cost more with us, then in
the North, especially since we are now to have Coal cheap by Sea, and by
carrying Coal to Oar, and Oar to Coal, shall save half Freight, and a great
part of the Duty on Coal; but at worst we are offered by the Great to have it
done for 20 s. a Tun, with Pit Coal in a Cupulo; so I hope we may modestly
deduct out of this Valuation 20 s. and 9 d. per Tun for the Bristol Voyage, and
1 l. 4 s. 6 d. in Smelting Charges, besides 4 s. a Tun for Carriage from the
Mines to the Mill, which is four Mile, and we never paid but 12 d. a Mile; though
he has set it at just double the rate, by which you may guess at all the rest:
And if you will please to compute the Profit fairly, at the true value, and add 3
l. per Tun for the Slag, I believe you will find Mr. Waller very modest in his
Calculation; but you may see also a fair Computation of the Profit of this hard
Oar, in the Answer to the Objections.

And here I cannot forbear to take notice of the extraordinary Partiality of
this Worthy Objector, who notwithstanding the Papers he Answers, tells him,
that there is several sorts of Oars in these Mines, viz. soft Oar, Potters Oar,
Starry Oar, Steely Oar, etc. and though he knows, and was also told, it was not
the soft or Potters Oar, but the hard or steely Oar that was smelted in 1696.
yet he takes not the least notice of this, but slides it over smoothly, as if
all the Oar was under the same difficulty of Smelting; whereas the soft or
Potters Oar will Smelt in a Fire Shovel in a Kitchen Fire, without any Flux;
but yielding more Profit in Oar, for Glasing Earthen Ware in Holland, where it
sells now for about 12 l. per Tun; the Partners never Smelted any of that down
into Lead, except a small quantity for Trial. And he is told in the said Paper,
that if all the hard Oar were left unwrought, the soft or Potters Oar, was
sufficient alone to bring in great advantage to all the Adventurers, and to all
this he is silent; but I fancy no Person that has read his Paper will believe
that he was so, for want of Malice, but because he cannot deny the Fact.

And thus having given an Answer to the material Part of Mr. Bateman's Paper,
if any part thereof may be said to be so; I don't know whether I ought to
condescend so low as to take notice of his Satirical Flights and sly
insinuations; I observe indeed; That he is conscious of his Guilt, by running
for shelter under the Protection of a noble Lord, and of the North-Country
Gentlemen, both which Stories, I am confident, are mere Fictions, in hopes to
create some further Differences; for most of the Gentlemen he mentions, did
assure me, that they never heard that any such noble Lord ever spoak against
the Mines, nor they never spoak disrespectfully of any such Lord, nor don't
know who he means; and Mr. Bateman would do well to name the Person, Time, and
Place, and saddle the right Horse, or else it is hoped, this noble Lord will be
pleased to entertain a more favorable Opinion of the accused, than of the
accuser.

And as to the North-Country Gentlemen, the old Partners and Subscribers, have
a great Honor for them, and never spoak nor thought any Evil of them; but if a
few inferior Persons being Tenants of Mines in other places have entertained a
wrong Notion of this Undertaking, and thought it their Interest to oppose it, I
hope any accidental Discourse relating to them shall not be construed to any
other purpose.

As to Sir H. M. threatening Mr. Bateman, I can speak this to my own Knowledge,
That when a worthy Member of Parliament proposed at a General Meeting, That the
said Bateman should be prosecuted at Law, at the common Charge for his
scandalous Words; Sir H. M. was the Man that diverted the question, and desired
that it might be deferred till another Meeting. Sir H. does confess, that in a
way of Discourse he has given his Opinion, and so has several other Gentlemen
at the Bar concerned in this Undertaking, that a good Action will lie against
Mr. Bateman; for though it is free for every man to give his, Opinion and Advice
to a Friend in private matters, that asks it; yet it is not free for any man to
go about officiously to undervalue any man's Estate or Property to the damage
of the Owner, as in this Case Mr. Bateman has done, affirming, that the
Proprietors had never a Vein one foot wide, that their Oar was good for
nothing, and that they themselves (naming some of them) were great Cheats,
whereby several Gentlemen confessed, That they were discouraged from paying in
their Money which they had subscribed, and others from subscribing at all; if
this will not bear an Action, I don't know what will, -- as to his Reflection on
one particular person that helped a Gentleman to buy at seventeen pound, and
sell at twelve pound, he is desired to name the party, and the time, and the
Circumstances of the Case; for it is hard that all those Gentlemen should lie
under Censure for every single Contrivance amongst so great a number of
Partners, or perhaps for none at all, but a mere Suggestion; and as to those
Gentlemen refusing any Shares at twelve pound a piece, except some that are
under prior Mortgages, Sir Thomas and Sir H. M. will give Mr. Bateman one
hundred pound for every Share he can prove they so refused, which is good
encouragement for him to speak out; he will be a great while getting so much
money by his Salary at fifty pound per Annum, and therefore I would not advise
him to be shy and lose so good an Offer.

As to the Computation of the Value of the Northern Oars, we wish they were
twice as rich as he makes them, being of Opinion with Mr. Bateman and Mr.
Whiston, that there is no danger, but there will be a sufficient Vent for all
the Lead that can be raised in England and Wales; and therefore having answered
his under-value of the Welsh-Oars, upon which his Calculation depends, I shall
not say any more to that particular, though some Persons better skilled in those
Affairs, stand amazed at his Confidence.

Mr. Bateman makes a great Harrangue upon a supposed mistake, that the Authors
of the Answers to the Objections, were but lately informed of his Reflections
on the Mines; whereas, he says, they knew his Opinion long ago; but though this
is not material to the merits of the Cause, yet a Man is glad to catch hold
upon every Twig when he is a Sinking: But how does this agree with the
Postscript! which tells you, that immediately upon his being rejected, he
vented his revenge in disparaging the Mine: Now though he would not reconcile
this matter, I can do it very easily; for it appears by that Paper, that the
same was writ by Sir Th. and Sir H. M. and that they were Strangers to Mr.
Bateman, and but lately heard of Mr. Bateman's Reflections; but the Committee
heard on it long ago, as the Paper it self expresses; but he makes what Persons
he pleases to be Authors of that Paper, only to furnish himself with Arguments
to reflect upon them.

But in Stating the Postscript, he has been pleased to show another piece of
his Skill; for he leaves out the chief Complaint against him; that he had
affirmed, there was never a Vein one Foot wide in Oar, and says not one word on
that matter, because he knows we have it under his own Hand, that it was three
Foot wide in Oar when he was there, at which time the Vein was then in a
switch, but afterward came to be Six Foot wide again; see the Paper of the
Affidavits, where this matter, is largely handled, and fully explained, without
any the least Answer to it from Mr. Bateman.

And as to his being three or four days in the Country, it is very true he was
so, but he spent his time in viewing and advising about the cutting of Tridole
Pill, a ridiculous Project, which would have cost a great deal of Money to no
purpose, for the Sea would have filled it up again with Sand, etc. as soon as
finished; and afterward about viewing the Mills, and surveying Ground for
Building of Huts, etc. but was really in and upon this Mountain not above three
or four Hours, as several Witnesses can testify. And whilst he was there, he
sufficiently discovered to all the Company how little he was acquainted with a
Mine; for when Mr. Waller had showed him the several Veins, and particularly
the Bog-Vein, out of which was then raised about 200 Tun of Oar (and of which
he says not one word) and showed him another place, where the same Vein
appeared again at a great distance: He staid till Mr. Waller was gone out of
Hearing, as he thought, and then calls to the Workman he brought with him, and
asked him, is this a Vein? I God knows, says the Miner, and a large Vein too,
Don't you see it before your Eyes? But alas Mr. Bateman had seen the Veins so
deep in the North, that he did not understand a Vein so near the Surface of the
Ground, though he saw it; and whereas he desires an Affidavit, expressing that he
was never underground; there is no Body ever said so; but the Postscript says,
he was never employed underground, but only as Clerk to a Lead-work: Now there
is a great difference between being employed as a Grow-Steward, in directing
the Works underground, and being employed as a Clerk in keeping the Accounts
above-ground; and this he knows well enough, but that he has a particular way
with him, of making Observations which are nothing to the purpose.

And now I desire to know where the mark ought to be placed? upon this Project,
or upon his Forehead? and who those Persons are that have Fiction for their
Foundation? whether they that have made Proof of the matters of Fact, or they
who have made none? they who assert notorious Falsities, contrary to their own
Letters, or they whose Words and Actions agree together? I appeal to every
disinterested Person, whether there is any thing like Anger or Satyr in all Sir
H. M's Papers; but as in all other Cases, of the Million-Lottery, and the like,
Abstracts were made of the Act of Parliament, for convenience of Postage, and
farther Explanation of the Undertaking; so in this Two Settlements were
required to be Executed, and then Abstracts of those Settlements were
absolutely necessary to be Printed; and the World had been troubled with no
more, but that Objections raised by this Bateman and others, compelled the same
Author to give an Answer to them; and also to Print Affidavits and other Proofs
of the matters of Fact, and this he calls haranguing Men into a good Opinion of
the Mine.

But what can give a greater Demonstration of the Fair^^ss of this Undertaking,
then all these Proceedings? The Books for taking Subscriptions were opened the
3d of October, and shut up in 3 days; whereas most Persons believe, that if
they had been kept open three days longer, the Books had been full; and this
was done to give the World more time to be satisfied, and fully informed; and
then, at the time appointed, on the 2d of Nov. the Books were opened again, at
which time there was so great a Crowd, that it is well known, that a Noble
Lord, and several other Persons of Quality, were forced to wait a long time
before they could get to the Books; and when all was Subscribed to Five or Six
thousand Pounds, which was done in 3 days more, the Books were shut up again;
purely out of respect to those Gentlemen that were then in the Country, and not
come up to Town; for the Undertakers being entirely satisfied of the great
Advantages that would (in all humane probability) accrue to all the
Adventurers; were so far from doing it in a fit and spurt, as Mr. Bateman will
have it, that they several times adjourned the days of Subscriptions, to give
all Persons more time to be fully informed in the matter: and those that will
look over the Books, will find several Persons of great Judgment and Knowledge
in Mineral Works who have Subscribed several times, one after another, as they
had time and leisure to be more fully informed: And it is well know, that Sir
Th. and H. M. has several times at the General Meeting ^fered, that in case any
persons were dissatisfied in the Undertaking, Sir Th. and Sir H. were willing
to return back their Money; which (...) S^^scribers were so far from accepting,
that they immediately made an Order to the contrary.

And yet this Gent. who they never had the honor to see an their Lives, is
pleased not only to abuse the old Partners, but all the Subscribers too; as if
all those Honorable Persons, who upon (...) Deliberation and full Inquiry into
the matter of Fact have engaged in this Undertaking, as well for the public
good of the whole Kingdom, as their own particular advantage, were all (...)
Company of mere (...) acting in a Fit or Spurt of mere Credulity and
Inconsideration.

If such a Person as this be Co^^^enanc'd, I cannot tell (...) Ho^^^^ and
Reputation*


