AN ANSWER (To a printed Paper dispersed by Sir John Maynard entitled The
humble Petition of the Owners and Commoners of the Town of Isleham in the
County of Cambridge, and to the Exceptions thereto annexed against the Act for
the dreyning of the great Level of the Fennes;) whereby the Honor and Justice
of the late Parliament is vindicated, the scandals and untruths in the said
printed paper discovered, some vain Objections answered, and the truth of the
proceedings in that work of Dreyning (so much conducing to the honor and
profit of this Commonwealth) held forth to all sober and uninteressed persons.
THE substance of the said Petition falling under these four Generals, viz.
First, that parties interessed are by the said Act made Judges. Secondly, that
the said Act destroys propriety. Thirdly, that the said Act does enact
impossibilities and falsities. And lastly, that Dreyning is declared a Monopoly
by the Remonstrance of the late Parliament in the year 1641 and the said Act
obtained, because there were so many Parliament men parties interessed when the
said Act was passing, the Petitioners being unheard. It is answered to the
first, That this charge is uncertain and scandalous; There being no particular
person named, nor in truth could they justly name any; for amongst the Judges
named by the said Act (which are above sixty in number) there is never a party
interessed named a Judge (but John Trenchard Esquire, who was an Adventurer for
one thousand Acres, and thereupon declared he was a party interessed, and
refused to act as a Judge.) It is true, that all the Judges of the Courts of
Westminster for the present, and in succession, being appointed Judges by the
said Act in general words and not by name, It fell out that the Lord Chief
Justice Saint John, who was an Adventurer for one thousand Acres only, was
then Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and thereupon never appeared or acted
in the business, or was present at any Session of the Commissioners appointed
Judges.

To the second Charge, that the said Act destroys propriety: It is answered,
that this is a mistake; for it is, and ought to be the care of the Supreme
power to provide for the good of the whole, and to compel every man so to use
his own, as it may be serviceable to the common good (yet with as little
prejudice to each particular as may be) and this has been observed in all
times upon various occasions; whereof instances are obvious: And in particular,
of recovering surrounded grounds, viz. the Stat. of 23. Eliz. cap. 13. for
dreyning the Marshes of Erith, and Plumpsted, and a moiety given for dreyning:
The Stat. 4to Iaco. cap. 8o for dreyning the Marshes of Lesnes, and Font in
Kent: and a moiety given for dreyning; In both which cases they were freed from
tithes for seven years as a privilege and encouragement of their industry. And
when they could not dreyn it within the time limited, the time was lengthened
and more lands given, and yet these undertakers were to maintain the work but
one year, and the undertakers by this Act are to maintain this Level for ever;
By the Statute of 4o Iaco. cap. 13. a place called Waldersey in the Isle Elie,
is appointed to be dreyned by undertakers, and two third parts given for
dreyning. And the benefit redownding to the Commonwealth by such dreyning
appears in a great part by the very Statute of 43o Eliz. cap. 11o (mentioned by
the Petitioners) viz. not only great and inestimable benefit to the Supreme
Magistrate, but to the people, and increase of able people: And this very Level
of the Fens has been several times heretofore endeavored to be dreyned by
others, though in vain; and was a work worthy of the care of a Parliament, and
it is so expressed in the said Act, thereby to recover above 300000. acres of
surrounded grounds for arrable Meadow, and Pasture: and not only fit for
cole-seed (though oil be no contemptible commodity to this Nation) but for
wheat, and all other grain, and for hemp, and flax, which may be of great
concernment to this Commonwealth.

And if any desire to be further satisfied of the excellency of this work, let
him consult Mercators Geography of the world, printed at Amsterdam in 1636. fo.
67. wherein the fame of the undertaking is taken notice of, and published to
the world, though undervalued by some of this Nation who are ignorant of the
concerment of this Commonwealth therein.

And men which broach such principles, as that Acts of Parliament (wherein all
men's consents are included) destroy propriety; would be carefully heeded in
time; lest the consequence may tend to bring in question, not only many things
well settled by Acts of Parliament for public good in most (if not all) former
Parliaments, but interrupt the great affairs of this Commonwealth, if such an
unsound, destructive principle ( That a Commoners right cannot be bound by an
Act of Parliament,) should be taken up by tumultuous giddy people.

To the third Charge of impossibility and falsities in the Act; It is answered
by denial, that there is any impossibility or falsity in the Act; for it
appears to any man that will have patience, carefully to peruse the said Act,
that only the surrounded grounds within the said Level are to be dreyned, and
no other: and if any person be compelled to contribute to the dreyning, who is
not bettered thereby, the Commissioners appointed Judges by the said Act, have
power to give relief; And the Right Honorable the Council of State have
likewise for ease of the Country, authorized other Commissioners, living in
the said Level, and near thereunto to hear and determine the same upon the
place in a short and easy way. And it is an unheard of boldness to charge the
Parliament with falsity in matters of fact, declared by them in the Act it
self, and the consequence no other, then to make Acts of Parliament less
certain then a Chancery-Decree, and subject to re-examination, as often as it
shall please any troublesome discontented person.

To the last Charge, That this dreyning was declared a Monopoly, by the
Declaration of the late Parliament in 1641. And the said Act unduly obtained,
By reason so many Parliament men became interessed therein, at the passing of
the said Act; It is answered, that the first part of the Charge is grounded
upon a mistake, the said Declaration being against Improvements, taken out of
Commons, by the late King, Queen, and other Lords of Manors to the prejudice
of the Commoners without Law, See the (...)der Par(...)meant. (...) Feb. 16(...)
whereas the work of dreyning this Level, was then under the care of a
Committee of Parliament, to provide for dreyning thereof, and declared to be a
great work And no color of a Monopoly if the Act be perused; and the very
original undertaking proceeds from the solicitation of the Country.

And to the second part of this Charge, of the undue gaining of the said Act,
through the interest of Parliament men: It is answered that this general
Charge, without naming any particular person, is in it self a great scandal to
all the Members of the late Parliament; and it is affirmed, and a certain
truth, that there were but four Members of the late Parliament, who claimed to
be Adventurers, (and four are no great number amongst some hundreds of
Parliament men,) and yet those four were excluded by Order of Parliament, to
have any Vote at the debate of the business, See th(...) (...)der. of 1646.
and all their Adventure-Lands together, but 3050. Acres, which was of so
little value and concernment to some of them, as they lost their land for not
paying taxes. And of those four also, when the said Act passed, there was but
one single person of them, (namely the said Mr. Trenchard) who sat in the
house at passing of the said Act; and surely the said Sir John Maynard, (who
was a Member of the late Parliament, and present at most of the debates
touching the said dreyning) cannot but fear some condign punishment to
overtake him, thus to traduce and scandalize the Supreme Powers and Government.

And to the last part of the Charge, that the Petitioners were not heard; It is
answered, and ready to be made good to every man's satisfaction, that the
Committee of the late Parli. in consideration of the said Act, before they
proceeded therein, sent letters to the several Sheriffs of the Counties of
Norfolk, Suffolk, Lincoln, Northampton, Huntington and Cambridge, and also to
the town of Lynne, and to the Committee of the respective Counties, and of the
Isle of Elie, to give notice to the Inhabitants; and that such as desired to be
heard should attend the Committee; and notice was accordingly given, and many
of the Country came in, and were heard what they could say, and particularly
the said Sir John Maynard, and these three things were chiefly in debate before
the said Committee; 1. Whether the said Level were hurtfully surrounded. 2.
Whether the work was feasible. And 3. Whether it were beneficial to the
Commonwealth: And after Witnesses examined at the said Committee, and above
forty hearings before them, (in the space of almost three years) and
satisfaction given therein, and many amendments made, and provisions inserted
to the advantage of the Country (brought in by the Council for the Country,)
the said Act passed. And thus far in Answer to the said paper called the
Petition.

Here follows an Answer to the Exceptions against the Act, printed with the
said Paper.
FIrst, Some matters of fact suggested in those Exceptions to be contained in
the said Act of Parliament, are either maliciously, or through wilful ignorance
mistaken; for whereas it is suggested, that by the said Act Thorney-Abbey is
excepted from the dreyning, and yet it is part of the said Level, and hurtfully
surrounded; It is answered, that Thorney-Abbey is not excepted by the said Act,
but contrariwise in recompense of the dra^^ing of the surrounded ground of
Thorney, there are 4000 acres taken out, and adjudged to the undertakers as
part of the 95000 acres appointed by the Act of Parliament for the recompense
of dreyning.

Secondly, That whereas there are several exceptions grounded upon the title of
the Act, and upon pretense of fallacies and equivocations in the word Level,
and great Level: It is answered, that there is no force in those Exceptions,
for the said Act of Parliament does appoint no grounds to be dreyned, but the
Moors, Marshes, fenny and low-surrounded grounds, within the bounds of the
said Level, and though there may be a little Reed grounds part of the said
surrounded Level, (not considerable, in reference to the making so many
thousand Acres improveable for the Commonwealth) the same ought not to hinder
so public a work: And for such part of the said Level where sedge is only to
be had, it is apparent, and every man's reason will conclude, that it cannot but
be of greater concernment to the Commonwealth to improve it for Meddow-pasture
or Arrable; and for Osyers and other plants of that nature they will be very
much increased.

To the Exceptions of the Preamble of the said Act, which recites, that the
said surrounded grounds have been of small and uncertain profit, but if
dreyned, may be improved, and to the suggestion in the Exceptions, of the
profit made before the dreyning; Its evident, that the stock of Cattle of all
sorts kept by the Commoners generally in the Fens now, are more then doubled to
what they were before the first undertaking of dreyning by the late Earl of
Bedford; and many thousand Acres of the said Fennes sown already with Wheat,
Rye, Barley, Beans, Oats, Cole-seed, Rape-feed, Hemp and Flax; the latter
whereof, though by the printed Paper styled trash and trumpery, yet to such as
know the concernments of this Commonwealth, are, if not of absolute necessity,
yet certainly of great and high advantage to this Nation. And the Customs at
the Port of Lynne, for such of the said Commodities, as were thence transported
for the year, ending in June, 1653. came to about 1300 li. besides what was
used at home, and the advantage to the Commonwealth by setting many thousands
of poor people on work.

To the Exception mentioned to be the third, touching the particular bounds of
the Level, wherein the Petitioners refer to their first Exception; It is
answered in the former Answer to that particular, whereby it will appear the
gross mistake of the Petitioners, as conceiving that the bounds of the said
Level to be dreyned by the said Act, did comprehend all the grounds within
those bounds, whereas it is only the Moors, Marshes, Fenny and low grounds
within those bounds, and no other, which appears by the plain words of the
said Act.

To the Objection, that the consideration moving the passing the said Act was
that the Earl of Bedford had 95000 acres decreed to him in the thirteenth year
of King Charles, which decree was procured by bribing the King with 12000.
acres and that the consent of the Lords and Commons was not had thereunto
according to the Statute of the forty third year of Queen Elizabeth, It is
answered, First, that the Petitioners wilfully omit the first and maine
consideration in reference to the now E. of Bedford, which was, that Francis
late Earl of Bedford (a man known to be of a public spirit) did undertake the
said dreining, which undertaking was in the year 1630. (seven years before the
said decree) and not a business sought by him, but a work whereinto he was
drawn after two years consideration, and solicitation of many worthy persons
Lords and Owners of the said Fennes, and after many attempts and former
undertakings by others, which proved fruitless. And there were no less then
forty seven Commissioners (all Land-owners within the said Level) who made it
their suite in behalf of themselves and the Country, to undertake the same, and
offered him 95000 acres for recompense of the dreyning: which was as little, if
not a less proportion of ground then any other would accept for to do the said
work; and the whole business was settled and agreed by a Law of Sewers at Lyn
in Norfolk in the said year 1630. by forty seven Comissioners upon their oaths
and was a chief and prime motive for the said Act of Parliament. In the second
place it is denied that any bribe of 12000. acres was given to the late King
for the said Decree of the thirteenth year of the said late King, nor can it be
apprehended that any such thing should be, in regard the said decree of the
thirteenth year of the said King did only set out the 95000. acres, after the
work adjudged done, which by the Law of Sewers made at Lin, in the said year
1630. was decreed to be set out. It is true, that by the said Law of Sewers
made at Lynne, (which was near seven years before the said dreyning,) that the
late King was to have 12000. Acres, parcel of the said 95000. Acres, but for
what consideration, or upon what agreement, the present undertakers are
ignorant of, nor is it material to them, they engaging their estates in the
said work of dreyning upon the strength and security of the said Act of
Parliament which gave them as well the said 12000. acres, as the residue of the
95000, acres, and without which they had never engaged in the said work, or
adventured any further sum of money therein. And to the last part of this
Exception, it is answered, that it carries no weight in it, for that if the
said work of dreyning had been pursuant to the Statute of the 43. year of
Queen Elizabeth, it would not have needed any new Act of Parliament. And it is
very clear, that as the Parliament in the 43. year of the ate Queen, had power
to make one Law for dreyning, so the late Parliament might, and all succeeding
Parliaments may make other Laws likewise for dreyning and improving lands for
public advantage. And in truth in a work of so great concernment, and vaste
circuit of grounds, and wherein so many persons were concerned, as Lords and
Commoners. It was almost, if not altogether impossible to know who were the
major part, or to have the consent of the major part. (Sir John Maynard
acknowledging many thousand persons to be therein concerned.) And upon this
ground it was necessary to obtain the said Act of Parliament before they
should further engage in the said work: and if this be a material exception,
then the before mentioned Statutes for dreyning made in the time of Queen
Elizabeth and King James are liable to the like exception, and by consequence
this and all succeeding Parliaments disabled to make any Law for improving any
waste or surrounded grounds to the benefit of the Commonwealth.

To the Exception, that the Earl of Bedford and his Participants made no
progress in the work, but only to divide the 95000 Acres by shares and lots,
and that it was found by a Jury at Huntington 14 Car. that the said Earl and
his Participants had not meliorated the Fennes; It is answered: first, that
there was above 100000. li. disbursed by the said late Earl of Bedford, and
Participants by advice of the best Artists that were to be gotten after his
undertaking of the said work in the year 1630. and before the Decree, or
setting out, or dividing the same, in the thirteenth year of the late King.
And Secondly, that the proceedings at Huntington, in the fourteenth of the late
King, urged by the Petitioners, (wherein Sir John Maynard an old Courtier, was
not a little active and busy to advance the late Kings interest) and the
Decree thereupon, was undue and illegal, and in order to a project then in
hand, to deprive the late Earl of Bedford, and all his then Participants of
the said whole 95000 Acres, after all the expense of money, and to give the
said whole 95000 Acres, and 57000 Acres more from the Country to the late King
to become the Undertaker; which proceedings were condemned by the Parliament.
And the Petitioners themselves in the latter part of their exceptions confess
that the Decree of Sewers at Huntington was illegal, and therefote null. And
these very Commissioners of Sewers at Huntington, (though of the late Kings
choice, and most of his servants) were so much convinced of the right of the
said late Earl of Bedford and his participants, that in their Decree they did
acknowledge that diverse great Sluices, Rivers, Dreins, Cuts, and other works, had
been made and erected by the said Earl and his Participants, at his and their
great charges within the said Level, which did much conduce to the dreyning of
some part of the said Level, and which would be of good use, to the further
dreyning, imbanking and recovering of the said Fennes, and that the said late
Earl and his then Participants, were worthy of 40000. Acres for their
recompense, in regard of their charge then expended: And if it be considered,
now that those unrighteous Commissioners adjudged 40000 Acres; was but a
moderate recompense for above 100000 li. then expended; and that all the
addition of recompense by the late Act, is but 55000 Acres more, for which the
present Undertakers have expended above 200000 li. since the said Act; It will
appear that the now Undertakers are great sufferers and losers by the said
undertaking, and those who malign the undertaking, would be loath to reimburse
the money expended with damages, and take the land dreyned now all the hazard
is past, subject to the charge of future maintaining the works.

To the Pretense, that there was no interruption to the work but fears that
the undertaking was declared against in the beginning of the late Parliament in
December 1641 The same is formerly answered, that Declaration being against
Improvements by the late King, Queen, and Lords of Wastes without Law, and not
concerning this dreyning, which was then under consideration of a Committee of
Parliament; but their fears were, that some tumultuous and busy
narrow-hearted men (who savor nothing of public concernment, which is cross
to their private humor,) might give interruption to the work, if not settled by
Act of Parliament, and thereupon did resolve not to engage their Estates
further in it, but by the Authority and countenance of Parliament.

To the exception, which saves to the Undertakers breaches by inevitable
accidents, which are in convenient time to be repaired and made good; It is
answered; That in reason no further provision can be made for the Country in
that particular, then is by the said Act, in regard provision is made for the
dreining and imbanking, and making the same Winter-ground in such manner as the
rivers which did overflow the same or any of them should not overflow the
grounds within the said Level: which thing is already done, and works made
which have not only been adjudged to be sufficient; but have by experience
proved so, and their own concernment, as to their 95000. acres is a sufficient
obligation upon them to preserve the same: But if by some inevitable passage of
providence, any extraordinary flood or storm should come, or any water coming
through any quick-sand under a bank) not by humane reason, charge, or industry,
to be foreseen, or prevented) any work should fail, and that they repair it
in convenient time, the late Parliament did, and all reasonable men will
conceive that they have performed their undertaking, and without that
provision, no rational man would have engaged in the said work.

To the Exception, that there is a liberty of leaving 15000 acres for beds and
receptacles for waters, whereby the drowned land of Thorney and Whittlesey
might be dreyned, and dry land drowned. It is answered: First, that there was a
necessity for such a provision, and 15000. Acres was but a small proportion to
be alloted in so great a Level as above 300000 acres. But secondly, that this
exception appears to be vain and malicious, the Petitioners not so much as
affirming (now the work is done) that there has been any such fraudulent and
indirect use made of that provision; and as it is a vain pretense that beds
and receptacles for waters should be made upon dry lands (which is the higher
ground) so it would have been very imprudent in the undertakers to drown dry
ground, in regard the said Act gives relief to any that by dreyning in one
part, should be drowned in another.

To that exception in the Act, that the ordinary course of Commissioners as to
this Level is altered; It is answered: First, that there are above 50
Commissioners of Sewers appointed by name in the said Act for the said Level,
besides the Judges of the Courts at Westminster for the time being, all named
by the late Parliament, and such as by the view of their names will appear to
be persons of great worth and understanding. And secondly, by the said Act the
Commissioners for the Great Seal (who appointed Commisssioners of Sewers upon
all Commissions) have power to nominate others in their rooms. And lastly,
there was great necessity to take care in this particular, for whereas upon
other Commissions of Sewers all the Lands within the danger of surrounding, are
liable to contribute to the charge of maintaining the works by this Act the
95000. Acres designed to the undertakers, are only made liable to the charge
and the maintaining the work, and the residue of the Level being above 200000.
Acres freed from it, so that the Land-owners within the said Level, who were,
not to be contributary to the charge, were justly excluded from being
Commissioners of Sewers.

To that Exception which suggests that upon the Petitioners complaint to the
Committee named in the said Act, July 6. 1653. they found no redress; and to
that other Exception which suggests that in the adjudication no care was taken
to provide that Lands which should receive no benefit by the dreyning, might
not be made contributary: and to another Exception, that the said Commissioners
adjudged the grounds dreyned without hearing the Petitioners; it is answered;
first, that the Commissioners appointed by the said Act sitting in the Temple
Hall the said sixth of July 1653. upon complaint made by Sir John Maynard in
the name of himself and other Inhabitants of Isleham, did give him a full
hearing, and did offer him, that if he would make it appear that there were any
ground unequally and unduly taken out of Isleham, they would give relief; or if
he could not prove it there, and could prove it in the Country, they would
award a Commission into the Country to indifferent Commissioners there to
examine the same, but the said Sir John Maynard then and there declared that he
would Petition the Parliament; so that this part of the suggestion is
altogether untrue and scandalous: and for the care taken in the Adjudication;
It is answered and ready to be proved, that the Commissioners appointed by the
said Act, for adjudging the same, after they had received sufficient
information, that one part of the said Level was dreyned according to the said
Act, would not proceed to adjudge the same, until they had sent out Summons to
all the parishes in that part of the Level, concerned, to give notice of their
intended Sessions, and then after made a personal view, and after that had Oath
made of due notice of their summons, and then heard all Complaints, and did
receive all their Witnesses on all parts, and did upon all Complaints which
they found just, give relief according to the said Act, and did observe the
same course upon their latter adjudication of the residue of the said Level,
and notice of the said Commissioners Session was timely given, and the
Commissioners did at their several Sessions make several Orders, for relief in
all cases, where they found the Complaints just; And that this suggestion may
appear to bear no color of truth; It will appear by the order made upon the
last adjudication at Elie, upon a Petition then exhibited in the name of the
Inhabitants of Isleham, who suggested, that too great a proportion was taken
out of their Commons, that the Commissioners did then, by the consents of the
then Petitioners, and of the Undertakers, refer the examination of the truth
of the fact, to Commissioners named by the then Petitioners and Undertakers,
and a day was appointed for hearing Witnesses on both sides; but the then
Petitioners, finding that they were not able to make good the truth of their
Petition, did wave any further proceedings upon their Petition.

To the Exception, which gives power to the Commissioners to make lands
improved, though not within the said Level, to be contributory to the
Undertakers; It is answered, that the reading of that clause in the said Act
will satisfy any uninteressed person: for whereas it was pretended that in the
setting out of the 95000 Acres, some were drawn to contribute to the same and
receive no benefit by the dreyning, and others would receive benefit by the
said dreyning, who did not contribute thereunto; the Act does provide to
relieve the former, and also that such Lands as shall be better in quality or
condition, by reason of the said dreyning, or be thereby secured from
overflowing, and inundations shall contribute proportionable to the benefit
which the Owners, and occupiers of such Lands, shall receive thereby as may
appear by the words of the said Act which no reasonable man can opposse; and
yet the undertakers hitherto have made no benefit of that clause in the said
Act: whereby the troublesome disposition of such as prosecute the said Petition
and complaint, may appear by this causeless exception.

The Exception to the said Act for repealing the two Laws of sewers, viz. 19.
Iac. et. 14. Car. because they were illegal, and therefore in themselves null,
is vain and frivolous; for if it be admitted that they were illegal and null
(whereof many learned men did doubt) it is far from a fault to declare them so
by an Act of Parliament.

For the Exception to the Comissioners named in the said Act in regard, as is
suggested, that some of them cannot Act, many have not acted, and some who have
acted, have put the Petitioners out of possession of 930. acres of their Fennes
(unheard) whose names they know not: charged those Commissioners to have
adjudged Lands dreyned, which were never drowned, and those hurtfully
surrounded which were bettered by overflowing, and therefore conceive they have
just cause to except against the said Commissioners; There is no force in the
first part of the Objection, and if it were material, yet unless it were
specified which of the said Commissioners cannot act, or which have not acted;
it is not possible to answer to it. But to the other scandalous part of that
exception it is answered. First, that the names of the Commissioners who made
the several Adjudications appear upon record, and their names with the
Judgments are enrolled in Chancery, and if the Petitioners have cause of
complaint against them, it were but just they should be heard to make their
defense. Secondly, that the suggestion that the Judgment was without hearing,
has no truth in it, as may appear by what is formerly said. Thirdly, that the
said Commissioners have given no such Judgment, as is untruly suggested but
they have proceeded justly according to the said Act, and the Level being
dreyned, have so adjudged it, and set out the 95000. acres as the said Act
requires, whereof 930. acres parcel of 3125. acres of Isleham Fennes are part,
but they did withal at the same Adjudication, according to the said Act, upon
complaint of the inhabitants of Isleham, refer to Commissioners by consent,
to examine whether a greater proportion were taken, then by the said Act was
intended, and surely such as are in authority will be sensible of the honor of
the Commissioners appointed by the said Act, who were all named by the
Parliament, and have no benefit, but much trouble by that service. And for the
Petitioners surmise, that some should be disabled to Act, (not naming any,) if
that should be true, yet there being above fifty in all, and of great Honor
and integrity, there would be no cause of any more Commissioners: Howbeit, to
prevent all color of complaint therein. It has pleased his Excellency the
Lord General and Council of State to name twenty four other Commissioners
dwelling in and near the said Level to hear and determine any complaint
according to the said Act so as it may appear that such as prosecute this
Petition are of a restless spirit.

For that Exception of depriving the Petitioners of the benefit of Commissions
of sewers according to the Statute of the twenty third year of Henry the
eighth, and that the scouring of the old dreynes would leave very little land
in the said Level, hurtfully surrounded: And that there is a sufficient
provision for dreyning made by the Stat. of the forty third year of Q.
Elizabeth, most part of this is formerly answered, yet finding these exceptions
made double in their Petition and exceptions as if some great weight lay in
them. It is further answered. First, that the evidence of the thing is
undeniable proof, that the scouring the old dreynes would not recover the said
Level from surrounding which had lien hundreds of years, hurtfully surrounded;
and the maine question in the late Parliament was, Whether the work were any
way feazible. Secondly, that the said Act of Parliament exempts the country
from charge of maintaining the work which lay upon them by the ordinary
Commission of sewers upon the Statute of the twentythird year of H. 8.

And lastly, it was almost, if not altogether impossible to know the certain
number of all persons concerned in the said Level, whereby to have gotten the
major part of their hands and seals to our Indenture according to the Statute
of the 43. Eliz. and yet admitting it had been possible, it is no argument for
the Petitioners to complain of a Parliament, for making a subsequent Act of
Parliament for public good.

For the general Charge in the Exception, mentioning, First, that the said Act
is without the Petitioners consent. Secondly, against it. 3. Unreasonable. And
fourthly unnecessary; the two first of these suggestions are not, nor ought to
be of weight against an Act of Parliament, wherein the consent of the whole
Nation is involved, and such pretenses tend to the subversion of the Government
of the Commonwealth, for if Laws may not be made without particular consents
of private persons, there is no hope that ever any Law shall be made for
public good, (the generality of men being for the most part covetous, and
self-seekers; minding their own private before the public concernments,) and
if it rested in their will, would never part with any of their private Estates
for public uses, nor suffer any thing they enjoy to be employed for public
services, which all Parliaments prefer before any private concernment
whatsoever. And to the pretense of the unreasonablenesse of the said Act being
a general Exception; abundantly answered by denying it, and by referring to the
Act it self, and to the clear Answers formerly given to every particular
Exception, wherein any pretense of unreasonablenesse is surmized, and whether
the work was unnecessary or not, (besides the Authority and Judgment of the
late Parliament, which does and ought to answer and silence that pretense,) let
all reasonable and uninteressed persons judge, whether it were not a work
necessary for the Parliament to redeem and recover above 300000 Acres of
surrounded grounds within this Island, and make them good Arrable land, Meddow
and Pasture, by improvement whereof this Commonwealth may not only be supplied
with cordage, linen and other necessaries, but many hundred thousand pounds
raised yearly within this Commonwealth, by Corn, Oil, Hemp, Flax, and other
Commodities, thousands of poor set on work, and the rage and violence of the
waters, which threatened ruin and destruction to many adjacent parts, be
stopped and prevented.

The length of this Answer, is necessarily occasioned, by the many untrue and
groundless surmises in the Petition and Exceptions, and to manifest the
integrity of the Undertakers, and justice of proceedings, through all this
chargable and hazardous work; Originally undertaken by Francis late Earl of
Bedford, at the Countries solicitation for public good: That the profit was
not considerable to the charge and hazard, nor will it yet answer the vast
sums of money expended by the said Undertakers, and some of them being ruined
in their Estates by reason thereof. Most of the present Undertakers became
engaged in the perfecting the said work, upon the Authority and Credit of the
said Act of Parliament, and have expended near 300000 li. upon that security;
and the charges for repairs yearly are estimated to be 10000 li. the works for
the dreyning, are such as are not elsewhere to be seen in England, scarce in
the Christian world, worthy the care and countenance of a Parliament, the Act
it self just, honorable and necessary, and sufficient provision thereby for
just complaints, and only the Undertakers therein, the great sufferers and
losers, and will appear guilty of ^^other fa^l^, sav^ indiscretion to hazard
their Estates for the good of the public.

And whereas Sir John Maynard has been pleased to commend Reed and Sedge to
the Commonwealth, as rich Commodities to be taken care of, and has styled
those, produced by the labor and cost of the Undertakers, upon the improvement
to be trash and trumpery; yet such as they are, and the advantages this year
arising by them, out of a small part of the Fennes coming lately to hand, is
hereby offered to the consideration of prudent persons. There was 28000 Acres
of the aforesaid Fenn-ground, sown with Cole-seed, Wheat, Barley; Oats and
Flax.
li. sh. d. 1. EVery Acre for Hassocking, burning the Hassocks, Plowing,
burning the Sword, and sowing with Cole-seed, cost one pound, which came into
the hands of such as would work, whether poor or rich. 28000. 00. 00 2. Every
Acre of Seed, Wheat, Barley or Oats that were sown, being near 10000 Acres
cost in Seed, 8s. per Acre, which came to the hands of the Country. 4000. 00.
00 3. The small division Dykes, since the Adjudication, came clear to the poor
Laborers. 3000. 00. 00 4. Expended for Timber, Carpenters, Bricklayers, and
other Laborers, in building houses above. 10000. 00. 00 5. The reaping,
threshing and carriage of Cole-seed, to be fit for the Boats, to poor
Laborers, at 3 li. per Last. 25000. 00. 00 6. The reaping, threshing and
carriage of Wheat, Rye, Oats, Barley and Flax to Laborers. 5000. 00. 00 7.
The carriage of far above 5000 of Cole-seed, and above 1000 of Wheat and
other Commodities, to the Watermen of Lyn and Wisbeach. 2700. 00. 00 8. The
transportation by water, of Materials for houses, to Watermen and other works.
300. 00. 00 9. The chambering of 3000. Last at the least in Lyn, and
thereabouts at 4d. the Last per week for 13. weeks. 650. 00. 00 10. At Lyn to
Meeters and Porters at 12d. per Last. 150. 00. 00 11. 100 Last of Seed, Wheat
and other grain to London, and other parts by shipping. 10000. 00. 00 12.
There is this present year, in order for the next year, expended to Workmen
and Laborers in hassocking, plaining, burning, sowing, and of Cropps. 30000.
00. 00 13. The State in Custom, Excise (...) Impost, for Cole-seed, Oil and
otherwise. 5000. 00. 00

By which, besides the great charge of dreyning, this year it appears there is
expended

To the Laborers, Workmen and others. 95000 li. 00 00 In Lyn, Chambers,
Porters and Watermen. 3600 00 00 The shipping. 10000 00 00 The State. 5000 00
00 These are the Advantages which have accrued to the State, the Country, and
the (...) this year by a small quantity, of about 28000 Acres, beside the
intrinsecal value of the Commodities themselves produced by this Charge to the
Commonwealth not here set down. 113600 li. 00 s. 00 d.

And if above 100000 li. advantage arises by so small a quantity, under so
many discouragements, a good Common-wealths-man will easily judge, what annual
profit and benefit will redound to this Nation, by the improvement of the whole.

London, Printed for Richard Baddeley within the middle-Temple-gate. 1653.


