AN ANSWER To a PAPER, Entitled, A Brief Account of the Designs of the PAPISTS
against the Earl of Shaftsbury, occasioned by his Commitment, July 2. 1681.
I Will not pretend to enter into the matter of Fact, for which the Noble Peer
stands Accused and Committed, but leave the merits of his Cause, and the
disquisition of his Guilt or Innocence, together with the validity of the
Evidence, to those Noble Persons who are to be his Judges; whose Honor, Wisdom
and Integrity without doubt will not fail to do both him, and themselves
Justice upon his Trial: and I think it had been no more than becomes all good
Subjects, patiently to attend the issue of that affair; and not, as the Author
of this Paper, who pretends a service and particular friendship to his
Lordship, by Printing a lame Apology, to bring his Actions upon the stage, and
expose them to a more curious Examination, than possibly they would otherwise
have fallen under.

Nor can I imagine, to what purpose the Vindicator should endeavor to render
his Lordships Fame and Interest so popular, as if the safety of the Nation, our
Laws, Liberties and Religion, were to have the same fate and period with his
Lordships breath; that he is to be esteemed the main pillar of the English
Security; and that the happiness of the Nation is chained to his good or ill
Destiny; unless he had a secret design to do his Lordship a mischief, by making
him so infinitely popular, as thereby to become dangerous and suspected; since
it has been an old observation, collected from the Histories of all places and
ages, That few Subjects who have courted Popularity have been Innocent, and
fewer Fortunate: and which is above all dispute, the sacred story informs us,
that when Absalom made his warm Applications to the People, and thereby stole
their hearts, it was the Prologue to an unnatural Rebellion against his Royal
Father, and drew upon him the hard destiny of an untimely death, and a monument
of Infamy which will last to all Eternity.

And indeed, the Vindicator is fallen upon very unhappy mediums to effect his
Design; for certainly any man's Reputation must be ill rescued from pretended
injuries, where the reparation is to be carved out, by Letters of Reprisal
against the Government: and sure he must be very much lost for Topics to make
any person appear innocent, who is obliged to make use of such, as render his
Majesty and the Government Criminal. And had he been master of second thoughts
or consequences, he would certainly never have attempted to make his Lordships
Reputation look white, by blackening his Sovereign, and leaving the Honor of
his Lordship upon this issue, That he cannot be esteemed Innocent but the King
must appear ungrateful and unjust; and which, as the Affairs of the Nation now
stand, his affirming that this commitment is an effect of the Designs which the
Papists have had against the Earl of Shaftsbury, is neither better nor worse,
but an arraignment of the King and Council, as accessories to the horrid Popish
Plot; and by the most ridiculous contradiction, to bring the King and
Government into a Conspiracy against themselves, that so the Earl of Shaftsbury
may appear innocent.

Surely, If his Lordship be the person as he says, page 1. The whole tenor and
universal conduct of whose life have spoken him, not only a person of the
greatest Abilities and Wisdom, but of the highest Loyalty to his Majesty, and
warmest Zeal for his Service that any these three Kingdoms have produced in
this age, he will with great Indignation resent the Abuse put upon him by this
forward Apologist, and his warm zeal for his Majesty's Service cannot be so
soon frozen, as to endure such warm reflections, to be, for his sake thrown
upon his Prince, as can proceed from none but such Subjects as have sued out a
perpetual divorce between themselves, and their Loyalty, and even the common
decencies of good Breeding, since nothing worse than Ingratitude can be charged
upon the meanest Subject, Ingratum si dixeris; and how much heavier is the
scandal when it is levelled at one of the greatest Monarchs in the Universe.

Nor is it with less advantage to his Lordship, that the unthinking Vindicator
takes such pains to give the world an Inventory of his Lordships great Merits,
and That there is not a Nobleman or Gentleman within the Kings Dominions, to
whose influence his Majesty does more owe his peaceable and happy Restoration.
For besides, that by notoriety of Fact it is apparently false, and that no
person can eclipse the glory of the Illustrious Duke of Albemarle, so
unquestionably allowed the happy Instrument, under Providence, of that wondrous
event. If the Vindicator had meant honestly and fairly to his Majesty, he ought
to have acquainted the world, that no Nobleman or Gentleman within the Kings
Dominions has drank larger draughts of Royal Bounty than his Lordship, that
from an Estate of 3000 l. or thereabouts per ann. he is advanced to above
treble the Annual Revenue, besides ready money; that from the condition of a
private Gentleman, he has, by his Majesty, been raised to the honor of an
Earldom, and a Peer of the Realm of England; that he was loaded with the honors
of Privy Counselor and Lord Chancellor of England, a place next in Honor and
Power to the Throne: and sure these were as high Rewards as a Subject of the
greatest merit can pretend to, unless he would ask the Kingdom also. And the
envious concealment of these uncommon Favors, and marks of Royal Bounty, looks
as if the Vindicator had some very evil intentions to his Lordships Fame, and
to make him suspected of Ingratitude toward his Prince, rather than that the
King should have been ungrateful to him, which all the world knows to the
contrary.

But certainly the Apologist must be one of the most spiteful persons in the
world to his Lordships Fame; for whoever pretends to vindicate the Reputation
of any person, with what is evidently false, must be designing to defame it at
the highest rate; for nothing but a deficiency of Truth, can be supposed to
tempt any person to fly to Falsehood; nor would any person make use of it, but
with an intention to be detected: and it was either very malicious, or
improper, to tell the world, That the King can never forget the many great and
memorable services which this Gentleman did him, when few had either Courage,
Loyalty, or Prudence to render them useful to his Interest. For besides the
ungrateful reflection of Cowards, Fools and Traitors thrown upon the indefinite
number of his Majesty's Friends, what can this be, but to refresh the memories
of the whole Nation with things much to the disadvantage of his Lordships
Reputation, and he will have much to do to lay the Devil of Curiosity which he
has hereby conjured up, or to persuade the world to believe, that when Sir
Anthony Ashly Cooper was in the beginning of the late times in actual Hostility
against the King, that during Olivers Usurpation, when his hand is to so many
illegal and arbitrary Orders in the Council-Book, and the severest against the
Royal Party, I say he will be a great Artist indeed, if he can persuade either
the King, or his People to forget them, or to remember them as memorable
Services: and no man can believe but when the Apologist tells us, the King can
never forget them, but that it is a more gentile way of reminding his Majesty
of them, who having forgiven these memorable Services, might otherwise be ready
to forget them too.

To the same effect we will suppose he takes another head of Reputation to
recommend his Lordship to the world from his successful administration of his
Majesty's Affairs, for many years together. Just like the little Knave, who
being chid at a Gentleman's Table for taking notice of a Stranger, who had a
very extraordinary Nose, the next time he saw him he mended the matter, with
saying, that Gentleman has no Nose at all. So our Apologist mentions the
successful administration of Affairs, as if there had been no nose at all on
the face of them; as who should say, I do not tell you who it was that advised
the breaking of the Triple-League; I say nothing about the shutting up of the
Exchequer; not a word of Delenda est Carthago, at any rate Delenda est
Carthago, that out of pure zeal to the Protestant Interest, and Religion,
Holland must, like Carthage, be utterly destroyed; for thus it will happen when
men write Apologies: it does but whet the edge of Curiosity, to be prying into
things, which they observe are so industriously covered and concealed. Et fugit
ad salices, and se cupit ante videri.

And what Apology can be made for the fine story of his Lordships withdrawing
himself from the administration of Public Affairs? since it is well known,
that many of those great transactions which the world is now made believe were
in order to the introducing Popery and subversion of the Protestant Interest at
home and abroad, as the Dutch War, French League, shutting up the Exchequer,
were acted while his Lordship sat at the Steerage, and did so successfully
manage his Majesty's Affairs. And people will be apt to think the Apologist
has done his Lordship no right, since it is obvious he must needs know what the
general fame speak him; and Adviser of, and an Assistant to those Measures and
Counsels, for which the Vindicator would have us believe his Lordship withdrew
from the administration of Public Affairs.

The Vindicator has been a great Traveller, and it may be derives an authority
from thence by virtue of the Proverb, to impose upon us; or otherwise how comes
he to know that the whole Posse of the Eccles^asticks was mustered up to defame
him? and they must indeed, have a very implicit obedience who to sink and
eclipse the Credit of this Peer, should make use of their Pulpits to that
purpose, rather than to gain souls to God, or commend Jesus Christ to the
Consciences of men. Truly this is a heavy charge against the whole Order of
Ecclesiastics, that they should Preach Blasphemy against the Earl of
Shaftsbury; but the Apologist should have remembered, that in the same breath,
he says the Clergy have no Honor to lose; and then he needed not to have laid
any stress upon their endeavors: for what is the Moon the worse, for the
barking of the Curs? And indeed it is very unfortunate for his Lordship, to
have such a Champion for his Reputation, who has evidently forfeited all title
to Credit or Esteem: he who values not his own Reputation being an ill Advocate
for that of another. For I dare appeal to his Lordship for the falsehood of this
scandal, who knows very well, that more Ecclesiastics in this Age are persons
of Honor and quality, and it may be men of as great Learning than any former
Ages have known; and if ever the Clergy of England deserved the Character,
Clerus Britannicus stupor mundi, I think, and so do better Judges than my self,
that the present English Clergy may pretend to it.

It has not been my fortune, or any of my acquaintance that I have enquired of,
to hear any of the Clergy take their Texts about the Lord Shaftsbury; only I
have heard of one, who in my Lords own Country was very bold, but whether in
the Pulpit or out of it I know not; and that my Lord, notwithstanding that,
generously gave him a very good Benefice when it fell; whether true or false I
do not aver: but if it be true, it seems my Lord and his Apologist differ in
their sense, and that my Lord does not think speaking against him so
unpardonable a sin as the Vindicator does.

I have nothing to say to his endeavoring to make his Lordship look white by
bringing him out of Mrs. Celiers Meal-Tub; but I think the Apologist extremely
to blame in vilifying the Evidence, and bestowing such language as would better
become an Oysterwomans Vindication, than that of a Noble Peer. He positively
affirms them to be suborned Villains, mere mercenary Rascals, beggarly Fellows,
and in a word Irish-men and Papists. Now either he knows them, or he does not;
if he knows them, it is more than his Lordship does; for page 4. he tells us,
It is with great amazement that we hear of a Peers being sent to the Tower for
high Treason, without being allowed to have the Witnesses that swore against
him, confronted with him, and examined ore tenus. And if he does not know them,
as it is evident he does not, it is apparent that he shoots at Rovers, and that
these persons whom by guess he does so liberally defame, may be persons both of
Quality and Reputation; and truly to sober and considering men, it will not
much advance his Lordships Innocence, to have it vindicated by a person who
dare thus boldly calumniate at adventure; the Tongues or Pens of such daring
men, being rarely esteemed any slander to the persons whom they design to
blast, or any honor to the fame they endeavor to justify.

But that which is most surprising, is, that a person who would persuade us he
is so great an enemy to Popery, and to the Hellish Popish Plot, and that my
Lord Shaftsbury stands committed only for his zeal against the Papists, should
yet attempt his Lordships Vindication by such a method, as must of necessity
ruin the Reputation of the popish Plot: And sure if the Vindicator has such an
abhorrence for the Popish Plot, he would have found out some better expedient
than to establish his Lordships Reputation upon the ruin of it, for if the
Plea for his Lordships innocence will hold good for him, That were his Lordship
a person traitorously inclined, yet he is wiser than to communicate a Design of
levying War for the Deposing or Destroying his Prince to such base and
mercenary Rascals. Why should it not hold good for the Popish Lords, who have
often for their Defense made use of the same argument and suggestion? Allow
this, and what will become of the Popish Plot? and if you disallow it, what
will become of the Vindicators Plea, or the advantage his Lordships Innocence
will receive by this intemperate Argument, which has more heat than light, to
create belief?

The truth is, the Wisdom of the Nation in Parliament, the Judges and Sages of
the Law, have ever looked upon this Apology not only as frivolous, but
disserviceable to those who have made use of it; and that for this reason, That
no person can commit Treason without Accomplices; and that it is to be
supposed, they who have such wicked intentions and designs, must make use of
Instruments proportionable to them: And who can be supposed so fit to undertake
infamous and desperate Designs, as infamous and desperate Men? And further,
that some of those who are said to be Evidence against his Lordship, were
within these few days in an Esteem so different from what the Vindicator
represents them, that it is the general Discourse of the Town that his Lordship
was a zealous Advocate to obtain a Pardon for at least one of his supposed
Accusers; of which people are apt, according to the liberty of their
inclinations, to make various conjectures and constructions, not much to the
sense of the Vindicator. And by the favor of the Vindicator, he cannot at this
rate vilify the Evidence of the Irish, as Irish; not only without a scandal
upon a whole Nation of the Kings Subjects, but he must also endanger charging
the guilt of Innocent Blood upon the whole English Nation; since so lately,
Oliver Plunket the pretended Primate of Ireland, suffered the pains of death
for high Treason, upon the Evidence of these, whom he is pleased to call
Beggarly, Suborned, Mercenary Villains, Irish and Papists.

But the most ridiculous thing in the Vindication is his Postscript, dated from
Whitehal, in a Letter to Mr. Gibbs, which plainly shows it to be a Forgery of
the Apologist himself; for he tells Mr. Gibbs, That the Earl of Shaftsbury was
just then committed to the Tower, and Sir Tho. Player under Examination before
the King and Council, and several Warrants out, etc. Now if the Writer of this
pretended Letter had been at Whitehal, he could have told Sir Tho. Player was
not before the King and Council; and if he was not at Whitehal, as it is certain
by this gross mistake, he was not, then the whole thing is a Forgery of his
own, and I think that sort of practice will tend little to the Reputation of
the Earl of Shaftsbury, or to the discrediting the belief of a Presbyterian
Plot: and those little arts which he says are used to promote this Popish
Intrigue, being found to be his own, will very much confirm even the wavering
and incredulous in the belief that there may be other persons who design
against the King and Government, as well as the Papists.

If the sense of my Duty and these horrible Scandals of Subornation of
Witnesses, Ingratitude, Injustice, and carrying on the Popish Plot, charged in
this Vindication upon even the King himself, had not justly given the
provocation, yet the injustice done to the Earl of Shaftsbury by this untoward
Vindication, may in some measure justify this Paper. All I have to add, is, if
the Earl of Shaftsbury be Innocent, I hope he will receive a better Vindication
at his Trial than this Apologist has made for him, or otherwise he is like to
be in Misericordia Domini Regis: and if he be Guilty, he that is an Abettor,
Comforter, or Aider of a Traitor, makes himself one too. And for my particular,
I join with the despised implicit obedient Ecclesiastics in their Litany, From
all Privy Conspiracy, Treason and Rebellion, whether of Papists or
Presbyterians, Good Lord deliver us.

London: Printed for T. Davies, 1681.


