THE ANSWER OF The BURGESSES and other INHABITANTS of the Parish of Buckingham,
To a late scandalous Pamphlet set forth by Sir TIMBER TEMPLE.
ALthough we have been so extremely unfortunate, by our late Election of the
Lord Latimer and Sir Timber Temple for our Burgesses this next Parliament, to
disoblige not only the honest Gentry of the Neighborhood, but of the whole
County of Bucks, as also the better part of the Kingdom; yet having seen a most
false and scandalous Pamphlet, pretended to be written for our Justification by
Sir Timber Temple, which impartially, we must confess, contains in it (and that
notoriously known to thousands that were present at the County Election) as
many falsehoods as Sentences, and that the said foolish Pamphlet has some
malicious and insignificant Reflections upon an honest and well-deserving
Gentleman of the Neighborhood, viz. Sir John Busby, our constant and chiefest
Benefactor; as also upon others that are, and have been our best friends:
Therefore we think our selves obliged in Justice and Gratitude, to vindicate
the Honor and spotless Reputation of that prudent and most worthy Gentleman,
Sir John Busby, from those unjust reproaches he is most falsely charged withal
by Sir Timber Temple in the said Pamphlet, alleging the said Sir John Busby to
be a great incendiary amongst his Neighbors, and to be a professed Enemy to
Buckingham; whereas we know, and must all confess, that the said Sir John Busby
has been for these many years (as it is said before) our chiefest Benefactor,
a Gentleman and Friend, that has always contrived and studied our welfare,
that has yearly at his Training nobly feasted us, that has endeavored to
suppress the raging malice of our Enemies, and of those that sought and
threatened our ruin and confusion; that has most freely upon all occasions
spent his Money amongst us, notwithstanding his near Neighborhood to Winslow,
still laboring to bring Trade and Traffic to our Corporation; that has
always taken part with us when we had a good Cause, and chiefly to whose favor
we owe the General Meetings of the Gentlemen at our Town, and to whom we have
had constant Address in all our necessities, misfortunes and difficulties, for
advice and counsel, which he ever, with much discretion, gave us, to our
certain advantage, if we had the luck to follow it: And we must here all
heartily acknowledge, that if we had in due time taken his advice concerning
the choice of our Burgesses to serve in Parliament, which was not only in
private, but publicly by him given to us all, we had not been so obnoxious to
our Neighbors as we now are, nor distasteful to the Kingdom; for the scorn,
scourge, and reproach we now lie under he did then judiciously foresee, and
tell us, would assuredly be our doom, if we should be so unadvised to make
choice of Sir Timber Temple; so that we cannot any longer excuse our follies,
which we now see and feel, to our own sorrow and amazement; neither can we
silently suffer this good Gentleman, our great Friend and best Neighbor, to be
thus unworthily and injuriously traduced, a Person of that known Integrity,
Judgment, and Industry, to serve his King and Country, that he is become the
Favorite of all good men, and the fearful Dread of all lewd debauched Persons,
and of all such like Disturbers of his Majesty's Peace. And this further we
cannot but take notice of in his behalf, that what was intended by the
detracting Libeller to disgrace him, does infinitely magnify his Credit, since
it appears, that the worst of his Enemies, swelled with prying envy and malice,
after the strictest inquiry into his Life and Conversation, cannot in truth
fasten upon him the least imputation of guilt or unworthiness. It is not the
intent of this our Answer to make Reflections upon Sir Timber Temple, for that
would still more condemn our choice, which we do most heartily and humbly
repent of, begging pardon of our Contrymen for the same: But our chief aim
is, hereby to vindicate our Friends from the false aspersions of that
scandalous Libel, which calumniates not only the Living, but the Dead, and
reproaches Mr. John Dormer, lately deceased, and that cannot speak for himself,
of the like offense, the Author of the said Pamphlet has so lately been guilty
of, viz Bribery; for else we must ingeniously confess, though to our own shame,
since we acknowledge our fault and repentance, that Sir Timble Temple had never
been chosen, or perhaps thought of, to serve for the Town of Buckingham, either
in the last, or in this next Parliament, by reason he was so backwards in
performing those first engagements which he formerly made to us by many Vows
and Protestations, when we chose him Burgess of the late long Parliament, that
he now insolently denies that he ever made any such promise; whereas the thing
is so plain and apparent, that no man living, but himself, would deny such a
known truth, attested and confirmed by his name, Sir Timber, that shall
eternally remain, in spite of Oaths and Perjury, to him and his posterity for
ever. As to that passage in the said Pamphlet, relating to his Grace the Duke
of Buckingham, who is said, at the former Election, in a very strange and
extraordinary manner, to espouse Sir Peter Tyrrell's interest, we know not what
Sir Timber Temple cavils at, unless he will be angry, that his Grace, and the
rest of the honest Gentry, then appearing for Sir Peter Tyrrell, did not think
him worthy of that favor and countenance; and thereupon Sir Timber Temple, in
his foaming displeasure, will not allow his Grace the privilege of a Commoner,
because he did not appear in his behalf; alleging, that the intermedling with
Peers of the Realm in Elections made by the Commons, is very Illegal; and we
wish he could say and prove, never before practiced in other places, nor should
be for the future; though we must acknowledge it, as our greatest crime and
folly, that we did not hearken to that wise and grave Counsel his Grace was so
favorably pleased to give us. And concerning that eminent and over-busie
Person the Pamphlet speaks of, still reflecting, in dark terms, upon his Grace
the Duke of Buckingham, who is said to strike at the head of the High Sheriff's
Son with a great Truncheon of Oak, and that missing his blow, the Trunchion
brushed upon the young Man's belly; all which is so notoriously false, that
thousands can witness, that the Dude of Buckingham was then at a distance, and
scarce ever saw the Sheriffs Son that day; and we know of no other eminent
Person that rode with a Truncheon in his hand; so that if there was any riotous
Assembly that day that concerned themselves in our County Election, it was Sir
Timber Temple's own Party, being about eight or ten inconsiderable persons,
that were met together by Sir Timber Temple's procurement and instigation, on
purpose to give the honest Freeholders all the disturbance they could in their
free Election; for which purpose also the day before, Sir Timber Temple had
cajoll'd the High Sheriff to adjourn his Court from Alisbury to Buckingham,
which he did accordingly; intending also to adjourn from Buckingham to some
other place, with a design still to weary out the Freeholders: Sir Timber
Temple also having over night at Buckingham caused a Drum to be beaten, a
Company of Tatterdemallion Boys of our Town, headed by Justice Risely, Sir
Timber Temple's wise Brother in Law, being gathered together, crying up, A
Chester and a Verney. And we are certainly informed, that the proceedings of
Sir Timber Temple in this A (...) were so spolish and ridiculous, and did so
highly exasperate the Freeholders that were met together to make a free and
good Election, being about ten thousand persons, all of one mind, that if he
had appeared amongst them in the Field, the same Schoolboys fate of the High
Sheriff's Son, would, without doubt, severely have fallen upon him, and he had
been, according to his deserts, Caned and Whipped out of the Field home to his
Custom house for his Boyish misdemeanors. But because it is much wondered
abroad, what was the end and design of Sir Timber Temple's proceedings in this
manner, contrary to the vogue of the whole County; we that were then his
Confederates, and for whom he pretendedly acted, must give you this true
account, that Sir Timber Temple's chief design was, to heighten the charge of
those two worthy Gentlemen, Mr. Wharton and Mr. Hampden, that stood to be
chosen for the County, being Gentlemen of another stamp, and of excellent
Principles, quite different to Sir Timber Temple, that hoped thereby to cool
their zeal for the Protestant Religion, and the good of their Country; and the
rather, as he supposed, because the said two Gentlemen had been at a vast
expense in Treating the Country at the former Election at Alisbury, where they
paid for above ten thousand Ordinaries. And his other great motive was, to
complement us his Friends of Buckingham, at the general Charge of us the
Freeholders of the County, which he thought would excuse him two or three
Entertainments at his Custom-house, besides those usual Presents his pregnant
Lady made to our Wives and Daughters. But what is deceitfully suggested
relating to the High Sheriffs honor, Sir Timber Temple had not the least
regard unto; and it is much to be admired, how they two could have any fair
correspondence one with another, for that Sir Timber Temple, by his implacable
and vexatious Suits, tending to overthrow the said High Sheriffs new
Enclosures, has lately caused him to expend in Law above five thousand pounds.
We hope that what we have here inserted, in answer to that false, nonsensical,
and malicious Libel, will sufficiently clear those Gentlemen our good friends,
whom Sir Timber Temple has so much in vain labored to reproach; and we do
hereby solemnly protest, that if any thing of the like nature shall hereafter
be attempted by Sir Timber Temple, or any of his malicious Accomplices, against
us, or any of our friends, we shall particularly, without any false imputation,
at large set forth and make known to the World (what we are here willing in
some measure to conceal) ziz. the villainous Practices, damnable Cheats,
Briberies, Extortions, Perjuries, and Subornations of Perjuries, Treachery,
Whoredoms, and depraved Nature of this abominable Satyrist; for though he does
conceal from us those execrable Crimes he has so darkly committed, for which
by Law he deserves the Gallows; yet we can fully charge and prove against him,
with addition, all the former wicked and detestable impieties. Finally, we do
again hereby profess our great obligations to Sir John Busby; and although our
present Bailiff, Mr. George Dancer, as also Henry Heyward the Barber, two sworn
Confederates with Sir Timber Temple, we fear to the utter ruin of themselves,
and our unhappy Corporation, will not give us their subscriptions to this
Recognition, yet all the rest of us, both Burgesses and Inhabitants, do most
freely and unanimously make this our answer and acknowledgment, which we shall
for ever sign and own, in spite of Sir Timber Temple and his accursed
Accomplices.

Buckingham, September. 16. 1679.

