AN ANSWER TO THE LETTER FROM Amsterdam, Of April the 18. 1678.

Being found at Harwich, opened, and carried to the Magistrates of that Place.

-- Redit labor actus in Orbem. Printed Anno Dom. 1678.

AN ANSWER TO THE LETTER from Amsterdam, Of April the 18. 1678.
Dear Fellow Laborer,
YOurs of the 18th, of April came to a thousand hands, before it reached mine.
You do ill to commit matters of such Importance to any thing, but to Cipher,
knowing how much we have always owed to Disguises: For which reason our
Apostles preach not, but in a Cloak, and, for greater security, under two Caps,
and choose their Texts out of the mysterious Book of the Revelations: They
understand well enough that the precious Seed, which they sow, will not grow,
unless it be well covered, and that the Children of Light are none of the
wisest Generation. It grieved my heart, and almost turned my stomach, to see
the Old Cause look like an Old Courtisane newly risen, undressed, unpainted,
and unperfum'd. What a vast difference there is between the Cause dressed, and
undressed? I beseech thee, who could endure to look on the Hag in her
nakedness, her design of subverting Church and State, dethroning Kings, turning
out Bishops, and destroying men for daring to be honest and rich, in fine, in
her Native cheating, lying, and forswearing, with a thousand other Hellish
qualities? But when she has put on her tender Conscience, her fears of Popery
and Arbitrary Government, her good will toward the King, and her charitable
endeavors to reform his Ministers: In good faith! she is not the same thing.
Wherefore, my dear Brother, let us behave our selves like good Jockies, and not
discover the faults of our Beast, till she is sold. This, I assure thee, was
the Art of our noble and successful Predecessors, whose Designs the
Well-meaning men (as they called them) never perceived, till past their power
to prevent.

However, as the Devil will have it, the Publication of thy Letter has not done
us much harm: For, People are now so well and solidly deceived, that it is no
such easy task to cure 'em. We talked to 'em formerly so much of the Gospel,
that it is now Natural for 'em to take every thing, we speak, for such. It Is
true, it cost us many a painful grimass, many a scrued eye, much wringing of
the hands, and many an heart-rending groan, before they came to the Lure; but
when we had once blinded 'em, we 'ene did what we pleased with 'em: We made
sport with 'em as the Philistines did with Sampson, and may continue to do so,
provided we remember to keep their hair cropped, that is, instruct 'em well in
the Presbyterian Catechism. I must confess, it is wonderful to see, with what
ease they swallow any thing from us, in so much as it is hard to tell, whether
their throats are wider in taking in our Impostures, than ours would be in
devouring them, whenever they fall within our clutches. We told them, that War
with France was so necessary for us, that we ought to begin it before the least
preparation was made toward it: and they believed us. Presently we tell 'em,
that twenty trifles are far more necessary to be provided for, than the War:
and they call it the Sense of the Nation. We told the King, that we could not
advise him either to War or Peace, unle^^ we knew every individual part and
circumstance of his late Message into France, etc. and yet we took upon us a
little before to advise him to a Declaration of War, when we understood nothing
of those matters: and our shifting passes undiscovered. We say, that it is our
Interest to join with any of the Confederates, that shall yet dare to stand out
against the French King; and yet at the same time, and during the instant
Treaty, we think fit to disband our Army, that no Confederate may be encouraged
to do so. On the one side we profess, that there is no safety for us, unless we
reduce the French Affairs to their condition at the Pyrenean Treaty; and on the
other we take care in this conjuncture, to give his Most Christian Majesty the
best opportunity we are able, of making good terms. And when the noise of our
coming into the Confederacy, had made him quit Sicily, and offer Proposals for
Peace, we resolved to ease his mind of those fears, and leave him to prey on
Europe in quiet: and after all we gravely call the Courtiers Pensioners of
France, and make the People believe, that the King himself is selling Three
Kingdoms for a French Marquisate. When we have a mind to accuse any Great
Minister, it is enough for us to cry stop Thief once, and all the Hounds open
immediately: and because we allege nothing against him, they conclude his
crimes unspeakable. I vow to thee, it tickles me, to behold how easily we gull
'em. They are ravished with our Votes as soon as ever they hear 'em: Nay they
are ready to swear they are good, before they know what they are. The first
sentence is, What has the House of Commons done to day? The second, And very
well done too. So that I verily believe, should they hear of a Vote passed for
a Navy to cruise on Salisbury Plains, or that the House of Commons be entrusted
with the Militia, they would instantly protest, that it were the most
reasonable thing in the World. I am of opinion, that they imagine the Commons
bound by their places to save the rest of the Nation the labor of Thinking,
and that it were ridiculous not to trust those with their Reason, whom they
have trusted with (what they account more precious) their Purse.

The King's late Speech, and the Chancellor's gave us some rub: They had so
much plain and undeniable Reason in them, that several of our Well-meaning
Party began to fail us. But a little patience will bring all about again. We
must seem to yield at first, then protract matters, spend whole days in sober
debate whether forthwith, immediately, or out of hand be most proper, as if our
Parliament intended to vie with the French Academy in refining Language, and
then when matters are indifferently well perplexed, and the (...) pretty thick,
secretly clap on a weight, and bring in an appropriating clause, which, like
the substracting mark in Algebra, takes off the force of those Figures it is
annexed to: and the day is our own once more. I never yet knew any Act so
stout, as that it was not, like the Dragon in the Apocrypha, in danger of being
split by these hairs. Tacking of words one to another, is not more necessary
for the confounding of sense to our Teachers, than Tacking of Bills for the
confounding of business to our Statesmen. However I must acknowledge to thee,
that I like not this style of Rhetoric, which they have now li't-on at Court.
Such resolution and briskness, if pursued, will utterly ruin us. A soft, meek,
condescending Speech for my money: Oh! this is Oil to the Fire. When we hear
such an one, we begin to think them guilty enough, and our selves their
Masters. In like manner we want mightily the old way of taking off, which
certainly, while it held, was one of the greatest Revenues of our Cause.

It is a great pity that our Stratagem of removing Ministers took not. 'Twas an
excellent good one, and had done our work effectually. By this means, we should
have stripped the King of his Friends: For, who, do think, would have ventured
the being a Counselor, unless he could Prophecy what advice would be grateful
to us, and would be sure to give none else: and that would not serve his turn
neither, for, we would be sure to disapprove it at a venture: besides, it is
our privilege (and we have Precedents for it) to accuse him, without being
bound to show any cause, which, how Paradoxical soever it may seem, is both
just and honest; For, Vox Populi, Vox Dei: and, thou know whose
Representatives we are. Moreover, had this Plot taken, the King had not only
lost, but we had got Friends. We have daily experience in what stead we are
served by outed Statesmen. The Turks and we are much of a nature, and
Renegadoes commonly prove the best Captains to us both.

We must endeavor to lessen the House of Lords, as much as we can; ( Nobility
and Treachery seldom fadging well together) and in order thereunto we begin to
act, as if there were no such thing in the World. We pronounce, that all
Treaties, and other State-Transactions, ought to be conformable to our
Addresses; and though the Lords better Education, frequent Traveling abread,
etc. do generally fit them more for considerations of this kind, yet men ought
to believe (as we do our selves) that each of us comes from the Plough like
another Serranus, and being once the Creature of a dozen Shoo-makers, or
suchlike Fellows, (and these drunk too) is sufficiently gifted for the
Government of a Nation. And the best is, that as amongst the Bishops we have
some who favor Presbytery, which is, No Bishops, so among the Lords we have
some Birthright-sellers who carry on our Democracy, which is, No Lords.

But, at present, our great and true grievance is the New-raised Army. We Will sit
hard, but it shall not stand long. We are resolved, like green Pease, (the
season affords me the similitude) to eat 'em young, though it cost us never so
dear: they may grow too hard for our teeth. And therefore (to carry on the
Metaphor) we butter 'em, and pepper 'em. We sooth 'em with fair words, and join
issue with the King in calling 'em brave men, and such as spent their
livelihoods that they might venture their lives for their Country. And at the
same time we are about to appoint Committees for the receiving complaints, and
hearing the lamentable cries of several Pigs and Geese against them, and have
ordered stories to be brought in of more important Outrages. Somewhat in
imitation of the Scotch stratagem: but, the truth is, the Scots have the
advantage of us in this point, not only because they are the more demure, and
consequently the better, liars, (and men hardly suspect so much wit, as a lie
comes to, in that tone) but also because the Scene of their Drama is more
remote, and their stories not so easily disproved as ours. In all cases we
firmly purpose one way or other to get rid of this upstart Monster. For, else,
what would those tumults, thou speak of, signify? We Will disband 'em, if it
be but to find 'em again, when we our selves need 'em. We Will serve 'em as a
Printer does his Letters, distribute 'em after the printing one sheet into
their respective Boxes, that, when occasion is, they may be set in a new form
to print another.

Thou need'st not bid us to set the pattern of 41 before our eyes: but I should
be glad thou could tell us a way of removing it from those of others: It does
us no small mischief. Would to Jove, the Act of Oblivion had been more
efficacious, and corresponded better to the ends, for which we desired it;
which were only, thou know, that their Party might not remember, to prevent,
nor ours to forbear. But we are never content. What an ungrateful Rogue am I to
grumble so much, when I ought rather to thank the Devil, that (for the
generality) those impressions are at this time so well worn out, that men begin
to hear with patience, what they would have abhorred five or six years ago, and
now prick up their ears, where then their hair would have stood an end?

Before I go any farther, I think fit to advertise thee of one thing, which is,
that thou must not think, for any thing thou read'st here, that the Nation, or
House of Commons are all of our Party. No; we have a very small one in either.
But it is no news to thee, that the Pharisees are of the quality of Leaven: a
little serves to influence the lump. Our business in the House is, by specious
pretenses and covert lies, (the Tools of our Trade) to work a League offensive
and defensive with several honest Gentlemen, who mean better than they
understand, and by this course, when Noses are told, (thanks to those which we
lead) for the most part we exceed by one or two: and such a Vote is as much the
Common Justice and Prudence, as if it had been made Nemine contradicente. I
assure thee, this is a great Prerogative of the House, and vast Privilege for
the Members; For, by this means many times a Noddle that has never a dram of
sense in it, comes in a trice to be the sense of the Nation.

Prithee, as soon as thou can, send me over some Hand-Granadoes, I mean, some
pretty quaint stories to throw among the People. Popery is as good a Topic, as
ever; it holds out admirably well. This morning a man brought me a dozen of
Stories to sell; and at least nine or ten of 'em were on that subject. But I
refused 'em all for improbable, save only one, which was of 50 Priests hid in a
Cave in Wales, which he offered to prove out of the Old Testament, saying that
Abdias's hiding the Prophets was not History, but Prophecy. There was another,
of a secret League between England and France, sealed and delivered by the two
Kings in the presence of certain Brandenburghers, which was pretty passable,
and I may chance to buy.

But now to the main: Bid the French Agent endeavor to have our Subsidies
better complied with. What? does he think the 50 thousand Pistols returned
hither the other day such a business? Mind him of our natural Antipathy against
his Nation, and that it requires a great deal to take this off, and make us fit
for Bribery on the square. But let him not despond: Money will do the work:
it is that (as a modern Author, though an Enemy, truly says) which makes all
doctrines plain and clear. This will force us to mistake the French King for
the Spanish: and with good reason too, when his Gold speaks him so great a
Master of the Indies. We Will make the whole Nation serve him: that is, we will do
his business, and receive his Money, and the Courtiers shall bear the blame.
But, in good truth and sober sadness, we must watch the Monsieur's waters, and
assist no farther to the breaking of the Confederacy, than it conduces to the
piecing up of the Covenant. We may else bring our Hogs to a fair Market: that
is, 'ene be sold for Slaves. Did you ever hear of such a wheedling Letter, as
he sent lately to our Brethren the States? He looks like the Hostler with his
Hat in his hand, and a little Oats in it, and his Bridle under his arm: If he
catch the Beast, he will try if he can sit it better than the Spaniard; and, I Will
warrant, he will be sure to girt its fat belly straight enough, and never be at
the expense of shooing.

It grieves me, that we have lost so prime a Pen, as thou mention'st; but my
comfort is, that our Authors seldom write well of the right side. Besides, we
have such store of Wits amongst us, that we hardly miss him: For, thanks be to
Jove, the Saints now are not only famous for profound hum-drum Nonsense, but
we have as shrewd raillerie, and tart drolling, as any is among the profane;
so that now under the Sheep's skin you have not only the Wolf, but the Monkey
also: and if thou consider'st the intolerable Fornication amongst us, thou wilt
say, we have hooked in the Goat to be of our Party too. We are infinitely
improved since our first institution. Our way is broader than it was, and more
comprehensive: We take in all Sects but Episcopacy, and have greater store of
Deists and Atheists, than the Conformists. Perhaps thou smilest, when I tell
thee of Atheists, but I assure thee (which is, doubtless, a miracle in
confirmation of our doctrine) there are no greater sticklers for Religion than
our Atheists; which makes me not question, but they are of the Elect: but the
Atheists of the other side are in a sad condition.

There Is no fear of Andrew's desertion: He Is of a right stock. Hull has an
exact Representative in him, and hardly intoxicates more by its Ale, than by
its Burgess. He is a first-rate Wit, and you may know him to be a good Satyr by
the Signature.

This goes not in Cipher, because of the opportunity I have of this Express,
who is an honest and trusty Gentleman. He is one of our Coffee-house
Messengers, who visit those Houses, better than any Bishop his Diocese, and as
punctually as the Carriers of the Playhouse Bills, only with this difference,
that these tell you what is to be acted or counterfeited to day, and our men
relate what was acted and counterfeited yesterday. In fine, they are Politic
Rat-catchers, that walk every day from Man's in the Court of Requests, to
Garoway's by the Exchange, and crumble their State-Ratsbane in every
Coffee-house, as they go. But I must leave off, being just now ordered by the
Juncto to draw up some more Relations of proceedings in the lower House, in
such fashion, as may be most creditable and advantageous for the Cause, which
are to be sent into the Country after the rest, which, we hear, operate kindly,
and do admirable service there.

Pray let me constantly hear how squares go in thy Province, and what ground
the Devil gets in his Neighborhood the Low Countries.

Now according to form I should say, So I rest: But we protest against Forms,
as I do most especially against this, for, to say truth amongst Friends, I can
never rest, till -- Therefore without any more ado, I am,

Dear Fellow Laborer, Whom and What thou know.
Land. June 5. 78. S. V.

