An ACCOUNT Of the Noble RECEPTION of his GRACE THE D. of Monmouth, BY The
CITIZENS of the CIT CHICHESTER, On the 15 of this instant February.
In a Letter to a Person of Quality in London.
SIR,
GREAT was the Joy of most persons in and about this city, when they heard that
his Grace the Duke of Monmouth was safe, after their knowledge of the most
horrid and bloody Assassination of the Noble and Worthy Gentleman Mr. Thynn.
who was the Duke's known Friend, and with whom we heard his Grace had been in
the same Coach not long before; but our Joy was much increased when we saw his
Grace safe, and that he did us the Honor of a Visit: For the Duke of Monmouth
came yesterday to this City, where his Reception was so very great, and
exceeding all that ever he had here before: That if their Loyalty to his
Majesty may be measured by their Honor and Affection to his Son, no City in
the Kingdom more justly deserves the name of LOYAL than this.

His Grace was met with a Body of above five hundred Horse, and at the Gates
received by above two hundred Youths very handsomely clad in White, who waited
on him in excellent Order to his Lodgings, through the Throngs and Crowds of
People, filling all the Remainder of the Streets, who by their loud and
uncessant Acclamations, accompanied with Bells, Bonfires, and every thing
Customary on such solemn Occasions, showed the high Content and Pleasure they
take in a Protestant Prince, every one expressing in a more than Ordinary
manner what Joy they had Conceived in seeing his Grace among them, after the
danger they believed he might have been in: Praying to God to preserve him from
all Bloody Machinations of his Enemies: This Sir, I thought good to send you
notice of, being Honored Sir,

Feb. 16 1681. Yours, etc.

LONDON, Printed for Roger Evans, 1682.


