An Answer TO THE CITY MINISTERS LETTER FROM HIS COUNTRY FRIEND.
SIR,
IT is not for me now to acknowledge my private Debt to you for the favor of
your Letter, since the public is as much concerned in it as I: and if I may
judge of all by the compass of my Neighborhood and Acquaintance, I may assure
you, they are not insensible of your Obligation, though they are ignorant of
the Author.

The Country as far as my Intelligence reaches, has followed the Example of the
City, and refused to read the Declaration of Indulgence according to a certain
Order said to be the Kings, which we in the Country can scarce believe to be
His. For it has neither been signified to the Ordinaries according to the usual
manner, nor could those that dispersed it give any Account whence it came to
them. I have heard indeed that an Act of Council concerning it has been
published in the Gazette, which I never saw, and if I had, I should scarce have
thought Authentic: for I always took that Paper as for its Authority, to have
been all of a piece, and that we were no more bound to take notice of any Order
published there under any penalty, then we are to believe all the News from
Poland or Constantinople. Nay though this Order had come to us in due form, yet
had we had great reason to suspect something of surreption and surprise upon
his Majesty in this matter, and that it could not proceed from his Majestys
free and full consent; for we cannot yet forget his repeated professions of
kindness to us, and of satisfaction in our Principles and Duty: and having done
nothing since which might forfeit his good Opinion, we are unwilling to believe
that it is His Majesty's own mind and pleasure to load us with such an Order,
as we cannot execute with any congruity, safety or good conscience. For

I. As to his Majesty's Declaration, We of all his Majesty's Subjects are the
least concerned in it; and with all duty be it spoken, we cannot see, that our
legal Establishment receives any Addition by this Declaration. For there are
yet, thanks be to God, no Penal Laws to which our Congregations are obnoxious,
and therefore we do not stand in need of any Toleration: Yet it is upon us
only, that the Reading of it is imposed. An Act which cannot well be construed
otherwise than as a soliciting and tempting our own people to forsake our
Communion. If this Declaration must needs be read in any Religious Assemblies,
in reason surely it should be in those, that wholely ow their subsistence to
it. It would better have become the Roman than the Protestant Chapels. But in
the Roman Church Indulgence has another signification; and belongs to those
only that frequent their Churches, but not to such as leave them: for with them
this is the only sin that is not capable of Indulgence. But the Priests desire
to be excused, lest while they proclaim Toleration to others they bring an
Interdict upon themselves. Or why I pray, was not Father Pen Ordered to publish
it in his Meetings? Or the worthy Mr. Lob, the reputed Father of this Project;
why had not he the benefit of his own Invention, and a Patent for being the
sole Publisher of it within his own Pound? Or why was not my Lord Mayors
private and elect Congregation thought worthy of so great a grace? Surely it is
not to draw upon us the envy of the Dissenters, that the honor of publishing
this Declaration is imposed upon us alone, when it belongs to all other
Communions in the Kingdom except our own: and if we refuse it, I hope it will
be imputed to our Modesty, for we are not ambitious of being impertinent or
busybodies in other men's matters.

A certain person much greater than he deserves, but perhaps not so high, is
said to have used the Words of Rabsh^keh upon this occasion, That the Church of
England Clergy should Eat their own Dung. Isa. 36.12. This sentence might
better have become a Messenger of the King of Assyria, than a pretended
Counselor of our own Prince, though some make a question to which King he
belongs: but God be thanked, we are not yet so straightly besieged as to be
reduced to that extremity, and though by the permission of God, We should be
reduced to so miserable a condition, We should I hope, by the grace of God be
content to endure that and worse extremities if possible, rather than Betray or
Surrender the City of God. But before that comes it is possible that the Throat
that belched out this Nasty Insolence, may be stopped with something which it
cannot swallow.

II. Besides there are some Passages in the Declaration, which in Conscience we
cannot Read to our People, though it be in the Kings Name; for among others we
are to Read these Words: WE cannot but heartily wish as will easily be
believed, that all the People of our Dominions were Members of the Catholic
Church. Our People know too well the English of this, and could not but be
strangly surpised to hear us tell them, that it would be an acceptable thing
to the King, that they should leave the Truth and our Communion, and turn
Papists. The Wish of a King when solemnly Declared, is no light insignificant
thing, but has real influence and effect upon the minds of Men. It was but a
Wish of Henry the Second that cut off Thomas Becket then Archbishop of
Canterbury. Councils and Courts of Justice too often bend to a Kings Wishes,
though against their own Inclinations, as well as against their Rule: And can
we imagine that they can have no force at all upon the common people? therefore
we cannot in Conscience pronounce these words in the Ears of the People whose
Souls are committed to our Charge. For we should hereby lay a snare before
them, and become their Tempters instead of being their Instructers; and in very
fair and reasonable construction we shall be understood to solicit them to
Apostasy, to leave the Truth of the Gospel, for Fables, and the mistakes of
men; a reasonable and decent Worship, for Superstition and Idolatry; a true
Christian Liberty, for the most intolerable Bondage both of soul and body. If
any will forsake our Doctrine and Fellowship, which yet is not ours but
Christ's, at their own peril be it: But as for us, We are resolved by the grace
of God, to lay no stumbling block in their way, nor to be accessory to their
ruin, that we may be able to declare our integrity with S. Paul, That we are
pure from the blood of all men.

III. In the next place, We are to declare in the Kings name, That from
henceforth the Execution of all, and all manner of Penal Laws, in matters
Ecclesiastical, for not coming to Church, or not receiving the Sacrament, or
for any other Nonconformity to the Religion established, or for, or by reason
of the exercise of Religion, in any manner whatsoever, be immediately Suspended,
and the farther Execution of the said Penal Laws, and every of them is hereby
Suspended. What! All, and all manner of Laws in matters Ecclesiastical? What
the Laws against Fornication, Adultery, Incest? for these are in Ecclesiastical
matters. What! All Laws against Blasphemy, Profaneness, open derision of
Christian Religion? Yet these crimes are punishable by no other Laws here, than
such as have been made in favor of the Established Religion: How shall the
Lords day be observed? What shall hinder covetous men to Plow and Cart, and
follow their several Trades upon that day? since all the Laws, that secure this
observance, and outward countenance of respect to the Christian Religion, are
by this general expression laid aside: Besides these words, for not coming to
Church, or not receiving the Sacrament, or for any other Nonconformity to the
Religion Established, cannot in Conscience be read by us in our Churches,
because they may be a temptation to young unguided people to neglect all manner
of Religious Worship, and give them occasion of depriving themselves of such
opportunities of grace and salvation, as these Penal Laws did often oblige them
to use. For being discharged attendance on our Service, they are left at
liberty to be of any Religion or none at all: Nay Christian Religion is by
these general terms left at discretion, as well as the Church of England. For
men may forsake us to become Jews or Mahometans, or Pagan Idolaters, as well as
to be Papists or Dissenters, for any care taken in this Declaration to prevent
it. And even of such as pretend to be Christians, there either are or may be
such Blasphemous Sects, so dishonorable to our Common Lord and Master, as are
incapable of all public encouragement and allowance; for that would involve
the Government in the Imputation of those Blasphemies, and the whole Nation in
that curse and vengeance of God, which such provocations may extort. Wherefore
it is not out of any unreasonable; opinion of our selves, nor disaffection to
Protestant Dissenters that we refuse to publish this Indulgence, but out of a
tender care of the Souls committed to us, especially those of the weaker sort,
to whom we dare not propose an Invitation to Popery, and much less any thing
that may give countenance or encouragement to Irreligion. It is said indeed,
that we are not required to approve but to read it: To this Sir, you have very
well answered, that Reading was Teaching it, or if it be not so absolutely in
the nature of the thing; yet in common Construction, I am afraid it would have
been so understood. But we do not stand in need of this Excuse, for if there be
any passages in it, that are plain temptations to Popery or Licentiousness; it
cannot consist with our duty either to God or the Church to Read them before
our People.

As for the Dispensing Power, and the Oaths and Tests required to qualify men
for Offices Military and Civil, I must leave them to the Consideration of those
who are nearer concerned, and therefore reasonably presumed to understand them
better. Nor do I envy his Majesty the use of his Popish Subjects, though I do
not know what service they may be capable of doing more than other men. This
Nation has for some time made hard shift to subsist without much of their aid,
and against the wills of several of them: but now they are become the only
necessary men, and seem to want nothing but Number to fill all places Military
and Civil in the Kingdom; in the mean time the Odiousness of their Persons, and
the Insolence of their Behavior with their way of menacing of strange things,
makes some abatement of the merit of their service.

Lastly, The respect which we have for His Majesty's Service, will not permit
us to Read the Appendix to the Declaration: Where the flower of the Nobility
and Gentry of this Kingdom are something hardly reflected on, as Persons that
will not contribute to the peace and honor of the Nation; Because they would
not consent to the taking away the Laws against Papists, that they may be put
into a Condition to give us Laws. The Persons here reflected on, We know to be
the chief for Ability and Interest, and Inclination to serve the King, and
therefore cannot do His Majesty that disservice as to be Publishers of their
disgrace, and make our selves the Instruments of alienating from His Majesty
the Affections of his best Subjects. Nay we find in our selves a strange
difficulty to believe that this could come from His Majesty, who has
experienced their faithfulness upon so many and pressing Occasions. This could
not well proceed from any but a Stranger to those Honorable Persons, and the
Nation, and a greater Stranger to shame and good manners; and what have We to
do to Publish the Venom and Virulency of a Jesuit?

Printed in the Year, 1688.


