An Answer to a Paper, Entitled, Reflections on the Prince of Orange's
Declaration.
IT seems a strange piece of Arrogance that any man should reflect on a
Declaration, because it does not begin as he would have it; that is, with a
Manifestation of our Clandestine League with France, whereby and Army of
Frenchmen, together with our Papists, Irish, and other Mercenaries, might
establish Popery in England. The Reflector ought to have considered, that a
Clandestine League, though it may be very notorious to its Existence and Effects,
may likewise be very difficult to prove, according to the meaning of the Word
Clandestine. But that there is such a one, we have the Testimony of the King of
France, in a Memorial delivered to the States of Holland; and though it has
been since disowned by our Court, and Mr. Skeleton upon it committed to the
Tower; his short Confinement, and sudden Advancement to a Regiment, shows that
his Disgrace was but a trick of State: It is also an inconsequential way of
Arguing, that because the Prince does not begin his Declaration with it,
therefore there is no such League, things of that high consequence being easier
and better carried on by secret Messages than Writing under Hand and Seal.

2. In his second Reflection, he tells us the Prince had needed less Apology,
if he had pretended only to have come to deliver the King from Evil
Counselors, and to engage him further in the interest of Europe; forgetting
the Prince does declare to us he comes for that end, though not singly, and
brought over his Army to secure him from the Rage and Fury of those Evil
Counselors. His next Quarrel is, that the Prince uses the Style, Of We and Us
within His Majesty's Dominions; a thing, I believe, ordinary enough in Great
Princes, when they speak, or write, to their Inferiors. The Prince of Orange
is General of a great numerous Army, Admiral of a vast Fleet, State-holder to a
High and Mighty Commonwealth, and consequently, too great to speak in the Style
of a Private Person; so that Rewarding, Punishing, Commanding, Advancing, may
very naturally fall within his Power. Nor is it any Crime to endeavor the
calling of a Free Parliament, and settling the Nation, though by ways and methods
unusual in our days, nothing being more frequent, in our Histories, than for
our Barons, with Arms in their Hands, to compel their Kings to call and hearken
to their Parliaments: But now there being a standing Army of forty thousand
Mercenaries in the Land, it was grown a Crime to Petition for a Parliament, and
a Folly to expect a free one, new Charters and Corporations, and a general
nomination of incompetent Magistrates, having taken the Election of Members for
Parliament out of those Hands, the Laws of the Land, and Memorial Custom, had
entrusted with them. According to the new Scheme designed by those Upstart and
Popish Counselors, no man was to Elect, or be Elected for Parliament, that
would not engage, as far as in him lay, to take away the Penal Laws and Test;
nay, those Wicked Counselors prevailed yet farther upon His Majesty; and he
that pardoned so many of his Enemies, was not suffered to forgive his best
Friends, and most Loyal Subjects a refusal or excuse in that particular.

That the Prince will send back his Army, seems to some a strong presumption
that he will not stay behind, since even our own lawful King thinks himself not
safe without an Army of Mercenaries, in his own Kingdom. From a strained phrase
or two, Of We and Us, Require and Command, sometimes used in his Declaration,
to infer, That the Prince of Orange intends to make himself King of England,
seems to all Rational Men a very Captions and Unsatisfactory way of arguing,
and a very Unjust Calumny cast upon so great a Prince, since more than once, in
express terms, he Declares he has no design upon His Majesty's Crown or Person,
so that all that Reproach falls to the Ground.

3. In his third Reflection, he tells us the Prince wants a clear Call, and
that a Son against a Father, a Nephew against an Uncle, a Neighbor against a
Neighbor, cannot be such: That he is Son-in-Law, and Nephew to His Present
Majesty, gives the Prince a fair and just pretense to interpose in our Affairs;
had he been a Foreigner as our Reflector terms him, it might have looked like
an intended Conquest; had he not been a Neighbor, it had been impossible for
him to have afforded us this seasonable Assistance. But some think, that where
attempts are made to introduce the Catholic Religion, by a Conspiracy, against
the Laws that secure and establish the Protenstant Religion and the Test, that
only can keep the Papists out of the Government: And to carry on this
Conspiracy the better, the old Charters are taken away under pretense of
forfeiture, and surrender; new ones granted, such as might bring Elections
within the power of those Evil Counselors; Papists upon the Bench, a Jesuit
in the Council; and whole Troops of them in the Army: 'Twas high time for a
Protestant Prince, that had so near relation to the Crown of England, to look
about him, and choose rather to be Censured by our Reflector, and such as he,
for entering upon the Stage a little before his time, than be justly Reproached
and Cursed, to the end of the World, by all such as love the Protestant
Religion, and Ancient Government of England, for appearing too late in their
Defense. The Example of Henry the Fourth, of France, may teach us how hard it
is for a Protestant Prince to obtain his Right, where the Catholic Religion is
Predominant; nor was the new Armor of Popery he put on, at last, sufficient to
defend the old Protestant against the Stab of a Jesuited novitiate.

4. His fourth Reflection acquaints us, the Protestant Religion is at once
exposed and hazarded, for if the King prevail what can the Prince of Oranges
sort of Protestants expect at his hands; which are indeed, all sorts of
Frotestants that I know of, for the Presbyterians, Independants, Phanaticks,
Church of England men, are in his Army: It Is fair warning, and I hope God will
give the Protestants Grace to make the right use of it: As for their changing
Masters, it is a Chimera of his own, and utterly Foreign to the Declaration he
pretends to reflect upon. Lest we should forget, he reminds us with that
admirable Demonstration of, Isay, that the whole Protestant Religion is at
stake; for which I heartily thank our Worthy Reflector, for though it be very
true, we had not seen it in Print but for him.

5. In his fifth reflection, he tells us that some Laws are better broken than
kept, which will not be easily granted; it is indeed true, that some Laws were
better be repealed than continued: But then they must be Nulld bu the same
power they were constituted, and not by any part of it in contradiction to the
whole.

His instance is, that Christianity could not have been introduced, had the
Pagan Laws been Executed; by which Parallel he would warrant Popery to be the
true Christianity, and the Protestant the Healthen Persecutors; Laws for
Idolatry cannot bind, therefore Laws against it cannot; a very strange
inference, and I allow that a Lawful Authority by exceeding their just Bounds,
may act unlawfully, but the Legislative power cannot, since all over the World
the Supreme power ever was absolute, be it in one or more. He says no Man is
obliged to maintain a Religion that is not true, be it never so Legally
Established: So that is but saying the Protestant Religion is not true, and His
Majesty, notwithstanding His repeated engagement, is no longer bound to protect
it. For in the words of our Reflector it is an absurdity and impiety to do so.

6. The sixth thing considerable in our Reflector is, his defense of the
Dispensing Power, and the use His Majesty, seduced by his Evil Councelors,
makes of it; which is no other than the setting aside of all our Laws made for
the security of the Protestant Religion; But sure such a Prerogative can never
be Legally vested in the Crown, which if admitted, were the destruction of all
Law.

Had those Evil Counselors only prevailed with His Majesty, to have Dispensed
with the Penalties inflicted on Catholics and other Dissenters, for serving
God according to their Particular Consciences, though perhaps contrary to Law,
the matter had never been Complained of: But to put them into places of Highest
trust, to make one Lieutenant of Ireland, another President of the Council, a
third Lieutenant General of the Tower, a fourth a Judge; employing numbers of
them in the Army, Court, etc. is a transgression of the Law, which is certainly
very dangerous, if not immediately, yet in its inevitable Consequences, to the
Protestant Religion and Government, and therefore a mischief remote only (as an
Egg is from a Chicken) from the worthy reflectors Malum in se, which he
acknowledges this Dispensing Power extends not to. And the particular
Catholics breaking the Law in these points, are without excuse: For no Man is
obliged in Conscience to be a Judge, a Priest, a Minister, a Privy Councellor,
a Courtier, or a Soldier in time of Peace; contrary to the Laws of the Land.
Nor do those Laws deprive the King of the service of any of his Subjects
absolutely; since all men if they please may Capacitate themselves for
employment. If the High Commission Court be at an End, Magdalem College and
the Bishop of London restored, we may in all appearance thank the honesty and
Caution of some of its worthy Members, and the Noise of what our Reflector
calls the Prince of Orange's Invasion; though some will say, a descent upon
England made by a Prince of the Blood, Married to the Eldest Daughter of the
present King, upon the invitation of many Lords both Spiritual and Temporal,
and of the considerable Gentry Commonalty of all Counties, might here deserved
a fairer Name. Nor ought any man to complain if his honest Neighbor break
violently into his house at a time when his Family cry out Fire or Murder; the
Common obligation of humanity, and a due care of their own preservation, exact
no less of them. But this Paper is not intended for a vindication of the
Prince, I will therefore return to my Reflector again, who undertakes for all
good Protestants that they only refused to repeal the Test, by reason of the
security it affords their Religion. As if they had cast off all care of their
Civil concerns, and were only intent upon Religious affairs, so as to consent
to give his Majesty a Majority of Papists in the House of Lords; by which he
might have two Negative Voices upon all Laws to be offered: and an House of
Pears ready to repeal the Habeas Corpus Bill, and such Statutes as any ways
seem to incumber what Papists think his Majesty's Prerogative, of which they
maintain the Dispensing Power to be an Essential part; and well they may, since
it is the very power, by which he maintains them in their places and
employments: So that by leave of my worthy Reflector, the consideration of
Religion, though they are the principal, are not the only reasons, that have
determined all good Protestants to a Non-concurrence with His Majesty in the
repeal of the Test.

8. In his eighth Reflection he tells us, that Chapels are places of Devotion;
so are the Turks Mosques, and the Jews Synagogues, yet no good Christian but
would be offended to see them multiplied and encouraged, either in his own, or
his Neighbors Country.

9. In his ninth he tells us, the King was content the Test should remain: I
answer, these Evil Counselors were not content the Test should remain, but
sent their Regulators and other Agents, to threaten, promise, remove and change
the Magistrates in all Corporations, in order to the procuring Members of
Parliament, such as were to enter the House under solemn promises, and firm
resolutions, to take off the Penal Laws and Test, notwithstanding all the
weighty, nay, convincing Arguments they might meet with there to the contrary:
A desperate sort of Senators, and fitter for Catalines Conspiracies than an
English Parliament. Nor did these Evil Counselors cease to solicit even
Knights of the Shire, till the general indignation their proposals met with,
together with the noise of the Prince of Orange's preparations, frighted them
from a further prosecution of their enormous attempt. He ingeniously confesses
the seizing of Charters to have been a fault, so there is no contest between us
on that point; but he adds, That the Prince of Orange has nothing to do with
it; now others think him highly concerned in it, for if according to Sir Thomas
Moore, Rex Potest Juriper Parta mentum and potest and destrui; or according to
the Opinion of later times, a Parliament may make a Bill of Exclusion; a Prince
that has so near a Relation to the Crown of England, ought not to suffer any
foul play in the calling together such an Assembly as may null his Title, or
preclude him of his Right to the Crown, in time to come. It Is true, the Council
of seizing Charters was given in the last Kings Reign, and most of them then
seized, but no man can deny but some have been condemned and seized in the
Reign of his present Majesty, and restored not till the universal apprehension
of the aforesaid Invasion; so that we are promised a Free Parliament, only
because they cannot put one of their own framing upon us.

10. His tenth Paragraph needs no answer.

11. In his eleventh, he tells us there were but two Papist Judges, as if the
Laws were not broken unless Judges were all Papists; or that Judges sitting
contrary to Law could give a Legal Sentence. Both these defects he supposes
supplied by the Dispencing Power, a power sufficiently baffled by those
Gentlemen of the lorg Robe of Council for the Bishops, and not defended by
either Judges or Council, on the other side; for which two of the Judges, Jones
and Holloway, lost their places on the Bench.

12, 13. His twelfth and thirteenth concern Ireland and Scotland and therefore
I will leave them untouched, to the Gentlemen of those Nations, who best
understand, and are most sensible of the Oppressions they are under.

14. In his fourteenth, he pleads the Validity of the Kings Declaration for
Liberty of Conscience, though that pretended Prerogative has been discussed and
baffled in Parliament, within these few years, and deserted as such by His late
Majesty; he affirms, that the King, as Head of the Church, might oblige the
Bishops to cause the Declaration to be read in the Churches, which if they had
complied with, in the Opinion of many good Protestants, they had precluded
themselves of their Votes in parliament against it; for with what forehead
could they Vote against the Declaration, when they had caused it to be read in
their Churches? An Act amounting to no less than maintaining; or owning, the
Dispencing Power.

15. In his fifteenth, he allows the Prince and Princess of Orange, have in
terms full of respect signified to the King their deep regret which all these
things have given them, and their thoughts about Repealing the Test and Penal
Laws as an expedient of Peace, but blames him, it seems, for doing all this so
respectfully and privately, and would rather had it done by a Manifesto, that
some of the Princes, Friends might be Imprisoned for delivering it, as Captain
Lenham is for bringing over the Declaration. He tells us next, the King has
come up almost to Fagel's Letter, which was the Declaration of their Minds,
viz. The Church of England Test, and Laws of Supremacy to remain; then urging
the Kings Concessions, which may be observed to bear date only from the report
of the Princes preparations for England.

16. He tells us in his sixteenth, that the Prince thinks a free Parliament to
be the last and great Remedy for these Evils, but complaints these Wicked
Counselors are against it, for fear of being called to account, that they had
preingaged Voices to take off the Penal Laws and the Test, and regulated
Corporations and Buroughs, that so they might assure themselves of the Members
of Parliament; he allows the charge, but says what has all this to do with the
King? No man say it has, and the Prince only requires the removal and
punishment of those Evil Counselors in a Free Parliament.

17. Next our Reflector tells, that there never was a Parliament absolutely
Free, but that Drink, Money, and other evil Arts, have had a great sway in
Elections: This is true, but no reason that we should consent to a General or
Fundamental Corruption of our Elections, because we cannot avoid some few and
casual ones. Then he would have had the Prince have desired the King to have
laid aside those Evil Counselors, as if it were not Notorious, that the
Princes dislike of some men has been their ready way to preferment in our
Court; and Ambassadors for Holland have been, of late, chosen out of those he
has most aversion for, as if these Wicked Counselors feared nothing so much
as a good understanding between His Majesty and the Prince of Orange.

19. In the Nineteenth he tells the Prince and Princess of Orange's question
concerning the Birth of the Prince of Wales, saying, That during the Queens
pretended Bigness, and in the manner in which the Birth was managed, there have
appeared so many just and visible ground of suspicion, that not only the Prince
himself, but all good Subjects in England do vehemently suspect that the
Pretended Prince of Wales was not born of the Queen.

20. Next our Reflector tells us, That the Prince ought to have writ to the
King for a private satisfaction in his Matter, which the King would no doubt
have given in the manner that all reasonable men do when they are examined
against themselves. All men allow the imputation of such an imposture, to be a
great reflection on their present Majesty's: But some think they have in a great
measure drawn it upon themselves, by omitting to have those witnesses by, and
those Methods observed, that our Laws require to prove the Birth of a
Legitimate Prince of Wales: It Is not perhaps enough to say, that there were as
many Witnesses, and as good proof of it, as the Law exacts, still the question
returns, why not the same persons? a Legal proof admits of no Equivolent.

Our reflector will not deny, but there has been common same all over Europe,
that this Prince of Wales was not Born of the Body of her Majesty; and common
belief of it amongst protestants; this of it self were enough to make the next
Heir to the Crown look about, and move every stone that the matter might be
examined by impartial methods in a free parliament, which is all that the
Prince and Princess of Orange aims at: for their proofs to the contrary, it is
not to be expected they should acquaint the World with them before the Trial.

22. In his two and twentieth Reflection on the eighteenth Paragraph, where the
Prince says, He was invited to this Expedition by many Lords, both Spiritual
and Temporal, and many Gentlemen, and Subjects of all Ranks; Our Reflector is
pleased to tell him he is mistaken as Monmouth was. Notwithstanding those
eminent Peers, Gentry and Commonalty of all sorts that are already in his Camp,
and such as are going daily, as well Soldiers as others; nor considering the
great number of the Nobility that are in the Country and have not been
examined, and that such as were examined here in Town, did no more than answer
Not Guilty to the Charge of High Treason: So that there are more Nobility and
Gentry with him than with his Majesty.

In his three and twentieth Reflection on the 19th and 20th Paragraph, where
the Prince refers all to a free Parliament; our Reflector says it belongs not
to him, to refer other men's business; as if the Prince had no relation to the
Crown: Then tells us we are already in possession of what the Prince promises
us, as if the Catholics were all out of employment, the Dispencing power given
up, no standing Army, no apprehensions of Popery and Arbitrary Power, and a
Free Parliament for redressing of Grievances of all kinds in being.

24. In the twenty fourth Reflection on the three last Paragraphs of the
Princes Declaration, he tells us, The Prince has a manifest design upon the
Crown, because he summons the Nobility, Gentry and People of England to his
Standard: And if so, who must stay with the King? To that may be answered, All
such as believe the Prince of Orange has brought this Army, and intends to make
War upon England to subdue it to his mere will and pleasure, trample all Laws,
both Divine and Humane, under his Feet, dethrone his present Majesty, and make
himself King; they will stay and fight for him, or at least to the best of
their power, in some other manner assist and help him: On the contrary part,
such as believe the Prince means nothing of all this, but brought over his Army
only the better to assist the Nobility, Gentry, and people of England, upon
their earnest desires, and frequent solliciations, and reiterated complaints,
in the recovering of the old Legal way of choosing Members for Parliament,
which by Illegal new Charters, on pretended forfeitures, was in a ready way to
be for ever lost, in rescuing all the Laws of England from the devouring laws
of a Dispencing Power, in reducing Popery within those bounds the Law has
prescribed it, which, like an Inundation, had so over-flowed its Banks, that
our Religion and Government were in peril to be swallowed up by it; and
finally, to redress these and all other grievances, if for these and no other
ends or concerns, men think the Prince have landed here, such men will take his
part, espouse his quarrel, and contribute to his success: and in these cases
every man will judge for himself, as they did in our late Civil Wars.

Again, he charges the Prince with a design of Conquest; which not only the
Prince himself disclaims throughout his Declaration, and will hereafter disown
in all his Manifesto's; but the States of Holland, who have so vigorously
assisted, and engaged themselves with all their power and credit, to maintain
him in this attempt, have assured us he left Holland under high and solemn
protestations to the contrary. All this is, I hope, sufficient to dash the
strained inferences of an inconsiderable Reflector.

As for that impudent Calumny of Perjury he endeavors to six upon the Prince,
it needs no other refutation than a serious consideration of the Charge it
self; his Words are, The Prince of Orange swore to the States of Holland never
to be their State-holder, though it were offered him, and yet is now that very
State-holder he swore never to be on any terms. Now let any reasonable man
consider, whether it be possible a Wise State should by an Oath given him,
disable the Prince of Orange from being their State-holder, though Circumstances
and times should so change, that their immediate preservation and very
existence of their State should require him to accept, and execute that Office.
For his personal Reflections toward the latter end I think very Impertinent,
and only fit to be buried in Contempt.

Thus having followed my tedious Reflector through his twenty four Reflections,
I take my leave of him, reserving the Princes farther Vindication to some time
when I shall be more at leisure to write, and people willinger to read, than
they can be under the present surprise, hourly expectation, and continual
anxiety, for the event of this Heroic Enterprise.

FINIS.

