The Answer of the BERMUDA COMPANY TO THE Matters Complained of in the Petition
of Mr. PERIENT TROTT, humbly offered to the Consideration of the Honorable the
Knights, Citezens and Burgisses Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
THe Bermuda Company having purchased the soil of the Island, were incorporated
in 1614. by the Name of the Governor and Company of the City of London, for
Plantation of the Summer Islands; and thereby had the sole Government committed
to them, with a power to make Laws as near as might be to the Laws of England;
being the same power granted to all other His Majesty's foreign Plantations,
and the Company are still the proprietors of the said Islands. And if any
Bylaws were made contrary to their power, or prejudicial to the Island (as is
untruly suggested) the Company here must needs be the great loosers.

That no Lands have been taken away from any person without due proceedings and
Examinaton had according to the Laws and constitutions of the Islands; neither
have any Records or due Entries manifesting any man's title to the same been
razed or altered, nor have any persons been admitted to any shares in the said
Islands, but upon evidence of their right and title to the same.

That the penny in the pound upon Tobacco, is a Tax necessary to support the
charges of the Government, (over and above the public shares set aside and now
employed for that purpose) and is duly imposed, and for the recovery thereof,
Actions at Law are brought against the Petitioner Mr. Trott, whereby the
validity of the said Tax will be tried.

And if the Governor and Council there do impose any Assessment upon the
Planters, without the consent of the Assembly, it is without the knowledge of
the Company, and contrary to the Known Laws of the place, and would be
redressed upon complaint made to the Company here.

That the managing the Trade of Tobacco in the Companies Magazin Ships, is
necessary for the Proprietors, sufficient for the growth and utmost
improvements of the Islands, satisfactory to the Planters, always used since
the first purchase of the Islands, and the only way for the preventing of
frauds and oppressions.

As to the Whale Fishing, The Company having made a Lease thereof for Ninety
nine years, to several Undertakers, who expended near four thousand pound in
Boats, Tackle, and other charges for carrying on the Trade, and having
entrusted some persons under them to manage the same for five years, and the
said Trustees having some ways interested Mr. Trott therein, and the five years
being expired, the said Boats and Tackle were seized at the request and for the
said undertakers, who are the Proprietors and owners of the same. And are now
under the value of one hundred pound.

As to the building of Ships, If the same were not restrained, there would not
be Timber left sufficient for the necessary supply of the Islands.

And as to Appeals, Any person aggrieved may bring the same, unless where the
Cause of Action is under the value of five pounds.

And ever since the granting of the said Charter, the Company have endeavored
to advance the Common and Public Interest of the Islands, and the rights of
the Proprietors there. And the Islands are now in a more flourishing condition
than ever they were since they were first Planted.


