AN ANSWER TO THE Call to Humiliation: OR, A VINDICATION OF THE Church of
England. From the Reproaches and Objections of W. Woodward, in Two Fast
Sermons, Preached in his Conventicle at Lemster, in the County of Hereford, and
afterward Published by him.

Printed for Edward Robinson Junior, Bookseller in Ludlow. 1691.

AN ANSWER TO THE Call to HVMILIATION: OR, A Vindication of the Church of
England.
WHEN I first met with this importunate Call to Humiliation, I wondered how it
came into the Head of that Minister, to call upon the Church of England in a
Conventicle; he might as well have called upon the Socinian Church in Poland,
or the Quakers in Pensylvania. How absurd was it to summon the Church of
England to the Stool of Repentance in a Presbyterian Assembly at Lemster, and
to proclaim a Fast for Persecution to those whom he pretends were persecuted by
her? But tho the Church was out of his Audience, yet it was matter of great
Edification to his Hearers, to calumniate and reproach her; and I presume at
the next gathering he was well rewarded for it. See how this Minister keeps his
Days of Humiliation; he Fasts notoriously for Strife and Debate; instead of
healing our Wounds, he enlarges and enflames them; he sets forth the Sufferings
of his Dissenters, with Hyperbole's, and lying aggravations, to what purpose,
but to exulcerate and enrage them? as if he were sent in the Spirit of Elijah,
he calls in effect for Fire from Heaven upon us. The Profanation of our Fast
Day, was not enough for his Invectives; withal, he could find but little work
of Humiliation for his own Sectaries, but with loads of Sackcloth and Ashes he
overwhelms our Church, and in a word, he has laid out his whole Gift of
Calling, and Clamouring, and Railing upon it.

The best Apology against such a Libel, would be Patience and Silence; and the
best Answer, that which Mr. Hooker made to certain Reasons and Raileries of the
Puritans, to his Reasons, No, and to his Raileries Nothing. But there is
sometimes a necessity of answering some Persons according to their folly; the
applause and triumph with which this Pamphlet has been cried up by his
followers, the Confidence wherewith they pronounce every thing unanswerable,
that is not answered; and the Complement of p. 27.
Dumb Dogs, which this Holy Rabshakeh has bestowed upon us, do make it
necessary to say something in our vindication, and to show how easy it is to
defend our Church, against the feeble Assaults of a Lemster Conventicle.

In answer to his Two Sermons, as he calls them, I will consider, 1. His
Declamations about Persecution. 2. The Reasons and Objections which he pleads
for his Nonconformity.


Days of Humiliation are at all times necessary to the Church of Christ, which,
while it is Militant, will be never so far without Spot and Blemish, as not to
stand in need of public Explations; but when the Judgments of God, are either
imminent, or present, and the unbounded wickedness of a Nation, do force them
down from Heaven, then certainly is the time to weep, to Sanctify a Fast, and
to call all the Inhabitants of the Land to a Public Repentance. Our Church on
such occasions has contented her Self to follow the example of Religious Men
in Scripture, and to prescribe such general Confessions, as are universally
true of all, and particularly, applicable to the Case of every one; there is a
Confession in that last Office, so full and comprehensive, that no one, who is
not much in love with Cavil, can accuse the insufficiency of it. But this
Minister is dissatisfied with it, he has searched among See p. 10, 11.
the accursed stuff, (as he styles it) of Ecclesiastical Affairs, and after
much pains in rummaging, See p. 10, 11.
he finds that the accursed thing See p. 10, 11.
lies hid under the covering of Decency and Order, Penal Laws, Laws for
Uniformity, Subscriptions; Declarations, Liturgies, Articles, Laws for
Ceremonies, and Forms of Prayer. Thus one whole Constitution is accursed in his
Opinion; even the Articles of our Religion are not excepted, tho approved by
all the Protestant Churches, and Sealed with the Blood of Martyrs, and the
Prayers of all Churches, for at least 1^00 Years together, have been nothing
but Curses; and, as Achan's Sacrilege, an Abomination to the Lord.

But Persecution is the great Rock of Offense, and he is very angry at the
Compilers of the Office, because they have not mentioned it in the Confession;
he cannot forgive a certain The Bishop of Sarum.
Bishop in particular, who, he thinks, assisted in composing the Form, and had
before Declared, that Persecution had not a little contributed to fill up the
measures of the sins of a Church, See his Ep. Ded. and p. 11.
and that they who were guilty, ought seriously to profess their Repentance of
it; But he observes, That he said this before he was a Bishop, which is, to
insinuate, that it is no wonder he should now prevaricate, and that he was
fallen from Grace by taking a Bishopric on him; But here he had an occasion of
showing his Spite at the Order, and even a Reconciling Bishop, could have no
Quarter from him. Now, for once, let Persecution be as heinous a Sin as he can
make it, and let it be granted, that many Church men have been guilty of it;
Yet, Why must it be particularly confessed in a general Humiliation? Why more
than Drunkenness, Perjury, Blasphemy, or Whoredom? Would he have every
individual Confess, that he has been a Persecutor, a Drunkard, a Blasphemer,
and a Whoremaster? If many are innocent of these Crimes, so they are of
Persecution; There are thousands of Congregations that never persecuted any
one, and yet this Unjust Judge would force them to plead Guilty of it. Be the
Sin never so Epidemical, yet, why should I confess it, if I am not Guilty? And
as for those that are, let him read over the Confessions, and he will find,
they are in general Expressions included in it, and general Confessions are
sufficient, because no others can be accommodated to so many millions of
Christians; but nothing will please that Minister, unless the whole Church lie
prostrate at his Feet, and submit to the Discipline he imposes, and then,
perhaps, he would think her sufficiently humbled, and condescend to pardon her.

Let us now reflect a little on the extremity of their Sufferings, as he is
pleased to represent them; and one single Paragraph out of all his Tragical
Aggravations will be sufficient. He assures us, p. 4.
That it is as clear as the Sun, that for near 30 years last past, 1600
Ministers of the Gospel have suffered very hard things upon the account of
Conscience, by reason of great Fines, and long Imprisonments. At the
Restoration there were many Mininsters ejected who had either intruded
themselves into the Freeholds of others, or had Usurped their Benefices in the
times of Schism and Rebellion, without lawful Qualisications; so that they were
ejected, not for Conscience, but Intrusion; whether they were just 1600, is not
worth enquiry; but that they all suffered for Conscience, cannot be so clear as
he pretends, for I suppose, neither he, nor we can know the Consciences of
1600, without something of Omniscience; but that all the 1600 did suffer by
long Imprisonment, is an unconscionable overlashing, and it is as clear as the
Sun, that it is a notorious Falsehood. He adds, That many of them have dyed for
want of natural Bread, and that both the Shepherds and the Flocks have been
starved. What! Have their Ministers died with Famine? Have whole Congregations
perished for want of Bread? This is certainly all Fiction and Romance; or, if
you will, the Rhetoric of common beggars, who with doleful Complaints of
Starving, cheat the People into Compassion. I Grant, That many Families of
Dissenters have been distressed by Penal Laws, tho I think he can never make it
out, that they were many thousands. But the conclusion of this Tragedy, is
beyond measure extravagant. If, says be, the Sufferings of our Brethren were
written at large, as the Sufferings of the Saints at other times have been, Mr.
Fox his Book of Martyrs, would be but an Enchiridion in comparison of it. That
Work is an account of the Sufferings of Christians, from the Crucisixion of our
Savior, to the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; and as Voluminous as it is, it has
not bulk enough for the Dissenters Sufferings since the Restoration; nay, it
is but a little Epitome in comparison. They, alas! have suffered more in 30
years, than the whole Church in 1600; and the Martyrologies of the whole
Catholic Church, may be infinitely exceeded by the Acts and Monuments of a few
little Conventicles. One would think that many Myriads of Dissenters had
suffered Martyrdom; That every individual Church of England-man had destroyed
as many as Dioclesian; and that all England had been a Sea of Blood for 30
years together; when in the mean time, not one of them suffered death for his
Religion, not many of them were ruined in their Estates, and pecuniary
punishments, were the only persecution of almost all of them. Yet he has the
Confidence to say, P. 11.
That the Church of England had taken into her hand the Bloody Club of Cain to
Martyr the Dissenters; that his Weapon was a Club is revealed to him by P. 4.
Bucheltzerus, to whom the Cabala was derived; but that the Church of England
has used it against the Dissenters, is the revelation of Beelzebub, for the
Father of Lies can be his only Author for it. Let him name but one Dissenter
that has been martyred by the Church, and he shall have my License to revile
her with all the odious Names, from Coin to the Apocalyptick Whore, in
Scripture: But if that be impossible, he may still revile, if he please, but I
think he will be no where believed, but in his Conventicle and his Patmos; so
the place of his retreat is Ep. Ded.
called by the fifth Evangelist, that he may be paralelled to one of the former.

But this magnifying of Sufferings is an old Artifice of Dissenters; so did
their Ancestors the Donatists, as may be seen in St. Austin, and so did the
Popish Priests, (their late Brethren and Allies,) in the time of Queen
Elizabeth, as may be seen in Creswell's Philopater and the Books of Parsons.
Behold how one of them exclaimeth, Where are now the old Tyrants of the World,
Nero, Decius, Dioclesian, Maxentius, and the rest of the great Persecutors of
the Christious? Where is Genserick and Hunricus, with their Arrian Heretics?
Alluding to the Persecutions of the State here as infinitely beyond them. This
was just such another Outcry about Persecution as this Ministers. And how did
the Statesmen of those Times apologize for their Severity? See a Treatise of
the Lord Burluigh, Entitled, The Execution of Justice in England, for
Maintenance of public Peace.
The sum of their defense was this; That what they did was necessary to the
Preservation of the State, and that their Treasons and Seditions occasioned the
hard Laws against them. And, Will not the same defense serve to justify the
Laws against the Dissenters? The severest As the 1 Eliz. c. 2.23 Eliz. c. 1.35
Eliz. c. 1.
Laws, and the severest Proceedings against them, were in the Time of Queen
Elizabeth, they were then suspended, deprived, imprisoned, banished, and some
of them even Barrow and Greenwood.
executed, for their scandalous Writings; and the ground of these Proceedings
may be learnt from the Queen her self in the Speech of the Lord Keeper
Puckering to the Parliament, Transeribed by Dr. Pierce from his own hand
Writing, and Published in his Discovery against Mr. Baxter, an. 1659. p. 109.
which was delivered by her Command and Direction: There he tells them, That
they were commanded by her Majesty, to give no ear to the Solicitations of the
Puritans, of whom he declares, It may be doubted, whether they, or the Jesuits,
do offer more danger, or be more speedily to be repressed, and this Reason is
there given for it, because they publish, in their Books, and teach in all
their Conventicles, sundry Opinions, not only dangerous to the Realm, but also
Derogatory to her sacred Majesty and her Crown, and by Separation of themselves
from the Unity of their fellow Subjects, and by abusing the sacred Authority of
their Prince, they do join with the Jesuits in opening the Door, and preparing
the Way, to the Spanish Invasion, that is threatened against the Realm. Thus far
the Queen her self, by the Mouth of her Lord Keeper; and so effectual was this
Speech, that the Parliament then passed the Act of the 35 Eliz. the severest
against the Dissenters in the whole Body of our Laws. But a larger account of
the true Reasons of those hard Laws against the Papists and Dissenters may be
seen in a It is printed at large in Dr. Burnet's Hist. of the Reform. par. 2
lib. 3. p. 420.
Letter of Sir Francis Walsingham her Secretary, to Monsieur Chiroy a
Frenchman. The Preservation of the State, against their Seditious Practices, is
there assigned as the true Cause of those Severities. And as to the Puritans,
he concludes, that after they had been a great while tolerated; When they
desended into that vile and base Means of Defacing the Government of the Church
by ridiculous Pasquils; when they began to make many Subjects in doubt to take
Oaths, which is one of the fundamental Points of Justice in all Places; when
they began both to vaunt of their Strength and Number of their Partisans, and
to use Comminations, that their Cause would prevail through uproar and
violence; then it appeared to be no more Deal, no more Canscience, but mere
Faction and Division; and therefore, though the State were compelled to hold
somewhat a harder hand to restrain them than before, yet was it with as great a
moderation, as the Peace of the State or Church could permit. Such were the
Reasons of the Laws and Prosecutions against them in the happy Days of Queen
Elizabeth: And have not these Observations been since confirmed by woeful
Experience? Is it any wonder, that at the Restoration of our Church and
Covernment, (which had been destroyed by a most unjustifiable Rebellion, when
the whole Kingdom had been turned into an Aceldama, and the best of Kings was
barbarously murdered,) the Lawgivers should look back upon the Miseries they
had felt, and secure the King, the Kingdom, and the Church, against the
increase of those Sectaries that had so lately destroyed them; and yet it is
notorious, that these Laws were never rigorously executed, but when necessity
required it: Their Assemblies were ever tolerated or connived at, when
themselves were pleased to show that favor to the Government; but when they
began to libel, associate, and plot, against the King, and it was evident, that
the ruin of Church and State was again attempted; and all the Sectaries were
ready to contribute their Strength and Power to effect it, was it not then high
time for the Government to oppose them, to secure it self by the Execution of
Laws, and to prosecute those who were resolved to ruin it. They had Liberty
enough, till it was made a Cloak of Maliciousness, and the Government did never
persecute them, but when it was persecuted by them. How impertinem then is it
to clamor at the Church, because the State made Laws for its own preservation;
How unjust to arraign their Governors as Tyrannical, because they would not be
destroyed; and how impious to call suffering for Sedition; I ersecution for the
Gospel.

If these Ministers had any regard to the Judgment of St. Aug. Tom. 2. Epist.
48. contra Donat. and Rogat. devi Corrig. Haeret.
Augustine, it would be to some purpose to ranscribe the essicacious Reasons;
with which he justifies the use of Temporal Penalties, for the reducing of
Dissenters; but however they may deal with him, the agreement of their chief
Divines, the declared Judgment of their infallible Assembly, and their own
undeniable practice, when they had power, will be enough to silence and condemn
them.

The Dissenters of late have wearied the World with their outcries against
Persecution, they have magnified Liberty of Conscience as the Magna Charta of
Mankind, and cried it up in their Addresses to K. James, as the restoring of
God himself to his Empire; But nothing in the World that thinks and sees, can
possibly believe them; for their own Writings, both past and present do
manifestly show, that they never condemn Persecution, but when they cannot
Persecute. It may be proved by a vast cloud of witnesses, That Toleration has
been ever damned by the Presbyterians; and therefore it unavoidably follows,
that Persecution has been ever approved by them. I could make good this by a
deduction from their first Apostle Mr. Cartwright, to their present Patriarch
Mr. Baxter; but in a Matter so notorious, so much labor, is unnecessary. I
appeal to the Testimonies of They were these, Dr. Burgess, Mr. Ward, Mr.
William Good, Mr. Tho. Thorowgood, Mr. Humf. Hardwick, Arthur Salwey, Will.
Reynar, Geo. Hughes, Edm. Calamy, Tho. Case, John Lightfoot, Tho. Watson. R.
Baxter, Tho. Horton, Lazarus Serman, Matt. Newcomen, Richard Vines, Simeon Ash;
James Crauford, Tho. Edwards.
Twenty of their most eminent Preachers, who in the Reign of Presbytery, did in
their Sermons and Writings, with great Zeal, inveigh against Toleration, as
unlawful in it self, and destructive unto Church and State: I refer you
likewise to a very pathetical Letter to the Assembly, Subscribed by all the
London Divines, Ann. 16^5. wherein they expressly Declare their abhorrence of
Toleration, and exhort the Assembly to allow no Liberty to the Independants, as
being notorious Schis maticks; and both this Letter, and that collection of
Tostimonies are to be found in a Pamphlet, Entitled, Toleration disproved,
which was Printed at Oxford, Ann. 1670. But hear the Divines of that Assembly
it self, expostulating with their Dissenting Brethren the Independants; Papers
of Accommodation, cited by Dr. Still. in his Sermon about the mischief of
Separation, p. 41, 42.
They desire an Answer to this one thing. Whether some must be denied Liberty
of their Conscience in matter of Practice, ctice, or none? If none, then say
they, we must renounce our Covenant, and let in Prelacp again, and all other
ways; If a denial of Liberty unto some, may be just, then Uniformity may be
selted without any Tyranny: They charge them farther with Cited out of the same
Papers, in his unreasonableness of Speararation. p. 69.
opening a gap for all Sects to challenge such a Liberty as their due; And add,
That this Liberty was denied by the Churches of New England, and they have as
just grounds to deny it as tdey. Thus we see, that not the Presbyterians only,
but even the new Light of Independancy is against Toleration; and that
persecution of Dissenters was not only their Doctrine, but their Vow and
Covenant also. In that Covenant they Swore to extirpate Prelacy, and to
endeavor after Uniformity in Doctrine, Discipline and Worship; and is it not a
wonderful Confidence in this Minister, to Arraign the Church for persecuting,
and at the same time to contend for the obligation of a persecuting Covenant,
to reckon Uniformity among the accursed Stuff, and then Declare that they are
bound by Oath to settle it.

But their practice at last, is the clearest demonstration of their Doctrine.
Behold, an An Ordinance for putting in execution the Directory, August. 11.
1645.
Ordinance of Parliament against the use of the Liturgy; If any person
hereafter shall at any time use, or cause to be used the Book of Common Prayer
in any Church, or Public place of Worship, or in any Private place or Family
within the Kingdom; every person so offending, for the first offense, shall pay
the sum of Five, for the Second, Ten pounds, and for the Third, shall suffer
One whole years imprisonment, without Bail or Mainprize. Do any of our Laws
forbid the dissenters to serve God in their own Families, as they please? or
where is there such an abridgment of Liberty in our Statute Book? But yet their
proceedings were much more cruel than their Ordinances; so far were they from
allowing any indulgence to the Church of England, that they would not allow
Liberty of Conscience to the Supreme Head and Governor of it; They refused to
permit their King the use of the Common Prayer in his own Chapel, and infisted
to obtrude the Directory upon him against his Conscience; so that he had reason
to complain, as he did, Decl. of Jun. 18. after the Votes of Nun-Addresses.
of their offering violence to the Conscience of their Sovereign, and to say,
If it be Liberty of Conscience they desire, he who wants it, is most ready to
give it. Nay, those Prosbyterians, when they had him in their custody, were so
inhumane, as to deny him the attendance of so much as one Chaplain for the
performance of Divine offices, tho the Good King did often and earnestly
Request it, which (as himself observes in his In his (...).
Meditations on it) was a piece of Rigor and Barbarism, greater, than is ever
used by Christians, to the meanest prisoners, and greatest malefactors. Thus it
was that they dealt with their Sovereign; and the whole Household were Treated
no better than the Master of it.

It is known to all the World, how the Episcopal Party were plundered,
Sequestered, Decimated, Imprisoned, and totally Ruined by them; With what rigor
their rebellious Oaths, Covenants, Engagements and Abjurations were imposed,
and that they were all ejected out of the Churches, Colleges, Schools, and
Universities. The Lord Survey of the Leviathan, p. 305
Clarendon tells us, That the Reverend Bishops who were left alive, and out of
prison being stripped of all that was their own, preserved themselves from
Famine, by stooping to the lowest Offices of Teaching Schools, and Officiating
in private Families for their Bread, which, together with the Alms of
Charitable Persous, was the only portion of the poor Bishops, and all the
faithful Clergy of the Church of England. His Preface to Bishop Mortons defense
of Episcopacy. p. 39.
Sir Henry Yelverton computes, (and he thought that he was not mistaken) that
there were 8000, who forsook all for the Covenant; and of an 729 Parishes
within the Bills of Mortality in Londom, 15 were ejected, besides the Prebends
of St. Paul's and Westminster.

And now it will not be improper to add the Reply of Archbishop Bramhal to Mr.
Baxter's Complaint, That the most Learned, Godly, Painful and Peaceable Men
were ejected, because they durst not use the Ceremonies. Let Mr. B. says he, P.
643. of his Works.
sum up into one Catalogue, all the Nonconformists throughout the Kingdom of
England, ever since the beginning of the Reformation, who have been cast aside
at any time, because they durst not use the Ceremonies; I dare abate him all
the rest of the Kingdom, and only exhibit the Martyrologies of London, and the
Two Universities; or a List of those, who in these late intestine Wars, have
been imprisoned and banished by his Party in these three places alone, or left
to the merciless World to beg their Bread, for no other Crime but Loyalty, and
because they stood affectod to the Ancient Rites and Ceremonies of the Church
of England; and they shall double them for Number, and for Learning, Piety,
Industry, and the love of Peace, exceed them incomparably. This is an assertion
that shall stand unconfuted for ever and let every one now judge between the
Church of England and the Separatists, which have been the greatest Persecutors.

Thus have I been forced to retort the accusation, and to make it good by
undeniable Proofs against them; that I might silence, if possible, their
Hypocritical Clamours, and convince their Followers, that they are inexcusable
in Judging that in others, which they do themselves; and that of all men they
are the unsittest to pull the Mote out of the Churches Eye, when the Beam is in
their own. If Persecution be the accursed Thing, why have not the Dissenters
themseves appointed Days of Humiliation for it? Why do they not give it a Place
in their Confessions? Is it not strange, that, in 40 years time, they should
not express their Repentance? And (to use this Ministers Expression,) is it not
fit, that for one Tear of the Church of England, they should drop ten, nay, an
hundred for one. It will be objected, that some of them, of late years, have
condemned all Persecution for Religion; but have they ever kept a Day of
Humiliation for it? Do they not think themselves bound by Covenant to extirpate
the whole Government of the Church of England? And notwithstanding the Clamours
of that Party against Persecution, is it not evident, that wherever they get
Power, they immediately persecute. We have two Books already of the History of
their Persecutions in Scotland, and when to the extirpation of all the Bishops,
the ruin of Six hundred Ministers, and the Desolation of four Universities,
they shall add the Destruction of the miserable Relics of that Church, I will
not say their Story will be much greater than Fox's Martyrology, but I think
the Dissenters Sufferings will be but an Enchiridion to it. In the mean time we
have a fair Specimen, however of the moderation of that Party, whose tender
Mercies have been always cruel, and a clear Demonstration of what may be
expected by us, if GOD, in His just Judgments, should deliver up our Church
unto their Fury. And yet these are the men that exclaim against Persecution,
and cry out against the Church of England as cruel and tyrannical, but let them
remember that Reflection, which was long since extorted by their Clamours, Dr.
St. Sermon. on the Mischief of Separ. p. 55.
That they want the Ingenuity of Adonibezek to reflect on the Thumbs and Toes;
which they have cut off from others, and think themselves bound to do it again,
if it were in their Power.

But after all, this Minister, though he furiously declaims against
Persecution, and with so much Malice and Acrimony arraigns the Church of
England for it, yet if his invectives be well considered, one shall find that
he no where declares for Liberty of Conscience, and that no one ought to be
perfecuted for his Religion. When he condemns Persecution, he adds always, See
p. 3, 4, 6, 8, 11.
for the Truth, which is a plain Intimation, that Persecution for Error he
accounts Lawful; if he really does not, to what purpose is that Limitation? Why
did he not openly condemn all Punishments for Conscience; but then he would
have condemned the constant Doctrine of his Party, and though he was too wary
to do that, yet it would have spoiled the design his Sermons, if he had spoke
out honestly, and asserted the Lawfulness of persecuting men for their Errors:
But if this be his Judgment, (and that Limitation is a strong Presumption of
it,) then the sum of all is this, That the Presbyterians may lawfully persecute
all other Churches, but must never be persecuted themselves by any, because all
other Churches are erroneous, and the whole Inelosure of Truth is theirs, and
it is only the Persecution of Truth that is condemned by them.

It is evident, that he himself founds the Iniquity of the severe Proceedings
against them, upon this ground alone, that they suffered for the Truth. For to
this Objection, p. 11.
that the Nonconformists have been buffeted for their Faults; his only Reply is
this, Let Us have a fair Hearing before we be judged, the Persecution of Truth
is a great Sin wherever it is found; then he immediately proposes the Reasons of
their Nonconformity, and concludes at last, p. 24.
That if in all these: Things the Nonconformists are in the right, and have
witnessed to the Truth, then ought the Church of England to hang down her head,
etc. And thus, as he states the case himself, if the Dissenters have not
witnessed to the Truth, the Church of England is not guilty, and all their
Outcries about Persecution must pass for nothing. Here then lies the stress of
the dispute, Whether the Nonconformists have Truth on their side, and were
therefore really persecuted for Righteousness-sake? I proceed therefore to
examine.

Q. The Reasons and Objections which he pleads for his Non conformity.

His first Stumbling block is the Subscription in the Act of Uniformity, with
the Oath in the Oxford. Act, in which are these Words, I. A. B. do declare,
That it is unlawful, upon any pretense whatsoever, to take Arms against the
King: Again I do swear, That it is not lawful, etc. He adds, we refused thus to
declare and swear, and he requires three Things to be observed;

First, A man may believe a Proposition to be true, but would not be willing to
swear it; and this Objection is a perfect Cavil. He that asserts a Proposition
to be true, does mean only that he is convinced of its Truth, and he that
swears it is true, does only call God to witness that he is convinced of it.
Nothing is more obvious than that in all assertory Oaths, when we swear to the
Truth of Things, we are understood to declare no more than our own Belief and
Knowledge concerning them; and thus, when I swear that it is unlawful to
resist, nothing more can be understood, than that I am fully satisfied of it;
if I believe it unlawful, I may subscribe and declare that it is so, and if I
came do that, I may also swear it, since in this Case an Oath, superadded to a
Declaration, must follow the nature of the Principal, and can be nothing else
but a Sacred Confirmation of my sincerity in declaring; and I am morally
certain, that no Magistrate in England would have refused to administer the
Oath with this Interpretation.

Secondly, he objects, that Barclay, Grotius, and others who have written in
favor of Kings, do yet allow some Cases, in which it is lawful to resist them,
and if a King does govern by his Will, and not by Law, he does excidere de
jure, that is, he forfeits his Right to Govern. I answer, that an Arbitrary
King does forfeit his Right, is affirmed by neither of these Authors, but is
contradicted by them; and though it be true, that Barelay, Grotius, and others,
whether Republicans, Jesuits, or Presbyterians, have allowed Exceptions for
resisting, yet I am sure the Holy Ghost has made none in Scripture; they that
resist shall receive Damnation, is denounced without any Limitation, and how
shall we limit, where GOD has not limited, or distinguish, where He has not
distinguished. So was the Rule understood and practiced by the first and best
of Christians, so was it taught by the first Reformers of our Church, and some
of them with their Blood bore witness to it. The Popes were the first
Christians that taught Resistance, but though an Augel from Heaven had taught
it, we have received another Doctrine, and could not have departed from it.

Thirdly, he adds, That all the Nobility and Gentry of England and Scotland,
and all the Protestant Princes beyond Sea, in their Proceedings against King
James, have justified the Nonconformists in refusing the Oath. Now I have no
Correspondence with all these Princes, Nobility and Gentry, and therefore know
not their minds about it, but I am sure he cannot make good his all without
taking Sanctuary in Hyperbole. There be many that think those Proceedings may
be justified without justifying Resistance, but I believe there are no Princes
that will allow it against themselves, and if the Majority of the Nobility and
Gentry do justify what they once condemned, their Authority can be urged on
neither side, and though there he a Revolution of Opinions as well as
Governments, yet the nature of Things is immutable, and Truth the same
yesterday, to day, and for ever.

His Second scruple is about Reordination, as though Ordination by Presbyters
were not sufficient, without the laying on of the hands of those, we now call
Bishops. But first, since this Minister has now undertaken to argue, he should
have proved, that Reordination implys a Nullity of their former Orders; But, as
no Declaration of their insufficiency is required, so, neither is it implied in
the nature of the thing, nor understood to be so by Construction of the Fact,
as appears from the Reordination of many French Ministers, whose Orders have
never been condemned by our Church, who never intended to renource them by that
Action, nor are supposed to do so. Secondly, though the Ordination of Presbyters
be granted to be sufficient, yet this will not justify the Nonconformists
Ordinations; There is all evidnet difference betwixt the Case of these
Ministers and the Presbyters of some Foreign Churches.

1. Those Foreign Divines, though their Churches are not under Episcopal
Government, yet they do not separate from Episcopal Communion, but have all
owned Commun on with the Church of England. Blondel, their best Advocate for
Presbyterian Parity, does yet condemn Separation from Bishop; as Schismatical,
and expressly Praef. ad Apol. p. 59.
declares, that Aerius was therefore an Heretic, because he asserted, That
separation was to be made from those who admitted any difference between
Bishops and Presbyters. But their approving of Episcopal Government, and
coadmning Separation from it as Schismatical, has been so often, so
irrefragably Ibid p. 47 and Bramhall's Replication to affirm the Bishop of
Chalcedon, p. 164 of his Works.
proved, that there can be no longer any Controversy about it. But on the
other side, the present Nonconformists do make Episcopal Government the chief
reason of their Separation, and condemn it as unlawful and Antichristian, which
no Resormed Church or Divine that we know, did ever before them; and this is
certainly a very material difference between them.

2. The Ordination of Presbyters withou: Bishops in those Foreign Churches, has
been generally defended by the plea of Necessity; thus it has been defended by
some of the Foreign Bishop Hall's, and Mortons Bcoks in defense of Eiscopacy,
Archbishop Bramhall in his Sup. Dr. Durell's Church Government, Saywell's
Evangelical and Catholic Unity, and lately in the Judgment of Foreign,
reformed Divines.
Divines themselves, and thus by many As Downham, Mason, Field, Andrews, and
leately by Dr. Sherlock in his Vindication of the defense of Dr. Still.
Divines of our own Church. As their circumstances were, it was impossible for
them to have Bishops, and therefore they wanted them out of invincible
necessity; whereas our Presbyterians are uncapal le of that Plea, they reject
the Authority of Bishops, and Ordain in opposition to them, and therefore it is
evident, they are under no necessity, and consequently their Orders may be
thought in ufficient, without impeaching the validity of Foreign Ordinations;
And thus having separated their Cause, from that of other Protestants, I
proceed to examine what he urges for it, and his first Reason is this;

I. That the word of God makes not difference between the Bishop and the
Presbyter, or Pastor of a Church, and he cites those Texts, Acts 20.7.28. and
Tit. 1.5, 6, 7. to prove that those, Names are promiscuously used. Three ways
have been taken to Answer this Objection; 1. That both the Names of Bishop, and
Presbyter in Scripture, denote always the Prelatical Bishop, and not the Modern
Presbyter. 2. That even in Scripture, the Names are so distinguished, that a
mere Presbyter alone is never called a Bishop, though a Bishop is often called a
Presbyter. Both these Opinions have been well defended By Dr. Hammond and Dr.
Tailor.
, and perhaps, it is impossible to consute them; but to cut off all superfluous
Disputes, it is enough to Answer, 3. That though the Names of Bishop and
Presbyter are not distinct in Scripture; yet it is a very fallacious way of
arguing from the indistinction of Names; to infer the Identity of Offices. St.
John the Apostle calls himself twice a 2d Ep. John v. 1. 3d Ep. v. 1.
Presbyter, Romans 16.7.
Andronious Junia, and Phil. 2.25.
Epapheaditus, (who according to this Minister's opinion, were only
Presbyters,) are reciprocally called Apostles; Are the Offices of an Apostle
and Presbyter therefore really the same? This one instance is a clear
Demonstration of the Falsehood of that Consequence. Though there was a confusion
of Names, there was yet, a distinction of Offices, and if that can be proved,
viz. That in the Apostolical Churches, some single Persons had a Pre-eminency
of Power and Authority over the other Presbyters, it will necessarily follow,
that that Office, (to which the Name of Bishops is now appropriated,) is at
least of Apostolical Institution.

Timothy and Titus See Jus Divinum Ministerii Anglicani, p. 71, 72.
are granted by all sides to have had such a Superiority; and the Presbyterians
only pretend that their Office was extraordinary, and expired with them; but
this is affirmed without sufficient Proof, for what, though Timothy be required
to do the Work of an Evangelist, can they prove that this signifies any more
than a Preacher of the Gospel? And if it could be proved to be a Temporary
Office, how does it appear that his Episcopal Power was a part of that Office,
or that it was not distinct and separate from it? On the contrary it may be
proved, by a Cloud of Witnesses, that this Power was not Temporary, but was
every where derived by Succession upon single Persons; and particulably: as to
the Succession of Timothy and Titus, we have the Confession of Du Moulin, In
his 3d. Ep. to Bishop Andrews, p. 181, 182.
That the Episcopal Order was (of Apostolical institution) -- and that what
name soever we give to Timothy and Titus, whether Bishops or Evangelists, it is
manife that they had Bishops for their Successors and Heirs of their
pre-eminency.) And in fine, this precarious Pretense of extraordinary Offices
may with equal reason be urged, (as we find it is by Anabaptists; Quakers and
Socinians) against the whole Order of the Ministry; and if it be admitted (as
Mr. In his Christian Directory, cited in the Vnreason. of Separ. p. 264.
Baxter once confessed) we leave room for andaecious Wits, to question other
Gospel Institutions, at Pastors and Sacraments, and to say they were but for
one Age. The Sum is this, there is clear Evldence in Scripture, that there were
some Officers who had Power of Jurisdiction over Presbyters, and therefore the
Texts which he produces to show the Community of Names can be no Argument
against it.

But to justify Ordination by Presbyter, he cites, 1 Timothy 4.14. where it is
intimated that Timothy was ordained by the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery. To this it is answered On the brief Account of Church Government,
in Answer to the writings of the Presbyterians, p. 195. etc.
. 1. That Presbytery there is taken for the Office of a Presbyter, and so the
Sense runs thus, neglect not the Gift, or Office of a Presbyter which was given
thee by Prophecy with the Imposition of hands; and this Sense is warranted by
the Authority of Calv. Instit. lib. 4. c. 3. sect. 16.
Calvin, and of St. St Jerome. in Locum.
Jerome long before him. 2. If Presbytery be taken for the Ordainers: it may
nevertheless be understood of such Presbyters as had a Superior Power over
others, for as Apostles and Bishops are sometimes called Presbyters, so might
they Collectively be called Presbytery; and accordingly it is observed, that
the Apostles themselves are called by St Ignatius, the Presbytery of the
Church. 3. It is evident from 2 Timothy 1.6. that St. Paul was the principal, if
not the only (...) ordainer of him, and surely it is no good consequence, that
if Presbyters may assist an Apostle or a Bishop at an Ordmation, therefore they
may ordain without him. He conchides, that Augustine, Jerome, and Chrysostom
with many other Greeks and Latins, are of his Judgment, but he produces no
passages out of any of these Authors, but asserts roundly, that they are all
of his mind, and it is as easy to answer, that they are all against him;
however, when he shall produce his Testimonies, it will be time enough to
examine them.

Secondly, He proceeds to justify his Orders by the Authority of our own and
Foreign Churches, All our learned Divines at the Reformation from Popery, beld
that Ordination by the Pastors of Churches (he means Presbyters) was valid and
good. Thus he affirms on, without proving, many Greeks and Latins and all our
Divines, are only consident Phrases and ought to pass for nothing; in short I
defy him to produce any one of those Divines, that has allowed of Presbyterian
Ordinations made in a Schismatical opposition to Bishops, and without the Case
of necessity. But he adds, The Twenty third Article of Ministering in the
Congregation, seems to speak as much; That Article declares, That it is not
lawful to exercise the Ministry without a lawful Calling, and that those are
lawfully called, who are called by Men, who have public Authority given them
in the Quibus potestas public concessa est in Ecclesia Art. Edit. 1552 and
1562.
Congnegation, i.e. the Church to do it. And how impertinent is this
Allegation? was public Authority ever given in our Church to Presbyters, to
ordain Priests or Deacons? on the contrary, it is expressy provided in the
Preface to the Approved Art. 36. and established by Acts of Parl. Reg. Edw. 6.
and Eliz. p. 58.
Form of Ordination in our Liturgy, that whereas it is evident unto all Men
diligently reading Holy Scripture and ancient Authors, that from the Apostles
time there has been these Orders of Ministers in Christ's Church, Bishops,
Priests and Deacons -- therefore to the intent these Orders should be
continued, and reverently used and esteemed in the Church of England; it is
requisite, that no Man shall execute any of them, excep the be called, tried,
examined, and admitted according to the Form hereafter following; and I hope it
is evident from that form, that a Bishop is necessary to Ordination.

He goes on and affirms, That the French, Belgic and Helvetick Churches,
besides many others, are of his Judgment. All the other Protestant Churches
(excepting only Geneva) have Episoopal Government, and that they allow
Ordination by Presbyters in opposition to it, is an Assertion that may well be
thought incredible, till it be sufficiently proved; and as for the Churches he
mentions, their Divines account the Non-Conformists Ordinations Schismatical,
and the best defense of their own is necessity. But he needs not name the
Church of Scotland, for Scotland, (says he) has justified all our
Nonconformity. By Scotland he means the Presbyterian party of that Kingdom,
See the Letters about the Persecution Scotland p. 58.
the lesser part for the whole; but however, if Scotland justifies them, it is
the only Church in the world that do so.

Lastly, He adds, our Diocesan Bishops may glory over us, as the Kings Bishops,
or Bishops of the State, which is just the Raillery of the Papists, Parliament
Bishops, and Nags-head Bishops. But are our Bishops ordained by the King and
State? are they not Christ's Bishops, and Scripture Bishops? No, for this new
Apostle of Patmos, does Peremptorily tell them, that they must not pretend to
be so near in Blood to the Scripture Bishops of the first Two hundred years as
the Pastors of single Congregations. But with Submission to his Apostleship, I
reply, that the Jus Divin. Minis. Aug. 71.
Presbyterian Assembly have granted, that Timothy and Titus had super out
Authority over Presbyters, and therefore our Bishops having the same Authority,
may pretend to Kindred with them. 2. Ibid. p. 140.
They acknowledge also after Blondel, that above 140 years after Christ,
Bishops were set over Presbyters; so that they grant them to be introduced
within 40 or 50 years after the decease of all the Apostles. 3. The Epistles of
Ignatius (who was Contemporary with the Apostles, and suffered Martyrdom within
nine years after the decease of St. John) do manifestly show; that the
superior Authority of Bishops was then established in the Church, and
therefore certainly by Apostolical Institution. And the Authority of these
Epistles has been so demonstratively cleared from all Exceptions by Bishop
Pearson, that there is now no Contreversie about it. 4. Mr. Chillingworth at
the end of his Book, has plainly demonstrated the Apostolical Institution of
Episcopacy, and he Sums up his Demonstration in these Words.

Episcopal Government is acknowledged to have been received universally in the
Church, presently after the Apostles times.

Between the Apostles times, and this presently after, there was not time
enough for, nor possibility of so great an Alteration;

And therefore, there was no such Alterat on as is pretended. And therefore,
Episcopacy being By Peter du Moulin, Beza. Chamier Nic. vedetius, whom he cites
as Confessing it.
confessed to be so Ancient and Catholic, must be granted also to be
Apostolic. Quod erat Demonstrandum.

And I hope this Minister will condescend to answer this Demonstration, when he
writes again, or however be so modest, as not to conclude so confidently, when
he has proved nothing. But behold the Chair of Infallibility! Wherefore I say,
that Ordination by the hands of the Pastors of Churches, filled with the Holy
Ghost, is much more elegible than by Diocesan Bishops; a very peremptory
Decree, but we must not question it, for Pythagoras has said so; yet thus much
I presume to Answer, that Diocesan Bishops are filled with the Holy Ghost, as
well as parochal Pastors, and that Schismatics have no Title to it.

We come now to his Third Reason of Nonconformity, the Declaration of Assent
and Consent, required in the Act of Uniformity to the Book of Common-Prayes.
And (...) He cannot Assent to that passage in the Athanasian Creed, where it is
said, that every one that does not keep that Faith whole, shall without doubt
perish Everlastingly. Now it is certain, the Athanasian Creed is entirely The
Judgment of Foreign Reformed Churches, p. 32, 33.
received, and approved by all the protestant Churches in the World, (excepting
only the Antitrinitarians) as has been lately observed; and therefore this
Minister is herein a Nonconformist to all Protestant Churches, as well as to
the Church of England, and they are all Condemned together, as practicing a
point of Popery, in damning all that differ from them. Let us see now the
Reason upon which all Protestant Churches are condemned by him. One Article
(says he) of that Creed is about the Procession of the Holy Ghost, from the
Father and the Son, which the Greek Churches did not believe nor receive; and
supposing them in an Error, he adds, I must be very bold if I leap into the
Throne of Judgment, and pronounce them damned. I am as much afraid as he is, of
invading Christ's Tribunal, and pronouncing any one damned, much more a whole
Church, and such a Church as comprehends so many Millions of Christians.

But, 1. The Differences between the Greek and Latin Church, about the Article
of Procession, is by Mr. Field of the Church, lib. 3. c. 1. Loads Conf. p. 16.
Pearson on the Creed, p. 324.
Learned men affirmed, to be only verbal, because the Greeks acknowledged under
another Scripture Expression in the same thing, which the Latins understand by
Procession, viz. that the Spirit is of, or from the Son, as he is of and from
the Father; That as the Son is God of God, by being of the Father, so the Holy
Ghost is God of God, by being of the Father and the Son, as receiving that
infinite and eternal Essence from them both; Thus Bishop Pearson upon the
Article, and if so it be, then there is no difference about the Doctrine it
self, but only about the word Procession. But says this Minister, The
Procession of the Holy (...) Ghost is a most profound Mystery, and very much
obscured by bringing in word Procession; and is not this a most profound
Objection? Is it not rather profound Non Sense, to say, that the Procession is
obscured by the word Procession? And how does the expressing that Mystery by
Procession any more obscure it, than the infinite Duration of God is obscured
by calling it Eternity? But, the Scripture on that occasion never uses the
word. In relation to the Father, it is used John 15.26.
expressly, and in Relation to the Son, it is contained virtually in Scripture,
where the Holy Ghost is often said to be the Spirit of the Son, and that is all
which is understood by proceeding from him: and if no words are to be admitted,
that are not found in Scripture, (the old-Subtersuge of the Arrians) we must
not only exterminate Homoonsios, Procession, and eternal Generation, but we
must burn all our Bibles, except the Greek and Hebrew, because they are not
properly the Word of God, but Words that signify by the Agreement of Men; and
if the original Words of Scripture may be Translated by Words of humane
Institution, why may not a Doctrine of Scripture be so expressed also.

Secondly, as many of the Roman Church have absolved the Greeks from damnable
Error in this Point, so it is notorious, that the Writers of our Church have
always vindicated them from it; and therefore it cannot be imagined, that our
Church in this Creed should pronounce them damned; and it must be manifest
injustice to put such Interpretations upon the Creeds of a Church, as have heen
ever disclaimed by the chiefest Writers of it.

Thirdly, These damnatory Clauses must be understood to refer only to the
Belief of the Doctrines contained in the Creed, and not to every particular
Word and Expression in it. The great Fundamental Doctrine, which in this Creel
is called the Catholic Faith, is this, That we worship one God in Trinity, and
Trinity in Unity, and of this Faith it is declared, That they who keep it not,
shall perish everlastingly. And they who believe this, viz. That the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, are Three Persons and me God, do believe all that follows
in the Creed, which contains nothing, but what is Essential to the Unity and
Distinction of the Three Persons, and therefore however, they who believe the
Trinity, may scruple some Words and Expressions in this Creed, or understand
nothing of them; yet as long as they believe the Doctrines, they are not
included in the Sentence of perishing everlastingly. Faith belongs not unto
Words but Things, and though no one shall be damned for a Word, yet it is no
uncharitableness to say after our Savior, that he, who believes not, shall be
damned; neither is it any Popery to conclude, that if the Belief of the Trinity
be necessary to Baptism, it is necessary to Salvation; and if this Minister be
of another mind, let him answer the Arguments that have been Dr. Sher.
Vindication of the Doctrine of the Trinity.
lately urged for the necessity of that Belief; and let him also satisfy the
World, if he can, why the Athanasian Creed, which the Presbyterians appointed
to be read in Churches, in their Directory drawn up at the Savoy, an. 1661,
should be afterward a Reason of their Nonconformity.

But he goes on with his Scruples about the Matter of Consent, and declines to
speak of the Ceremonies, the Cross, the Surplice, and behold the Reason,
because all know they came from Rome, and when Rome falls, they will fall too.
This is an Art full of Venom, to traduce by odious Insinuations, that which
cannot be opposed by just Objections. It appears from Orig. in Ps. 38. Hom. 2.
Origin and others, that the Cross in Baptism, and from See Hooker, lib. 5.
rect. 29.
S. Chrysostom, and S. Jerome, that such a Garment as the Surplice, were of
Ancient Usage; their Antiquity is far enough beyond Popery, and they come no
more from Rome, than do our Creeds and our Bibles; and if this Minister has
had a Revelation in his Patmos, that they shall fall with Rome, we are
foretold, that in the last Times false Prophets shall arise, and must not take
his Dream for Vision. Next, en passant, he upbraids us with our praying for
King James, a professed Papist, that he might persevere in the Faith, but there
is no such Prayer in our Liturgy; and if there were, seeing the Papists are
Christians, and believe all that is necessary to Salvation, (for I hope, he
will not leap into the Throne of Judgment, and pronounce them damned,) why may
we not pray for their Perseverance in the Faith, not the Faith of a Papist, but
the Faith of a Christian, that will suffice to save them. And now, after these
little Skirmishes, we enter into the Battle, and must encounter the Reasons
which he has mustered up against reading the imposed Form of Common Prayer. And
here pray judge between the Church of England and the Nonconformists.

First, he affirms, that during the Apostles Times, and two or three Hundred
Years after, there was no Liturgy used nor imposed, neither did they direct for
the drawing up of any, and enforcing it by Penal Laws. Here are many things
jumbled together, which must be separated, Penal Laws; imposing set Forms;
Directions for them by the Apostles; and the Primitive use of them. As for
Penal Laws, the Presbyterians themselves allow them, and their Directory is as
accountable for them as our Liturgy; imposing to be considered hereafter; and
as to Directions for composing Forms, out of many that are urged, I shall
select these three Considerations.

1. Seeing there is convincing See Dr. Flammond's View of the Directory; Seldom
on Eutichyus, p. 83. Dr. Lightfoot, Vol. 2. p. 158. and Dr. Comber's
Scholastical History, p. 3. the Examiner of Dr. Combet, p. 4. does question the
Solidity of their Proofs, but yet declines to undertake them.
Evidence, that the Jewish Church had a fixed Liturgy, and therefore both our
Savior, and his Apostles, who frequented their Synagogues, did certainly join
in it, and not one Iota is to be found in the Gospel that condemns it; from
this Silence, and that Practice, we may certainly conclude, that the use of
fixed Liturgies is lawful; that the joining in them is warranted by their
Example; and that separation from a Church upon that account is absolutely
unlawful.

2. Our Savior himself composed a Form of Prayer, for his Disciples, and in so
doing has See M. Mede on Matt. 6 9.
commended a set Form of Prayer unto His Church; He enjoined them, when they
prayed, to say, Our Father, etc. which is as plain a Prescription of a Form as
any Words can express. It is Clarkson 's Disc. conc. Liturgies. p. 3.
confessed that this Form was anciently used in the Church, and this Primitive
Use may be very reasonably ascribed to that Prescription, especially when we
have so plain a Testimony as that of Tert. de Orat. ca. 1.
Tertullian, Novis Discipulis Christus novam Orationis Formam determinavit; i.
e. Christ has prescribed a new Form of Prayer to his new Disciples: And
therefore from the Institution, nay from the Use of that Prayer which is
confessedly ancient, we may certainly conclude, that a Form of Prayer is lawful
in it self; that it is useful and edifying, that a Prayor is not therefore
unlawful or inexpedient because it is a Form; and that the Prescription, or Use
of a Form in a Church, will not justify separation from it.

3. All the Directions which our Savior or His Apostles have given for the
Performance of the Duty of Prayer, may be applied to Forms of Prayer; suppose a
Prayer to be exactly composed according to those Directions, may not such a
Prayer be frequently used? Does it cease to be made according to those
Directions if it becomes a Form? Is a good Prayer spoiled by using it often?
And can the same Prayer be agreeable and not agreeable to Scripture, though it
is not altered? The Spirit has given Directions for Prayer, and those are
equally applicable to Prayers composed by private Men, and to those that are
made for the use of a Church by the Governors of it; he has given no Direction
that private or extemporate Prayer should be only used in the Church. The Rules
are general, and if the Apostles have not directed the drawing up Forms, they
have left no Directions for any Prayer at all, seeing every Prayer either is,
or may be a Form.

Lastly, As to the Use of Liturgies in the first Ages of the Church he affirms,
That it has been abundantly cleared by those that have labored in this
Controversy, that the Pastors of Churches in the Primitive Times did not read
Prayers. Those Laborers he refers to, are only Mr. Clarkson, for out of his
Discourse of Liturgies he has extracted his Objections, and they are all
answered already in Dr. Comber's Scholastical History; but because he has
rallied up some few of them to defend his Nonconformity it is necessary to
oppose the same Answers to them. He says, it is abundantly cleared, that the
Primitive Pastors did not read Prayers. Mr. Clarkson indeed affirms, that no
such Phrase is to be met with in any Writers of the Four of five first Ages at
least; And to this it is replied Dr. Comber 's Schol. Hist. pt. 2d. p. 206, etc.
that no such Phrase as extempore Prayer, nor any thing Equivalent can be
produced in that time; that if written Forms of Prayer be clearly proved in
those Ages, such positive Evidence cannot be overthrown by a negative Argument,
and the want of a Phrase will not prove that any thing that was not which is
proved to have been: That Mr. Clarkson himself has found written Forms within
that time; and that it is certain, that the Jews had written Forms, and yet the
reading them is is no where mentioned in Scripture. The Minister proceeds and
urges, that Act. 12.5. the Prayer for Peter's Enlargement was (...) instant,
forvent without ceasing, but not by any Form, as is agreed on all sides; as if
Prayer by a Form could not be instant and servent; but the ancient Church were
of another opinion, when the Litany was commonly expressed by See Dr. Comber on
the Litany.
(...), that is, earnest or servent Supplications. However, tho it be granted,
that no set Form was used on such an extraordinary occasion, does it follow
that none was therefore used in the ordinary Prayers of the Church? Or suppose
that no Forms were used when the Church had the extraordinary Assistance of the
Holy Ghost to direct their Prayer; does it follow, that no Forms are to be
used, when that Assistance is long since ceased? if it does, then it follows
also, that studying Languages is now unlawful, because the Apostles were taught
them by Inspiration, and that no Preacher ought to predmeditate or write his
Sermons, because we never read that the Apostles did so.

But the next Objection he thinks to be demonstrative, some says he, have been
so curious as to observe, that in the Primitive times, the Saints usually
prayed with their Eyes fixed on the Mercy-Seat, or closed, which utterly
disables Persons from reading Prayers. Mr. On Psalm. 132.7.
Mede has proved, that the Jews worshipped toward the Ark, (whose cover was the
Mercy Seat) and that the ancient Christians worshipped toward the Holy Table or
Altar, which Answers to the Mercy Seat in the Jewish Temple; but whether their
Eyes were fixed or closed is a moot Point to me, and I have not the Curiosity
to make a research in to it. Mr. Clarkson Labors to prove that they lift up
their Eyes toward Heaven; but however, they disposed of their Eyes, I hope the
officiating Minister might nevertheless read Prayers to them. In out own
Assemblies some devout Persons may be seen with their Eyes closed, others
looking toward the Altar, and others toward Heaven, and even the Minister
himself does often lift up his Eyes in Prayer; but I hope all this is no
Argument that we have no Liturgy in our Church, and that they who scruple its
use, do scruple nothing, and if it is no Argument now, it never was one.

2. We come next to his Second Class of Reasons, which he thus begins, The
Pastors of Churches in the Primitive times, were under the teaching of the
Anointing, and had the Spirit and Gift of Prayer. Suppose we this to be true,
that they were taught to pray by the Unction of the Spirit; was this Unction
extraordinary, as the Gifts of Languages, Prophesying and Miracles? or was it
an ordinary standing Gift, which was to continue in the Church unto the end of
the World? If he means the former, to what purpose does he urge a Gift which no
one now can justly pretend to? if the later, why did he not explain the Nature
of it, and show the Promise, the extent and the necessity of it, and withal
answer the Arguments, Dr. Falkners Libertus Eccles. his Vindication of
Liturgies, and the Cases Conc. the Lawfulness of joining with Forms of Prayer,
part. 1.
that have been urged against these Pretenses.

But whatever he means by this Gift of Prayer, he would prove the use of it
from Justin Martyr, and Tertullian the Justius Apol. 2. p. 98.
(...) in the former, he says, is Vindicated beyond all Exceptian. The
Objectors understand by that Phrase, that the chief Minister used his own
Abilities in composing a Prayer. But Libe^tas Eccles. p. 113. etc. Schol. Hist.
p. 33. and part. 1.
others think that it signifies his praying with all his might, i. e. with the
utmost intention and fervency of Spirit. They explain this Phrase by another of
the same Author used a little before it, where he says, that they made their
common Prayers to God (...), i. e. fervently and importunately. They further
prove, that the same Expression in another place of Justin (where he represents
the Christians in general, as praising God with Prayers and Thanksgivings,
(...)) must signify only fervency of Devotion, since it cannot be pretended
that every Christian in the Congregation prayed publicly by his own Ability
and Composure; and lastly they show, that this Phrase is by the ancient Writers
applied to singing of Hymns, which were set Forms of Prayers and Praises, and
not Composed at every meeting by the Minister; and these are plain
Demonstrations, that this Expression is no Proof of any Gift in praying, since
it often signifies only fervency in it. The P. 24.
Examiner of Dr. Comber labors much to vindicate this Phrase, and he cannot
deny, that it sometimes signifies only fervency of Spirit when it is appled to
the People, but he thinks it a very plain Case, that a Minister cannot properly
be said to pray to the utmost of his Ability, when he does not pray to the
utmost of his Ablity; and may not the same thing be said of the People also? If
the Minister use a Form, may he not likewise pray with all his might, or as
well as he is able? and is not this a plain Equivocating upon the word Ability?
take it first for fervency, and then for a faculty of composing, and the
Contradiction is solved, and the Fallacy Transparent.

The other Proof is out of Tert. Apol. cap. 1.
Tertullian, sine Monitore quia de pectore oramus, we pray without a Monitor,
because we pray out of the Heart. But this can be no Proof against a Form of
Prayer; sor 1. They who join with a Minister that prays Extempore, do pray as
much with a Monitor, and have a Prayer dictated to them as much, as if they
joined in a prescribed Liturgy. And 2. Praying out of the Heart, Schol. Hist.
part. 1. ^p. 46. etc.
may signify either saying a Prayer by Heart; or secret mental Prayer without
words; or praying heartily, sincerely and affectionately, de anima innocenti,
de Spiritis Sancto, (as Tertullian a little after) with a prayer proceeding
from an innocent Soul, and the Holy Spirit moving and exciting it These
interpretations are probable and consistent with the use of Liturgies, and
consequently from this passage no Argument can be drawn against them: Yet from
thence this Minister takes occasion to vent his Malice against Liturgies, and
to reproach them, as an heathenish way of Praying. Now if our Savior
prescribed a Form to his Disciples, (and it is impossible for him to prove the
the contray) then this reproach is Blasphemy; might not an Atheist say as well,
That Prayer it self is an Heathenish practice, or a Quietest, Comment. in
Entychium, p. 55.
taht vocal Prayer is a Heathenish way of praying. Mr. Seldom thought it
probable that the Heathens learnt to use set Forms from the Example of the
Jewish Church, and he cites Authorities to prove it, and View of the Directory.
Dr. Hammond produces out of Plato and Alexander, ab Alex. these two Reasons of
that practice, which he thinks may pass Christian, least evil things should be
asked in stead of good, and least any thing should be said Preposterously in
their Prayers; and therefore the practice of the Heathens is so far from being
a prejudice to Liturgies, that it is a solid Argument for them, Whether either,
or both, the Example of Gods Church, or the Catholic reason of mankind were
the Original of it, the universal use of them among Jews and Christians, and
Heathens, is an impregnable Proof of their expediency, and can be ascribed to
no other cause, but the voice of God or Nature.

3. He transcribes this Objection after Mr. Clarkson, when the Christians were
so numerous in Constantinople, that it was thought necessaryto dispose of them
in several Church, the Emperor Constantine Eusebius. de vita Constable. lib. 4. c.
35.
(...) to Eusebius for 50 Bibles, for the use of those Churches, but there is
no mention of any one common Prayer Book. Eusebius commends Constantine for
observing in his Court the manner of the public Service in the Church, he
first imoplyed his mind in the Meditation of the Scriptures, and then with
those who dwelt in his Palace he repeated, Ibid cap. 17.
(...), the authorized Prayers; and it is known, that he himself composed a
Prayer which he Ibid cap. 19, 20.
prescribed to his Army. And after such convincing, Proofs can a Negative
Argument be thought considerable enough to Balance them. Is it imaginable that
Eusebius intended to give an exact Inventory of all that was provided for those
Churches? Constantine sends to Eusebius in Palastine for 50 Bibles, probably
because the best Copies might be there most easily procured; does it therefore
follow, that no prayer Books were provided at Constantinople, where it was
easy to procure them? and if we should send to Holland for Bibles when we want
them, would it not be as plain a Demonstration, that we have no prayer Books in
England? Sue Schol. Hist part. 2d. p. 48. etc.
He pretends, That when Forms of Prayer began to be used, ever Church made use
of what Forms they pleased, and for this he cites Socrates Scholas. lib. 5. the
passage he intends is in Chap. 22. In which the Historian reflecting upon a
division among the Novatians about the time of keeping Easter, and showing that
anciently in different Churches, it was observed at different times without
breach of Communion, does pass from thence to observe the diversity of other
different usages in the Christan Chruches, as the different Customs of keeping
the Fasts before Easter, the Marriages of the Clergy, and the different Rites
and times of Prayer, and interpreting Scripture in many Provinces and
Countries. The he tells us, that the Novations in the Hollespont did not
observe the same manner of praying with those of Constantinople, and concludes,
that upon the whole every where, and in all the Worships (or Rites) of Prayers,
you cannot find, that they agree together, two in the same thing; and this is
the passage they insist on. But 1. (...), may signify Ceremonies and Rites of
Prayer, for of different Ceremonies he was before Discoursing, and then the
Passage will be no proof of different Forms. 2. Admitting that he speaks of
different Prayers, this diversity is not spoken of single Congregations, but of
several Nations and Dioceses, such as, for instance, Jerusalem, Cyprus,
Constantinople. 3. A little after we have the reason fo this variety, I judge,
says Socrates, that the Bishops, who presided in several Gages, were the cause
of it; and how? They transmitted their own Usage as a Law to those who should
come after them; thus the cause of this diversity was not Liberty, but Law and
Prescription. 4. Immediately after, he vindicates the Nicene Council, which had
determined the Controversy about Easter, and prescribed a certain time to keep
it. But diversity in praying, and the different times of Easter, are by this
Historian proposed as things alike indifferent; and if Church Authority may
determine and prescribe in one case, so it may also in the other. Thus we have
the great Example of the Nicene Fathers for prescribing, and in stead of the
Liberty they pretend to, the Prescription of set Forms, or Rights of Prayer to
whole Dioceses and Nations. In short, the design of the Historian is to show,
that there were diverse Customs in the Church in Things indifferent, and that
the Communion of the Church ought not to be divided for them: Now Custom is a
Law, introduced by Practice; and Law is a restraint upon Liberty: And if
indifferent things may be prescribed by Custom, they may be prescribed by
Canons, and Separation for them is alike unlawful.

He observes further, that there were several Liturgies allowed even in the
Roman Communion, and that this Branch of the Churches Liberty was taken away by
the Council of Trent, and here in England by the Reformation. And what was that
Liberty which was thus abridged? Not an Arbitrary Liberty in every Pastor of a
Parish to use what Form he pleased, but the use of different Rules of Prayer
that were before prescribed and practiced in different National Churches and
Dioceses. The different Offices in England, as those for instance after the use
of Sarum and York, did agree in Substance, they had the same Forms of Prayer,
and differed for the most part in Rubricks and Ritualities only; and when our
first Reformers established an uniform Order, it was not esteemed an
Encroachment upon Christian Liberty; neither are Unity, Order and Uniformity,
the less valuable because Councils and Popes were for them

5. His next Reason is an Invective against the Introducers of Liturgies, and
in the midst of it he defines ex Cathedrd, That the Liturgies which bear the
great Names of S. James, Peter, Mark, Basil and Chrysostom are known
Forgeries. That they are ent rely genuine as they are now extant, is affirmed
by no one; but that they are Forgeries quite throughout, and especially the
Liturgy ascribed to St. James, is so far from being known, that we may safely
affirm, that it is impossible to know it: And the contrary opinion of so
Learned men, as See Falkners Vindication, p. 149.
Baronius, Ddurantus, Leo, Allatius, Sixtus Senensis, Possevinus, Pamelius, and
others among the Romanists; Dr. Hammond, Thorudike, Falkner, Casaubon,
Salmotius, Durel, and some other Protestants will bear me out in affirming it.

But behold the Modesty, Charity and Humility of this Minister; 'Twas the
Ignorance, Carnality, Sloth and Laziness of the Clergy, together with their
Pride which first brought in and imposed Service-Books on the Churches -- When
the Church began to be an Harlot, when Bishops were not Silver Trumpets, but
tinkling Cymbals, etc. when in Councils, as of Ephesus and Chalcedon, they
professed they did literas ignorare, and could not write their own Names to
confirm their Canons, then came in our Liturgies. Thus far the Son of Thunder,
but I take heart again, for find it is brutum fulmen, and our Prayer-Books are
in no danger from it. The Falsehood and weakness of this Raillery is Schol.
Hist. part. 2d. p. 276.
sufficiently exposed already, and it is impossible such stuff should impose
upon any, but the greatest Bigots of Fanaticism. Ignorance, Carnality, Pride
and Laziness brought in Liturgies; he might as well have said, that Burglary or
Usury did introduce them; if Pride and Ignorance brought in Liturgies, why are
they not read in Conventicles? for In his Cure of Divisions.
Mr. Baxter has complained to all the World, that the People who frequent
them, for their Ignorance, Injudiciousness, Pride and Selfconceitedness are
their Grief and their Shaine, and certainly we may believe him. But if Pride
and Ignorance brought in Litugies; we remember well then Entbusiasm, Sacrilege
and Rebellion did eject them. We have Preface to Dr. Still. Unreasonableness of
Separation.
had convincing Proofs, that the Jesuits first brought extempore Prayers into
England; those Missionaries of Antichristian were the first Teachers of them;
and when Presbyterian Ministers were Trumpets to Rebellion, when their Sermons
and their Arms brought the best of Kings to the Scaffold, when the Church was
rent in pieces with damnable Doctrines, when Jeroroham's Priests profaned the
Pulpits and the Altars, when the Stalls and the Shambles were the chief Schools
of the Prophets, when all Religion was vanished into Cant; and Blasphemy and
Nonsense were entitled to the Holy Spirit; then were Liturgies first abolished,
and extempore Prayers first universally practiced in any Christian Nation in
the World.

But Liturgies, he says, were brought in when the Church began to be an Harlot.
Smectymnius Answer to Remonst. p. 7.
derived their Pedigree from Three Canons of the Laodicean, Carthaginian, and
Milevitan Councils; and thus they are allowed to be in use about 1300 years
since, and has the Church been a Whore for so many Ages? has she forsaken her
Spouse so long? has she renounced Christ Jesus for 13 Centuries together? Yes,
and much longer too, when we dispute about Episcopacy; for when we come to that
Controversy, the Mystery of iniquity was working even in the times of the
Apostles; and the Church did then begin to be an Harlot also; so little do some
men care how they wound our common Christianity, and condemn the whole
Catholic Church of Christ, so they may but vent their Malice against Liturgies
and Bishops. But because he cannot deny that Liturgies were introduced in the
4th and 5th Centuries, he particularly Rallies upon the Ignorance of the
Bishops of those Ages. And were those ever reputed ignorant Ages? when was the
Church better enlightened with Learning, than when Chrysostom, Basil, Nyssene,
Nahianhen, Epiphanius, the two Cyrills, Lactantius, Ambrose, Jerome, Augustine,
Isidore Pelus. Theodoret, Vincentius, Gennadius, and many others were the
Luminaries of it. But among these Gnostics even the Mechanics, and the Women
have been thought more able Divines than the Fathers; and indeed if Ability is
to be measured by the Gift of Prayer, as they call it, they may vye Learning
even with their own Teachers; for their most ignorant Zealots do often pray
with as much fluency of words, with as much pretense to the Spirit, (and which
is the main Gift) with as much Confidence, as the ablest Ministers among them.
But the Bishops of Ephesus and Chalcedon could not write their Names, and Mr.
Clarkson indeed produces the Subscriptions of Three or four to prove it. And to
Schol. Hist. pt. 2. p. 300.
this it is replied, That those Subscriptions are of no credit as being
suspected of Forgery; but suppose there were four Bishops among 830 in those
Councils, who were so illiterate, is it not a very impudent Calumny to say
indefinitely, as he does, That the Bishops of Ephesus and Chalcedon could not
write their Names to confirm their Canons? might it not as well be said, that
the Assembly of Divines at Westminster were Independants, because there were
Five of that Sect among them, or that the Nonconformists Ministers of this Age,
have generally died as Traitors, because Two or three were executed for being
in Monmouths Rebellion.

His last Reason concerns the imposing of Liturgies; and here he denies not the
Lawfulness of them, but after he has begged the belief of his Followers, That
they were not used in the Primitive times for many Hundred of years, he
pretends to prove the unlawfulness of imposing them. Now one would think it a
very plain Case, that things lawful in themselves may be lawfully enjoined by
lawful Authority; but this Minister is of another opinion, and the only Reason
he gives for the unlawfulness of prescribing Forms is this, That it is a
restraint upon the Gifts of such Ministers, as have Ability to compose better
Prayers themselves and this he illustrates by the trite instances of Trespass
Offering, and of a Law obliging those, who are not Lame and Impotent to make
use of Crutches. But, 1. All this is impertinent to the Dispute before us; for
the Ministers in our Church are not restrained from the Exercise of their own
Abilities in public Prayers; they may use their own conceived Prayers in the
Pulpit, and the Fifty fifth Canon, as explained by the general Practice, is an
allowance of it, and therefore if the Exercise of Abilities be not excluded in
our Church, the pretense of restraint can never justify a Separation from it.

Secondly, The Objection is grounded on these false Suppositions; that God is
better served by conceived Prayers, than by a public Liturgy; that the Church
is less difyed by it; that it is unlawful to lay a restraint upon private
Gifts; and that it is lawful to separate for better Edification; and unless all
these Propositions here precariously supposed to be true, (and I think he will
find it impossible to prove them) then his whole reasoning, and the Crutches,
he has brought to prop it, and the Pigeons, Lambs and Bullocks which attend
it, are plainly unserviceable to him. His Pigeons and Crutches are designed to
intimate that a Form of Prayer is a cheap, impotent, unedifying way of Worship,
in Comparison of their extempore Effusions; but this he should have proved; for
he knows we assert the contrary; we think that Prayers are not more acceptable,
because they are inconsiderate or of private Composure; that the Framers of our
Liturgy were as well gifted as Dissenters; that the Church may be better
edifyed by the Spirit of the Church, than by the Spirit of a Member; and that
those Prayers are fittest for the People, which they are before acquainted
with, and wherein they are secured from Presumption and Impertinence, Blasphemy
and Nonsense.

He should have proved likewise, that the Exercise of private Gifts cannot
lawfully be restrained by public Authority; we know, that even the miraculous
Gifts of the Spirit were subject to restraint, and we have an express Rule,
That the Spirit of the Prophets must be subject to the Prophets: There is no
Law, no Reason, nor Revelation against such a restraint; on the contrary both
Reason and Religion do require, that the use of private Abilities be regulated
by public Order, and that the vain Ostentation of them be restrained. Epist.
87. ad Prot. Aug.
Calvin has expressly declared for the necessity of prescribing Forms, To remedy
the simplicity and unskilfulness of some, to testify the Consent of all the
Churches in the same Prayers, and to prevent the desultory Lightness of those,
who affect Novelty; In short, all the Foreign reformed Churches, do either use
or approve of prescribed Liturgies; the old Nonconformists always allowed them,
and even the Presbyterian Directory prescribed every thing but Words; and if
private Spirits may be restrained to Sense and Matter, why not to Form and
Language also?

Lastly, Admitting that such restraint is unlawful, and that conceived Prayers
are more edifying than Forms, he should then have proved, that it is lawful to
separate for better Edification. The ancient Puritans thought otherwise, and so
did the Presbyterian Assembly in their Controversy with the Independents; See
Unreasonableness of Separation pt. 1.
and so both Reason, Experience, and Revelation do convince us, that the
restraint of private Gifts will not justify the dividing of Christ; that the
silenceing an able Minister is not so mischievous as Schism; that the Pretenses
of better Edification is the fruitful Parent of endless Separations, and that
the Church (which is in the House of the living God) cannot be built or
edified, by being torn in pieces and destroyed? Thus have I considered at large
his Discourse about Liturgies, it is the principal Fort and Bulwark of his
Cause, and the slight defenses which remain will be easily demolished.

4. The Point that follows next, is the abjuring of the solemn League and
Covenant, as in it self an unlawful Oath, and imposed on the Subjects of the
Realm, against the known Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom. And is it not
extremely modest in these Men, to Quarrel at the State, for requiring them to
renounce an Impious and Rebellious Covenant? was it reasonable to admit such
men into the Offices of the Church, as were sworn and obstinately resolved to
extirpate the whole Government of it? But let us consider the Reasons which he
urges against the abjurating that Covenant.

1. There are many learned Preachers that never redd a Law Rook, they know
nothing of Manna Charta, Bracton, Littleton, Cook, Common Law or Statute Law --
is it reasonable then to require them, to declare the Covenant is contrary to
known Laws and Liberties, which they are utterly unacquainted with? Indeed
there is no necessity that a good Preacher should be an able Lawyer; and much
less is it necessary to read over a Lawyers Library, to be convinced, that the
Covenant was illegal, can none but profound Lawyers know that Felony and
Burglary are against our Laws and Liberties? Does not every sensible man know,
that the impofit on of an Oath without Law to warrant it, is contrary to it and
that nothing is Law, which has not the concurrence of King, Lords and Commons
to enact it? have these Ministers never heard of the 3 Car. 1. c. 1. S. 2.
Petition of Right, which declares all others without Law to be against our
Laws and Liberties? Or can they tell us by what Law the Covenant was
established? was it not imposed without the Concurrence of the King. and
against his express Command? had they never heard of the Oaths and Laws about
the Kings Supremacy? and is not the Vid. indicium Acad Oxoniensis de solrum
Freder. p. 8. 14.
Cotenant plainly Contradictory to it? and Lastly, do they not know that this
Abjuration is required by an Act of Parliament? and what need then of
consulting Law Books about a Covenant, for which there is no President in them,
when the Legislative Power it self has declared the unlawfulness of it? it is
manifest this Ignorance is affected; time was, when they were so well
acquainted with Laws and Liberties, that they preached the People into a
Rebellion for them; in the Covenant it self they swore expressly Artic. 3.
to preserve the Privileges of Parliament, and the Liberties of the Kingdom;
if then they knew those Liberties, can they now be unacquainted with them? or
is it not as lawful to abjure, as to swear, without knowledge. Article 1. They
swore to preserve the Religion of the Church of Scotland in Doctrine, Worship,
Discipline and Government; and was there one in a Thousand of the Covenanters
that had a competent knowledge of these particulars? How could it be imagined,
that he common People should know them? and yet they never scrupled to exhort
them to take it, tho they were morally certain, they did not understand it. And
Lastly, why is not this Objection now considered by the Virgin Daughter of
Scotland, as he Phrases it: There they force the Clergy to swear that W. and M.
are lawful King and Queen by Laws of that Kingdom, and is this reasonable, when
they are utterly unacquainted with those Laws, and many Learned Preachers have
never read the Civil not Statute Law, nor Craig nor Skine, nor the Original
Contract; but it is always to be observed, that the Presbyterians never do
condemn what they do not practice.

2. The Substance of his next Reason is this, That the Covenant was taken by
the People of Two or three Kingdoms, and a man had need be a good. Casuist,
that can declare understandingly, that no one man is bound by that Oath, which
almost every man took. Now I believe this Covenant was not taken by the
Majority of these Kingdoms; in England I am sure it was generally refused by
the Clergy, the Universities and the greatest part of the Nobility and Gentry.
But admit the Majority took it, the force of his Reason depends upon this
Proposition; That an Oath taken by a vast munitude must needs be Obligatory;
and is it necessary to read all the Casnistical Books of Divinity to confute so
manifest a Falsehood? in Popish Countries many Millions do take Monastic Vows,
and all the Clergy swear obedience to the Pope; and may not an ordinary Casuist
declare understandingly, that none of them are bound by those Vows and Oaths
which all of them have taken? The Holy League in France was sworn by more than
the Solemn League in England, was it therefore Obligatory? and is it not a
sufficient Humiliation to which this Minister has called me, to be bound to
answer such Absurdities.

3. He urges, that by the Covenant all Persons were bound in their places to
endeavor a Reformation of the Church according to the Scriptures, and the
Examples of the best reformed Churches, and he asks, is this an unlawful Oath?
I answer, the Question is deceitful; a man hinds himself by Oath to serve God
and the Devil, and he asks, is it not lawful to serve God? is this an unlawful
Oath? Thus the Covenanters did swear to endeavor Reformation, Art. 1. and to
extirpate Episcopacy. Art. 2. But this Minister mentions Reformation only, and
then impertinently demands, is this Oath unlawful? I am ready to maintain
against him, that an Oath to serve the Devil is not more unlawful, than an Oath
to destroy Episcopacy; and that upon this ground, because it is of Apostolical
Institution. There are many other things unlawful in that Covenant, (as any one
may be satisfied by the unanswerable Reasons of the University of Oxford
against it) and therefore if this Minister will prove it lawful, let him
justify it throughout, and not fly to such Methods, as may serve to justify
the most execrable Oaths that can be, by producing one single Passage, that may
seem justifiable in them. But thus he proceeds, If a man should swear, that in
his Place and Calling he would endeavor to cast every Idol out of the World:
and what is the consequence of this terrible If? Why, truly nothing at all; but
he filly adds, that in Scotland they have cast off Prelacy, and established
Presbytery, i. e. they have cast out the Idol, and set up the true God among
them; but if this be his meaning, that Episcopacy is Idolatry, I account of him
as one of the incurable Fanatical Roll, that call every thing Idol or
Antichrist that displeases them, and I am not obliged to answer Bigotry and
Frenzy.

The last Point he insists on, is a Passage out of the Commination Office in
the Liturgy, wherein the Church declares her Desire, that the Godly Discipline,
used in the Primitive Church, may be again restored; and says, it is much to be
wished for. It is wonderful to consider, what work he makes with this Passage!
but I am willing to believe he never read it in the Liturgy. It was long since
an old conceit of the Nonconformists, Vid. Hooker, p. 331.
that the Primitive Discipline, which was so much wished for by the Compilers
of our Liturgy, was the Presbyterian Discipline, and from them, I presume, he
borrowed the Objection. But in the Liturgy it self there is no Foundation for
it, as will appear from a view of the Passage it self in the Preface to the
Commination; Brethren, in the Primitive Church, there was a Godly Discipline,
that at the beginning of Lent, such Persons as stood convicted of Notorious
Sins, were put to open Penance, and punished in this World -- In stead whereof,
(until the said Discipline may be restored again, which is much to be wished
for,) it is thought good, etc. and is Presbytery the Discipline here desired?
undoubtedly as much as Popery or Mahumetanism; It not that Discipline expressly
declared to be the Discipline of public Penance, which in the ancient Church
was inflicted upon such as stood convicted of Notorious Sins at the beginning
of Lent, in order to their Absolution, and Admission to the Holy Sacrament at
Easter? What can be more express and evident, than that the Ancient Leut
Discipline is there alone intended? And have the Non conformists, as he
pretends, ever written for, preached for, and suffered for, the Restoration of
this Discipline? Have they ever wished or desired it? Have they not always
written and preached against it? Do they not still exclaim at it, as Popery and
Superstition? But this Minister pronounces considently, that this Expression
stands in the Liturgy, as well for the Justification of the Nonconformists, as
for a Testimony against the Prelates. Thus the Godly Discipline is a
Condemnation to them who have always desired it, and Justification to them who
have always opposed it; and if Nonconformists must needs be justified by
Blunder and Contradiction, this Minister I confess is a fit Apologist for them.
But behold the Reflections he makes on this Passage.

First, The Reformers and Compilers of this Book of Common Prayer had no full
Satisfaction with what was then done. What, Were they not fully satisfied with
the Liturgy? The first Liturgy of Edward the 6th was applauded by the whole 2,
3 Ed. 6. c. 1.
Parliament, as composed by the Special Aid of the Holy Ghost; and Acts and
Monuments, Tom. 3. p. 171.
Doctor Tailor the Martyr publicly declared, that the whole Church Service in
King Edward's Second Liturgy, was so fully perfected according to the Rules of
our Christian Religion, that no Christian Conscience could be offended with any
thing therein contained. The Papists were the only Persons in those Times, that
were dissatisfied with it, and therefore, in Queen Mary's days, a Challenge was
made by Ibid. Tom. 3. p. 18.
Cranmer, that with P. Martyr, and four or five more, they would enter the
Lists with any Papists living, and defend the Common Prayer Book to be
perfectly agreeable to the Word of God, and the same, in effect, which had been
for 1500 Years in the Church of Christ; and let any one now consider, whether
our first Reformers were not fully satisfied with the Liturgy. But he adds,
they ingenuously confess, they came short of the Primitive Discipline, and that
the Reformation should have been carried on higher, if the Times would have
given leave. They confess, they could not revive the ancient Discipline of
Lent, and they desired a higher Conformity to the Primitive Church, (not in
relation to the Hierarchy and Liturgy, but) in the strictness of Men's Lives,
and the impartial severity of public Penance, Yet, says he, they had then
their Government by Bishops, Archbishops, Chancellors, Archdeacons, etc. as we
have at this day. They had so, and were fully satisfied with it, and there were
no Protestants in that Age that separated from it. Archdeacon Philpot,
Archbishop Cranmer, and several Bishops, our first Reformers and Martyrs,
approved that Government, and lived and died in the Administration of it; they
did not permit it only, as Moses did Divorces to the Jews, because of the
hardness of their Hearts, (as this Minister does falsely insinuate,) but they
never intimated the least Suspicion of its unlawfulness, and they plainly,
Preface to the Book of Ordin. (...).
declared Episcopacy to be evidently founded upon Scripture and Apostolical
Institution. But these Reformers and Martyrs were ignorant of those things
which are now known unto Women and Artificers; poor Men! they were under a
dispensation of Darkness, and the Gospel Light of Separation was totally hidden
from them.

Secondly, he observes, That it is more than 1^00 Years since these good Men
recorded their Desires of Restoring the said Discipline; and is it enough (say
he,) that the Church carries her good Wishes with her through all Generations
Enough certainly, while the Restoring that Discipline is impossible: Our first
Reformers could not revive it, because the universal and incorrigible
Wickedness of that Age, could not endure the Yoke of Primitive Penance and are
scandalous Offenders now less numerous or loss incorrigible? If the Reformers
are excusable, much more our present Governors, by how much the present Age is
more untractable and more obstinate against the Bands of Discipline. Is it
possible now to reduce Offenders to the Primitive Humiliations, the Fastings
and Watchings, the Sackcloth and Ashes the Prostration at the Church Doors, and
the other Austerities of Ancient Penance? Will any of the Dissenter's submit to
this Discipline as a satisfaction for their Schism? If such an impracticable
Discipline were imposed, these Ministers would presently cry out Popery
encourage all Offenders to oppose it, and set open the Doors of their
Conventicles to receive them such an Imposition would be vain and pernicious,
it would scandalize the weak, and alienate the obstinate, and serve only to
empty our Churches, and crowd the Conventicles; and though for that reason they
may desire it. yet the Church is not obliged to prescribe a Remedy, that will
make the Physician contemptible, and the Patient incurable. The restoring of
that Salutary Discipline (as the reviving of Primitive Piety,) may be always
wished for, but perhaps will never be attained; but the licentious Wickedness
of the present Times, the general Contempt of all the Censure of the Church,
and the manifold Schisms with which it is rent in pieces, do make it now
impossible; and if it were established, it is not to be hoped, that the
obstinacy of the Dissenters would be subdued, nor their Aversion to the Church
be reconciled by it.

I intend not to follow this Minister through his tedious Digression about
Reformation, and much less to ramble with him as far as the Temple at
Jerusalem, to which, forsaking his Text and his Purpose, he undertakes a
Pilgrimage, and returns with these wise Observations, P. 22, 23.
That the Temple was built upon Ornan 's Barn; that this Ornan was of Princely
descent, because he had a Princely Mind; and that Temple-Work is hard Work,
it is Threshing. Thus, after a long Journey, he brings back nothing, but Apes
and Peacocks as himself observes of some who ramble into the Indies. These are
the Saving Doctrines for which this Thresher is admitted by his Hearers; and
since a Barn is his Delight, may he never Thresh in the Houses of GOD, nor
profane those Sanctuaries that are consecrated to his Worship.

But I return to Reformation, and in Answer to his Harrangue about it I desire
it may be remembered, 1. That this Minister does not seek the same Reformation
which was sought by Christ and his Apostles, for Presbytery is not the Gospel,
neither is Extirpation of Bishops the Propagation of Christianity. 2
Reformation is very good in it self and the Churchmen are for it much more than
the Dissenters, but they cannot be convinced that the removing Decency, Order,
and an Apostolical Government, is Reformation; they know, that this is the
usual Vizard to disguise Sacrilege, Avarice and Ambition, and that the
Sectaries endeavor not to reform the Church, but to destroy it, that they may
seize on its Inheritance; and withal they cannot but reflect upon the
experience which we have had of Sectarian Reformation; when Prelatical
Government was reformed into no Government, and a sober Liturgy into
Enthusiasm, and 39 Articles into infinite Heresies, that could scarce be
paralleled in all the ancient Catalogues, and in stead of the Power of
Godliness, there ensued such an Inundation of Wickedness, as no Age could
parallel. This was observed by the For instance, by Edwards in his Gangraina.
Presbyterians themselves, and an ingenious Foreigner who then resided at
London, made this Observation upon those Times, A Letter of a Noble Venetian to
Ca. Barbarino, Translated and Printed 1648. p. 19.
one of the Fruits, says he, of this Blessed Parliament, and of these two
Sectaries, (Presbyterians and Independants,) is, that they have made more
Atheists, than I think there are in all Europe besides; and if we judge of the
Tree by its Fruits, and desire to see no more such Reformations, have they
reason to blame us for it?

3. It should be considered, that no pretense of Reformation can justify
Separation from a Church, in which no sinful Terms of Communion are imposed.
There is no Church in the World, which is free from all Corruptions in
Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, or Manners, and if the want of some Reformation
be a just reason for Renouncing Communion, the Unity of the Church is nothing
but a Notion, and it will be lawful for every Man to separate from all the
Churches in the World, for it is only the Triumphant Church in Heaven, which is
perfectly without spot and blemish. Defect of Discipline, and purer Communion,
were the pretenses of the Donatist and Novatian Schisms; but they were
condemned by the Catholic Church, and Aug. con. Parmen. Epis. lib. 2, 3. Tom.
7.
S. Austin proves at large against the Donatists, that Corruption in Discipline
or Manners cannot make the Communion of such a Church sinful, nor justify
Separation; and hence any one may discern, how impertinent to this purpose are
all this Ministers Clamours about Reformation; for though the pursuit of it may
be commeadable, and the Church may need it, yet it is evident his Nonconformity
and Separation cannot be justified by it, for there is no Church upon Earth,
which needs not Reformation, and if Men may separate where they see any thing
amiss, this Principle will carry them to a Separation from all
Christian-Society, and that is a plain Demonstration of the Faishood of it.

I have now considered and weighed all his Pleas for Nonconformity, and having
found them light and deceitful in the Balance, having sufficiently proved them
to be false and fallacious; I conclude, that the Nonconformists were not
persecuted for Righteousness sake, and that his P. 24.
virulent Reproaches of the Church of England in Prophetic Language are no
better than Blasphemy, and a contumelious Profanation of Gods word, by making
it the Instrument of his Spite and Animosity.

And one Ressection more will make it yet more evident, that they did not
suffer for Righteousness; it is this, that tho his Pleas be allowed to have
Truth and Reason in them, yet they will not justify the Dissenters Separation.
Every one knows that these Ministers were not punished for not conforming as
Ministers, but for setting up Conventicles; tho they could not Act as public
Ministers, yet they might have adhered to the Communion of the Church, and then
they would have been in no danger of Persecution; they suffered for their
Separation, and if all this Ministers Objections will not justify it, they
will not justify their Sufferings for it. The Plea of Reformation I have shown
already to be insufficient; and it is evident that Lay Dissenters are
unconcerned in all the others; they were neither ablig'd to renounce the
Covenant, nor the Lawfulness of Resistance, nor the Ordination of Presbyters,
nor to declare their Assent and Consent to the Common Prayer; and this Minister
himself denies not the Lawfulness of their joining in it. Thus he has left all
his Congregation without any defense, and it remains that they suffered not for
Righteousness, but for an unrighteous and indefensible Separation.

Let us see whether the same Objections will justify his own Separation?
Suppose the Oath of Non-resistance to be unlawful, was that a term of our
Communion? was it required of all that come to our Prayers or Sacraments? and
might he not have adhered to the Communion of our Church without swearing or
declaring it? be it granted next that Reordination is unlawful to be complied
with; was that likewise any term of Communion in Worship and Sacraments? And if
they could not Preach as Ministers, could they not Communicate as Laymen? and
is the unlawful silencing of a Minister to be revenged with Schisin? The next
point is the use of the Liturgy; and is there any thing unlawful in all our
Prayers? if he cannot Consent to some Passages in the Rubric, or in a Creed
that is very Seldom recited, yet there is nothing sinful in our ordinary
Worship, and the occasional Communion allowed by the Presbyterians themselves
is a clear Confession of it: And Lastly, as to the Covenant, if it must not be
renounced, cannot they worship God in our Churches without renouncing it? or
does it at all oblige them to Separation? Mr. Defense of Cure, p. 68.
Baxter has proved, that the Covenant binds them to Communion with our Church,
because, it binds to Reformation according to the Example of the best reformed
Churches; but all reformed Churches in Christendom do commonly profess to hold
Communion with the English Churches in the Liturgy; if they come amongst us
where it is used; therefore (says he) it seems to me to be Perjury and Covenant
breaking to refuse Communion with the Churches that use the Liturgy, as a thing
merely on that Account unlawful. Thus Mr. Baxter; and these Concessions are
very remarkable; that Separation on the Account of our Liturgy is unlawful;
that it is a breach of their Covenant; and is condemned by all Reformed
Churches; and what new Pleas can this Minister produce to defend his Separation?

Will he urge the Pretense of necessity to Preach the Gospel, and that
therefore he was forced to separate, because he could not do it in our
Churches? But if he was under the same necessity the Apostle was, then he has
surely the Commission and Authority of an Apostle; but if he has no Commission
from God, (let me use the words of an ancient Mr. Giffard cited in the
Unreasonableness of Separ. p. 80.
Nonconformist) it is the Devil that has sent him forward to Preach against
the Authority of the Church, and the Prohibition of the Christian Magistrate.
In short, they have neither the same Commission as the Apostles; neither is
there the same necessity of their Preaching, for the Gospel is now planted in
this Kingdom; it is Preached in our Churches and it would not be extinguished
if this Minister and his Brethren (to use his own Seraphical Expressions) were
all them Dumb Dogs, or Breasts without Milk, or Bells without Clappers. And
withal it is here to be observed, that it is evidently proved, Ibid p. 1. sect.
8, 9, 10, 11, and 17.
that according to the Doctrine of the most learned Nonconformists of former
times, both their Separating and their Preaching are absolutely unlawful.

The Sum of all is this; the Laws against the Dissenters were made for the
security of the Church and State; the Execution of them was not so cruel, as is
pretended; their persecuting of the Government did extort it; the Presbyterians
themselves have always condemned Toleration; they do ever persecute whenever
they have Power; this Minister declaims only against Persecution for the Truth;
but all his Pretenses to Truth appear to be false and groundless; and if they
were admitted, would not justify Separation; and therefore the result is this;
That his Call to Humiliation is an unreasonable Clamor, and that it ought to
have been directed to the Presbyterians themselves, and especially to their
Ministers; who have been the most grievous Persecutors; who have crubified
Christ Jesus by dividing hith; have torn his Body into pieces; have separated
from the whole Catholic Church; under pretense of Reforming the Reformed
Religion have Reproached and weakened it, have been always undermining that
Church which is the Bulwark of it; have bound themselves by impious Oaths, and
very lately ebtred into an Alliance with the Papists, to destroy it: And
lastly, have suffered obstinately for an Unrighteous Choose, condemned by Reason
and Revelation, by the Universal Church of all Ages, and by all the Reformed
Churches in the World.

Having now Answered the whole Design if this Pamphlet, and all that looks like
Argument in it; it would be superfluous to examine the Remainder and to reflect
particularly on his malicious Hints and Intimations, his Cant and Shtyr, his
abuse of Scripture, his Uses and his Prayers, which he Recommends to his
People, and wherein he Feaches them that Vile and Divilish Practice of turning
Prayers into Libels, and instructs them to Pray much worse than the Pharisee;
to commend themselves to God See p. 27.
As followers of the Lamb and the Lords Anointed, and to accuse the Churchmen
before him, as Dumb Dogs and Wolves, and bloody Persecutors. Thus do they fill
up the measure of their Fathers, who sin their Prayers taught the People to
Speak evil of Dignities, and to Curse the best of Kings, as a Bloody,
Persecuting, obdurate Tyrant.

Yet I cannot but take notice of his insolent, Triumph for the Establishment of
Presbytery in Scotland. Now, says he, is fulfilled that which was spoken by the
Prophet, The Land of Zebulun, etc. -- The People which sat in Darkness saw
great Light, and to them which sat in the Region and Shadow of Death, Light is
sprung up. And was this Prophecy never fulfilled till now? It Presbytery the
Messiah whose Light is there foretold? Did Nailor himself ever utter more
Abominable Blasphemy? Has the Virgin Daughter of Scotland proclaimed a new
Gospel which was not Preached before? Is it the Evangelium Armatum, or the
Gospel of Xaverius, or of the Whore of Babylon? Hither to I thought that
Episcopal Churches might have the Light of the Gospel; but a new Light has now
discovered that they are all in Darkness, and that all Christian Churches for
1500 Years together, have been in the Regions of Death, without Christ, without
the Light of the Gospel, and consequently without Salvation.

One thing more I must observe, that the Sermons and Writings of these
Ministers do make it as clear as the Sun, that all the projects of Union with
that Party are absolutely impracticable. The Presbyterians are the only
Dissenters that are thought capable of Comprehension; but to take them into our
Church, we must cast out our Liturgy, and our Bishops, we must submit our Necks
to the Iron Yoke of Presbytery; in short we must destroy our Church if we will
have an Union with them; no Alterations will content them; they who have, and
they who have not taken the Covenant do think themselves bound to extirpate
Prelacy, and to Reform according to the model of Scotland, they desire no
Union, and despise it; when Treaties of Peace are proposed they make themselves
ready to Battle; their Hostility is Irreconcilable, and the total Destruction
of our Church is the sum of all their Endeavors and Designs.

But Oh! That our Lives were as good as our Religion, and our Manners pure and
primitive as the Constitution of our Church; for then would God cover is under
his Wings, and he that has delivered, and does deliver, would still deliver
us. Our Church, we know, is Founded on a Rock, let us depart from Iniquity, and
her Foundation shall stand sure, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail
against it.

FINIS.

