AN ANSWER TO Blundell the Jesuits LETTER; That was taken about him at Lambeth,
on Monday the 23d. of this Instant June.
Directed to the Jesuits at Cambra in Flanders: Wherein he gives them an
Account of several Notorious Untruths, concerning the Proceedings in Court,
against the Five Jesuits lately Executed: with several other Preposterous
Relations. The which being duly weighed, it was thought fit to Exhibit this
Responsary to confute his errors, and for Vindication of the wholesome Laws,
and Impart^al Judicature of this Our ENGLISH Nation, etc.
No Wonder if the Jesuitick Order can Dissemble thus with their own Friends,
and send them Fallacies to keep them Ignorant of their Diabolick and most
unheard of Villainies; the which in open Day have showed their dismal heads in
this our Native Land: nay, and not only here, but through the Christian World,
that they can Equivocate with us for their own Interest, whom they mark out as
mortal Foes. What Nation has not heard since first that cruel Order took its
birth of Rapes and Massacres, and Murdered Kings, Poisoning and Devastations,
Tortures, and all the Cruel rage that the Infernal Legions armed with fatal
counsels e're could prompt them to; for they the barbarous Executioners of
Tyrant Rome, disperse themselves abroad throughout the Earth, and gather in the
Slain to fill her Babilonish Cup with reaking Blood from Tender Hearts of
Innocents distilled -- This when they rove like thirsty Tigers in their
uncontrouled paths, but if restrained from their pernicious Deeds by
interposing Justice arm, they never look back to view what they have done to
others, but cry, themselves are sore oppressed for those, who in steeming
slaughter do delight: so they themselves are not concerned, love not to undergo
the least of pain. And here among the rest I shall expose unto the World, the
observation of which being well weighed and considered, the which is an
Erroneous Letter or Lybill that was found in the possession of one Richard
Blundell, an Arch and notorious Jesuit, and a great Instrument for the carrying
on of the late Diabolick Plot: when he was taken some few days since at
Lambeth, and now remains in the County Goal, the which reflecting upon the
Justice of our Nation, with many notorious untruths, the which in order: First,
Denying that there was any Plot, and that the Five Jesuits lately Executed,
were wrongfully condemned, and that they had not privilege to speak for
themselves. The which notorious and scandalous Objections may be answered: That
these Parties being Apprehended for High Treason in designing the Death of his
Sacred Majesty, and for the endeavoring to subvert the true
Protestant-Religion, had during the time of their Imprisonment, all the favors
and privileges imaginable, to bring proof if they had or could produce any for
the better clearing of themselves, and that when they came to their Trials
their witnesses (the which it was probably conjectured, were suborned and sent
by their Tutors from St. Omers, and other places, being most of them young
Students to validetate the assertions of Dr. Oats,) yet notwithstanding were
most patiently heard: The often Laughter caused in the Court, which he
objecteth was by their confounding themselves in their Averrations, for they
not being well versed in Roman Lies, or that their premeditated Doctrine being
not well digested, they baffled one another most erroniously in their
Discourses, for one said this, the next being asked denied it, and said it was
after another manner; so that their Attestations proved not only Ineffectual,
but also prejudicial to the Prisoners. Their main point they in^isted on, was
to prove that Dr. Oats was himself at St. Omers at the same time he had given
in upon Oath he was at the Society of Jesuits in London, on the 24th. of April
77, and thereupon by reason their Rabble affirmed it, though many of them never
saw him, nor in Court had not known which was he unless they had been showed.
Upon this abortive reason, this adaucious Jesuit affirms that Dr. Oats was
perjured: The material of the Witnesses was a Tailor belonging to the College
aforesaid, who if he had denied to come over upon this account, how false
soever, had certainly lost the Jesuits Work, and peradventure all his Tools,
except he had conveyed them out of the College by Moonlight; so that for his
being conscious in attesting a known untruth, the poor Fellow had been undone
for ever. The next was the Butler, who was Sequestered of his place, and made to
Swear be would never Lie with any Nun in France, nor Fast a whole Lent
together, till he had performed the Rectors Will, who put him in remembrance of
the brave Atcheivements of those Hero's, who were sent over in King James's,
Time, supposing to excuse Father Garnet and the rest of the Jesuits, in the
daring Powder Plot. The Gardener seeing this, thought it was time for him to
stand out, lest his Palazados should be overthrown, and all his Trinks thrown
about, he Volentarily consented; so that they with the rest, being by the
public Confession absolved for what they should say or Swear, came merrily
over, but went as shamefully home after they had Disgorg'd their Popish
Element, vowing never to bring any more Lies into England, seeing they were no
better accepted, and no more regard taken of them; they being Mint of the Popes
own stamp, for Dr. Oats bringing in four Witnesses, one of them being a
Dominican Friar, a Chicken of the Popes own Hatching; and Three more honest
Protestant Attestators, who both saw, Spoke, and Drank with him on that Day,
their Oaths being absolutely deposed upon the same; Had all the Roman Conclave
with each of them a Bull in his Hand, that could have Roared the contrary as
loud as those of Basin, the judicious Court would scarcely have credited them
if but for Dispensation sake; But to the purpose, farther he says, that during
the time of their Trials, they behaved themselves like Apostles, but were not
come to be the Sons of Thunder, because the Plot took no effect, for if it had,
each of them then had been a Boanerges, and would have Thundered down both
Church and State. Again, he objects most falsely, That during the time of their
Trials, the Court shouted as if it had been a Bear-baiting, the which if there
was any disturbance or incivility from unruly spectators, their foolish
Witnesses, as aforesaid, were the cause of it. But give me leave to ask the
Monsieut Jesuit what Bear-baitings were in Ireland committed in 41. by the
barbarous and bloody Papists, when 300000 innocent Protestants unjustly fell,
not being suffered so much as to speak for themselves, but were inhumanely
sacrificed by their devilish rage. In the same case had we been e're this time,
had not Omnipotence prevented it. And farther let him know, that had they not
been concerned in the Plot, (as unquestionably they were) that there is a Law
forbidding all Jesuits, and Romish-Priests to avoid the Land on pain of Death;
the which they knowing, and presumptuously offending, by that contempt had
forfeited their lives, but Protestants are merciful, and will not act the
rigor again. It is a question whether the Earl of Shaftsbury offered them any
such Grace from his Majesty, during their Imprisonment, knowing them to be
Priests, and therefore irreclamable: Farther it is objected, that they went
joyfully to the place of Execution, so did the Monk that Stabbed King Henry of
France, the Dagger being Consecrated, dipped in the Euchrist, and wrapped in the
relics of a Saint, to make it more forcible for Execution, and then with
solemn Oaths to deny is the property of the Romish Faction. As to the Reprieve
that is related to be tendered them at the place of Execution, is most
erroniously false, and no man can be produced that saw any such thing, but that
is suggested to note to the world how little they feared death, and to animate
those that remain to imitate them in their Diabolick practices, trifting with
Eternity, and dye with lies in their mouths, which lying and equivocating may
be seen at the late Apprehending of this Blundell, about whom (as it is
credibly reported) this Letter was found; who both to the Justice Dr. Oats,
and the Constable, forswore himself, his Name, and Function; and that he was a
poor man ready to starve, and had not a Shilling in the world: with many other
dire Protestations, when upon search they found about him 60 pieces of Gold,
this letter and many other Seditious Writings; so that now as he was so
officious to his Brethren in Iniquity, some of the rest may Execute the same
for him.

FINIS.
Princed for F. F. in the Year. 1679.


