AN ANSWER TO A LETTER From a Gentleman in the Country, to a Member of the
House of COMMONS:

On the VOTES of the 14th Instant. Relating to the Trade of Ireland.

DUBLIN: Reprinted by Andrew Crook, Printer to the King's Most Excellent
Majesty, on Cork-Hill: And are to be sold by William Norman and Eliphel Dobson,
Booksellers, School.

An ANSWER to a Letter from a Gentleman in the Country, etc.
SIR,
WE live in an Age where Scribbling is the Language of one man to another; and
too often used on a Subject, to which they are as much strangers, as to each
other's person. This seems our case, we come abroad with the Crowd to please
our selves, though we disturb others; but that which brings me in Print, is,
because I think Men of better Understanding will not trouble themselves to
Answer your Unpolished Libel on the Government, and our Brethren in Ireland;
and by that means your Invectives might have the success you wished for, viz. A
belief amongst the Industrious part of the Nation; which, were they true, the
first work of England should be to remove our Friends, destroy the Natives, and
send over a Hundred thousand Soldiers to keep the Island from them; that know
how to make good use of it, if we do'nt: But the best way of Confuting your
Maxims in Trade and Government, is to repeat them, and then, a very few words
will Answer them.

I begin with your assertion, That it cannot but be the trouble of all Thinking
Men, to see a Kingdom and People once so famous for Trade and Navigation, to
Fight themselves out of both.

To this it is Answered, I meet with few of your opinion, but such as think the
Nation did ill to Fight at all.

Obedience to the late K. though in Wooden Sooes, and Faggots on our backs, to
Smithfield, was our duty, your Holy Church tells us; but that which makes few
believe it, is, that Doctrine was always Preached by Men of Debauched Lives,
and Prostitutes for preferment. But Sir, I must tell you what Men that think as
much as yours, say; and that is, They believe that by the War which is ended
with so much honor and advantage to the Nation, we have secured our Trade and
Navigation, with something more that perhaps you are no friend unto, our Laws
and Religion; but as to Trade and Navigation, pray how should we have preserved
them if the French had been Masters of the United Provinces. For seeing we and
the Dutch were fully employed both together, to deal with the French alone,
which way could we have blown the French and Dutch Fleets out of the Sea in
case they had been united. Those that find fault with our War, would be pleased
with our Captivity: Soft words are called for by such as are wounded with
Truths, therefore I shall not speak my Thoughts of your Principles. You tell us
of 700 years Harvest, and 50 Millions spent in this War; if it were more,
Englishmen think we have the worth of it: But I hope you do not believe the
whole 50 Millions are carried out of the Kingdom; it is demonstrable, that the
greatest part is still amongst us, though I confess it may be in worse hands than
before the War. I must own my self no Friend to that practice, which enriches
the Servant and beggars the Master. It should be the abhorrence of all good
Men, to see people in Civil Employments ready to burst with unrighteous Gain,
and the Industrious Merchant languishing by the Oppression of their Servants;
but this we hope will be enquired into.

Your next Paragraph begins thus; Among the many Rivals of our Trade and
Navigation, I have often thought Ireland to he the most Dangerous, and that
which led me into this Opinion, was the practice of the two last Reigns,
Encouraging the Irish more than their English Subjects in Trade and Navigation,
thereby to make Ireland a Nursery for Arbitrary Government, to which the
English were Abetters.

There needs no other Answer to your Thoughts, That Ireland is most dangerous
to the Trade of England, but that all the yearly Exports of Ireland, amount not
to the Value of one East India Ship's Cargoe, as will appear by what follows.

That you say of the Design of the two last Reigns, to introduce Arbitrary
Government is not doubted, but that the English in Ireland were Abetters to it,
is most manifestly False; there were no Men in the three Kingdoms, that
ventured their Lives more bravely against it, than they did; and to them I
think in a great measure we owe our Quiet and our Trade, on the late happy
Revolution of this Kingdom, which I fancy is the Reason you are so Angry with
them, perhaps you cannot forgive the stand, they of Enniskilling and
Londonderry made to the late King's Army, when they designed for Scotland if
they could have Reduced those Men in their way: They would then have been
troublesome to us nearer home, where You and Your Friends were ready to receive
them.

As to the English's being for Arbitrary Government, you are as much out, as in
the numbers of the Irish Seamen; and least you should think I speak at random,
as you do, know, I was Born in a City that has a great share in the Trade of
Ireland; have been thrice in that Kingdom, and made all the Observation I could
of the Nature, Trade, and Constitution of that Country; amongst other Things, I
found they had very little Navigation; Dublin their Capital, had not one Ship
belonging to it, Carickfergus, or Belfast, and Cork, had a few small Craft, but
not a Ship of Force or Burden in the Kingdom. I enquired particularly the
Number of their Irish Seamen, and by all I asked, was answered, they never saw
one that could Top and Yard, a Phrase they have among Seamen.

Your next Paragraph tells us, How dangerous it is to England, to leave Ireland
to their own Conduct in Trade and Government.

Surely you are a stranger to the Laws of both Kingdoms, or else you would have
known that they can Pass no Act of Parliament in Ireland, but what comes first
from the King and Council here; and cannot alter one Word in it, but must take
the Act just as it comes from England.

Your following Observations of the Situation, Nature, Product, etc. are true;
for that Reason I think we should keep it in English Hands, and not follow your
Proposals to drive them out: But of that when I come to your Expedients.

Now as to your Five particulars, wherein you say, Ireland Interfers with the
Trade of England; First, in that of their Fishing, wherein no doubt they have
Advantage above us, but they never had yet Men, Money, or Craft to make use of
it; the more's the pity, it being a loss to us, and I think a Fault that we do
not help them.

Your second Assertion is true in part, Their Provisions are Cheaper; but then
let me tell you, they are not so good as ours, and their Butter and Cheese is
near as dear.

Your third and fourth Observations, are so apparently False, that one Word
will Answer them both; you say You have been twice in Ireland; but besides your
self, I may venture to say, there was never any man in it but can tell you,
there is not Timber to supply the tenth part of the Use of the Kingdom; I have
seen a Survey of all the Woods in that Island, and except Shellela, there is
not so much valuable Timber in the whole, as one Gentleman has in England.
Surely then we are in no danger of their Building Ships, or Tanning Leather.

Your Fifth Observation is of their Wool, in which you are right; but as for
the multitude of Irish Spinners, you are in an Error: They are so far from
being our Rivals in the Woollen Manufactury, that this last year they could not
get so much in all the Country as to cloth their small Army.

But however, I think we have reason to look carefully into that Manufactury,
which is the Soul of all we have left of Trade; and yet I see Advocates for the
East India Trade, to the destruction of our own Manufactury at home.

In this, methinks we act like ill Husbands; that being Abused abroad, Revenge
themselves at home on their Wives and Children. We are wheedl'd out of our
Manufacturies by Designing Men, amongst our selves; kicked out of our Fishing
abroad; and then like Sampson, we pull down the House upon our selves, to be
revenged for our two Eyes. So I take our Woollen Manufactury, and Fishing to
be. But let us destroy Ireland, beat our Wives and Children, and we shall
Recover all.

You end your Fifth Paragraph with that which you think the most unaccountable
of all, The suffering them to hold Parliaments.

Now Sir, if you never read History, and so are ignorant how the Crown of
England came first to be Entitled to Ireland, then it is great Assurance in
you to talk of the Constitution of Kingdom you know nothing of: If you have
Read, you must know there was a Compact that they should hold Parliaments, with
the same Privileges as England: And although they have by their own Parliaments
abridged themselves by Poynings Law, in some things, yet have they still an Act
of Parliament for Annual Parliaments, and another Act, that all Laws made in
England before the Tenth of Henry VII. should be in force in Ireland. I believe
you will own we had Parliaments in England before Henry VII. they have then the
same Right to hold Parliaments that we have, but they are a poor People, and
must submit. Have a care of that French Maxim (we know not whose turn it may be
next) I remember in the Reign of Charles II. discoursing with the Duke of
Ormonde (who I think, take him every way, was one of the Greatest Men of that
time) upon the Trial of the Earl of Shaftsbury, his Grace said, My Lord
Shaftsbury was never my Friend, yet were I a Commoner, and one of his Jury, I
would starve before I would find him Guilty by straining the Law: We must have
a care of Constitutions and Laws; they are of better use to preserve our
selves, than to take off our Enemies. It you were of this Opinion, you would
not be against Ireland's holding Parliaments. Have a care, Sir, of breaking
into Constitutions, we know not who may come next; we are sure His present
Majesty will preserve our Constitution, and it is our happiness, He is more
tender of them then many of our selves; but if we will destroy them in a good
Reign, there may come a time when our own Presidents may be brought against us.

You end your Paragraph with an Invective saying, You hope the House will make
them Remember they were Conquered. I remember to have seen a Book in this
Reign, by Order of Parliament, Burned by the Common-Hangman, for Asserting that
Conquering Doctrine. It is by our Laws, that all the Monarchs of England, and
amongst the rest, His present Majesty is declared to be King of Ireland, de
Jure, when King of England, de Facto. Now if you please to remember, the
British of Ireland, who are Proprietors of most of that Kingdom, were as one
man in the Interest of England; fought (as is said before) for, and with the
King, that came to deliver them from the Usurpation and Tyranny of the late
King James; for so it was, He having lost his Title by Abdication, before he
came to Ireland; And King William came there to rescue his Protestant Subjects
in Ireland, from the Ravage and Murders of the Rebellious Irish Subjects. This
I hope you will not make a Conquest, if it be, we have had two or three of them
in this Reign, by the Execution of Traitors at Tyburn.

You now come to your Expedients, which are like that of an English Sea
Captain, that being in danger of Two Dunkirk Men of War, a French Officer on
Board him, Asked the Captain what he should do, for he dreaded being carried
into France; Never fear, said the Captain, I wont be taken: How can you be sure
of that, said the Frenchman? I will first blow up my Ship, replied the Captain;
at which Monsieur shrugg'd his Shoulders, and said, Par ma foy un tres bon
expedient Anglois. So are your Expedients; as will appear presently. I will
repeat them in Order, and then One Answer will serve them all.

1. That they should not Build or keep at Sea, one Ship. 2. That they be
Bounded and Prescribed in all their Trade by Act of Parliament here; not only
to the place they shall go, but also to the Qualities and Natures of the
Commodities they Export, and to the Time when they shall Export, that we may
have the first Market. 3 That they should not Fish, but with Men and Boats of
England. 4. That their Money be brought to the Standard of England. 5. That
they hold no Parliament, but be Governed by the Parliament of England. 6. That
they be not permitted to make any Manufacturies but Linen.
I told you before, one Answer should serve for them all, and that shall be
with a Question, such as a Porter made a Lord Mayor of London, in the Usurper's
time (for Regulating the price of Beer, was Proclaiming) That none should be
sold for more then a Penny a Quart: A Porter standing by my Lord Mayor's Horse,
called out, that there was the most material thing left out, which was,
appointing who should drink that small Beer, for he swore he would drink none? So,
Sir, you should have appointed in your Expedients, who should live in Ireland;
for no English man will; And surely our Nation will not think it safe in any
others Hands.

Methinks you make a bold stroke, to propose Ireland should be Governed by the
Parliament of England; that (in English) is Lopping off one of the Three
Kingdoms from the Crown. Your Scheme of Government exceeds all I ever Read of;
you would make Ireland to be a Commonwealth, but none of the Country to be in
the Government; sure some body need Govern you, though it were in Bedlam.

You and your Letter, with referring to Mr. Carry of Bristol's Book; I know the
Gentleman, and have Discoursed on his Book, which though it comes not to your
Notions, yet he abated much of it in Explanation. And now, Sir, with your
leave, I shall make some General Remarks on your whole Letter: What you say of
the extraordinary advantages Ireland has above us in Trade and Navigation, is
true, and it is as true, that they never had opportunity to make use of them.

The British in general speaking, acquiring their Fortunes there by Arms, not
with Arts or Trade; those few that come there with either of the two last, are
usually such as have mis-carryed in their own Country; so for want of stock, do
rarely more than earn their Bread in that plentiful Country. Frequent
Rebellions lessens the Inhabitants, but adds Acres to the British; which they
are more fond of, then Navigation and Commerce: And so far you are in the
right, that they are most taken up in Country Employments, but you are much in
the wrong in saying, the Irish are most in the Trade and Navigation; they
seldom Sail further then to a Potatoe Garden, and Trade only in Cows. I have
been in several parts of the World, and according to my Observation, the
Iridians are as Ignorant of Trade and Navigation, as the Indians in America.
Now that you should fear their Numbers at Sea, that have not Five Seamen of
their Nation, gives ground to believe, you writ with Jesuitical Maxims; Throw
dirt -- however false, some may stick. Put into the Heads of the multitude,
frightful Stories of the danger we are in, of being overrun by the Irish, both
at Land and Sea; and that you may have two strings to your Bow, you bring in
Foreigners Running away with what the Irish do not of the Trade of Ireland. To
show your Integrity in this, I will give undeniable Authority, out of the
Custom-house Books of Ireland against you.

I have now by me an exact Account of all the Exports and Imports of Ireland,
for Six Years of the greatest time of Ireland's prosperity, and by this
Account, their Exports in the Year 1682, amounted but to Five Hundred Forty One
Thousand Four Hundred and Nineteen pounds Sterling, of which Four Hundred and
Two Thousand pounds was for Account of Merchants in England; and Exported in
their Ships, One Hundred Thousand pounds Sterling, for Account of the English
in Ireland, and about Forty Thousand for Account of Foreigners. And that you
may not think this Computation was made at Random, I will tell you how it was
done.

The whole Account was drawn out of the Custom-house Books by a Clerk under the
Examiner of their Accounts, with every Merchants Name that entered them, and to
what Place the Ship belonged, in which the Goods were Exported: this was after
all brought into Form by a Man of the greatest Practice and Experience that
perchance was ever a Trader in that Kingdom, who knew for whom the most
considerable Factors dealt. (For by the way, most of the Trade of that Kingdom,
is managed, by Factors) This Gentleman did assure me with demonstrations more
then can be comprehended in the compass of this Discourse, that there was very
little Exceptions to be made to this Account, which he spent some years in
perfecting, for he writ Observations on every Commodity Exported and Imported.
What is here brought against your matter of Fact, as you call it, is I think
undeniable.

And that your ignorance in Commerce may appear, I will show that what you say
of Foreigners running away with the Trade of Ireland, is impossible; and that
for these Reasons.

1. First, because the greatest part of their Product is by their own Laws
prohibited to all parts of the World but England, as their Wool, Sheepskins,
Woollen Yarn, Linnen-Yarn: Green and Tan'd Hides pay double Duty upon their
Export to any part but England; all which Commodities are more then half their
Export. 2. The Act of Navigation is in Force by Law in Ireland. Now Sir, if you
know not my meaning by mentioning that Act, it is, That by that Statute no
Foreign Ship can carry any Goods from Ireland to England. 3. The greatest part
of the Provisions of Ireland, are Exported by Ships of England to our Foreign
Plantations, for little Beef, or Pork, whatever we think, goes to Foreign
Markets; now the Act of Navigation before mentioned, Prohibits all Foreign
Ships from Trading to our Plantations. 4. By Law they are Prohibited the
Importation of of any, though Commodities of our Foreign Plantations but from
England; not so much as a Pound of Tobacco or Sugar is admitted into Ireland,
but what comes from England; I may add, that they Forfeit Ship and Goods, if
they carry out of Ireland any thing but Provisions; Servants and Horses. I knew
a Ship seized in Virginia for bringing but a Dozen of Woollen Stockins from
Ireland. After all this, pray what is there left for Foreigners to drive that
mighty Trade you speak of in Ireland.
I think it proper to enquire now where the Million is, you tell us Ireland
runs away with, of the Trade of England; it is proved, that their whole. Annual
Exports amounts to little more then one half of your Million, and of that Four
Hundred Thousand goes for England, and English Merchants Accounts; you have
then but Forty Thousand Pounds to raise your Million out of.

There is another remarkable Instance you give of the danger we are in by
raising their Money 20 per Cent. above its value; it would be no very mannerly
question to ask you where you have been for this 12 Months, in which time the
nature of Coin has been so fully Debated and Resolved in Parliament, and
explained to the whole Nation, that I thought every one in it was convinced,
that by raising Money we cheated no body but our selves; and I do not think but
that the Gentlemen of Ireland understand that Truth, but necessity often
prevails over Judgment; we know not their Circumstances, only may guess, that a
Country who in their greatest Prosperity had never Four Hundred Thousand Pounds
Sterling of Running Cash, and Two Hundred and Forty Thousand Pounds per Annum
of the Rents of that Kingdom, belonging unto, and spent in this, are in hazard
of having all carried out. But let their consideration be what it will, I think
we have no reason to fear, but rather pity them in thi^ matter.

I had like to have past over your most sensible part; for it in Truth shows
the Man and his Conversation.

Your Words are these, But that which I think the most unaccountable of all is,
that we suffer them to hold Parliaments, Settle Estates, Pardon their own
Rebellions, etc,

It is plain what you mean, but it comes so near Arraigning the Government,
that you durst not express it in plain Words; the late King JAMES, with his
Irish Mob, that he called, a Parliament in Dublin, did there Attaint all the
British Protestants by Name, that owned King William their Rightful, Lawful
King; and to make sure of all the Protestants Estates in that Kingdom, their
pretended Act named Women and Children that never saw Irish Ground. Now this
Rebellious Edict of the Irish, the present Parliament of Ireland have declared
and Enacted Illegal and Rebellious, and the pretended Parliament that made it,
to be then in Rebellion against the Crown of England. And for this you say, the
Parliaments of Ireland pardon their own Rebellions: for you do insinuate there
being in Rebellion when they left the late King James: Truly Sir, by what I
hear of that Parliament, they are so far from pardoning Rebellions, that they
expelled one of their own Members for but a small overt Act in the time of the
late King James being in Ireland. They are a people (I am sorry it should be so
in respect of our selves, though I commend it in them,) that are not divided, as
we are, in Parties, but as one Man in His Majesty's Interest, except a very few
that are advanced in the King's Service, as too many have been here, by mistake
of some, and design of others; however those Plants grow not in Ireland; it is
observed no venomous Creature brought from England, lives there; I suppose you
never intend to try.

I have now done with your Letter, and shall end mine with directing what
follows, to Men of better Principles then you seem to be; and such I presume
wills not use Ireland as the Harlot would have had the Child, her Language was
like yours, divide the Child, let it he neither mine nor thine. Your Friends
have neither Right nor Possession of it, and they that have you Malign; But all
true English men consider them as. Bone of our Bone, and it is reasonable to
believe the House of Commons passed that Vote for making the Trade of Ireland
more Beneficial to England with that consideration, there is no doubt room
enough to make it so.

I have often thought it would be one of the first Works the Parliament, would
go upon, at the conclusion of a Peace, and not to let such a Treasure as that
Island, might be made to England, lie waste, as it has always been, ever since
the English have had sooting in it, which is unaccountable; it would be thought
so in the conduct of a Private Man, if he should neglect his own Inheritance,
and say out his Money in Improving that of another Man's; is it not so when we
employ our Men and Money to enrich the Subjects of the Mogul, and neglect a
Country of our own so near as that, if rightly managed, would strengthen and
enrich our Nation more then all the Trade we have in the World besides. What
would France make of it, if they had it? I do not think they, would cry it
down, as the destruction of their Kingdom: We have perhaps, more reason to
value it then is at present seen; I doubt we are in more danger of losing our
Trade and Navigation, then ever we were in since we were a People; and it is
feared, we have nothing left to help us but Ireland; but then it must not be
left to former Conduct, I am loath to say what I know in this matter.

We should also consider, the Reason we have to encourage British Planters in
that Kingdom; for no other can secure it to England. But I have been too long
for a Letter, though too short for die Subject; I shall only give my humble
Opinion, That it would he for the service of England in this great Concern of
settling the TRADE of both Kingdoms, to hear the People of Ireland before they
conclude them; hear him, hear him, is Parliament Language, and Christian
Practice, before Judgment. I end with the Words af Seneca, in his Morals

He that lives according to Reason, shall never be Poor; And he that governs
his Life, by Opinion, shall never be Rich. FINIS.

