AN ACCOUNT OF THE Present Condition OF THE PROTESTANTS IN THE PALATINATE In
Two Letters to an English Gentleman.

Foelix quam faciunt aliena pericula cautum.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Parker at the Unicorn under the Royal Exchange,
and Sold by A. Baldwin near the Oxford Arms in Warwick Lane, 1699.

A True Account of the Sad Condition of the Protestants in the Palatinate.
SIR,
I Agree with you, that the Palatinate is one of the best Countries in the
World; whose natural fertility and plenty is such, that there is none that
recovers itself sooner after a War than it. But affairs at this time are such,
that it cannot be expected that we should see it in that flourishing condition
it was formerly, when you saw it in your Travels. During the War, our hopes to
have our condition bettered by the Peace that should ensue, made us cheerfully
suffer, hoping to enjoy our Estates and Religion as formerly, when hostilities
should cease. But our expectations proved vain, for though the War is ended,
yet the Wild Boars are ravaging our Vineyards. But these blood-thirsty Zealots
for Religion, though they differed from us in opinion, yet we suffered them to
dwell among us, and were used kindly: for requital of which kind usage, they
are now turning us out of our Houses, and Churches. Thus those whom we
tolerated and protected amongst us, are for extirpating and depriving us of
that shelter and countenance that we afforded them; by which means a new fire
is kindled here in the Palatinate, so that we Protestants are in as ill a case,
as the French Reformed are in France, and worse than you were in England under
the late King James; In this, that you had only the storm hanging over you, but
this is fallen on our heads, to the extirpating the Protestants, and their
Religion out of their Native Country, and this is to make way for Popery, aad a
crew of indigent Romanists who seek but for occasions to profit by the ruin of
such of their neighbors, that cannot adhere to them in their superstition.

With permission I would here make some reflections how little consonant it is
to the Princes Secular Interest to countenance Innovations contrary to the
says and practice of his predecessors, by which we may observe that none of
the Romish persuasion are to be trusted, but they will when opportunity offers
itself omit nothing to propagate their Religion, to effect which they will wade
through all difficulties, though they thereby sacrifice the Peace and Riches of
their Country, and their faith given; so inherent is persecution to Popery that
to be a Papist and a Persecutor may be looked upon as convertible terms, that
imply the same thing.

These are those who are for Damning all that are not of their opinion, a true
mark of a bad Cause, that dare not trust God to convert Souls his way, but to
assist him in his work will use Fire, Faggots, Dragoons, Force, Terrors, and
all to constrain those that differ from them, to a compliance; but they
consider not that Conscience cannot be forced, tho the Will and Body may
consent and yield to forbid compliances, yet the Conscience will ever bear
inward testimony against all such sinful consents, let the imposing be never so
dreadful to Nature; for we are taught not to fear men, but him that with the
body can destroy the Soul also.

But this is the sad State of those Countries that fall into Popish hands, who
suffer themselves to be biased by a bigoted Clergy, by whom they are
influenced to become unnatural to their Subjects, and instruments of
overturning the established foundation both of Church and State. Thus the
Popish Clergy becomes in a Commonwealth, what Vermin are to the fruits of the
earth, whom they destroy and consume, and so become the plague of the Age and
Country wherever they got footing.

The long experience of these truths might open the eyes of Sovereigns, and let
them see the selfishness of these Catterpillars: How have they devoured the
Laity? and clothed themselves with the fattest, and fairest of their effects.
How many Families have been impoverished to enrich Monasteries and Abbeys, and
Religious Societies, who are so many Nurseries of Pride and Idleness; so that
that most numerous part of the Subjects are become the most useless members of
the Commonwealth where they reside.

It were to be wished, that Princes in this Age, as in the times of
Reformation, knew their Interest so effectually, as to banish that Vermin, and
as in England convert those incomes to better uses; this is it that has made
your Island so powerful and wealthy, as it is at this day, as also other
Countries and places where Church Lands are possessed by the Laity, whereas in
Popish Countries the Clergy possesses one half, in some three parts, and in
others more; which revenues, if otherwise disposed of as in Protestant
Countries, the Prince and People would be proportionably rich according to the
rest of their reformed neighbors. But our Prince, not content to find a
Country lately fallen to him by inheritance, disposed so advantagiously for his
interest by the constitution of its government, but he must bring in
innovations, and not satisfied to enjoy such a Principality as his Predecessors
left him, but he must act so prejudicially to his own interest, and the ruin of
his Subjects, by settling his Religion at the cost of what is taken from the
right owners. It was not so with Charles Louis, the former Elector Palatine,
who though a Protestant, would not suffer the Protestant Ministers, nor indeed
any other of the different persuasions to inveigh one against another, although it
might be expected that this our Prince might have retained a tincture of such
Principles, more especially being descended from a Protestant offspring. But
this consideration hard for the Romish party is this day required with
ingratitude. Would to God that our Prince would but make reflection on the
advantage and benefits that did accrues to the Son of that Prince, viz. Charles
the last Protestant Elector Palatine. He found the Country in a flourishing
condition, with a great Treasure in Moneys, all which were marks of his Fathers
prudence, by which means he was enabled to support his Country, and protect
those of different persuasions, that flocked to him from all parts, as they use
to do as soon as a peace is established, by which means his Country was
replenished with inhabitants, which so long a War had unpeopled, and having
suitable privileges granted them were thereby encouraged to be Inhabitants,
and to increase Trade.

Thus the Palatinate was replenished with Inhabitants, the ruined Cities
rebuilt, and new ones erected, as Manheim and Fredericksbourg: this effect had
Toleration and that in a short time, for the Protestants had that
encouragement, that their Religion was the Religion of the Country, and others
were drawn thither by their being tolerated and countenanced by public
Authority, where all finding protection were encouraged to Trade and gather
riches, since they were assured to dwell quietly in the profession of their
different persuasions.

But what encouragements is there now to live here, where promises are
violated? The Natives that have been frighted from their Habitations, and
scattered into other Countries by the War, dare not now return, seeing our
Prince is for introducing Popery and its professors, who being less numerous
and rich than the Protestants, the end of repeopling, and reinstating the
Country in its former glory cannot be expected, for they show to have nothing
in view but the violating the rights and properties of the Protestants, as will
appear by this following Narrative.

At Heidelberg and Manheim they have built very much, since his Electoral
Highness has published a Proclamation, wherein he promises a freedom of thirty
years, and assures them that their privileges shall not be altered, but that
he will maintain them all, which did encourage us to carry on our buildings, so
that the work advanced very much; but having since issued out another
Proclamation, by which the Popish Holy days are enjoined to be kept through the
whole Palatinate, and that the Protestant burying places shall be common, our
Buildings are at a stand, and we see the Romish Religion introduced by
Authority, and exercised in our Churches through the whole Palatinate. Also his
Electoral Highness has taken from us the seven Latin Schools, with the Cloister
and Church at Heidelberg, where they are erecting Cloisters for the
Franciscans, Augustins, and Capuchins, with a Seminary for the Jesuits; and are
very busy to get into their possession the Holy Ghost or Cathedral Church, as
also the Collegium Sapientiae As they have done with the Cathedral Churches at
Weinheim and Ladenburg and other places, and has taken from the Ecclesiastical
Council, and the Verwaltung their ancient privileges and rights, and the
revenues, Liberties and properties, and the Freedom of disposing of their
Ecclesiastical Incomes, so that the Lands which belong to the Ministers and the
Tithes, which make a part of their Salary, are given to the Roman Catholics,
which proceedings have cast us into so great aconsternation, that we have lost
all courage, even our desires are cooled from going on with our Buildings.

When his Electoral Highness came into the Palatinate, and chose the Castle of
Weinheim for his residence, he then promised, and assured both Laity and
Clergy, that he would maintain all their privileges, but we find these were
but Popish promises, which do afflict us very much, and the more in that his
Electoral Highness refuses to fill up the vacancies in the Ecclesiastical
Council, which consists at present but of two persons, whereas their number
ought to be six, and a President. It is true he promises to allow the
Protestant Ministers something out of their income for their Subsistence, but
without doubt, it will be little enough.

At Creutznach the Church that stands upon the Egg Market, they converted to
their own use with the Latin Schools, which were thirty year since built at the
Protestants cost, and were endowed with a Subsistence for their Ministers and
Schoolmasters, out of the Carmelites revenues, that was secularized by the
Treaty of Peace made at Munster, which income they enjoyed ever since before
the troubles in Bohemia to this time. They detain likewise a Fund of a 1000
Rix-dollars made by the Protestants and with it also the interest of the
principal, borrowed of the poors Stock, all which they employ to pay Popish
Schoolmasters, and for Popish uses.

It is also forbidden upon pain of Death to expound the 80th question in the
Palatine Catechism, which treats of the difference between the Lords Supper and
the Popish Mass. At Hackenheim three quarters of an hour from Creutznach, a
Roman Priest went into the Protestant Church, and did not only pull the
Minister out of the Pulpit, where he was preaching, but beat him out of the
Church also, and he, and those that were with him handled most barbarously,
those of the Congregation who being wounded, were obliged to go out of the
Church, to have their wounds dressed. About a German mile from Creutznach a
Roman Priest set on those who were with him to kill a Protestant Barber,
because said he, he is a Protestant Dog to effect which they knocked him down
with their clubs, tho the poor man begged upon his Knees for mercy, and his
Life, they would not grant it, but while the wretch was crawling on the ground,
they shot him through the head with small shot. Notwithstandng all this the
Murderers go free, nor do the Magistrates take any notice of it; tho he has
left a poor Widow with five small Children, who can obtain no justice, which
seems as if the Magistrates approved this inhuman murder, seeing those who
committed this Cruelty were no strangers, but the Barbers neighbors, and very
well known.

All the Houses that belong to Protestant Alms, and Hospitals are taken away by
force, with those belonging to Protestant Ministers and Schoolmasters, whom
they molest and disturb in the executing of their functions, compelling them to
deliver up their Schools and Houses, to be employed for Popish uses. Neither
will they grant that the Protestant Clergy be any longer under the
Ecclesiastical Council, but will have them wholly to depend, and be governed by
the Elector's Secular Officers. When one of the Parents is a Roman Catholic,
there the Children are compelled to embrace the Popish Religion, though it be
both against the Parents and the Childrens will; neither are Ministers
permitted to admit any of them to be brought up in their Religion, upon pain of
Imprisonment, and 50 Rixdollars fine, nor will they suffer any Roman Catholic
to turn Protestant. And when the Protestants with all submission make
complaints, humbly representing how all these proceedings tend to their ruin,
and demonstrate how it is against the Peace of Munster, and those articles of
Agreement that were made, they answer, and publish abroad, that that the
Ecclesiastical Councils orders are against the Elector's and Country's
interest, and tend to Rebellion, and that they assume a Despotick power against
the Government, which tends to Sedition. Also that the Protestant Ministers
were Seditious Rebels, Disturbers of the Peace, and as such they Imprison them,
thinking thereby to strike terror into others. To remedy which, tho complaints
be never so submissively made of these their Grievances, representing also,
that through these Ministers confinement, people are deprived of their
Teachers, and Divine Service is obstructed, yet they are so far from working
any good effect, by appeasing these Incendiaries, that it animates them rather
to proceed to make them more uneasy, by quartering on them numbers of the
Electors Troops, who use them cruelly, living in their houses after a Military
manner. And when some of the Parishioners by their Superiors complain against
such proceedings, and crave Relief in favor of their Ministers, they fall on
them in a cruel manner, beating them in such sort that they are often taken for
dead out of their hands: Neither does their inhumanity end here, but bloody and
wounded as they left them, they throw them into Prisons, where they run the
hazard of perishing. Moreover, they send to quarter upon those. Complainants
Dragoons, who break their Doors and Windows making forcible Entries, then turn
their Wives and Children out of doors. These crying evils induce the Inspectors
to make complaints to the Deputy Lieutenants against those barbarous
proceedings; but they receive no other answer, but that the Ministers were
Rebels, and therefore they ought not to meddle or concern themselves for them,
lest they incur themselves his Electoral Highnesses displeasure.

When the poor people, taking the part of their innocent Ministers, complain to
a higher Court, of these barbarous proceedings, humbly begging a remedy to
these grievances, they receive fair promises, but never see the effects
thereof. Thus the suffering party receives no relief, and the oppressors are
unpunished. But what else can be expected, when all the places of trust are put
in Popish hands, and the Protestant Natives, though better qualified, are not
regarded. This is the sad condition of our Country at this time, our troubles
have so dejected our countenances that death and paleness seem painted there.
The thoughts of our sorrows are our companions night and day, our bodies are
bowed down, and our spirits sunk with grief, so that it seems as if we had no
more life left than to serve us to cry unto God for help. I wish all good
Christians would join with us in this good work.

Certainly our Prince must be our great enemy, for else he could never have
consented to the oppressions here mentioned, and sure no body would have
condemned him, for maintaining the Country in statu quo as he found it, and is
obliged thereto according to the constitutions of the Empire, and the solemn
assurances given by this Electors Father, to Charles, the last Protestant
Elector Palatine, when he named him his Successor, that there should be no
alterations made in Religion.

LETTER II.
SIR,
SInce my last the Elector Palatine has published a Declaration for Liberty of
Conscience in the Palatinate, which is mightily cried up by the Papists, as an
act of the great moderation of that Prince. The Title indeed is very specious,
and may impose upon such who are not acquainted with our Constitution; but
those who are not altogether strangers to it, must needs be convinced, that
this very Declaration is a most manifest Infraction of the Treaties of
Westphalia, and calculated for the extirpation of the Protestant Religion. This
puts me in mind of the Declaration of your late King James, who, under the same
specious Title, aimed at the destruction both of your Liberty and Religion. Our
Prince is as much a Bigot to Rome, as your abdicated King, and as much ruled by
his Father Peter's, and therefore we might reasonably suppose that he has the
same designs in view, although we should, nor have yet any Fact to convince us of
his Intentions.

You know that by the Treaties of Westphalia the Popish Religion could not be
exercised in the Palatinate, unless it was by a toleration of the Government,
to which the Protestant Princes seem but too much inclined. All the Churches,
Schools, Church Lands, Tithes, and other Ecclesiastical Revenues were in the
hands of Protestants, but by this Declaration the Churches are to serve equally
for the use of Papists and Protestants; so that this is as much a violation of
our Rights, as it would have been of yours, if the late King James had caused
Mass to be sung in Westminster Abbey; for the Papists have no better title to
our Churches than they have to yours

Had his Electoral Highness been contented to give the Papists leave to
exercise openly their Religion, and even to build Churches for themselves, we
might be silent, tho this would be against our Privileges; but to presume to
give 'em our Churches and our Ecclesiastical Incomes, under pretense of Liberty
of Conscience, is such an injustice, that I must return again to your late
King, to find any parallel to match it.

I have told you in my former how they have taken away our Schools and
Colleges, and given the same to Popish Priests, tho some of them were so
lately founded and endowed, that they could not have impudence enough to
pretend that they did formerly belong to the Papists; I must now give you some
particulars to show the effects of this Liberty of Conscience, and how it is
observed.

The Elector has taken away all the Tithes and other Incomes for the
maintenance of our Clergy, and bestowed the same upon Romish Priests; but to
give some compensation to the Protestant Clergy, he is graciously pleased
yearly to allow each Minister one hundred Guilders, which is hardly 15 l.
sterling, 20 Sacks of Corn, and one Fudder of Wine. This subsistence being so
small that it is impossible for them to subsist upon it, no doubt but they
expect that the said Ministers will quit their employment for want of a
livelihood, and that the Flock being left without a Shepherd will be either
dispersed, or easily seduced. A rare and precious Liberty of Conscience, which
deserves our immortal thanks!

The very sound of the title of a Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, must
needs determine any impartial man to believe, that thereby his Electoral
Highness intends that all his Subjects shall have an entire liberty to embrace
and profess what Religion they please, at least of the three that are tolerated
in the Empire, as it is therein verbatim expressed; but it is not to be
wondered at, that such who pretend that we must not hearken to the evidence of
our Senses and Reason, should pretend to change the genuine signification of
words, as you may see in the following particulars.

A certain woman of Sekenheim, near Ladenburgh, married to a Papist Husband,
having however brought up in the Protestant Religion her Daughter, desired the
Minister of the place to admit her to the participation of the Lords Supper,
being in the age required by the discipline of our Churches, which the Minister
did without any manner of scruple. This proceeding was doubtless very innocent
and justifiable by all divine and humane Laws, but it has seemed so great a
crime to the Papists, that the poor Minister was taken up, committed close
Prisoner, and fined 200 Florins. Would any man think afterward, that we enjoy a
free Liberty of Conscience.

An Inhabitant of Wiselock, a Papist by birth and profession, but a more honest
man than the generality of his persuasion, married some time time ago a
Protestant Wife, and it was agreed and covenanted between them, that the
Children should be Christened, and brought up in the Protestant Religion. His
Wife being brought to be of a male child, he, according to his promise, got him
Christened by the Protestant Minister of his Parish; which so incensed the
Popish Clergy, that they got an order to carry him to Heidelbergh, where he has
been kept close Prisoner, and very severely used, and forced to pay a fine of
50 Florins to come out.

I could bring you a hundred instances more of the like nature, and of persons
now in Prisons for having again embraced the Protestant Religion, which they
had been forced to feign to quit, by the violent Persecutions of the French;
but I am afraid to tire your patience, and therefore I come now to the
conclusion of my Letter, wherein I beg leave to examine in few words the
pretense of these violent Persecutions, to show that it is the most groundless
and unjust that ever was.

The first pretense, and which was at first mightily insisted upon, is the
fourth Article of the Treaty of Reswick, which was chiefly the work of the
Baron de Zeiler, a famous Renegado, in conjunction with the Ministers of
France. But notwithstanding what they may say, that Clause can never justify
the violent proceedings of his Electoral Highness; for, taking that Article in
the largest sense that can possibly be given to it, it implys no more, but that
the Roman Catholics should remain in the possession of those Privileges they
were possessed of at the conclusion of the Peace, in those Countries which were
to be restored by the French to the Empire. Now the Palatinate, I mean that
part which lies on the Right side of the Rhine, being not then in the
possession of the French and some part of it having never been in their hands,
it is plain that the so much spoken of Clause cannot justify any ways the
innovations lately made in the Palatinate, which consequently are an infraction
of the Treaty of Munster.

Neither is the Treaty of Reswick more religiously observed than the former,
when it seems to favor us; for that very fourth Article, which serves to
excuse their Persecution on this side the Rhine, is openly violated on the
other side of the River, where the Protestants would be contented to enjoy the
same Liberty they had under the French, and which was secured to them by the
fourth Article of the Peace. Sure this is the most unaccountable thing I ever
heard of, and which would put to the blush any man but a Papist. The
Protestants must be deprived of their Liberty about Heidelbergh by virtue of a
Clause in the Treaty of Peace, which ought to have no force in these parts, by
the reasons aforesaid, and they cannot enjoy their Liberty on the other side of
the Rhine, notwithstanding that Article secures it unto them. Who would have
thought that the Jesuits of Dusseldorp could exceed in Wit or Malice those of
France?

The French King has not as yet openly violated the late Treaty of Peace in
matters of Religion, for the Protestants in Strasburgh, and elsewhere in
Alsace, have the same liberty that they had during the War; but our case is
very different, as I have already told you, and it seems our Prince's Zeal is
above that of the French King.

Having given you an account of their proceedings, and confuted the groundless
justification thereof, I must acquaint you with the measures we have taken in
this sad juncture.

We applied our selves first of all to his Electoral Highness, as it was our
duty, and humbly represented the violent proceedings of his Officers against
us, praying the redress of these grievances Our representation was as
submissive and respectful as could be, but however we could obtain no Justice,
and our Deputies were so brow-beaten and threatened that they did not think safe
to insist any lonegr, for an answer, and returned home without any success.
Seeing therefore that the ears of our Prince were shut up against our just
complaints, we applied ourselves to several German Princes of our persuasion,
and desired that they would be pleased to intercede for us, and move at the
Diet of the Empire, that the Innovations made in the Palatinate might be
considered. They granted our Request, and accordingly a Memorial was delivered
at Ratisbonne to the Deputies of the Catholic Princes, containing that the
proceedings of the Elector Palatinate were a manifest infraction of the Treaty
of Munster, and that they might prove so fatal to the tranquillity of the
Empire, that it was highly necessary to enquire into that affair, and put a
stop to these innovations. This Memorial was communicated to the Deputy of the
Elector, who desired time to send it to his Master, and promised to return an
answer with all convenient speed.

It was sent accordingly to Dusseldorp, and examined by the Council of his
Electoral Highness; wherein it was resolved, that the Minister of the Elector
should give no particular answer to that Memorial, but only tell the Diet in
general terms, that his Electoral Highness was surprised that his Subjects
should presume to make such groundless complaints; that they could proceed but
from a Spirit of Rebellion, and that therefore he would watch more narrowly
their actions, and punish them according to their demerits, praying the Diet
not to concern themselves in this affair.

Could you, Sir, have expected such an answer from a Prince, who owes so much
to the Protestants, and who would have been at this day a Titular Elector had
not the Protestant Princes restored him to his Electorate? This is a piece of
gratitude not to be paralleled, which shows the true character of a Papist,
and their hellish designs against our Religion. This I think sufficient, Sir,
to give you a true Idea of our sad case, which may serve as a warning to all
Protestants never to trust a Popish Prince, for impose upon 'em as many oaths
as you please, bind them by their Interest, these precautions will serve for
nothing at all, the Pope will absolve them from their Oaths, and the Jesuits
will so bewitch them, as to make them act quite contrary to their Honor and
interest. Happy, and thrice happy England* to be free from such Biggotted
Princes; and that you may be sensible of, and long enjoy your present felicity,
will always be the prayers of

SIR, Heidelbergh, Feb. 7. 1699. Yours, etc.
P. S. I have forgot to tell you, that several persons were taken up, and are
still kept in Prison, for refusing to admit the new style, and to observe the
Holydays of the Popish Church, in honor of certain Saints, who, for ought we
know, had never any real being in the world, as their St Longin, etc: and of
others, who were debauched and profligate fellows, or cruel murderers of
innocent people, as their Dominic's and Loyola's. The Elector finding that a
great number of his Subjects are quitting their Country, has sent for several
thousands of Vagabonds from the Countries of Liege and Brabant, worse than your
Irish Bog-trotters to inhabit this Country, so that it is like to be peopled
with a hopeful generation.

FINIS.

