AN ANSWER TO A LETTER FROM A Gentleman in the Country, Relating to the Present
Ministry, AND Men in Employments.

LONDON, Printed by John Darby in Bartholomew-Close; and sold by A. Baldwin in
Warwick Lane. 1699.

Price 3d.

SIR,
YOUR Letter of the twelfth Instant finds me under the same Fears with your
self, but not so deep in Despair; because I think it possible for a good King
to mend Mal-Administration, tho not probable for a Nation so soon to return to
that Power which has cost three Kingdoms so much Blood and Treasure to throw
off.

Good men are too apt to fear Judgments, because they know we deserve them:
This, give me leave to think, is your Case; but we ought not positively to
determine any thing: That would be to measure Divine Providence by humane
Conduct. I think the Rule of Democrates more agreeable to our present
Circumstances, That whoever would live content, must propound to himself things
possible, and submit to things present. Why may not we hope the King will
change hands? and then we should not be so much disturbed with the present
state of Affairs. But I come to the seven particulars, to which you desire my
Answer.

First, Whether I ever read in Story, Sacred or Profane, of such Frauds in the
Management of the Treasure of any Nation?

Secondly, Whether there can be paralleled in any Heathen, not to say Christian
Government, such immoral, and profane Men in places of Power, and Trust?

Thirdly, Whether I have ever heard, in any Christian Government, of a Clergy
that so tenderly handled the Sins of a Nation, and the Vices of great Men, as
our Clergy in this Nation?

Fourthly, Whether this fault in our Clergy, and a greater Corruption in those
we call the Whig, or Dissenting party, have not given our Enemies, the Church
of Rome, greater matter of scandal against the Protestant Religion, than any
thing that has happened since the Reformation?

Fifthly, Whether under our present Management and Conduct, it may not be easy
for the late King to return, and est ablish himself without a foren Force?

Sixthly, Whether all these things being considered, it does not look as if God
had left the Nation to a spirit of Delusion, to trust in Lies; that we may fall
into the hands of Enemies, who design the extirpation of our Nation and
Religion?

Seventhly, Whether a Government that neither rewards nor punishes, does not
suppress Virtue, and encourage Vice?

Here end your seven Queries, of which I shall give my Opinion, tho I am sure
it cannot inform your better Judgment.

Your first Query is, Whether I ever read in Story, Christian, or Heathen, of
such Frauds in the Management of the Treasure of any Nation?

I must own I never did; And the reason may be, because we have nothing like
our Constitution, and late Revolution in all its parts, in History. Such turns
in State use to come with Force, and Arbitrary Power; and then Armies lived at
Discretion: But our Change was with the vogue of the People, who thought no
price too great for so happy a Deliverance.

The King who was in the Head of it, a Stranger to men as well as management in
the Nation, could not bring Strangers into Offices and Employments, I mean such
of our selves as had never been in Business before, but was of necessity forced
to employ those he found in business of the State; and from such Plants as had
been raised in the corrupt Soil of the late Reign, no very good Fruit could be
expected; and their opportunity for Frauds was such, as perhaps no Age ever
presented in former times. The Nation then went gradually step by step into
Levies and Taxes, and there was time to take care of the Management: but now we
were forced to leap into them with a running Jump, too much without Method or
Control; and that led our Managers, I verily believe, into greater Frauds,
than even the wicked Spirit that guided them at first, foresaw. For how could
it be imagined that the Spoil should be so great, that a Sweeper of an Office,
of twenty pounds per Annum Stipend, should arrive in four Years to an Estate of
six thousand Pounds? and Clerks in Offices of eighty Pounds per Annum Salary,
to a Purchase of twenty thousand Pounds Sterling? And in this proportion it is
said to go generally through all the Offices of the Kingdom. And this
Management has been laid with so great Judgment, that the qualifications of a
Person for an Employment were to have good Testimonials that he understood the
World; a soft Character for a Knave. And this is too notorious by the unanimous
conspiration of all in Employments, when the least of them was attacked: I need
not name particulars, which are in every days Pamphlets, too much to the
scandal of our Nation and Government: Pray God it may not be to the Ruin of
both!

Thus you see I agree with your first Inquiry, as to Fact, tho not to the
Inference you make which I think to be too sharp.

I end this Head with the words of a Heathen, which I think better Divinity
than we practice in this Age, viz. That to keep our selves quiet in this World,
we must aim at nothing that Men count worth wrangling for. It would be one good
step to a Reform, if Offices in the State were disposed as they are in
Corporations, as an Imposition, to Men that have got Estates, to serve their
Country, not to men of expectations to gain Estates by Offices: That is
advancing the Wasp above the Be.

We should consider the practice of our Neighbors, the Dutch, and there we
shall find no Man in any place of Trust that has his Fortune to make: and some
tell us, that all the Civil Employments in that Commonwealth put together,
amount not to the Sum that one Noble Lord, a Friend or otherwise to the Army,
has raised out of his Employment.

Your second Enquiry is, Whether there can be paralleled in Heathen, much less
Christian Government, such immoral and profane Men in Places of Power and Trust?

This Query gives such a Latitude for answering, that I might easily prove the
Affirmative; but then I must confess that to make the Parallel I must go
abroad; for I cannot find it in any Reign at home. But if we look into the
Reason of this Misfortune, we shall find it the same we have just now given for
the Frauds in our Managers of the Revenue: Did not the King find some of them
in Employments, even them you most complain of? Were not others of them early
in assisting the King in this Revolution? If we calmly reflected on this, we
should not believe these Men to be the King's choice, or entertain a thought
that he supports them. A Body full of Hereditary Distempers, must undergo a
course of Physic for Recovery: a violent Purge and Bleeding might endanger the
whole. We have had such great Proofs of the King's Wisdom and Conduct, that
methinks we should trust him, and satisfy our selves with a Maxim of the Lord
Verulam, If you would make haste, stay a while. I differ with you, that the
King loses good Men by letting bad Men continue so long in Power* I cannot dive
into the secrets of Princes, but to me (...) seems great Policy for our King in
our present Circumstances, to let faulty Men be fully laid open to the People,
before he removes them; and then they will not be able, as too often we have
seen it, to make Parties among the People, when their faults have drove them
out of the Court. I know you will say that the Men complained of have
sufficiently laid themselves open, to the general Abhorrence of the Nation; and
therefore the Reason before given is out of doors. It Is true, and therefore I
give it for the time past, hoping that the King by this time sees the
Transgressors are fully understood and known in the Nation, whose Eyes are on
his Majesty for Reformation in this matter, as a foundation for a righteous
Government. Seneca was in the right when he tells us, It is an ill Age where
Vice has got a Reputation, and the Dissolute have lost the only good thing
they had, the shame of offending. This has been too much our case, but you and
I will hope very soon to see better times, and that the Enemies of our
Government shall find themselves exposed for those wicked and false
Insinuations whereby they would conceal their own Crimes.

Your third Query is, Whether I have ever heard in any Christian Government of
a Clergy that so tenderly handled the Sins of a Nation, and the Vices of great
Men, as our Clergy in this Reign?

This Question, I must needs say, is more surprising than all the rest: You
seem at one stroke to wound the whole Body of the Clergy, in which I think you
are to blame. And so far do I differ from you in this Remark on the Clergy,
that on the contrary I think we never had a more learned and pious Clergy. None
can deny (...) as to the Bishops made in this Reign. What Age can you turn to,
and show where there has been more constant Preaching and instructing of Youth?
When was there such frequent preaching against lewd and profane Conversation?
Really, Sir, I fear you live in some ill Neighborhood, or perhaps hear none
but Cour-Sermons; and there indeed Men too often flatter. A Bishopric or a
Deanery, like Charity, hides a multitude of faults: But we don't see many of
these Spaniel Tongue-pads preferred. And now, Sir, give me leave to tell you
among what sort of Men it is my Lot to fall, and to hear preach; one is a
Doctor famed for Learning and Piety, whom I heard deliver himself in a great
Congregation in these words, It is too often the fault of learned Men to
flatter Princes, and we find the Translators of our Bible guilty in this
matter, or they would not so grossly have erred in that where they translate;
Who says to a King thou art wicked: Whereas in the Hebrew it is, Thou shall
fay to a King thou art wicked; that is, said the Doctor, if he be so he should
be told of it. And agreeable to this Doctrine, I think it to be the opinion of
most good Men, that it is the Duty of our Clergy to reach those Sins of great
Men in Government in their Pulpits, which they cannot come at in their Persons.
And this may be done without personal Reflections, by declaiming against
Things, not Men; and if our Clergy do not this as much as they ought, I fear it
is our own fault. We generally cry down, and with good reason,
Pulpit-Statesmen; and often run that truth beyond its bounds. I would not have
dictated from a Pulpit, what Men should be advanced, or who disgraced; what
Laws should be made, what abrogated: but I think it comes well from a Pulpit to
tell us that a Prince cannot be well served, or a Nation preserved by such
Ministers in the Government as make a mock of Sin, and hate and keep from
Employments all that pretend to Sobriety. These Wolves in Royal Clothing are
the Vermin of a good Government; and yet these are the Reformers of our Age,
that distinguish themselves by the name of Whigs, whom once we knew by their
pretenses to Religion and Property, but now they are Apostates to both. You may
find some of them in every Commission in the Kingdom, and too many of them
where such poisonous Plants should be plucked up by the Roots. It was the
Observation of a good Man, That ill Ministers make ill Times, and ill Times
continue and increase ill Ministers; and this seems to be our Misfortune.

Your fourth Query is, Whether this fault in our Clergy, and a greater
Corruption in those we call the Whig or Dissenting Party, have not given our
Enemies, the Church of Rome, greater matter of scandal against the Protestant
Religion, than any thing that has happened since the Reformation?

This is too plain to be denied, and our Miscarriage too great a fault to
excuse.

That which I have made the Rule of my Faith, has always been the Holy
Scriptures; and that Community which is governed by them, I choose to be a
Member. Now that our Church (let mistaken Friends or professed Enemies say what
they can) began the Reformation with the greatest Purity of Life, as well as
Orthodoxy of Doctrine, none but they who support their Church (if it be one) by
denying their Members the liberty of their Senses, can deny.

But in Controversy, that Argument which every Understanding can comprehend
will prevail most; and we have that on our side, which is a Reformation in
Manners as well as Doctrine from the Romanists: and this will convert Heathens,
when School-Controversies might distract them. Should a Heathen see that our
Doctrine and Church Discipline oblige us to an holy, sober, and religious Life,
and that no Man is accounted such among us that wants Morals; that our Religion
and Church-Goverment admits of no indulgence for Sins, nor thinks any venial;
but that plainness of Spirit, and integrity in all our Actions is the Badg of a
Christian: And if on the other hand the Romanists should appear in their
shapes, as teaching that there is no faith to be kept with a Heretic; that
Lies, Oaths, and all manner of Vice may be dispensed with for promoting their
Cause; and that they can forgive, nay saint a Criminal guilty of Sins that
Heathens abhor and never pardon: Were these things, I say, considered by Men
that never heard of Christianity, I think the Controversy would easily be
decided. For when we have said all, Morals are the common Touchstone that will
prevail with Mankind.

And now I come to your most sensible part in this Question; Whether our
present Management in Public Affairs by immoral Men does not give the Enemies
of our Religion and Nation advantages over us, they never had before? I must
own in my opinion it dos, and for this reason; because that which procured us
of the Reformation credit and esteem in the World when we separated from them,
was, as I said before, the Purity of our Doctrine; but that would not have been
so well understood in the World, if it had not been accompanied with plain
honest Morals between Man and Man. It was, if we believe Story, even in the
Reign of Edward the Sixth, a Proverb among the Papists; I am as sure of my
Contract, as if I had the word of a Heretic. Now if we lose the Character of
Moralists, I fear we shall want the most powerful Persuasive that brings in
Converts, and the best Antidote against Popish and Atheistical Delusions.

I confess I am silenced when Papists and Jacobites compare the Ministers of
the late Reign with ours; but I tell them they are mostly the same Men. Their
return leaves me little to say, when they name our great Whigs Liberty and
Property: Men that pretended to be Martyrs for the Religion and Laws in the
late Reigns, but are now Deserters of both. By this I confess we put Weapons
into the hands of our Enemies to destroy us. What can we say in defense of our
Church and Religion, when we are managed by them that hate the first, and
ridicule the latter? Ask them what is their Religion, they tell you they are
Whigs: What are Whigs? Are they Prebyterians, Independents, etc.? No, they are
no Meeters. What then? At last it comes only to this, they hate high
Churchmen, and would as an Expedient have none at all. And agreeable to their
Profession is their Practice, as lewd as Sodom, and sraudulent as Judas. And
our Misfortune is the common Misery; for where their numbers are great, the
whole Government lies under the blackest Character that ever this Nation bore.

This fourth Query of yours puts me upon a Review of the Chronicles and Annals
of this Kingdom; and tho we find various Misfortunes, almost as many as Kings,
yet among all we meet with none that bear any proportion to those we are now
under. Many Men and Families have been cut off according to the Power and
Pleasure of a prevailing Faction; but still the Ministry and Men in public
Trust were just to their own side. Revenues were not swallowed up by Managers,
nor were any so hardy as to advocate for them that were but suspected; insomuch
that I don't find above three Men in four hundred years before the late Reigns
who were questioned for mismanagement in public Receipts, that went off
without a Censure of another nature than Addressing. I fear such tender
handling does not only encourage faulty Men at home, but renders us a decaying
and lost People abroad. I cannot see how we shall desend our selves against
Foren Force, when we are conquered by home Frauds: and that which makes it look
like a spreading Leprosy is, that those whose Actions are so notorious in one
Post that they cannot hold it, have only the Punishment of being removed to
another, as soon as one can be found of the same Qualifications to succeed him;
the natural Consequence of which must be, that in a little time their numbers
will be too great to be called into question. It is indeed astonishing to see
that so many Men of great Estates, and English Blood, should be so blind as not
to perceive that if these things hold, the Nation is lost. I have bin so long
on this fourth Query, that I have little room or time for the other three; so I
shall end this with a Resolution of Seneca, and were I not an Englishman, say
to my Country as he did to Fortune, That he would have nothing to do with it
that repulsed Cato, and preferred Vitellius.

Your fifth Query is, Whether under our present Management and Conduct, it may
not be easy for the late King to return, and establish himself without a foren
Force?

This Conceit smells of the Cask, and argues too much Fear, and too little
Faith. I confess such Corruption, and ill Management as we are under, is always
the forerunner of a ruined State; and our Case seems almost desperate, when
the greatest part of a Session is spent in hearing Complaints, Address, etc.
against Mal-Administration. This opens the Eyes of the Nation, and it may be
feared will break forth one way or other: But I cannot think any true
Englishman, however disobliged by this, or engaged by Favors of the late
King, can ever have a Thought or Wish for his, or rather French-Tyranny. He
must be degenerate to a Prodigy, that would turn Slave to the French; and he
must have lost his Reason that frames an Idea of any thing else under the late
King, who had he ever so good Inclinations, must act by the dictates of his
French Master.

For these Reasons, I think it next to an impossibility for the late King to
return without a Foren Force. All my fear is from our Distractions at home; for
we cannot call them Divisions, Factions, and Parties, such as formerly were the
cause of Wars and Calamities among us.

We are now under a Distemper that this Nation never heard of before; all for
the King, (for so it is, if the Major comprehend the Minor) and none for the
Ministers. It will be the wonder of Ages to come, as it is the Torment of this,
to see our selves ruined by a few Men that have no Interest or Party in the
Nation. A pleasant Gentleman the other Day said, he believed that one Wherry
would carry away all their Friends, if they were separated from Employments.
And there may be Reason to believe it, if we consider their Politics, which
show them to be at their last shifts, and like Teague, who running too fast in
a Race, had nothing to excuse his fault, but that he run away with himself. So
our Managers way of justifying themselves, is to criminate the whole Nation.
When they of the Church complain, then they are Jacobites; when Dissenters find
fault, they are for a Commonwealth: but this Charm that for some time deluded
well meaning Men is seen through, and the Mask thrown off. Arts and Stratagems
in Government, in our Kingdoms, have not that effect they have among other
Nations: We are a free People, and such have not a slavish Understanding. The
humor of the English Nation is like that of Cato, who would not have it in the
power of any Man to say he killed or saved Cato. Englishmen will not endure to
have it said, that any Trick, or any set of Men have power to save or lose
England: They think therhselves safe by no other ways and means than those of
their Constitution in Church and Stat; and if they were duly observed, Mushroom
Projectors would not set up against English Oaks. The ancient Nobility and
Gentry of the Nation, were always the main support of the Crown.

Your sixth Query, is a desire of my Approbation to your Prediction; to which I
can give no Answer, but if what you fear be true, it is an ill time to convert
People, when they find both Advantage and Reputation in their Wickedness.

Your last Query is, Whether a Government that neither rewards nor punishes,
does not suppress Virtue, and encourage Vice?

No doubt it does; but I will answer your Question with another, Did you ever
know corrupt Ministers punish themselves, or reward what they hate? Single
Vices are curable by single Counsels, but a general Dissoluteness in Government
is hardly overcome. I therefore think the King has a more difficult work than
delivering us from the known Enemies of our Laws and Religion. In that we
joined; but so unhappy we are, that against the depravity of them that would be
our Masters, we can do nothing, but must stand still and see it done by the
King alone; if we speak out, we are Mutineers, and enemies to the Government.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
A Letter to His most Excellent Majesty King William III. Showing, I. The
Original Foundation of the English Monarchy. II. The Means by which it was
removed from that Foundation. III. The Expedients by which it has been
supported since that Removal. IV. Its present Constitution, as to all its
integral Parts. V. The best Means by which its Grandeur may be for ever
maintained. Sold by A. Baldwin. Of whom may be had all the Pamphlets against a
Standing Army.


