AN ANSWER TO A PAPER, ENTITLED, THE GRIEVANCES OF HIS Majesty's Subjects
Residing within the PRINCIPALITY OF WALES, In Respect of the Court of the
Council in the Marches of WALES.

With the Particular Conveniences of that COURT.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLXXXIX.

INTRODUCTION.
THE said Court was at first erected to suppress the violence of the Welsh, and
for preservation of the Peace in the Marches, and in the nature of the late
Court of Star Chamber; but in process of time encroached on the Courts of
Common Law, and held Pleas in Civil Actions by English Bill, and took
encouragement thereto, by the Clause in 34 and 35 Hen. 8. cap. 26. that gives
that Court power to hear and determine, by their directions, such matters as
then after should be assigned by the King, as then-to-fore used. And the same
Act constitutes Courts of the Great Sessions in every County for determing of
all Causes and Suits, where there is also a Court of Equity.

ANSWER.
IT will be agreed, that the said Court was erected (amongst other ends) for
the Suppression of Violence, and the Preservation of the Peace in Wales; but it
is absolutely denied, that the said Court was at first erected merely in the
nature of a Star Chamber-Court; for this Court continues, notwithstanding the
Star-Chamber-Jurisdiction has been long since abrogated by Statute; nor has
the said Court incroached upon the Courts at Common Law, or used any power more
than what is warrantable by the Laws and Usages of that Country, confirmed by
Parliament; and for the manifestation hereof, the Answer to the said pretended
Grievances is this, viz.

Grievances.
I. THat nevertheless, the Judges of the said Court of the Marches do take
Cognizance, and take upon them to decree Damages in Actions of Trespass on the
Case, Slander, Assault and Battery, etc. where the damages are uncertain, and
ought by the Law of the Land to be assessed by a Jury.

Answer.
I. IT is manifest by diverse Presidents yet remaining amongst the Records of
the said Court, that before the thirty fourth year of Hen. 8. the Judges of the
said Court, by an ancient Usage there, did constantly take upon them to decree
Damages in Actions of Trespass on the Case, Slander, Assault and Batttery,
where the offenses were well proved by English Depositions: Then came the
Statute of 34 and 35 H. 8. cap. 26. by which it is enacted, That there shall.
be and remain a President and Council in the said Principality of Wales and the
Marches of the same, etc. in manner and form as has been heretofore used and
accustomed; which President and Council shall have power to hear and determine
by their Wisdom and Discretion such Causes as be, or hereafter shall be
assigned to them by the King's Majesty, as heretofore has been accustomed and
used, pursuant to this Statute, the several Kings and Queens of England have
ever since to this day, by their Instructions ready to be produced, empowered
the Judges of that Court to hold Plea in the said Actions of Trespass on the
Case, Slander, Assault and Battery, and by their Wisdoms and Discretions to
decree Damages therein, where the Offenses are well proved by English
Depositions, as then-to-fore had been used and accustomed; so that it is very
plain, that in this particular the Court does no more than what by Law is
justifiable, and with submission more convenient and beneficial to the poor
Subjects of Wales, than if their Causes were tried by a Jury; for the Judges of
that Court are always Men of Abilities and Learning, and therefore much more
unlikely to be biased or corrupted, than poor ignorant Countrymen, who in
those parts scarce dare give a Verdict against a man of any Note or Quality.
But however, if this be esteemed a real Grievance, this may be a cause to alter
the Law, but not to take away the Court, which in this respect does nothing but
what is now warrantable; and upon the same grounds this may be a reason also to
alter the Proceedings in the High Court of Chancery, which does determine men's
Rights by English Depositions and Testimonies without any Trial by Jury.

II. That the Defendants in matters of Assault and Battery, are in the said
Court compelled to appear to an English Bill, and to answer the same upon Oath,
though the same contain matters criminal.

II. The Author of the said Paper is disingenuous in this particular, because
the Court never does require the Defendant to answer upon Oath to an Action of
Assault and Battery, but always accepts of his Plea by his Clerk or Attorney
without any Oath, as a pears by the standing Rules of the Court.

III. That the said Court do hold Plea, hear, and make Decrees for small Debts,
under forty Shillings; and in such Suits do allow more Costs than the Debts and
Damages do amount unto: And that in Actions and Suits for Trespass, Assault and
Battery, and on the Case, where the damages are not proved to be above 2 d.
there are usually given by the said Court 4 or 5 lib. costs; and where the
Plaintiffs Bill is dismissed, it is generally without any Costs to the
Defendant; by reason whereof many Vexatious and troublesome Suits are encouraged
by the Clerks and Sollicitors belonging to the said Court.

III. The Court of the Marches in this respect does no more than what is done
by the Courts of Westminster, and in the Great Sessions of Wales; for in these
Courts if the Debt in the Declaration be laid to forty Shillings or more, and
what the Plaintiff recovers be under forty Shillings, yet he shall have his
full Costs, which at the least comes to six or seven Pounds: So in Trespasses
of all sorts, before the Statute in that case made, the Courts at Westminster
did award full Costs, though the damages recovered were under forty Shillings,
and not above Twopence; and notwithstanding this Statute which moderates the
Costs in these Cases, in the Courts at Westminster, and not elsewhere, the
Judges there have made such Expositions upon this Act, that it is in a great
measure evaded; for in these Actions of Trespasses, if there appears any thing
of a Conversion, though it be but of a Shilling value, they always award full
Costs. Also in an Action of Battery in the Courts at Westminster, if the
Damages be found to be but one Shilling, yet if the Judge that tries the Cause,
does certify, that the Battery was well proved at the Trial, the Plaintiff
shall have his full Costs: But in this Court of the Marches (though there is no
Act of Parliament that does fetter it in point of Costs) yet if the Action
appears to be frivolous, the Court either gives no Costs, or but very little,
as 10, 15, or 20 Shillings; and if there be cause, they do dismiss the Suit
with costs to the Defendant for his vexation.

IV. That no Defendant shall in the said Court have a Dedimus to answer, but he
must first pay the Plaintiff, or his Attorney, 6 s. 8 d. which, with the Copy
of the Bill, Dedimus, Drawing, Answer, and Expense of Commissioners, etc. will
amount to forty or fifty Shillings, notwithstanding the Debt or Damages in
demand is not really 6 d. To avoid which Expense, and especially when they are
sued and molested by beggarly People, the Defendants in such Actions, though
there be no cause of Action against 'em, do choose rather to compound with the
Plaintiff, than to answer the Action with so great an Expense, which gives
great encouragement to Cursitors, and other litigious poor People, to bring and
multiply vexatious Actions in the said Court, whereby the mean and ignorant
sort of People within the same Jurisdiction are very much impoverished.

IV. Herein also the Author of the said Paper is very disingenuous, for that
the Defendant has always a Dedimus to answer of course, without paying one
Penny to the Plaintiff, or his Attorney; neither is the Plaintiff or Defendant
forced to take out any Copies of the Proceedings in Debts or Trespasses under
(...) Pounds, but each Party by his Clerk or Attorney, has access to the
Original Records to peruse them at pleasure without Fee, and to take such Notes
thereof gratis, as he thinks fit; nay, when the Cause comes to hearing, the
Parties, to avoid charge, are admitted in these small Causes, to carry the
Records themselves to their Counsel for their Instructions: But if the Cause be
a matter of Title of Land in Equity, or Debt, or Trespass, above Ten Pound
value, then the Records are to be copied in the Office; for which Copy the
Party is to pay four Pence a Sheet, each Sheet to contain twelve lines, and
sixteen words in each line, which is not above half the Charge of copying in
Westminster Hall and the Great Sessions.

V. That the Processes for Contempt in the said Court, were generally directed
(not to the Sheriffs) but to private persons nominated by the Plaintiff, who
are not sworn Officers, as well as to Pursuivants, and Sergeant at Arms, by
whom several poor People are usually forced from their own habitations, being
an hundred miles distance, to Prison, to the Lodge at Ludlow, for the
non-payment of the unreasonable and great Fees demanded by such Officers.

V. The first Process is in nature of a Summons, and so in effect is the
second, called a Contempt, upon either of which no person is arrested or holden
to Sureties, as in other Courts; but after, if the Defendant continues
obstinate, and will not appear, he is arrested upon a Process directed to the
Sheriff, and other special Bailiffs, but never carried to any Prison, if with
one Surety he will enter into Bond of 10 l. penalty to appear upon the Return
of this third Process; and if upon this third Process he refuses to give Bond
to appear, he is never carried out of the County to any Prison, unless it be in
some very extraordinary Cause of Contempt, upon breach of Orders; so that if
any Prejudice does arise to him in this respect, he may thank hinself for the
mischief which he might have prevented by two Summons, or a Bond for
Appearance; and if there be any Error in these Proceedings, the Court upon
Information, orders the Plaintiff to lose the Charge he has been at, and to
pay Costs to the Defendant. If Process were directed to the Sheriffs alone,
Justice would be delayed in the Execution, and retorn of Process, especially in
the cases of Gentlemen and wealthy Persons, who in this Country of Wales are
most commonly related to Sheriffs and their Deputies; neither are the Fees of
the special Bailiffs extravagant, the Fee for an Arrest being very small, and
to be paid by the Plaintiff, and not the Party Arrested.

VI. That where any of his Majesty's Courts of Westminster do grant
Prohibitions in Causes not properly determinable in the said Court, yet if the
Party that procures such Prohibition, after he is put to a considerable Charge,
has no benefit thereof unless he personally serves the other Party therewith
(who will abscond) the Judges of the said Court refusing to obey any such
Prohibition, or else imprisoning such as serve them therewith.

VI. The Charge of the Sixth Article is not true; for in the first place it is
denied, that the Court does countenance any Cause, wherein they have not
Jurisdiction: But however, if any Prohibition be at any time granted out of
Westminster Hall, and the Plaintiff abscond, the Service upon his Counsel,
Attorney, or Solicitor, or any of the Judges, is sufficient, and always
obeyed; nor can any instance be made of any Person that was imprisoned for
serving a Prohibition, unless he did it upon the Judges sitting in Court, with
abusive and insolent words.

VII. That after Actions brought, or Trials had in His Majesty's Court of great
Sessions, or in His Majesty's Courts at Westminister, the Judges of the said
Courts of Marches, upon a Bill filed in that Court by the Defendant at Law,
suggested matter of Equity, do usually take upon them to grant Injunctions to
stay proceedings in the said Courts of Westminster, and great Sessions; and in
case the Plaintiff at Law go on in any such Actions, will severely proceed
against, and imprison such Plaintiffs at Law, if to be found within their
Jurisdiction.

VII. As to so much of this Article as relates to the Courts of Westminster
Hall, the Author of these pretended Grievances is desired to give us some
particular Instances to prove the Allegation; for Persons who have been
Practisers in the Marches, and Officers there for many years, cannot remember
any such thing ever done; but it is confessed, that after an Action brought and
before Verdict had in the great Sessions, some Judges of the said Court of the
Marches, in imitation of the High Court of Chancery, have of late granted some
Injunctions to stay the proceedings there, when the Defendant in his Answer
has discovered some equitable Matter, for which the Plaintiff was relievable
in a Court of Equity. But if this be a fault, it is a fault contrary to the
Instructions and Law of the Court, and therefore can be no Reason to destroy
the Court, but rather to punish the Judges.

VIII. That in case of a Writ of Error, of a Judgment in a personal Action in
the Grand Sessions in Wales, brought in the said Court of the Marches, if after
Errors assigned, the Defendant in the Writ of Error pleads a Release, or other
matter of Fact thereto, the said Court cannot proceed to determine such Error
for want of a Jury; whereby such Writs of Error will for ever remain
undetermined, and the Plaintiff in the great Sessions shall never have any
fruits of his Judgment; which is a failure of Justice, which has several times
fallen out in the said Court, upon Writs of Error there brought; besides that
the said Court of Marches, which is no Court of Record, tak^ upon them to
correct and determine Errors in the great Sessions, which is a Court of Record.

VIII. There is no failure of Justice in the Case therein alleged; for the
Statute of 34 and 35 H. 8. which impowers this Court of the Marches to examine
erroneous Judgments given in Personal Actions in the great Sessions of Wales,
does implicitly and necessarily empower them to Try any Matter of Fact that may
be pleaded in such a Case, though it be not mentioned in express words; for it is
a Rule in Law, Quando aliquid conceditur concedi videtur id sine quo res ipsa
esse non potest: Therefore in 14 H. 8. f. 1. It is resolved, That if one makes
a Lease, excepting a Close or Wood, the Law gives him a way to it, though there
be no express words concerning the way. And therefore in this Court of the
Marches there are Presidents, that when any such Matter of Fact has been
pleaded upon a Writ of Error, as is mentioned in this Article, which happens
but very seldom, the same has been Tried at the great Sessions in some County
of Wales, upon a feigned Issue directed by this Court of the Marches; and
besides, if there be a failure in this Court of the Marches, there is the like
failure in the Court of the Exchequer-Chamber, erected by the Stat. of 27 Eliz.
for redressing Errors in the King's Bench; for if a Matter of Fact be pleaded
there, the Statute by express words does not provide how this Fact shall be
Tried, but in those cases such Matters of Fact have been Tried by Nisi prius:
So that this Court of the Marches is no otherwise defective in this point than
the Court of Exchequer-Chamber, and if either of them were defective in these
points, as they are not, that is a defect in the Law, and sufficient cause for
a Parliament to redress it by a new Act, but no cause to destroy the Courts.
And that this Court is a Court of Record in this respect, is very evident; for
the proceedings herein upon Writs of Error, are in Latin, as in other Courts of
Record, and the Court takes its Jurisdiction in this particular by an Act of
Parliament, and awards Execution if the Judgment be affirmed.

IX. If a Sheriff, Bailiff, or other Officer execute any Process from that
Court for the King or Subject, and the Defendant brings an Action of false
Imprisonment, such Officer cannot plead Not Guilty, and gives Process in
Evidence, but must be enforced to plead the Statute at large, together with
their Instructions, which never yet could be drawn by the best Clerk; besides
that it will cost upwards of ten pounds; whereas perhaps, the damage in the
Original Action did not exceed 12 d.

IX. Pleas to Actions of False Imprisonments brought against Officers for
executing the Process of this Court, have been drawn by Council, and
maintained, which are yet to be seen upon Record, and may be used as a
President in the like case at any time for a very inconsiderable Charge; and if
no such Plea had been yet drawn, yet certainly it is not impossible or
difficult to be done by any Lawyer, except the Author of this Paper.

X. They usually alter, and frequently quiet Possession upon the filing of a
Bill there, without any Process served upon the Defendant; and oftentimes upon
the Oaths of the Prosecutor; whereby men often lose their right, at least, with
much charge and difficulty regain the same.

X. There is no Injunction granted out of this Court to alter or quiet any
Possession before a Bill Filled in the Court, setting forth the Complainant's
Title, and an Affidavit made, that he has been in quiet and peacable
Possession, by Virtue of that Title, for three years before the exhibiting of
the said Bill, and then the Injunction is only to quiet the Possession till
Eviction by a due course of Law, which the Party enjoined may commence and
prosecute with what speed he please, and so bring the matter to a Legal
determination. And if he recovers by Law, the Injunction is forthwith
dissolved. But if this Affidavit be false, the Party concerned has liberty to
take Issue thereupon, and to prove it so by Witnesses, which if he does, the
Injunction is immediately dissolved, and good Costs to him awarded for the
vexation. And moreover, the King's Attorney, attending this Court, is ordered
to Prosecute an Indictment of Perjury against the Offender for this false Oath.
This proceeding is warranted by a particular Instruction from the King,
grounded upon the said Statute of 34 and 35 Hen. 8. cap. 26. for the preventing
of Bloodshed and Murder, which before often happened on such Occasions in
Wales; and if that Power should be taken away, the old turbulent Humor would
soon revive, to the great disturbance of the tranquillity of that part of the
Kingdom, and the strongest Man would have possession of the best Estate, till
he could be evicted by a great Expense, which a poor Man out of Possession
could never undergo.

XI. Many lewd and dissolute Persons live by serving the Process of the Court,
and making Affidavit thereof; and though they can neither write nor read, yet
will swear the serving of forty or fifty Processes at one time; wherein they
cannot but oftentimes forswear themselves, and much prejudice the Defendant.

XI. This may be objected against the Court of Chancery and Exchequer-Chamber,
and diverse other Courts, where illiterate People are mostly employed to such
purposes; but particular care is taken in this Court by the Judges, strictly to
examine them, and to caution them well of what they swear, and to punish them
if they swear false.

XII. That they usually grant Injunctions to stay proceedings in inferior
Courts, which hold Plea only of Trespasses, and Debts under forty shillings;
whereas it was never intended, the said Court of the Council of the Marches
should hold Plea of any Debt under forty shillings.

XII. This Court never grants Injunctions or Certioraries to remove Actions out
of Inferior Courts, but upon a Bill filed, and Oath made of Partiality in the
Inferior Court, either because the Plaintiff below is an Inhabitant in the
Inferior Jurisdiction, and the other a Foreigner, Or if the Plaintiff is an
Alderman of the Corporation, or Related to the Steward or Judge there: and when
the Plaintiff below appears, he by Answer sets forth the Nature of his Plaint
below, and the Plaintiff in the Court of the Marches by Replication sets forth
what he has to Plead in Bar, and if the matter of his Plea be not sufficient,
the Plaintiff below recovers his Debt in this Court, with his Costs; and this
removal must be before the Verdict, upon the first Commencement of the Suit
below, and the Party that removes the Action, must first give Security in the
Court of the Marches, to answer the Duty and Costs, in case the Suit goes
against him. All which warranted by the Instructions of the Court. And besides
all this, the Author of that Paper is challenged to show any Law, whereby the
Court of the Marches is intended to be excluded from holding Plea of Debts
under forty shillings.

XIII. That the Inhabitants of Wales are subject not only to the Court and the
Great Sessions, but also to the Courts of Westminster, and oft-times served to
appear both at London and Ludlow in one and the same day; and that the
vexatious Suits and Proceedings in the said Court of Marches, and the great
Oppressions of the Practisers, Clerks, and Officers of the said Court, have
been of late by several Grand Juries of several Counties in Wales, presented as
a great Grievance, and fit to be redressed.

XIII. This is no Objection; for the Defendants in this Court may appear by
Attorney: It is true, Wales is liable to several Jurisdictions, and suffers
most by those of Westminster, so chargeable and remote from thence. If the High
Court of Chancery and Exchequer would not meddle with any Cause of Equity
arising in Wales, if there were fewer Quo minus's -- sent out of the Exchequer
into Wales, and none but against such as were really Debtors to the King, as by
Law it ought to be, if fewer Outlawries were in the King's Bench and
Common Pleas, all reasonable men must allow it would be better for Wales. And
the Author of the pretended Grievances, would be a better Friend to his
Country, to promote a Law to limit the Jurisdiction of these Superior Courts,
as to Welsh Causes, than to endeavor to pull down an ancient Court that
contributes so much to the good of his Country. There is no Court without ill
Practitioners; but if that be an Argument to take away the use of all Courts,
where will be Justice found? And that this Court must be taken down, and not
others in far greater Faults, is strange Partiality.

XIV. That the the said Court is an Expense to his Majesty of many thousand
Pounds per annum; and as the Officers, Clerks, and Ministers of the said Court
do manage their business there, do make use of the Power and Authority thereof,
to oppress his Majesty's Subjects; and there being now no Court of Star Chamber
there, the said Court is now useless, there being Courts of Law and Equity held
twice a year of the Grand Sessions, where Causes may be determined at less
charge and trouble to the Parties, within the proper County where they live.

XIV. The Expense of this Court to his Majesty, is not above 2700 l. per annum,
which is inconsiderable in respect of the Advantage it has in all Ages brought
to the Crown; for hereby the Peace and Tranquillity of the Nation is better
maintained than otherwise it would be; and it is for the Grandeur of the Crown
to have a great Power to preside in those parts, especially when God shall
please to bless this Nation with a Prince of Wales. In the late times, when
there was no Court holden in the Marches, many Outrages were committed in the
Intervals of War; and it was then the restless humor of that People to find
out the way to Westminster, whereby many good Families were ruined: The Itch of
going to Law, will bring more Grist to Westminster Hall, and more Fees to some
men's Pockets (which peradventure is the Diana, and the thing some men contend
for) but in a short time will impoverish Wales beyond imagination. The Author
of this Paper in modesty might have spared saying, that this Court has used
any Oppression toward the King's Subjects, till he had proved some particular
Instances by some better Testimony than his own bare Affirmation: And as to
what he says, That the Charge of the Great Sessions is less than of this Court,
this is like the rest; for in the Great Sessions it is usual for matters in
Equity to depend seven, eight, nine, and ten years; but in this Court that
Author is challenged to show that ever a Cause depended two years, where there
has been any careful Prosecution; and by consequence, which is most chargeable,
is left to the Judgment of others.

The Particular Conveniences of the COURT of the MARCHES.
1. THis Court is the best Court for mean Men who are to Contest their Right
with Men of Fortune and Power; for by the Influence that such great Men have
with Jurors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs and other Officers, Men of small Estates have
frequently miscarried in their Suits, how good soever their Titles were: Which
Mischief is easily prevented by a worthy President, with a Well-chosen Council.

2. Whereas the Great Sessions are but twice a year, and Causes there in Equity
often hold Five, Six, Seven, and Ten years before they come to a Determination,
and sometimes Thirty Pound or more is given for Costs of Suits; This Court of
the Marches ordinarily Determines a Cause in three Terms, and seldom allows for
Costs above Fifty Shillings or Three Pound, except extraordinary delays have
been used by the Defendant. In this Court there are holden Four Terms and two
Appearances in one year, each of which, as to the dispatch of Business, is at
least equal to a Great Sessions, so that as much Business may be done in one
year in this Court of the Marches, as in three in the Great Sessions, which are
holden but six times in three years in any one County.

3. If this Court be taken away, peradventure no Welshman can be releiv'd in
his own Country in any Equitable Cause; for it is doubtful whether any other
Lawful Court of Equity be in Wales, especially in South Wales: For the Courts
of Equity in South Wales have in Westminster Hall often been questioned, and in
the noted Case of Pugh and Owen it was adjudged Illegal, and a Prohibition
Granted: The same Reason holds for the two Countys of Montgomery and Denby in
North Wales; because these are new Counties made out of Lordships Marchers by
the Stat. 26 H. 8. c. 26. It is true the Judges of those Circuits after the
Stat. 34 H. 8. did take upon them by Petitions, to give relief in Equity in
some particular Matters, but not formally by Bill till the time of J. 1. And it
is well known a Court of Equity cannot be erected by the Kings Grant, but must
be by Prescription, or by Act of Parliament: but if such a Court were legal,
yet, as appears above, the Court of the Marches is more useful.

4. Writs from Westminster are very hardly Executed in Wales, especially in the
Cases of Foreigners; for if they happen to be concerned in any Estates in
Wales, or have a right to any Debt there, they will find such Partiality in
Sheriffs, that they will be without Remedy if this Court be taken away; and
this would deter such from having any dealings there, and the Gentry of that
Country ought to consider, whether if this Court were down, it would not be
extremely difficult for them to borrow Money in England.

5. In this Court a poor man compels his right against Great men at a small
charge: for if he have many Debts owing from diverse persons, he may sue them
all at one charge, and set forth his causes of action against them severally in
one Bill, be they ten or more Defendants, and have Judgment and Execution
severally against them. Whereas at Westminster, or the Great Sessions, he must
have several Actions, and consequently be at the charge of so many Suits, each
of which Suits will be far more expensive than this Suit in the Marches for all
the Debts together.

6. If this Court be taken away, and Justice to be had only in the respective
Counties of Wales at the Great Sessions, which are limited to each particular
County, then the recovery of many Debts will be avoided by the Defendant's
stepping out of one County into another, to prevent any execution, which is a
frequent practice, especially with them who live in the Confines of Counties.

7. By the Statute of Rutland Judgments, or Actions of Debt, in the Great
Sessions, are given by default, without any notice or Summons, to the
Defendants, upon a presumption that all persons are to be present at the said
Sessions, upon the general Summons of the County, Fifteen days before. Many
taking advantage of this, commence Actions on purpose against persons without
any cause, and especially, against such as have Estates in Wales, and yet live
in other Counties, whereby it is impossible they should have notice to defend
themselves: So that people in their Persons and Estates are surpised and
seized, which is the first notice they receive of any Suit against them. At the
Court of the Marches this is speedily relieved at a very little charge; but in
the Courts of Westminster or elsewhere, the Remedy is tedious and chargeable;
which would cause many such pretended Debts to be paid or compounded, rather
than men would be at the expense of redressing themselves by such troublesome
means. And this, perhaps, may make some Injunctions to the Great Sessions
excusable.

8. The quieting of a three Years peaceable Possession, has been found greatly
beneficial for Wales, where many strifes happen very often on such occasions,
with the death and wounding of men, which no Court besides this of the Marches
can so effectually, and readily prevent.

There are other advantages which attend the Jurisdiction of this Court, too
many to be here enumerated; but to any unprejudiced persons, this may appear
sufficient to show, that the Clamours against this Ancient Court have been
groundless: and that if it be taken away, all people that have any Concerns in
Wales (except such as like not to pay their Debts and do right to their
Neighbors) will find the want of it when it is too late. Yet had the Clamours
any thing of Justice in them, the total abolishing a Court of so long and legal
an Establishment, and so highly beneficial to the Subjects of England and
Wales, might prove an Innovation of dangerous consequence, at a time when it is
not fit to try such Experiments; nor would it be for the Interest of the
Public, to have thousands now petitioning for Justice, as they did upon the
return of C. 2. after the discountinance of this Court by the preceding
Troubles.


