AN ANSWER TO A LETTER TO A DISSENTER, Upon occasion of his Majesty's late
Gracious Declaration of Indulgence.



London, Printed Anno 1687.

An ANSWER to a LETTER to a DISSENTER, etc.
PArdon me, Sir, if I think it is your Interest at least, if not your Fear and
Resentment, must be the effect of you addressing the Dissenters at this time,
since hitherto Conscience and Religion could never prevail to draw from you any
manner of Condescension to them. Truth must at all times carry Conviction with
it, unless Interest hinder; how much it overruled you formerly, in what you
your selves now own to be Truth, I leave you to judge.

In the mean time it is to be considered whether the Dissenters in this
Juncture act contrary to Truth or no; for if they act according to Truth, let
the Clamor of the Church of England be never so great, they will be able to
justify themselves both to God and Man.

The great Question then will be, whether the Penal Laws be just and equitable
Laws, and consistent with the Law of God or not? If they be not consistent with
the Law of God, but quite contrary to the Principles of Christianity, to impose
on and enforce Men's Consciences, and inflict Penalties on them for not agreeing
in mere Matters of Religion; then certainly the Dissenters will be found
altogether in the right, if they consent to the abrogating of those Laws. It
will be but actum agere to prove this imposing and persecuting Principle to be
quite opposite to the express Rule, Doctrine and Practice of Jesus Christ, it
having been sufficiently evinced already, and all Parties now readily acquiesce
in it.

And as nothing but Interest at first prevailed in the enacting these
persecuting Laws, so I doubt it will be found that the self-same Interest, and
not Religion, sways in the continuance of them: for if the Church of England
for once would lay aside that Idol-Interest, and consider what is agreeable to
the Word of God, and what not, and remember that Golden Rule, of doing unto
others as they would be done by, I am confident she could never be so eager an
Advocate for the continuing of these unchristian Laws.

Now as to what advantage the Papists can make by Repealing of the Penal Laws,
and the dismal Consequences hat will follow, which indeed is all that is
considerable in this Letter, and which is the frightful Bugbear made use of, it
may receive an easy Answer: For no Man of sense will argue that the bare taking
away of the Penal Laws is in it self either an establishing of Popery, or
destroying of the Church of England: The King is most graciously pleased to
tell us in his Declaration, that he will maintain Archbishops, etc. And that he
questions not but his Parliament will so settle a Liberty of Conscience for all
his Subjects, as his Successors shall have no cause to alter. Now the
Parliament no doubt will go no farther to the settling of Popery, or destroying
the Church of England, than what the King in this his Declaration expects shall
be enacted, so that the Penal Laws must be the very essential part of the
Church of England, if the bare taking away of them, and confirming all her
other Rights and Privileges will destroy or prejudice her; for the same Law
that gives Liberty to the Papists and Protestant Dissenters, will as strongly
confirm her in every Privilege and Power, except only one, which is the Power
of doing hurt: And since you say, page 16. that the Church of England is
convinced of her Error in being severe to the Dissenters; they have reason to
conclude that the Church of England will rather thank than be displeased with
them, for taking from her the means and Temptation of her ever falling into the
like Error again.

As to what you say page 3, 4. about the new Friendship of the Dissenters, and
the little Truth to be expected from the Papists Performances; let it be as you
say: yet I know of no Dissenter is shaking hands, or entering into any
Engagements with them, more than what is natural to all Men to desire, and
endeavor, a free and undisturbed Exercise of their Religion according to the
Conviction of their Consciences. And how little to your purpose is that
Paragraph, page 3. where you say, Wine is not more expressly forbidden to
Mahometans, than giving Heretics liberty to the Papists. For how does it
follow, that because we give them Liberty, that therefore our Liberty must be
precarious from them, when the same Law will give the Church of England her
Pre-eminence in Powers, Revenues, and all other Advantages and Emoluments, and
the Papists the bare Liberty of the Profession of their Religion? Were it
intended indeed to divest and strip the Church of England of all her rich and
splendid Attirements, and cloth the Papists with them, the Argument might
carry more force in it. But it takes from the Church only the worst and vilest
of her Garments, and which she her self is now ashamed to appear in, and leaves
her all the rest. Page 3 you say the Papists cannot have Absolution, if they
continue their Kindness. You need not be beholden to them for any Kindness, for
the Law will continue all to you, without any Kindness to be expected from
them; so that the Principle concludes amiss, and you will have no occasion to
put them on such difficulties to get their Absolution. And page 3, Whatever
their Skill in Surgery is, you say the worst that ever pretended to it at
Healing; there is another Church has as bad a Faculty at Healing: But I am
sure, we have had of late one Sovereign Plaster which has given a great deal
of ease, when other inexpert Physicians had festered and made the Wound almost
incurable.

Page 4. As to what you say to the Papists treatment of those that think them
guilty of Idolatry, is not to the purpose: for you proceed on this false
Principle, That the Papists are to have the Power in their hands, whereas the
Intent of the Law is, that no one sort of Men shall hurt any other for
differing from them in their Principles, and this to be secured as firm as the
Laws can make it; so that as to the Consequences that may happen from the
Papists, if any thing can be rationally concluded in your Letter, it must be
from hence that the Papists are to be invested with all the Power, when no such
thing, but the quite contrary is to be enacted.

As to the Matter of Addressing, it is strange the Church of England should
oppose it: for if the King be Supreme Head of the Church, as they have
sufficiently preached and printed, the King must have a Power to dispense with
Penal Laws; for all our Lawyers agree the King to have the same Power as the
Pope had in Ecclesiastical Dispensations; and that the Pope had a Power to
dispense with the Penal Laws in matters of Religion, especially in malis
prohibitis, was never questioned. And without doubt it is not that the King
doubts his Power in dispensing, that makes him desirous to have the Penal Laws
taken off by Parliament, but that he designs his Subjects may have the Liberty
of their Consciences, as well in future times, as they are sure to enjoy it
during his Reign; and why the Dissenters should not thank him for exerting that
Power thus seasonably, I cannot comprehend, only thus much we gather from some
Men's Principles, that as long as the King complied with their Desires, the
Prerogative was strained to the highest, but as soon as he acts contrary to
their Humors and Interest, though in the most just and necessary occasion that
ever was, great is the Cry, and the Dissenters, because they address the King
for this necessary and legal Dispensation, must be charged with giving a Blow
to all Laws, and voluntary Aggressors of Magna Charta, so that the Dissenters
(notwithstanding this specious Address) may from hence guess ex pede Herculem,
what Entertainment they are like to have from you, if you once again have the
Power over them, having already pronounced them so great Delinquents in this
Particular: and may they (say I) suffer accordingly, if they give it you again
when it lies in their power to take it from you: But I could wish the Church of
England had been no more Aggressors of Magna Charta than the Dissenters are in
this, or any other Particular.

As to what you say P. 5. about the Instruments of this new Friendship, and
their being bribed, etc. I look on it as all Calumny, the old way of dealing
with the Dissenters, fortiter calumniare aliquid adherebit: But however, I see
no harm there is to take Money to do a good Thing, as I am sure the taking off
these unchristian-like Laws will be.

But for the Circular Letters, and tyring the Posthorses, P. 7. You take up
this I suppose at guess only, by what you your selves did in the case of
Abhorrences to the late King, but drop Instances in that particular as soon as
you please.

But you threaten highly, and tell the Dissenters, P. 12. That the Church of
England can in a Moment bring Clouds again, and turn the Royal Thunder upon our
Heads, blow us off the Stage with a Breath; if she would but give a Smile or a
kind Word, the least glimpse of her compliance would throw the Dissenters back
into their former state of Suffering: But she (good Church) will not allow her
self to be rescued by such unjustifiable means, but chooses to bear the Weight
of Power, rather than lie under the Burden of being Criminal. Now what the
Sense of this studied Paragraph is, or what weight it is that the King is going
to put upon her, I cannot imagine, unless she reckons Archbishops, Bishops,
etc. to be a Weight; and indeed they have been a dead and heavy Weight to some
People: But of this Weight, I suppose, she may be eased as soon as she
pleases: And that she will not thank the King for easing her of what
disgraceth her, and of which she her self is now ashamed, she must, I think, in
the Sense of all sober Men still lie under the Burden of being Criminal.

But she dealsvery sawcily methinks with the Royal Thunderer, as if she with a
Smile could alter what he has so solemnly declared he will continue during his
Reign: But why should she that has so strongly maintained that the Word of the
King is Sacred, imagine that for a Smile from her he would so easily alter his
Sacred Word? The Reason is plain, she maintained his Word to be Sacred, when
she thought he would regulate himself by her stinted Principles; but now she
sees that he acts by a more Divine and Generous Principle, the Case is altered,
tho he is still the same to her, for he maintains her in all her Grandeur,
Rights and Privileges, according to his Word: But certainly she was much to
blame to imagine that when he promised to maintain her, he would so maintain
her as to give her Power to destroy all others.

But that Page 3. where you say that they (the Roman Catholics) are no more
able to make good their Vows, than Men married before, and their Wife alive,
can confirm their Contract with another Woman: You are to be hugged now, that
you may be squeezed at another time: We know it is the King has made this Vow
or Promise to us, that we shall enjoy this Liberty during his Reign; now that
such Language should proceed from Loyal Churchmen is very strange, so that if
the Government do but in the least thwart them, it is not their Doctrine of
Passive Obedience and Submission can keep them within bounds, but they must
squint on the Government.

But you seem to speak very fairly, P. 16. That the Foundation must be
enlarged, and an Agreement made amongst Protestants against the common Enemy.
And is the Church really in earnest in this Point! Or perhaps she thinks she
can put any thing upon the easy good-natured Dissenters, whom she will hug at
present, that she may squeeze them hereafter: But the Dissenters I hope will
not swallow such a gilded Pill; For why did not the Church of England agree to
this in the Westminster Parliament, when the Bill of Comprehension was
proposed, a very seasonable time for so good and so great a Work, and saved all
this Trouble, but instead of that, they fell to Violence and Persecution, and
at this instant threaten severely, and would no doubt be at the same glorious
Work again, had not the King in his great Mercy put a stop to it?

But the next Heir, you say P. 16. and all things will conspire to give the
Dissenters ease and satisfaction, if they do not anticipate and destroy it
themselves. How far the Church of England may influence the next Successor,
bred in her Bosom, and not in that Country you speak of, and of a Sex easier
to be prevailed with, the Dissenters have no reason to hazard, since nothing
but the Great, Noble, and generous Resolution of our present Prince could break
through the daily and continued Solicitations of the Church of England to the
contrary.

P. 10. You bid us consider and take warning by the Church of Englands mistake
in the same kind, when after the late King's Restoration they preserved so long
the bitter taste of the Dissenters rough usage toward them in other times,
that it made the Church of England forget their interest, and sacrifice it to
their revenge. The Case indeed is worth considering; by their Revenge, I
suppose, you mean the enacting and executing of those severe Penal Laws upon
the Dissenters; a Revenge, I must confess with a Witness! But, Sir, the
Dissenters will consider this Case seriously, and deal more fairly by the
Church than the Church dealt by them; they will neither enact, nor execute any
Penal Laws against the Church of England; but on the contrary, they, as the
King has been pleased to declare, will consent to confirm all Archbishops,
Bishops, etc. And likewise to enact, That neither Papist, nor any other shall
have power to hurt the Church in the Profession of her Religion, or the
Possession of her Rich Temporalties; and humbly crave only at her hands, that
they may have by the same Law, the free Exercise of their Religion in Peace and
Quietness; And hope the Church will not refuse them so small a pittance.

Now, Sir, if the Church be not satisfied herein, it will tempt Men to
conclude, that her eager desire to have these Laws continued, is with a design
to put them at a proper season in execution again; and that she cannot be
satisfied in any thing less than a Power of Persecution, since all her other
Privileges will be confirmed to her, and that only taken from her.

FINIS.

