THE ANSWER OF A Protestant Gentleman IN IRELAND, TO A Late LETTER from N. N.
Upon a late DISCOURSE between Them concerning the present Posture of That
Country, and the Part fit for Those concerned There, to Act in it.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Church
Yard. MDCLXXXIX.

THE ANSWER OF A Protestant Gentleman in Ireland, etc.
SIR,
SINCE you cannot help it, but are pusht on by a fatal Necessity, I will not
wonder that you add so scurrilous a Letter to so insipid a Discourse.

If the Notions that have troubled your Head, had evaporated in that Noddle
that first conceived them, I apprehend no Damage could have accrued to me by
the Disappointment: and you might with safety have appeased the Twinges of your
tender Conscience, without discovering so little regard to common Honesty. I am
obliged to you, for the Liberty you give me, to make what use of them I please;
the Choice is easily determined, I know what use to make of waste Paper. But I
crave leave to disagree with your Judgment; since I cannot understand your
Arguments so cogent, or your Design so ingenious, To put me in the right way te
keep my Estate in Ireland however you cajole me with a complemental
Acknowledgment of a former Welcome there. As you need not tell me the Danger it
is in; so there is no necessity to delude me with improper Directions, how to
escape it; wishing that the way were plainly seen, and yet plainly wishing that
I may not take it. When you pretend to be plainer, you appear to me to be most
intricate; for what can you mean by the two pretending Kings to Ireland?
Certainly, it must be James and Lewis; and I am fully satisfied, that which
soever of those two sides I take, I take the unjust side, and really deserve to
lose my Estate. Your Conviction has no more Influence on me, than your
Conversion; and tho with a Jesuitical Equivocation, you flatter the Protestant
Interest, yet secretly and sl^ly you promote the Popish Intrigue.

I might turn the Point upon you and retort your own Words, [I do not engage in
the Point of Right and Wrong between King James, and King William, which of
those has the best Title to this Crown; or rather, which has a Title, and which
has not;] but your Language is so foul, so malapert, so impudent, that it
cannot be repeated without the danger of Infection. For who but a profligate
Wretch, case-hardned with a Popish Zeal, and Superstition, durst belch out so
uncharitable a Censure on those glorious Adventurers who contributed to the
miraculous restitution and reestablishment of the Protestant Religion under a
Protestant King and Queen? But now the Vizor is off, it is no longer Popery in
masquerade, the Jesuit is barefaced; no man, but one trained in that
diabolical Discipline, would presume to asperse the happy Actors in the late
Settlement, with those odious Terms of Falseness, Weakness, and Baseness; and
so profanely scoff at a Reformation of the Lord's doing. Were there any other
Advantage to be gained by the Wager, than your yielding that whole Proceeding
to be lawful and just; I could as positively lay my Bett, That the first
Contrivers and Promoters of it were principally guided by a Care and
Concernment for the Established Religion, and not animated to it by those
dis-ingenious Motives of Revenge, Advantage, or Ambition: But so bold and base
an Assertion, so contrary to Truth, Sense, and Experience [that Religion is in
a worse condition, than it could have been put by King James as long as he
could have lived] deserves no Reply, but a Whip and a Scourge: so saucy and
virulent an Expression [that the whole Proceeding is the blackest and foulest
that ever showed its Face in the World, not excepting that against King Charles
the First] is not to be answered with Patience. Nevertheless, I will for once
play the Stoic, and calmly reason the Case with you. Either you grossly
equivocate, or you speak nothing to the Purpose; if by Religion you mean your
own, and the Popish Persuasion, it is very palpable that it is in a worse
condition, than King James would have put it: if you mean the Protestant
Religion, how can you with that Confidence aver it to be in a worse condition?
Are the Bishops imprisoned, indicted, and tried for Actions merely moral, and
conscientious? Are the Heads and Members of Colleges arbitrarily turned out,
and the Fountains of Learning tainted by Romish Poison? Are any Sort or Party
of Protestants discountenanced? Are Employments Civil and Military taken from
men, because they will not truckle to the Determinations of a Popish Council,
or stisle the Inspirations of a good Conscience, by the prospect of a good
Place? Are there any Popish Chapels open, or Jesuitical Schools and Seminaries
permitted in the Land? Does the King brow-beat his Dependents for not following
him to the Mass? or the Ministers of State make the Roman Catholic Profession
the End and Pledge of your Advancement? Do the Court-Agitators put a Muzzle
upon your Reason, or infringe your natural Privilege of Free Will? Or have you
been Closeted, and obliged to give your Vote against the Dictates of your
Judgment? Is there a Mass openly celebrated in the Kingdom, a Jesuit to be
found, or a Friar to be seen? If not, how ridiculous is the Comparison? How
senseless the Presage? The Protestant Religion is now become the National and
Universal Profession, cherished by the King, encouraged by the Parliament; in
the late Reign it was clouded, despised, and rendered altogether unfashionable,
and in all probability would have been quite extinguished, if James, your King,
had long lived so. And now let us consider the Circumstances of King Charles
the Martyr, and his Apostate Son; and look into the Parallel of their several
Sufferings. The one of an Angelick Life, the Pattern of Goodness, and Mirror of
Virtue; who lived a Saint, and dyed a Confessor; it will be undecent to reflect
upon the Immoralities of a Prince; turn the end of the Perspective, and all
considerate Men will agree in the Character of the other. The one indeed was
accused openly, Things laid to his Charge that he knew not, persecuted and
deserted by the predominant Party of his Subjects, and cut off by a Form of Law
and Justice: the other had his Accusation legibly stamped on all his Actions, by
the Breach of Promises, the eluding of Oaths, and the Infraction, or Suspension
of the Municipal Laws of the Kingdom; he affronted and cast off his best and
truest Subjects, he deserted the Throne, and by a spontaneous Act Abdicated the
Government; he was neither imprisoned nor restrained, but by his Flight he
justly incurs the Guilt of those Crimes which an inward Witness confronted him
with, and which the Modesty as well as Prudence of the Government has forborne
to make public, since it is not the Custom of England to try and condemn the
absent, or to execute men in Effigy: and if such men [whom he has raised from
nothing, and done such singular kindness to] preferred their Religion and the
Salvation of their Souls, before the servile Compliance with an Idolatrous
Worship, and supporting the Tyranny of a Bigoted Zealot, and Inflexible Votary
to the Church of Rome; in my Opinion they deserve to be placed in the first
Rank of good Patriots and Champions for the Liberty and Prosperity of their
Country. And if the Government be so tender of the Honor of an Abdicated
Prince, as not to publish what they know concerning the suspected Birth of the
Prince of Wales; the Secret League with France, etc. let it not be imputed to
sham or Defect of Evidence; do not dare or defy them to do such a thing, lest
that may fall out, which has often happened to an insulting and unprovoked
Challenger. Your Similies about setting Fire to a Part of the House, may pass
for very Elegant; but let me retort the Allegory, and ask you, what say you to
him, that sets Fire to the whole House, and runs away by the Light of it? For
such Papers as are writ on this Subject, I willingly remit you to hug your self
in the Delight you take in them, and entreat you at the next Edition, to affix
to them your Imprimatur.

And now let us join Issue; let us (to use your Metaphor) open the Tables, and
try the several Games that are to be Played; or to humor your Conceit, let us
take out the Dice, and either play at In and In with one of the Kings; or at
Hazard, if the contrary side should prevail. Most Judicious Sir! I do admire
your Logical Head, which way you could find out such extraordinary Remarks, as
have escaped the Curiosity of others! You begin Hypothetically, you conclude
Dogmatically, and you proceed all the way Fallaciously. If the Protestants of
Ireland side with King James, and King William prevail, how can you be certain
that King William cannot make them suffer with any face of Law, Equity,
Conscience or Policy? To me it appears quite otherwise; for tho you beg the
question in your Parenthesis, and positively pronounce that King James has not
Abdicated the Government of Ireland; all Men that know the Constitution of that
Kingdom, and its subordinate Dependence upon England, will spit Contradictions
in your face, and inform the World, that when the Parliament of England have
declared the Throne vacant, and placed the Regal Diadem on King William, it
will neither be against Law, nor Equity, to punish such persons as voluntarily
and wittingly adhere to King James, with loss of life, and Confiscation of
their Estates. Neither is the case the same as was in England, so long as King
James was actually King, no man was blamed for serving under his Command, nor
obnoxious to Punishment for being faithful to him; but when he is actually
deprived of his Regality, and had abandoned the Government, when King William
is in Possession of the Throne, and publicly proclaimed both in England and
Ireland, according to your Position, Law, Equity, and Conscience, are of the
side of the lawful King (i. e. of him whom the Legislative Power of the Land
has constituted King) at least as long as he is possessed.

In the next Paragraph you have conjured up a Spirit, which with all your skill
you cannot exorcise; you have started an Objection, which with all your
Sophistry you cannot answer. The Right and Power of England in and over the
Kingdom of Ireland is unquestionable, no King of England, since the Conquest of
it, ever went into Ireland to be Crowned; but by the assumption of the Crown
here, he is ipso facto become King there. Certainly if you were conversant in
the History and Laws of Ireland, you would never amuse the World with such
frivolous questions. You would know that the Parliament of England can oblige
Ireland by an Act inclusive, that by special words the Parliament of England
may bind the Subjects of Ireland, vid. Cook. 4. Institut. 350. That Appeals are
made from thence to the Parliament here; that the Privy Council can summon
Offenders before them, that the Judges of the Kings Bench can remand the
Hearing of Causes by Writs of Error. Nay, the Parliament of Ireland are so
subjected to the Power of England by Poyning's Law, made in the Tenth of Henry
the Seventh, that they have not the power of an ordinary Grand Jury in making
Presentiments, a Bill cannot be brought into the House, before it is approved by
the Council in England, and Enrolled in the Chancery there; so that if the
Parliament in England cannot lay a Tax upon the Estates in Ireland (which for
the Honor of my Country, I will neither determine nor dispute) yet it is
apparent by all Histories and Records, they may do things of a higher nature,
and settle the Throne of Ireland by an Authority paramount to theirs; (tho it
has been usual to make a Recognition of the Regal Title in that Kingdom in
their proper Parliament, in imitation and concurrence with what is done in
this) and the same indubitably will be practiced, whenever King William shall
be established in the Possession of that forlorn Country.

You cavil and banter, when you set the Convention against the Parliament, and
the Prince of Orange against King William. The Lord Keeper has the same
Authority as the Lord Chancellor, tho not so great a Title; the Convention and
the Parliament are different terms, one Latin, the other French; but their
Power and Jurisdiction the same. When we say, the Three Estates convened in
Parliament, is not the Convention in the Parliament, and the Parliament
consisting of the Convention of the Three Estates? There must be no long
Vacancy in the Throne, the King never dies, but upon the Natural, or Civil
Death, or departure of the Regnant Prince, the Throne must be immediately
filled, and when the Prince of Orange is solemnly proclaimed, and placed in the
Throne, and Crowned King; he is a Rebel and a Traitor that questions his Right,
or opposes his Government.

You rear the Fabric of your Discourse upon a false foundation, you gull the
people by a subdolous Supposition, That King James is lawfully possessed of the
Kingdom of Ireland. You may as well be an Advocate for the French King, and
assert his Right to Alsatia, Lorrain, and many Towns in Flanders, because he is
possessed of them by force; you may as well plead for his Brother the Great Turk,
and justify his Usurpation of all the Christian Territories. About November
last you might have said such things without control: He was then the Regnant
King, and tho by his Religion he was incapable to hold the Reins of Government,
yet before Conviction and Sentence, no man taxed his Disability; tho by his
Violation of Oaths, Subversion of the Laws, and Arbitrary Intrusion on the
Subjects Properties, be justly forfeited his right to rule; yet no man resisted
him. But now when out of a secret Guilt he has withdrawn himself, and without
compulsion abdicated the Government, when the Legislative Power has excluded
and dethroned him, and have actually placed the Crown of England, and its
dependant Ireland, upon the head of another; he that will own James to be still
the King, deserves to be exploded at Newgate, and confuted at Tyburn. But if
King James should prevail, and keep the possession of Ireland, (whereof by the
treacherous dissimulation of his Deputy Tyrconnel, and the assistance of his
French Myrmidons, he has already too great a share) it is easy to see how it
is likely to fare with those who pretend to set up King William, and if they
must claim no better Title or Security for their Lives and Estates, than what
they must be obliged to his mercy and kindness for, the consequence is obvious;
it will prove the Transcript of the horrible Persecutions in France (far
transcending all those of the Heathen Emperors put together) the Dragoons will
tread the Stage, and react those Tragical Barbarities on the Scene of Ireland.
Can we expect any other Answer or Usage than the Protestants of Suffolk
received from Queen Mary, whom they placed on the Throne, when the Papists had
set up the Lady Jane Gray? Or any other return than the French Tyrant has made
to his Subjects of the Reformed Religion, for establishing his Title against
all other Pretenders? Consider the Proceedings of the Emperor Ferdinand the
Second, and then tell me if any man in his senses ought to rely on the Word
and Promise of a Popish Prince made to his Heretical Subjects. He was famous
under the advantageous Characters of Piety, Probity, Virtue, a zealous Son of
the Holy Church: His Protestant Subjects continued faithful to him, and did not
adhere to King Frederick, tho a Protestant Prince, and chosen King by the
States of Bohemia; yet when he became Master of the Country by his Victory at
Prague, he handled them with equal cruelty and severity, as those who had sided
with Frederick, only he allowed them this hard choice, either to change their
Religion within three Months, or to depart the Kingdom: Nay, when he had
solemnly promised, and sworn to observe the Articles agreed between him and the
Elector of Saxony, in favor of the Lutherans (many of whom had served in that
Army which reduced Bohemia to his Obedience) yet so soon as he saw himself in a
condition to need no more of their service, he was absolved from the obligation
of his Promises by the Bishop of Aversa, and thereupon they were all banished,
as well as the most obnoxious. And by the way observe, the Protestant
profession was the established Religion of Bohemia, as firmly settled as
Imperial Edicts could make it, no less publicly professed and generally settled
in that Kingdom, than it was in Ireland; notwithstanding within a few years the
Protestant Religion was wholly extinguished, by the Violations made on their
Laws, Liberty, and Property, by this pious Emperor Ferdinand the Second,
contrary to all solemn Engagements, Promises, and public Faith.

The rest of your Argument will prove a trifle, if the matter be stated right,
you insist upon the Dispute between King William and King James, but take no
notice of him that sits behind the Curtain, that when the Gamesters have tried
their luck, intends to sweep away the Stakes. If King James retain his Usurped
Dominion, it is but to be Tributary to the French King, and what must the
Protestants expect under his Protection, but Rapes, Robberies, Murders, and
utter desolation, and destruction? If King William prevail and recover Ireland,
(as well we may hope, since God is on his side) Reason and Justice will incline
him to call them to account, who have abetted the Irish French Interest, and
then perhaps your Terra firma will be shaken, and you may look for a Reprisal
in Vtopia, or New Atlantis.

It is not to be wondered at that you who were wont to ridicule the Popish
Plot, should pretend a disbelief of the intended Massacre in Ireland. Those
whom you call timorous and unthinking people, had more wit than to believe
themselves in safety under a Popish Government, they withdrew their persons and
their effects in time, while many thousands of credulous men, cheated by the
specious pretenses, and horrible Imprecations of Tyrconnel (never true to his
word, but in his appointed days to Assault and ruin the Prorestants) and amused
by the mistaken policy of the through paced professors of Religion; continued
there, till they were driven to the pinching Dilemma, of Complying or Starving.
And now, in the Name of God, why should any considerate Man doubt the design of
the Papists to inslave the British, to destroy the Religion, and utterly to
exterminate the Protestants, either gradually, or by an universal Massacre? Why
were Arms secretly bought up, and an unusual Furniture of Chain-Bridles
provided by some of the Irish Clergy? Why was Londonderry to be possessed by a
multitude of Highlanders and Papists on the 7th. of December last, but in order
to that bloody Design to be perpetrated on the 9th. Did not Tyrconnel about
that time give Commissions (only upon a bare Letter from his Master) to raise
40000 Men, and distributed above 50000 Arms? Were not the New Officers to
maintain their Troops and Companies by such a proportion of Beef, Mutton, and
Meal for Three Months; and did they not raise that supply by Robbing the
British? Were not the Protestants in Munster plundered? The whole Province of
Canaght pillaged? All Arms and Horses forcibly taken from the Inhabitants of
Dublin and forty Miles round it? Is not Vlster (who upon the News of the
Barbarous proceedings in the other Provinces Armed and got together for their
self Defense) almost totally overrun by the insulting Enemy, their Houses and
Estates taken from them, their Tenants beggered, and themselves forced to seek
a Refuge in England, and Scotland? Have not many Protestants been Murdered,
some by Rage, and some by a Form of Law? Have not others been cheated by the
Trick of Protections, while the Officers defend them from the Rapine of the
Army, but expose them to the Fury of the Rabble? May not any Man of common
sense, the most Ignorant in all Ireland, plainly see (to retort your own Words)
the Massacring the English would make Room for the French, and unite all
Papists under the Obedience of King Lewis? And if so, can any Man with Reason
condemn those that have escaped from Ireland, or advise those that remain there
to justify, and support the Brace of Usurpers.

Hitherto you have vented your Spleen, and uttered many undecent Reflections on
the King and Parliament; but now you Attacque us with an ungentile Exprobation
of our present Necessities. Though our Rents do not come out of Ireland after us,
but are intercepted by such as have no Right to them; yet we may live, the
generous people of England will not let us starve, we are not in the least
doubt but King William will provide handsome subsistence for us, according to
our several Capacities. We are proud that so Illustrious a person as my Lord
Hallyfax will vouchsafe to solicit for us, and hope it will be to better
purpose, than the Negotiation of Father Peter's, or my Lord Powis Solicitation
for you. If Lieutenant General Hamilton has neglected his Honor and
Engagement, and contributed to the destruction of his Countrymen; I hope
Monsieur d'Avaux will Reward him according to his merits. For my part I do
intend to spend my time in London, till the Kings Commands oblige me to be
elsewhere, and I do not fear that it shall ever be in the power of King James
to punish me for it. And however you reproach and upbraid us with Hunger and
Want, I can assure you, your Friends in Ireland, are in no great plenty of Meat
and Drink: Hunger and Poverty are the concomitants of King James his Court,
though it may be better endured by his French Controllers, and his Irish
Followers, who never were accustomed to fuller Feeding.

Your next is a mere Wheedle; but be not deceived, the Protestants here have no
mind to return into Ireland, while either French, or Irish are Predominant;
neither will they seek a License from King James to sta^ here, or his Pardon
for their Absence. But when King William shall employ them, they hope to
return, and call them to account, who have occasioned their Exile.

I come now to consider the Case, which you have stated with all possible Art,
Malice, and false Insinuations. Your design is to instill a Jealousy into the
minds of the Protestants, to foment a mistrust between the English and Dutch,
and by a side-blow to wound the Honor of our Gracious King. It is not
impossible, but King James may for some time keep the possession of Ireland for
the use of King Lewis, and may Seize and Possess himself (but not fairly) of my
Estate: It is no less possible that King William may after some time beat out
King James, and his French Accomplices, and settle himself entirely in that
Dominion. Well, what then: Must my Estate be liable to Forfeiture because it
was Seized, and Usurped by proclaimed Rebels? Is there any Color of Sense or
Reason to start a comparison in the Case between British Protestants forced to
forsake the Country, and abandon their Estates for safety of their Lives in the
Reign of King William, and Irish Papists, who unprovoked, in the time of Peace
and Quiet; took up Arms, and Murdered so many Thousands of their
Fellow Subjects, who by King Charles the First and his Parliament, were
declared Traitors attainted by the Law, their Estates Forfeited by Rebellion;
and vested in King Charles the Second at his Restoration? Such an Argument is
to be urged only by that sort of Men, who with a seared Conscience and a brazen
Impudence, deny the Gunpowder Treason; make a mock of the Horrid Popish Plot,
and justify the former damnable Rebellion in Ireland, as an undertaking for
Self-defence. And what if the King have an Inclination to gratify Monsieur B
-- g, and those other Worthy Persons who have faithfully served him, and
assisted in the Expulsion of Tyranny, Popery, and Arbitrary Government, and
securing the Peace and Religion of the Kingdom? Is there any necessity to make
the Protestant Estates the Reward of their Service? No there are Lands in
Ireland to the value of 300000. l. per annum belonging to Irish Papists, (now
in Actual Rebellion against the Crown of England) with which the King may amply
Recompense his Servants, and distribute his Favors according to their
respective Merits. In the mean time, King William being a Man of exemplary
Piety, exalted Virtue, universal Probity, and the Champion of the Protestant
Religion, I neither mistrust his Justice, nor doubt his Generosity; I rest
secure and satisfied that he will in time restore me to my former Estate, and
give me more, if by my Service I can deserve it.

The Question which you Propose, and pretend to Answer, carrys the Confutation
in the very Terms of stating it: you say, in case we should return to that
which perhaps is justly enough called our Duty, so as to restore King J. to his
Right and Crown again, how shall we be assured we shall not fall under the same
dangers we apprehended our selves before both in our Religion and Properties.
He can give no better nor other assurance, than public and solemn Promises
added to such Acts of Parliament as we shall contrive and frame for our own
Security. -- Have we not had all these already, and has He not broke them all?
Does not his pretended Dispensing Power at once set aside all Promises, Laws,
and every thing but his Will and Pleasure? And though He should now disclaim
That to get in again, will it not be very easy when He is in, to lay hold on
that common, and indeed many times justifiable come off of Kings, that He was
then under a force, and could not bind himself to His own wrong, or to the
diminution of His Prerogative. I confess here is a hard question, and that
which makes it harder yet, I am afraid the Charge against us is most of it
true, therefore I shall shorten my Reply, and only Remonstrate in Brief: If a
Prince placed in the Throne by the dint of Loyalty, Fidelity, and Love to his
Family, rescued from the Bill of Exclusion, Established in his Government by
the Generous and Unanimous adherence of his Parliament, and the Destruction of
the Duke of Monmouth, Caressed with dutiful Addresses and joyful Acclamations,
enriched with Considerable Additions to his Revenue, Complemented with a
Connivance at the Private Exercise of his Religion, and adventuring the
Security of ours on the bare Assurance of his Word: If such a Prince under such
Circumstances of Glory and Felicity, beloved by his Subjects, and dreaded by
Foreigners, would tamely suffer himself to be imposed on by Priests and
Jesuits, dishonor himself by an Embassy to Rome, Provoke his People by setting
up Mass-houses, and Popish Seminaries, Invade Men's Properties, overthrow some
Laws, and Dispense with others; deprive the Heads of Colleges, Imprison the
Bishops, discard all Men from Civil and Military Employments, that refused to
Worship the Image which he had set up; endeavor by Threats and Promises to
Debauch his Servants, and by ungenerous Arts to Predispose his Subjects, to
break down the Bars that secure the Protestant Profession; What must we expect
if by the Indignation of God he be Re-establisht on the Throne; certainly he
can never ascend those Steps, but supported by the Papists, and trampling on
the Necks of Protestants; Rage, Revenge, blind Zeal, Ignorant Devotion,
Meritorious Service, the Purchase of Heaven, the escape of Purgatory, the Popes
Bulls, the Jesuits Tricks, the Priests Prayers, and the pernicious Advice of
Popish Counselors, will transport him beyond all Sense of Honor, and
precipitate him into Actions Correspondent to the Days of Queen Mary, and
imitating, if not exceeding the Inhumane Cannibals in France.

I grow weary now of this Expostulation, and I am amazed to see any Man obtrude
such Chimerical crude Notions, such fallacious Equivocating Argumentations,
such threadbare Repetitions, upon Men that can Read, Observe, and Understand.
If King James have not a mind to get upon his Throne again by the Power of his
Irish Army, What made him go there? Why has he raised so many Men, carried over
so many Arms, disarmed and destroyed the Protestants, and Summoned a
Parliament; and though the United Strength of England and Scotland (by the
mercy of God) shall ever be too hard for them, yet it is not impossible but the
Popish Party (seconded by the Atheistical Crew, and such as, being always
disgusted with the present Government, are gaping for an Alteration, they know
not to what) may ruffle and discompose the Calm Serenity Great Britain is blessed
with, and become the Setters and Forerunners of a French Invasion. And that
surely we have great Reason to expect, (notwithstanding the many Difficulties
you seem to object, but do not believe) since the French King has been at so
great Charge and Hazard to Comfort and Reinforce his inconsiderable Allies
there; for whosoever knows the Monarch of France, will not suspect him to be so
mean Spirited, as to be Compassionate, or so Impolitick to wast his Treasure,
and expose his Forces, to Re-establish an exiled and forlorn Prince: I am more
than confident he will not dissemble so gross a Self-denial, but intends to
turn the Mortgage of Ireland into a Fee-simple, and by the Livery and Seisin
already given him in part, to claim, and seize the whole. And than (as you say)
King Lewis would get more by the Victory than King James, and it would do King
James little Service to have the Kingdom so recovered.

Your Prophetic Supposition (that the People of England may bring themselves
to be Conquered by France) shall be no more regarded, than your slye
Insinuations, to induce them to so servile a Subjection, or your tacit
Commination, that such a Conquest is approaching, or your Pernicious Prospect
of so unpracticable an Accommodation, that the People of England should consent
to receive King James, without any fear of suffering by him, either in their
Religion, Laws, or Properties.

Your Conclusion is agreeable to the Premises, a disingenious Reflection on the
People of England, who in all Ages have manifested a Prudential care of
themselves, and at this Juncture will do it, maugre your Crafty Insinuation to
the contrary.

Upon the Word of a Gentleman, I do assure you, I do not take it ill that you
have offered your Thoughts, which how wild and Incongruous soever, can have no
other Influence upon me, than to dispose me to Continue,

SIR, Your humble Servant.


