ANSWER TO THE CASE OF THE Old East India Company; As Represented by Themselves
TO The LORDS Spiritual and Temporal IN PARLIAMENT Assembled.

LONDON, Printed by K. Astwood, for the Author. 1700.

AN ANSWER TO THE CASE OF THE Old EAST INDIA Company;
THE Companies Case shall be answered in the Method it is stated by themselves,
not that they have given a true State of it with respect to the Act lately
passed (for that is quite otherwise, as shall afterward be shown) but to take
of the Clamor which is made of invading their Property, depriving them of
their Possession and Right, ruining many Families, and the like; and therefore
having to deal with Persons, who will not answer what is said or objected to
them, only continue to make Popular Outcries they must be followed in their own
way, till the Noise is abated, and their Passions laid, and then it is to be
hoped they will listen to Reason, and consider the Case as it truly stands, and
shall before I finish be faithfully represented.

The Company page 1, 2. recite so much, as they think for their purpose of the
Charters granted by Queen Elizabeth, King James, King Charles the 2d. and King
James the 2d. wherein is suggested, That the same was for the Honor of
England, for the Increase of Navigation, and the Advance of Trade, and the
like: And I shall readily grant the Trade to the East Indies to be such,
because I really think it so, and not because of those Suggestions in the
Charters, for it is well enough known, that those who draw the Charters, do not
think themselves obliged to the strictest Examinations of the Suggestions, or
to answer for the exact Truth of them.

But the said Charters (say the Company, page 2.) contain a Grant of the Trade
to the East Indies; to the Company exclusive of all others, and by some of them
they are constituted the Lords Proprietors of Bombacy, and that the perpetual
Propriety of the Island of Sancta Helena is afterward granted to them, and
that by these Grants they are induced to think they have a Right in Law to the
Trade, at least that they should have an Vncontroverted Title to the Lands,
Inheritance, etc. And that on this presumption; and relying on the Public
Faith and Credit of the Great Seal of England, the Company have expended above
a Million on the Credit of these Charters in Fortifications, etc. And page 3.
That in prospect of this Right, they have acquired Revenues of 44000 l. per
Annum, and many Settlements and Privileges.

In the Recital of these Charters, the Company have omitted to give an Account
of the Provisoes inserted therein, viz. That the respective Kings granting the
said Charters reserved Power upon three Years Notice to make them void: But
that being also a Condition in their last Charter, will come into Consideration
afterward.

As to the Right they pretend to the Trade exclusive of others, I do not find
one Word said throughout their whole Case, to prove or maintain any such Right;
and this might reasonably have been expected from them. The saying, They were
induced to think they had a Right, and that upon that Presumption they expended
Money and purchased Territories, etc. When at the same time every Lawyer must
tell them, they had no such right, and that the King by his Charter could not
grant any such Right exclusive of others, and that several Recoveries have been
had against them as Law for prosecuting such pretended Right: What would this
be termed in other Affairs, but downright Folly and Madness?

And as the Crown had not a Power to grant such Right, so his present Majesty
has not in Fact granted any such Right exclusive, therefore the New
Subscribers to the Old Company, had no Inducement to think they had any such
Right, but if the Company (in their case) mean that they had a Right to the
Trade, equal with all other the King's Subjects who had no Charter, that is not
denied, and being granted does not serve their purpose, as will afterward
appear.

The Company go on, page 3. to give an Account of the Declaration of the House
of Commons and House of Lords, That the East India Trade should be carried on
in a Joint Stock exclusive to all others, but omit to mention their other
Declaration, That it was lawful for all Persons to Trade thither, unless
restrained by Act of Parliament; and they take no Notice of the two Addresses,
made by the House of Commons, of the 6th. of Feb. 1691. and 25 Feb. 1692. to
dissolve the Company.

They mention Message of his Majesty to the House of Commons of the 14th. of
November. 1692. but very craftily (to say no worse) omit the most material Part
of the said Message, viz. That his Majesty required the East India Company to
answer directly, whether they would submit to such Regulations, as his Majesty
should judge proper and most likely to advance the Trade, and the Company
having fully agreed to it, and declared their Resolution in Writing, his
Majesty commanded a Committee of his Privy Council to prepare Regulations,
which they did, and offered them to the Company; but the Company
notwithstanding their Declaration of Submission, rejected almost all the
material Particulars, so that his Majesty finding, that what possibly the House
of Commons might have expected, and indeed was necessary to preserve this
Trade, could not be perfected by his own Authority alone, and that the Company
could not be induced to consent to any such Regulations, as might have answered
the Intentions of the House of Commons, and that the Concurrence of the
Parliament is requisite to make a Complete and Useful Settlement of this Trade,
has directed all the Proceedings in this Matter to be laid before them, and
recommends to them the preparing such a Bill, in Oder to pass into an Act of
Parliament, as may establish this Trade on such Foundations, as are most likely
to preserve and advance it.

The Company proceed to tell How it was suggested, that their Charter was
become void by their Non-payment of the Tax imposed upon them by Parliament,
and how they the 7th. October. 1693. obtained a New Charter, but say nothing of
the Eighty Odd Thousand Pounds, paid out of the Companies Stock that same Year
for the special Service of the Company, and great part of it for obtaining the
said Charter, as Sir T. C. gave an Account to the Committee of both Houses of
Parliament. Surely if the Company had a Right in Law, as they pretended they
were induced to believe, there needed not such Chargeable and Strenuous
Solicitations.

And now we are come to the Charter it self granted by his present Majesty,
which bears Date the 7th. October. 1693. which was as they say, contested before
the Queen and Council by those they call Interlopers, upon the Hearing whereof
it plainly appeared and was unanswerably made out, that the King had not by
Law, a Power to grant the Trade to some Persons exclusive of others, and that
the then Companies Affairs were in such a Condition, that it would be a plain
Cheat to others, that should come in upon their Stock. However Law and Reason
failing, they had recourse to other Means and grea Sums of Money were
distributed (as it was acknowledged before a Committee of both Houses of
Parliament) to get a New Charter for the Old Company, and at length a New
Charter was obtained, but those who were concerned to advise his Majesty in
point of Law, were so just to their Trust as to take care that no Right of
Trade exclusive of others was granted, and also that the Company should submit
to such Alterations, Restrictions and Qualifications, as the King should make
before the 29th. September. following, and so on the 17th. November. a New Chapter
of Regulations was made, and another the 28th. September. 1694. Wherein (amongst
other things) was the Proviso before mentioned, That if it shall appear to the
King, his Heirs and Successors, that the said two Charters or any other
Charters heretofore granted, shall not be profitable to the King, his Heirs or
Successors, or to this Realm, that then and from thenceforth, upon and after
three Years Warning to be given to the said Company, by he King, his Heirs or
Successors, under his or their Privy Seal or Signit Manual the several Letters
Pattents, etc. shall cease, be void, and be determined.

Upon the Security of this Charter, the Company say, page 4. they consented to
a New Subscription, and that there was anew subscribed 744000 l. and the Money
brought in during the Sitting of the Parliament, and that nothing was done,
said or offered, against the Charter of Regulations; so that upon the Public
Faith, (at least tacitly given) 781 New Adventurers, of which many are Widows
and Orphans, did subscribe a large part of their Substance to support this
Trade, during a Hazardous War for the Profit and Honor of England, and that
the new Adventurers thought they might without any Hazard subscribe on the
Security of a Charter which was so plainly designed by his Majesty, to preserve
the East India Traffic then in Danger of being lost. This is the Gloss put
upon that Transaction, but let us examine the Matter to the bottom, and then
see whether it has not another Face.

How this Charter was obtained appears, by the Report of the Committee of the
Honorable House of Commons, who finding great Sums of Money paid for special
Service, and observing that the greatest Payment was in the Year 1693. they
searched for the Orders for the Issuing of that Money, the chief of which were
One dated the 13th. April, 1693. at a Court of Committees in the Words
following.

The Governor this Day acquainting the Court with what Proceedings had been
made in their Affairs toward granting a new Charter, and which what had been
disbursed by him in prosecution thereof, the Court approved of the said
Charges, and ordered a Warrant to be made out for the same; and returned him
thanks for his great Care, Pains and Trouble in their Service, desiring him to
proceed in the perfecting thereof. Another was Dated the 24th. of November,
1693. at a Court of Committees held the same Day. viz.

The Governor this Day making a Representation of what Sums of Money had been
by him of lae disbursed, in the management and carrying on of the Companies,
Affairs for their Service, the Court approved thereof, and ordered that a
Warrant be made out for making the same paid in Cast accordingly, giving him
their Thanks for his great Care and Pains taken therein. Another was at a Court
of Committees holden the 22d. of January, 1693/4. in the Words following.

It being represented to the Court, that in the further Prosecution of the
Companies Affairs, and in Order to their Settlement there have been several
Sums of Money disburst, amounting to 30000 l. in the whole; the Particulars
whereof were now laid before them, on Consideration thereof had, it is Ordered,
that the said Moneys be made paid in Cash.

The said Committee of the House of Commons found by Examination of most of the
Persons present at the aforesaid Committees, that the Governor in the said
Committees did only in General inform them what Sums he had disburst, without
naming the Particulars, to whom, or for what Service, which several of them
said was a new Course, since Sir T. C. came to be Deputy Governor or
Governor: but in all times before he was concerned, the Particulars of all
Sums for the special Service of the Company, were declared.

Further the said Committee found that in pursuance of the first Order, dated
the 13th. of April, 22275 l. was paid out of Cash, in pursuance of that Order,
and 24983 l. in pursuance of the next Order dated the 24th. of November, 1693.
and 30000 l. in pursuance of the last Order of the 22d. Jan. 1693. Amounting in
all to 77258 l. besides several smaller Sums amounting in the whole to 10144
l. 12 s. 3 d. Which with the former Sum makes -- 87402 l. 12 s. 3 d.

And what Security was to be expected from a Charter so obtained, which had
more in it (as it is to be feared) of Private Promises than Public Faith, or
such a Sum of Money was ill bestowed; and Sir B. F. on his Examination on
Oath, acknowledged he had said to one with whom he treated, that he would not
let the Companies Money go for nothing, so that it is not to be wondered, that
the Parliament took no Notice of the Matter whilst the Money was paying in,
when it is considered what is said above, and Sir T. C. (amongst other things)
acquainted the Committee of both Houses, That there were several Contracts,
some to the Value of 60000 l. on Account of procuring a new Charter, and others
to there Value of 40000 l. on Account of procuring an Act of Parliament: By such
means it might be hushed for a while, but it was not long before the Parliament
took Public Notice of it, and if the greater Affairs of the Nation had not
been so urgent, and the Sessions been so near an End, perhaps the Company might
have had Justice done them then, and been past complaining of any Imaginary
Injustice done them now.

It appears therefore very plainly, that it was not for the Profit and Honor
of the Nation, and to support the Trade, that the New Subscribers came in, but
they were deluded into it by a Charter obtained by Indirect Means, and by the
hopes of an Act of Parliament to confirm it, to be obtained in the same Manner.

The Trade would have been much better preserved, and more to the Honor of the
Nation, if no such underhand Practices had been carried on; and if some Persons
thinking themselves to have a greater reach than others, or being deceived by
the Old Companies making his Majesty believe their Stock to be worth 750000 l.
and by afterward sharing 325000 l. of the New Subscribers Money amongst
themselves, or by the Persons failing them who had promised to get an Act of
Parliament, or by Losses at Sea, or by what other Means soever it were,
happened to fail in their Expectation, who are answerable for it but
themselves? If any Widows were drawn in, it was but few, and that not for much,
to be sure; but that is a state Cry, and they and all others had Warning enough
by the Transactions before the Council, and by public Prints, in one of which
Entitled, Reasons proposed for the Encouragement of all People to underwrite
to the New Subscriptions, appointed to be made to the late East India Companies
Stock; after an Account of their Affairs, this Caution was given page 7. If
People will put out their Eyes, and always be thus bubbled out of their Money,
as well as their Senses, they may go on till they are weary, and perhaps this
is done, that the old pretense might still be urged for their Continuance, viz.
That a great many Widows, Orphans, and Innocent, and Ignorant People might not
be cheated and undone, if they should be dissolved, but let not the said
Gentlemen deceive themselves and others, doubtless the Parliament will not be
thus affronted, but will take notice of these Proceedings, and assert the Right
and Liberty of the Subject to the Freedom of this Trade, etc.

If Persons will then adventure their Money after all this, they must take
their Fate, and I think if such a Procedure escapes censure it is a happy
Issue, though they come to some Loss. (not to say any thing of the Violences
and Irregularities of the Old Company.) For,

10 Ed. 3. One John Peach was arraigned at the Parliament Bar, for that he had
obtained of the King a Monopoly for Sweet Wines. The Pattent after great Advice
and Dispute adjudged void, and before his Face in open Parliament cancelled,
because he had exacted 3 s. 4 d. for every Tun of Wine, himself adjudged to
Prison, until he had made Restitution of all that ever he had received, and not
delivered till after a Fine of 500 l. paid to the King, which at that time was
a great Sum of Money.

In Queen Elizabeth's time upon Complaint in Parliament of Pattents granted for
Monopolies, most of them were immediately revoked, and the rest left to the Law.

In King James the 1st. time, an Act of Parliament passed, to make void a
Charter for the sole Trade to Spain, and another against all Monopolies, and
though the Pattents for some Trades with joint-stocks, (whilst the Trades for
which they were granted were in their Infancy) have been permitted for the
settling of a Trade, and till the first Adventurers have reaped some reasonable
compensation for their first Undertaking and Adventures, yet afterward when
those Trades have increased and become great, the Wisdom of the Nation has
always thought fit, to open a Way for the Kingdom to receive a General Benefit
thereby.

This as to Pattents in General, and from the President in Ed. the 3d. Time, I
shall make no Inference, but leave it to the Company themselves, only I shall
observe, it was never esteemed a Breach of the Public Faith, and Credit of the
Great Seal or a Derogation from the Honor of our Kings, to have their Pattents
annulled by Parliament; when the Grants were thought by that Grand Council of
the Nation not to be profitable, or to be against the Common Right of the
Subject, whatever the express Covenants in those Grants were, and no King or
Queen by any Grant or Pattent, thought thhemselves bound in Honor or
Conscience not to pass an Act of Parliament to make void such Pattent, and the
reason is plain; the King being busied in the many arduous Affairs of the
Kingdom, cannot be supposed to know always what he may legally grant, and is
oftentimes deceived in his Grants, and for that reason they are often annulled
by the ordinary course of Law, and so might this Companies Pattent have been
without any Wrong or Injustice to the Company, for all Persons having a Right
by Law to trade to the East Indies, unless excluded by Parliament; the King by
his Charter could not grant to the Company any new Right to the Trade, only the
Privileges of an Incorporated Body, but the Parliament justly bearing a high
Veneration to his present Majesty, who has run so great Hazard, and performed
so Great and Glorious Achievements for the Honor and Weal of the Nation, have
notwithstanding taken care in the late Act passed, that nothing should
interfere with his Majesty's Pattent, before which Time the Case stood thus.

The Company had a Pattent of Incorporation from his present Majesty, with
Power to trade to the East Indies, and other Privileges, without any express
Clause to exclude others, or any Covenant (as was in the former Charters from
the Crown) that his Majesty would not grant License to others, to trade thither
during the continuance of the said Charter, but with the express Proviso
beforementioned, to have power to make void the said Charters upon three years
notice, if it shall appear to the King, that the said Charters shall not be
profitable to the King or this Realm.

During the continuance of these last Charters, therefore even according to the
Charters themselves; all other the Subjects of England had a Right to Trade to
the East Indies as well as the Company, and many used that Right and actually
traded thither without Interruption, not only as by Law, but even as by those
Charters they might; and no doubt, but the Persons so trading would have been
contented, if the Trade might have been continued to be carried on, as it was
before this last Session of Parliament; they sought no Alteration, the Law as
it stood was their Protection and Security; and the Charters the Company had,
and the Money their Joint Stock was enabled to scatter up and down, was the
Companies Security; and the private Traders thought theirs as good as the
Companies.

But though the Company in their Case, talk so much of their Dependence on the
Security of their Charters, and the Right in Law which they had by them, yet
they themselves were convinced that their Right was not well founded, and
therefore as they had sought formerly to get an Act of Parliament, without
which they knew well enough, they had no such Legal Right as they pretended; so
this Sessions they were for making another Attempt, and in Order to succeed
they first made an Offer to lend 700000 l. to the Government, to have the Trade
to themselves exclusive of all others. The other Subjects of England being
about to be excluded by such means from the Trade, were soon alarmed, and that
not without Reason, and begin to think with themselves how to preserve their
Right in the Trade, and their honest Result was, That if the Parliament thought
fit to raise Money by that Trade, they desired only to fare as the rest of
their Fellow Subjects, and they would be ready to lend to the Government as
well as the Company, and a much larger Sum.

Hereupon the House of Commons thought fit to raise a Fund of 8 l. per Cent.
for the Payment of the Interest of Two Millions, and that such as lent their
Money should be entitled to Trade (for so much as they lent) to the
East Indies, which was no more than this. In the present Exegency of Affairs,
the East Indies, rather than any other Trade, only they judged it reasonable to
give all an equal Liberty to come in, whereas the Company would have had it
partial, and that they only, and such as would have been again drawn in by
them, and come in upon their bottom, should have had the Benefit. This was the
true Case.

Page 6. The Company say, That after the Bill was brought in, viz. the 10th. of
June, They did agree to submit their present Stock to a Valuation of 50 l. per
Cent. viz. 20 l. per Cent. for their dead Stock, and 30 l. per Cent. for their
quick Stock, which they were contented to warrant at the said Sums, and upon
these Terms they offered to open their Books for new Subscriptions, in Order to
raise the two Millions, and afterward to ascertain the Payments of the said
two Millions, they had a General Court on the 20th. of June ( which was when
the Bill was well nigh passed the House of Commous) in which they agreed to an
immediate Subscription by private Adventurers, 20000 l. to be paid as the first
Payment subject to make good the subsequent Payments, which Subscription was
accordingly made.

This is the Proposal as the Company expressed it in their own Case, and from
whence it is talked up and down the Town, as if the Company made an Offer of Two
Millions, and that it is Hardship upon them, that they who were in Possession
and offered the same Sums, should not be accepted rather than others; and the
Company insinuate this when they say, Page 5. That formerly it has been the
constant Custom in Farms, Bargains and Offers of the like Nature, not to close
with a new Proposal till the first Bidder be asked, whether he is able to
advance further, and that notwithstanding their Charter, and the Right they
have to the Trade, they were early told their Proposal should be opposed,
though they offered the two Millions in question.

I think with Submission, if any preference had been shown by a Parliament, it
would have been to those who were willing to stand by, and adhere to the Legal
Rights of the Subjects of England, and not to those who strive by undue Means
to gain and support Grants not founded on Law, however the Parliament have
thought fit to make no difference, and therein the private Traders acquiesce.

But as to the Companies offering to raise two Millions, when what they and
others call an Offer, is taken to pieces and examined it will be found only an
Evasion, and no such Offer in reality with an Intention that it should take
effect, only an amusement to gain time, and so to baffle the Bill. For,

1. They agreed to submit their Stock to a Valuation of 50 l. per Cent. viz.
their dead stock 20 l. per Cent. and their quick Stock 30 l. per Cent. which
they were contented to warrant at the said Sums, and upon these Terms they
offered to open their Books for New Subscriptions, in Order to raise the two
Millions.

They knew very well, that others did not value their Stock at any thing near
so much, and that no Body would be gulled a second time to come into them, and
not only to take their Stock at 50 l. per Cent. which was believed not to be
worth 20 l. but to join with them, and become subject to all their intricate
Accounts and Encumbrances, and answerable for all their Misdemeanors which the
Stock if there be any must answer for, if the Parliament should think fit to
call them to an Account, which possibly may come to pass, if the Company
continue to provoke them by censuring and aspersing their Proceedings, because
it has not suited their extravagant Expectations.

Well, this they were aware of, and therefore to mend the Matter, they were
contented to warrant their quick stock at 30 l. per Cent. They were content,
that is, the Company were content that the Stock which most People believe is
not worth 3 l. per Cent. should warrant it self to be worth 30 l. per Cent. and
upon whom should any one have come for making good this Warrant and when? This
is plainly to offer nothing at all. But,

2dly. To ascertain the Payment of the two Millions, they subscribed 200000 l.
subject to make good the subsequent Payments, let us consider this a little.

Upon the Parliaments Acceptance of this their Proposal, they might reasonably
expect in Act to be passed in their Favor, and then if no more then the said
200000 l. had been subscribed, (as for the Reasons beforementioned, it is more
than probable there would not) what would have been the Consequence? Why,

1st. The Company would have obtained what they have been so long aiming at, an
Act of Parliament exclusive, for the Sum of 200000 l.

2dly. The King would have been defeated of a much more considerable Loan, the
Company offering Subscriptions for 200000 l. and others delivered in
Subscriptions for above 1200000 l.

Now as the Companies Case says, page 9. All things are seen where every one
are concerned to look, so the House of Commons (wherein are so many piercing
Eyes, and all concerned to look) soon saw, that this Proposal was in no sort
adapted to answer the End, that is, the Parliaments End, to get the King Two
Millions of Money; though it would fully have answered the Companies End (if it
had been complied with) to have got the East India Trade settled on them
exclusive of others for the Sum of 200000 l. which would have been to them a
very good Bargain, for they knew their Stock would presently have advanced
twice that Sum.

Well now, we are (going along with the Companies Case) at length come to the
Bill, Which they say, page 6. highly tends to the prejudice of the Companies
Charters and Rights thereby granted, and also to deprive them of their Property
which they have in Lands of Inheritance, and other Estates and Interests in
Foreign Parts to the Value of 44000 l. per Annum, which Bill likewise by
undeniable consequence deprives them of their Possession and Right in several
Forts and Fortifications, the Purchase and Improvement of which, have at
several times cost them above a Million of Pounds Sterling.

If a Person is Tenant at Will, or has a Lease for Years of ceretain Ground;
and woll build, or otherwise lay out Money extravagantly upon what he knows he
may be turned out of, at the Pleasure of the Lord of whom he holds, or at most
upon three Years Warning; is there any Injustice in his Landlord to make Use of
the Power reserved upon the Demise, or is any one to be blamed but the Tenants
own Indiscretion; the Company knew upon what Terms they had their Charters,
that all of them in the former Reigns had no Foundation in Law for granting the
Trade exclusive, nay, the most of them contained a power of Revocation on three
Years Notice: And therefore in what they say they have expended, they should
have had a regard to the Terms on which they held those Grants. However, their
Clamor herein is otherwise without Ground, for if they have since their
beginning as they say expended a Million, they have got it over and over by the
Trade and divided it out, and the Revenues they pretend to in India costs them
much more than the Income.

I agree with the Companies Case, page 6. That this Actis directly contrary to
all their former Charters in that point, where the Trade is granted to them
exclusive of all others, and with great Reason. It is the Business, and ought
always to be the Care of Parliaments, to preserve the Rights of all the King's
Subjects equally; and never was a more equal, reasonable and just Act passed,
as will appear by and by.

But though the Act is contrary to the Charters of former Reigns in that point,
it is in nothing contrary to the Charter of his present Majesty; as before has
been said.

The Company say, page 6. That no Breach or Forfeiture of their Charters is
charged upon them, if so, it is not because by Law it could not be done, for
they have done enough to forfeit 100 Charters, and to subject them to grievous
Fines besides, if Advantages were taken either by the King or Parliament: But
without that, the Proviso gives the King a full power to determine them in
three Years, etc frustra fit per plura quod fieri potest per pauciora.

The Proviso is as has been said to this Effect, that if it shall appear to
his Majesty, that the said two Charters shall not be profitable to the King or
to this Realm, that then upon three Years Notice or Warning, the same shall
cease and be void.

How could the Reservation have been more full than this, It is not, if the
Trade shall appear unprofitable, nay, norif the Company shall appear
unprofitable, but if the two Charters granted by his Majesty, or any other of
the former Charters shall appear to his Majesty, not to be profitable to him or
to the Realm. Then etc.

And how can the unprofitableness of any of the said Charters appear more
plainly and effectually to his Majesty, then by the Judgment of both Houses of
Parliament.

And now I shall in short state the Case truly as it is.

Before the last Sessions of Parliament the Company had a Right to Trade to the
East Indies, and so had all other the King's Subjects, and all went on trading
thither as they saw fit, all were alike subject to the Hazard of the War, and
all had born their share of Losses, and all hoped with the Peace and Time to
repair them.

The Company not contented with the Right they say they had, (though the Law
was open and they as well as others, might have had Redress in Westminster Hall
for the Invasion of any Right) They apply to the Parliament to get others
excluded from their Right, and the others then apply to preserve their Right,
and the Company being the Aggressors, think to come off (according to the
English Proverb and Practice of many) by crying Whore first; for they have
thereby brought a Tax upon the whole Trade, and if any have reason to complain,
it is the private Traders, who before had a Right and could have traded as they
pleased; but now are obliged to trade for no more than they lend the Government.

The Parliament duly weighing this great Affair, came to Resolutions Equal and
Honorable at such a Juncture, obliging all to lend to the Government so much
as they desire to be concerned in the Trade.

In their Case page 9. they find fault, that the Bill allows Foreigners as
well as the King's Subjects to subscribe to the Two Millions, whereby they will
be let into the Secrets and Mysteries of it; which as the Company are ready to
show, may produce Effects very pernicious and dangerous to the General Interest
of the Nation. Whereas in the Companies Answer to the Regulations proposed by
his Majesty, dated 20 May, 1692. in Answer to the 8th. Proposition about
Subscribers aching Oath it is his own Money, amongst other things they say,
Thirdly, If such a Limitation be advisable, certainly some Nation or other
would have hit upon the Expedient before this time, whereas on the contrary the
wise Dutch indulge and favor the very Jews, and the more for buying the
greater Stock, of whom one Man by Name Swasso, had at one time about 75000 l.
Stock, the French King likewise for the Encouragement of large Subscriptions in
that Stock, propounded many considerable Privileges and Immunities both to
Natives and Foreigners, proportionable to the greatness of their Subscriptions.

The Company will argue for and against the admittance of Foreigners as it
serves their turns, and so their Discourse about the Town is to the same
Effect, one while they say their Factors will cheat them of all they have
there; and another while, that they would send out all that ever they can into
their Hands and trust them further. Upon the whole it is Evident.

1. That the Company and all other his Majesty's Subjects, had before this Act
an equal Right to the Trade to the East Indies, unless excluded or restrained
by Act of Parliament.

2. That there has no hardship been put upon the Old of New Subscribers in the
Old Company, nor any Right of theirs invaded, but rather a great Favor is done
them, in not punishing them for their Illegal Practices.

3. That the old Company made no Proposal to lend the Two Millions, but such as
must have proved ineffectual to the Necessity of the Government, and
destructive of the Rights of the Subject.

4. That the Company heretofore thought it an Advantage to admit Foreigners
into the Company, and many are actually now in the present Company, though now
in their Case they argue against it.

FINIS.

