AN ANSWER TO Mr. Read's Case. WHEREIN IS A Full Discovery of his Dissimulation
with GOD and MAN.

Daniel 5.27. Tekel, Thou art weighed in the Balance, and art found wanting.

Matt. 16.23. Get thee behind me Satan, thou art an offense to me, for thou
savourest not the things that be of God, but those that be of Men.

Gal. 2.11. But when Peter was come to Antioch, I withstood him to the Face,
because he was to be blamed.

Turpe refer pedem, nec passu stare tenaci. Ovid.
It Is horrid shame for Men to change their Steps,
When God bids stand, then to give backward leaps.
LONDON: Printed for the Author. 1682.

AN ANSWER TO Mr. READ's CASE, etc.
Mr. Read,
TO my great Charge I had a sight of your Pamphlet Entitled, Mr. Read's Case;
I assure you it cost me Six Pence, and when I brought it home, I was fain to
imitate the Author in turning Dissembler, a little to praise it, that I might
not be laughed at for throwing my Money away so idly. The truth is, among all
the Books I ever saw, I never viewed a parcel of words so much in vain before.
It made me conclude you penned it on purpose to cheat the buyers of their
Money, as you read the Common Prayer to gull the Informers of their Office;
truly Sir, it was not kindly done of you these hard times, now Money is so
scarce, to lay Traps and Snares for your poor Brethrens Purses, to promise such
Mountains in the Title Page, and bring forth nothing but Dust in all the other
Leaves. Well! I have lost Six Pence by it, but if I mistake not your loss is
far greater. I may get Six Pence again, but I question whether ever you will
recover your Honor or Reputation more. Certainly a Man that had any value for
his Credit, any desire of esteem with understanding Men, would never have sent
forth an Apology upon such an emergent occasion as I confess your Apostasy is,
so raw, so thin, that it made me shiver to behold it, not only without trimming
to make it fine, but necessary clothing to keep it warm. Would any man (that
was well in his Wits) first rashly do an unheard of, scandalous, ridiculous
action, and then confidently undertake to justify it, merely by multiplying
words without knowledge? I cannot Sir, let your Arrogance pass without a just
Reproof, and a dealing with you answerable to the offense you have given. Once
indeed I loved you as a Brother, but now I loath you as an Impostor. Once
indeed I honored you as a suffering Champion for Christ, but now my Stomach is
turned against you as a shameful Betrayer of the Cause of Christ, and a
cowardly Runaway from the work of Christ.

And because you are such a Pharisee in your eyes, and challenge your Brethren
to convince you of sin, in what you have done; I here undertake to make it
appear, that you are guilty of six or seven abominable sins in the very penning
of your Pamphlet; the Lord give you an heart to repent them before Repentance
is hid from your Eyes.

First, I cannot but think you deeply guilty of the sin of Ignorance. That is,
in plain English, you are not qualified with knowledge and understanding
sufficient for that great employment you have taken upon you. I don't question
but this will grate much upon your spirit; but so it is, and you must excuse my
plainness in telling you of it. And let any wise Man peruse this Learned Piece
that comes from your Study in Bloomsbury, and if he be not of my mind I shall
willingly be accounted a Slanderer -- Now if we may judge of your Understanding
in the great and weighty things of the Gospel, by your knowledge of less
subordinate matters, you cannot be esteemed by your best friends, a man gifted
for the work of the Ministry. Is it possible in the days of light that you (one
of the pretended Masters of Israel) should be so woeful ignorant of the
Controversy between the Church of England and the Dissenters, as every eye that
looks upon your conceited Pamphlet may perceive you are? Can there be a more
prodigious piece of ignorance than to suffer from the practice of some well
meaning persons to the Non-conformists Interest, because they go to Parish
Churches, that therefore there is no such Principle of Dissenting amongst any
on this account. It Is a sign how well read you are, what have you been a
Nonconformist, and in Prison so long? been a Sufferer so much for a Cause you
are not yet acquainted with? I will only say this, you that knew so little of
the Cause of your Sufferings when you were in Prison, it is much to be
suspected, you know as little of the Mysterys which you teach when you are in
the Pulpit, and how well versed you are in the leaves appears by this wise
conceit, That your reading a little of the Common Prayer, would secure you and
your people from suffering for time to come, it was a very learned Conjecture;
such as I believe never entered into a man's brain before; but do you really Sir,
know no better, if you do not, why would you proclaim your ignorance so openly
to the World? could you not have been content to keep on in your way under the
imputation of a Knave, but you must come upon the Stage with your Reason too,
and get the addition of a fool into the bargain? I could tell you, (and it may
be you may e're long know it to your sorrow) that you are now a greater
transgressor of the Law, and more obnoxious to penalty than you were before.
Pray by what authority do you presume to read the Common Prayer? how do you
meddle with the Liturgy of the Church of England without power from the Church
so to do? you are a Thief and a Robber; you enter not in at the door, but climb
up another way, in meddling with the Priestly Office without Holy Orders. If the
Governors of the Church should come upon you, and Sue you with a Quo Warranto,
as I am sure they may, and at last clap you into Prison for this offense, I
know not what men may do, but I am very confident the Angels will hardly visit
you so often as they did before. It would be tedious to discover the many
follies of your Book, I will only take a view of the Title Page, and so pass
from this head.

Mr. READ's CASE, etc. And a pitiful Case it is, as ever infatuated man was in.
PVBLISHED. In truth a wise man would have concealed for shame, and not have
made himself a laughing stock to the World. FOR PREVENTION OF SCANDAL TO HIS
BRETHREN AND PEOPLE. I would fain hope you are not quite so shallow, as to
imagine you can remove any scandal by such an insignificant heap of words. FOR
ENCOVRAGEMEMT TO SVFFERING PROTESTANT DISSENTERS. Good Sir, send us word as
soon as you can how you do, I profess I am afraid you are disturbed in your
Head. What encouragement can suffering Dissenters receive from a giddy
whimsical man, that is unstable in his ways, that knows not what to be at, nor
which side to take, that is ready to conform, inform, deform, any form to keep
himself out of Prison, and secure his maintenance among his People. But the
Title goes on, FOR A REBVKE TO THEIR LAWLESS ADVERSARIES. Bless me! the Man's a
Conjuring, he is a mumbling out a few Prayers to drive away the Devil of the
lawless Adversary. Well, I never heard the Common Prayer was read as a Spell
before; but it may be Sir, you would have Dissenters retort upon them thus --
You lawless Adversaries, the famous Mr. Read reads the Common Prayer, therefore
look to it that you do not disturb us at our Meetings, nor be any more
troublesome to us at your peril. But now Sir, suppose they should go on to
disturb us for all this, what shall we do then? will you be so kind to us as to
read the Mass next, and try what that will do, it may be that will rebuke them
more effectually.

Well, but this Title, and this Book, such as it is (and he is a wiser man than
I that knows what it is) is humbly tendered to our Governors in hopes of their
forbearance toward us, in truth, Sir, if our Governors had no greater motives
to forbearance than your Book or Practice, all the World would acquit them of
rigidity, should they proceed in a more sharp way against us than they have yet
done. And were all Dissenters such as you (as blessed be God they are not, but
abhor you and your scandalous bending) they might justly become the objects of
the Worlds scorn, and the subjects of the Magistrates justice. What an argument
have you used, what shadow of reason have you produced to prevent scandal for
your unworthy temporizing, and dabling in those waters that refresh and make
glad the City of our God. Nay he that out of excess of Charity, grants common
sense accompanies every Paragraph of your Book, affords you a kindness you
could never recover of him by Law. Much more I could say, but let this suffice
to evince you destitute of that knowledge, necessary to the Public Capacity
you are in.

Secondly, You are eminently guilty of that horrid sin of Pride, and from your
own Pen you may be justly condemned of it; I confess Ignorance and Arrogance
are very usually companions, especially amomg men of our Coat. I seldom know an
ignorant Preacher but he was confident of his Abililities, nay gloried in them,
as though he exceelled all other men. Now whether you be not such an one we
shall presently see. How imperious do you appear in your Title Page, calling
your case, A leading Case, as if you were a man of such note and influence that
others must necessarily, follow, because you have led the way to Apostasy; and
so high is your conceit of what you have done, that you think you sufficiently
answer Dr. STILLINGFLEET. By the way, Sir, I perceive you have read something
of the forementioned Dr. a little to guide you in your untrodden path, lest
you should break your shins in running away too fast form your Nonconforming
Brethren; But for consulting any others to establish you in the cause you were
once a well-wisher to (though never versed in) we suppose you too Politic, as
knowing the dangers attending those that will be faithful in this Generation;
how very likely such are to be great sufferers, and among other kinds of
sufferings, this especially, to lose their Maintenance. Oh dreadful! 'twas time
indeed to make your peace with Dr. Stillingfleet, and to answer his call as far
as you could; But pray Sir, did this Dr. call upon you to read as much of the
Common Prayer as you confess to be lawful. I cannot well think it, because I Am
sure he knows it is not lawful for you to read it. Neither does Authority
desire it of you, they enjoin you to hear it, but not to read it, they have
wiser men enough of their own to do it, who are persuaded in their Consciences
of the lawfulness of it, and against such we say nothing. They want no
Turn-Coat Wheedlers to assist them in carrying on their Worship; and therefore
all you are like to get from Men as well as God for what you have done, is --
Who has required this at your hands? But was it not a piece of a mortified
Pride in you (as well as gross ignorance) to imagine that your case (though
every way forlorn and despicable, yet because it is your case) is a necessary
leading Case, and others must follow you in it, which God forbid. Your Pride
also is discovered in Page the 5th. where speaking of rectifying that which you
call a mistake, and to teach them better who are so mistaken, whom with great
insolence you call THE IGNORANT AMONG US. But wherein lies their ignorance? why
in this, that they count it offensive for a Minister (that is otherwise
persuaded) to read the Common Prayer; It Is very well, Sir, I confess, there are
some such People in this Age that are of that mind, and I am apt to think their
knowledge is almost as great as yours. I heartily wish one of the least of them
had a fair opportunity of tugging with you upon this point, and that your
maintenance lay at stake to make out what you have so arrogantly expressed. I
believe Dr. Stillingfleet may go seek his Chaplain, for you will scarcely
endure the sight of the Common Prayer more. However, suppose they were all
ignorant of this persuasion, 'twas highly presumptuous in you to undertake to
rectify the mistake, and to teach them better, when you are not able to give a
rational account of your own actions. Were there no wiser men for, or against
the Common Prayer, than you discover your self to be, the Pope might pity us
for fools, I hardly think he would envy us for Heretics. We have another
Discovery of your Ambition in Page 10, 11. Where after telling a formal Story
of Meeting with your People in troublesome times, you propounded an expedient
(an admirable good one) to ease and relieve them in their troubles; And that
was, Reading some of the Common Prayer to them. But the Remedy it seems was
very offensive, insomuch that some of them (well perceiving what a trinketting
Fox they had got for their Pastor) quitted themselves from being any longer
under your charge, 'twas honestly and honorably done of them: And I wish all
the rest had as wisely consulted their own good, and taken the same course.
Others of them you say, were so prejudiced against Forms, that you were forced
at that time to lay aside your intended prevarication; so that we may thank
their constancy more than your honesty, that you had not been at dabling work
some years since. But the faithfulness of those few put you in such a rage,
that you proudly called them Weak: How great their Parts may be, I cannot tell,
(having never known them) but I am more than confident, that they are stronger
in grace than your self, and will be honored in the day of Christ, when such
dawbers in untemper'd Mortar as you shall hang down their heads and be ashamed.
Another touch of your pride we have in Page 13, where you seem to intimate that
People will wonder that Mr. Read should read the Common Prayer; that a man so
learned, (for that is the sense) so able, so renowned, as Mr. Read; that such a
Star of the first Magnitude, such a Pillar of the Non-conformists Cause as Mr.
Read should shake or be moved from his foundation, Truly Sir, had you kept in
your Apology, those that knew you not, but only heard of your sufferings, and
the esteem you had among the godly upon that account, might perhaps be a little
induced to wonder at your sudden charge. But I dare say, all wondering will now
cease, they that read your Pamphlet will no more wonder at whatever Mr. Read
does; no, though he should wear a Surplice, though he should bow at the Altar,
though he should at last retreat to the Mass, for a refuge against the storm of
Persecution. That you had a faint heart we all knew by what you have done, but
we did not imagine you had such a weak brain till we saw what you have writ.
However you thought People had an high esteem of your Abilities, by your
supposing they would shake their heads and say, I wonder at Mr. Read, which
does not become a man that ought to be exemplary in lowness of mind. Your
arrogant bragging of your being alone, and leading the way, as though you had
done such an act, sufficiently shows your vainglorious humor. I will not
insist upon your horrid pride in comparing your self to Jehosaphat, and
abusing, yea profaning the Holy Scriptures (what worse sin can there be!) to
make them serve your turn, though no colorable parallel can be made between
your case and that; upon which those precious words were spoken. What could the
veryest Atheist this day in England do more than wrest the Word of God to
gratify his base Lust? but as if all this had not been sufficient to proclaim
your sin of Pride or Sodom, and to publish the haughtiness of your Spirit, as
the iniquity of Gomorrah, you conclude more like a Ranter than a Preacher, more
like a Roman than a Christian, and more like an hypocrite than either, taking
up the words of Joab in an insulting manner, as though there were never a
Champion for the Cause of God in England but you. What Sir, are you arrived to
the impudence of the unjust Judge, that neither feared God nor regarded Man.
You seem not to fear God in that you dare trample upon his Word, and in a
desperate manner wilfully break the Third Commandment, as your taking up good
Jehosaphats words do abundantly testify. You regard not the esteem of Man in
that you rank your self with Joab, when there is no likeness in your
circumstances. Pray let us see how Joabs condition and yours will bear a
proportion. Joab was General of an Army, you a Pastor of a Congregation; Joab
was a stout Soldier, you a base Coward; Joab had a lawful call to fight
against his enemies, you without any call set your self in opposition to all
your friends; in a word, Joab stood in need of aid from Heaven to resist the
Adversaries of the God of Israel, you have succor from Hell to help you to
suppress the Cause of Christ and his People, in which work you are now engaging
your self: But stay, now I think on it, there is one thing wherein you and Joab
are much alike; You know Joab served a King that was an eminent Type of the
Lord Jesus Christ, and truly he himself was a Type of you; for he left his
Master in a day of Temptation, and it is no breach of charity to say you have
forsaken yours --

Thirdly, It Is easily demonstrable you are guilty of the sin of falsehood in
what you have writ, the lying Spirit that entered into Ahab's Prophets, I doubt
has taken possession of you. Your saying Page 11. you consulted your Brethren
in the Ministry, and they owned the Lawfulness of using the Liturgy in the
ordinary Lords days Service, finds small belief amongst sober people.

1st. Because we have only your bare word for it, and that assure you goes but
for a little now.

2dly. Because most of them disown it, and protest against it, even Mr. Baxter,
whom you so much quote, professes he knew nothing of it, and has declared his
dislike of it.

Lastly, Because we have an higher esteem of the Ministers, than to think them
so weak to advise you to such an altogether unjustifiable, and justly offensive
thing to the present Government. And therefore it concerns you to make this
improbable story a little more evident, or else not to be angry if we enrol you
in the number of those that speak lies in hypocrisy. For my own part, I
solemnly profess I believe you not, nor does any other that I have spoke with,
or heard of.

Again, In the same Page you say that you have consulted Lawyers, and they tell
you, that the reading of it will prove the lawfulness of your Meeting, and
secure you from any farther trouble. I challenge you for truths sake to name
those Lawyers. Will you impose upon us at this rate, to have us believe Lawyers
are turned Madmen, to tell you a thing so alien to sense and reason. Produce
(if you can) ever a learned Lawyer in England that will stand by this Position,
that you (without Power, or taking Orders from the Bishop) reading Common
Prayer makes thereby your Meeting a Lawful Assembly, and secures you from the
Lash of the Law. Whereas on the contrary, you have made your self a Criminal by
your presumptuous boldness and contempt. Nay, you confess your self, Page 36.
that you are in the Bishops Court already for it, likely to be Excommunicated
and Imprisoned. Amen, Amen, say I. Let all such Mungril Dissenters be so met
with, Good Lord --

Fourthly, Your Hypocrisy and Dissimulation does grossly appear from your own
mouth. You confess Page 11. you were not very fond of the Common Prayer, that
is, you did not thoroughly like it, nor approve of it in your Conscience, and
yet rather than suffer the spoiling of your Goods, you will bring it into the
Worship of God, and read it to your People. Sir, have you not read of Baalam
the Son of Bozar, that loved the wages of unrighteousness; who was so tempted
with the offers of reward which Baalac tendered him, that he would fain have
acted contrary to his Conscience, but was against his will prevented, (as you
were at that time) and as therefore justly called the CARNAL PROPHET. And do
you not tremble to think how like to him you are? What, does the love of the
World, or the fear of suffering, make you do that in the Worship of God, which
otherwise you would not do? Indeed, Sir, I much fear your heart is not right
with God, and that Principle upon which you say you act is very ridiculously
urged, Viz. Obedience to Magistrates in things lawful is a duty. Pray who
denies it, what do you infer? therefore you read the Common Prayer in obedience
to them. Surely a man in Bedlam would argue more rationally; what obedience is
your reading to the Magistrates? Did any Justice of the Peace, or any Judge
upon the Bench, command you to read the Common Prayer? they have nothing to do
with it, neither will they meddle in it. Oh Sir, remember the great God will
not be mocked, he knows the hypocrisy of our hearts, and will reckon with us
for it. Nay farther, you have not only a base covetous end in what you do, but
an envious, malicious end. You read the Common Prayer merely that you may have
an advantage to go to Law with your Neighbors. I should never have thought so
if you had not your self ingeniously acknowledged it. You tell us Page 12. As
soon as you had begun to read, and had made proof of it to the Grand Jury at
Westminster, you were for Lawing on it as fast as you could, and to that end
brought an Indictment against Justice Parry, Richard Goory, and some others.
Excellent good Devotion I profess, for a Minister of the Gospel to worship God
in a way he is not very fond of on purpose to take revenge on them he has a
spite against. Truly I cannot but apply the words of our Savior to you, Mat.
23.14. Woe to you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye devour Widows
houses, and for a pretense make long Prayers. So woe to thou dissembler, that
art bent to go to Law, and seek revenge, and for a pretense, or that thou
might get an advantage, thou read the Common Prayer. Therefore thou do
contract the greater guilt, and shall receive (without repentance) the greater
condemnation. Mistake me not, I do dot meddle with the Cause between Justice
Parry and you: It Is possible he may have overshot the Mark, and done that which
he cannot answer, and you might have warrantably commenced a Suit against him;
but this I say, to read the Common Prayer to make your Plea against him the
more plausible, is such a piece of dissimulation, and dallying with the Worship
of God, as few (beside your self) would have the forehead to own.

Fifthly, You are guilty of the sin of scandalizing many precious Servants of
Christ, and dealing very dirtily and disingeniously with them. You Would fain
father the Brat of Apostasy upon such men as you know have a greater name in
the World than your self, that you might be thought to do nothing but what was
their Principle, and so be secure from the Censures of the People. And here you
stick not to affront the living, and abuse the dead, raking the ashes of the
grave, and disturbing those that are silent in the dust, making them your
Patrons to protect you in your turning aside from the purity of the Gospel;
when all the World knows that herein you wrong them most abominably. If you can
pick out any thing from the Writings of those famous Men you mention, that show
them not absolutely in some cases against some Form of Prayer, (which is the
most you can do) pray what service will this do you in your case? Suppose they
were not against a Form of Prayer, does this argue they were for the Common
Prayer, or because some (though but a very few) of them were not rigid against
hearing the Common Prayer in Churches, does it follow they were for Ministers
reading it (contrary to their Principles and Profession) in their Congregation
only to avoid suffering? Ask Mr. Baxter and Dr. Owen whether they can approve
of your doings, or whether they did intend by any thing they ever writ, to set
up the Common Prayer in private Meetings. And methinks, since you would so fain
make them favor your design, it had been but honesty in you to have known
their minds, and modesty in you to have waited till they led the way, before
you had exposed your Case to Public View. As for those that are gone, and
cannot speak for themselves, I will in short answer for them, That they lived
and dyed in the Faith of the Reformed Cause, bearing a worthy testimony against
all imposed Forms, judging it far beneath those that live under a Gospel
Dispensation in the lively exercise of Faith, having the pourings forth of the
Anointing, to be straightened in their Addresses to God, either publicly or
privately by any prescribed Form of Man's Invention; and I am morally certain,
were they now alive they would abhor in the least to countenance your
Proceedings: and do you not think it a sin against God thus to abuse the Memory
of those Worthies of whom the World was not worthy?

Sixthly, You lie under the guilt of being offensive to the Godly. You have
given occasion to the enemies of the Gospel to open their mouths, and have
sadned the hearts of Gods People by what you have done. Suppose the reading of
the Common Prayer were in it self hadiaphorous (which is more than Dissenters
will by any means grant) and so but an accident (though it is a Solaesim to
suppose it) in the Worship of God that may be, and may not be, without
impairing the purity or essentials of it. It had been your duty as a Professor,
but more as a Preacher, to have imitated the blessed Apostle Paul, who declared
he would never eat meat rather than make his Brother to offend. You could not
but know how generally offensive this strange act of yours would be to
Dissenters, especially in this day. Oh then, why would you dare so
inconsiderately (contrary to the bonds of Charity, of Christianity, of
Community that lay upon you) to become a just stumbling block to the Children
of the living God?

Lastly, I have this Sin to charge upon you (and a home charge it is) that you
have shamefully given up the Nonconformists Cause to the hands of its Enemies;
a Cause that God has been pleading, and his poor People owning in these
Nations. You would represent to the World the Nonconformists owning the Liturgy
of the Church of England, even whilst they are suffering Persecution for opsing
it. You would make the World believe the Private Meetings are not set up in
opposition to the Public

You would fain make a difference between Reading the Common Prayer, and giving
the unfeigned consent and assent of the mind to it. What purer Jesuitism can
there be? In a word, your whole design (as far as I can fathom) is to render
Nonconformists as People of no Principles; are you not ashamed, and will you
not repent of these things? I will say no more, but what was said to that evil
Spirit by which you have acted, The Lord rebuke thee, even thou Lord, that have
chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee.

I am really weary of tracing you any further, and shall therefore break off
from tiresome Prose, into the fancy of Verses, and bestow these following Lines
as a fit Inscription to be written upon your Door, and so take my leave of you.

Here lives the Con-non-forming Mungril, that
Would fain be something, but he knows not what;
Who has been studying how to act the part
Of Jack of both sides with a wheedling Art;
One Leg long dis'plin'd in Phanatick Schools,
The other cringing unto Tory Fools;
Whose craving Stomach makes him longer loath
To sup the starvling Nonconformists Broth;
But long to be refreshed with a Bit
Of Roast Meat from the Reverend Bishops-Spit;
Who can dispense with the tail of Antichrist,
Whose Conscience's Victim when preferment's pressed,
More skilled in running than his ground to stand,
Prepared to do or be what times command;
Who gnaws his fingers to the very stump,
Being mad he knows not what will turn up Trump.
From my Study in Plain-dealing-Ally, opposite to the great Study in
Bloomsbury. March 14. 1682.
FINIS.
London, Printed, and are to be sold by R. Janeway.


