An answer to a Paper Entitled, A Letter to a Friend, upon the dissolving of
the late Parliament, and the calling of a New one together, with a List of
those that were against making the Prince and Princess of Orange, King and
Queen.
SIR,
AS by the strain and style of your Letter, I may easily repute you one more
precipitant than prudent, and more passionate than politic: So may I on
rational Grounds, from the drift and design of your Letter, conclude you a
great Jacobite, or veiled Favorite of the late K. James: For in pretense of
vindicating the present King's Interest, you first set up Marks of your own
making, or Suppositions of your own Invention (which ought not to be supposed)
and then fighting, with the Maggots of your own brain, to please your own fond
fancy, you discharge the Artillery of your pretended Zeal and Loyalty, at your
own foolish proposals. And for all you pretend, by your Wit and Loyalty, to
antidote the fate which besel his Majesty's Predecessors, viz. the robbing him
of his peoples affections, and then of his own Authority; yet could you not
have fallen on a readier and surer way, to raise animosities in the Kingdom,
and bred jealousies in the hearts of the Kings best Subjects. For at first you
suppose a controversy where really there is none, viz. whether it was the Kings
wisdom, or to please himself with an Exercise of Regal power, and to look
Great, that made him dissolve this Parliament. Then Worthy Sir, (your own
wisdom acquiescing with what his Majesty did) you take up the Cudgels in his
Vindication, whilst there is few or none to strike at. Tho his Majesty, in his
last Speech to the Parliament, when it was Prorogued, spoke more sense, and
gave greater Reasons for what he did (tho in few words) than in all your long,
learned, Legomachical Apology. Next, you cast an Aspersion on the Members of
Parliament, that they were ignorant of what was fit to be done: and therefore
you tell them, that the K. sent them about their business, for not uniting the
Protestants, and vindicating our Laws and Liberties, and punish those who had
subverted our Constitution, etc. Truly Sir, there is much in this; for it wlil
be found a difficult thing to unite the Church of England with Dissenters, though
they seemtodiffer but in matters of Ceremony. But if they did not make it their
Business to vindicate the Laws and Liberties of the Nation, and design (in the
right place) to punish those who had subverted the Kingdoms Constitution; they
were neither good Christians, just Judges, nor wise Statesmen; nor any ways
fit to stand at the Helm of public affairs. But, till you prove your
assertion, your contumelious speeches are but an aspersion. The next thing you
propose out of your wisdom, is a speedy means to clear the Kings Descent into
England, from being an ambitious Usurpation. Truly Sir, I believe there are few
men of sense that will repute the Kings Expedition to England an Unrighteous
Invasion, unless such busy men as you, by sowing such seeds of
Dissatisfaction, and setting up such suppositions of Sedition and Faction, gain
the Weather-gage on a right Understanding, and lead the people to open
Rebellion; and though you be pleased confidently to say, that His present Majesty
holds his Crown precariously, and that King James's Abdication is easily
reversible, yet no man that is Master of his Reason, and knows the
circumstance of the late Revolution, and the present state of Great Britain,
will be so Foolish as to believe any such thing, Unless he, likewise, believe
that it is an easy matter to turn Britain to a Bedlam, and all the Inhabitants
thereof to Madmen; who would willingly forfeit their Religion, Lives, Laws and
Liberties. Truly Sir (as I have said) you could have fallen upon no surer way
to do both King and Country a diskindness, than by supposing, under the
pretense of a good meaning, those Rebellious Controversies, which may breed
Jealousies, make the best. Subjects question the Foundation of their Loyalty,
and deny their Allegiance to our present King. For how can those Gentlemen (who
because in the twinkling of an Eye, they were surprised with a sudden and
unexpected Change and Revolution of Government, and could not be resolved in a
moment, nor be satisfied in Conscience, at a word, whether they owed any
Allegiance to King James or not) be now pleased to see their Names Listed,
Posted, and exposed as Dissenters from the present Government, Stigmatized with
the Title of Jacobites, and not likely to be true and lasting friends to King
WILLIAMS Sovereignty? and consequently, unworthy to be Members of Parliament,
or to have any hand in State Affairs, and undeserving of the King's favor? Now
how can any Parliament at this rate be reputed free, When they ly under the
lash of such disgraceful and murdering aspersions? I shall not meddle with more
of your Letter; but take this of me: Men of least Conscience soonest satisfy
greatest scruples, and he is neither good Divine or good Statesman, that would
divide a Kingdom against it self: For as Salust de Bello Jugurth. says,
Concordia res parvae crescunt, Discordia autem maximae delabunter.
Callicratidas being affronted by King Cyrus in his Embassy, when he returned
to Sparta, broke out in these words: I shall use the best of my endeavors, to
reconcile the Greeks among themselves, that they may be the more formidable to
these Barbarians, and leaving off all Controversies among thesmelves, they may
no more stand in need of help from that prodigal King. And of this Man's
resolution Conrad Lycosthenes speaks thus: Singularis profecto fuit
prudentiae vir, quod perspexit Graecos non alia magis ratione posse reddi
Barbar^s formidabiles, quam si depositis intestinis simultatibus, mutam inter
se concordiam sancirent. Plut. in Lacon apoph. Scipio Africanus asked Tyresius,
how the Numantians, who were once reputed so Warlike a People, were so easily
broke and overthrown. Tyresius answered, concordia Victoriam, Discordia exitium
praebuit. Thus Concord and Unity are the Sinews, Strength, and Victory of a
Nation, which, (with Faith, Truth, and God's favor) I pray this Isle of
Britain, and all true. Christians may long enjoy.

With Allowance.


