AN ANSWER TO THE Earl of DANBY's PAPER Touching the MURDER of Sir Edmondbury
Godfrey.
THE pretended Answer to the Objections against the Earl of Danby, about the
Murder of Sir Edmondbury Godfrry, is so far from excusing him, or making that
Narrative appear unlikely, that, if the Author be Dr. Tongue, as is reported, he
could not have invented a more certain way to confirm the opinion that Paper is
likely to produce amongst considering men, of the Earl of Danby's being the
main Contriver of that d^^^stable villainy; for allowing his Poetical
flourishes, in his Commonplace Harangue, about the difference between
Prosperity and Adversity, to be as true as he in frothy Nothings s^^^s to teach
us; and that his Patron stands at this time a remarkable Example of Fortunes
^^^^ability, as well in being dissected by false and feigned Friendships, as
exposed to the furious gusts of Revenge, proceeding (to use the Author's own
words) from such Foes as his wilful Passion, which overflowed all bounds of
Reason, made Enemies to his ^urple greatness, when Ambition got the Reins: And
truly Purple greatness may that well be called, which Dies it self so deep in
the Purple Goar of Innocence.

But to take all matters as they stand; Sir Edmondbury Godfrey once an active,
worthy, honest, judicious, learned, zealous and impartial Magistrate, now a
most Villainously-murder'd Person, which both by the Laws of God and Nature,
cries out for Vengeance against the Authors and Contrivers of his horrid Exit.

The Earl of Danby, once a flaming Meteor, above our Horizon, pretending by his
ill-acquired and worse-dispenc'd Power, nothing but ruin and destruction to
all that Region he had influence on; now a Prisoner to stand or fall as his
abused Prince, and Justice shall agree: but however undoubtedly liable to an
Hue and Cry from the Nation, for all those undeniable Villainies and Crimes he
tacitly confesses in his Pardon.

A Pardon so drawn up, that were there nothing in the World but that, to point
out what is chiefly here enquired for, it certainly would trace us to the
Action beyond all Circumstances yet revealed, but what is right down sworn of
the Murder. For as a Statesman merely, and to fence against all those
traiterous Stratagems of prostituting the Honor of his Prince and Country, to
the designs of an Ambitious Neighbor; or his weak contrivance to enslave us,
and rule us by an Army, with other the like half-spun, raw, untaking Politics;
a Pardon for Treason, Misprision of Treasor, Conspiracies at home or abroad,
and other matters, with which the first and Pardoning clause of his was filled,
relating to matters of that nature, would have been enough: but it is to be
observed, that the second reciting clause of his, seems to Pardon him all
Felonies, etc. Crimes none but Murdering-States-men, as he is now thought to
be, could ever need.

And it is very likely he surpised his Master, his loving Master, (and, but for
him, perhaps the best of Princes) into that Pardon for those latter Crimes, by
reading but the former part unto him; for it may be doubted, he durst not read
the names of Crimes so remote to his Employment, and from which he could never
hope his Majesty would shelter him, by taking all upon himself, as he, in his
unbounded goodness to him, has done for very great ones of the first Nature.
But to our first point, which is, that Sir Edmondbury Godfrey is murdered, and
the Earl of Danby, a Prisoner, stands suspected of it, which how he is cleared
from, by his Poetical Advocate, we will examine.

First, the Paper infers, that because Danby could not hope to be much greater,
therefore he needed not to do that mischief: But (to speak the Author's style)
that is but a very weak Inference; for Ill men will do as much mischief to
continue, as to obtain Power: otherwise Cromwell, and other Tyrants, are foully
be-ly'd. Then too, he wilfully mistakes the Paper he pretends to Answer; for
that intimates the design of the Murder likely to proceed from Danby's fear,
that Sir Edmond should make apparent to the King and Kingdom, as he had done to
the Duke, that Danby was either the Inventer of the Plot, or Concealer of it,
for purposes of his own. But it may be asked, What purposes of his own? To this
might readily be answered, To prevent an Impeachment against him, upon one head
more, (viz.) for keeping up an Army, beyond the time limited by Parliament for
their Disbanding: since it is demonstrable from his own Letters and Practices,
that he long before knew there should be none of the intended foreign use for
them; and if so, what use could they be continued for but the enflaming of the
Nation; or what pretense so justifiable for keeping them up, as a dangerous
Plot amongst so obnoxious and hated a People as the Papists, on whom he might
be revenged too sufficiently, for the Popish Lords voting against his design of
keeping the Earl of Shaftsbury (and other zealous Patriots for Liberty) in the
Tower. Therefore not to charge him with conspiring with the Papists, as this
Paper would foolishly hoodwink us with the reasons suggested, are sufficient to
show he might politickly contrive that horrid Murder.

Next to what is said about the opportunity, is suggested against the Earl of
Danby, by the being of Sir Edmond at his House that day, we will, with the
Author, allow, that all men who have opportunity, do not causelessly murder
their Friends: But it is before suggested, that he could not esteem Sir
Edmondbury Godfrey his Friend, who had discovered his malice to his too long
blinded Patron the Duke; nor did Danby treat him as such, after he had
knowledge of that honest man's love to that well meaning Prince, in sending
Coleman to him; but upon several meetings and applications to him, reviled him
(though a Gentleman as well born as himself) with the foul and opprobrious
names of Rogue, Knave, and medling-Rascal. And though Murder be so execrable a
crime, that no Christian can think of without horror and amazement; yet we
find men often called so, accused, and found guilty of it; Nor is there one
generous or heroic action in all the notorious life of Danby recorded, but on
the contrary, it has been a summary of base ingratitude to his first Raisers,
and constant Preservers, of falsehood and injustice to his Equals, of tyranny
and oppression to his Inferiors, of dishonor and Treason to his Prince and
Country; in fine, a life of lies and infamies, therefore when provoked, no
doubt capable of any the most unnatural villainies: and that this may not be
thought a mere uncharitable suggestion, I will refer my self to the known
custom of the honest Earl of Lindsey, his Lady's Father, who when he heard any
notorious Lie, in respect to his Son in Law's most notable virtue, still would
call it an Osbourn.

But to follow our Paper, which concludes on a Supposition taken from what is
proved by the Witnesses against those already Executed for the Murder, and
those, he says, have deposed, he was traced from his own House toward London
in the morning, etc. inferring from thence, he could not be at Danby's that
day; but if all things concluded thereupon be but as true, as that he was
waiting at the Earl of Danby's that day till one a clock, to speak with him,
then is Danby as surely guilty of the Murder, as it is sure that Sir Edmondbury
Godfrey is dead. For it is notoriously known to Sir John Banks, Mr. Mules, and
twenty other people of business that waited with him that day that Sir Edmond
was there; he complaining then to diverse of them how he was fallen into Danby's
displeasure, besides his being there, has not only been declared to the Privy
Council by the Lady Prat, but has been attested by the King himself in open
Discourses, acknowledged by a great Countess, Danby's own Relation, and
confessed by himself: nor can it be any wonder the Witnesses should mistake the
story of his constant progress that day, since it is so notoriously known, they
often change their tales of the Rooms the Body was laid in, in Somerset House,
during its supposed continuance there. But to waste time no farther, it is as
likely Danby might be deceived in his Instruments as other men, if guilty, it
is plain have been. But to clear himself from so probable surmises and
presumptions which are made against him, his only way is generously to wave
his Pardon (at least) till after Judgment, and take his Trial for this and
other things charged upon him by the whole Nation: For all scribbling for him is
but washing the Blackamore. And it is more than to be suspected, that those who
take that pains, or any other ways publicly to defend him, who so plainly
confesses Treasons and Felonies, by sheltering himself under a Pardon for them,
has been some of his Accomplices in these Crimes, of which, believe it, there
will not want Witnesses, when it is as safe and lawful to speak truth, as it is
now meritorious to do the contrary: Which time, sweet JESUS, in thy good mercy
send us speedily.

FINIS.

