An Answer to some Objections against Returning and Raising the Exportation
Duty on TIN.
d. in the Pound, or 5 per Cent. on all Goods according to their Value, and Tin
paid 4 s. for every Hundred Weight Coynage Duty, andit, and before the Duty was
taken off, 7 s. 4. d. the Hundred, Custom. In all 11 s. 4. d, which is about 20
per Cent. according to the Value of Tin, which was then but 2 l. (...) s. or 2
l. 10 s. a Hundred to the Tinner.

Cornwall, and has no relation to the Duty fetled in the Book of Rates by the
Act of Tonnage and Poundage, but is paid by our own Subjects as well as
Foreigners, in the Country where the Tin is got.

And as to the 12 d. in the Pound by he Act of Tonnage and Poundage, it was not
according to the true and real Value of the Goods, but according to such Value
as was set upon them by that Act in the Book of Rates, wherein Tin is valued at
7 l. 6 s. 8 d. the Hundred; though the true Value of it, Anno 1660, when that
Act was made, was not near so much.

Besides, if it be enquired what Custom other Goods Exported pay, some will be
found much to exceed 12 d. in the Pound, or 5 per. Cent. As for instance, Lead
Exported, paies 10 l. Custom for every Hundred Pounds in Value: And if Lead
(the Exportation whereof cannot be in Prejudice of any English Manufacture) pay
10 per Cent. it is hoped it may not be thought unreasonable, that Tin (the
Exportation whereof at so low a Duty as now, being plainly prejudicial to the
Manufacture of Pewter) may pay 15 per Cent. which (at the Price of Tin now in
London) is about 11 s. 6 d. the Hundred Weight Custom, and is 8 s. 6 d. the
Handred more than the 3 s. a Hundred it now pays, and which Tin may well bear,
without lessening the Foreign Vent of it.

East India (there being great Quantities of it in that Country, as good as the
English Tin) which will much lessen the Foreign Vent of our Tin.

s. 4 d. the Hundred, but 4 or 5 s. the Hundred more: For though East India may
produce great Quantity of Tin, yet it is manifest to the most experienced Men in
that Trade, that the Demand for it there is so great, that it will yield in
East India and other Countries beyond the Cape of Good Hope, from 3 l. 10 s, to
5 l. the Hundred Weight; and therefore impracticable to bring it into Europe as
Merchandise: Though sometimes when no better Kentilage can be got, some small
quantity is brought as Ballast to stiffen the Ship, and can be neither more or
less, by laying an Additional Duty of 8 or 10 s. the Hundred Weight on our Tin
exported: Besides, it is not so good in Quality as ours, for the Dutch give 3 or
4 s. the Hundred Weight more for the English, than the East India Tin at the
same time.

And it is evident such an Additional Duty, will not so advance the Price of
Tin, as to discourage the Foreign vent of it; either by discouraging the Use,
or Consumption of it, in Foreign Countries, or by encouraging them, to bring
Tin from East India: For since the taking off the Duty the last Parliament; the
Tinner has advanced the Price of Tin, near 20 s. the Hundred to the Foreigner,
as well as to our own Subjects: The Tinners Price being then but 48, or 50 s.
the Hundred; and the last Christmas Coynage it was advanced to 3 l. 7 s. the
Hundred; besides the Coynage Duty. So that'tis plain that 8, or 10 s. the
Hundred, Additional Duty, will not discourage the Foreign Vent of Tin; since
that will not advance the Price to the Foreigner one half so much as the Tinner
or Merchants has advanced it, since the taking off the Duty.

And the difference only is, that the Duty is to the King and for the good of
the Public, and the 20 s. per Hundred, now advanced in Price, is to the
private Gain and Advantage of the Tinner and Merchant, who make this Objection
against the Return and Increase of the Duty; which is not only much to the
Kings Advantage, but also the only remedy for the Pewterers Grievance.



s. per Cent. they have advanced to themselves in Price, since the 4 s. 4 d.
per Cent. was taken off the Duty.

England, upwards of 1000 Tuns of Tin, one Year with another. And therefore
every Shilling the Hundred added to the Duty, will increase the Kings Custom
above 1000 l. per Annum. So that 8 or 10 s. the Hundred added to the present
Duty, will increase the Kings Customs upwards of 8 or 10000 per Annum.


