AN ANSWER to a late PAMPHLET, ENTITLED, The Judgment and Doctrine of the
Clergy OF THE CHURCH of ENGLAND, Concerning one Special Branch of the KING's
PREROGATIVE; VIZ. In dispensing with the Penal-Laws. SHOWING That this is not
asserted by The Most Reverend Fathers in God, the Lords Archbishops, Bancroft,
Laud and Usher. The Right Reverend Father in God, the Lord Bishop Sanderson.
The Reverend Doctors, Dr. Heylin, Dr. Barrow, Dr. Sherlock Master of the
Temple, Dr. Hicks, Dr. Nalson, Dr. Puller, So far as appears from their words
cited in THIS PAMPHLET.
In a LETTER to a Friend.

LONDON, Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXVII.

Imprimatur,

May 13. 1687. GVIL. NEEDHAM.

An Answer to a late Pamphlet, etc.
SIR,
I Have received the Book you sent me, Entitled, [ The Judgment and Doctrine
of the Clergy of the Church of England, concerning one special branch of the
King's Prerogative, viz. Dispensing with the Penal Laws.] Had I not now learnt
to wonder at nothing, it would a little have surprised me; but now I shall only
tell you that I have read it, and do not like it: And reserving one little
reason for by and by, viz. That it is not true: I shall at present give you
some other reasons of my dislike, to prevent mistakes.

And first negatively, Not because it is for the King's dispensing Power; For I
never envy my King any Prerogative that belongs to his Crown: And tho, it may
be, this Branch of the Prerogative was not so well understood in former days,
yet it is certainly now the right of the Crown, as much as the Opinion of the
Judges can make it so; and I never dispute against such an Authority: And I
think it is a disparagement to the judgment of the Reverend Judges to call in
Clergymen to help them out; when he himself tells us, p. 34. Unto the Judges
the people are bound lastly and finally to submit themselves for matter of Law.
Why then does he make any further dispute about the matter? As if he distrusted
the Judgment of the Judges, or thought that people would rather believe Divines
than Judges in matter of Law; which would be a great scandal to that Reverend
and Learned Bench. And therefore, I confess, I am very much offended with that
priority he gives to the Judgment of Churchmen in this point, before the
Judgment of the Judges. He says, We could not resolve our selves in this great
point (of the Supreme Power inherent in, and inseparably annexed to the Crown,
to dispense with Penal Laws) but by these two ways.

1. To see, how far the Judgment of our Churchmen, appearing in their
Doctrines (which are for our edification) does warrant this Prerogative to be
in the King.

2. To see how far the Judges Resolutions (in declaring their sense of the Law
of the Land in this doubtful question) do agree in such their Judgments and
Doctrines.

Fie for shame! First, make the Clergy Judges of Law, and Preach edifyingly
about the Prerogative, and then set them before the Judges themselves, as a
Rule and Pattern for them to follow; and then, as it naturally follows, judge
over the Judges judgment by its agreement with the judgment of Divines, about
Law and Prerogative. If the Writer of this Letter was a Divine, it argues a
good Opinion of his own Profession; but if he were a Lawyer, or but a Justice
of Peace, I know what he deserves.

Secondly, This brings me to the positive Reasons of my dislike of this way,
and they are comprehended in two: 1. That I do not think fit to lay such stress
upon the Judgment of Churchmen in matters of Law; and such, sure this unlimited
dispensing Power is, a mere point of Law; and that such an abstruse point too,
as not all Lawyers, nay not all Judges have formerly been agreed about. Now,
what does a Churchman's, Judgment signify in matters of Law? No man's Opinion
is of any value, but in such things wherein he is skilled; now a Churchman does
not signify one, who is skilled in Law, but in Divinity: And tho a Churchman
should be a good Lawyer; if he gives his Opinion in any point of Law, his
Opinion is not valuable, as the Opinion of a Churchman, but of a Lawyer; for
suppose a Churchman were skilled in Physic too, would you value his Judgment
in Physic ever the more, because he is a Churchman? Or think your self more
safe in his hands, than in a professed Physicians? There are Interlopers indeed
in all Professions, but that any man's Judgment should be valued, because being
of one Profession himself, he gives judgment in another, is a Mystery to me.
And therefore this Writer should first have proved all those great Divines,
Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Doctors, with whose names he has so pompously
filled his Title Page, and to whose judgment he appeals about the King's
Prerogative, to haxe been great Lawyers, as well as great Divines, or else the
Cause is Coram non judice; and yet he makes no offer at this, unless by the
Title he gives Dr. Sherlock, of Master of the Temple, he would intimate his
great skill in Law too; but this will not do; for his Book of Non-resistance
was written before he lived within the infection of the Law-air. So that it
seems a very great injury to the Cause to appeal to such Judges as have no
skill in the matter: For what credit can the Opinion of Divines do it, when it
is not a point of Divinity, but of Law that is in question? For it is generally
seen, that those are very apt to mistake, who guess at things out of their Ken;
and people are apt to suspect that such contemplative men, who keep their
Studies, and seldom look abroad into the World, may form fine Romantic Idea's
of Government, which will not suit the public Constitutions of Kingdoms and
Nations.

Secondly, I think it is a very dangerous thing to put the Question upon such
an issue as this: The design of it, I suppose, is to recommend it to the Layety
of the Church of England by such venerable Names; but he should have
considered, that the Layety of the Church of England are not so Priest-ridden,
as they are at Rome and Geneva; they have not an implicit Faith in their
spiritual Guides, and their Guides do not desire they should; and therefore it
is not their Names but their Arguments must prevail; but if people are taught
to rely on the opinion of their Ministers in such Prerogative Disputes, the
Popish Priests and Phanatick Ministers are great Politicians too; but if they
may be Judges, Sovereign Princes will get nothing by it. The Church of England
indeed has always been addicted to the Service of the Crown, but there are
other Maxims of Government among other men: Bellarmin and Suarez, and Mr.
Baxter's Commonwealth, and the Dissenters Sayings, not to take notice now of
Julian the Apostate, are not very favorable to the Prerogatives of Princes;
and I fear people are more inclinable to follow such Guides as these, and
therefore I should have thought it more advisable to have taught people more to
rely on the Opinions of Judges than of Divines, in matters of Prerogative and
Law; because I fear that the honest Prerogative Divines will be greatly
out-numbred by the Popish and Phanatick Common-wealthsmen; and whether this
will prove for the service of the King, should have been considered.

2. My second Reason, why I dislike this way is, That I fear instead of doing
service, it will do great disservice to the King, by weakening the Authority of
those many excellent discourses, which have been written about Non-resistance,
and which did great service, not only to former Kings, but even to our present
Sovereign in the late evil and critical times. It will not easily be forgot how
many hard Censures those honest Divines underwent, who durst both from the
Pulpit and the Press oppose that factious humor which was then so rampant, and
presaged those wicked Conspiracies, which were afterward by the Divine
Providence so happily discovered and disappointed. The Doctrine of
Non-resistance would very hardly go down, and the great objection against it
was, That it made the Prince absolute, and set him above all Laws, which were
Laws no longer than he pleased to have them so; and thus our Lives and
Properties, and Liberties and Religion, were at the Will of the Prince; and if
this were really the natural consequence of the Doctrine of Non-resistance, I
suspect it would to this day put a great many English Subjects out of conceit
with it; and yet this is in great measure the design of this Letter, to apply
those Sayings or Arguments, which were urged for the Doctrine of
Non-resistance, to prove a Dispensing Power inherent and inseparable from the
Crown. Now far be it from me to dispute this Point, Whether there be such an
inherent Right in the Crown or no, especially as far as the Judges have
determined that there is; but this I say, That it is not a necessary
Consequence of the Doctrine of Non-resistance, that because we must not resist
our Prince, whatever he does, therefore he may de jure dispense with what Laws
he pleases; and I think it is for the Interest of the Crown, that these two
should be kept distinct; that the Prerogatives of the Crown should be asserted
and maintained upon their own bottom; and that the Doctrine of Non-resistance
(which must defend all other Prerogatives, and is a better and cheaper security
than Forts and Castles) may not be entangled with other Disputes, which will
weaken its Authority, though it be Divine, when it is clogged, as some men will
think, with such uneasy and fatal consequences. This, I confess gives me a
just indignation against those half-witted Scriblers, who to serve, as they
think, a present turn, have endeavored to lessen the Reputation, and to weaken
the Arguments of those Divines, who have appeared so zealous for the Doctrine
of Non-resistance and Passive Obedience, by affixing a great many consequences
to them, which are neither consequences, nor theirs; and by wresting their
words to other purposes, than they intended; and for this reason I judge it a
very good piece of Service to the Crown to undertake the Vindication of the
men, and of their Doctrines.

For Divines to determine points of Law, especially such as require deep skill
and insight into the nature of the Constitution, as I observed before, is out
of their Sphere; but obedience to Sovereign Princes, both Active and Passive,
is not merely a point of Law, but a Gospel command, and this they not only may,
but ought to explain and press upon the Consciences of their hearers: This the
Church of England her self has done in the Homily of Obedience, and this the
Ministers of the Church have taken all occasions to do, and with that success,
that there are not more Loyal Subjects in the World, than the true Sons of the
Church of England; but farther than this, they have not gone, or if a few
dablers in Politics have, let them answer for themselves: The Scripture
teaches Obedience, but the Prerogatives of Princes, and the Liberties of
Subjects, are the matter of human Laws and Constitutions, which properly belong
to another Gown.

And thus I come to consider what Testimonies this Writer has produced to
prove, That it is the Doctrine and Judgment of the Reverend Clergy of the
Church of England, that the Power of Dispensing with any Laws is an inherent
and inseparable Right of the Crown; where I will not meddle with the main
point, Whether the King have any such right (for I will not dispute that) but
whether these Divines, whose Authority is alleged in the cause, ever taught
any such Doctrine. He begins with the Reverend Dr. Hicks Dean of Worcester, and
endeavors to render one of the best Books that ever was wrote for Passive
Obedience, wholly useless or odious to those men who are not fond of the
dispensing Power. But what does the Dean teach? That the English Realm is a
perfect Sovereignty or Empire, and that the King of England by the Imperial
Laws of it, is a Complete, Imperial, Independent Sovereign; that it is a
contradiction to call this an Imperial Crown -- unless he have all those
Rights, which are involved in the very Notion of his Imperial Sovereignty.
Well! to make short work with it, does the Dean say, That this Dispensing Power
is one of those Rights which are involved in the notion of Imperial
Sovereignty? No, he says no such thing; but this Writer says so for him, that
this Power of dispensing with Penal Laws must be, or nothing, one of those
Prerogatives; which he proves from Sir Robert Pointz his Vindication of
Monarchy; and what then? suppose it be, does the Dean say so? for that is the
only point in question, What his Judgment is?

No, but he says, That the Imperial Crown has all the Rights which are involved
in the Notion of Imperial Sovereignty, and our Author can prove, that the
dispensing Power is such a Right, and therefore the Dean must grant, that this
dispensing Power is a Right inherent in the Crown. Very well! A Popish Priest
will allow, that an Imperial Crown has all the Rights that are involved in the
Notion of Imperial Sovereignty; now say I, a Supremacy in all Causes, over all
Persons, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, is an inherent Authority of the
Imperial Crown; therefore Popish Priests renounce the Supremacy of the Bishop
of R^me, and own the Supremacy of the Kings of England. If he think this is not
a good proof, let him consider this matter over again, which will be worth the
while, if it be only to teach him to Reason a little. When there is any Dispute
about the rights of Sovereignty, it is a ridiculous inference to say, That he
who owns all the Rights of Sovereignty, owns whatever any man says is a Right
of Sovereignty; for still he owns no more, than what he himself believes to be
so.

Now I am not concerned to enquire what Dr. Hicks believes about the Dispensing
Power, but what he has said; and our Author has not produced one word out of
his Book about it; and therefore I suppose he could not; for his own words had
been a better Authority in this case than Sir Robert Pointz: I am sure, where
he particularly states and enumerates the Rights of Sovereignty, he takes no
notice of it; for as he reckons them up, they are these.

Jovian, or an Answer to Julian the Apostate, chap. 10. p. 201. Ed. 1.
1. To be (...), accountable to none except God. 2. To have the sole Power and
disposal of the Sword. 3. To be free from all Coercive and vindicative Power.
4. Not to be withstood or resisted by force, upon any pretense whatsoever.
Lastly. To have the Legislative Power, that makes any form of words a Law: The
Sovereign Power may indeed be limited as to the exercise of this Power, which
may be confined to Bills and Writings prepared by others; but still it is the
Sovereign Authority, who gives Life and Soul to the dead Letter of them. Here
is nothing at all about this Dispensing Power, when there was a fair occasion
for it: Possibly this was an Omission, which at that time he did not think of,
that not being the matter of Dispute; or it may be he was not so well
instructed, and did not think this essential to the notion of all Sovereign
Power, as seems probable from his two sorts of Imperial Power, either of which
make an Imperial Sovereign; such as is limited by the Laws of God and nature
only; or such as is limited by the Laws of God and nature, and Civil Laws and
Pactions too; The Power in both sorts of Sovereigns is Imperial, full, perfect,
absolute and entire; but the exercise of it is differently bounded and
regulated; one by the Laws of God and Nature, and the other by human positive
Laws; and the latter limitation, does no more destroy the fullness and
perfection and Supremacy of the Power, than the former; because the Sovereign,
who is under Political limitations, as to the exercise of his Power, has his
Power nevertheless as absolutely, fully and entirely in himself, as he that is
only under the limitation of Divine and natural Laws.

De laudibus legum Angliae C. 9. Rex Angliae -- principatu nedum Regali sed
Politico suo populo dominatur. Regnum sic institui, ut Rex non libere valeat
populum tyrannide gubernare, quod solum fit dum potestas regia lege politica
cohibetur.
Thus the learned Chancellor Fortescue grants the King of England to have Regal
or Imperial Power, though it be under the restraint and regulation of the Power
political, as to the exercise thereof; and as a Fountain that has Channels and
Pipes made for it, within which its waters are bounded in their passage, and
through which they are to flow, is nevertheless as perfect a Fountain, and has
its waters as fully and entirely within it self, as any other Fountain, whose
waters flow from it at liberty, without any such regulation; so a King whose
Imperial Power is limited by human Constitutions in the exercise of it, is
nevertheless as complete a Sovereign, and has the Sovereign Power as fully and
entirely within himself, as he who is at liberty to exercise his Authority as
he will: To be arbitrary is no more of the Essence of an Imperial Sovereign,
than to be free in the course of its waters is of the Essence of a Fountain;
but as the Fountain of an Aqueduct, for example, is as perfect, in its kind,
and generally more beneficial and useful to mankind, than a free flowing
spring; so limited Sovereigns are as perfect and essential Sovereigns, as the
purely arbitrary and despotick, and generally more beneficial and salutary to
the world.

A great deal more the Reader may find to this purpose in the same place, which
possibly may be the reason, why he did not mention this absolute Dispensing
Power among the Essential Rights of Sovereignty; because he might imagine, that
this might not be essential to all Sovereigns; not to those, the exercise of
whose Sovereign Power is regulated by Civil and Political Laws, who yet are as
perfect Sovereigns, as the most arbitrary and despotick Princes. But I do not
love to guess at other men's thoughts, nor shall I undertake to justify or
condemn this Notion of his; but I think, the Reader by this time sees what
little reason there was to appeal to the Dean of Worcester to justify the
dispensing Power.

His next Authority is Archbishop Bancroft, who it seems asserted, That the
Judges are but the Kings Delegates, and that the King may take what causes he
shall please to determine, from the determination of the Judges, and determine
them himself, which the Archbishop said was clear in Divinity, that such
Authority belongs to the King by the Word of God in Scripture.

Now I wonder this Writer would produce this, and that for these two Reasons.

1. Because at that very time in the Presence of King James, my Lord Chief
Justice Coke contradicted the Archbishop, and told the King he could not do
it, and gave him his Reasons why he could not, as the Chapter Justice himself
reports it, in that place to which this Writer refers. 12 Co. Fol. 64. 5. Jac.


Now methinks here he loses more than he gets; for if he have got a great
Churchman, he has lost a very great Lawyer, whose Judgment is more
considerable in such matters; for as the Archbishop could tell him what has
been done in Scripture-times under the Jewish Commonwealth, that Moses, and
David and Solomon, and other Kings of Israel administered Justice in their own
Persons. So the Chapter Justice could tell him, what the Constitutions of this
Kingdom, and the regular form of Law will admit, which is more to our purpose.

2. I wonder a little more, how he can prove the dispensing Power from this:
The King may judge what causes he pleases himself. Ergo, He can dispense with
all Laws when he pleases. Does the Power of hearing and trying causes, and
expounding, and interpreting Laws, include in it a power of dispensing with
Laws? Then it seems every Judge is by his Office a Dispenser with Laws. If the
King have Power of determining causes in his own person, must he judge with or
without Law? If he judge according to the Laws, how does this prove his Power of
Dispensing with Laws? Surely this is a Power which can result only from a
Supreme absolute and unlimited Sovereignty, not from a mere power of hearing
and judging causes, according to the true meaning and interpretation of Laws;
so little does this Writer understand what he writes about; and it is great
pity there is no more care taken that the Kings Prerogative do not suffer by
such unskilful Scriblers.

His next man is a very great one indeed, not only an Archbishop, but a Martyr
for his King and the Church; the famous Archbishop Laud, whose Judgment would
weigh more with me, than some other men's Reasons. He quotes a saying of his,
out of his Book against Fisher, but never directs us where to find it; and that
is a great book to search all over for one single passage: but however the
saying is so innocent, that we may admit it to be his, without farther Enquiry,
viz. That the Supreme Magistrate in the Estate Civil, may not abrogate the Laws
made in Parliament; tho he may dispense with the Sanction or Penalty of the
Law, quoad hic and nunc, as the Lawyers speak. Now unless quoad hic and nunc
signifies a general and unlimited Dispensation for all persons at all times, I
suppose it does not reach the plenitude of the Dispensing Power. Quoad hic and
nunc, I doubt may be expounded as a limitation of the Dispensing Power, which
will beget a dispute how far this Power of Dispensing may extend; for which
reason I wish he had concealed the Judgment of this great Archbishop; tho the
comfort is, he was but a Divine, and therefore his Judgment not Authentic in
such matters any farther than this Author has made it so, by appealing to it;
especially since he does not give his own Opinion in the case, but refers to
the received opinion of Lawyers at that time, which whether it then was for an
absolute Dispensing Power, must be first known, before we can know what the
Archbishops Opinion was.

But he makes a much greater flourish with Archbishop Usher, who wrote an
Excellent Book concerning the Power communicated by God to the Prince, and the
Obedience required of the Subject; out of which he has transcribed four or five
Pages, how much to his purpose, shall be presently examined: But I must first
mind him, what another of his Witnesses, The Right Reverend Dr. Sanderson
Bishop of Lincoln has observed in his Preface to that Book, Sect. 9, 12, 13. In
the 9 Section he takes notice of several Objections which either were or might
be made against this Book. The Second is, That it is not yor Divines at all to
meddle in these matters, whereof they are not competent Judges, nor do they
come within the compass of their Sphere: They ought to be left to the
cognizance and determination of Statesmen and Lawyers, who best understand the
constitution of the several Governments, and the force and effect of the Laws
of their own several respective Countries, and are therefore presumed to be
best able to judge, the one (by constitution) in whom the Sovereignty resideth,
and the other (by the Laws) how that Sovereignty is bounded and limited in the
exercise thereof.

In answer to this he says, Sect. 12. True it is, that for the more ease of the
Governors, and better satisfaction of the people in securing their Properties,
preserving Peace amongst them, and doing them Justice, the absolute and
unlimited Sovereignty, which Princes have by the Ordinance of God, has at all
times, and in all Nations, been diversely limited and bounded in the ordinary
exercise thereof by such Laws and Customs as the Supreme Governors themselves
have consented to and allowed. As with us in England, there are sundry cases,
wherein a Subject, in maintenance of his Right and Property, may wage Law with
the King, bring his Action, and have Judgment against him in open Court; and
the Judges in such cases are bound by their Oaths and Duties to right the Party
according to Law, against the King, as well as against the meanest of his
Subjects. So that it seems, this Bishop thought that the exercise of the
Sovereignty might be limited by Laws, and by such Laws as would hold good
against the King himself in his own Courts, and therefore that all Laws were
not dispensable at the Kings pleasure; and this Preface was wrote long after
his Cases of Conscience, of which more presently. And he adds, That the
debating and determining of every doubt or controversy belongs to the
Learned Lawyers, and Reverend Judges who are presumed to be best skilled in the
Laws and Customs of the Land, as their proper study, wherein they are daily
conversant; and not to Divines, who (as Divines) are not competent Judges in
these matters, nor do they come within the compass of their sphere. By which
one would guess that this Reverend Bishop did not apprehend, that he himself
had been guilty of determining so nice a Point of Law as the Dispensing Power,
tho this Author has discovered for him, that he has.

Well, but how does he bring off the Archbishop after all this, for meddling
with such nice points? As to that he tells us, Sect. 13. That there is no need
of bringing him off: That, in relation to the present Treatise, all that he had
said about Divines determining Law Cases, as far as they related to Conscience,
might well enough have been spared, wherein the Reverend Author, without
meddling with these Punctilio's of the Law, undertaketh no more but to declare
and assert the Power of Sovereign Princes, as the Godly Fathers and Councils of
the ancient Catholic Church, from the evidence of Holy Scripture, and the most
judicious Heathen Writers by discourse of Reason from the light of Nature, have
constantly taught and acknowledged the same, as to the unprejudiced Reader by
the perusal of the Book it self will easily appear. From whence one would
guess, that Bishop Saunderson did not apprehend, that Archbishop Usher had
determined any one point of Law, about the absolute or limited exercise of the
Sovereign Power, according to the Constitution of these Realms; and therein he
had our Author differ, who has found the Dispensing Power plainly determined by
the Archbishop. But whoever consults the Book it self (and it will reward any
man's pains, who will do it) will find, that the Bishop was in the right, and
those Reasons which the Bishop urges, will convince him, That he was so. For he
will find, that the Archbishop does not meddle with the particular Laws and
Constitutions of these Kingdoms, but only urges the Authority of Fathers and
Councils, and the Holy Scriptures, and the consent of Heathen Writers, which
can no more determine what the particular Laws and Constitutions of these
Kingdoms are, than the Laws of England can the Customs of the Roman Empire. The
Archbishop only considered what Rights belong to the Sovereign Power, wherever
it is, by the consent of Scriptures, Fathers, Councils and Heathen Writers, who
followed the light and conduct of natural Reason; and took it for granted, as
the Bishop observes he well might, That the Kings of England are Sovereign
Princes, and therefore have all the Rights of Sovereignty belonging to their
Crowns: But how the exercise of this Sovereign Power is limited by the
particular Laws and Customs of Nations, and by the consent and grants of
Sovereign Princes themselves, which Bishop Sanderson asserts, has at all times,
and in all Nations, been diversely limited and bounded, this the Archbishop says
nothing of; and I cannot then guess, how he should determine this point of the
Dispensing Power. But let us now consider what this Author alleges to prove,
That the Archbishop did teach, that this Dispensing Power is an inherent and
inseparable Right of the Imperial Crown: And to set this matter in a clearer
light, I shall place his quotations in that natural Order they stand in in the
Archbishops Book.

He having then searched into the ground of Sovereignty, and (by Reason, and
Witnesses of all sorts) deduced the Original thereof from no lower an head than
Heaven it self, as he himself tells us, The Power of Princes. p. 66. Ed. 2.
1683.
he proceeds to look a little into those Royal Prerogatives, which are annexed
to the eminent Estate of such supreme Governors. And the principal thing he
takes notice of, is their exemption from Laws; P. 68.
as the Senate of Rome decreed to Vespasian, That what Laws soever either of
the Senate or People it was ordained, that the Emperor's Predecessors were not
tied to, from those he should be loose also: So that this freedom from Laws,
tho a Branch of the Imperial Power, was decreed and confirmed by the Laws of
the Empire, and granted to the Emperor by the Roman Senate; which indeed
signified making him Emperor, for without this he had not been an Imperial
Prince.

But what is this exemption from Laws which belongs to the Imperial Crown? And
that he tells us from the Civilians, That they are free from all Coactive
Obedience to them, and are held by none of the written Ordinances. For the
understanding of which, he distinguishes between God's Law, the Law of the
King, and that which is the Law of God and the King together. As for God's Law,
which signifies the unwritten Law of Nature, or the Written Word, the greatest
Prince in the World is as much bound to obey it, as the meanest Subject. But
then he adds, (which is one of our Author's quotations) By the Law of the King,
I understand such Ordinances as are merely Civil and Positive; the Coactive
Power whereof being derived from him who is the supreme Lawgiver under God on
Earth, he himself cannot be properly said to be tied thereby. Which he proves
from Grammarians, Civilians, and Schoolmen, and by this good Argument. As no
man therefore is superior to himself, so no man has jurisdiction over himself;
because none can oblige a man against his Will, but only his Superior; and the
jurisdiction over a man's self may be dissolved at pleasure. Which only
signifies, that the King is not bound in his own person to observe the Laws as
Subjects are, because no body has any jurisdiction over him but himself, and no
man can command himself any longer than he pleases. Right! But suppose a
Sovereign Prince has bound himself by Oath to God and his Country, that he will
observe the Laws, is he not as much obliged then to observe the Civil and
Positive Laws of his Country, made and confirmed by his own Authority, as he is
to observe the Laws of God? for tho by making a Law he does not immediately
oblige himself, yet by his Oath he may. The Archbishop only considered what was
the Right of Sovereign Power without any Super-induced obligation, not what a
Sovereign Prince might oblige himself to by Sacred and Solemn Oaths: And yet I
wonder this Writer should have no more regard to the Sacred Majesty of Princes,
than to found their Rights upon such a Power, as the wisest and best Princes
have not thought fit to use: As he might have learnt in the same place had he
thought fit to have read on. For there the Archbishop quotes the saying of
Valentinian the younger. p. 74.
It is in truth a greater thing than the Empire, to submit the Princed^m it
self unto the Laws. And that of Alexander Severus, Although the Law of the
Empire has freed the Emperor from the Solemnities of the Law, yet nothing is
so proper for Empire as to live by the Laws. And that which Severus and
Antoninus set down so often in their Prescripts; Although we be loosed from the
Laws, yet we live by the Laws. Whereunto also we may add, that commendation
which Plutarch gives to Alexander the Great; That he conceived he ought to be
thought Superior to all Men, yet subject to Justice; That is, to be obliged to
observe all the Laws of Justice, not to be subject to any Coercive Power. And
Pliny to Trajan, He thinks himself to be one of us, and so much the more
excellent and eminent he is, that he so thinks; and no less remembers that
he is a Man, than that he is a Ruler of Men. For he who has nothing left to
increase his height, has but this one way to grow by, if he submit himself,
being secure of his Greatness. And in his direct Speech to the Emperor himself;
Thou esteemest us the same, and thy self the same, and in this only greater
than the rest, that thou art better than they. And, Thou have made thy
self-subject to the Laws, O Caesar, which were not written to restrain the
Prince by; but Thou will have nothing more lawful to Thee, than is to Us. Now,
when this has been the Sense and Practice of the wisest and best Heathen
Princes; that it is an Imperial Virtue and Dignity, tho they are free from
Laws, yet to submit themselves to the observance of Laws: I should think it no
great Complement to a Christian Prince to found any part of his Imperial Power
upon such Exemptions, as. Sovereign Power must have, but yet, which Sovereign
Princes think it their greatest Glory not to use: For if the Exercise of such a
Liberty be inglorious; that Power, which is founded on it, cannot be glorious.

And here comes in the first Citation of this Writer, who I think has not
mended the Archbishop's Sense by altering his Method. The Power of the Prince.
P. 76.
For such positive Laws as these, being (as the other works of Men are)
imperfect, and not free from many discommodities; if the strict Observation
thereof should be perused in every particular, it is sit the Supreme Governor
should not himself only be excepted from subjection thereunto (which shows that
before, he had only spoke of the personal exemption of the Prince from the
necessity of obeying his own Laws, and that he now enters upon a new
Prerogative of the Crown in the Words that follow) but also be so far Lord over
them, that where he sees cause he may abate, or totally remit the Penalty
incurred by the breach of them, dispense with others for not observing them at
all, and generally suspend the execution of them, when by experience he shall
find the imconveniencies to be greater than the profit that was expected should
redound thereby to the Commonwealth. Plutarch sctteth this down as a chief
point of that natural skill, which Philopaemen had in Government, that he did
not only rule according to the Laws, but overruled the Laws themselves, when
he found it conducing to the Weal-Publick. Now, I do not see one Word in this,
but what is the undoubted Right of the Supreme executive Power: For it is
impossible any Nation should be well and happily governed, where this Power is
not; And that for this Reason, which the Archbishop gives; Because Human Laws
are imperfect, and therefore there must be a living Authority to supply their
Defects, and to temper their Severities, and to pity and relieve Subjects, when
the case is truly pitiable. But then there are some natural Limitations of the
exercise of this Power in the most absolute and despotick Princes, and there
may be Political Limitations of it by the consent of Sovereign Princes
themselves, according to the Laws and Constitutions of several Kingdoms. For
tho the Imperial Crown can be divested of no part of Sovereign Power, yet the
exercise of it may be directed and limited by public Laws, as we heard before
from Bishop Sanderson. This last the Archbishop takes no notice of, it not
being his design, as you heard before, to adjust the Rights of Princes by
Political Laws, but only to consider in general, what are the essential Rights
of Sovereign Power, without examining how the exercise of it is diversely
limited in different Countries. And therefore let us only consider what those
natural Bounds and Limits are, which he has set to this dispensing and
suspending Power. And they are included in the reason of this Power, because
all Human Laws are imperfect, and therefore there wants a Sovereign Power,
which is so far Superior to all Laws, that it can correct their Faults, and
supply their Defects, and temper them to such particular Emergencies and Cases,
as could not be foreseen when the Laws were made. For if human Laws could be so
exactly framed, as to fit all possible cases, if the Law were for the good of
the Commonwealth, the dispensing with, or suspending the execution of such
Laws, would be a public mischief: And a Power which could serve no good end,
could be no Prerogative of Sovereignty. And therefore the very Dispensation
must be for the public good, or else it is the abuse, not the natural Right of
Sovereign Power. To which purpose he mentions the Opinion of John of Sarisbury,
P. 79. I do not take away the dispensing with the Law out of the Hands of the
Powers, but such Precepts or Prohibitions, as have a perpetual Right, are not,
as I think, to be subjected to their Will and Pleasure. In those things only
that are mutable, the Dispensation with the Letter of the Law is to be
admitted, yet so as by the compensation of Honesty or Vtility the Intention of
the Law may be entirely preserved.

So that according to this Rule, the natural Instances of this dispensing Power
seem to be these: When a Law is made, and is for the Public Good, but happens
to fall very severely upon some particular Persons, without their own fault,
only because such particular Cases were not and could not be considered in
making the Law: here the Equity of the Prince ought to relieve such Sufferers;
according to his long Quotation out of AEneas Sylvius P. 91. which this Author
has transcribed at large, and we readily own. When the Penalty annexed to the
Law, may in some particular cases be remitted without the public Injury, and
may be thought very just and convenient with respect to the pittiable
Circumstances, or former Merits of the Person offending; as the Archbishop
observes, and this Author from him, P. 79. While the Laws do stand in force, it
is fit that sometimes the King's Clemency should be mingled with the Severity
of them; especially when by that means the Subjects may be freed from much
detriment and damage. Which belongs to the Regal, not to the Ministerial Power;
the condition of the Magistrates, whose Sentence is held corrupt, if it be
milder than the Laws, being one thing; the Power of Princes, whom it becomes
to qualify the sharpness of them, a far different matter. If any thing happens
after the making of a Law, which was not foreseen when it was made, and which
is besides, or contrary to the original intention of the Lawmakers, and
renders the execution of that Law manifestly and notoriously oppressive to the
Public; the Prince may certainly suspend the Execution of such Laws, till they
be altered or repealed by the Power which made them, or in the same regular
Exercise of the Legislative Power, as they were first made. This dispensing,
and pardoning, suspending Power is so necessary to the Public Good, that for
my part I would not willingly live under any Government, which wanted the
Exercise of this Power. And if this be all this Writer intended to prove by his
long Quotations out of the Archbishop, I am perfectly of his mind, that the
Archbishop was of his Opinion, and so, I believe, is every Man who considers
any thing. For the Exercise of such a Power as this, is no Injury to the Laws,
nor to the Legislative Authority. For in this way, the Prime and original
Intention of the Law is always secure, and can never be dispensed with; the
general Force and Vigor of the Law is maintained, though it be remitted in some
particular cases; all Men's Rights and Properties are secure, which are secured
by the Law; (for the Laws can be dispensed with, not for the hurt and damage,
but only for the Benefit of the Subject, and therefore no legal Rights can be
taken away by a Dispensation) and more than that, some Men may find Refuge and
Sanctuary in the Clemency and Sovereign Power of the Prince, from the
Severities of the Law, as far as is consistent with the Public Good and
Safety. But any other dispensing Power than this, the Archbishop says nothing
of. And this, I think, is answer enough to what he alleges out of Archbishop
Usher.

After these 3 Archbishops, the next who follows, is the humble, patient, and
learned Dr. Robert Sanderson, late Lord Bishop of Lincoln; and were he living,
this Writer would exercise all the Humility and Patience he had, without
offering him any occasion to show his Learning. At the end of his 9 th Lecture
concerning the final Cause of humane Laws, Sect. 16. he comes to explain that
Aphorism, Salus Populi Suprema Lex, The Safety of the People is the Supreme
Law, which was expounded in those days, to set up the Interest and Safety (as
they pretended) of the People in opposition to the King; which he does with so
great Learning and Judgment, as not only to confute, but to shame all such
Protences. From the 18 th Sect. this Writer, among others, which are nothing to
his purpose, transcribes these Words, which I suppose he thought were: Non ita
se voluisse Legum vinculis astringi.
A King that gives Laws and Statutes to his People, will not (or did not
intend) to be bound up by the Laws, that it should not be lawful to him, the
Safety of the Commonwealth being in apparent danger, to provide for the Safety
of the Kingdom and People committed to him by God, even against the Words of
the Law. -- It is lawful for the Prince in the Preservation of his own and his
Subjects Safety, to lay aside for a while all strict observance of the Laws,
and to make use a little of an arbitrary Right, lest by too unseasonable and
superstitious Reverence of the Laws, he may suffer both his own Person, and his
People that are subject to him, and even the Laws themselves to fall into the
Power of his Enemies. Ergo, the Power of dispensing with Penal Laws is an
inherent and inseparable Right of the Crown. Quod erat demonstrandum. An
excellent Logician! to make an accidental Case the measure and Standard of a
constant and unalterable Right. To prove that to be a Right when there is no
necessity, which nothing but Necessity can justify; nay, to make Necessity,
which has no Law, the Rule and Pattern of Legal Administrations; to prove a
dispensing Power in ordinary cases from a Right or Necessity to act without or
against Law in extraordinary cases: For the Bishop does not here say, that in
such absolute Necessity the King may dispense with Penal Laws, but that he may
act against the Words of the Law, that he may lay aside for a while (while that
Necessity lasts) all strict observance of the Laws, and make use of an
arbitrary Right. So that if he can draw any Inference from this to ordinary
cases, where there is no such absolute danger, it must be to prove a lawless
and arbitrary Power, which is a great deal more than a Power of dispensing with
Penal Laws. In the very next Section ^e says almost as much of the People; That
it is lawful for Subjects in defense of their Prince and of themselves (when
there is such a pressing necessity, that a pious and prudent Man could not
doubt, but if the Lawgiver himself were present, he would grant a relaxation of
the Law) to have greater regard to the common Good, which is the supreme Law,
and the end of all Laws, than to any particular Laws, which were made not to
prejudice but to serve the common Good. Now should any man hence draw a general
Maxim, that all Men must have greater regard to the public Good than to the
observance of the Laws of their Country, it would be as bad Logic, as it is
Divinity and Law.

The last Bishop he calls in to bear his Testimony, is the present Right
Reverend Bishop of Chester: but tho I have ventured to defend our dead Bishops,
who cannot speak for themselves but in their Writings, I dare not make so bold
with the living: That great Man understands his own Sense best, and if he be
misrepresented, wants neither Learning nor Interest to right himself.

And thus we proceed to the Reverend Doctors of our Church, who I believe will
be found to speak the same things with the most Reverend and Right Reverend
Bishops. The first is Dr. Heylin, whose words are said to be these: He (viz.
the King) has Authority by his Prerogative Royal to dispense with the rigor of
the Laws, and sometimes to pass by a Statute with a Non-obstante. But where he
says these words, he does not tell us, and therefore I know not where to find
them, and therefore know not upon what occasion they were said, nor to what
they are applied. But, as you have already heard, no Man doubts, but in some
cases the King may dispense with the rigor of the Laws, and before the Judges
had declared their Opinions in the Point, I know some good Lawyers, who did not
think, that some few Instances of a Non-Obstante was a sufficient proof of a
general dispensing Power; and why might not Divines be of that mind too? And
then the Doctor's saying, that the King might sometimes pass by a Statute with
a Non-obstante, does not prove that he was for the dispensing Power in the
modern Latitude of it; for though it was as good Law before, as it is now, yet
it might not be so well understood.

The next in order is the Learned and Judicious Dr. Isaac Barrow, too learned
and too judicious to be commended by so injudicious a Writer, as will appear
from what he transcribes out of his Treatise concerning the Pope's Supremacy. I
was mightily surprised to think, what should come into the Doctor's Head to
state so nice a Point of Law as the dispensing Power, in a Treatise of the
Pope's Supremacy, which seemed as foreign to the business as could well be
imagined; and I was as much afraid that I should not have the Satisfaction of
seeing what it was, for he was resolved, if Men would be so curious to examine,
they should take pains for it; for he directs to no place, where to find what
he cites, but sends his Readers to seek for three short Sentences in a Book of
428 Pages; but by good luck I have found them, and am very much edified by them.

The first is this. Treatise of the Supremacy. P. 311. Quarto.
It is indeed a proper endowment of an absolute Sovereignty, immediately and
immutably constituted by God, with no Terms or Rules limiting it, that it is
Will declared in way of Precept, Proclamations, concerning the Sanction of
Laws, the abrogation of them, the dispensation with them should be observed.
Where the Doctor was showing how the Popes of Rome arrogate to themselves the
most absolute and unlimited Sovereignty in the Church, as it follows, This
Privilege therefore in a high strain the Pope challenges to himself, asserting
to his Decrees and Sentences the force and obligation of Laws, etc. The Mystery
of this Quotation is this, that he would have his unwary Readers to believe,
that this endowment or privilege or Prerogative of Sovereign Power, that it is
Will declared in way of Precept, Proclamations, concerning the Sanction of
Laws, the abrogation of them, the dispensation with them, should be observed,
is immediately and immutably constituted by God, with no terms or rules to
limit it: and thus indeed it is home to his purpose, but shoots vastly beyond
the Mark: For this does not only prove, that the King may dispense with Laws by
his Proclamation, but that he may make and abrogate Laws too by his
Proclamation.

But the Doctor's plain Sense is this, That such an absolute Sovereignty, as is
immediately and immutably constituted by God, with no terms or rules to limit
the exercise of it (and such a Sovereignty the Popes have challenged) has this
Endowment or Prerogative, that its Will declared in way of Precept,
Proclamations, concerning the Sanction of Laws, the abrogation of them, the
dispensation with them, should be observed. And who ever denied this? But I
find no one asserting, That the Kings of England were such absolute and
unlimited Sovereigns, by God's immediate and immutable Constitution: That their
Proclamations were as good Law, as any Acts of Parliament: That they could make
and abrogate Laws by their Proclamations. I am sure Dr. Barrow said no such
thing, tho our Author did believe, or would have his Readers believe that he
did, unless he quoted it to no purpose. And that is not improbable by his next
Quotation, which is to as little purpose as one could wish. P. 318. The power
of enacting and dispensing with Ecclesiastical Laws touching exterior
Discipline, did of old belong to the Emperor (and therefore not to the Pope,
which is the design of it) and it was reasonable that it should; because old
Laws might not conveniently suit with the present state of things, and the
public Welfare; because new Laws might conduce to the good of the Church and
State, the care of which is incumbent on him; because the Prince is bound to
use his Power and Authority to promote Gods Service, the best way of doing
which, may be by framing Orders conducible thereto. And what is all this to a
Power of dispensing with Acts of Parliament, whether they concern Church or
State? Who ever, but the Pope, denied the Princes Authority in Ecclesiastical
Affairs? If the Oath of Supremacy indeed prove the dispensing Power; then not
only a few Bishops and Doctors, but the whole Church of England teaches it; if
it does not, our Author might have spared this Quotation.

And so he might his next, P. 400. It is a Privilege of Sovereigns to grant
Privileges, Exemptions, and Dispensations. No doubt but it is, and they may in
many Cases do it by Law, which owns this Authority in the Sovereign. There are
many legal Privileges, Exemptions, Dispensations, in the Power of the Prince.
Ergo, What? Thus much for Dr. Barrow, and the Pope's Supremacy, which was never
favorable to the Prerogatives of Princes. The

The next in course is The Reverend Doctor Sherlock Master of the Temple, who
says in a positive manner: It does not become any man, who can think three
consequences off, to talk of the Authority of Laws, in derogation of the
Authority of the Sovereign Power; The Sovereign Power made the Laws, and can
repeal them and dispense with them, and make new Laws. The only Power and
Authority of the Laws is in the Power that can make and execute Laws. Sovereign
Power is inseparable from the Person of a Sovereign Prince.

Here our Author breaks off, for he durst go no further, it immediately
following: And though the exercise of it may be regulated by Laws, and that
Prince does very ill, who, having consented to such a regulation, breaks the
Laws; yet when he acts contrary to Law, such Acts carry Sovereign and
irresistible Authority with them, while he continues a Sovereign Prince. Now it
is all out, and let him make his best of it.

But to expose the Shuffling Arts of this Writer, it will be convenient to
consider what the Dr. was a proving, when these words dropped from his Pen. The
Case of Nonresistance of the Supreme Powers, chap. 6. p. 186.
Having at large proved the Doctrine of Non resistance from Scripture
Testimonies, and the common Principles of Reason, in the Sixth Chapter he
answers some Objections against it. The Second Objection is,

That a Prince has no Authority against Law, as is urged in Julian the
Apostate: There is no Authority on Earth above the P. 109. Law, much less
against it. It is murder to put a man to death against Law, and if they knew
who had Authority to commit open, barefaced, and down right murders, this
would direct them where to pay their Passive Obedience: But it would be the
horrid'st Slander in the World, to say that any such Power is lodged in the
Prerogative, as to destroy Men contrary to Law.

To this the Doctor answers, Now I perfectly agree with them in this also, that
a Prince has no just and legal Authority to act against Law; that if he
knowingly persecute any Subject to death contrary to Law, he is a Murderer; and
that no Prince has any such Prerogative to commit open, barefaced, and
downright Murders. But what follows from hence? Does it hence follow,
therefore we may resist and oppose them if they do? This I absolutely deny,
because God has expressly commanded us not to resist. And I see no inconsistency
between these two Propositions, that a Prince has no legal Authority to
persecute against Law, and yet that he must not be resisted when he does. -- He
who exceeds the just bounds of his Authority, is liable to be called to an
Account for it, but he is accountable only to those who have a Superior
Authority to call him to an Account -- Thus the Sovereign Prince may exceed his
Authority, and is accountable for it to a Superior Power. But because he has no
Superior on Earth, he cannot be resisted by his own Subjects, but must be
reserved to the Judgment of God, who alone is the King of Kings.

In answer to what is said, That an Inauthoritative Act, which carrys no
obligation at all, cannot oblige Subjects to Obedience (thereby meaning Passive
Obedience) he urges, That it is very false and absurd, to say that every
illegal is an Inauthoritative Act, which carrys no obligation with it. This is
contrary to the practice of all human Judicatures, and the daily experience of
Men, who suffer in their Lives, Bodies, or Estates, by an unjust and illegal
Sentence. Every Judgment, contrary to the true meaning of the Law, is in that
sense illegal; and yet such illegal Judgments have their Authority and
Obligation, till they are rescinded by some higher Authority: This he explains
at large, and comes at last to P. 195. enquire, Whence an illegal Act or
Judgment derives its Authority and Obligation? The Answer is plain; It is from
the Authority of the Person, whose Act or Judgment it is. Which he proves and
confirms in four Propositions.

1. That there must be a Personal Power and Authority antecedent to all human
Laws. For there can be no Laws without a Lawmakers; and there can be no
Lawmakers unless there be one or more Persons invested with the Power of
Government, of which making Laws is one branch: For a Law is nothing else but
the public and declared will and command of the Lawmakers, whether he be the
Sovereign Prince or the People: Which shows in what sense the Dr. affirmed,
That Sovereign Power made the Laws, and can repeal them, and dispense with
them, and make new La^, viz. That there is no such thing as a Law without a
Lawgiver, who can make, and repeal, and dispense with Laws, and without whose
Authority too the Law can have n^ne. For without doubt the same Power that
makes Laws can repeal and d^spense wi^h them too.

2. And hence it necessarily follows, That a Sovereign Prince d^ not receive
his Authority from the Laws, but Laws receive the^ Authority from him -- For
the Law has no Authority, nor can give any, but what it receives from the King,
and then it is a wonderful Riddle how the King should receive his Authority
from the Law.

3. Hence it foll ws, That the being of Sovereign Power is independent on Laws:
That is, As a Sovereign Prince does not receive his Power from the Law, so,
should he violate the Laws by which he is bound to Govern, yet he does not
forfeit his Power; H^ breaks his Faith to God and to his Country, but he is a
Sovereign Prince st^ll. And in this sense the Dr. affirmed, That Sovereign
Power is inseparable from the Person of a Sovereign Prince.

4. Hence it plainly appears, that every illegal Act the King does is not an
Inauthoritative Act, but lays an Obligation on Subjects to yield, if not an
Active yet a Passive Obedience. For the King receives not his Sovereign
Authority from the Law, nor does he for^t his Authority by breaking the Law;
and therefore he is a Sovereign Prince still, and his most illegal Acts, though
they have not the Authority of the Law, yet they have the Authority of
Sovereign Power, which is irresist^ble and unaccountable.

Now this shows in what sense the Doctor immediately adds, It does not become
any Man, who can think three consequences off, to talk of the Authority of Laws
in derogation to the Authority of the Sovereign Power. Which does not signify
that the Law cannot abridge the Kings dispensing Power, nor have the Authority
of a Rule to him (which he does not meddle with) but that no Law can have such
Authority over a Sovereign Prince, as to un-king him, or deprive him of his
Sovereign Authority, and make all his illegal Acts inauthoritative, if he
breaks it: For that is the direct answer to the Objection; and he seems to have
looked no further; and indeed to speak the truth, his Argument holds no
further; for it does not follow, that the King is not bound to keep the Laws;
but he is a King still, and cannot forfeit his Sovereign and irresistible
Authority, though he breaks them. But if this Doctors Judgment be of any force,
we may learn what his Opinion was, (if he be not now better informed) by his
answer to the fourth Objection, though possibly he will not thank me for my
pains in transcribing it.

P. 207. 4. The next objection against the Doctrine of Non-resistance, is this,
That it destroys the difference between an absolute and limited Monarchy;
between a Prince whose Will is his Law, and a Prince who is bound to govern by
Law: which undermines the Fundamental Constitutions of the English Government.
To this he answers, The difference between an absolute and limited Monarchy, is
not, that Resistance is lawful in one case, and unlawful in the other, for a
Monarch, the exercise of whose Power is limited and regulated by Laws, is as
irresistible as the most absolute Monarch whose Will is his Law: and if he were
not, I would venture to say, that the most absolute and despotick Government,
is more for the public good than a limited Monarchy.

But the difference lies in this, that an absolute Monarch, (where by absolute,
it is plain he means a despotick Prince; for otherwise, a limited Monarchy may
be called, and often is, an absolute Sovereignty,) is under the Government of
no Law, but his own Will: He can make and repeal Laws at his pleasure, without
asking the consent of any of his Subjects: he can impose what Taxes he pleases,
and is not tied up to strict Rules and Formalities of Law in the execution of
Justice. But it is quite contrary in a limited Monarchy; where the exercise of
the Sovereign Power is regulated by known and standing Laws, which the Prince
can neither make nor repeal without the consent of the People, etc. No, you
will say, the case is just the same. For what do Laws signify, when a Prince
must not be resisted, though he break these Laws, and govern by an arbitrary
and lawless Will? He may make himself as absolute as the Great Turk or the
Mogul, when ever he pleases: For what should hinder him, when all men's hands
are tied by this Doctrine of Non-resistance? now it must be acknowledged, that
there is a possibility for such a Prince to govern arbitrarily, and to trample
upon all Laws: And yet the difference between an absolute and limited Monarchy,
is vastly great.

1. For this Prince, though he may make his Will a Law to himself, and the only
Rule of his Government, yet he cannot make it the Law of the Land. He may break
Laws, but he cannot make nor repeal them: and therefore he can never alter the
Frame and Constitution of the Government; though he may at present interrupt
the regular administration of it: And this is a great security to Posterity,
and a present restraint upon himself.

2. For it is a mighty uneasy thing to any Prince, to govern contrary to known
Laws: He offers as great and constant violence to himself, as he does to his
Subjects. -- The breach of his Oath to God, and his promises and engagements to
his Subjects, makes the exercise of such an arbitrary Power very troublesome.
And though his Subjects are bound not to resist him, yet his own guilty fears
will not suffer him to be secure: And arbitrary Power is not so luscious a
thing, as to tempt Men to forfeit all the ease and pleasure and security of
Government for the sake of it.

3. Though Subjects must not resist such a Prince, who violates the Laws of his
Kingdom; yet they are not bound to obey him, and serve him in his Usurpations.
-- Subjects are bound to yield an active obedience only according to Law,
though they are bound not to resist when they suffer against Law. Now it is a
mighty uneasy thing to the greatest Tyrant, to govern always by force. And no
Prince in a limited Monarchy can make himself absolute, unless his own Subjects
assist him to do so.

4. And yet it is very dangerous for any Subject to serve his Prince contrary
to Law; though the Prince himself is unaccountable and irresistible, yet his
Ministers may be called to an account, and be punished for it; and the Prince
may think fit, to look on qu^tly and see it done: or if they escape at pre^ent,
it may be time enough to suffer for it under the ^ext Prince which we see by
experience makes all Men wary how they serve their Prince against ^aw: None but
Persons of desperate Fortunes will do this ^ated; and these are not always to
be met with, and (...) ^eldom fit to be e^pl^d.

5. And therefore (...) may observe, that by the ^undamental Laws of our
Government, (...) Prince (...) govern (...); so he is irresistible: (...)
shows, that our wise Lawmakers d^d not think that Non resistance was
destructive of al^ited May

Not long since this was ^gh (...) D^ctri^, and I am sure it is very necessary
to keep Pe^e (...)Prince (...); for which reason I (...) though it does not
reach the height (...).

And now I find our Author begins to run ^ow, when (...) ^akes up with Doctor
N^lson, who says, In the Kings Power it is to remit the severities of the penal
Laws, whereby he may m^st his clemency and goodness, as well as his greatness
and justice, of graciously pardoning the ^maller Breaches of his Laws, and the
more capital offenses, which he might most justly punish: For whoever denied
this? The King, without doubt, may not only pardon some smaller Fault, but the
greatest of Crimes: but how this is to his purpose, I still want to be informed.

And so I do, as to what he quotes out of Doctor Puller's Book, concerning The
Moderation of the Church of England. I^ that Equity which consists in remitting
of the rig^ of the Laws, when they press too hard upon particular Persons; or
in supplying the defects of the said Laws, where they provide not sufficiently
for particular ^ases, which is all Doctor Puller contends for, be all that this
Writer would have, what need he to have writ a book about it, and confirmed it
with so many great Authorities; when I don't know, that in this he has an
Adversary in the World; if he have, it is fit such a man, if ever he stood in
need of Clemency and Mercy, should never have it. Who thinks the Court of
Chancery, an illegal Court? and yet that is properly a Court of Equity. It is
one thing to moderate the rigor of Laws in favorable cases; another to
dispense universally with such Laws, as, if Doctor Puller's Book prove any
thing, are very moderate already; and yet this may be the Prince's Prerogative,
resulting not from Moderation and Equity, but a Plenitude of Power.

As for his Anonymous Author, with whom he concludes, I neither know him nor
his Book, and suppose the cause will not depend upon a single Authority.

Thus we have heard what the Reverend Prelates and Doctors of the Church of
England have said of this matter: in the next place, he tells us what were the
Reasons that induced the Reverend Judges in Westminster Hall so openly and
solemnly, after mature deliberation, to declare their Resolutions in this Point
for the thing. But I had much rather he had told us what their Resolution was,
how far they extended this dispensing Power; whether to all Cases, or only to
some, or to all, or to some as the King at any time judges necessary; for I
have heard very different Accounts of the matter, but could never see any
authentic Record of it: To have informed us in this matter, had been a real
Kindness, because it is the Rule of our Actions, of our Words, and of our
Writing too: for when I once know what the Judges declare to be Law, I will
enquire no further; their Opinions solemnly declared, must silence all
Disputes, because they carry Power and Authority with them, unless any
superior Authority think fit at any time to judge over their Opinions.

This makes it very necessary to know what the Judgment and Resolution of the
Judges is, especially in any great and concerning Points; but as for their
Reasons I am not so fond of knowing them, because it is the Authority of the
Men, not of their Reasons, which must determine such matters: for Mankind
reasoning so very differently as they do, there never could be any final
Determination of such Cases, if all men must be first satisfied in the validity
of their Reasons: And therefore I think this Writer has done no service to the
Cause, by making their Reasons the Subject of Dispute; for though they may be
very good Reasons, yet it may be, all men will not think so; and then such men
will be apt to be dissatisfied, that a Judgment (which as they think) is not
founded on sufficient Reasons, should have such great Authority.

For it is not enough to say as this Writer does, That the Reasons they went
upon, were only such as were exactly correspondent with the avowed Doctrines
before recited; and that by this Declaration of theirs, the Law of the Kingdom
of England concerning this Sovereign Power in the Crown, is no more than what
was before publicly asserted to be the Divinity of the Kindom. For though the
Divinity of the Kingdom is a great word, and cannot be determined by a Jury of
Divines, who lived in different Ages, and never spoke together about it; nay,
indeed can never be determined by any single Divines, though never so many, and
never so learned, but only by the Authority of a Convocation, or National
Synod; yet those who think the Reasons not good, will like them never the
better, because some Divines have been of that mind, when they can so out
number (as I said before) the Church of England with Popish and Fanatic
Divines, who teach another Doctrine. And besides this, I doubt he puts it upon
a very dangerous Issue. For, if after all his confidence and assurance, other
men should not think that these Reasons do so exactly correspond with the
avowed Doctrines of the Bishops and Doctors of the Church of England, that they
have neither taught the same Doctrine, nor used the same Reasons, (as possibly
this Author by that time he has read thus far, may see reason to suspect) what
then! had he not better have let all this alone? have not the Reverend Judges
great reason to thank him for bringing their Judgment and Reasons to such a
Test, as they will not bear? They need not the Authority of Divines to justify
their Determinations at Law; and therefore it is, at best, over-officiousness,
and a lessening of their Authority, to make such Appeals, besides the folly and
rashness of making such Appeals as will do no Service.

But suppose these were not the Judges Reasons, how will he justify himself
for publishing these Reasons as theirs, without their Authority? which I dare
boldly say, he never had. Nay, I dare lay considerable odds, that these were
not their Reasons, as he has worded and represented them, and that for more
Reasons than one: Did all the Judges agree upon these Reasons, and make a
Record of them? or has he seen them signed with all their Hands? if not, how
does he know that these are their Reasons? For a Bench of Judges may agree in
their Conclusion, when they differ in their Premises and Reasons: And I will
believe that they had other Reasons besides these here mentioned. Possibly some
such thing as this might be said in Court, but I believe, not as it is here
reported; and it is an Affront to Judges in such a weighty Point as this, to
declare their Reasons upon mere hearsay; when it is so evident, that of twenty
men, who hear the same thing, searce two of them shall exactly agree in their
Report; so uncertain and variable a thing is Oral Tradition, which how
infallible soever it may be in Divinity, is not so in Law.

But to let all this pass, and to allow these Reasons to be very good; for I
will no more dispute any Reasons, which are attributed to the Judges, than I
will dispute their Resolutions; yet the question still remains, Whether these
Reasons are exactly the same with what the Divines of the Church of England
have formerly taught? This he asserts, and this, I hope, I may examine without
any offense; for it is no Condemnation of their Reasons, though I should say,
that they were never used by Divines. Now a Reason has a necessary Relation to
the Conclusion, or to that which is to be proved by it; for though a hundred men
should say the same thing, and draw a hundred several Conclusions from it, you
cannot say, that their Reason is the same, because their Conclusions are not
the same; for those only reason alike, who from the same Premises draw the same
Conclusion: so that though every one of these Propositions, which are here said
to be the Judges Reasons, had been asserted a hundred times over by the Divines
of the Church of England, yet if they did not draw the same Conclusion from
them, which the Reverend Judges have done, they cannot be said to be the same
Reasons; and whether they have done that, or not, may be learned from what has
been already said.

And yet in truth, I cannot tell whether the Premises be the same or not; for
they are set down in such loose, and general terms in this Paper, as admit of
very different Senses; and in which Sense they are understood by the Reverend
Judges, is not said. And therefore I shall show you in what Sense these
Propositions have been owned by the Divines of the Church of England, and then
those who know the Judges sense of them, will easily see where they agree, and
where they differ.

1. That the Kings of England are Sovereign Princes.

This is universally owned by the Divines of the Church of England; but then
they make some difference between Sovereign Princes, not with respect to the
fullness of Power, for they have all the Rights of Sovereignty, but with respect
to the Exercise of this Sovereign Power: for some Princes are under no
Restraints and Limitations, but only the Laws of God and Nature: they can make
what Laws they please, repeal them when they please, dispense with them as they
please, without the consent of any but themselves: Other Sovereign Princes,
though they have all Sovereign Power, and therefore are irresistible and
unaccountable to any but God; yet the Exercise of their Power is by their own
consent directed and regulated by Laws, that they can neither make, nor
abrogate Laws, but by the Consent of their Nobles and Commons assembled in
Parliament; and therefore though they never can do any thing to forfeit their
Power, yet they may do that, which is illegal; and how far the legal Exercise
of such a Sovereign Power extends, must be known by the particular Laws and
Constitutions of their several Kingdoms, not from the unlimited notions of
Sovereign Power, and Sovereign Will and Pleasure: And the Divines of the Church
of England have generally looked upon the Kingdom of England, as such a
limited Monarchy; and if they have been mistaken in it, I hope it is a
pardonable mistake, because it has been so general.

2. That the Laws of England are the Kings Laws.

This also is universally acknowledged, and the reason assigned for it by the
Learned Doctor Sanderson; Sanders. Praelectio septima de Legum humanarum causa
efficiente. Quin and in jure nostro, and in quotidianis processibus juridicis
in foro contentioso ex solenni formula Regi^ Leges di^ solent (the King's Laws)
non aliam ob causam, ut nos docuerunt juris nostri periti, quam quod Reges
Angliae sint fons justiti^ and Legum: and legibus ipsis ut pro legibus
habeantur vim omnem imponendi habeant concessam sibi a Deo (...), potestatem.
because, as the Lawyers teach, the Kings of England are the Fountain of
Justice and Laws, and have alone that Sovereign Authority, that can give the
Force and Virtue of Laws to the Laws themselves. For though, as he observes,
there is something necessary to prepare the matter for Laws, as the consent and
advice of Parliament, yet it is the consent of the King only, which gives them
the Form and Obligation of Laws: So that they are the Kings Laws, because that
it is his Authority that makes them Laws; but when they are made Laws by the
King, they become the Laws of the Land, the Rule of his own Government, and his
Subjects Obedience.

3. That therefore it is an incident inseparable Prerogative in the Kings of
England, as in all other Sovereign Princes, to dispense with penal Laws in
particular cases, and upon particular necessary Reasons.

It is also asserted by the Divines of the Church of England, That the King may
pardon what Crimes he pleases, and in some cases, upon great and urgent
necessities, may dispense with some Laws for a greater public Good, or for the
Relief of some particular Persons, where the Law appears too hard and rigorous,
while the general Intention and Vigor of the Law is secured: For as they urge,
the Imperfection of all humane Laws requires such an Authority as this to
supply their defects. But the therefore I do not so well understand, for I find
none of them resolve this dispensing Power into the Laws, being the Kings Laws,
which indeed will prove a Power of dispensing with all Laws where he pleases;
for all Laws, as well as penal Laws, are the Kings Laws. Nor do I find any of
them say, that this dispensing Power is equal in all Sovereign Princes. For
they generally make some difference between absolute and limited Sovereigns;
that is, the Exercise of whose Power is bounded by Laws of their own making:
the first sort, who can make and abrogate Laws at their own pleasure, may
certainly dispense with them also, when they see fit; whether those, who can
neither make nor abrogate Laws, without the consent of their People, can
dispense with what Laws they please, is a question, which I find no where
debated among them, and therefore cannot give their opinion in it.

4. That of these Reasons and these Necessities the King himself is Sole Judge.

This I do not find any of our Divines meddle with, though I think the Case is
very plain; every Man judges for himself, and will do so; and therefore a
Sovereign Prince, who has no Superior, will finally judge for himself, and no
man can call him to an account for it, no more than they can resist him, though
he should judge amiss, and exercise an illegal Power: But this does not alter
the case, nor make that legal, which in it self is illegal; he is concerned to
judge right, and exercise no Authority, but what he may, because there is a
Superior Judge even of Sovereign Princes; and then, which is consequent upon
all.

5. That this is not a trust, vested in, or granted to the King by the People,
but is the ancient remains of the Sovereign Power, and Prerogatives of the
Kings of England, which never yet was taken from them, nor can be.

This also is universally owned by the Divines of the Church of England, that
the Kings of England, receive no power or Authority from the People; for all
Sovereign Power comes from God, and the Crown of England, is not Elective but
Hereditary: Nay, they own, that no Essential branch of Sovereign Power, can be
taken away from a Sovereign Prince: the only question is, whether the exercise
of Sovereign Power, can be regulated and limited by Laws of the Kings own
making? and this those who talk of a limited Monarchy, must own: for there can
be no limited Monarchy, if the exercise of Sovereign Power cannot be bounded by
Laws. Thus I have shown, as well as I can learn, what the Sense of the Divines
of the Church of England is in these Points; how far they agree with the Judges
reasons, if they be theirs, I cannot tell, because I know not in what Sense
they understood them.

As for his application of all this, to the case of Liberty of Conscience, I
have nothing at all to say to it: for since the King has declared his pleasure
in it, I will not dispute against it: I am not without hope, that Liberty of
Conscience, will not do the Church of England so much hurt, as her Adversaries
wish, nor the Church of Rome, so much good as they expected: for though
Fanaticism is a pleasing delusion, Popery is not popular in this age; and
therefore it is not mere showing, that will make Converts; and I believe
Liberty of Conscience it self, at this time, will not drive any Sober Dissenter
the farther from Church.

And I have more hope of Gods Protection, because we are upbraided, as we are
by this Writer, with our very hope and confidence in the Divine Providence; for
who ever reads it, can think it nothing less, besides the knavery of the
Quotation.

Doctor Hicks, in answer to that Objection against the Doctrine of Passive
Obedience, Jovian p. 263.
Where then is our security? How can we be safe from the oppression of our
Sovereign, if we may not be allowed to resist? Among other things tells his
Readers, Page 265.
that there neither is, nor can be any absolute security, either for the
Sovereign against the Subjects, or for the Subjects against the Sovereign, in
any Government: and therefore in the second place, it may be a sufficient
answer to the question, to show, that we have all the security against the
King, that the King has against us; even all the security, that any people in
the World ever had, have or ought to have; and he instances in the Providence
of God, in the Conscience, and Honor of the King, and in the Laws of the
Realm, to which every man, be he never so great, is obnoxious, besides the
Prince himself. This was all very much to the Doctors purpose, it being all the
Security we can have, that our Prince will not oppress us, which is not
absolute security neither. But what does this signify to Liberty of
Conscience? how does this secure the Church of England if all her Enemies be
let loose upon her?

But this Writer picking out two or three sayings from what the Doctor said of
the Divine Providence, without any regard to the series of the Argument,
concludes it with these words in Capital Letters. So that they have all the
security that any People in the world ever had, have, or ought to have. As if
the Doctor had taught, that no People in the World ever had, or ought to have,
any other security against the Oppression of a Sovereign Prince, but only the
Providence and Protection of God; whereas he applies this not only to the
Providence of God, but To the Conscience and Honor of the King, and the
security of Laws: The Providence of God indeed has the overruling determination
of all things, but ordinary Providence works by means, and we have no reason to
expect Miracles now; and therefore the Providence of God does not make other
securities needless.

The Doctor tells us, Page 267.
As the Princes best security against the People, is the watchful Providence of
God; so the same watchful Providence is the Peoples best security against the
Prince: So that the Providence of God is an equal security to Prince and People
against each other: But how would any Prince look upon such a trifler, who
should tell him, Sir, all the security you have, or possibly can have against
your Subjects, is only the Providence and Protection of God, and therefore you
may save Money, and disband your Guards and Armies. To persuade Men to part
with all other securities, and to venture upon the most destructive Methods, in
confidence of the divine Protection, is like the Devils Temptation to Christ,
to cast himself down from the Pinnacle of the Temple; for it is written, he
shall give his Angels charge concerning thee, and in their hands they shall
bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone, 4. Mat. 6. I
believe both Prince and People desire all the security they can, and do not
think it reasonable to part with one good security, because they have another.
We have the Kings Word, his Conscience, his Honor, and his Laws, and thank God
for all, and implore the Protection of his Providence, without which all other
Securities are nothing; and next to the Providence of God, Laws are the best
security, because they are the Foundation of Conscience and Honor too, and of
all promises to govern by Laws; for Conscience respects Laws, and where there
is no Law in the the case, Conscience is not concerned and can hinder nothing;
and to be sure the Honor of a Prince, as well as Conscience, is less
concerned, when it is under no restraint of Laws.

He concludes this Pamphlet with some few Authorities for Liberty of
Conscience; I shall not now examine how pertinent they are, for I will give no
other Answer but this; when he has answered all the Presbyterian Arguments
against Toleration, but especially that Book called Tolleration discus'd, and
the Arguments of Doctor Parker, now the Right Reverend Bishop of Oxford in his
Ecclesiastical Policy: When he can prove, that Liberty of Conscience is the
Doctrine and Practice of the Church of Rome, and the standing Rule of the
Inquisition, then I will consider further on this Argument. In the mean time,
Sir I am,

Your most Obedient Servant.

FINIS.
Books lately printed for Richard Chiswell.
A Discourse concerning the Necessity of Reformation, with respect to the
Errors and Corruptions of the Church of Rome. Quarto. First and Second Parts. A
Discourse concerning the Celebration of Divine Service in an Unknown Tongue.
Quarto. A Papist not Misrepresented by Protestants. Quarto. An Exposition of
the Doctrine of the Church of England, in the several Articles proposed by the
late BISHOP of CONDOM, [in his Exposition of the Doctrine of the Catholic
Church.] Quarto. A Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the CHVRCH of
ENGLAND, against the EXCEPTIONS of Monsieur de MEAVX, late Bishop of Condom,
and his VINDICATOR. Quarto. An Answer to THREE PAPERS lately printed,
concerning the Authority of the Catholic Church in Matters of Faith, and the
Reformation of the Church of England. Quarto. A Vindication of the Answer to
SOME LATE PAPERS concerning the Unity and Authority of the Catholic Church,
and Reformation of the Church of England. Quarto. An Historical Treatise
written by an AUTHOR of the Communion of the CHVRCH of ROME, touching
TRANSVBSTANTIATION. Wherein is made appear, That according to the Principles of
THAT CHVRCH, This Doctrine cannot be an Article of Faith. Quarto A CATECHISM
explaining the Doctrine and Practices of the Church of Rome; with an Answer
thereunto. By a Protestant of the Church of England. 8vo. The Law-Christian's
Obligations to read the Holy Scriptures. Quarto. The Plain Man's Reply to the
Catholic Missionaries. 24o. The Protestant's Companion: Or an Impartial
Survey, and Comparison of the Protestant Religion as by Law established, with
the main Doctrines of Popery. Wherein is shown, that Popery is contrary to
Scripture. Primitive Fathers and Councils; and that proved from Holy Writ, the
Writings (...) the Ancient Fathers, for several hundred Years, and the
Confession of the most Learned Papists themselves. Quarto. A Discourse of the
Holy Eucharist, in the two great points of the Real Presence and the Adoration
of the Host. In Answer to the Two Discourses lately printed at Oxford on this
Subject. To which is prefixed a large Historical Preface relating to the same
Argument. Quarto. The Pillar and Ground of Truth. A Treatise showing that the
Roman Church falsely claims to be That Church, and the Pillar of That Truth,
mentioned by S. Paul in his First Epistle to Timothy, Chap. III Verse. 15.
Quarto. A Brief Discourse concerning the Notes of the Church, with some
reflections on Cardinal Bell rmin's Fifteen Notes. Quarto. whereof Ten are
extant. The rest will be Published in their order. A Defense of the Confuter of
Bellarmin's Second Note of the Church [ Antiquity] against the Cavills of the
A^viser. Quarto. The Peoples Right to read the Holy Scriptures asserted. In
Answer to the 6th, 7th, 8th, 9th and 10th Chapters of the [ Popish Representer,
Second Part]. Two Discourses: Of Purgatory and Prayers for the Dead. Quarto. A
Short Summ^ry of the Principal Controversies between the Church of England, and
the Church of Rome. Being a Vindication of several Protestant Doctrines, in
Answer to a late Pamphlet entitled [ Protestancy destitute of
Scripture-Proofs].

