AN ACCOUNT OF THE Present, Miserable, State of Affairs IN IRELAND. AS ALSO, A
Relation of a Late Bloody Fight between the Papists and Protestants in that
Kingdom: With the Particular Number, of the Protestants and Irish Papists that
were Slain. Together, With A True Narrative of the Late K. James's Entry in
Dublin; and of the Three several Proclamations Issued by Him there.
Licensed, According to Order. 1689.
I Have not omitted to give a Weekly Account of the present State of Affairs
here, but I fear a Miscarriage in the Post, or some other way, may prevent
their coming to your Hands, by Reason of these distracted Times. The Pac^^ets
have been stopped; no less than Ten came in the ^^^st time together; there being
as many now due. They, when ever they come, are carried to the Lord
^hancellours, where they are all viewed and opened, ^^d such as are not liked,
committed to the Flames. There is no public News Letter, nor Gazette, suffe^d
to be in any Coffee-House, only the Dublin Ga^^tte, which is a Legend of their
own Composition. All ^^ings here are in a confused distracted Condition; since
^e were disarmed, very few Shops opened, Trading ^^ire decayed, no Money
stirring, the People daily ^^ocking to the Isle of Man for Sanctuary, amongst
which number, I thought to have made a shift for one: ^ut the Late King coming
for Ireland, and being now Dublin, where he arrived from Kinsale, on the 24th.
(...) March, gave us some Hopes, it would abate the ^uelty of the enraged Tyr
-- l.

Upon this hopes of Protection, I think to stay a little ^^^ger, The worst we
fear is, that they will impose ^^ch Oaths upon us as will not digest with some
tender consciences, or that we shall be exposed to the ^orders of the Soldiers
to Plunder us, which they ^^ten threaten; Nay we fear a Massacre, if by a
Speedy ^^pply from England, or Some Extraordinary Providence be not timely
prevented. They may do with us that they please, for we are at their Mercy.

Since the Late King came here, he has set out three ^roclamations. 1. For the
Advancing of Coin for ^^e better payment of the Army. 2. For Calling me his
Subjects of Ireland, to Remain upon the Pre^ses, otherwise their Estates to be
Sequestered, for Caring on the War. 3. For Calling a Parliament, which to Sit
the 7th. of May. In the mean time, all Stratagems are put in Practice, for the
Reducing the Rebels (as they call them) in the North, who if they do not lay
down their Arms in a short time, are to be Sacrificed, Man, Woman, and Child.
Yet, though the Warlike Roman has the Name of the Soldier, the Subtle Britain
out-does him in Policy. The Lord Kingston with a party of 1500 Horse, and 3000
Foot, having lately bawk'd a Body of 14000, who were in search of him. He first
got his Men over the Black-Water in small Boats, which he sunk as soon as he
Landed, then coming to a Pass, he Marched over his Men, where, when he had them
safe over, he burnt the Bridge, by which means he got safe into Londonderry,
while the Enemy were left destitute of all means to pursue him.

A like Stratagem happened at Colraine, against which the Irish with a Numerous
Party had laid a formal Seige; The Beseig'd made two Resolute Sallys which so
galled the Enemy, that they Resolved the 3d time to push at all.

The Third Sally is made, and further then before, where pretending to run they
made toward the Garrison; the deluded Foe with much Fury pursues to the Gates,
where the Protestants, opening to the Right, and Left upon the Signal given,
they Fired six Pieces of Concealed Cannon, which made such Slaughter amongst
the Poor Irish, that it stopped their Carreer for that time, the Rest being blown
up in a Mine to the Number of about 2 or 3000. The Protestants are yet
Considerably strong in the North, having Entrenched themselves in; in
Expectation of a Battle.

Tyrconnel is going down with a Powerful Army to Reduce them, which when he has
done, he threatens to Invade Scotland; Nay further if not timely prevented; But
one 20000 out of England would spoil his Design, and soon under God
re-establish the Peace of this Distracted Kingdom.


