THE ANTI-PROJECTOR OR The History of the Fen Project.
It Is ausual question, Whether drayning be good for the Common wealth.

Answ. 1. There are two kinds of legal drayning. The one is by the ancient
Commissions of Sewers, according to the 23 H. 8. where the Commissioners of
Sewers and Jurors are to be of the same County where the land ly^th; who once
or twice every year, if occasion required, ought to view the wants of scowring
the old Drains, and to return the defaulters to the Commissioners, who used to
ascertain their Amerciaments.

The second is according to a Law made in the 43 Eliz. whereby the major part
of the owner, and Commonners of any Township may agree with any person or
Corporation for a certain sum of money under their hands and seals indented,
for the drayning of such lands, as they find hurtfully surrounded. This is
also Legal and good for the Commonwealth, because it is with their free
consents.

It may be objected, Why has not the Country Drayned themselves all this while?

The Countries have been always able and willing; but for these fifty years or
thereabouts their legal Commissioners, according to the 23 of H. 8. have been
obstructed by powerful undertakers, Courtiers, Lord-keepers, Atturnies-General,
and Projectors, and dissolutions, and intervals of Parliament: The which Law if
it had been constantly put in execution, without these gross interruptions,
would have done the work in most Towns where need required within the supposed
Level. For without doubt the stopping of the old Draynes is the cause of all
their new mischiefs.

Illegal Drayning.
All the illegal undertakers have pretended they had the consents of the
Countries to be drayned by them, which always has been the ground of their
cheat from the beginning. (viZ.)

The first notorious undertaker was the Earl of Lincoln, in Queen Elizabeth's
days. His covetous Lordship by bribes to some Courtiers, and misinformation
by pretending what a glorious work drayning would be to the Public, and that
he had the consent of the Country which indeed were but an inconsiderable party
of his own faction) procured a Pattent or Commission for the drayning of the
Fens But his private ends were to drain his own surrounded foul lands at the
Public charges; and he so packed his Commissioners, by making them Judges and
Parties, that they made a Level and took away the poor Country-mens lands
(which were never drowned, or bettered by overflowing) for melioration.

The Queen being informed how her good Subjects were abused, and that the said
Commission was contrary to the Law of Sewers, (viz.) 23. H. 8. She thereupon
made that just and equitable Law, so consonant to nature and reason, for the
most strict preservation of propriety, called, The Statute of Improvement in
the forty third year of her reign. Which Law prescribes the Rule to
undertaking, or contracting. viz. First there must be fairly and freely
obtained the consents of the major part of the owners and Commoners under their
hands and seals indented So that the Commissioners of Sewers have nothing to do
with the matter and manner of undertaking. Neither is a Commissioner of Sewers
capable to be in undertaker, for then he should be both Judge and Party, and so
to contract with himself which were absurd.

Primo Jacobi, Sir Miles Sandys having purchased some hurtfully surrounded
lands; to drain himself though to the drowning of his neighbors (by bribes to
Courtiers procured a Commission to drain the Fens, and got himself and his
participants to be made Commissioners, and consequently judges and Parties.
Then they made a Level, and brought in those Towns of Cambridge shire, on the
South Side the River Grant to be part of the Level, or hurtfully surrounded
grounds, which words are convertible; and they contracted with themselves, and
gave to themselves one third part of those lands for draining and melioration,
most part of which lands being in truth dry grounds, or bettered by
overflowing, or at least able to drain themselves, by clensing the old Sewers,
had not the Legal Commissions of Sewers been obstructed by these undertakers.

This Project was wittily discovered to King James in the beginning of his
reign; for one told the King he should hear a Cow speak, which the King
wondered at, and was persuaded to go to his Stables at Theobalds, where the Cow
was covered all over. The King commanded the Company to withdraw; and uncovered
the Cow, and upon the horns, there was a large Parchment rolled up, and all the
undertakers fallacies discovered therein. The King enjoined secrecy, and in
full Parliament spoke against it in these words; It is just the same Case, my
Lords, as though a pack of Thieves should give me 20000. l. to give them a
Patent under my broad seal to rob my loyal Subjects of 200000 l. by the which I
should perjure my self, and become a Thief and Tyrant. And thereupon it was
thrown out for a Project. Some of the undertakers friends pressed earnestly
that the Countries might bear their charges, Sir Edward Cook replied, Let those
pay them that set them on work.

19. Jacobi. The King himself turned undertaker, contrary to his speech in
Parliament, and contrary to the Acts made 43 Eliz. and the fourth and seventh
of his Reign. The occasion the King brake that Parliament, was for his
favorites sake, whose brother (Sir Edward Villiers) was questioned for a
Monopolist.

Observe this undertaking of 19 Jacobi was the foundation of Francis E. of
Bedfords undertaking, as it appears in their Lyn Law, where the Bribe given to
the King is nearly couched, which was 12000 acres of our lands.

After King Charles had condemned Loan money by the Petition of Right, and had
often broke his own Law, then the Projectors swarmed again, for they knew the
King was irreconcilable to Parliaments, and all things were carried with a high
hand, and those most renowned udges chief justice Crew, and chief Baron Walter,
were disgraced, and the Judges Patents were altered, and those words, Quam diu
se been gesserit expunged, and those Prerogative words inserted, Ad been
placitum Domini Regis.

This was a fit season to Monopolize, and in this interval of Parliaments,
Franci^ Earl of Bedford, the Lord Treasurer Weston, the Earl of Dorset, the
Earl of ^insey and his son, the Lord Mowbray, Lord Gorge, Sir Edward Heron, Sir
John Brook, Sir David Coningham, Mr. Latch, Sir John Munson, Sir Philbert
Vernatt, with many more of the Kings Party turned undertakers, and gave bribes
to the King, Queen, and Lords of the Council, Secretaries, Attournyes General,
and Courtiers, and procured illegal Commissions, and made themselves Judges and
Parties, and gave the peoples lands to themselves, as Commissioners and
undertakers, which are inconsistent for the reasons premised.

At Kings-Lyn, 6 Caroli. They pretended they had the Major part of the Owners
and Commoners consents, which if they can show under our hands and seals
according to the 43 Eliz. we are content they shall enjoy our lands: we are
ready to join Issue with them upon that point, and so are those of the Isle of
Axom against Mr. Gibbons.

Likewise those which oppose the Earl of Linsey, Sir Anthony Thomas, Sir John
Murson, Sir Cornelius Vermooden, and others, are ready to prove all their
undertakings have been against the Countries Consents, and that they have been
both Commissioners, and undertakers, Judges and Parties, which is against the
Law of God, Nature, and common Reason.

By the same reason these packed Commissioners being Judges and Parties, made
300000 acres the Level, (very much of which land is dry, or bettered by
overflowing) they may make England the Level, England to be surrounded, and
take one third this year for drayning, and another third the next for
melioration, and the third take all by their Prerogative.

The six Counties Petitioned King Charles at Newmarket against Lyn Law, which
was condemned at a Session of Sewers held at Huntington, 14 Car. Before this
the people were Pursuvanted, imprisoned by Council Table warrants, and their
Hay taken off their C^res, and the six Counties were most grievously oppressed.

Afterward the King turned undertaker himself, and so our oppression
continued, for the Comissioners were still Judges and Parties, and took away
our lands against our consents.

In the beginning of the last Parliament when Francis Earl of Bedford was mad^
Lord Treasurer, then by his power and faction in the Lords House, a Bill was
exhibited to the Parliament by some of the undertakers for drayning, against
the peoples consents, but that bill dyed with him.

Afterward when William Earl of Bedford was made General of the Parliaments
Horse, there was a bill for drayning committed; there was a Committee of 30 or
40. and they sat in the Court of Exchequer, and Mr. Pelham had the Chair. The
Earl was there present himself, and some Parliament men which were the said
Earls participants were very active, and sat at the Committee as Judges, and
Parties. Upon a long debate that bill was overthrown.

About two years after (when William Earl of Bedford, and Mr. Henly returned
from Oxford) there was a short Ordinance for drayning committed. The Committee
sat in the Star Chamber and the six Counties were summoned, and there was an
extraordinary appearance against the undertakers; Mr. Scowen had the Chair, and
the people cried out, no Mr. Scowen, for he was Francis Earl of Bedford's
Solicitor. This Committee was furnished with too many undertakers of Parliment
men. There were at least twelve several Chairmen of that Committee, and most of
them biased for the undertakers, for no witnesses were fairly examined for the
six Counties, but leading Interrogatories obtruded upon them: not one Town of
ten were examined at all, when the six Counties attended there were commonly
two or three undertakers who adjourned the Committee in Westminster Hall on
purpose to vex and tire the people; when the people had spent their money and
were gone out or town, then the Committee sat in one corner or another, so
that their sollicitors were fain to watch them. The Committee Men were often
feasted by the undertakers, and our lands were offered to be sold at two years
value to Parliament men, which was often complained of to the Parliament by
some worthy Patriots. This great (not good bargain) increased very much their
faction: yet providence (which has done wonders) blafted this Ordinance that
it withered away to nothing.

About four years since there was a new Act set on foot, and the six Counties
were surprised, for they were not, as formerly, so much as summoned. This Act
was a child of darkness, for it could not endure the light. We are informed the
Chairman ushered in this Act, with a Petition like unto that at Kings-Lyn, as
though it proceeded from the Major part of the owners, and Commoners, but it
was a mere imposture of the undertakers faction, and not one of a hundred.

The House was very thin when this Act was passed, about 43. and some of them
were parties interressed, and the undertakers of all the Levels, like birds of
a feather flocked together and watched their oppertunity when many of the
uninteressed Parliament Men were absent: If the truth were known there was no
House, because there was an Order, That no Parliament man being a participant,
should be Judge and Party in his own Cause.

For the Act it self, it is a formidable monster. The Title and Preamble is
like a Sarazens head and neck, the Body is proportionable, and worse then that,
and the conclusion worst of all. We shall make it appear to be against the Law
of God, nature, reason and common sense: For first, They have enacted parties
interessed to be Judges. Secondly, they have enacted impossibilities, as wet to
be dry, and dry wet (viz.) that to be the Level which is not the Level: they
may as well enact white to be black, and black white. Thirdly, This Act
destroys Propriety. Fourthly, the Earl of Bedfords Pan Thorney Abbey is exempted
from draining; when dry land, and such as is bettered by overflowing, must
contribute. Fifthly, they have destroyed a chief branch of the Common Law, in
depriving the people of their Juries of the neighborhood. Sixthly, they have
enacted a most intolerable grievance in impowring the Commissioners to make
the people dance attendance a hundred miles from their homes every seventh day
after the Term, to attend them for four or five hours, to spend their moneys,
and have no agrievance redressed, sometimes no Committee appearing, whereas
anciently according to Law and equity; for the ease of the six Counties, This
Level was seven Levels, and each Level had their several Commissioners and
Jurors, and acted only in their proper Countries. We shall discover many more
insufferable grievances, if the Supreme Authority please to hear us by
witnesses upon Oath. And we hope their Honors in their wisdoms will take care
we shall not be obstructed by Judges and Parties, and biassed Chairmen, as
formerly we have been.

The Undertakers have had two Adjudications which they much boast of. The first
was when many thousand acres were actually drowned, occasioned by land-flouds,
incident to River-Medows; yet contrary to occular demonstration, they were
adjudged drained.

The other was in the extremity of the drought, when it was impossible to judge
what land was drained, and what not. And they have adjudged thousands of acres
drained, which were never drowned, and thousands drowned which are bettered by
overflowing in the nature of River-Meadows.

The people are put out of possession of their lands without hearing one
witness upon oath on their parts, which is against the fundamental Law of the
Land, and the great Charter of Liberty and property.

The Lincolneshier men in the Isle of Axom, had the benefit of the Law against
Mr. Gibbons, and they have a verdict against him, Sr. Edward Barkham, Captain
Hall and Mr. Waldren were left to the Law by the Parliament, and recovered
against the Undertakers. But we of the six Counties have been so obstructed in
the E. of Bedfords Level by the Undertakers faction, that we are barred the Law
by this Act of Parliament. But we hope the Supreme Authority will remove this
block out of the way, and leave us to the Law, as other freeborn people of
this Nation are.

In the Parliaments first grand Remonstrance 1641. this levelling and
destroying of propriety was voted, An injustice, oppression, violence, project
and grievance. And in more express words, thus, Large quantities of Commons and
Severals have been taken from the Subject by the color of the Statute of
Improvement, and by abuse of the Commission of Sewers, without their consents
and against it. So the Undertakers were the true Levellers, for they created
the equivocal word Level.

Compare these Votes with the late Act for Draining, and you may observe most
gross contradictions, for iniquity viz) injustice, oppression violence, project
and grievance are established by a Law, which is not to be wondered at, because
it proceeded from the barren womb of self-interest; but the fertile womb of the
public (which is self-denial) will help it in good time.

We believe the Undertakers will be endeavoring to sell our Lands again (as
formerly they were) at two years value to gain a new faction; but we are
confident of better things, and that at last their bribing dishonest
proceedings, and their project will be destroyed together.

The E. of Bedford and his participants Case is the same with those
fore-recited Cases of the E. of Lincoln, and Sir Mi^es Sandys, both pretending
the public, but intending only their private ends, and gross partiality (if
it be dived into) will be found in the bottom of it. For the E. of Bedfords
large Manor of Thorney Abbey, consisting of 20000 acres of hurtfully surrounded
Lands must be partly drained, and partly meliorated at the Countries charge;
and 20 Towns must be pejorated by the draining the Earls foul Town. And dry
lands, and such lands as are bettered by overflowing, must contribute to drain
the E. of Bedfords lands, and the Earls really hurtfully surrounded lands are
not to be contributory (by the said Act) to draining.

In all the undertakings (which are the same Cases Mutatis Mutandis) there are
300000 people concerned in it, which have furnished the Parliament with many
thousand men, horses, and vast sums of money, besides the prayers of a numerous
godly precious people. And those few undertakers, upon this account only, have
most of them been most malicious enemies against the Parliament; for some of
them had like to have slain the Lord Fairfax in the Isle of Axom who was
rescued by the anti undertakers. He that will forsake old friends, and trust to
reconciled enemies, rans a great hazard, or rather will be certainly ruined.
Can a Blackmore change his skin?

We hope that the four Undertakers nominated in the Act, shall he examined upon
Oath, who are their participants; for we have just cause of jealousy, many of
the Commissioners are judges and parties.

If any of the Commissioner in this Act are participants in another Level, the
grievance is the same; for our fellow sufferers in the Earl of Linseyls Level,
were much obstructed by a participant in the Earl of Bedfords Level, who was
sometime Chairman for S. William Killegrew in the Earl of Linseys Level, and
all the participants of all the Levels, and their allies and friends join and
combine together against the poor Country.

The Undertaker talk of great matters that will (...) to the Commonwealth (...)
Rape; I am sure they have committed a Rape upon the Republique, in ravishing
the good People of this Nation (by their Tyranny and Oppression) out of their
Properties and Liberties. I hope we shall be left at liberty to make choice of
our own undertakers, if need require, according to the 43 Elizab. And that the
Parliaments faithful Friends, shall not be the Earl of Bedford's and Master
Henley's Wards any longer. Is it probable strangers will do us more good, and
study our profit more then we will do our own? Certainly we know how to drain
our selves better then they, (might we have the benefit of the good Laws of the
Land) and are better able.

As the Courtiers thought (after the Parliament was dissolved in 3 Car. and the
Petition of Right was broken as soon as it was made they were cock-sure to
perpetuate their Tyranny, and that they should never have been questioned; so
the undertakers and their faction in Parliament had the same thoughts (which is
demonstrable by their actions) and are come by Divine Providence to the same
end.

As the over flowing corruptions of the undertakers faction (being Judges and
Parties) did hurtfully surround the Parliament: So certainly it was good for
the Commonwealth they should be drayned and meliorated, and it is according to
the Statute of Improvement or Undertaking viz. the 43 Elizab. For I am sure the
major part of the Owners and Commoners of the Earl of Bedford's Level, will
consent unto it under their Hands and Seals Indented.

Objection, It may by objected, The Earl of Bedford 's Draynes are the best
Draynes, and have done the work, as some of the Commissioners have adjudged.

Answer, We answer, That by the new Draynes, there is very little good done,
but by drayning the barren North, and drowning the rich South for private ends;
as will experimentally appear at the first Floods which shall break out, which
(probably) was the cause of the precipitation of the adjudication.

But the old and Legal way of drayning and undertaking (viz.) by the 23 Henr.
8, and 43 Elizab. are the best for the Commonwealth, because the old Draynes
have the greatest descents, and are the natural sinks and vent of the Fens.

If a Man's fundament were stopped, though a hundred issues were made in the
same body, the mass of blood would be corrupted, and the body would break out
in Botches and Boyles. So stop up the old Sewers the Quagmires will generally
increase on the South Side though much good may be done on the North-side to
some particular Towns, as Thorncy, and Wittlesey, which drowns the Soake of
Peterborow consisting of twenty Towns.

Objection, The Earl say they has made a rich Improvement out of the great
Level which was before of little or no value. Now it bears Rape, and Cole-seed
etc.

Answ The undertakers have always vilified the Fens, and have misinformed
many Parliament men, that all the Fens is a mere quagmire, and that it is a
level hurtfully surrounded, and of little or no value: but those which live in
the Fens, and are neighbors to it, know the contrary.

For first the Fens breed infinite number of serviceable horses, mares, and
colts, which till our land, and furnish our neighbors.

Secondly we breed and feed great store of young cattle, and we keep great
dayeries, which afford great store of butter and cheese to victual the Navy,
and multitude, of heyfers, and Scots and Irish cattle have been fatted on the
Fens, which afford hides, and tallow.

Thirdly, we mow off our Fens fodder, which feeds our cowes in winter, which
being housed, we gather such quantities of compost and dung, that it enriches
our pastures and corn ground, half in half, whereby we have the richest and
certainest corn land in England, especially for wheat and barley, wherewith by
Sea) we do, and can if our navigable rivers be not made unserviceable by the
undertakers pernicious new ditches) abundantly furnish London and the Northern
parts in their necessities. All which fore-recited commodities make our Fens
far more profitable to the owners, lying as they are for grass, then if they
were sown with corn, rape, or cole-seed.

Fourthly, we keep great flocks of sheep upon the Fens.

Fifthly, our Fens are a great relief, not only to our neighbors the uplanders,
but to remote Countries, which otherwise, some years thousands of catle would
want food.

Sixthly, we have great store of Osier, Reed, and Sedge, which are such
necessaries as the Countries cannot want them for many uses, and sets many poor
on work.

Lastly, we have many thousand Cottagers, which live on our Fens, which
otherwise must go a begging. So that if the undertakers take from us a third
part of our Fens, they destroy not only our pastures and corn ground, but also
our poor, and utterly disable us to relieve them.

What is Cole-seed and Rape, they are but Dutch commodities, and but trash and
trumpery, and pills land, in respect of the fore-recited commodities, which are
the rich Oar of the Commonwealth.

This Project has proved the Philosophers stone, or that accursed thing to the
undertakers, for it has undone most of them that ever meddled with it. The
cause is plain, because it has proved a Grinstone to the faces of thousands of
poor people.

He that oppresses the Poor, reproacheth his Maker.

Prove. 14.31.
FINIS.

