An Answer to the Popes Letter Written to the King of France, wherein he
insinuates that Barbarous Doctrine, That Temporal Dominion is founded upon
Religion: With a Refutation also of the Popes Supremacy.
May it please Your Holiness,
WE of the Reformed Church do in all the Humility that becomes us, return our
Answer to your Letter to the King of France, for it is that which requires our
Answer, and not his.

Your Holiness is pleased with all Expressions of Zeal to List your high
Spiritualities under the prosperous Banner of that King, with no less
confidence of his future progress, than gratulation of his past proceedings.
Now since we are liable to his Irresistible Power, and must be sure to fly
before his Omnipotent Hostility, why should Your Holiness seek to prevent his
victorious Hand, by the hazardous, infamous, and fallible Attempts of Private
Murder, Firing, etc. And since you are pleased to hold the Profession of the
Art of Religion and War in a complication, how could these things happen to us
under that Conjunction? For though the harsh Constitution of the Church may
give them Authority, yet then methinks the Gentleness of Martial Discipline
might a little mitigate the rigor of Religion, for they are evermore forbidden
by the true Principles of War.

But how unreasonably then does Your Holiness charge our Government with
Cruelty? What is it only because our King will not suffer himself to be
murdered by his own Subjects? If they are any way so much yours, as you seem to
own them by your Vindication, why did you not take them to you from amongst the
Heretics? But if they will live here in wealth and prosperity, under the
influence of His Majesty's Protection; if then they will remove that
Protection, they are naturally as well as legally left to destruction. Would
Your Holiness as you are a Temporal Prince take such a Reflection so much as
for common sense?

But it seems, if we will not suffer slaughter and dissolution by Treachery,
the penalty is but to receive it by open War; and we will choose the later
because it is furthest off. And what need we fear that, seeing Men, Women, and
Children are already in the condition of common Soldiers, subject to be put to
death for not being killed?

Your Holiness cannot think we will believe, that he was offensive only to
Heretics by the name of Heretics, for then he had not taken away those Towns
from his Brother of Spain, which he would no doubt have done if they had been
his Father's, as you call your self. But now in requital of Your Holiness's
Reception into this Military Renown, you are pleased to adopt that King into
your Theological Capacity, by imputing unto him a Celestial Knowledge of that
which is not to be found in Divinity nor Reason, namely, That Kingdoms are
founded upon the truth of the Orthodox Faith.

Now the Position is a Paralogism, and not altogether false in terminis; for
though Kingdoms be founded otherwise, yet in some sense Christian Kingdoms may
be said to be so founded, and you do not say, Kingdoms in general are not
otherwise founded. But if that had been the meaning, you had said nothing at
all; therefore I take your intent to be, That the Truth of the Orthodox Faith
has Right of Dominion, or right and just Dominions are founded upon the
Orthodox Faith.

This therefore, besides that there is not one word of Scripture for it, our
Savior totidem verbis disclaims, My kingdom is not of this world, therefore my
Servants do not fight. Besides that he has done the same by notorious
inference; for since Peace of all things was his Legacy, (my Peace, not my
Love, my Justice, my Mercy, my Patience, etc. but My peace I give unto you;)
either this was to the Apostles only, or to the Church in general. If the
first, then Your Holiness is punctually forbidden to take or join your self to
the Sword in any manner, at least Offensive: If the later, (which I rather
think to be intended) then a King being a Member of that Church, though he must
fight to defend his own, and may impugn a professed Enemy, he must not violently
invade the Dominions of others that live quietly by him; for so you will
absolve a Christian King from all Christian Duty, not only of Peace but
Justice, which is most properly exercised in respect of other Princes, for that
the unequal Conversation of a King with his own People is not so capable of the
Evidences of Religious Virtues.

But lest the Index Expurgatorius should have discharged you of this Text, we
will endeavor to prove it by Reason.

If Kingdoms are of right only founded on the Truth of the Orthodox Faith,
then what shall we say of all those Heathen Dominions, that during the History
of the Bible, and ever since, have enjoyed long and flourishing Durations,
under the preservation of excellent Politic Laws, and Principles of Humanity
and Society, to which Dominions not only their own Subjects, but the Orthodox
People of God (if happening under them) were required to yield their Obedience,
(salva religione.)

Shall we part the World, the Flesh, and the Devil? Or shall we deny to give
each its due? Shall they who expect an everlasting Kingdom, (and that for the
sake of doing Justice) not only be guilty of, but profess such Emphatical
Iniquity, as to snatch away from the poor Reprobate World, the contemptible
Boon of a Momentany Dominion? It was a far milder injury than this in Nathan's
Parable, that awakened the indignation of Justice in King David to the severest
Sentence.

Man by the name of Man had Dominion given him over the Earth, and the
Furniture thereof; and after he fell, that is, after he ceased to be Orthodox,
retained yet still by the name of Man the Right of Dominion. Now this natural
Dominion must needs import that Politic Dominion about which we contend,
because without that it is impossible to enjoy this, as every man's Experience
and Observation must needs suggest.

But if Dominion be its right, then till that is obtained Fighting for it is
its right. Now, is this right of Fighting understood as an evil or a good to
those of the Orthodox Faith? I suppose it is not intended by Your Holiness as
an evil; for though the Church must bear, she is not to prepare her Cross. If
then it be understood as a good, then show me the man (except the ambitious
Prince and the mercenary Commander) that does not esteem it the most unhappy
life that is spent in War. War! it is one of God's great Judgments, equivalent
to Plague and Famine; that which all mankind by natural instinct do shun and
dread. And is this the perpetual lot of the Elect by the name of a Right? For
this War, by the nature of the Position, must never have an end till the whole
World be conquered, for the same reason that it must begin. But supposing the
whole World to be conquered, then still as to the generality of men, after that
dear-bought Universality, who will be the better? Man will have but the whole
World, and so he has now.

But again if this be so, then since all the Persuasions do hold themselves
Orthodox; (for no man will profess a Religion, and say it is false.) It is very
likely this Principle will be one Ingredient of all their Religions, and so all
parts of the Universe by a certain Idiosyncrisis of fighting for their own,
will be moving War together; and so we shall affect the World with a universal
principle of Contention, Slaughter, and Destruction, and all the miserable
Concomitants of War; and that not as an accident of its depravation, not as the
issue of its corruption, but as matter and part of the original rectitude of
its constitution, because all this is to be quatenus Truth and Orthodox Faith.
And as it is in the World at large, so will it be with the Factions in every
particular Kingdom: Every one as he thinks himself Orthodox, will also think
himself entitled to Dominion and Property over all the rest. Now for that I
know Your Holiness makes no question but the Truth of the Orthodox Faith is in
the Church of Rome, and consequently the Right of Dominion; when you shall have
conquered all the World, I pray you which of all the 300 Factions among you
shall have it, since but one can be the Orthodox? and Your Holiness can tell if
you are infallible.

As for the putting Saints out of the Temple, if your Authority be not good,
(as I shall show presently) there are no such Saints; then as to the condemning
the Forefathers, if you mean those we commonly call the Fathers, we deny it: We
approve every word of every one, but all that say as you say we deny to be
Fathers. But the question of the Fathers is not rightly taken by some, for they
spoke nothing of any point as if it were in controversy, for it was not then.
If you mean the Popes, then to their and your Authority we say thus: 1. The
whole Difference betwixt you and us depends upon the Authority of the Pope, (at
least that is the grand Controversy.) 2. That Authority depends upon his
Succession to S. Peter. 3. The Virtue of that Succession depends upon three
things in conjunction, viz. S. Peter's being Universal Bishop, his sitting at
Rome in that capacity, and his Authority for both; (for if he sat at Rome, and
were not Universal, you are not Universal; if he were Universal, and sat not
at Rome, you are not his Successor; if he had no Authority, neither have you.)
4. This Authority of the Pope is Matter of Faith, or equivalent to it; (for you
say, To be out of the Church is damnable, and to deny the Popes Authority is to
be out of the Church.) 5. This great Matter of Faith is built upon these three
things, two of which are Matter of Fact, and the other Interpretation of
Scripture. 6. That upon which Matter of Faith depends, ought to be as certain
as the Faith ought to be steadfast: then if those three things are so certain,
show me the Evidence, which I require to be as plain as that whereby we know
Christ was the Messiah; because it is to support a point of Faith, the want of
which you make as dangerous as the want of that.
And now in this case Your Holiness is prevented of the use of your
Archimedes's Engine, (having no where to stand while you use it) viz. The Pope
says so, therefore it is true. For the question is, not whether the Pope say
so, but whether it be true because the Pope says so. So that this must be
previously proved to ground his Credit upon. Do not mistake the Elenchus, the
Dispute is not of S. Peter's being Universal Bishop, or sitting at Rome, nor of
his Authority so to do; but of such a Certainty of these things as Faith
requires. We are not sure that S. Peter was not so, and did not so, and had not
so; but we are sure that we cannot be sure he was so, and did so, and had so:
and so long no man can be required to ascribe this Authority to the Pope. Take
by the way but Bellarmine's first Argument to prove that he was at Rome Bishop
or no Bishop: S. Peter (says he) in his Epistle writes thus, The Church at
Babylon salute you; which Babylon is figuratively Rome: A proper basis to build
Faith upon; I am confident that he himself did not take either this or any
other he uses to be so.

Then as to the Interpretation, it is positively impossible that God could deal
so unreasonably and unmercifully, as to leave that Uncertain, upon the
Certainty whereof the Temporal and Eternal Peace of his Church depends, if all
the true Religion rest upon this question, namely, Whether the Pope be what he
pretends to be, or not? Is it possible that the Scripture, which came on
purpose to teach us Religion, should let us understand nothing of it, but what
we can pick out, as if we were reading a Riddle, or interpreting a Dream or an
Oracle; nay, and must pick out that which by no rule or measure of
Interpretation can be found out? Is God such an Egyptian Task master?

Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my Church, and the gates of
Hell shall not prevail against her. Whatsoever thou bindest in Earth shall be
bound in Heaven. Feed my sheep. Now as we tender our being in the Church, and
consequently our Salvation, we must find in these words all these Institutions,
(and that as certain and conspicuous as Thou shall do no murder.) 1. That S.
Peter was thereby made the greatest of the Apostles. 2. That being so, he was
Bishop of the World. 3. That being so, where ever he sat, that place should
retain that Holiness, that who so ever succeeded in that Seat should be
Universal Bishop. 4. That that Universal Bishop has an Infallible Faculty and
Authority in interpreting Scripture, and dictating the Doctrines of the Church.
5. That he has power over Kings: and several other things.
Now no man can say, that these things do naturally flow from these; and then
though they could (which they cannot) by dint of Syllogism, involved
Reasonings, and Concatenations of Inferences be deduced; yet then they would
not seem to be the things that every one is required to believe, because every
one then is not capable of them.

Perhaps you will object, Every one is bound to believe the matters in the
Athanasian Creed, yet those are not found in Scripture but by Inferences, which
every one is not able to make, neither does every one understand it.

The Case is not the same; for we believe there is a God before we come to the
Athanasian Creed, (and do also naturally suppose great things in that God) and
then from that learn the manner and nature of his Being, which then we have no
reason to disbelieve, unless we know any thing more likely to be true, or any
thing that were likely to make that false; and no man is bound to believe any
more of this than he understands. But that there is a God in general every one
is bound to believe; but now in this case we do not first believe a Pope, and
then come to this dark Analogy, to learn the Nature of his Office. But we come
to this, to learn that there is such a thing as a Pope, (it being all the way
that he is to be proved;) which therefore since you make so necessary, ought to
be depending upon a common Testimony. To conclude then, he that cannot find
Evidence for the Matters of Fact aforesaid, and a certain Rule for this
Interpretation, must not be a Papist; and he that can, deserves to be a Pope.

Your Holiness's As far as is Lawful, ANGLICVS.


