AN APOLOGY AND ADVICE For some of the CLERGY, Who Suffer under FALSE, and
SCANDALOUS REPORTS. Written on the Occasion of the Second Part Of the Rehearsal
Transprosed: IN A LETTER TO A FRIEND: And by Him Published.

LONDON, Printed for A. E. 1674.

AN APOLOGY AND ADVICE For some of the CLERGY Who Suffer under FALSE, and
SCANDALOUS REPORTS.
SIR,
I Have now read the second part of the Rehearsal Transprosed, which you so
earnestly recommend to me in your last: And am very sorry to see that the
difference between those ingenious men is inflamed to this height; and that the
Controversy should be so far run out into matters of personal abuse. I shall
not tell you at this time who I think has the better in the argument; This is
obvious, That M. M. has much the advantage in the Reproaching part. For though
I confidently believe that his Adversary is clear, as to the soul things laid
to his charge by this Author; Yet He is a Clergy man, and it is not enough for
them to be innocent, while there are any who have the ill will to accuse them;
and such there will be, while there are Sects, and Jovial Atheists in the
world. I have nothing to say in particular of the personal matters; only this I
will adventure to observe; That I think you do amiss in conceiving so great a
prejudice against the Author of the E. P. from those uncertain, if not untrue
things, which his heated Antagonist has said of Him. You know it is a great
piece of Injustice to entertain Reports hastily of any man, and especially of
the Ministers of Religion, whom so many take pleasure to defame, either out of
design to disgrace their profession, or to excuse, and extenuate their own
vileness by it. And I entreat you to consider that there may be such a
concurrence of unhappy circumstances upon a Clergyman, that is very virtuous,
and very Innocent, as may render him exceedingly obnoxious in the opinion of
those that have none, or but a slight knowledge of him. I shall recite some of
those circumstances, which I believe may come pretty near the present Case, and
which concern some others (besides this Learned, and Ingenious Gentleman,) for
whom you profess to have affection, and esteem.

First, Then, when a Divine has any different apprehensions from common
Thoughts, though but in Philosophy, and speculation; Yet this alone shall
prepare dislike and unkindness for him in some, who will be apt presently to
judge him a conceited, and fantastic Affector of Novelties, though he be
never so unlike that character; and this prejudice disposes them to receive
with gladness, any report to his disadvantage.

But if he step out of the road in Theological matters, and dare dissent from
the usual systemes in any of the Controversies of Religion: If he contradict
any opinion they have taught, or defend any Article of Truth in a way which
they have not heard; or if these things are but said, or suspected of him; it
shall be enough to render him first a strange man in their thoughts; and after
that, any Monster that the malice of his enemies shall paint Him like.

If ithappen, over and above this, that he falls into public Controversy with
any presumed Orthodox man of note, what ever the Cause be, what ever reason,
and justice he may have on his side, it is odds but he shall receive a blot from
the contest; And though he should write nothing but Demonstrations, and his
adversary nothing but absurdities; Though he shamefully baffle, and confute him
in the judgment of all ingenious, and impartial men; Yet it is all one, The
supposed Orthodox Disputer shall triumph among his common easy Admirers, while
his Antagonist shall be hanged and drawn, unheard and unknown: And whatever the
other affirms of him in Corners, shall spread and sound, and beget him
prejudice, and distastes, though it be never so false, or unlikely.

2. If this Clergyman be one that sets himself with earnest, and successful
zeal to detect and reprove the sins, and follies of any popular Sects of
Religion; If he speak out with courage, and Resolution, and shame their darling
vanities, either from the Press, or from the Pulpit; He then raises upon
himself the most angry Nest of Hornets in the world; and must look to be
persecuted with their noise and stings without mercy, and without end. For if
the most wary and silent of the Conforming Clergy, who offend them not, are
stigmatized by many of them as profane and ignorant men; If they can scarce
escape the imputation of being Drunkards, and debauched persons, and are sure
to be accounted, (at the best) strangers, if not enemies to the Life and power
of Religion, and the Mysteries of the Gospel: What then must be their portion,
who openly, and impartially set themselves to disgrace their beloved phancies?
Certainly there is no man's reputation (be he never so innocent) that can stand
before such and so many enemies as this freedom of necessary and just reproof
will raise upon him: every Word he speaks shall be racked, and every Action he
does shall be canvast, and both examined with all the Criticisme of subtle
malice, till some scandalous matter be extorted from them to furnish out
reproachful stories: And these when they are up, will run, and spread like Fire
in a train of Gunpowder. The enraged Parties are pleased, and tickled at the
heart by them; They never inquire into their truth, or falsehood: It Is
convenient that ill things be said, and believed of those Enemies of Godliness,
(as they account all whom they reckon theirs) And therefore they blow those
lewd Tales about with all the pleasure of Revenge, and all the zeal of
ignorance and ill will: And there are people every where, who are prepared, and
ready to give hearty welcome to any ^oul story of a conforming Minister: For ye
know how every corner of the Land abounds with Enemies of the Church, and all
that adhere unto it: so that they have the wind, and are Masters of fame; and
when they set on it can blast the cle^rest Innocence under Heavens; and set on
it they will, when they are confronted, and exposed by just, and smart
R^prehensions. So that there was scarce ever any man that dealt roundly and
honestly with them, but came away loaded with the dirt of their dung-hills; and
more, or less, infected with the poison of their breath.

3. If this Churchman be wont to reprehend the pretended Wit, and Wits of the
Age, with spirit and smartness, and endeavor to render the Drollers and
Buffoons odious, and contemptible, as they deserve; If he be sharp, and
frequent in reproving and exposing the concomitant Atheism, and vile humor of
deriding Religion and things Sacred; He then draws the Railers, and Jesters
upon his back, who will put a thousand tricks upon him, and persecute him with
their scoffs in all companies, and make him the constant mark of their
malicious sport.

Now You know Sir, what a taking sort of people these are in our times, and how
far this fooling will go with some to render those contemptible in their
esteem, that deserve better thoughts of them. There is much malice in mankind,
which this humor gratifyeth, when it exposes any man's name to scorn and
laughter; especially it is tickled when any of the Clergy are derided: So that
no worth, no virtue, no Accomplishments are sense against this set of men: Yea
the more eminent any of these are, the more subject to such wrongs, and the
more the common Envy makes such abuses spread. For even the Sects that pretend
to the greatest seriousness and gravity of humor are transported with the wit,
that aims at making the Sons of the Church ridiculous, especially when it falls
on those who have been so hardy as to declare against their dear follies, and
fall on them it shall, while there are Buffoons to be hired for that service.

4. If the Minister uses to be close and pungent upon the great Debauchees of
the Age, and endeavors by any more than ordinary earnestness, and power of
reproof to make them despicable, and vile in the eyes and thoughts of all men:

If besides this in general, he chance to incurr the particular ill will and
displeasure of any one, or more of them, (though innocently, and without giving
just ground of offense) He must expect the utmost of their rage. They will toss
his name about in every Alehouse and Tavern; and make Him their constant
subject, and their Song. They will inflame all their company, and acquaintance
against him, and make it a great entertainment of their meetings to raise
odious stories of him, which they will publish in all their neighbourhoods, and
so blacken him, as if he were a Devil, though he be the most innocent person
breathing. They will propagate and improve all the slanders that have been
raised on him by his Fan^tick Adversaries; And they again entertain and spread
all those that are invented by these debauched ones; and so between the one and
the other, they will make him appear as a very vile* and odious person, be he
never so virtuous and unblameable in his conversation.

Thus an innocent man that does nothing but his Duty, may by it draw all the
worst sort of Enemies upon him: And if he be a person free, and open in
speaking of his mind, and not pharisaical and superstitious in his actions
(though never so honest and harmless in them) Such openness, and unaffected
freedom affords matter and occasion to the malice of those that lie in wait for
him; and makes way for the belief of the ill things they injuriously fasten
upon his name. And if to all the rest this be added, That he be a person not
inclined to converse much in common companies, or to make friends by such
Conversations; If he be intimately known but to a few, and only superficially
and by hearsays, to others, the slanderous tales raised upon him shall spread
with so much the less stop, or contradiction. When these unhappy Circumstances
meet in any person, he will certainly be defamed and run down, though he have
the piety of a Saint, and the Innocence of a Chrysome Infant.

And now the usual Scandals that such Enemies endeavor to fasten on the Clergy
are, those of Drinking, and Women. For the first, they ordinarily fix it upon
the merry men, who are of the humor for Company, and common Conversation: But
as for those who seldom or never go into public Houses, nor are any way
disposed to the jollity of the boon-Companions, They have no color nor
occasion to lay the reproach of Drinking upon them: And therefore the Other
must be their Portion. For that is a sort of imputation that will bear upon any
man; and it is such, as one cannot well stir in for his vindication. It Is a
scandal that renders the person most vile among the more sober, and religious,
and affords most matter for the malicious merriment and sport of his profane
and Atheistical Enemies: And therefore if he be a single-man, If he now and
then be in Company with those of the other Sex, and be spoken well of by any of
them: These shall then be ground and matter for the plot; and many Scenes of
scandal and abuse shall continually be made out of it.

And now Sir, if you reflect on the recited particulars, and mind that they
have been the Circumstances of some innocent persons of your acquaintance, and
will but be so just as to consider how many of them concur in the present case,
You will see that you ought not hastily to believe the foul Stories put upon
the Author of the Ecclesiastical Policy, nor the like of any other Clergyman,
that is under such Circumstances as those. And I beseech you to call to mind
how much our Religion obliges us to practice candor, and charity in our
judging one another, and how much we may need it our selves. You know who tells
us that Charity thinks no evil; It suffers long and is kind; is not easily
provoked; rejoices not in Iniquity; viz. It is not willing to hear, or
entertain reproaches of ones Neighbors; It has no pleasure in them; It
judges by the Rules of kindness, and love, which covers multitudes of evils,
and bears long before it be incensed by defaming stories. According to such
measures a Christian ought to govern his thoughts, and speeches of every
private person: But especially Charity and many other Considerations will
require it from him in reference to the Clergy. The malice of men makes them
usually glad at heart to hear evil of their Brother. This pleases the envious
humor, and is a kind of set off to those that pride themselves in not being
guilty of such Crimes; and serves to lessen the faults they have, (in their own
opinion, at least,) and so pleases exceedingly in the comparison: But this
malice and readiness to calumniate is not so eager, and severe upon any as the
Clergy, especially in this Age, in which they are so contemned, and worried by
the Atheists, and profane on the one hand; and by the Papists, and Sects on
the other. This ought to be remembered, and suspense to be held on our belief on
Consideration of it, till the evidence be notorious; And then too, men ought
not to be forward to publish the shame of such persons, in whose esteem the
honor, and interests of Religion, are so much concerned. On which account a
scandal upon one of the sacred function is more pernicious, than in other
cases, because thereby the mouths of the Atheists, and profane are opened
against the whole Profession, if not against the Foundation of it. And the
effect of his Ministry is obstructed as to others, who else might have received
much benefit from his Labors. So that every good Christian ought to have
tenderness for the reputation of the Clergy; And the want of it among us, is
perhaps one of the greatest scandals of the Reformation, and that which has
been an unhappy hinderance to the Reverence and propagation of the excellent
Religion it prof^sseth.

But I need not insist on this, in writing to one, whose own thoughts can
furnish him with plenty of Reasons against this disingenuous Practice: Only
give me leave to add, That to slander and abuse Those of this Coat is a
Cowardly and ungentlemanly kind of baseness. For the Clergy are a sort of
naked, disarmed men, that have no Defense but their Innocence, and the
sacredness of their profession; And this has been protection to them, amidst
the rudeness of the most barbarous N^tions: For the most brutish Indians would
not offer any sort of violence to the Priesthood; and respect to this Order
seems to have been an universal acknowledgement of Mankind: So that to fall on
These, on every occasion, and without any, and to tear their Names (the dearest
part of them) by malicious falsehoods, and abuses, is barbarous beyond the
ferity of Cannibals. And it is certainly a very ungentlemanly practice; It being
like fighting with women, or assaulting one whose hands are bound, and has not
the Liberty of defending, or righting himself in the ways that are common to
the rest of men: so that methinks none but the most rascal spirits, and
infamous Cowards should be guilty of this baseness.

I thus lightly pass over these R^flections, in which I doubt not but I have
your concurrence, and come to a passage of your Letter, in which I differ from
your opinion.

You would have the Author of the E. P. to refute, and disprove those things of
Immorality which his Adversary charge on him; and you think if he be
guiltless, he owes himself and his Profession this right.

For my part I verily believe him innocent; But yet, if I were fit to be
consulted, I should by no means advise his writing any particular vindication:
The things are too soul to be touched by his hands, and such spots are better
worn out by time and patience, than wiped off by hasty Zeal of Reputation. Dirt
while it is green will not be struck off clear, but the very wiping of it
fastens some stain, and spreads it further: Industrious Apologies, in such
cases, beget suspicions, and raise more scandal: And it is a scandalous thing to
have so much appearance of guilt, as to seem greatly concerned to clear ones
Innocence; such lewd Reproaches will dye of themselves when they are let alone,
and despised; but they are revived, and kept alive by much ado of answering,
and refuting: The best way for any man to confute a slander, is to do it by the
greater strictness of his Life: And if I was to counsel any Clergy man that was
fallen under such circumstances of misfortune, I Will tell you how I would Advise.

(1.) I would persuade him to examine strictly, what occasion he may have given
by any appearance of the vices with which he is reproached. It Is not sufficient
for the Clergy to avoid evil, but they must stand off out of the shadow of it.
Many things are lawful and harmless, that yet are not expedient, especially for
men of sacred Character: And therefore if such a one find, that though his
Conscience be clear, yet his prudence has been defective; and that he has not
been enough cautelous, and watchful in the midst of so many enemies; He ought
to blame his own unwariness, and to resolve for the future upon more strictness
in observing the Rules of expedience, as well as those of Du^y: And not to
content himself to fly from vice, but to get at what distance he can from any
thing that looks like ^t.

(2.) If he be clear of the things imputed to him, He ought then to consider
narrowly of what other sins he is guilty, that may be the reason of Gods
leaving him to the fury of malicious Revilers. David did so when Shimei cursed;
He considered the permission of such an abuse as a judgment from Him, without
discharging his rage on his railing enemy: And certainly when a man is exposed
to causeless infamy, there is something more than malice, and misfortune in the
case; God is to be remembered in it, and the provocations he has received from
our unquestionable sins. These he ought to call over in his thoughts, and to
humble himself before the Divine Majesty under the sense and apprehension of
them. He should consider these as the main Adversaries that have hurt him, and
execute his revenge here, in destroying, without mercy, these enemies of his
soul, as well as of his credit: He should resolve to be more careful that his
ways please the Lord, and then his enemies will be at peace with him.

(3.) I would have him tie himself to a greater, and more severe Industry in
the Duties of his place: And though he were constant, and laborious in those
offices before; yet should he study to double his diligence, and be more
assiduous (if possible) after such usage. He should join constant Catechizing
to constant Preaching, and frequent Sacraments to both; And study how otherwise
to promote the spiritual advantage of his people; and endeavor to do it with
all Conscience both toward God, and them. He should punctually perform all
that his Rule requires, without deviations, or omissions; and not content with
doing but just what is required of him, He should employ himself in all those
particular Industries (that the Law allows) that he judges tending to the
Glory of God, the Honor of Religion, and the Edification of his charge: And
take example for his practice from the strictest and most laborious Divines,
yea and strive even to exceed them, in all painful and faithful diligence.

(4.) It is further advisable, in my Opinion, That such an injured Minister,
betake himself to great Privacy and Retiredness of living; That he be not
frequent in unnecessary visits; that he mingle not ordinarily with common, and
promiscuous companies; That he be not seen much abroad, but when he is about
urgent affairs, and those especially that relate to his Office; That he go not
without great cause to public Houses, or places of resort: But that he stick
close to his studies, and the preparations that are requisite for the due
discharge of his great, and important business.

However severe these Rules may be thought, I judge they are exceedingly
expedient, if not necessary, for a person in the Circumstances we suppose. And
really there is so much wickedness, folly, and trifling in the ordinary
conversations of the world, That methinks no serious, intelligent man should
endure to be much in it. And as to the Clergy, There is so much captiousness,
and malicious watching upon their words and actions; so much of what will give
them just offense, and which they ought not to hear without reproof; And so
much offense ready to be taken at them, and so many affronts ready to follow
that, if they do reprove; That I see not how they can honestly and safely
converse, except with a few known friends, though the malice of false reports
has not yet touched them. And in my judgment it is most advisable for all the
Clergy, in this evil Generation, to draw up (as far as is possible) into
privacy, and retirement; For the Sea is too rough for them to be abroad upon
it: But especially those on whom Envy, and ill will have fastened any slanderous
imputations, are of all Ministers, and all men, the most concerned to live in
as much silence, and reservedness, as their public Office will permit.

These things, I know, (and by some experience) will contribute very much to
the quiet and vindication of such an injured person, and more than all the
verbal Apologies in the world: Or if they succeed not to clear his name, and
restore him to the good opinion of men; There is yet no doubt but they will
give him peace and approbation with God, and Conscience, which is infinitely
better.

And if after all this, malice and Infamy should persecute him still; If it
should continue upon him the old slanders, and out of nothing, and no
appearance raise new ones to disquiet him, He need not, He ought not be
concerned, but may despise those impudent falsehoods, and scorn to trouble
himself to disprove them. He should not yield his enemies the satisfaction of
having vexed, and discomposed him: But rest himself contented with his
Innocence, and the Testimony of his Conscience; blessing God that he is not
such a person as they would render him to the world, and praying Him to give
them a due sense of this their sin, and to pardon them upon their Repentance.
In order to which excellent temper, He should frequently consider Him who with
much long-suffering endured the contradictions of all sorts of sinners, and was
reproached and vilified in his name, as well as injuriously treated in his
person: And since they called Him, our Lord, Beelzebub, and published him for a
Wine-Bibber, a Glutton, and a Friend of Publicans and Sinners, why should we
care what they call us; or be at all moved at the Reproaches, which we have not
deserved? Men's Tongues are their own, and they will speak; and let them say
what they will, they cannot hurt us, while we are innocent, if our own
niceness, and vicious tenderness of our names, do not assist their malice. This
all good and wise men should endeavor to overcome, and outgrow; But chiefly
the Clergy, and those of them especially of whom we are now speaking, ought to
be well fortified against this weakness; That they may avoid the temptations to
discouragement, impatience, and many other sins, and follies, that an over
great concernment for Reputation does expose men to: That they may go on with
courage, and an equal mind, through good Report, and ill Report, in doing of
their duty: That they may gain the noble height of wisdom, and Religion to
count it a small thing to be approved and applauded by the judgment, and
voices of men; and may attain the generosity of despising popular Fame,
otherwise than as it may facilitate their doing good; considering, that This is
most commonly given to the foolishest and worst of men, and things; while
infamy and reproach is usually bestowed upon the worthiest and the best.

By such Exercises, and such Considerations as these; the scandall'd person
shall either wipe off the slanders that are upon him: Or strengthen himself so
as not to be hurt by them.

Thus I have let my pen run on as the humor of writing bad me: If to no other
purpose; Yet the employment has given a little present diversion to my self:
And I know you can be content that I should sometimes write for the little end
of venting my own thoughts, in declaring my opinion, which I have now given you
freely, in this matter, and with it the experience of

Your Friend.


