AN APOLOGY FOR THE FAILURES Charged on the Reverend Mr. George Walker's
PRINTED ACCOUNT Of the late Siege of Derry, IN A LETTER to the Undertaker of a
more Accurate Narrative of that SIEGE.

Printed in the Year 1689.

AN APOLOGY FOR THE FAILURES Charged on the Reverend Mr. George Walker's
PRINTED ACCOUNT OF THE Siege of Derry.
SIR,
YOUR Inventory of those momentous Mistakes you offer to demonstrate in the
late Printed Account of the Siege of Derry, with your Reflections on 'em was
surveyed by some of our Club, Men of approved Prudence and Moderation, who also
pay a great deference to the celebrated Mr. Walker: Their unanimous Verdict is,
You Publish these Animadversions, with the accurate Journal of that Siege,
which by this time you expected: This they judge of absolute Necessity, as
being the most apposit medium to give resurrection to the Memory of as well the
yet living, as the lately expired, of that great Body of Northern Scots, (of
late the Terror of Papists, and Envy of an ambitious Party in Ireland) which
the above Account endeavors to extinguish, and bury with some ingenious Scars
in the Grave of perpetual Oblivion.

I had sent you this Commission last Week, had it not been recalled upon a
Motion made, and carried by the major Vote, that no second Narrative on this
Subject, how accurate soever, be Printed, but with a Salvo of the Honor, with
which his personal Merit, auspicious Conduct, in his Government of Derry, with
his Majesty's gracious Acceptance thereof, have already invested Mr. Walker.
This Vote we took for an embarasment as insuperable as Kilmore Boom; till last
Night one of our Number undertook to remove it, by a just Apology he said he
had provided for Colonel Walker, abridg'd in a Letter to you, intended chiefly
to rectify some dangerous Mistakes of yours concerning that excellent Person:
The Letter being read and approved, I here present you with the Inscription,
Preface, Subscription omitted.

On behalf of the Colonel I offer this double Plea: The First, That it is his
Infelicity, not his Sin, to be mistaken for the Author of those
Misrepresentations, with which you charge his Narrative. The Second, To
discover their genuine Parents, with some of the occult Causes of their
Production in this juncture. The Arguments evincing the former, are,

1. This Narrative is guilty of manifest violation of the prime Rule of
History: ( viz. That nothing be inserted for truth, but that whose intrinsic
Evidence commands the Reader's belief, or borrowed, renders it at least
credible.) Your Animadversions present us with many Instances of this kind; the
exact Journal will with more.

2. This Account peremptorily, and very immodestly, confronts the Verbal
Narratives Colonel Walker occasionally gave of that Siege, all along his
Journey, before his arrival at London; very eminent instances whereof I have
already transmitted both from Scotland and some remoter parts of England, which
I am ready to produce, when they may prove serviceable to Mr. Walker.

3. This Narrative pretends to give the History of Transactions in that
Garrison, whereof Colonel Walker was neither Spectator nor Actor, viz. Of the
four Months that passed between the first locking the Gates, and his Arrival at
Derry; Colonel Walker having neither in Derry furnished himself with a Journal
of that time, nor consulted those Persons who alone were qualified to give him
a full Account of all the Proceedings in that interval; though he knew 'em to
be in London while he prepared his Narrative, and had the opportunity of daily
Converse with 'em.

4. This Narrative quite divests the first and principal Actors of the Honor
of that first Service, without which this Narrative had beeu a Nonentity; in
special, Counselor Cairns, who declared for the then Prince of Orange, and the
Protestant Religion; who formed the Multitude into Companies after locking the
Gates: Transferrs it on those whose only claim to it is the Narrator's Bounty,
or, if you please, his Charity.

5. This Narrative transmitts not half that imperfect Journal (now in London)
whence it is borrowed; and (which seems at least very indecent) is so far from
emblazoning the matchless Gallantry of even the chief Commanders, (as well as
those first Actors above hinted) that it either passes over in silence their
Actions, or their most remarkable Circumstances, which would prove its chief
Ornament; a due Account whereof would command the Reader's Admiration, and
eternize the Actor's Memory, eminent Instances whereof we expect from your
Narrative. Now besides the Disparagement such failures reflect on the
Historian, I doubt it will be sound an arduous Undertaking to account for 'em
to the surviving Relations and Posterity of those Hero's, (especially the
incomparable Colonel Baker) whose insupportable Sorrows under their
irreparable loss might be somewhat alleviated by their reviewing in the
Monuments of unsuspected History the renowned Lives and glorious Transits of
their deceased Relations.

6. The entire Texture of this Narrative discovers its being contrived under
the Conduct of mortal Prejudice against the Northern Scots Presbyterians:
Notorious in three equally groundless and immodest Calumnies. 1. Against Mr.
Osborn, the Vindication of whose Innocence will merit room in your Narrative.
2. In Mr. Hewson's being placed in the same Category with Mr. Osborn, though
many thousands yet alive in Ireland and Scotland are ready to testisie, nor
does himself deny it, that Hewson was discarded some Years ago by the Northern
Presbyters, and to this day lies under Sentence of Deposition passed on him by
all their Presbyteries for notorious Scandals; is no more a Member of Mr.
Osborn's Communion than of Mr. Walker's. 3. Most eminently, in not inserting
thye Names of the seven Non-consorming Ministers in Derry, under pretense of
want of Information, after a List of their Names was put into Mr. Walker's
Hand, by the same Gentleman now in London, from whom Mr. Walker had the Diary.

7. This Narrative gives Colonel Walker the first Figure in Martial Exploits,
in which I presume his Modesty will own, he had several Equals, some Superiors
in Derry, besides Colonel yiBaker; of which some are on tip-toe to give him
demonstration, (which they say his Narrative exacts from 'em) did they not
revere his Gown more than they fear his Sword. It invests him solely with the
whole Conduct, and that in the quality first of Chief, after of sole governor:
whereas thousands yet surviving confidently averr, he had not been Assistant
Governor, but by Colonel Baker's Interest, much less chief, had nor that
Gentleman's Modesty in complementing Mr. Walker with the Precedence in their
joint Subscriptions, given him the opportunity of converting Colonel Baker's
civil Ceremony into a sacred, and very significant to the Churches Service, of
which more anon; thus, Cedunt arma togae; thus he carried the Honor, first of
Chief, ever after of Sole Governor of Derry, for whom the Garrison intended
neither.

I have contented my self at present with a bare allusion to some Persons and
things in these Arguments, have studiously avoided giving 'em due form and full
strength; partly out of the deserence I bear to Mr. VValker's Person; partly
because this will fall properly within your Province in your intended
Narrative. Sussice it, they answer the end they are produced for, viz. To
evince that an History obnoxious to the heavy charge these Premises inserr, can
with no Modesty vouch a Person of Mr. VValker's Character for its genuine
Author; some one of these taken single, being of sufficient force (much more
the whole Conjunct) to blast the Credit of any History whatever. In sum, this
History bears no more resemblance to the excellent Governor of Derry, than
Simon Magus to Simon Peter: But if any be found so hardy as to attempt an
Attaque upon either these Premises or the Conclusion, pray Capitulate with 'em
for a Cessation of Arms 'till your Narrative is Printed, and then I promise to
give 'em Battle, if they please, before the Walls of Derry: Mean while I take
leave of the first part of my Apology for the Colonel, and proceed to the
second; in my Conduct to which, I doubt not to make some Advantage of those
very Blockad's by which you endeavor to prevent my Passage. The first, and I
hope principal, is,

Object. If it be an unpardonable Crime, to entitle Mr. Walker to those
Misadventures of which you impeach his Narrative, what Hecatomb can atone for
the bold Adventure of the High and Sacred Dedication prefixed to it? For a full
Answer to this formidable Objection, (which will go a great way to complete the
Apology) I humbly offer to your second thoughts, whether you are not in equity
obliged to allow in the Person of Mr. George Walker, the discriminating
qualities of late Governor of Derry, and Rector of Donnogh-moor: In the former
you are to consider him in a Martial Capacity, in the latter an Ecclesiastic:
In the former he owned no Superior terrene but his Sovereign, in the latter
many, in special his Diocesan: In the former he commanded thousands without
control, in the latter he must obey, not dispute the Authority of his
Superiors: In the former he sought for King William, Queen Mary, and the
Protestant Religion, in conjunction with you Presbyterians, avoiding all
discrimination of the Church and Kirkparty, (which then would have proved
fatal) in the latter he was obliged to publish his Narrative under the Conduct
and Command of his Ecclesiastic Governors: consequently in a Method might
equally subserve the Churches Honor and Interest, and disserve those of the
Kirk. If you would know who these Ecclesiastics are, to whom you owe the most
injurious mistakes in this Narrative, pray enquire who that very Reverend
Prelate from Ireland is, who went as far as Barnet to meet Colonel Walker,
received him into his own Coach, conducted him to London; under whose menage
Mr. Walker was observed to act while he was preparing his Narrative. This
Bishop with some others of his Club can inform you best of any. I shall then
adventure to give you their Names, when the Act of Scandalum Magnatum, as it
respects that Order, is repealed, which I dare affirm, will be found the
Interest of both Church and State. 'Till then, I beg your Excuse.

Obj. If you further Object, it suits not over well with Mr. Walker's
Character, to pass such things in his History as have nothing to support their
Credit, but the bare Command of his Ecclesiaftick Superiors.

Sol. I confess all the Distinctions in Scotus your subtle Countryman must
leave this Objection unanswered, upon the Principles of you Presbyterians,
whose nigh thirty Years Sufferings, Contempt and Indigency, you owe to your
opposing your private Cosciences as the proximate Rule of your Actions, to the
conscience and Commands of your Superiors. But upon Mr. Walker's Principles
it is easily blown off: For though our Church pretends not to Infallibility, in
determining Points of Faith, yet she pretends, and I hope justly, to
uncontrollable Authority to her Commands over her inferior Clergy, and to the
dictates of the public Conscience over the private; and therefore though Mr.
Walker might modestly concert the Truth of those Passages, which bear not so
much as its imperfect Color, yet might he at no hand dispute inserting 'em, if
his Superior require it. Mr. Walker could not forget, though you may, that
Modern Doctrine, very edifying to the Embracers as well as Inventers of it,
viz. That where the Matter of my Superior's Command is doubeful, (as
undoubtedly in this Case it was) his Command makes it my undoubted Duty to
obey: Obedience to my Superior being my undoubted Duty, complying with my
doubting Conscience being a business of very doubtful and dangerous Event:
Though I Am very apt to believe, had some men among us foreseen it would ever be
their own fate to take Sanctuary in the private (and as they called it)
pretended Conscience, (which is the pittiable, I say not ridiculous misfortune
of all those of our Clergy who now refuse to Swear Allegiance to the best of
Kings) they would heretofore have less ridiculed it. But to complete Mr.
Walker's Vindication, and the solution of your Objection, I Am forced to reveal
an Horribile Secretum, whose Discovery by Mr. Walker, had proved as fatal as
Calvin's Horribile Decretum, (on which you know who among us betrayed horrible
Ignorance of Latin as well as Divinity) it is this. On that memorable Evening of
locking Derry-Gates, in an Assembly of the chief Citizens, consulting their
Bishop, then present, whether they should receive a Popish Regiment of King
James's Army, then approaching to seize the Garrison for that King's Service,
the good Bishop having long before ebib'd the Doctrine of Passive Obedience,
gravely exhorted them to the Affirmative; assuring them (though with the loss
of the Garrison for King William and the Protestant Religion) they should
thereby become a Victim to the sanguinary Cutthroats, yet the Loyalty of their
Obedience to their ONLY lawful Sovereign, would abundantly recompense their
deepest Sufferings: Upon which one Irwin, (I Am told) a young Presbyterian Scot,
cried out, My Lord, your Doctrine's very good, but we cannot now hear you out;
and immediately getting the Keys, with some others of his Fellows, locked all
the Gates, a few Minutes before the two foremost Companies demanded entrance in
King James's Name: Can you imagine, had Mr. Walker been sui juris, his
Narrative would not have afforded at least one Line to the Resolution,
Gallantry, and inestimable serviceableness of this Action? without which, this
Account of the following Gallantry displayed on that Stage had probably issued
in a second History of Massacres, exceeding those of 41. But to return to the
Bishop; he finding his Doctrine the oftener repeated, less credited by
Churchrebel Jack Presbyter, left the City some days after to the disloyal
Whiggs.

Now, Sir, make Mr. Walker's Case your own, and suppose your Merit (as indeed
his is) above the Deanery of Derry, vacant, (by Mr. Manby's exchanging the
Communion of the Church of England for the more encharming Embraces, as he
pretended, of the Mother Church) and the Bishopric too, by the Bishop's
Abdication: Yet upon your Canonical Obedience tell me, could you do less in Mr.
Walker's Circumstances than cover this pernicious Counsel of your Diocesan,
which created Nature cannot expiate, and assure your Sovereign, God intimates to
the World the Church of England defends and maintains their Majesty's Interest,
and the Protestant Religion; and improve your Rhetoric to persuade their
Majesty's the Dissenters are at best unserviceable to either Interest. I hope,
Sir, by this time you are satisfied of Mr. Walker's Innocence in his Publishing
the above Account. You Presbyterians distinguish between the Action and the
Anomy, or Irregularity of it, which latter you say in the Original makes the
sin: You will also grant that the bare Instrument is often blameless, when the
principal efficient is very culpable: I plead for no more on behalf of this
worthy Gentleman, and so conclude his Apology; though I heartily wish he had
not given me the trouble, am persuaded himself does, he had not given the
occasion to any to believe very applicable to him (stepping out of the Bishops
Coach) that Passage of the Satyrist Juv. Sat. 10. lin. 278, ad lin. 282.
respecting Consul Marius, (if the comparison be not too mean for the
Collonel's Merit,) -- quod illo cive tulisset
Natura in terris, quid Roma beatius unquam,
Si -- animam exhalasset opimam,
Cum de Teutonico vellet descendere curru?


I intended, my hand being in, to bestow a cast of my Office upon these
Gentlemen, whose alone Commands could qualify Mr. Walker to plead Not Guilty
to your Charge; and to have assigned the leading Reasons of their exerting
their Authority over him in this juncture: But being doubtful of their
Gratitude, I shall leave to themselves that Province; mean while will furnish
you with some Queries, I Would have you lodge with 'em; to which, their Answers,
whether Categorical or Equivocal, will discover these Reasons, and peradventure
what lies somewhat deeper.

Qu. 1. Whether these Gentlemen, I mean the Westminster Ecclesiastic Club; or
if you please, Committee for the Church of Ireland, were not sollicitously
apprehensive of the too great Figure the Northern Scots made for many years
past? Being unquestionably the greatest Body of Protestants in Europe, entirely
united in Principle, Interest, Alliance and mutual Accord; who, upon an
Estimate made of their Number three years since, were found to amount to Eighty
Thousand Fighting Men Pray see for this the ingegeniously Penned Letter to the
truly Honorable Sir Arthur Royden about that time.
; and upon a more exact since, to about a 1000000. Whether they were not
sufficient to have preserved entire the Province of Vlster, and by their
assistance to the English in all other parts, either to have saved the whole
Kingdom from being lost, or before this time to have retrieved it, without
putting our King or Kingdom of England to any other charge than Arms,
Ammunition, one Chief Commander, little or no Treasure, had Arms been sent 'em
any time before March last? Whether the matchless Prowess and Services of those
sew Inniskillin-Men, with those in the Garrison of Derry, do not determine this
Quere in the Affirmative?

Qu. 2. Whether, suppose Presbytery and Prelacy placed on a level, share
equally in the Favor of King and Parliament, with the Church-revenues and
Dignities; every individual being left to his proper choice (all which
Conditions I humbly conceive prerequisit to the right stating the Question) in
that great Northern Body, the Tyth fall to the Church of England's share? I
know who would venture a Pole, e're they yielded that: if the danger of
incurring the Guilt of Sacrilege did not deter 'em.

Qu. 3. Whether these Gentlemen don't in judgment determine the second Query in
the Negative? Since one of their Club, a Gentleman of great Sense, as
intelligent in Irish Affairs as any, upon the report of so many thousands dying
in Derry by Famine, spoke plainly among some of his Gown, what others would
perhaps for State-reasons have minced, viz. It Was no matter how many of them
died, for they were but a pack of Scots Presbyterians. And I Am persuaded had
Mr. Wr. when he brought the Colonel to London, left the Parson at Donnoh-moor,
a pack of Presbyterians they had been still. But pray deal gently with the
young Man Mr. -- for his Father's sake, who, as I have heard, was the most
Scotiz'd Presbyterian Minister of the English Nation.

Qu. 4. What Counsels, what Instruments may be justly charged with the
unattoneable Guilt of retarding the Conveyance of those Arms and Ammunition
(till the Season was lost) which might have saved, or speedily reduced Ireland?
Not our most gracious Sovereign, whose Royal Propension, repeated Royal
Commands for the speedy and effectual relieving the Protestants there, His
Majesty's Royal Concern for the Delays of the Conveyance of these Succors, his
Subjects of the first Figure attest, and the Rebels dreaded the event of, Not
the Dissenters, nor moderate Conformists, both whose accurat accounts of the
condition of Ireland were last Spring frequently confronted by Letters from
Eutopia, till the doleful event discovered the truth of the former, and Fiction
of the latter. Not the City of London, whose forwardness to spare no Treasure,
or if need were, Hands, in that Service, whose unparalled Hospitality, and
incredible Charge in maintaining distressed Protestants from Ireland, as well
all England over, as in the City of London, all of you that retain any Sparks
of Honor and Gratitude admire and Celebrate.

Qu. 5. Whether those unaccounted (but not unaccountable) baffles given to the
reliefs sent to Derry, first by Colonel Coningham, etc. and afterward by -- do
not issue from the same Spring with the Delays mentioned in the next preceding
Query? Whether the Romance of Kilmore Boom will atone for the loss of those
Thousands of Souls (near a Myriad by this time) of immortal Memory, that
perished in Derry for want of those Succors, Royal Bounty so amply provided,
Royal Care ordered the speedy and seasonable conveyance of? But of this
enchanted Boom at more leisure.

Qu. 6. Whether some Men are not satisfied (I don't say endeavor) Ireland be
entirely lost, (tho themselves have large Stakes there to lose) and remain
unreduc'd for some years, rather than Dissenters be employed in retrieving it,
share in the Rewards of that Service, make some Figure in their Country, be
rendered capable of their Prince's Favor, of Honors and Offices in common with
their Fellow Subjects proportionably to their Merit? I Will exclude from this
Category (and with their own approbation) all the moderate Sons of the Church
of England both Clergy and Laity; yet am sure some such Men there be. These
Gentlemen can peradventure discover 'em.

Qu. 7. Whether, if all Protestant Subjects were equally forward with the
Dissenters for the Service of the King, Kingdoms, and Protestant Religion, the
late King James's Arrival in Ireland had not been effectually prevented? And
besides, either the saving, or retrieving of Ireland, the Rebellion in Scotland
had not been either prevented or crushed in the Egg, as well as the execrable
Plot in Edinburg, whose Origin, says some, is the same with that Kings
Declaration, lately Printed in London, and dispersed in England, and no body
doubts, lies nearer Westminster than Edinburgh? Whether if Dissenters had been
entrusted with the Conduct, or employed in the Service of the Fleet, they had
not at least guarded the British Seas against the French Pirates, if not have
given a good account of the French Fleet?

Qu. 8. Whether if his Majesty were vested with as unlimited Empire over the
Hearts, Estates, and Services of all other Protestants in his Dominions, as of
all the Dissenting Protestants at home, and all Protestants abroad without
exception, it would not render him the most August, most Potent, and
incomparably the most happy Monarch on Earth? As by natural Right, Personal
Merit, Divine Disposal he is already of all the Christian Orb? Whether all
Papists, and all other Persons disaffected to their Majesty's Sacred Persons,
Government, and Protestant Religion, had not before this been removed from
Kingdom, Camp, and his Majesty's Service, unless they gave sufficient Security
of their peaceable and Loyal Behavior? Whether one Disloyal Dissenter, or
disaffected to the Government can be produced in their Majesty's Dominions in
this Reign? Whether General Schomberg on the Head of 50000, or if need were, a
100000 Men, might not by this time make the Walls of Paris quake? If not in
their Majesty's Name take peaceable possession of the Louvre, and display in
the heart of Paris the English imperial Banner? Whether his Majesty would need
any aid from any of his Allies to Suppress any Rebellion in his Dominions; or
at all employ any Foreign Forces, except in extending his Empire beyond the
Alps, etc, or in both Indies?

Qu. 9. What these Gentlemen will advance toward Printing the C. History of
Ireland in the two last Reigns, almost ready for the Press? We'll give 'em
City-Security to do 'em in it as much right, as Mr. W's Narrative has done the
Presbyterians wrong. We'll tell nothing but the Truth, though not the whole
Truth, it being impossible to represent to the Life all the good Services (some
being very secret) of some of the Bishops, especially the three Archbishops now
living: whether to the Catholic Cause, in their zealous Espousal and advance
of the York-Interest, and thereby of the Irish Catholics: Or to the Church, in
their conferring of Livings and Ecclesiastic Dignities on the Inferior Clergy,
(whose Qualifications and Conversations the Historian accounts for) in
proportion to their Talent of railing genteelly at the Phanaticks. In their
affronting, yea, silencing (some) of their own Clergy, for Preaching boldly the
Doctrine of the Church of England against the Papists: In the Bishops turning
Informers to the Government against the Dissenters, exposing them to the Odium
of the Government, contempt of Mankind: In their Persecuting, Fining,
Confining, Impoverishing them, cum multis aliis -- The unreasonableness of the
Printer drives the Historian to this involuntary Address to these Gentlemen:
For he says, he wont take for Printing this, being a large Folio, ten times the
Sum he paid for Mr. Wr's Copy; unless the two Irish Archbishops now in
Westminster will promise Verbo Sacerdotis to take off nine parts of the
Impression for Ireland, the tenth being more than he hopes to have vent for in
England. The Archbishop of Dublin, he says is a poor Spiritual Prince; has
received of our public Fund of Charity to distressed Protestants from Ireland,
not above a 1000 l. that he can hear of; has in England not above 10000 l. in
Bank, designed for a Purchase; therefore expects his Brother Archbishop should
be bound with him.

10. Lastly Quaeritur, Sir, of your self, whether by this time you do not
foresee consequence enough in any imaginable Answer may be given to these
Questions for concluding it necessary in these Gentlemen to have improved as
they did, their Empire over Mr. Wr. in this juncture; though they might foresee
the event somewhat prejudicial to him, pernicious to your Party? I must also
inform you, some of these Gentlemen are no less studied in Politics than in
Divinity; the former being their constant, if not sole business ever after
Consecration; the latter only subserves the former; which seldom happens, but
when in a Sermon (the Quintessence of two or three years profound
premeditation) the Government is to be gravely reminded of the Churches infinite
Service to the State, above all possibility of a full reward; or to prescribe
to the Government some new method of hampering the Fanatics, whom the Churches
neither Grace nor Wisdom could ever reclaim; who are never thankful for any of
the Churches Blessings, neither for Oxford-Oaths, Five-mile-Acts, twenty pounds
Fine per Month, Mouth-padlocks, Meal-tub-Plots, Irish Witnesses, nor all the
Devices of Old Nick himself, to reduce 'em to Canonical Obedience. You must
further know, these Gentlemen bear a very Sympathizing Sense of the Odium the
Clergy of England, especially some of the Bishops have incurred from all
Protestants abroad, and some of their own Communion at home, for their
Ingratitude (to mention nothing higher, if higher may be) to our most gracious
Sovereign, after having but a little before magnified him to the Stars, though
still below his Merit, as the only Savior of their Lives under God, as well as
Protector of their Estates and Dignities. Now the incomparable Sagacity of
these Gentlemen discovered an opportunity, and they had the Grace to improve it
(the like having been never presented before, perhaps never may again) of not
only wiping off all this Reproach, but also of acquiring a greater Glory (and
why not Reward too) to the Church of England, than perhaps any modest
Englishman will challenge to the whole Nation; and all this by the Service
(you know of whom, but) attributed to one of their undignify'd Clergy. Pray
observe the Modesty of the Dedication -- God Fights their Majesty's Battles --
but by the hand of the Church -- Defends and maintains their Majesty's Interest
and the Protestant Religion.

I don't wonder this Mystery should not easily enter your Presbyterian Skull,
since it requires equally with Transubstantiation, a Head Abdicated of Reason
and Five Senses: my own Pate, though of somewhat a more Catholic make than
yours, has a deadly hard tug on it.

For though I can (to magnify the Service of our Church) allow you Vlster
Scots and English Dissenters should pass for Powder-monkies of the Churches
Army (except the Inniskilling men, whose hopes must not yet be quite forlorn)
and that half of the Earl of Angus's Regiment in Scotland should pass for
Cowards, (it being Canonico-Prelatically impossible, tho
Schismatico-Presbyterially certain, so despicable a handful of the
deepest-dy'd-Kirk-Whiggs should utterly defeat, without hopes of ever again
rallying, our Churches Host; consisting, very few excepted) of the Churches
best Sons and Champions in Scotland, which the Sequel demonstrates; for the
Whigs there did not so much boast of the Victory, as the Tories here bewailed
the Discomfiture.

Yet can I by no means yield, the renowned General Schomberg should not make a
Thumb at least, and the Dutch, Germans, and Swisses he Commands (who were never
seen to turn their Backs on any Enemy, but after Victory) should not make one
Finger more, of that invincible hand, that defends and maintains the King's
Interest, and the Protestant Religion.

It wants Confirmation, That the Fingers of the Dutch, in the Face of their
Enemy, are employed only in turning up their Mustacho's, to teach Teague a more
decent way of taking Snush, or in concerting the Antiquity of Min-Heir and
Mounsieur, while the Hand of the Church is preparing Mandates, with a Present
of Leaden Padderines to be sent Post by the French and Irish to Saint Patrick
in Purgatory.

However, I doubt not these Gentlemen's fatal necessity, or pious Zeal for
recovering the so-lately-decay'd Stock of the Churches Credit, will excuse (if
not hallow) their pious Fraud in thus managing Mr. Walker, to most of the true
Sons of the Church; and therefore I pray, it may to you; and so much the
sooner, because this with the preceding Apology for Mr. Wr. removes all Letts
to your Printing your designed Narrative, except a License, which the
Archbishop abovenamed, upon your presenting him with these Queries will
infallibly procure.

Thus far that Gentleman's Letter, and with it an assurance that I ambition the
Character of,

SIR, Your Faithful Servant.

FINIS.

