AN ANSWER To the pretended REASONS of some Drapers, Mercers, Haberdashers,
Grocers, and Hosiers, etc. AGAINST Pedlars, Hawkers, and Petty-Chapmen, Humbly
offered to the Consideration of the High-Court of Parliament.
Reasons 1.2.3.6.
ITs Alleged, that there are 18000 Pedlars, etc. That they destroy
Shopkeepers, spoil Gentlemen's Sons, etc. whereby they cannot pay their
Merchants, Taxes, etc.

Answer.
If there be such a Number, they are too many to be destroyed at one Blow, much
less are all their Families to be Destroyed. And it is not they that destroy
Shopkeepers, or disable them, or discourage Gentlemen's Sons, but perhaps
Industry and Frugality may make a considerable difference, and want thereof may
be the cause of such ills.

R. 4.18.
They pay no Duties, Contributions, etc.

They do pay Customs, Answ.
Taxes, Parish-Duties, Hearth-Mony, and contributions in their respective
Habitations, according to their Estates and Callings.

R. 5.7.
They Multiply; the Profit that 15000 get would Maintain 3750 Families at 40
pounds per Annum.

Answ.
Its well where Trades multiply and thrive, and they are to be encouraged,
rather than those who will not thrive, and it seems not reasonable that 15000
should be undone, to serve the Turns of 3750 who may live without it, if due
means be used; and if 3750 could live at 40 l. per Annum a piece, (as the other
15000 live with far less) they need not break by such great Numbers as is said
by them.

R. 8.9. (...)
They are most of another Nation, and Statutes were made against them by Q.
Mary, Q. Eliz. and King James. Many of them (indeed) are of the other Nation of
Scotland, which ought not to be complained of being also the same Kings
Subjects. There were indeed Statues (...) Beggars and though in one of them the
names of Pedlars and Petti-Chapmen are mentioned, yet it has been always
thought, that only such Pedlars, etc. are intended as misdemean themselves by
Begging, Idleness, or ill courses, and not they who are painful, honest, and
inoffensive in their Calling, which both before and after the said Statutes
were permitted by Testimonials, to use and exercise the said Calling, and
therefore King James of blessed Memory, in the 15th year of his Reign, by
Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, and Proclamation thereupon,
reciting, That the Calling of Pedlars and Petti-Chapmen was an Ancient calling,
and had in all times been used as well for the benefit and ease of his People,
especially those that dwell remote from Market Towns, who might hereby furnish
their Necessities with small Wares and Commodities at their own Doors, and save
their pains and travel in going to Markets and Fairs, and attend their
Day-labours and Vocations, as also for that the industrious Pedlar and
Petti-Chapmen, were of great use for venting and uttering several wares and
comodites made in this Kingdom, did give Authority to Justices of Peace near
to the habitations of such Pedlars and Petty-Chapmen' to License such as were
Honest and Industrious to use that calling, which Licenses were transmited into
the High Court of Chancery, and there (by many together) confirmed under the
great Seal and by the same Letters pattents, a distinction was made between the
said licensed Petty-Chapmen, and others not licensed punishable by the said
Statute, there was also a prohibition therein to sell Popish knacks and other
things; which said power of Licensing was from that time used until some small
time preceding the late unhappy Troubles; which course again revived, its
humbly conceived, may obviate the material Grievances supposed in the said
pretended Reasons, That is to say,

R. 10.17.
Inconveniences arising from disguises, and injury to Government, which
nevertheless are but suggested fears and suppositions; R. 13.
under pretense of Scotch-Cloath, other goods are sold.

Answ.
And they are bought of Gentlemen's Sons, Tradesmen, etc.

R. 14.16.
Tradesmen Break in Corporations, etc. 3750 Families every year disfurnished of
maintenance, etc.

Answ.
How all this can be, or by reason of Pedlars, and the inconsiderable
Merchandise they deal in, is humbly conceived unaccountable and incredible, but
that too many Break every year is deplorable, but it has been thought that if
they consider home, truer Causes may be found out.

R. 15.
They sell not cheaper but by false Measures, etc.

Answ.
False Measures may be avoided, by measuring by the Good Housewives own Ell or
Yard, or may be punished according to Law, and they cannot sell cheaper while
they buy of them, and they of whom they buy complain not, nor do these
Petty-Chapmen deal in the commodities of most of the Trades mentioned; upon all
which, They most humbly offer it to consideration, whether if his most Gracious
Majesty recontinuing the said way of his Ancestors, in Licensing and
Distinguishing as aforesaid, as (its said) he once proposed to do, it may not
be a remedy against the fears and ills suggested, a preservation of so many
thousand Families, as must otherwise be utterly ruined at once, and a
prevention of other ill consequences, which God forbid.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1675.


