An Answer to the REASONS for continuing the Palace-Court.
It Is pretended, That the Palace-Court was erected Seventy Years since, which
is notoriously false, it being Erected by Letters-Pattents from King Charles
II. under the Great Seal, October the 4th. Anno Regni sui 16. And though it was
of that Antiquity, yet if it be now found to be a Grievance, that can be no
reason for its continuance.

The Retale Trade being chiefly used among the meaner fort of People, and Trade
being incapable of being carried on without some Credit, if there were not
sufficient means provided, at small Charges, and in a little time, to enforce
Payment, the Retale Trade would sink, and the meaner sort of People would
perish for want of Credit. It cannot be denied, but that the Erecting a Court
of Law (to try small Causes by Juries, for the ease of the Subject) is
extremely useful, in case there had been a defect of Justice for want of such
Courts, but in Westminster, White-Chapel, Stepney, St. Katharines, Clinke,
Southwark, and almost in all places within the limits of the Palace-Court,
there are such Courts of Record; so that unless it be for the lucre and benefit
of the Steward-Council, and Attorneys of the Palace-Court, there is no
necessity or reason for that Court to interfere with the other Courts, and
encroach upon the Limits and Jurisdictions of the several Lords of them. And
it is to be noted, That Marshal-Court Bailiffs enter all private Liberties to
make their Arrests, which the Sheriffs Officers don't do, though to execute the
Process of a superior Court, unless they will subject themselves to the Action
of the Bailiff of the private Liberty.

Besides the several Courts abovementioned, within their Limits and
Jurisdictions have (by prescription time out of mind) tried Causes of three or
four Pound Value, as well as the Palace-Court, therefore no need for that Court.

It is for the ease of the Subject to have Justice administered near their own
Habitations, but the Palace-Court compels Persons out of Middlesex, Essex,
Surry, and Kent, within twelve Miles, to be tried at that Court held in
Southwark, which, without doubt, is a great Violence and Oppression to the
Subject, to be forced from one County to another to receive Justice by Process
of any inferior Court.

It Is suggested, That if the Palace-Court be suppressed, that another of the
same Nature must be erected, which is merely begging the Question; for there is
no need of that, or any other such like Court, the defect being supplied by the
aforesaid Inferior Courts and Jurisdictions.

It Is said, That the Mayor's and Sheriff's Courts in London are Inferior
Courts, and have been found useful; but if those Courts had Jurisdiction twelve
Miles round Guild Hall, they would no doubt, instead of being useful (as now
they must be confessed to be) be a great Grievance and Oppression to the People.

The Palace-Court pretends to discharge all Prisoners where the Debt and
Damages are under Forty Shillings: This course has been in use, it may be a
little before the sitting of this Parliament, as if they foresaw, that their
oppressive Court should receive its downfall from the Wisdom and Justice of this
Parliament.

It is pretended, That the Council and Attorneys of that Court have bought
their Places for Life, and consequently have a Freehold in them; and therefore
it would be an unjust thing to take away any Man's Freehold. If this should be
allowed as a sufficient Objection, then no Act of Parliament could ever be
made; for no Act that ever was made, or ever will be made, but must be to the
prejudice and disadvantage of a few private Persons; so that this can be no
reason to continue the Palace-Court.

It seems they are willing to submit to a regulation, knowing that nothing but
a total subversion of this new erected Palace-Court can in the least affect
them; for a regulation of their Proceedings will be little or no ease to the
Subject, their vast Jurisdiction extending twelve Miles round the Palace,
making a Circle above seventy Miles in compass, being the Grievance complained
of, which all the Towns and Villages about London can testify; and by the
reason that they obtained the Letters-Pattents, for the increase of their
Jurisdiction, as to the Persons, so they may obtain Letters-Pattents to enlarge
their Jurisdiction as to place; and consequently gain Power to Arrest seventy
Miles round the Palace, and then there would be little left for either
inferior or superior Court to do.

It cannot be denied, but that the Court of Marshalsea is a very ancient Court,
and very useful for trying all Causes arising between any of the
King's-Houshold; but it is plain, that that Court was very early for enlarging
its Jurisdiction, and did direct Process against all Persons within the Verge,
whether of the Household of the King or not; to obviate which encroachment, it
was Enacted by the Parliament, that the Parties Arrested should have liberty to
averr, that they were not of the Household at the time of the Suit commenced; by
which Act their Invention to increase their Jurisdiction was subverted; and it
is to be observed, that every Act made concerning the Marshalsea either
restrains or explains their Jurisdiction, but no Act enlarges it. And since it
was thought so necessary formerly to keep that Court within its due Limits and
Jurisdiction, why it should be thought convenient at present, that this new
erected Palace-Court should be favored with such ample Authority, is a thing
very difficult to imagine.


