AN ANSWER TO THE REFLECTIONS on the Five JESUITS SPEECHES.
OR, General Rules of CHRISTIAN CHARITY.
TOGETHER WITH The Speech of HENRY IV. King of France in behalf of the Jesuits.
FOr purposes best known to the Divine Wisdom, God has been pleased to suffer
amongst men, some who never had inclination to goodness, generosity, or any the
least moral virtue: Such true Children of him who was a Liar from the
beginning, cannot endure any other man should be esteemed pious, just, or true;
of such our Blessed Savior speaks Matt. 11.18. These Diabolical natures combat
Religion as their most mortal Enemy, in what shape soever they meet it: If it
appear in severe mortified Devotion, then it is called by them madness, as of
St. John Baptist, Behold a man that has a Devil; If it comes dressed in the
charming shape of Love and Sociable Conversation: Then (as the Blessed Jesus)
beheld a Drunkard and a Wine Bibber, a friend of Publicans and sinners; Such
children of Perdition, full of Envy, Malice, and all ungodliness, are ever
busy and taking more pains to serve the kingdom of darkness, and completing
their full measure of wickedness, then the best of Saints do to arrive at those
blessed Mansions prepared by their loving Redeemer in the Kingdom of the God of
Love: Of this sort of Spirit must he certainly be, who was Author of the
Preamble and Postscript Printed with the Jesuits Speeches: For were it likely
that men should be so Infatuated by the Principles of any Religion, as to die
with expectation of reward from him they call the God of Truth, when they
invoked him with their last breath as witness to a Lie, could it be possible, I
say, that men should arrive at such madness. Yet ought poor limited and
undiscerning men leave them to the Judgment of the Great, Wise, Just and All
seeing God to punish them as they deserve: But nothing is more certain than
this Truth, that the God of Truth hates falsehood above all things; and
therefore when provoked both by that, and the utmost contempt of his Divine
Majesty, by being invoked to be a witness to a Lie, he will above all Crimes
punish such contempts with his utmost vengeance: And is it possible, but that
all men of all Religions, who believe at all the Immortality of the Soul,
should also believe this Truth as certainly as they must believe there is a
Divinity, which gave their Souls that immortality. Yet dares this uncharitable
Author, as if he were the great searcher of hearts, accuse five persons,
pretending (as he says,) to Dignified Orders of Religion and Sanctity, together
with the perfections of Noble Learning (which usually betters men) to break
through all the Impalements of Divinity and Morality, and with a terrible Lie
to take their ultimate farewells, merely for the vanity of Imposing a belief of
Martyrdom, and to insinuate their Heresy into the Credulous and unstable: Oh!
most ridiculous conception, unlikely indeed to bear so great sway with the
living as the last words would do of the most Notorious Malefactors, much less
theirs who by a continued series of Good Life and Modest Behavior had spent
their time, (as they thought,) in their service of God, living some of them to
a great Age, without being Accused of any Crime against Humane Society, until
this the worst of Crimes which was Sworn against them; but that single one of
Designing the Murder of Gods Vicegerent their Anointed King, if true, was
enough to make black a continued life of virtue, longer then Methusalem; but
they with their last breaths deny their guilt, and others upon the Bible swear
it, these are but four, and they were but five, those were persons who had
Dedicated themselves wholly to the Service of God in the way they [at least]
believed true; three of these are men by their own Confessions guilty of many
Foul and Notorious Crimes, not yet giving the least Testimony to the World of
their Conversions by a good life, all of them of Indigent and Desperate
Fortunes, which they have well amended by their pretended Discoveries; which
true or false, it concerns them as to their well being here to make good; the
others can have no benefit by their Attestation, (but if false) the Eternal
Damnation of their Souls; a bribe no man would be found of. Now if this be
seriously considered on both sides, will it not be enough to sway with the most
Partial Standers by, at least to suspend his Opinion of the Truth until it
shall be revealed either in this World, or the next by the Almighty God, to
whom they have sides on both appealed, and who alone sees Truth through all
Disguises.

But not to suffer all the dirt to stick, the malicious Pen of this Author has
thrown on their (at worst but doubtful) Memories, we will slightly consider the
strength of his Arguments, avoiding all offenses to the Magistrate and the Laws
we live under, by whom supposing this (scarce probable) Evidence against them
true, they were most unjustly Condemned.

His Preamble and first Paragraph of his Postscript, tends only to persuade us
that these 5 dying men did hope by their damnable Lies to escape Purgatory and
leave it on their Left Hand, and at once skip from the Cart to Jacobs Ladder,
mount directly up to Heaven; which no man in his right Wits can believe, except
their Accusers will swear they told them so, or that he would produce some
Authority from Popish Doctors, that should not only allow Equivocation lawful,
but dying in a Lie Meritorious: For as for his calling them in the close of
that Paragraph Ipso functo Rebels and Malefactors when they first Arrived, that
can be no proof against them, since the same Argument holds against
Christianity it self propagated by the Apostles and their followers contrary to
the Laws of Nations then in force: And to which all persons pretending to make
Converts may readily reply in the words of the Apostle forbid by the Jews to
preach any more in the name of Jesus, Whether it be better to obey God or man,
judge ye.

I do not undertake to vindicate the Religion these men Died in, much less the
Opinions or Extravagancies of some Doctors of it, the Laws forbidding the one,
and the Romish Church it self the other; I will therefore only say it is no
more just to tax the whole Society with the Heterodox Opinion of two or three
men, then it would be to accuse Protestant Religion with King-killing
Principles, from the practices of some called so in the Murder of K. Charles
the first; and from the multitude of Sermons and other Discourses Printed in
Commendation and Vindication of that detestable villainy: But because our
Author refers much to the Oration made to Henry the Fourth of France, I will
only by way of Reply, insert that Great Kings Answer to it, mentioned by Mr.
Gaven, which was in these words.

The Speech of Henry IV. King of France in behalf of the Jesuits.
1. THe care you show of me and my Kingdom is grateful to me; albeit you seem
not to have thoroughly weighed the things you demand, nor are you, as yet, so
well acquainted with my thoughts, as I am with yours.

2. You deem the weal of my Kingdom to consist in the proposition you have
made; and you tell me it is a matter that deserves to be most carefully
deliberated. And I tell you, you have said nothing which I have not most
carefully weighed, and most diligently examined by my self these Eight or Nine
Years.

3. You take your selves for men of great understanding and experience in the
Common wealth. But believe me, I know as well as You all that has been in
Controversy in this matter.

4. First of all you object to the Fathers of the Society, the Assembly of
Poissy; The Clergy held an Assembly at Poissy anno 1561. in which the Society
was allowed of, and admitted though not fully.
but without cause. For if there had been at that place others like many of
them, the Catholic Cause would have had a more happy success. Therefore that
which you turn to their Dispraise, any just Vmpire will attribute to their
Virtue. But that which I most wonder at your Judgments for, is, that so
preposterously you condemn the Society of Ambition, whereas the Fathers of the
Society with a constant Submission, have ever refused all Honor and
Preferment, as well Ecclesiastical as Political: And which is more, they bind
themselves by Vow not only not to aspire to Honors, but even to refuse the
same when they are freely offered unto them. Consider their whole course of
life, and you shall find that all their Ambition is to labor for to help all,
and that without any pretense of Interest or Gain. They value not the expenses
of their own pains, so they may profit many.

5. But you call to question the very name of the Society of Jesus, and for
that you tax them. But see with what reason, For if they must be blamed for
that holy name, what shall we say for those Religious persons who take their
name from the most blessed Trinity? And your Daughters here at Paris; what will
you think of them that call themselves Daughters of God? Finally how will you
censure my Knights, who are called of the Holy Ghost? Truly I do not more
dislike them that take their name from Christ, then any other.

6. You object that the Divines of Sorbon condemned the Jesuits. I do not deny
it. But they condemned them being innocent, unknown, and unheard. For this I
call to witness, those very Divines themselves, who now admit them, whom their
Predecessors banished, and honor them whom they contemned; nay they praise now
and extol those that were condemned, and stick not to take them for their
Directors, and Masters, in all kind of Learning.

7. You tell me Jesuits have hitherto remained in France only by connivance.
Here I acknowledge, and reverence the Divine Providence, that has reserved
this Honor for me, not yet Achieved by others, that I should establish in
this Realm the Society of Jesus, which hitherto has had no settled abode in
France. My Predecessors have received the Society, I will Patronize and
preserve them.

8. Peradventure you will turn to the Jesuits discredit, that for which you
ought to praise and honor them: The University of Paris earnestly and openly
opposed them. And what, I pray, was the cause of this opposition? All was, that
the Fathers did not only equal others in Learning and Industry, but also went
far beyond them. A clear Testimony of this is the great number of Youth that
frequented the Fathers Schools, where (together with Learning) they Learnt
virtue. But to stop this opposition, I will make a Decree that the Universities
of Paris shall no more oppose them. And this you will be glad of.

9. But you will tell me, that the ablest of your Parliament got not their
Learning of the Jesuits, This I will not much gainsay. For the ablest of you,
as they excel in Learning so they exceed in years. These got their Learning in
Foreign Nations, before the Society set foot in France. Others did not so, and
so I am certain they think and speak otherwise. And what need they speak? the
matter it self speaks. We our selves saw how at the departure of the Society
out of France, all the Muses seemed to depart. Our University was desert and
mourned: Those came seldom at it, who before in great numbers frequented the
Fathers. Yea many departed the Realm, and forsook their Country to study in the
Societies Schools; nor could your Decrees or Threats stop them.

10. You say the Fathers joined themselves to the League, that is not to be
imputed to their fault, but to the iniquity of the times. But this I persuade
my self, upon the assurance I have of the Integrity of their Consciences, that
they will become such toward me, as it behooves them, who mindful of benefits,
desire to show themselves most grateful.

11. Now some of you impose on the Fathers a new Crime, and peradventure as yet
unheard of, saying, that they draw to their Order young men of the most
forwardness and best dispositions. An unpardonable Crime; yet I praise them and
esteem them particularly for this that you condemn. Do not we, though in a
different matter, do the self same? A Captain that is to raise Soldiers, does
he not cull out the choicest, and leave the meanest and lest hopeful? In your
Parliament, when you choose a new Court, or fill up an old, do you prefer the
unlearnedst, and least apt for business? If the Jesuits put Unlearned Masters
in their Schools, or in their Churches ignorant Preachers, would you not with
reason blame them? What offense is it that the Jesuits should provide the
fittest they can, both for Church and Schools.

12. That slander which concerns the Jesuits Treasure, is as false as common.
Go visit all the Colleges in France, search all their Treasures, sum all
together, and you will scarce find twelve, or at most fifteen thousand Crowns.
I know well how poor and sl^nder furniture and Provision was both at Lions and
Bourges. Nevertheless 30 or 40 persons were to be fed in each of these
Colleges; whereas their yearly Revenues was scarcely sufficient for eight
Masters.

13 The Vow of Obedience with which they tie themselves to the Pope does not
oblige them to be more faithful to externes, then to us Neither is there in
that Vow any thing contrary to the Oath which they will swear unto me. They
will attempt nothing (I am sure) against their Prince. That Vow to the Pope,
binds them to go to Barbarous and Savage Nations that they may reduce them to
the Catholic Church. The whole World testifies that the remotest Regions of
the Indies, together with infinite Heretics, have been by their pains and
Learned endeavors brought to Christ's fold. I remember I have often said, that
if the labor of the Spanish Fathers be so profitable for Spain, why should not
France with reason expect the same? Is that Kingdom more fortunate and
flourishing then this? Spain is loved by the Spaniards, and why should the
French hate their Native Soil?

14. But as you are wont to say, these men seek to be admitted into Provinces
and Kingdoms what way soever they can. Pray you is this an offense? It Is the
custom of all that follow the instinct of nature. I my self, by what means I
could, sought to get my Crown. Howsoever we cannot admire the Fathers constant
patience whereby they go through so great and hard matters, and bear so many
and so heavy Crosses.

15. Neither do I Esteem them the worse, for that they be so observant of their
Rules and Constitutions. This is that whereby the Society does increase,
flourish and better it self every day more and more. For this reason I thought
not good to change any of their Constitutions or Rules, though I have made some
change in others, which was not approved of all. But that is no matter.

16. The Fathers of the Society has many back friends, among some that seem
Holy and Religious persons, who speak ill of them. This no wise man will wonder
at. Our Age is not come to that sanctity, that Ignorance should cease to hate
Learning, or corruption of manners leave to envy integrity of life. It was so
in times past, and so it is still. These moaths always gnawing on Learned works.
No prosperity so circumspect; that can escape the tooth of malice, hatred and
envy, always attended the highest things. I observed, when it was consulted
about the recalling of the Jesuits into France, that two sorts of men did
specially oppose themselves, Heretics, and loose living Churchmen: The one
was moved thereunto by their bad faith, the other by their bad life. But I am
so far from being hereby moved to alter my intended purpose, that I am more
confirmed in my resolution.

17. The Fathers of the Society, speak and think honorably of the Pope, so
they should, and so do I; I join with them, since I am certain that in averring
and defending the Popes Authority, they differ not from other Catholic Divines.

18. Neither did their Doctrine ever give occasion to Clergymen to deny me
Tribute. Now is there any to be found whom these Fathers Words or Books
animated to Killing of Kings. Whatsoever some have patcht together to bring
them to discredit, is all a Fiction and mere Fable. Thirty years and more are
passed since the Fathers began to instruct the Youth of France both in Virtue
and Learning. Of these some have gone through with all their studies in their
Schools. Others have broke off, and applied themselves to Physic or Law. Tell
me whether any of these ever learnt of their Masters to lay hands upon Kings,
and to kill them? I tell you the Fathers are so clear, that they are content to
appeal even to their enemies judgment. There are some Pulpit-men among the
Heretics, who were trained up in the Fathers Schools: Ask these men their
judgment concerning the Jesuits Lives and Doctrine: But whose cause is so good
as to desire to be tried by Enemies? Yet I am sure in their case this has been
done, The Ministers have been asked their judgments of the Jesuits: And they
have given no other answer, but, That the Jesuits Lives cannot be Reprehended,
and for their Doctrine, that it is in too clear a Sun for to be questioned.
Surely few can be found that will dare to stand to their Enemies judgment,
their security of Conscience must needs be great, that fears not any
Adversaries Verdict.

19. The Confession of Barriere, who attempted against my person, does not
infringe that which I have said. For so far was any Jesuit from that fact
(which you nevertheless affirm) that one of these Fathers of good credit
advised me of it in time, and another of them dehorted and deterred Barriere
from his Attempt, proposing to him Goods heavy Judgments due to such
Malefactors.

20. As for Catel, all imaginable torments, were not able to wrest the least
word against Varadius or any one Father of the Society. If this be not so, why
spared you the guilty? Why let you them go when you had them fast? why punished
you them not according to your Laws and Court?

21. But to grant you that that never was; suppose some one of the Society had
attempted against my person. Will you condemn all the Apostles for one Judas?
shall the punishment light on my head, for whatsoever any of Soldiers shall
trespass in Military License? I acknowledge the hand of God, whose will it was
to have me pressed and humbled at that time; the same hand raised me, and set
me safe again. Gods goodness and providence be thanked. I have learnt to forget
and forgive injuries for Gods sake, as I willingly do for that King who is
greater than my self. And now I will be so far from remembering injuries done
unto me, or revenging the same, that I will daily offer up prayers for my
enemies. All of us have need of Gods mercy, which is no ways better to be
obtained, then by promptly and readily pardoning those who have offended Us.

NOw it is plain by this Discourse, that this great and wise Prince had well
considered what he spoke of; and had he found their Doctrine to be such as is
pretended, he would have been too nearly concerned to have become their
Advocate and Protector.

As for the pretended horrid Ceremony for Consecrating a Person and Dagger,
designed for a Royal Massacre. I will only speak of it in the Authors own
words; that it is an Invention of Men worse than Devils, a Lie indeed of so
impudent a nature, that it is enough to amaze Heaven it self, to see how Devils
Incarnate can outdo in malice the Spirits of everlasting Darkness.

Let any impartial eye observe the Countries our Author sums up to banish the
Jesuits; and besides that, he will find false causes assigned in most, it not
all the examples; He does in his last overthrow all that he has said, for if
Ferdinando King of Sweden was Expelled his Kingdom for endeavoring the
Readmission of the Jesuits, then it is as plain that he did not believe they
held Tenants destructive to Kings, as it is that these did who destroyed him,
as much as in them lay by Expelling him his Kingdom for defending the Jesuits.
Thus malice makes men blind: But above all, who can believe him, when he says
Father Harcourt's Letter about Sir Edmondberry Godfrey's Murder written three
Hours after it was done is so publicly to be seen, when any man that reads the
Trial may perceive it could not be produced; and if it were found since, and so
public as he pretends, no doubt our Author would have as well recited it, as
refer^d to it, for doing so would have been worth all he has said.

As to their Prayers for the Judges and Accusers, in my Judgment they were more
likely to proceed from Charity than Malice, let our good natured Author be of
another Opinion if he pleases, but his reason for the contrary is none; for it
is well known St. Stephen at his Stoning did the same, and yet desired neither
Prayers nor Tears of those that were not of his own profession, but it is true
those Prayers may become Curses to the Witnesses, if the Deposition against
them be as false, as it is evident some of what they have Deposed to King and
Council has been, as I could instance in the Case of Don John, and diverse
other matters, if I were minded to disparage the Kings Witnesses, as they call
them: But this I cannot forbear observing, that it may be justly said of some
of them, as Doctor Dun says of Witches, That they confess things impossible.
But leaving them to the great Judge of all things, I will only remind them of
this Truth, that if they betray innocent Blood for Gain, and make Gods Name
contemptible, by invoking it to a Falsehood; no Equivocation, nor Mental
Reservation, will shelter them from his dreadful vengeance which he in his due
time will visit them with: And it is a thousand to one he will for Terror to
others and Despair to themselves, make them the most miserable and contemptible
wretches breathing in this World; but if they have Sworn Truth, let them give a
luster to it by amending their Lives, that they and the Nation they have saved
by their Discoveries may glory in one another, to the confusion and destruction
not only of these, but all other its enemies.

But to conclude, I will desire but any reasonable man to consider the
absurdity of their Arguing, who pretend that not only these last five, but the
eight others condemned by the same Evidence, had Dispensations to die with Lies
in their Mouths: And that by the Doctrine of Equivocation and Mental
Reservation, they and all other Papists can say and Swear any thing, when it is
plain to all the world, that nothing but their fearing to Swear falsely lays
them liable to the Laws against Popery; can it be believed that men who forfeit
Peerage, Offices of Honor, Trust, Power and Profit, loose two thirds of their
Estates, and make themselves more obnoxious to more severe Laws than ever was
in force against Christianity during the first ten Persecutions, and all this
because they will not Swear against Conscience, can have Dispensations so
covenient to their earthly well being, and make no use of them; nothing can be
more contradictory to humain reason then these Calumnies, nor can any
indifferent person choose but see through such absurd contradictions. In fine
there has thirteen men, of which one a Protestant, have died already by the
Accusation of these four Witnesses, all have gone out of the World absolutely
denying the matters they were accused of, any one of them might have secured a
Pardon by confessing his Charge; they have been all of them of approved Honest
Coversation in their several callings during the rest of their Lives, and yet
we must not believe one tittle of their last words spoke so plainly, (if false)
to their destruction both here and hereafter; to their destruction, and not the
least to their Interest: Yet on the contrary we are not so much as allowed to
doubt the Fidelity of their Accusers, though men Notorious for Scandalous and
Wicked Lives; men who from abject qualities assume to themselves by this means
Dignities, and pretend to Honors and Titles; and who from the extremest
Poverty and Necessity are advanced to Opolency and Plenty for Accusing persons
of Consulting with them about Affairs of so high a nature as the Alteration of
Kingdoms, and Murdering the best of Monarchs. Persons of such Qualities and
Fortunes, as would with Job have disdained to set them with the Dogs of their
Flock, who if they would have made use of such pitiful Instruments, would
certainly have taken care for their support, and not have seconded their
Imprudent Election of such Counselors in matter of so great Trust, with a
second Error of suffering them to want when they had trusted them, but would
have provided for them as those we see do sufficiently, who now make use of
their service; but though we may not call them perjured persons until
Convicted, which their Protectors will easily prevent, by not permitting them
to be Indicted, yet none can deny us the libetty of thinking that men will
easily discern the difference between the Dying and the Living Testimonies, let
their Pretenses and Lies be never so many; But to the God of Truth we refer
both Causes, not doubting but in his good time all these secrets will be
brought to Light to his everlasting Glory.

POSTSCRIPT.
SInce the former, there is come forth another Paper called, An Answer to the
Jesuits Speeches, by Esrael Tongue D. D. full frought with labor and studied
falsehoods, but so plainly malicious, that no body who had not been a witness
of the success of their ill spun improbable stories in their first pretended
Discoveries, could have had the least hope, these should have prevailed with
one man, so contrary to the sentiments of humain nature. No, we all too well
know Sophistry vanishes at the approach of Infallible death, and that Dr. Tongue,
and the more hardened Imposture his Companion in Title and Design, will find at
the approach of that Grim Usher to their Eternal abodes, no resolution but a
good Conscience can make them follow him Smiling, this Truth writ with an
indelable Character in every breast will save us a labor to answer his
frivolous Anatomizing those men's last words, delivered so cheerfully and
heartily at their Execution; only we may safely make reflection on the last
Paragraph of his Impious and Uncharitable Paper, where he says, It is no more
then they expected, a Truth undeniable as to him and his Companions, who cannot
but be Conscious to themselves whether the Evidence given against them be true
or false, and from that might well expect their denial, which no man else that
believed them guilty did or could: But it is in vain to warn thinking people
from making natural reflections on these men's dying words, until it be proved
that they made it their practice to violate all Laws Humain and Divine, by
better Evidence then such as have been notoriously guilty of doing so, by a
continued series of Cheating, Stealing, Robberies, Perjury and Burggery, and
all other unnatural Crimes and Vncleanesses sufficiently known, and above
denial public to the whloe World; but what Truth can be expected from a low
spirited Wretch, who for a little Money (of which he complains he has been
Cousened too) can be contented to debase his Character of Divine to be the Zany
or Deputy Devil to such Mountebanks.


