ANSWERS FOR John Walkingshaw of Borrowfield.
To the Libel at the instance of Robert Greenlies in Glasgow, and Robert Yool,
one of the Baillies thereof.
WHereas there is a Libel Pursued before the Lords of His Majesty's Privy
Council, at the instance of the forenamed Persons, against the said
Burrowfield, founded upon several Ancient Laws against Privy Conventions, and
putting on Armor within Burgh, without the Magistrates License, and against
Convocating and Assembling within Burgh, and for Assisting the Magistrates for
suppressing of Tumults: And subsumi^g, that notwithstanding thereof, the said
Burrowfield drew his Sword and beat the said Robert Greenlies, and by many
Execrable Oaths, swore he would kill him without any other Provocation, but
that by order of Baillie Yool, he had seized Two Horses belonging to Hugh
Hamilton, for Transporting the Bagage of Colonel Hamilton's Regiment, and that
he rescued the said two Horses and sent them to his own Stables of
Burrowfield; and therefore concluding him guilty of an unwarrantable Opposition
to the Magistrates Commands, Beating and Blooding of the Town Officer, Sweating
and Profaning of the Name of GOD.

To which it is Answered, That the Laws Libelled have no Relation to the matter
of Fact subsumed, these Laws relating only to the unlawful Assemblies and
Convocations within Burgh, and to the Tumults therefrom arising, but not to any
casual Quarrel, though ending in Blows, which is frequent in every Burgh: And
as for Burrowfield himself, he is no Inhabitant of Glasgow, but a Neighbor
Heretor, and wears only an ordinary walking Sword, as much for Ornament as Use,
and at no time puts on any of the Armor related to in those Acts, and at all
occasions gives suitable respect to the Magistrates his Neighbors.

And as to the Fact Libelled, the same is altogether Calumnious, for the Forces
were Marched the day before, and the Bagage undoubtedly carried along with
them, and Burrowfield going home to his own House without any Company but his
own Servant, and seeing an Insult made upon Hamilton his Tenent, under Cloud of
Night, forcing him from his Bed, and carrying away his Horses by Violence
without any Warrant for that effect, Burrowfield judged it lawful to Assist
his Tenent Hamilton in Defending him and his Horses from any, who Acted more
like a Robber then a Person under Authority, which he did not pretend, but even
upbraided Burrowfield, and offered to Beat him with a Rung: In which small
Scuffle, if Burrowfield have taken his Sword in his hand to Compesce the
Insulter his, Insolence, a Justice of Peace might have been sufficiently
comptent for all that matter, without troubleing your Lordships; and
Burrowfield believes, that the said Insulting Person himself, would never have
Complained thereof, if Dowhill who must make business for the Town of Glasgow,
to give him an Errand to Edinburgh on their Charges at this Juncture, had not
made use of his Name for the end foresaid.

Though Burrowfield be Libelled against for opposing the Magistrates in the
lawful exercise of the Government, yet there is no circumstance of his
Opposition Libelled upon, nor can be: And if that opposing of the Insulter be
the Opposition meaned by, Burrowfield was innocent, for he did not look upon
the Insulter as a Magistrate, nor saw he any Warrant from a Magistrate, nor did
any Magistrate speak to him on the Subject: And seeing by the Acts of
Parliament 1681, and 1693. The Magistrates of Burrows, are ordained to have a
competent Number of Horses in readiness for the service of the Forces,
Burrowfield could not doubt but that the Magistrates of Glasgow were
accordingly provided; because they used to have a List of all the ordinary
Carters and Bagage-Men, and appointed them their Rooms by turns: And it was
never heard of, that ever there was so unevenly a cast of the Bagage Horse for
one Regiment, as that Fourteen Horses of Sixteen should be put upon
Burrowfield, his Tenants. Beside, that the Baggage was gone off, and that so
the Insulter was doing unwarrantably in the silence of the Night, in Robbing
Hamilton of his Horses, and the rather because they had beeen so employed for
Six or Seven times successive of before, whereas they ought only to be employed
by their turns, and with that discretion, that Carters and Hyrers Horse who
have no labor be first employed, and those who leave labor; last, and this
was in the throng of Hamiltons labor.

Whereas the Libel Subsumes, that Burrowfield used Execrable Oaths, the Libel
is Calumnious, and he is known by his Neighbors to be free thereof, and to
abhore the same: And if at any time in passion an Oath escape, he repents it
seriously, and would never have expected that any good Neighbor would have
exposed him to your Lordships on that behalf, which might have been well judged
by a Justice of Peace, to whom by their Instructions the Cognition thereof is
committed.

In respect of all which, Burrowfield ought to be Assoilzied, and the Anthors
and Fomenters of this groundless Libel condemned in Expenses.

Double of the Libel at the instance of John Walkingshaw of Burrowfield, Robert
Turner, Richard Greenleis, James Greenleis, John Armor, William Martain, Thomas
Greens, David Watson, and the other Tennents of the said John Walkingshaw.
AGAINST John Anderson of Dovehill Provost of Glasgow, Robert Yool John Aird
Elder, and John Warddrop, Baillies of the said Burgh of Glasgow.
THAT whereby the Rules of Society Laws, Constitution, and Practice of this and
all well governed Nations and Kingdoms, all necessary Burdens and Impositions
are laid on and exacted by an equal Proportion; so that every Member of the
Society, Residenter, and Subject in the Kingdom may bear an equal share; and
that no Man be Oppressed, but every one bear an equal Burden: As also, By the
good and wholesome Laws and Acts of Parliament of this Nation, and particularly
the 4th. Act of the 4th. Ses. of this current Parliament, ratifying and
confirming the Act of Parliament 1681. and the Act of Privy Council, dated the
14 February 1693 years. It is thereby Statute, and Ordaind, That where it shall
be necessar, that the Army have use for Bagage-Horses for transporting their
Bagadge from place to place, That if the Army or Party having use for the said
Bagage-Horse, be in a Burgh, that the Horse may be employed and made use of by
Order of the Commander of the Party, and the Magistrates of the Burgh jointly:
And where the Horses are furnished and made use of in Landwart, by the order of
the Commander, and one of the Commissioners of the Supply within the Shire.
Likeas, By the Ninth Act of the Seventh Session of this Current Parliament,
anent Quartering of Soldiers, The foresaid Act is confirmed, and just and
equal Methods laid down, and Penalties determined against those who shall be
Guilty in the matter of Quartering: And it is thereby declared, That the same
Execution shall be granted for Carriages as for Quartering. As also, By the 45.
Chap. Parl. 2d. Ja. 1. It is Statute, That all Judges do, and execute the Law
evenly: And by the 17- Chap. Parl. 6. Ja. 2. It is Statute, That all Officers
wilfully Trespasing in their Offices, shall tyne the same for Year and Day; And
by the foresaid Act of Privy Council, confirmed by Act of Parliament, as
aforesaid. It is Statute, That there shall be paid of Hyre for each Horse, One
Shllling Six Pennies for each Mile; And that it shall not be lawful to keep any
Man's Horses longer than one Day. Likeas, By the Act of last Session of
Parliament, anent the Security of the persons of the Leidges, It is Statute,
That no Man be imprisoned without condescending upon a particular and special
Crime; and that no person be keept and detained in prison after sufficient
Baill and Caution is offered for presenting the said person to abide and
underly the Law, and that under the Penalty mentioned in the said Act: As also,
by the Law and Practique of this Kingdom, The Spulzieing and Masterfully
away-taking of Plough Horse in time of Laboring, is a Crime of a high Nature
and severely punishable: Yet nevertheless, the said John Anderson of Dovehill,
having shaken off all fear of God, Obedience, and Regard to His Majesty and
Government, and the Laws and Acts of Parliament of this Kingdom, and the Rules
of Christianity, and Society, He the said John Anderson, with Robert Yool, John
Aird, and John Warddrop, and one or other of them, conceiving a deadly
prejudice, Hatred, Malice, and Envy against the said John Walkingshaw of
Barrowfield, and his Tenants, and snatching all occasions and oppertunities for
Oppressing the said Complainers, did upon the (...) day of March last by past,
or one or other of the days of the said Month, when the Regiment of Foot under
the Command of Colonel George Hamiltoun was to March from Glasgow; And when
Application was made by the Officers of the said Regiment three Days before
their March, that they had need of Sixteen Horses for Transporting their Ladies
and Bagage; The said John Anderson and the other Defenders, albeit at that time
there was Thirty common Carriers, and a Hundred Hireling Horses, which were
constantly employed in such Services, did cause give Advertisement to the
common Carriers and Horse Hirers, to keep their Horses out of the way, the Day
when the Regiment was to March; whereas the foresaid Defenders ought to have
Proportioned the Number of Horse, and appointed the Carriers and Horse Hirers
to have been in readiness; But in stead thereof, The said John Anderson and the
other persons complained upon, did send to the Complainers Lands, while his,
and his Tenants Horses were Plouing, and in the Harrows albeit the Pursuers
Lands lies not within the Jurisdiction of the Magistrates of Glasgow, and did
Unjustly, Masterfully, and Oppressfully take away Fourteen of the Complainers
and his Tenants Horses, whereas the Regiment had only for use Sixteen, and did
pass by the common Carriers and Horse Hirers of the Town of Glasgow, whose
Trade and Employment it is to furnish Cairts and Horses for transporting
Persons and Bagages: And as further Instances of the said Defenders, their
Acts of Oppression, They hunded out, and gave Warrant to their Town Officers,
who upon the (...) Day of March last bypast came under Cloud of Night, at
Eleven a Clock, and brake open the Doors of Richard Greenleis and Hugh
Hamiltoun, Two of the Compleaners Tenants, their Horses, while they were in
their Beds, and draged them out of their Beds, and Seized their Horses, and
secured them in other Stables, for the space of two Nights, to the great
prejudice of the Horses, and the Tennents their Laboring, the Seed lying upon
the Ground unharrowed: As also, John Boner, on of the Complainers Tenants,
having his Horse Ploughing some Land belonging to John Luke, Dovehills Brother
in Law, was exensed from carrying any of the Bagage; But when after the
Regiment was Marched, and no more use for Bagage Horses, it was told Dovehill,
That ths said John Boner was one of the Complainers Tenants, the said John was
committed to Prison until he should furnish Horses, albeit there was use for
them: As also, the said Robert Yool one of the Defenders, having called David
Watson, one of the Complainers, to furnish two Horse for Carrying the Bagage of
the said Regiment, the said David told the Baillie, that his Horses were Hired
by his Master Burrowfield, and drawing in his Masters Plough: Nevertheless, the
said Robert Yooll Baillie, did most wrongously, and unjustly commit the said
David Watson to prison until he should furnish two Horses upon his own
expenses, and continued the said David in prison, albeit the Complainer his
Master offered to Baill him in the Terms of the Act of Parliament, as appears
by Instruments taken thereupon. Likeas, the Complainers Tennents Horses being
so Masterfully pressed, were by the Direction of the said Defenders, carried not
only to Kils^th, the first days Journey, but likeways to Falkirk, contrair to
the Act of Parliament and express use and practice in the like case, and when
the Tenants Cairts and Horses were returned instead of receiving Three pound
Scots for each Cairt, as constant use is; there was no more given to them but
Two Shilling Starline: By all which it is evident, That the said John Anderson
and the other persons above complained upon, are Guilty of manifest Oppression,
Injustice and Crooked Judgment, and of the Breach of the Rules and Laws of
Society, and of the Acts of Parliament, and Constitutions of this and all well
governed Nations, which being proven, the forenamed Defenders, and ilke one of
them, ought not only to be decerned to make up and repair the Damages and
Losses sustained by the said Complainers and his Tennents, and to pay the
Penalties and Fines contained in the Act of Parliament anent wrongous
Imprisonment, and to Loss and Tyne the Offices of Magistrates in not judging
evenly; But also further Punished in their Persons and Goods, to the Terror of
others to do the like in time to come, etc.


