An Account of the PROCEEDING to Judgment, against Thomas Saxton, who Received
Sentence at the King's Bench-Bar, on Friday the 12th. of February, 1685. Upon a
Conviction of willful Perjury, in For-swearing himself against Henry Lord
Delameer, Barron of Mere, in the County of Cheshire, etc.
HERE STAND I FOR PERJURY.


A Among all the Projects and Contrivings of wicked Mer; none are so dangerous
as those of insnaring their Fellow Creatures by false Oaths; nothing so horrid
and Detestable, as to make the Justice of the Nation the Executor of their
Reverge, or Advantage, as in Case of Perjury, it has of late been too sadly
manifested, and had not an expedient been found to put a stop to the Carrier of
those Consciences, or at least to their effects; who bogled not at the blackest
Falsehoods. What Streams of Innocent Blood, had been by this time shead? What
Iniquity of that kind had been lest unpracticed? But God, whose peculiar Care
it is, to protect the Innocent, Winks not at such Villainy nor leaves it
unpunished, in this World has been Evident; but to pass over former Perjuries
and Perjurors, whom Justice has made examplar: I shall proceed to give the
Reader an Account of one lately Committed, and of the due Punishment the Law
has directed to be inflicted upon the false Swearer; which take as follows.

Thomas Saxton (a Person taken in the late Western Rebellion) amongst other
Persons) having accused Henry Lord Delameer, Barron of Mere in the County of
Cheshire, of High Treason, in Conspiring the Death of the King, by Leavying War
and Raising Rebellion, etc. The said Lord was thereupon Apprehended, and
Committed to the Tower of London; and taking his Trial, upon an Indictment
found upon the Oath of Saxton, he was by his Peers acquitted in the open Hall
of Westminster, upon the 14th. of January last; and upon that Trial, it
appearing that Saxton was Perjured; an Information was exhibited against him by
his Majesty's special Command for wilful Perjury, and he upon his Arraignment
pleading not Guilty, was on the 8th. of February, a second time brought to the
King's-Bench-Bar; and there putting himself upon the Jury for his Trial, the
Juror upon full proof of his manifest Perjury, found him Guilty, without going
from the Bar, whereupon he was Remanded to Newgate, and from thence on the
12th. of February, brought by a Rule of Count, in order to receive his
Sentence, where having nothing material to offer in his own Defense, after he
had been heard to what ever he pretended on that occasion, the Court proceeded
to pass Se^rence, as thus,

That he the said Thomas Saxton for his willful Perjury, of which he had been
sairly and fully Convicted, should stand on and in the Pillory, on Saturday the
13th. of February before Westminster Hall. On the 15th. of February, to stand
on and in the Pillory at Temple Bar. On the 16th. of February, to be Whipped at
the Carts Tail, from Ludgate to Westminster. On the 17th. to stand on and in
the Pillory, before the Royal Exchange. On the 19th. to be Whipped from Newgate
to Tyburn and Fined Five Hundred Marks.

And thus, we see Justice meet with those, that seek by unlawful ways the Ruin
of others, whether through Malice, or by an incitement to self preservation;

FINIS.
This may be Printed, February the 15th. 1685. R. P.

LONDON; Printed by E. Mollet, next Door to Mr Shiptons Coffee-House, near
Fleet-Bridge.


