AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST THE PRESENT FEARS AND JEALOUSIES OF THE NATION.

By an Impartial Hand.

With Approbation.

LONDON, Printed by R. E. at the Seven Stars in Ave-Mary-Lane, 1679.

AN ANTIDOTE, etc.
When I consider the present Condition of this Nation, the seditious
endeavors of our Enemies of all sorts, the slanderous Reports in City and
Country, and the strange Jealousies which men of corrupt and wicked designs
foment, to the great disquieting of our minds, and to the prejudice of the
Religious and unspotted Intentions of a most Gracious King, I judge it not
unseasonable to offer to the Public these few Lines, as well to prevent the
mischiefs of discontent and seditious fears, as to encourage all persons to
those duties, and that Loyal behavior, which our Heavenly Profession, and our
Worldly Interest, require from us; and the rather I have been persuaded to this
attempt, because there are such numbers every where of men, of diverse
Principles and Designs, busily employed in undermining the Nations Tranquillity,
by laboring to alienate the Peoples Affections from their Superiors, by
aspersing his wisest Proceedings and Actions, and by spreading abroad the
dangerous Seeds of Distrust, Suspicions, and Rebellion; chiefly in this
juncture of time, since the Discovery of the Popish Plot; now that Men's minds
are apt to take ill impressions, the Malice of some is unsufferable in
divulging the greatest Improbabilities, which nevertheless have ill Effects and
Consequences attending them. It is not long since we have smarted under the
woeful Sequels of such Unchristian Practices, which should oblige all men of
reason to be cautious how they entertain and give encouragement to any thing
that may lessen the Reverence to Government, or divert us from our Duty; for
let the Idolaters of Liberty say what they will, a Kingdom can never flourish
whiles Authority is dis-respected; and a Government is never safe when People
give themselves the liberty to cast all manner of abuses upon the lawful
Governors. The contempt of Laws is the next door to Rebellion; and the
Slanders fastened unjustly upon those that execute them, are near akin to
Murder and Assassination. If the tongue wounds the Name, the Hand will scarce
spare the Person, if opportunity were offered; and the rather we should take
heed how we entertain, or are instrumental in spreading abroad ill Reports of
the Sacred Persons of our Governors, or of their Government, because we see
confirmed to us, that this is the Method which their Enemies and ours observe
to bring us to our ruin. That we may therefore better secure our selves from
such dreadful Calamities hereafter, and now from the wicked impressions of
disaffected Persons, that we may quiet the Clamours and Fears of jealous Souls,
and encourage men to a right esteem and respect of our truly Religious King,
and to the duties that tend to his preservation and ours, from the Fury and
Malice of our irreconcilable Enemies: I shall first give my Reader a short
Narrative of several Instances observable in our Princes Reign, of his love to
his People, of his gracious Disposition, and of his sincerity and care in the
preservation of the Protestant Religion: 2. I shall examine what Duties our own
interest, and the present condition of the Nation, in relation to our Enemies
abroad and at home require from us.

Never any Prince has suffered more from Rebellious Subjects than ours; never
any more disobliged, and more cruelly handled. By the late Civil Wars he was
driven out of all his Inheritance, forced to seek for shelter in Foreign
Nations, after that he had seen his Royal Father barbarously murdered, his
Nobles and faithful Servants massacred, his Friends and Relations persecuted,
and their Estates sequestered, and yet never any more merciful to his greatest
Enemies. When God was pleased to restore his Sacred Majesty to his Throne and
Kingdoms, and with him Religion and Peace, how gracious has he shown himself
to his fiercest Persecutors. He has not diminished any thing of their Estates,
who endeavored to take all from him. He has not attempted upon their Lives,
who labored to deprive him of his: Nay in all his Majesty's Actings, in
relation to public or private concerns, since his happy Restoration, we may
all take notice of his rare and Christian disposition, and of his constant
endeavors to oblige the Nation. At his first appearance upon the Throne of
England, of his own accord he granted a General Act of Oblivion, to silence all
our fears, to stop the mouth of our Jealousies, to prevent the active malice
of some men, to secure our lives and fortunes, to heal up all National Wounds
which had been bleeding too long, and settle that Peace and Tranquillity which
we have enjoyed at home ever since. His just resentment might have taken notice
of those who had enriched themselves with the Plunder of his people, and the
Spoils of his Imperial Crown: The laws of Retalliation would have justified the
Sequestration of the Sequestrator's ill-gotten Goods; but his majesty's Wisdom
and Goodness smothered all his Displeasures in a gracious Pardon, and gave, to
the peace and quietness of h^^ People, those Estates and Riches which he might
have justly and lawfully taken to himself by a due Execution of Justice. He was
content to lose the great advantages which Divine Providence put into his
hands, out of a special regard to the good of the Nation, and, in Imitation of
his Royal Father, (that courageous Martyr) act in this occasion more like a
good Christian, than like a powerful King.

Amongst all the Princes mentioned in holy or profane Literature, I find none
so gracious, so merciful, and so ready to forgive offenses, as ours has been:
I find none more provoked by the Cruelty and Rebellion of his Subjects, and
none so willing to spare the lives of Offenders. Augustus the Emperor, in
whose peaceable Reign the Prince of Peace, the Lord Jesus was born, was
dignified by the Roman Senate with this Honorable Title, The Father of the
People, because he was of an admirable disposition: But we all know how cruel
his Triumvirate was, and the beginning of his Empire was stained with the blood
of the Noblest Families of Rome. Vlpius Trajanus was an excellent Prince, not
guilty of the extravagancies of his Predecessors, and yet he could not pardon
the offenses of his Subjects without a bloody Compensation. His Successor
Adrianus was so merciful, that he offered his Diadem to a Noble Traitor, who
had harbored the ignoble thought of murdering his Prince; yet in several
occasions he gave liberty to his Passion and Revenge to spill the blood of the
guilty. Likewise amongst the people of God, who more Religious and devout than
David, a Man after Gods own Heart; yet his Vengeance would not suffer the gray
hairs of Joah and Shimei to go down in peace to their Graves, though the latter
had acted against him but with his Tongue; whereas many of this Nation, whose
Hands and Tongues, if not their Hearts, have been acting against our merciful
Prince, have been pardoned, suffered to enjoy their Estates in peace, protected
by his Laws, and many of ability preferred and employed. Though these
kindnesses have been done to private Persons and Families, and they have
chiefly reaped the benefit of his Majesty's gracious Disposition, the whole
Kingdom is thereby obliged to his Majesty, because in the forgiveness of such
Offenders, he has had an Eye to the Public good, peace and satisfaction of
all his Subjects, rather than to his just Resentment. Moses was a Meek Man, yet
how many hundreds and thousands were made Examples of his Justice, and Gods
Wrath, for their Rebellions; few or none pardoned. Constantine the Great, the
first Christian Emperor's Name is sacred in the memories of men; he forgave
his Enemies, advanced Religion, encouraged Piety, yet he imbrued his Fatherly
hands in the blood of his own Son and Heir Crispus, upon the suspicion of a
Rebellion. Theodosius the Emperor was a brave and an excellent Prince, yet the
Inhabitants of Antioch complain of the promiscuous killing of their Citizens in
the Emperors rage. Justinian, the Lawgiver of the World, could not give Laws
to his own passions, nor save Bellisanius and Narses, his two great Generals,
from the cruel hands of his Empress Theodora. I might run over all the
Histories of former times, from the beginning of the World to this day, and
mention to you the noblest, the rarest, and most merciful Princes in foreign
Nations, and in this, yet I dare affirm, and do offer my self to prove from a
certain knowledge of the Histories of the World, that I may say I have perused,
that there was never any King, or Sovereign Prince, neither in England, nor
elsewhere, who has been so gracious, so compassionate and merciful to his
People, as our King Charles; neither has any Reign been more free from
shedding of blood; never any Government more mild and happy; never any Prince
less ruled by violence and interest, nor more governed than himself, by that
Sacred Maxim of his Royal Father; The settled Laws of these Kingdoms are the
most excellent Rules a King can govern by.

Where are the Widows and Orphans amongst us that can complain of the unjust
murder of their Relations? Where is the Family ruined by the Confiscation of
its Estate and Patrimony? Where can we meet with any particular instance of his
Majesty's overruling the ordinary course of Law and Justice. Henry the VIII.
and our former Kings, would sometimes give place to wrath, anger, and revenge;
and their Wills sometimes took the place of Laws: But where can we meet with
any such Example in our days? Where is there a person either Condemned, or
Executed, or deprived of an Estate, by our Princes Command alone? Many have
received their Lives and Estates from him, which had been forfeited by Law; but
to this very day, none ever lost either Lives or Fortunes to gratify his
Majesty's will and pleasure; even in this late wicked Plot against his Royal
Person, he has not punished any man but by course of Law.

Is not this a happiness for all the English Subjects, for Poor and Rich, to
live under such a reasonable Government, and gracious a Governor, and where
Law and Equity, Justice and Conscience sway the Scepter, where Power and the
Regal Authority are never used, but in vindication, and for the execution of
righteous Laws; though the Papists never intended to observe any measures of
Reason, Conscience or Humanity with his Majesty's Person and People, but in a
secret and private way intended to fill the Land with Assassinations and
Murders; nevertheless, he observes a Legal Method, and proceeds against them by
such means as are justifiable before God and Man: His Majesty delivers them
over to a Court of Judicature, to have a fair Trial for their Lives; he suffers
them to answer for themselves, and leaves them to an impartial Judge and Jury.
In foreign Nations such Enemies of the Public Safety would have been pulled
in pieces, as the De Wits; cut down and mangled by the rude Rabble, as Sejanus
at Rome, and the Assassins of the Prince of Orange, and of Henry the III. of
France, and many others: They would not have had the patience to see them
alive, who had resolved upon so cruel a design, as to murder the King and his
People without cause: But the World sees the moderation of our English Natures,
the Excellency of the Principles of our Religion, and the Justice of our King,
who is willing to make his most desperate Enemies sensible of it in their own
persons, without any passion, which has never carried him to act against them,
but in a regular way. And though some of them had forfeited their Estates by
Law, and it had been but a piece of Justice to reduce their Posterity to
poverty, who intended to make so many poor Families in this Land; yet to the
Eternal praise of his Majesty be it spoken, he has not attempted to take ought
of their Estates, but has restored since his Restoration, to the Children of
many Rebels, Traitors, and Regicides, the Patrimonies belonging to their
Forefathers, it is therefore a most unreasonable Aspersion, and a wicked
Slander, proceeding from the Shop of Ignatius, and his bloody Jesuits, to
report any thing amiss of his Majesty's most Excellent Government: As Mr. Oats
has very well taken notice, it has been the design of those Troublers of
Peace, to make us stand in fear of an Arbitrary Government; and to fasten upon
his Majesty, and his proceedings, the most abusive Lies: but let any man run
over the passages of his good Reign, he shall have no cause to suspect what
there is not the least color to believe.

The suspicions and jealousies in relation to Religion, are as plainly
scandalous and unlikely; it is sufficiently known, how zealous his Majesty has
always been in the profession of the true Protestant Religion from his Infancy:
It was the Advice of his Royal Father, Above all, I would have you, as I hope
you are already, well grounded and settled in your Religion; the best Profession
of which I have ever esteemed that of the Church of England: In this I charge
you to persevere, as coming nearest to Gods Word for Doctrine, and to the
Primitive Examples for Government. According to this direction our King has
behaved himself so, that neither fear, favor, nor interest, could ever draw
him from this Religion. In his Banishment his Majesty alone knows the greatness
of his Trials, and we and all the World the constancy of his mind.

Here the whole World might have seen the Religion of King Charles the II.
Neither the love nor glory of a Crown, nor the honors of the World, nor the
advantages of Life could prevail upon him to waver in the least from that
excellent Religion and Faith, for which the King his Father spilt his blood,
and which Christ and his Apostles have recommended to us; or to accept of the
Popish Superstitions: And since his Majesty's return to his Honor and Dignity,
which may be looked upon as a Reward of his Fidelity, as a glorious and
honorable acknowledgment of Divine Providence of our Prince's faithfulness to
the Profession of the true Protestant Religion, and a Testimonial from God
himself of his reality in his Faith, sufficiently evidenced to all the World by
the wonderful Circumstances of his happy Restoration. I say, since his
Majesty's return, how many plain and undoubted Testimonies has he given us of
his sincerity in the Protestant Profession and Resolution, to maintain it in
his Kingdoms against all Dissenters and Opposers. His Royal Father left him
this Charge: I do require and entreat you, as your Father and you King, that
you never suffer your Heart to receive the least check against, or disaffection
from the true Religion established in the Church of England: I tell you, I have
tried it, and after much search, and many disputes, have concluded it to be the
best in the World; not only in the Community as Christian, but also in the
special Notion, as reformed, etc.

Therefore as soon as he was settled by the advice of his Loyal Parliament, he
restored the Orders and Government of the Church of England, which in the
approved judgment of the King his Father is the best in the World, because it
is the most conformable in Doctrine and Practice, to Christ, his holy Apostles,
and and the Primitive Church, as he expressly declares: And to secure this most
excellent Religion the better, by removing all the causes of dissension, and
Obstacles that seemed to hinder such as had received contrary principles from
embracing it, the Kings Majesty yielded to an amendment of certain things which
gave offense. What could have been desired more from generous and a gracious
Prince, than was then granted in compliance with the peoples weakness and
mistakes? The Nation was then, through the disorders that had been in Church
and State, split into many pieces, and sad divisions: Men's judgments were
possessed with unreconcileable Prejudices and strange Principles, in opposition
to the Church of England, which they would not, nor could not speedily
overcome. It was therefore judged convenient to grant them time, and yet to
establish those Law as might both declare to the World His Majesty's constancy
in the true Protestant Religion, and direct them that were Dissenters to
embrace it. Examine but the Royal proclamations, and the Acts of Parliament,
and see what they say, and it will plainly appear, that the Kings Majesty never
had any design, since his Coronation, nor before, but to settle, protect,
favor, and maintain, according to his Royal Promise, the true Protestant
Religion of the Church of England, as it was established in Queen Elizabeth's,
King James's, and his Martyred Father's days.

And if not withstanding, out of his royal goodness and wisdom, the Laws
against Papists were not always strictly put in Execution, it was because the
necessities of the Kingdom, and the good of the Public did so require it, for
the preservation of Peace, and the better settlement of the Truth. Fire and
Sword are not always seasonable against Dissenters in Religion: It belongs to a
King to mitigate his Laws, and suit them to Times and Cases: He is not always
bound to observe them in all their rigor and exactness, neither does such
proceedings consist with the general good and happiness of a Kingdom; though
the surious zeal of inconsiderate Subjects may sometimes wish for the contrary.
But, as in distempered Bodies the Physician does not always observe the same
Rules of his Art, nor apply the same Remedies; but changes and alters them
according to the Diet, Humor, Pulse, Country, Air, and other Circumstances of
the Patient: So it becomes a wife Prince to handle the Distempers of Church and
State, in such a manner as may answer the universal good, the chief end of
Government, and prevent the increase of the Disease. It is therefore a grand
presumption, for every petty Fellow, and ignorant Mechanic, to exclaim against
his Superiors Actions in such a case, when he is not capable to understand the
great Reasons of Sat that govern them.

Besides, the Papists did scemingly express their Duty and Allegiance to the
King, out of a design as it is now supposed by some, when he was in his
Banishment, when many Protestants were unable to do him service, but with their
Prayers and Wishes. After his happy return, could he do any thing less than
grant them some freedom under his good Government, for which many of them had
taken up Arms against Rebellion? It was but just, whiles they confined their
Religion within their own Breasts, and professed to live as peaceable Subjects,
and quiet in their Offices and Estates, that they should reap some of the
Fruits, and taste of the sweetness of that Reign, for which many of them had
ventured their Lives and Fortunes. As they had a share in the sufferings, it
was but just that they should have also a share in the happiness that
succeeded: As they have been concerned in his Majesty's Calamity, Reason and
Conscience obliged him at first to suffer them to have an Interest in his
Restoration and happiness. This is sufficient to justify our Kings gracious
Proceedings toward the Papists from all jealousy and suspicion, and to make
it appear that his Grants and Allowances proceeded not from any approbation of
the Popish Idolatries and Superstitions, but from a Principle of Justice; not
from an allowance of their Religion and Abominations, but of their Persons, and
faithfulness to him in his distress, which had obliged him in requital to show
them some favor.

And not only to them his Majesty has given several Expressions of Royal
goodness, but also to all Dissenters from the Religion of the Church of
England. Though the Laws are severe against Conventicles, and Conventiclers,
whiles they are peaceable and not mutinous, though their Practices are of ill
consequence, and not agreeable with Law, yet so great is his condescension as
to suffer them in their way, without disturbing their Meetings, according to
this Christian Speech which has been often heard from his Majesty. I will
never trouble any for his Conscience, but let no Man trouble, nor disturb my
Government.

If the Papists had not plotted the Nations ruin, and agreed together to
murder both Prince and People, they might have yet continued freely in the
enjoyment of their Religion, and of as much privilege as they could reasonably
desire under the Government of so favorable a Monarch. No person would have
dreamed to disturb them in their Privacies and secret Devotions: They might
have lived and died, without any fear of the Execution of the Laws, in the
fruition of their Estates and Places, with as much liberty as the Protestants
themselves. We all began to look upon them with kindness, to esteem them as our
Brethren and good Countrymen, and to favor them in many respects: But how
strangely have we been mistaken and deceived, let the World judge. However this
is our comfort, that their malice and bloody designs intended against us were
causeless, and without any provocation on our parts. Neither his sacred
Majesty, nor any of his people did ever before give them any distaste, but in
harmless Disputes; in which they had as much freedom to answer as any
Protestant Divine.

But when this hellish Plot broke out, to our great amazement, it cannot be
judged unreasonable if they are restrained by Authority, and the ancient Laws
revived against these new Traitors, that offer for Religion to rise in Arms
against their King and Country. It cannot be thought unreasonable if their
Leaders, and the Chieftains of their Rebellion be secured, that they may not
put in practice those Inhuman purposes unto which they had encouraged their
silly Proselites. It cannot be thought unjust, if Governors and People require
from them security for their good behavior for the time to come, and such
Oaths as may oblige them to a peaceable Behavior, if any such there be that
has that good influence upon their wide Consciences and licentious Principles.

His Majesty's care to prevent the mischiefs which they intended against us,
our Religion, and Nation, has been answerable to and no less than his favor
and goodness to them before. Truth, this Conspiracy is so heinous, that at the
first Relation it may not seem strange, if a good Prince, who is as much
persuaded of his peoples Affection for him, as he knows his love and
mindfulness of their welfare and safety, could not easily believe it; it being
so unlikely an Attempt, that Posterity may look upon this Plot, as some in our
days do upon the Gun-Powder-Treason, as upon a Romantic Story, or a Politic
Invention, or a State Trick, and give no more credit to it than to the
Histories of Grand Cirus, or of Guy of Warwick, or of Amadis de Gaul.

In a matter of so great a moment, it did become a Prince of Reason, Judgment,
and Wisdom, to weigh the Testimonies, examine the Circumstances, and consider
all particulars, before he ought to pass a determinate Sentence in this Case.
But now the Evidences are as plain as the Sun, now that it appears that this
Barbarity was really harbored in the breasts of some of the Popish Party; now
that we see their Malice and Cruelty written with the indelible Characters of
the innocent Blood of an eminent Magistrate and Martyr, whose only Crime was
that he knew theirs, and their horrid Proceedings; now that we see, by his
unexpected Murder, what our King and People were to receive from the merciless
hands of these men, who can deny it? Certainly God has infatuated their Wicked
Counsels for the good of our People, Nation, and Religion, and suffered their
furious Zeal to begin one Tragedy which they intended should have acted many
more. But by this Cruel Murder they have given us a clearer Prospect of their
Diabolical Designs, and alarmed us all in defense of our Persons, King, and
Country, against such future Inhumanities: They have hereby listed up the Mask,
and shown to all the Nation the fearful Features of their disguised Religion,
and declared to us all what Malice and Cruelty governs them, what Wickedness
they would commit, if Power and Authority were in their hands. O Barbarous
Impiety! could you offer to strike at a Breast full of tenderness and affection
for your persons? Could you attempt upon a life upon which depends all our
lives and fortunes? Your Inhumanity is the more inexcusable, and not to be
paralleled amongst the Turks and worst of Infidels, whose Principles suffer
them not to be wicked to their Benefactors.

This Circumspection of our merciful Prince deserves our Eternal Praises,
rather than the Abuses of disaffected people. Why should the Papists plot
against his life, for being our Friend? This is an Injustice guilty of the most
grievous folly and palpable mistakes, proceeding from Ignorance, and the not
observing the great care that his Majesty has taken to discover and prevent
all the mischiefs intended against us and his Government; for, upon the first
Discovery of the Plot his Majesty gave speedy Orders to his privy Council to
proceed in the Examination of this great business: According to his Royal
Commands they sat regularly twice every Week to sift out the matter, and when
they found the truth of it by undoubted Circumstances, they sent to apprehend
diverse of the Conspirators; examined them severally to sift out the matter;
afterward they committed others to Custody; using in this and all other
Proceedings all the Care and Secrecy immaginable. All persons chiefly
concerned or suspected were sought for; and as many as were found were sent to
Prison, to be tried according to the Order of Law. It is true, our people laid
not violent hands upon them: We did not tear them in pieces as they went about,
nor dis-member them upon bare suspicions of Treason: We did not mangle their
Bodies, nor exercise our rage upon these bloody men.

The Proceedings of our King and Council were agreeable with the Rules of
Humanity, Reason, and Equity. The Malefactors were secured, and delivered over
into the hands of Justice, to be treated according to the Laws of the Land.
They had fair Trials for their lives; men of Conscience and Worth judged them
Guilty by most undeniable Testimonies: They had liberty to answer for
themselves, and to defend their own Cause: They were heard with patience and
Christian moderation; and there was nothing acted against them, but was
suitable to Christ's precepts and his Holy Gospel. If all the Proceedings be
observed, we shall find nothing more reasonable, nothing more Christian and
just, than the Actions of our King and Superiors in this Case. They are
sufficiently justified from all suspicions of Cruelty on one hand, and from all
neglect or carlesness on the other. Can the Papists now find fault, if they are
abridged in some respects from that liberty which they intended to abuse in so
wicked a Plot? Can they blame our Governors, for seeking so carefully to
preserve themselves, the King's Majesty, his Dignity, Government, and Religion,
from their Inhumanities? And on the other side, to satisfy all the English
Subjects, let us observe the care and diligence of his Majesty, and of our
Governors, to secure the nations peace from Popery and the Conspirators.

After the Plot was fully discovered, his Majesty reinforced his Guards, and
gave liberty to the Trained-Bands to stand up in their own defense; Care was
also taken to secure and seize upon all suspected persons. About this time the
Papists thought to have smothered the noise of the Plot, in the Death and Blood
of a diligent Inquirer into their proceedings, Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, whom
they inhumanely murdered. When he was missing diverse Reports were raised, and
Slanders fastened upon him: They that were guilty of this black Crime
endeavored to make us believe the greatest Improbabilities; That he hadkill'd
himself, etc. But the manner of his lying, with all the Circumstances,
convinced the Coroner and Jury, assisted by Chyrurgions on purpose, that he had
been basely and inhumanely murdered. The boldness and desperateness of this
Villainy awakened the whole Nation, and caused his Majesty immediately to send
forth his Royal Proclamation, for the seeking out and finding the Actors in
this Inhumane murder, commanding them to give intelligence of all such
Discoveries to one of the principal Secretaries of State: For their greater
encouragement, five hundred pounds were promised to them, with a Pardon, if the
Discoverer were any ways guilty. I cannot here express what displeasure his
Majesty received, how sensible he was at the loss of so useful a Subject, who
dyed for his care and diligence in the Service of his Prince and Country. The
Virtues and Excellency of his person, the Integrity of his Behavior, his
Goodness, Piety, Prudence, and Discretion in his Place and Calling, caused his
Majesty, and all that knew him to mourn for him. But the baseness of his
Murder, the Treachery of his Assassins, the Marks of their Cruelty lest upon
his dead Body, called for Vengeance from man as well as from God; which every
good Subject was so much the more concerned to see executed upon the bloody
Butchers, in regard of their impudency, and the boldness of the Attempt,
wilfully to betray and murder an innocent person, a famous Justice of Peace, in
a Royal Palace; a Justice known to his Majesty by his great Services, and to
all the City by his good behavior and Religious life: To murder him within the
protection of the Guards; and having carried his Body into the Fields, and cast
it away as a Dog, to endeavor next to murder his Name and Reputation with vile
Slanders. All these Circumstances could not but stir up the Justice of a good
King, by the punishment of the Inhumane Villains, to secure other men from such
like Inhumanities, and declare to all the World his sorrow, grief and
displeasure for such a barbarous Act. For the better finding out of the
Murderers, his Majesty caused a diligent enquiry and search to be made,
summoned and commanded all his Officers and good Subjects to do the like: And
when he was informed that some were willing to come in and reveal the Murder,
but the fear of the Consequences, as of the revengeful hand of the Friends, or
of the other Murderers, made them cautious how they endangered themselves: His
Majesty, for their encouragement, by a second Proclamation, promised on the
Word of a King, That if any person should speedily make discovery, he should
not only receive the Reward of 500 l. and Pardon promised, but his Majesty
would take such effectual care for the security of such Discoverer, as he
should in reason propose. What other ways and methods could be proposed more
likely to bring this Murder to light, and the wicked Varlets to their deserved
punishment? They have by Gods goodness proved so effectual, that this Popish
act of Inhumanity, with all its Circumstances, is generally known, and fully
understood. The guilty persons were secured; search, and a diligent enquiry was
made for them that were fled; Green, Hill, and Berry were tried, found guilty,
condemned to be hanged: Which Sentence was accordingly executed upon them; two
suffered upon the 21. of Febr. Berry was Reprieved for a few days, but is now
executed also.

During his Majesty's most peaceable Reign, as he has always expressed an
abhorrency of the shedding of Innocent Blood, so he has always been diligent
and careful to see to the due execution of the Laws upon bloody-minded men, and
to cause his Justice to take away the Lives of those who cannot suffer his good
Subjects to live in peace. As in this occasion his Justice has been remarkable
to the whole Nation, his Piety toward God, and care for the preservation of
the Protestant Religion, in other respects, have been no less visible; for
considering the number, the power and devilish subtilties of our Enemies; and
that therefore without Gods goodness, protection, and watchfulness over us, we
are in continual danger to be oppressed by our vigilant and malicious
Adversaries, his Majesty by a Proclamation called upon all his good Protestant
Subjects, to humble themselves before God, to ascribe to him the glory of all
our Deliverances, to amend sincerely our lives, and put our selves into such a
disposition, as may reasonably expect Gods protection for the time to come: A
method always observed by good Kings and Princes, when their Enemies were
numerous and great. Queen Hester sent to Mordecai, and the Jews, to humble
themselves before God when Haman's Conspiracy was discovered and known. The
King of Nineveh commanded a general and a strict Fast within his Dominions,
when Jonah foretold the Judgment of God by Fire that was to consume that sinful
City: And David, Hezekiah, and Josiah, and all the good Kings of Judea, took
the same course to divert Gods approaching Judgments: And as their Prayers and
Humiliation proved effectual, so as to prevail upon the goodness of God, and
oblige to withdraw the Sword of his Justice stretched out over their heads: So
likewise I hope God will forgive the great sins of this Nation, preserve his
Majesty in prosperity and health, many any many years, and keep his Royal
Person, and us all, from the bloody hands of all Papists.

By the Death of Sir Edmundbury Codfrey this Plot appeared so plain, and with
so many heinous and dreadful Circumstances, that every one was fully convinced
of the reality of this Hellish Design; which, if not prevented in time, would
have drowned us all in Rivers of our own blood. To hinder therefore all sequels
of the Plot, and take from the Papists the power and opportunity of putting any
part of it in execution, his Majesty on the 30th of October. issues out his Royal
Proclamation, to command all Popish Recusants to depart from Westmin-Hall,
Somerset House, S. James's, the Cities of London and Westminster, and not to
come within ten miles of these places. By this means his Majesty has provided
for the security of his Royal Person; he has hindered our Enemies from meeting
together in numbers; he has broke the Neck of all Popish Resolutions,
Consultations, Tumults and Rebellion in the City, or near his Royal abode. And
lest they should gather together in any considerable numbers in the Country,
and raise there any stirs, to the disquietness of his Majesty's Subjects and
Government, by another Proclamation of the 10th of November. his Majesty first
declares his knowledge and persuasion of the dangerous and wicked Plots and
Designs of Popish Recusants against his Person and Government, tending to the
subversion of the true Protestant Religion established by Law within this
Realm: And then he strictly commands all his Subjects, being above the age of
16 years, if they be, or shall be lawfully Convicted, to repair to their
several abodes, and not to pass above five miles from thence, upon pain that
the Offenders shall lose all their Estates moveable and immovable. And because
some Popish Recusants have escaped Conviction, through the Indulgence and
favor of his Majesty's Officers, he is pleased to command all such as shall be
reputed Popish Recusants, though not Convicted, if they obey not his Royal
Orders, that they shall be punished, by tendering to them the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy; and in case of a refusal, that they shall be treated
according to the severity of the Laws in such cases provided. And further, if
they refuse obedience to this his Majesty's Royal Commands, the Justices are
ordered to signify their Contempt to my Lord Chancellor, who is appointed to
take that severe course which is agreeable with the Laws, and the Public
Safety: Only his Majesty out of his Royal goodness is pleased to except such as
are hindered by sickness, weakness of body, imprisonment, and such as are
banished ten miles from the Cities of London and Westminster.

By this Proclamation his Majesty provides for the safety of his Subjects all
over the Kingdom, and prevents the malice of the Papists from breaking out in
the Country at a distance, as it intended to break out in the Bowels of the
City: Therefore they are hereby confined within certain limits, and such
circumspection is used, that those who are willing to disturb the Nation, shall
not have the least power to effect their desires and designs.

Though the Papists of Note and Credit are generally accused for being
accessory to, and acquainted with this Conspiracy, his Majesty's Wisdom,
Christian moderation and Justice, have endeavored to secure none, but those
who are apparently guilty, and against whom there are evident proofs. On the
rest he lays such Injunctious and Commands, as may keep them in peace; but
those he has labored to find out, and bring to their deserved punishments.

And because some of them were fled, his Majesty by his Proclamation of the
20th of November charges them to come in to their Trials before the 10th of
December. and justify themselves from the Crime laid to their Charge, of
designing to destroy the Kings Royal Person, subvert his Government, and root
out the true Protestant Religion established by Law; His Majesty declares, if
they will not surrender themselves, that they shall be declared guilty of
High Treason by Law, commanding all his Officers and Loyal Subjects to
endeavor to find out, and apprehend them; and for their encouragement, his
Majesty promises them 100 l. as a Reward. And for the better discovery of
these Offenders, all Officers are commanded within their Parishes and
Precincts, to take the Names of all Popish Recusants above to years of age, and
to deliver a List of them to the Justices of the Peace, who are thereby ordered
to send for them, and tender to them the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy; and
in case of a refusal, to bind them over to appear at the next Sessions of the
Peace, where they are to be treated according to law.

In the same Proclamation his Majesty gives an Express Command to all his
Officers in the Country, to proceed without delay to disarm all such persons as
shall refuse to take the oaths; and promises also ten pounds to every one who
shall find any considerable quantity of Arms in the houses of any Popish
Recusant, to be paid to them by the Sheriff of that County. Order is there
likewise given to all Officers upon the Seacoasts, to use diligence in the
taking of Popish Priests, and of other English Papists coming in or going out
of the Realm, and to carry them before a Justice of the peace to take the
Oaths; which if they refuse, they are to be sent to Goal, and their names to be
signified to his Majesty's Privy Council, that such further course may be taken
for the safety of his Majesty, and of his Government, as to his Majesty's Royal
Wisdom shall be thought fit.

The same day his majesty, having taken notice of the numbers and wicked
actings of Popish Priests and Jesuits disguised within the Realm, with an
intent not only to draw his Subjects from the true Protestant Religion to the
Romish Idolatries, but also to set on foot diverse traiterous Plots and Designs
against his Majesty's Government, and the Protestant Religion, was pleased by
another Proclamation to charge all Magistrates, and other Officers, to use
their utmost endeavor to discovery, apprehend, and commit to safe Custody, in
order to their Trials, all Popish Priests and Jesuits; and for the
encouragement of every such Discoverer, his Majesty promises twenty pounds for
every Priest or Jesuit apprehended, to be paid at the time of the Apprehension.

The Jesuits and Popish Priests have always been the Popes Emissaries in
England, and have had a hand in all the Wars and Disturbances in the Land,
since the Reformation: They have been the Spies upon our Public Peace,
Tranquillity, Government, Church and State; therefore our own preservation calls
upon us, to secure and treat them according to the Ancient Laws of the Realm,
as our sworn Enemies, and the Disturbers of the Nations Peace. By this last
Proclamation therefore, every one may see how careful his Majesty has been to
secure such wicked persons, and deliver them over to Justice, to hinder all
their evil designs and purposes, and defend his Subjects Lives, Religion, and
Estates, from this and all other damnable Conspiracies.

And because in all Plots of this nature, when the chief Actors are either
silent, or not apprehended, there remains something secret which cannot easily
come to light, for the better discovering of such things, and the whole Design,
with all its heinous and criminal circumstances, his Majesty was pleased, on
the 27th of November. by another Proclamation, to declare and promise, That if
any person would come in, and make any further discovery of the late horrid
Design against his Majesty's Sacred Person Government, before the fifth day of
December, he should have as a Reward a full Pardon, either for being guilty
thereof, or for the concealment, and two hundred pounds in Money for such a
discovery.

Here are Rewards and Punishments, Promises and Threatenings, much vigilance,
circumspection, and care employed by his most Excellent Majesty, to secure us
and our Religion from the wicked designs of our Popish Enemies: Nothing that
Wisdom or Prudence can suggest, has been omitted for the Public safety: And
because the Jesuits Policy has always invited over into their Schools, and
Seminaries several Gentlemen's Children, under a pretense of a better and a more
speedy Education, and a greater Proficiency in Learning, but purposely to
infect them with their Popish Principles and Religion, to the great prejudice
of the Nation, as well as to the ruin of such poor Souls, his Majesty has
been pleased strictly to forbid such Transportation for the time to come,
because these Persons, when they are grown up to years of understanding, and
have learned their Lesson perfectly, they are sent back into England, as
Sapho's Parrots and Birds were amongst the Woods and Caves of Africa, upon the
same Errand, to proclaim that the Pope he is God. These Persons are dangerous
to Religion and the Public safety, for they are like Sampson's Foxes, they
spread the Fire every where in this Field of England; they borrow from beyond
the Seas that subtilty, which together with the courage and strength of
Resolution, natural to our Nation, renders them the most fiery and desperate
Enemies of our Religion and Government, and carries them to the boldest
Attempts against the Lives of our Kings and Princes: Of this number were Pool,
Campian, Garnet, Piercy, Catesby, and others of the same Principles.

To prevent such Evils for the time to come, and hinder our English Gentry from
Popish and Jesuitical Infection, the Kings Majesty sent out his Proclamation on
the 8th of January, to command home all such young persons as are in foreign
Seminaries, and their Parents or Guardians to send for them speedily, promising
his gracious Pardon for their former offense, if they return according to his
Majesty's Order; forbidding, for the future, any such persons to be sent into
those Foreign Schools of Papists, and their Parents and Guardians to send them
any relief: Besides, his Majesty declares in this Proclamation; That he expects
due obedience to this Command, and that such as shall disobey shall be punished
according to Law, as well as deserve his high displeasure.

Here are several Proclamations in which all the ways and methods that can be
imagined, to prevent the growth, the machinations and wicked designs of Popery,
are carefully observed. All that may or can conduce to the settlement and
security of the Protestant Religion, and the present Government is established
and commanded. The Papists are banished from Court, disarmed in the Country,
confined to their Dwellings, bound to their good behavior; their Children are
commanded away from Popish Schools, their Priests and Jesuits are sought for
and imprisoned, penalties and rewards are promised and threatened for to
encourage the Execution of the Laws. What greater Testimony of his Majesty's
Sincerity to our Religion, and care of our Welfare, can we wish for? What means
more effectual could be employed for that good purpose? What other Orders and
Commands can we imagine seasonable and sit to secure our selves from Papists or
Popery? But if these Commands and Proclamations have not met with an exact
obedience in all respects and in all parts of the Land, I suppose it is the
fault of some private Officers, who prefer their Obligations to, and intimacy
with Papists, to the performance of their Princes Orders, and a due obedience
to his Commands. I am persuaded no reasonable people can justly desire from a
good King greater assurances of his reality in the Protestant Profession, and
of his resolution to maintain it, than we have always had. In his Majesty's
most gracious Speech, on the 9th of November. to the Lords and Commons when his
Majesty went to thank them for their care of his safety, and preservation in
these times of danger; he assures them, That he studies as much their
preservation, and promises to join with them in all the ways and means that
may establish a firm security of the Protestant Religion according to their
hearts desire. In his time his Majesty tells them that they need not sear, but
for the time to come he promises to concur with them readily in all Bills and
Acts which they will present for the security of their Persons and Religion,
and desires them to think of some more effectual means for the Conviction of
Popish Recusants. In the conclusion his Majesty declares, That he is ready to
do any thing that may give comfort and satisfaction to all his dutiful and
Loyal Subjects.

In these words his Majesty's Royal Sincerity and candor in Religion appears
as clear as the Sun in its splendor; and no reasonable Person can desire
greater Evidences of his care of his peoples safety, of his resolution to
maintain the Protestant Profession, and to keep Popery out of this Land, than
his Majesty has lately given us.

Likewise at the Prorogation of the last Parliament his Majesty was pleased to
tell them, That he would immediately enter upon disbanding the Army, and that
he would let all the World see that there was nothing that he intended but for
the good of the Kingdom, and for the safety of Religion; That he would
prosecute this Plot, and find out who were the Instruments in it. And in the
Conclusion his Majesty promised, That he would take all the care that lay in
his Power for the security of Religion, and the maintenance of it as it is now
established.

To the same purpose his Majesty declares in his gracious Speech to both houses
of Parliament lately assembled, That for the public good, and satisfaction of
all his Subjects, he had done many great things.

Again, in order to our safety, his Majesty in that Speech offers to confirm
any new Law which they shall think seasonable or necessary for the securing of
the Kingdom against Popery: and assures them, That with his life his Majesty
will defend the protestant Religion, and the Laws of this Kingdom.

By these Gracious Words and Promises this wife and Loyal Parliament is
encouraged to act in order for their own security as vigoously as they can.
What now can any Prince say or do more in such a case as this? He has
endeavored to secure Religion from Domestic Plots, and Foreign Attempts: He
has set all Engines at work, and made it his whole and chief business to
provide for our good, welfare, security, and the happiness of the Kingdom,
according to the pious and Religious Examples of the Royal Martyr, his
Majesty's Father, and of King James his Grandfather, under whose Governments
these Kingdoms and true Religion have long flourished in Peace, and would never
possibly have been so much disturbed with Wars, Tumults, and Civil Dissentions,
had it not been for the Jesuits that thrust themselves amongst us. King James
was sensible of their dangerous proceedings, therefore he enacted against them
most wholesome and just Laws, which caused them to attempt often upon his
Sacred Life. For our late Royal Martyr, we know by whom he was condemned to
dye, before that Arch-Traytor and Usurper Oliver and his Butchers brought him
to his Trial. The most noble Family of the Stuarts, it seems, is not sit for
their unjust and superstitious purposes; they have been the nursing Fathers of
Gods true Church amongst us; they have defended Religion against their
Idolatries with their Swords, Pens, and Blood; their noble and generous minds
cannot stoop to acknowledge any other Superior but God; they will not yield to
their cruel purposes; therefore these wicked Traitors have always labored to
cut off that most Religious Family: There can be no greater Testimony of our
King being a true Protestant, than this, that the Pope and his Papists have
declared him to be their Enemy, and have sought to destroy him who is God's
Anointed, and the best of princes.

By these wicked Designs, and restless endeavors, the Papists have from time
to time drawn upon themselves the hatred of the English People, angered the
Governors of the Church and State, and obliged them to enact Laws against
them, to restrain them from that Liberty which a great part of them never knew
how to use with moderation and discretion in this Land.

Their Proceedings and Attempts are not only disconsonant with the peaceable
temper and blessed Rules of Christ's Religion, but so barbarous and inhuman,
that we may justly wonder what spirit of madness possesses their Souls; what
cruel Devil prompts them to such Actions, and makes them forget all sense of
Humanity: The settlement of their Religion, which is their ordinary pretense to
excuse their Tragedies, may blind the Consciences of Fools; but Men of any
reason may perceive a Human not a Divine End of their Villainies: The Pope, and
Court of Rome, whose Agents the Jesuits are, care as little for the Salvation
of English Souls, as it seems, they do for their Bodies. Were this Island a
barren and a fruitless place, they would never take the pains to seek to subdue
this Nation; but they are longing to finger again the Peter Pence, the Annates,
the First fruits, the Revenues, and dispose of the sat Benefices of this Land:
This is their aim and end: To come to it they set all Engines a work, and dread
not to spil Rivers of innocent Blood. But did but the English Subjects, that
are Papists, and so forward and zealous to promote their Catholic Cause, know
the weight and unsufferable burden of the Pope's Keys, did they but call to
mind the Tyranny and baseness of the former Popes in England, and the Groans of
our English Nation when Popery had the Command, they would never be such Fools
to sacrifice their lives to bring their Native Country to so great a Bondage,
which our Forefathers could never bear: Is it not a madness for them that have
a good King of their own, and a lawful Authority appointed by God over them, to
strive to murder him, and all his Generation, and set up a Pope, an Italian, a
Stranger, who never intends to Reign amongst us in Person, but to govern us by
his Cardinals and proud Legates, and who will give to them the least share of
their Country, when in his hands? Is it not a strange madness, for Natives of
England to seek to inthrall their Country to a Foreign Power, and the pleasure
of an Enemy? Have they no other way to exercise their undaunted Courages, but
by massacring their Brethren and Kinsfolks, for the Lust and benefit of
Imperious Italians, or Frenchmen? Must Religion be the Cloak for this Villainy
and Madness? God, whose Power and Providence have preserved this Church, and
our Princes from barbarous designs of Roman Murderers, will I hope defend the
Person and Life of our Pious, Gracious, Merciful, and Christian King, from all
Popish Conspiracies. I pray God to awaken all Christian Princes into a sense of
the Popish Usurpations, that they may shake off all the Fetters of this Italian
Thraldom, the Bolts and Chains of the Popes Bondage.

There is an old Prophecy amongst the Papists, which I have heard from some of
their Doctors in the Schools, That an Englishman shall take the City of Rome,
dissolve the Roman Church, and put a period to the Papacy. It is certain, from
the 17th and 18th Chapters of the Revelations, that there is a time when God
will bring that proud City to ruin, and treat her in the same manner as she
has treated other Nations; who knows but God may raise up some brave Soul that
may endeavor to free the World, and all Nations from so great a Plague, and
set at liberty so many Christian Princes, that scarce dare think of delivering
themselves, for fear of a Ravailack, a Stab, or a Cup of Poison? who knows but
that Providence may pitch upon, and Commission a Native of this Land to punish
Rome for her Murders, Burnings, and Villainies committed by her Emissaries in
our Cities, more than in any under the Sun. I am certain this agrees with the
methods of Gods proceedings in the World, as well as with his holy Word; for in
former Ages, the overthrow of Empires have been commonly brought to pass, by
those Nations who have been most afflicted and distressed by them, in the times
of their prosperity.

In the mean while, as our good King has been, and is yet vigilant and careful
to protect us, our Religion, and Country, from ruin and destruction; and he
neglects no labor, spares no cost, declines no trouble nor pains for the
general good of his People, for their safety, honor, and interest, I think we
are obliged by all the reason of the World, to make him some Returns, to assist
him in so pious a work, as the Establishment of Religion, and the security of
the English Nation, and to demean our selves as thankful and dutiful Subjects.
I shall not here mind you of the Commands of God, nor heap together passages of
Scripture that tell us, that we must be subject to the Powers, because there is
no Power but of God; that they that resist shall receive to themselves
damnation; that we must obey for Conscience sake; that we must love, honor,
and respect him as Gods Vicegerent, etc. I shall only mind my Reader, what the
present posture of Affairs, in relation to our own good, and his Majesty's
vigilance and care in providing for our safety, require from us; and what
present Obligations we lie under, to perform those things which both our
Interest and Duty demand from us.

This Hellish Conspiracy of the Papists, that has now at last awakened us into
a sense of our great danger, has been many years contriving and designing; as
the Design was privately and subtly laid, it was to be carried on with
vigor, and would handly have wanted the assistance of foreign Princes, and
Armies: If the first Train had taken fire, this Church and State had been
infallibly blown up, and cast into a Civil War: God has been merciful to us in
the discovery and prevention of it.

But the Persons chiefly concerned, and the vast Treasures heaped together for
the carrying on of the Popish Designs, are not like to sit and remain idle
after this disappointment; our proceedings, and the Execution of the
Instruments, will in all probability oblige them to take other measures to
carry on their wicked purposes with more secrecy than before; our Divisions
and unreconcileableness give them no small advantage and encouragement to make
fresh Attempts, which God of his Mercy frustrate: However, our Nation is not
yet out of danger by the death of a few Malefactors; we have Enemies both at
home and abroad, that watch for, and endeavor our destruction: His Majesty,
you see, has employed his utmost endeavor for our safety, security, and
happiness, and is yet resolved to employ all his power to defend and protect
us, and our Religion, from all Popish Designs. It concerns us not to be idle,
but in our several places to contribute to our own happiness and preservation,
to give our assisting hand to our Religious Prince, in so blessed a work as the
settlement of our Religion and Government, chiefly in these particulars, which
I shall recommend to the perusal and practice of all sincere Protestants.

First, Let every one of us in our several Places and Callings, watch with
diligence over our Enemies designs and motions, at home and abroad; and in all
occurrences that we may justly suspect; let us carefully give Intelligence to
Authority, take heed of concealing out of friendship or fear, resolutions and
actions that are ominous to Prince or people: They that are abroad in foreign
Courts, have a great advantage to learn all Transactions, and understand the
designments of great Revolutions; for such weighty matters can never be so
secretly intended, but they must be discovered to many, whose hands and
assistances are needful to further and advance them.

Secondly, Let us all return to his Majesty the Tribute of sincere, and Loyal
affections, out of a sense of his care of our welfare. The Crown of it self is
heavy, our Enemies render it heavier by their daily Conspiracies; let us not,
who are true Subjects, add more weight and trouble to the Crown of our good
King, by unreasonable jealousies, and unreasonable fears and murmurings; but in
our several Spheres, and according to our Abilities, let us alleviate as much
as in us lies, his Majesty's Burden: And by all dutiful expressions of our love
and respects discover to him our sensibleness of his continual care of our
safety and welfare.

3. Take heed we discredit not his Authority, vilify his Person, or dishonor
his Government, by any wicked and slanderous Reports, of our own, or others
invention; for this kind of Ingratitude which his Majesty never deserved from
the Hands of his Protestant Subjects, nor any others, will breed ill blood
amongst the People, and afflict the Heart of a good Prince.

4. Let us Protestants be so sensible of our danger and good, as to reunite
again in the Profession of one Religion, and in the public worship of our God;
that our Enemies seeing that their often repeated malice has caused us to
stick and unite closer together, may be discouraged from all future attempts of
this kind, and never be advantaged through our Divisions.

5. Let us, as well for the honor of our Protestant Profession and for the
credit of our Nation, as to prevent the Judgments of God threatened upon us for
our Sins, abstain from all National Sins, and such Crimes as deserve the
severity of Gods Justice, and have heretofore involved Kingdoms in dismal
Calamities. Chiefly, let the Ministers of the Gospel look carefully to
themselves, and their behavior, that they may not give occasion of scandal by
their Lives. And they whose Actions are looked upon as Examples, should take
heed how they countenance those disorders and Breaches of Gods Divine Laws,
which his Justice has been obliged to punish severely in other Nations
heretofore.

6. Let such Magistrates and Justices as are entrusted with the execution of
the Laws, and his Majesty's Royal Commands, be vigorous, resolute, and speedy
in the performance of their Duties; and aim all their Actions at the public
welfare, the honor of their Prince, the safety of Religion and Government. As
their Enemies and ours want not resolution to put in practice the boldest
Attempts, methinks our Noble and brave Officers cannot want courage to oppose
them.

7. Let every one be true, trusty, and faithful in the mannagement of those
Public Concerns that are put into our hands; Treachery seldom proves faithful
and beneficial to the Traitors. It was the Custom of a Turkish Emperor, to
hang up a Traitor with the Rewards promised for his Treason: And we all know
the Story of that Roman Virgin who was killed and buried under the heavy weight
of that which was in the Enemies lest hand; but of all Treasons, none more
dangerous to the Authors, than those which expose their Native Country to the
Power and Malice of desperate and Foreign Enemies.

8. Take heed of raising or increasing the Peoples jealousies, and needless
fears, by encouraging idle Rumors: It is good to foresee an approaching
danger, for that will prepare us to receive it; but it is dangerous to be too
timorous, and suspect a Mischief where really there is none; and men are
commonly disheartened by flying Tales, which are wont to breed much mischief in
a Government.

9. Remember your Places, Callings, and Capacities, and act accordingly,
without presuming to meddle with, or advise Authority, in matters that are
either above our reach, or concern us not immediately.

10. Let us not be sparing of our Purses and Estates when the public safety,
the honor of our God, the safety of our Souls and Religion, the Lives and
Fortunes of our Children are in danger; but as our Enemies are ready to
sacrifice their Lives and Fortunes for the promotion of their blind
Superstition and our Ruin, let us express no less liberality and generosity for
our own safety, and the defense of our Christian Profession. It is better to
give a small Portion of our Estates than to lose all. Mahomet, the Turkish
Emperor, wondered at the parcimony of the Grecians of Constantinople, at the
taking of that Imperial City, for though it was full of Plunder and Gold, they
chose rather to suffer the Turks to carry all away, than to assist their
Emperor with Moneys to pay his discontented and hired Soldiers. Lastly, in
regard all our endeavors, the Prince's vigilance, and the peoples disposition,
are in vain without a blessing from the God of Heaven, let us all, by our
constant and Religious Prayers, strive unanimously to obtain it from God; let
us beseech his Divine Goodness to watch over us still by his Divine Providence,
to discover the wicked Machinations of all our bloody Enemies, to defend the
person and sacred life of our good King, to grant him a long continuance
amongst us, to direct his Councils, bless his Armies, and preserve our Religion
and Government from all future Conspiracies. If we could be persuaded to a
careful practice of all these Advices and Duties, there might be reasonable
hopes of securing our selves and Nation from all Papists and Popery. We are so
much the more engaged to observe them; because, not only our gratitude to our
Prince calls upon us to join with him in promoting our own good, but also the
safety of our Religion is highly concerned; for false Religions men have
undergone all manner of dangers and difficulties: how much the rather should we
take care for the preservation of the true Religion; of that Religion which
Christ and his Apostles recommend to us, without which neither we nor our
posterity can reasonably expect either safety or salvation; besides our lives
and fortunes are aimed at by these Popish Plots. Thousands of Families will be
utterly undone if they can obtain their ends. No Mercy nor Compassion will be
shown to such Heretics as they judge us to be. The whole Nation will swim in
Blood, and we must expect all the Cruelties and Torments to be exercised upon
us, that Hell and the Devil can suggest: and not only our lives will be
sacrificed, but also the lives of our Wives, and of our innocent Children; and
every where ruin and calamity, misery and woe, will appear amongst us, if we
secure not our selves in time. Where is that national Soul which this cannot
move and oblige to a timely pr^^^^ntion of Popish Designs of such dreadful
Consequences.

In a word, the honor of our God is highly concerned: To him we owe our Wives,
Children, Fortunes, Lives and Estates; we must part with all for the glory of
our Great Maker and Redeemer: Suffer not this glory to be stained with Popish
Superstitions in this Nation: What a dishonor will it be, if through our
weakness, neglect, parcimony, or otherwise, the Pope brings in again into this
Land his unsufferable Tyranny, Ignorance, and filthy Abominations.

To conclude, I pray God so to direct his Most Excellent Majesty, his Councils
and Resolutions, so to prosper his Pious and Religious Endeavors, and so to
stir up all his good Subjects to the defense of their Laws, Liberties, and
Religion, that they may all join unanimously with him together, and always
defeat the proud purposes of the Popish Party; and that none of them may be
more wanting to their own good, than his Sacred Majesty will be to the Safety
and Security of the Religion, and Peace of his Kingdoms.

FINIS.

