ANTISCORBUTICAE.
PILLS against that Epidemic Disease the Scurvy, with all its Symptoms, which
for the Instruction of the Ignorant, are the Putrefaction of the Gums; rotten,
black, and loose Teeth, stinking Breath, laziness and dullness of the Limbs, and
the whole Body, Giddiness in the Head, sudden Flushings, heat and redness in
the Face; some have risings on their Body, as if stung with Bugs, Spots in the
Legs and Thighs, of a Red, Black, Purple, or Blue Color; others have an
Itching in some or all parts of the Body, a shortness of Breath, red Gravel in
the Urine, like Brick-dust; strange Pains and Aches in several parts of the
Body; Fluxes of the Belly, Dyssenteries, swellings and breakings out in the
Body, which these Pills certainly Cure, by Purging away those Tartareous
Humors which occasion this Disease. They likewise open the Obstructions of the
Womb, Liver, Spleen, and Stomach, and therefore an admitable Remedy for the
green Sickness, and such as want their Monthly Terms. The black or yellow
Jaundice, Hypocondriack Vapors; and all Diseases of the Head, viz. Vertigo, or
Swimming of the Head, Palsy, Coma, Lethargy, Carus, Apoplexy; they are a
sovereign Remedy for the Dropsy. They cleanse the Stomach, Mesoraick Veins and
Passages of the Chyle, and Nutriment. In fine, consult the Paper of Directions
for the use of these Medicines, to those Diseases for which they are
recommended, and I dare be bold to assure you of a good success: for I
recommend them for nothing but what Thirty Years Experience of the Galenical
Practice, and above Twenty in the Study of Ghymistry approves. Those that drink
the Spaw, Tunbridg, Epsom, Barnet, Astrop, Dulledge, Islington, Waters, cannot
use a better Remedy, and in all cases where Purging in required. The Box
containing 18 Pills, Price 1 s. 6 d.

SOLAMEN, MISERIS.
WHich causes Expectoration, and is an admirable Medicine for the Asthma,
Ptysick, Catarrhs, and Rheums: In a short time it takes off the tickling
Defluxion that falls from the Head upon the Lungs; it opens and takes away all
Stoppages and Pains of the Stomach, Lungs, and Chest, therefore an
extraordinary Remedy for the Consumptive. It Cures a new Cough, or Cold, though
never so violent, in three or four times taking; and old Ones in a small time.
It takes off all Looseness, and Vomitings, and Surfeits, especially after hard
Drinking. The Measses, and Small Pox it brings out to Admiration. It is an
Infallible. Remedy for all windy Distempers, as the Colic, Griping of the
Gurs; it is admirably comfortable to the Sciatical, and those that have Aches
or Pains in their Limbs whatsoever. But for the Toothache, I believe there is
not the like Remedy, for in an Hour or less it gives ease, whether the pain be
in a sound or rotten Tooth, in one or all the Teeth; not by stopping them. but
by taking it inwardly, it dispels the Rheum that causes the Pain; as yet it
never failed me. The first Dose takes off the violent pain, the next perfectly
cures it. Price 1 s. 6. d. the Pot.

EXUKIANO: Or, the only Venereal Antidote without Mercury.
BEing an easy course of Physic, of that admirable Virtue, as to expel all
Venereal Malignities gotten by soul Men or Women: Never failing to remove all
Sharpness, or heat of Urine, in twice or thrice taking. It cures all Ulcers and
Fistulaes in the Throat, Womb, or any part of the Body, if timely used, it
flings off the Venom, and prevents a Pox. It never fails to cure the Whites and
Weakness of the Back. And whereas most affirm, it is not to be cradicated
without Mercury, I can show the contrary to any Artist, and I Will be bound to
give him 500 l. if he can make it appear I have the least of it in these
Compositions. And if he has been so unfortunate, as to have been abused with
Mercury, I have a Secret to kill it. The whole Parcel contains two Doses of
purging Powders, a Glass of Elixir, and a Pot of Balsom. Price, 3 s. Many have
been cured with one, but two never fail. All these Remedies hold good several
Years. They are to be Sold at My House at the Carved Fosts in
Stone-cutters-street, between Shooe-Lane and Fleet-ditch. Where I am to be
spoken with every Morning till 11, and from 5 to 9 every Evening. And at Mr.
Troughton's Bookseller, near the Broad Gate in Coventry. Mrs. Moors, a Salter,
next Door to the White Heart Inn in Southwark, Mr. Henry Barber's in Ship Alley
in Well Close. The Poor may have Advice for Nothing.


