DECLARATIO BELLI HUNGARICI, NVPER EDITA A SERENISSIMO Michaele Apafio,
PRINCIPE TRANSYLVANIAE CONTRA S. CAESAREAM MAJESTATEM.

Ad Exemplum Transylvaniense, Anno 1682.

Vniversis orbis Christiani Regibus, Principibus, Rebuspublicis Totius S. R. I.
Statibus and ordinibus, Gemiscentibus denique sub oppressionum pondere
Infoelicis Pannoniae Civibus, Ad sempiternam memoriam. Michael Apafi, Dei
Gratia Princeps Transylvaniae, Partium Regnum Hungariae Dominus, and Siculorum
Comes. Notum facio testorque veritate pura and fide simplicissima.

LONDINI: Impensis Francisci Smith Sen. apud signum Eliphantisutis Castrophori
in vico vulgo dicto Cornhill, 1682.

Declaratio Belli Hungarici, etc.
POstquam indignantibus Fatis, and exitiosa Procerum inter se discordantium
socordia, a Principibus Hungarici sangvinis, ad Austriacos (unde vulnerum and
malorum omnium scaturigo prosiliit) devoluta fuisset Regiae Dignitatis Purpura;
concatenatis and in se quodam orb redeuntibus consiliis id intentabant, ut
labefactata and protrita Liberate, quae ab aliquot seculis intemerata
steterat, absolutum sibi in Hungaria and haereditarium pararent stabilirentque
Dominatum.

Et licet ex fundamento Liberae Electionis (quae inter Hungaros a primordiis
Regni prima and fundamentalis Lex est) juramenti sanctitate obstringerentur, ne
in Praejudicium Legum and Privilegiorum Regni quicquam praesumerent; varii
tamen praetextus quaesiti, ut convulsis Libertatibus animi Regnicolarum
exacerbarentur: Ad hoc congruens and validum Dominationis arcanum reputabant
spargere and fovere dissensionum materiem, ut capaciora ingenia, discordi
Libertati obnoxia, in transversum agerent, faciliori tandem modo vincenda and
supprimenda.

Nec in hoc solum Termino substitit prae postera Dominandi cupiditas, sed per
ingentes calamitates, and intolerabilem rigorem, ruptis fidei and jurisjurandi
repagulis, in omnes promiscue Status, efflictim grassabatur; idque erat omnium
intentionum finis and determinatus conatus, ut lentis and ingeniosis artibus,
and si hae non succederent, aperta vi Privilegiorum Regni Legumque praesidia
everterentur occulto irati numinis permissu; an quod florenti Regno fatalis
periodus immineret, factum; ut qui legitimo nativi sanguinis Principi parere
renuerent, alienigenam Dominum inviti paterentur?

Accedebat his malis Procerum Regni Nobilitatisque contemptus, qui dignitatibus
and muneribus publicis, contra vim Legum, paulatim exclusi, vel remoti,
extraneorum imperio, and insolenti Dominatui subjiciebantur: ita crescentibus
in dies injuriis and invalascente potentia, eo praecipitii prolapsus erat
Hungariae status, ut antiquae Libertatis vix imago and vestigia amplius
cognoscerentur; quicquid illustre videbatur and excelsum, neglectum erat and
attritum; ruina and exitium parabatur omni formidolosae virtuti.

Non preces proderant, non lamenta; frustranea ad fidem Regiam and ad Jura
publica provocatio. Stabat pro ratione voluntas, imo quicquid libebat and
expediebat actum; ad normam praetumidae potestatis, admissae aliquando, sed in
speciem and vindictam, querelae, per vana and irrita verba remissae, saepius
per ludibrium and exprobrationem elusae.

Ambitus Praefectorum, Officialiumque Regis and eorundem insatiabilis avaritia,
atque funestum crudelitatis exercitium, in tantum excreverant, ut suspecti
redderentur and in Regem Statumque publicum noxii, qui divitias haberent: hinc
extortae per sceleratissimos praetextus opes, distincta and abrasa Bona, ut vel
suam ingluviem satiarent hirudines, quibus ruere aut stare Hungarium perinde
erat; vel aerarium camerae saginaretur, spoliarium miserorum and atrocium
praedarum infame receptaculum. Proscripta pridem erant vera rerum and congrua
vocabula, quippe Bona aliena in pretium proditionis largiri, clementia:
Exulantium and illegaliter proscriptorum fortunas inter nothos Patriae
distribuere, Liberalitas; innocentibus veniam concedere, Titulo misericordiae
colorabatur. Leges, jura, judicia: breviter, Divina and humana omnia penes
Germanos erant; in Regno, egestas, damna, dedecora and abominanda rerum imago.

His and aliis innumeris propemodum injuriis cum supra modum premerentur vividi
and impatientes servitutis animi, tandem versa in vindictam nimia patientia, ad
justa and concessa remedia proruperunt, Regemque se liberis suffragiis, non
Dominum elegisse recordati, extravagantem indirectamque gubernandi formam ad
justum tramitem reducere conabantur.

Remedium igitur ex Bello sumptum, statim festini occursus; and ex communi
metu, and jactura Libertatum unanimans societas, bonitas insuper causae
animarunt nobilissimam gentem, ut arma necessaria and justa capesseret,
funeratamque Libertatem ex Tenore Decreti Andreae Secundi Regis cognomento
Hierosolymitani, citra infidelitatis vel rebellionis notam, ad pristinae
integritatis splendorem vindicare anniteretur.

Primus qui luxuriantem potentiam aggressus est, erat magnanimus ille Heroes
Stephanus Bocskai, Vir Excellentis ingenii, sagacitate and virtute bellica
Illustris, majorque privato judicatus, dum adhuc privatus esset: is ingentibus
exacerbatus injuriis, parvo equidem copiarum numero, sed maximo and
imperterrito animo, saevienti violentiae se se opposuit, partemque Caesareani
exercitus, forti and heroo animo aggressus, eundem felici successu fudit,
fugavit, primamque persecutus victoriam, Regnum and Orbem admirandis
progressibus implevit, communi Hungarorum consensu meritus, ut Hungariae and
Transylvaniae Princeps pronunciaretur: vindex Libertatis, quam ex emortuali
pulvere resuscitatam cum immortali sua gloria non tantum restituit, sed and
Regi illius temporis, Rudolpho videlicet Secundo, and ejusdem successoribus, ne
limitatam and circumscriptam Legibus potestatem amplius transgrederentur,
regnandi modum praescripsit.

Jam quieti and tranquillitati publicae apprime videbatur prospectum, sanctis
per Tractatum amplissimis conditionibus, quibus cautum erat per fidem and
Diploma Regium, Libertatem imposterum tam Ecclesiasticam, quam secularem fore
sartam, tectam and securam; sed non multo post experti sunt Regnicolae fallacem
esse subinde spem, and mortalium vota fundamento niti admodum lubrico: ereptus
enim e vivis Serenissimus Bocskai brevi post pacem intervallo, adeoque
praematura morte, Hungaris dolorem, ambitui novam occasionem reliquit, dum
eodem pene funerali actu and memoriae magni Libertatum vindicis and relabenti
Libertati parenret atur, factu ad omnem posteritatem memorando, dum novo quasi
funeri regenitae libertates immergerentur. Illico quippe occasiones erreptae,
pacta recentia, tanquam vi armorum extorta contra fidem and conditiones pacis,
quae omnino spontaneae erant and liberae voluntatis, rescindendi.

Quam effraenem licentiam, fideique and juris jurandi rupturam graviter
ferentes cordati Patriae Cives, ut renovatis malis novam and efficacem medelam
opponerent, ad priscam Regibus oppressoribus resistendi facultatem and
Praedecessorum eorum protectionem respiciebant, confugiebantque.

Juvit piarum intentionum Zelum exquisitissimarum oppressionum atrocitas,
juriumque Divinorum and humanorum eversio, quibus commoti Antecessores mei,
Gabriel Betlin and Georgius Rakocius primus gloriosae reminiscentiae Principes
(hic duplices injurias, totidemque Belli actus in unum compendium concludo, ad
evitandam singularium enumerationem) ut vicinum malum, in ipso, quod dicitur,
ortu suffocarent and incumbentem onerosamque potentiam propellerent,
afflictiones calamitosae gentis suas esse rati iisdem tollendis vel mitigandis
omnem curram impenderunt, eo semper fine, ut insolentem and extravagantem
Dominationem intra Legum and Privilegiorum Terminos coercerent, ne finale
Religionis Libertatisque excidium florentissimum Regnum obrueret, cum damno and
praejudicio totius Christianitatis.

Arma iterum sumpta pro defensione justissimae causae, quae divinum Numen tanta
benedictione coronaverat, ut Reges Austriaci incrementis armorum and insperato
progressu territi pacem ultro proposuerint, concluserint, fideque and Diplomate
Publico roboraverint, sed and ista pax per gemini Tractatus immane robur
sancita, neque speratam tranquillitatem, neque duraturam Libertatem restituerat
Hungaris: occasio potius captata per similes inducias, Regibus, ut in statu
imaginariae and infidae pacis, per consvetas and delenificas arts Procerum
Nobiliumque inficerent atque dividerent animos, quos per vim bellumve
infringere non valuerunt.

Prolixum esset and supervacaneae operae praecedentium temporum calamitates
longa serie refer, quae cum historiarum monumentis comprehensae sint, ideo
memoriam earundem non repeto. Relictis igitur praeteritis, praesentium
gravitatem breviter enumerabo, ut universus Orbis judicet, and cognoscat
Hungaros vim and injurias passos, omnique liberate, contra obligationem Regiam
fidemque and contenta Diplomatis, Legumque publicarum, exutos, arma concessa
and justa sumsisse.

Fatendum sane est, neque sine intimo doloris sensu recognoscendum, quod and
moderna Sacra Caesarea Regiaque Majestas statim ab initio collati ex more and
antiqua consuetudine, per libera suffragia regiminis, Praedecessorum suorum
vestigiis insistens, a legitimo regnandi modo, ad praegravem and absolutam
Dominandi formam deflexerit: Nihil enim toto Regiminis tempore a consuetis and
inveteratis contra libertatem moliminibus remissum, parum and nisi quod
placebat, ex publico jure supplicantibus concessum, imago quaedam Libertatis
and ostentamenta Regiae Clementiae infensivis servitium portendebant.

In hoc ita pressae jamque exspirantis Libertatis statu non deerant inter
Hungaros elevatae generositatis animi, qui insidiosis hisce machinationibus,
and exercitis in publicum exitium consiliis indoluerunt, vim and natae fidei
rupturam modeste repraesentantes, majori tamen Zelo and conatu quam effectu:
sicut enim sua Majestas summum illud Purpurae Decus praecerptum praefloratumque
acceperat, ita dum id ipsum ex fide and obligatione ad pristinam integritatem
reducere debuisset, per liberam potius and insinitam potestatem gessit.

Hinc ex obsequio and respectu Regiae Majestati debito (cujus gens Hungarica
semper fuit observantissima) primo precibus and supplicationibus tentatum
rigorosi Dominatus temperamentum: sed cum neque querelae, neque gravaminum
toties conscripta and repudiata volumina vim inordinariae potestatis sisterent,
medela vulnerum in armis quaesita, quae publica Lex justa pronunciat and
legitima, eoque in casu arripienda, quando Regum aliquis, non observato
ordinariae potestatis aequilibrio, ad praeposteram dominandi libidinem contra
apertissima jura and privilegia Regni cum injuria and oppressione Regnicolarum
progreditur.

Atque utinam meliori ordine and validiori conatu continuata fuissent coepra
pro libertatibus armis! multo, enim decentius honestiusque fuisset generosis
and constantibus factis renovare obfuscatam libertatis claritudinem, quam
subire jugum, dedecorosae servitutis per nimiam credulitatem and fatalem
discordiam.

Sed innatum Genti Hungaricae dissidendi studium* and quae ad effascinandos
animos efficacissima erant, verbum and Promissiones Sacrae Caesareae Regiaeque
Mattis, obicem tantis coeptis praepropere imposuerunt.

Quamprimum enim in Aula Viennensi innotuisset Tredecim Comitatus arma ad
vindicandas Libertates induisse, illico exquisita ad dividendos animos art,
Literas ad praedictos Comitatus exmisit, in quibus gratiam fecit iis omnibus,
quicunque defectionis poenitentes a Partibus Rakocianis ad obedientiam Regi
debitam redierint: additum insuper, quicquid hactenus delictum esset, nullum
forum, nullam Legem vindicaturam, omnes in vita, fama, fortuna, bonorum
mobilium and immobilium possessione remansuros illaesos and indemnes. Hanc
veniam Regia fide public sancitam cum cognoscerent, rapti in diversas parts
animi ardorem and impetum amiserunt, armisque imprudenter depositis ad quietem
scilicet, sed brevem nimis, remigrarunt, existimantes ingentis gratiae locum
patere occupantibus, qui sub specie indulgentiae ad securiorem postea vindictam
reservabantur; alii enim vita, alii fortuniis, alii perpetuis carceribus
mulctati. Haec nunquam deplorandae satis inconstantia, Portam Caesareanis,
omnemque occasionem effectuandarum intentionum facile aperuit, qui omni metu
remoto in Hungariam Duce Generali Sporkio ingressi, atque in intima Regni
perreptantes, Urbes, Arces, Fortalitia, sine ullo suorum cruore and nece
occupatunt; neque enim amplius erant, qui se vi opponerent, promissa gratia
ludificati.

His factis, processum ad omnis generis afflictiones, rapinas, turpitudinesque,
quas effraenis and licentiosus miles passim exercuit contra tenorem dictarum
literarum and assecurationem Regiam: desoedata and direpta Templa, Castella
diruta, eversae nobilitares Curiae, incaptivati raptique ad Tribunal Posoniense
nobiles, promissae Amnistiae incaute fidentes: Multi tamen and cautiores, qui
sub larva Regiae Gratiae fraudulenta molimina occultari praeviderant, paratas
insidias evitarunt, in hanc Provinciam, meamque sub Protectionem confugientes.

Exhorrui ad nuncium dirae calamitatis and improvisae metamorphoseos: and quia
turbinem hunc in rempestates gravissimas orbique Christiano praejudiciosas
erupturum facile praevideram, statim Ablegatum meum ad Sacram Caesaream
Regiamque Mattem ex bona and sincera intention emisi, repraesentando Majestati
suae periculum, quod enasci poterit, si in sanando hoc morbo, asperioribus
remediis uteretur: miti and remissa medicina agendum, ut in spem and fiduciam
Regiae Clementiae conciarentur animi, ne ad desperationem redacti, in eas
prolaberentur extremitates, quae aliquando Hungariae and toti Christianitati
possent esse periculosae. Sed haec mea propositio, and rectum, sincerumque pro
Publico commodo studium, quod iterum atque iterum reiterari difficulter auditum
fuit, and sine decenti, desideratoque responso remissum: profundiores enim
radices egerat absolute dominandi cupiditas, quam ut verbis and persuasionibus
evelli quiret.

Omnes actiones, totusque in Regno Processus perfectam vim, non Regium
gubernium redolebat. Nihil quod ex jure and Legibus postulabatur, impetratum:
nullius status certus: crimen, ubi opes, neque jam sensim sed praecipiti rigore
ad omnia afflictionum genera progressum, ut appareret occasionem diu quaesitam
avidissime arripi, qua Regnum liberum in haereditarium converteretur; statim
vis illata, libertatibus sublatus honor, Legum depressi Proceres, Nobiles a
patriis Penatibus in exilium acti and proscripti, Bonis omnibus Fisco
adjudicatis. Dignitates, Honores, and munia publica in praejudicium Jurium
Regni Extraneis collata; institutum praeterea rigorosissimae inquisitionis
concilium contra vindices Libertatis, aliosque, quos illicitis conatibus
contradicturos existimabant. Judicati illegitimo processu, caesique funestis
carnificum manibus tres Comites, ut sisterent toto orb memorandum atrocitatis
documentum; sed neque hoc sufficiebat ad explendam vindictam: augebantur
orbitatis injuriae, dum posteri proscriptis vel interfectis Parentibus, alio
insuper dolor, redacti ad mendicitatem, afficerentur.

Accedebat ad hanc Tragoediam Templorum Evangelicorum occupatio: ubi furor and
vesania cum tanto impetu desaeviebat, ut bellum cum sacris Aedibus geri, and
muros rebels existimares. Subito Parochiis exturbari Ecclesiarum Ministri,
missique in Exilium, alii per vim and minas, extortis reversalibus ne amplius
concionarentur, vitam and licentiam recedendi a Patria obtinebant: plurimi
veluti piaculares victimae condemnati, relegatique ad Triremes, (horribili
prorsus and detestando exemplo) ut ibidem duram and anxiam agentes vitam,
luctu, squalore laboribus, and inedia consumerentur.

Instabat praeterea vis persecutionum, and execrabile in conscientias Dominium:
neque matrimonia, neque infantes baptisandi facultas concessa, nisi administris
Catholicis: homines passim ad Missam and Processiones vi and armis pulsi, qui
renitebantur, ingentibus poenis, and pecuniaria mucta affecti.

Ne foeminae quidem exsortes periculi, quae, quia criminis laesae Majestatis
argui non poterant, ob lacrimas incusabantur; nesas erat and periculosum
ingemiscere malis, interdictumque, ne capite damnatos propinqui deflerent.

Pecuniae per varias arts and excogitata nomina a misera plebe public and
privatim extortae: praesidia deducta atque imposita, Leges ex libidine
imperatae, ubique rapinae, depopulationes, calamitatumque and oppressionum
numerus innumerus.

His and aliis inexplicandis injuriis atrocitatibusque concitati Domini Exules,
cum per extremam violentiam in ultimum vitae, Libertatis, and fortunarum
exitium praecipitati fuissent, and cum ab omni open Christianorum destituti,
nullam amplius spem mitigandae severitatis superesse cernerent; sumpta tantis
in necessitatibus resolutione, ut Regno and tot innocentium ruinae subvenirent,
ad gratiam fulgidae Portae Otthomanicae confugerunt, protectionem ejusdem
contra injustissimam violentiam implorantes. Neque frustraneum erat propositum,
facile admissae preces, and quos praedura sors and nimia austeritas Patria
extorres reddiderat, iis Otthomanica propensio refugium, securitatem, and media
ad sustinendam sustentandamque vitam benign concessit. Ita saepe divinitatis
opera ea sunt, ut furias in ipso jam successu securas, subita ultio excipiat,
ne vel unquam improbis terror; vel spes calamitosae virtuti.

Scio equidem plurimos esse, qui hoc extremae necessitatis factum male
interpretantur, gentemque Hungaricam praepostere suggillant, and tanquam
degenerem a Christiano nomine criminantur: sed illi vel libertates Hungaricas
in suis fundamentis ignorant, vel Partibus austriacis nimium velificantur.

Sciendum enim est, and probe notandum, Reges in Hungaria austriacae familiae
per suffragia liberae electionis (id quod in hoc Regno aequissimum juxta and
antiquissimum imperii genus est) ad sceptrum and coronam pervenisse, fide and
jurejurando, (quod sub aperto coelo, antequam coronarentur, deponere moris
erat) ad conservandas Libertates obstrictos.

Ex hac fide and jurejurando nata est vera and propria obligatio, quae non
solum ad Imperium recte and ex praescripto Legum Regiique Diplomatis exercendum
necessaria erat, sed and insuper facultatem tribuit Palatino Regni, tanquam
custodi libertatum, ut Regi, a concessa and ordinaria potestate ad saevitiam
and injustam dominandi licentiam degenerantis, una cum Regnicolis contradiceret
and resisteret: non igitur praescissa erat Libertas, in casu desperatae ad
legitimum gubernium reductionis facultas, protectionem cujuscunque etiam
Otthomanni, tanquam vicini Monarchae, impetrandi.

Plurimi jam anni elapsi sunt, a quo infelicissimum Regnum, inter duas
Potentias positum, ab una discerptum, ab altera pressum in toto orb
miserabilem Tragoediam repraesentavit: illa nunquam aut movit contra Hungariam
arma, aut deposuit, sine Imperii sui augmento, antemuralis autem hujus
imminutione: unde factum, ut paene tota in dominatum potentissimi vicini
concesserit, proinde cum Regnum hoc Potentissimo Monarchae ubique confine,
primos ejusdem impetus sustinere necesse habeat, ipsa vero Domus austriaca in
regimine suo, praeter depressionem Hungarorum and eversionem Libertatum, nihil
unquam aliud quaesiverit and intenderit; maxim vero moderna Caesarea Regiaque
Majestas, Cives sponte aequissimos, ad dedecorosam Lenitatem statumque
miserabilem adegerit, eosdem armavit, quae fortissima est in periculosis
desperatio; cumque per tempus undecennalis exilii moderamen oppressionum nullum
viderent, neque sperarent, consultius videbatur ad potentissimi Principis
Protectionem confugere, ejusdemque auxiliis in summae and inevitabilis
necessitatis causa, ob respectum boni communis, uti, quam vel lugubri in exilio
consenescere, vel illud exiguum Regni, quod adhuc superest, in manifestum
discrimen praecipitare.

Neque primi sunt Hungari, qui in sui Desensionem, Protectionem Otthomannicam
implorarunt.

Henricus and Fridericus fratres Regis Castiliani sedente Pontifice Clemente
quarto, cum socios haberent Conradinos, evocarunt Terra Marique Saracenos, non
ut Provinciam tutarentur, sed ut Gallos Italia ejicerent. Maximilianus
Austriacus, ut and vim illatam arceret, and quae praecipua ejusdem intentio
erat, Rempublicam Venetorum everteret, laboravit Turcam in subsidium provocare.
Franciscus primus Rex Galliae cum animadeverteret Car. V. ambitionem and
formidolosam potentiam, non dubitavit auxillia Turcarum adsciscere; sed neque
nostris temporibus dedecorosum erat Inclytae Reip. Poloniae Tartaros contra
Christianos, ut se defenderet, evocare.

Praemissis igitur ex rationibus and causis, judicet Christianus orbis, an gens
Hungarica liberrimae constitutionis, quae ex fundamento Jurium and
Privilegiorum suorum non tantum partem summi Imperii habebat, sed and in
delatione Coronae naturalem Libertatem exemptamque Regio Imperio (ut videlicet
certo eventu Regi resisteret) sibi reservaverat, inique egerit, quod se se
protectioni fulgidae Portae, restitutionem Libertatis, securitatemque
Religionis, vitae, honorum, and manutentionem omnium Jurium, Caesarea fide
promittentis, submiserit.

Ego vero, qui communi cum hac Gente origin, Hunnorum ex sangvine descendi,
and a Deo omnium Regnorum fundatore ad solium principale Hungariae Dominationis
ideo me erectum agnosco, ut veluti in specula positus Libertatem religiosam
quam civilem defendere, injuriasque praeter ullam causae justae probationem
populo liberrimo illatas, in quantum possem, propellere conarer.

Hi respectus and causoe me impulerunt, ut arma justa and necessaria capesserem
ad vindicandum Libertatem, and reducendos Exules atque oppressos. Idcirco
nullus sapiens and rectus mirabitur, neque Zelum and institutum meum carpet,
quando causae justissimae, Gentis inclytae and nobilis, and quod summum est,
sanguinis mei defensionem suscepi. Meus unicus scopus est, ut divina adspirante
elementia, florentissimum quondam Regnum in desideratam tranquillitatem, and
liberrima natio adavi^^^ Libertatis immortalitatem vindicetur. Aequum est and
rationi conveniens, violatam contra fidem Libertatem, concesso per manifesta
privilegia jure, defendere: justum est pro amicis and cognatis, vim injustam
passis, Bellum defensivum suscipere: hominum quippe inter se conjunctio
latissime patens est, quae vel sola ad opem ferendam sufficit: neque
praecluditur jus humanae societatis, quando Reges oppressores, eas in liberos
subditos exercent injurias, quae nulli aequo and recte sentienti probentur.

Quod superest, hortor and admoneo, imo rogo and obtestor omnes status
Hungariae, ut mecum justa and pia arma sociantes, annitantur per fortia facta
and concordem unionem reducere ad pristinum splendorem, protritae Libertatis
gloriam. Redeat in praecordia praedecessorum virtus, qui sanguine, qui vita
Libertates tutati sunt. Alacri in re tantae consequentiae and constanti opus
est proposito, caetera divino Numini committenda, qui praeteritos, pro
vindicanda Libertare, conatus, actionesque felicissimis eventibus cumulavit.

Non hic de privato res est, non de Religione Catholica disceptatio, quae
Communibus cum Evangelica nititur privilegiorum fundamentis. Pro Patria, pro
vita, pro fortunis, pro honor, pro gloria totius Gentis agitur. Illi injustum
Dominatum, sangvinem and fortunam petunt, Vos Libertatem quaerite, quam nemo
bonus, nemo honestus, nemo Nobilis, nisi cum vita simul amittit.

Quod ad me attinet, and humanae infirmitatis memini, and vim fortunae reputo,
and omnia, quaecunque agam, subjecta esse mill casibus non inficior: Caeterum
quemadmodum in conscientia mea securus sum, eaque intention ex securo and
pacato statu, ad defensionem vestram, Deo Duce and Auxiliatore armatus
proficiscor, quod nihil aliud in tendam, nisi emolumentum publicae salutis, ita
evertum finemque prosperum indubitato spero.

Quod si autem aliqui invenirentur, qui in publicum Patriae exitium parts
contrarias sequantur, illorum contumaciam, si merita subsequatur poena, non
mihi, sed suae propriae culpae and temerario errori imputabunt; spero tamen and
confido omnes ordines, consilia, cogitationes, facta, intentionesque suas ad
salutem Patriae and ejusdem amplitudinem emolumentumque directuros. Sanguine
majorum nostrorum parta est libertas, hactenus sanguine desensa; sanguine
quoque; ab oppressione and interitu vindicanda.

Sat proemiorum, sat honoris erit, si vel defensam Patriam liber adfpiciat
spiritus, vel ea collapsa vindex libertatis dextra, and insons animus inter
cadavera suorum ad meliorem patriam migret.

Jehova, Deus Exercituum, Deus Justus and fortis, benedicat ex alto sanctis and
licitis conatibus; ipse sit moderator omnium and actionum and consiliorum:
disponat and deducat ad sinceram concordiam diversos and dissidentes animos:
corroboret sorts, animet pusillanimes, faciatque ut omnia suscipiantur,
terminenturque ad sempiternam sui nominis Gloriam: eversarum Libertatum
restitutionem: afflictae gentis quietem tranquillitatemque: omnium and
singulorum publicam and privatam felicitatem, Amen.

THE DECLARATION OF THE Hungarian War, Lately set out by the most Illustrious
MICHAEL APAFI, Prince of Transylvania, Against the Emperor's S. Majesty.

According to the Transylvanian Copy, Anno 1682.

To all Kings, Princes, and Commonwealths, of the Christian World, to the
Estates and Orders of the whole S. Roman Empire: Lastly, to the miserable
People of Pannonia, that groan under the burden of their Oppressions: For
everlasting Memory, Michael Apafi, by the grace of God Prince of Transylvania,
Lord of (several) Parts of the Kingdom of Hungaria and Count of the Siculians,
I do declare and testify in sincere Truth and unfeigned Faith.

LONDON: Printed for Francis Smith, Sen. at the Elephant and Castle in
Cornhill, 1682.

The Declaration of the Hungarian War, etc.
AFter that by the indignation of Heaven, and the pernicious negligence of the
Nobles at discord among themselves, the royal purple and Dignity was dissolved
from the Princes of the Hungarian Blood upon the Austrian Princes (whence all
our Evils and Miseries have taken rise and flowed forth) they have with
combined and a continued Series of Councils endeavored to impair and tread
under that Liberty, which from some Ages had remained untouched, so to get and
establish for themselves an absolute and hereditary Domination in Hungary.

And although upon the foundation of a free Election (which among the
Hungarians even from the very beginning of the Kingdoms is the chief and
fundamental Law) they were bound by the Sacredness of an Oath, that they should
not attempt any thing in prejudice of the Laws and Privileges of the Kingdom,
yet sought they various Pretexts to violate Liberties, that thereby the Minds
of the Inhabitants might be exasperated; to this end they counted it an
agreeable and mighty Secret of Domination, to spread and foment Matters of
Discord, that they might drive the greater Wits (apt to abuse Liberty by
dissension) into Confusion, the more easily at length to be overcome and
suppressed.

Neither in these bounds only stayed this preposterous Lust of Domination, but
by huge Calamities and intolerable Rigors, having broken the Bars of Faith and
Oath, they rushed violently upon all States promiscuously, and this was the End
and Scope of all their Intentions, that by smooth and cunning Arts, but if
these succeeded not, by open force, (the offended God secretly permitting) to
overthrow the Safeguards of the Laws and Privileges of the Kingdom, or that it
was done because the fatal period of a flourishing Kingdom was now at hand,
that they who refused to obey the Lawful Prince of native blood, might against
their will endure a stranger for their Lord.

To these Evils was added the Contempt of the Nobility and Chief Men of the
Kingdom; who, maugre the power of Laws, were by little and little excluded or
removed from Dignities and Public Offices, and subjected to the Command and
Insolent Domination of Foreigners: thus Injuries daily increasing, and Power
growing strong, the state of Hungary was fallen so deeply that scarce the image
and footsteps of ancient Liberty could be any longer known; whatsoever seemed
illustrious and high, was neglected and born down, ruin and destruction was
prepared for every formidable Courage or Virtue.

Petitions profited not, nor Lamentations; in vain were Appeals made to the
King's Faith and Public Rights; will stood for reason, yea, whatever they
listed and thought fit was done according to the measure of overgrown Power;
Complaints were sometime admitted but for a show and revenge, by vain and
fruitless words sent back, more often were they eluded by upbraiding and
mockery.

The ambition of Governors and Officers of the King, with their insatiable
Covetousness and deadly exercise of Cruelty, were grown to such a height, that
the having of Riches rendered Men suspected and obnoxious to the King and
Public State: hence, by most wicked pretenses, Riches were extorted, Goods
sequestered and taken away, that either the Leaches (to whom it was all one
whether Hungary stood or fell) might satiate their greedy Maws, or the
Exchequer (the ruin of the miserable, and infamous receptacle of horrible
plunders) be crammed. The true and genuine appellation of things were long since
banished; for to bestow other Men's Estates for a Reward to Traitors, was called
Clemency; to distribute the Fortunes of others (in exile and illegally
banished) among the Bastards of their Country, Liberality; to pardon the
Innocent, was colored with a title of Mercy, Laws, Rights, Judgments: In
short, all, both Divine and Civil Affairs, were in the hands of the Germans,
but in the Kingdom, Poverty and Oppression, with a shameful and abominable face
of things.

With these and other almost innumerable Injuries, when the vigorous minds, and
such as were impatient of slavery, were above measure oppressed, at last their
too long Patience being turned into Revenge, they betook themselves to just and
lawful Remedies, and calling to mind, that by their free Suffrages they had
chosen a King, not an absolute Lord, they endeavored to reduce that
extravagant and indirect Form of Government to its due course.

For remedy therefore they betook themselves to War, for with sudden
Conferences, and by reason of common Fears, and loss of Liberty, an unanimating
Society: moreover, the goodness of the Cause encourage the noble Nation to take
up just and necessary Arms, thereby to endeavor the restoration of their
buried Liberty to the splendor of its former Integrity, according to the tenor
of the Decree of King Andrew the Second, surnamed of Jerusalem, and that
without any mark of unfaithfulness or rebellion.

The first that attacked Luxuriant Power, was the Magnanimous Hero, Stephen
Botskai, a Man of excellent Wit, and famous for Prudence and Warlike Virtue,
and esteemed greater than a private man: whilst yet private, this Man being
exasperated by great Injuries, opposed himself to the raging Violence with
small Forces indeed, but with a great and undaunted Courage, and with a valiant
and heroic Mind, falling upon a part of the Emperor's Army, did happily
overthrow it, and put them to flight; and following on his first Victory, he
filled both the Kingdom and the World with his wonderful Successes, having
justly deserved by the unanimous consent of the Hungarians, to be declared the
Prince of Hungary and Transylvania, being the restorer of Liberty; which, to
his immortal glory, he not only raised from the dust, but also prescribed the
manner of Governing to the then King (vid.) Rodolph the Second and his
Successors, that they might no longer transgress their Power limited and
bounded by Law.

Now Peace and Public Tranquillity seemed to be well provided, for most ample
Articles being established by the Treaty, in which by the Faith and Public
Deed of the King, provision was made, that both Ecclesiastic and Civil Liberty
should remain safe and secure: but, not long after, the Inhabitants found by
experience their hope deceived them, and that the expectations of Mortals have
but a slippery foundation: for the most Illustrious Botskai being snatched
away, a little after the Peace, and so by immature death leaving Grief to the
Hungarians, and a new occasion to the ambitious, whilst almost at the same time
Funeral Solemnities were performed both to the great vindication of Liberty,
and relapsing Liberty it self, a matter to be remembered by all Posterity that
the newly recovered Liberties should have as it were new Funeral, for presently
the opportunity was laid hold of, to annul the new made Articles, as if they
had been extorted by force of Arms against the Faith and Conditions of Peace,
whereas indeed they were voluntary and free.

Which unbridled License, and breach of Faith and Oath, the truehearted People
of the Country grievously resenting, that they might obviate renewed Mischiefs
with a new and efficacious Remedy looked back upon and betook themselves to
that ancient Power and Protection of my Predecessors, ( viz.) of resisting
oppressing Kings.

The Zeal of pious Intentions was helped forward by the outrage of exquisite
Oppressions, and the overthrow of Divine and Humane Laws, whereby my
Ancestors, Gabriel Betlen and George Rakocie, the first Princes of Glorious
Memory, being provoked, (here I comprise in one Abridgment double Injuries, and
as many Acts of War, to avoid the Enumeration of Particulars) that they might
(as they say) strangle a neighboring Evil in the very birth, and repel
incumbent and burdensome Power, and reckoning the Afflictions of a Calamitous
Nation their own, employed all care to remove or mitigate them, but always with
that intent, to restrain an insolent and extravagant Domination within legal
Bounds and Privileges, lest otherwise the final destruction of Religion and
Liberty should overwhelm a most flourishing Kingdom, with the damage and
prejudice of whole Christianity.

Arms being again resumed for defense of a most just Cause, which the Divine
Power crowned with so great blessing, that the Austrian Kings being affrighted
with increase of Arms, and unexpected Success, of their own accord offered
Peace, concluded and confirmed it by Faith, and public Royal Decree, but this
Peace also, ratified by the vast strength of a double Treaty, did neither
restore the hoped for Tranquillity, nor lasting Liberty; the Kings took
occasion rather by such Truces, in a state of imaginary, and faithless Peace,
by wonted and smooth Artifices, to infect and divide the Minds of the great Men
and Nobles, whom by Force or War they could not break in pieces.

It would be too long, and a needless labor, to relate in a long course, the
Calamities of former times, which since they are contained in the Monuments of
History, I therefore repeat not the Memory of them. Leaving then things that
are past, I will briefly enumerate the grievousness of those that are present,
that the whole World may judge, and know, that the Hungarians having suffered
Violence, and Injuries, and being contrary to the King's Obligation, and Faith,
and the Contents of Royal Sanction, and Public Laws, deprived of all Liberty,
have taken up lawful, and just Arms.

It is to be confessed indeed, neither can it be recognized without deep sense
of sorrow, that even his present Sacred, Imperial, and Kingly Majesty, soon
from the beginning of the Government, conferred upon him, according to the
manner, and ancient Custom, by free Voices, treading in the steps of his
Predecessors, declined from the lawful way of Governing, to the grievous and
absolute form of Domineering: for nothing in the whole time of his Reign was
omitted of the usual and inveterate Endeavors against Liberty; little, and but
what he listed, was granted to Supplicants, according to public right; a
certain Image of Liberty, and shows of Kingly Clemency, portended Servitude to
the defenseless.

In this state of liberty, so oppressed, and even expiring, there were not
wanting, among the Hungarians, Generous and Elevated Minds, who laid to heart
these deceitful Machinations and expert Counsels for public Destruction, and
humbly represented the Violence, and breach of pledged Faith, but with greater
Zeal and Earnestness, than Effect: for as his Majesty had received that highest
Royal Honor cropped and defloured, so whilst, according to Faith and
Obligation, he ought to have reduced the same to former Integrity, he Governed
rather by Arbitrary and boundless Power.

Hereupon, from kind dutifulness, and respect to Kingly Majesty, (of which the
Hungarian-Nation was always most observant) It was first tried by Petitions and
Supplications, to moderate a rigorous Domination: but when neither Complaints
nor Volumns so often written, and rejected, could stay the Violence of
inordinate Power, a Remedy was sought for those Wounds, by Arms, which public
Law pronounces just, and lawful, and to be laid hold of in such a case, when
any King not observing the equal balance of ordinary Power, proceeds to a
preposterous Arbitrariness of Lording, contrary to the most manifest Rights and
Privileges of the Kingdom, with Injury and Oppression of the Inhabitants.

And would to God the Arms taken up for Liberties, had been continued in better
Order, and more earnest Endeavor: for it had been more becoming and honest, to
have renewed the brightness of obscured Liberty, by generous and constant
Deeds, than to undergo the Yoke of shameful Slavery, through too much credulity
and fatal discord.

But the innate Inclination of the Hungarian-People to dissension, and the Word
and Promises of the Sacred, Imperial, and Royal Majesty, which had a mighty
bewitching power upon their minds, put a too hasty stop to so great
Undertakings.

For as soon as it was known in the Court at Vienna, that thirteen Counties had
put on Arms to vindicate their Liberties, forthwith he sent Letters to the said
Counties, composed with exquisite Art, to divide their Minds, in which he
offered Grace to all those, that repenting them of their defection, should
return from the Rakotcian-Party, to due Obedience to the King: It was added
further, that what Offense had hitherto been committed, no Court, no Law should
punish it; all should remain, as to Life, Fame, Fortune, the possession of
Goods movable and immovable untouched and indempnified. When they understood
that this Pardon was publicly ratified by the King's Faith, their Minds being
hurried diverse ways, they lost their Heat and Vigor, and Imprudently laying
down their Arms, went back to their repose indeed; but for a short time, they
imagined that a place of great favor was open to those that would first occupy
it, who (truly) under the show of Indulgence were reserved to a securer Revenge
afterward: for some paid it with their Lives, others with their Fortunes,
others with perpetual Imprisonment; this never enough to be deplored
Inconstancy did easily open a Gate to the Emperor's Forces, and gave them all
Opportunities to effectuate their intentions, who, now all fear being removed,
entered into Hungary, conducted by General Spork, and crawling into the Bowels
of the Kingdom, possessed their Cities, Towers, and Fortresses, without
incurring any Wound, or Death, for there were no longer any to oppose them by
force, being beguiled by promise of Grace.

These things done, they proceed to all manner of Afflictions, Rapines, and
Villainies, which the unbridled and licentious Soldier did every where commit
against the tenor of the aforesaid Patents, and Royal Security: Temples were
defiled, and taken away, Castles demolished, Noble Men's Courts overthrown, and
Noble Men made Prisoners, and haled to the Tribunal at Posvonia, having
unwarily given credit to a promised Oblivion: but many being more cautious, and
foreseeing that under the mask of Kingly Grace, were hidden fraudulent
Enterprises, they shunned the prepared Snares, and fled into this Province
under my Protection.

I was taken with horror at the tidings of this dire calamity and unlooked for
Metamorphis: and because I easily foresaw that this Whirlwind would break forth
into most grievous tempests, prejudicial to the Christian World, I presently,
from a good and sincere intention, sent my Envoy to his Sacred, Imperial and
Kingly Majesty, representing to his Majesty, the danger that might ensue, if in
curing this Disease, he should use the rougher Remedies: that mild and gentle
Medicines should be administered, whereby the Minds of Men might be induced, to
hope in, and trust to his Royal Clemency, and not, that being brought into
desperation, they might fall into those Extremities, which might sometime be
dangerous to Hungery, and whole Christendom. But this my Proposal and upright
and sincere Endeavor for public good, which was reitterated again, and again,
though difficultly getting Audience, was sent back without a becoming and
desired Answer; for the lust of a absolute Domination, had taken deeper root,
than that it could be pulled up by Words and Persuasions.

All actions, and the whole procedure in the Kingdom smelled rank of perfect
Force, not Kingly Governance. Nothing that was required of Law and Right was
obtained; No Man's Condition was certain, there was a Crime, where there was
Wealth; and not by degrees, but with headlong Rigor they proceeded to all
sorts of Afflictions, that it might appear, the occasion long sought for, was
now greedily laid hold on, whereby a Free Kingdom might be turned into an
Hereditary Possession; presently Violence was used, the Honor of Liberties
taken away, the Supporters of Laws depressed, the Nobles driven from their
Inheritances and Houses into Banishment and proscribed, all their Goods being
confiscated. Dignities, Honors, and Public Offices, were bestowed upon
Foreigners, in prejudice of the Rights of the Kingdom. Moreover, a Council of
most rigorous Inquisition was instituted against the Vindicators of Liberty,
and others, who they thought would contradict their unlawful attempts. Three
Counts, by unlawful Proceedings, were condemned, and slain by the detestable
hands of Common Executioners, to give a memorable Instance of Cruelty to the
whole World: but neither did this suffice to fill up Revenge, the Injuries of
this Bereaving were augmented, whilst Children, after their Parents killed, or
banished, were afflicted with yet another Sorrow, being reduced to Beggary.

To this Tragedy was added the seizing of the Protestants Temples, wherein fury
and madness raged with such fierceness, that one would have thought they had
waged War with the Sacred Edifices, and that the Walls were Rebels; on a sudden
the Ministers of the Churches were thrust out of the Parishes, and sent to
exile; from others Promises of never returning being extorted by force and
threatenings, that so they might Preach no more, they saved their Lives, and had
liberty to depart out of their Country; many as it were peculiar Sacrifices
were condemned and sent away to the Galleys, (horrible and detestable the
Example!) that there leading a hard and sorrowful Life, they might be worn out
with mourning, filthiness, toil, and fasting.

Besides the Violence of Persecutions, the execrable Domination over Conscience
was persisted in: neither were Men allowed to be married, nor Infants to be
baptized, but by a Catholic Administrator; Men were every where driven to Mass
and Processions, by Force and Arms, and they that strove against it, suffered
great Punishment and Fines.

Neither indeed were the Women free from danger, who, because they could not be
charged with Treason, were yet accused for Weeping; 'twas nefarious and
dangerous to mourn under their Miseries, and forbidding them to bewail their
Kindred condemned to dye.

Moneys were by various Arts and devised Names publicly and privately extorted
from the miserable Common People; Garrisons drawn off, and [others] imposed,
Laws given from Lust; every where Rapins, Spoils, and an innumerable number of
Calamities and Oppressions.

By these and other unexpressable Injuries and Cruelties, the banished Lords
were provoked, having been precipitated by extreme Violence to the utmost loss
of Life, Liberty and Fortunes, and being destitute of all succor from
Christians, they saw no further hope of mitigating this Severity, taking
therefore resolution under so great Necessities for the relief of the Kingdom
and so many Innocents exposed to ruin, they fled to the Favor of the
Resplendant Othoman Port, imploring the Protection of the same, against most
unjust Violence. And their Proposal was not in vain; their Requests were easily
admitted, for those whom extreme hard Fortune and too much Austerity had
expelled out of their Country, to those the Othoman favourableness graciously
granted refuge, security and means to sustain and support Life. Such oftentimes
are the Works of the Divine Being, that when Furies are even in the amidst of
success secure, then sudden Vengeance overtakes them; that Terror may never
be wanting to the wicked, nor Hope to calamitous virtue.

I know indeed there are many that put an ill construction upon this act of
extreme necessity, and preposterously reproach the Hungarian Nation, and blame
them as degenerate from the Christian Name, but these People are either
ignorant of the fundamental Liberties of Hungary, or too favorable to the
Austrian Party.

For they should know and well observe, that the Kings of the Austrian Family
in Hungary obtain the Scepter and Crown by Suffrages of free Election, (the
same which in this Kingdom is both the most equal and most ancient kind of
Government) and are bound by Faith and Oath, which under the open Canopy of
Heaven they are wont to depose to preserve the Liberties.

From this Faith and Oath there arose a true and proper Obligation, which was
necessary not only for exercising Government rightly and according to the
Prescript of the Law and Royal Charter, but moreover gave power to the Palatine
of the Kingdom, as to the Keeper of the Liberties, that he might, together with
the People, contradict and resist the King, when degenerating from the allowed
and ordinary Power, to Cruelty and an unjust License of Lording: Liberty
therefore was not cut off, nor in case of reduction to due governance dispaired
of, a power of procuring the Protection of any one, even the Ottaman, as being
a neighbor Monarch.

Many Years are now passed, since this most unhappy Kingdom, being placed
between two Powers, torn by the one, and pressed by the other, represented to
the whole World a miserable Tragidy, the former never took up Arms against
Hungary, or laid them down, without an increase of his Empire, but with the
diminution of the home Borders of the latter: whence it is come to pass, that
almost the whole is fallen under the Dominion of a most potent Neighbor,
wherefore since this Kingdom every where bordering upon a most mighty Monarch,
must of necessity sustain his first Assaults, but the House of Austria in their
Government, has never sought or intended any thing, beside the depression of
the Hungarians and the subversion of their Liberties, and especially the modern
Cesarian and Kingly Majesty has forced the People of their own nature most
plain an equal, to a disgraceful lowness and a miserable state, whilst
desparation, which is most mighty in great perils, has armed them, and since by
the space of eleven years exile, they neither saw nor could hope for any
moderating of Oppressions, it seemed more advisable to fly to the Protection of
a most Potent Prince, and to use his help in a Cause of the highest and
inevitable Necessity, in respect to the common good, than either to grow old in
mournful Banishment, or to precipitate that small part of the Kingdom yet
remaining into manifest peril.

Neither are the Hungarians tho first, that have implored the Ottaman
Protection in their own defense.

Henry and Frederick, Brothers to the King of Castile, Pope Clement the Fourth
in the Chair, when they had the Conrades their Associates, called out the
Sarazens by Sea and Land, not to defend their Province, but to eject the French
out of Italy. Maximilian of Austria, that he might repel the Violence offered,
and which was his chief intention, that he might overthrow the Venetian
Commonwealth, labored to provoke the Turk to his assistance. Francis the
first, King of France, carefully observing the Ambition and Formidable Power of
Charles the fifth, made no scruple to call in help from the Turks; neither was
it disgraceful in our times for the renowned Commonwealth of Poland to call
out the Tartars against Christians, for the Defense of themselves.

Let the Christian World therefore judge from the Reasons and Causes aforesaid,
whether the Hungarian Nation, being of a most free Constitution, which by its
Fundamental Rights and Privileges, had not only part of the Sovereign Power,
but also in bestowing the Crown, had reserved to it self a natural Liberty,
exempt from Kingly Government. (To wit in a certain Case [if it should happen]
to resist the King) Judge [I say whether] they have done perversely, in
submitting themselves to the Protection of the fulgent Port, that promises upon
the Faith of an Emperor, the restitution of Liberties, and security of
Religion, Life and Honor, with the maintenance of all Rights.

I now who am descended of the same common root with this Nation, of the Blood
of the Huns, and acknowledge my self therefore raised up by God the Founder of
all Kingdoms, to the principal Throne of Government of Hungary, that placed as
it were in a Watchtower, I might endeavor to defend Religious and Civil
Liberties, and as much as in me lies repel the Injuries done to a most free
People, without any proof of Just Cause.

These Respects and Causes have impelled me to take up Arms just and necessary
for the vindication of Liberty and bringing back the banished and oppressed,
therefore no wise and upright Man will wonder at, nor blame my Zeal and
Enterprise, since I have undertaken the defense of a most just Cause, of a
Famous and Noble Nation, and which is the chief of my own Blood. My only aim
is, that Divine Mercy assisting a Kingdom, in time past most flourishing, may
be redeemed to its desired tranquillity, and a most free Nation to an
everlasting [Enjoyment] of their Ancestors Liberty, it is equal and agreeable
to reason, to defend Liberty violated contrary to Faith, when that Right is
allowed by manifest Privileges, It is just to undertake a defensive War for
Friends and Kindred, that suffer unjust Violence; yea, the Bond of Men [as
such] one with another, is most extensive, which even alone suffices for the
bringing of Succor; neither is the right of Humane Society shut up, when
oppressing Kings exercise such Injuries toward their free Subjects, as cannot
be allowed by any equal and considerate Person.

For what remains, I exhort and warn, yea, I pray and beseech all the States of
Hungary, that associating with me in Just and Pious Arms, they Endeavor by
mighty Deeds, and a hearty Union, to bring back the Glory of worn out Liberty,
to its former Splendor, let the Virtue of their Predecessors, who defended
Liberty with their Blood and Life, return into their Breasts in a Matter of so
great consequence, there is need of a sprightly and constant resolution, the
rest are to be committed to Divine Providence, which prosper'd past Endeavors
and Actions for vindication of Liberties with most happy Events.

The Controversy is not here about a private Concern, nor the dispute about
Catholic Religion, which is founded upon the same common Privileges with the
Protestant [or Evangelical] we contend for our Country, for Life, for Fortunes,
for the Honor, for the Glory of the whole Nation, they seek an unjust
Domination, [your] Blood and Fortunes: Do ye seek Liberty, which no good Men,
no honest Men, no generous Man will lose, but together with his Life.

As for me, I am both mindful of Humane Infirmity, and I consider the Power of
Fortune, neither do I deny that all things that I do are subject to a thousand
Casualties, but yet as I am secure in my Conscience, and go forth in Arms, God
guiding and assisting from a secure and quiet state with such purpose for your
Defense, that I intend nothing else, but the Advantage of Public Safety, so I
undoubtedly hope for a prosperous end and event.

But if any be found to follow the contrary part, to the public ruin of their
Country, if their countumacy meet with deserved punishment, they shall not
impute it to me, but to their own fault and rash error; yet I hope and trust,
that all Orders will direct their Counsels, Considerations, Deeds and
Intentions, to the Weal of their Country, and to the Greatness and Advantage
thereof: Liberty was gotten by the Blood of our Ancestors; it has hitherto
been defended by Blood; by Blood also must it be vindicated from Oppression and
Destruction.

It shall be to me Reward enough, and Honor enough, if either my free Spirit
may see my Country defended; or if that be ruined, that my right Hand in
vindication of Liberty, and my innocent Soul among the dead Bodies of such
shall depart to a better Country.

Jehovah, the God of Hosts, the just and mighty God, bless from on high all
righteous and lawful Endeavors, be he the Governor of all both Actions and
Counsels; Let him dispose and bring to a sincere concord, contrary and
disagreeing Minds; Let him strengthen the strong, animate the weak, and cause
that all things may be undertaken and ended to the everlasting Glory of his own
Name; the Restitution of overthrown Liberties; the Quiet and Tranquillity of an
afflicted Nation; the public and private Happiness of all and singular. Amen.

FINIS.

