An ACCOUNT of the PROCEEDINGS AGAINST Francis Charleton Esquire At the
Kings-Bench-Bar, WESTMINSTER, On Tuesday the 7th of May, 1689. Upon an
Information of HIGH TREASON, Of which He was Acquitted, etc.
FRancis Charleton Esquire having Reversed an Outlawry of High Treason sued out
against him in the Reign of the Late King, and prayed, That he might have a
Legal Trial at the King's-Bench-Bar; And, upon his Arraignment, pleading Not
Guilty to the Information: The Trial commenced on the 7th Instant, when, about
Ten in the Morning, the Court being sat, the Crier made Proclamation for Mr.
Francis Charleton to render himself, who accordingly appeared, and then
Proclamation for any that would come and give Evidence. Whereupon the Clerk of
the Crown proceeded to swear the Jury, being all substantial Gentlemen of the
County of Middlesex, who were sworn without any Challenge or Exception. Then
being directed to take Notice of the Prisoner, and hearken to his Cause, the
Information was read, charging him the said Francis Charleton, together with
Sir Thomas Armstrong, and diverse others, with conspiring to compass the Death
of King Charles II. levying War, and subverting the Government, etc. in the
Parish of St. Giles's in the Fields in the County of Middlesex, on the 30th of
May, in the 35th Year of the Reign of the said King.

This Information read in Form and Manner, but in Particulars as aforesaid, the
Court ordered the Crier to call the Witnesses, and accordingly the Lord Gray of
Wark, and Richard Goodenough were called; but, after some stay, they not
appearing, or answering, the Court proceeded to give the Charge to this
purpose: That whereas Francis Charleton, the Prisoner at the Bar, stood charged
of High Treason by Overt Act, etc. and having put himself upon his Trial, no
Witness appearing against him, they must acquit him, unless they had any thing
of their own knowledge to charge him with, etc.

Then the Clerk of the Crown asking the Jury, after they had, had a short
Conference at the Bar, Whether they were agreed in their Verdict? And they
answering in the Affirmative, requiring the Foreman might speak for them, he
further proceeded, and demanded, Whether Francis Charleton Esquire the Prisoner at
the Bar, was Guilty of the High Treason whereof he stood charged in the
Information, or that he fied for the same? To which the Foreman, in the Name of
the rest, replied, That he was not Guilty, nor that he did fly for it.
Whereupon Mr. Charleton, having paid his Respect in making Obeisance, departed
the Court.

Licensed, May 7th: 1689.

London, Printed by D. M. near Fleet-bridge. 1689.


