AN ACCOUNT OF THE PROCEEDINGS AGAINST Richard Alborrow, Oliver Hawley and John
Condon, FOR Robing the King's Male, on the 12th. Day of April last past, at or
near ILLFORD in the County of ESSEX: Who was Tried at the King's-Beneh-Barr,
Westminster.
THE Prisoners being brought from Newgate by the Keeper, etc. to the King's
Bench-Bar, on Tuesday the 22d. of June, 1686. And having been Arraigned about
the Beginning of this Term: The former pleaded Guilty to his Arraignment; but
the two latter pleading not Guilty, they were brought to their Tryale before
Mr. Justice Wythins, etc.

The Jury were Gentlemen of the County of Essex, and are as follows, viz.

Simon Thorowgood Esquire Henry Luther Esquire William Frith Esquire Mark Wynn Esquire Ralph
Thickness Esquire William Luther Esquire John German, John Lockey, John Pool, John Pool
of Burworth-Green, Robert Dent, Nicholas Carleton Gent.
Then Sr. Samuel Astrey, Clark of the Crown, read the Indictment, which set
forth the Weight and Value of the Gold, as follows, viz.

One Wedge of Gold, weighing Seventy eight Ounces and an half, value 314 l. One
little Purse, wherein was many Foreign pieces of Gold, weighing Ninety nine
Ounces, value 396 l. One other Wedge, weighing one Hundred twenty two Ounces,
value 488 l. One other little Bag, containing several Foreign pieces, weighing
Six hundred and nine Ounces and an half, value 278 l. One other Wedge weighing
Six hundred and one Ounces and an half, value 267 l. One other Wedge weighing
One hundred ninety and two Ounces, value 768 l. One other-little Linen purse,
containing therein One hundred and fifteen Ounces and an half of Gold, value
462 l. Wedge weighing Seventy eight Ounces and an half, value 314 l. One other
Wedge, containing Eighty Ounces, value 320 l. Another of Eighty nine Ounces and
an half, value 358 l. Another Wedge weighing Eighty eight Ounces, value 352 l.
Another Wedge of Forty seven Ounces, value 188 l. One other Wedge of Twenty
three Ounces value 92 l. One other little Bag, containing One hundred and six
Ounces and an half, value 453 l. Thirty five Ounces more, value 140 l. Thirty
three Ounces, value 132 l. All, the Goods of Mr. Alvarius de Costi, Mr. Andrew
Alvarius, and Mr. Abra. Fenew, and Feloniously taken away from John Gelp, the
King's Post, at the place aforesaid, etc.

Richard Alborrow, being asked whether he was Guilty or not Guilty, said, My
Lord I am Guilty, and I Pleaded so the last time I was here, and likewise that
he had nothing to say material for himself, but that he hoped the King would
extend his Mercy and Clemency toward him, seeing he was so very Penitent for
his great Crime: So the Court pronounced the usual Sentence against him, and he
was immediately taken from the Bar.

Then the King's Council Proceeded against the other two, viz. Oliver Hawly and
John Condon, and called their Witnesses; the first of which was the Post-Boy,
who gave in Evidence that as he was Riding along the Road near Ilford,
aforesaid, two Men Set upon him and bid him stand, and took his Male and opened
it; and took out all the aforesaid Gold, and Rode toward London with it but he
did not know who they were that Robbed him.

The next Witness was an Ostler, who proved that he was hired to take Horses
from London to Stratford, by Mr. Condon, and that Alborrow, Hawley, and Condon,
and one Smith, (who is fled from Justice) came in a Coach on the Monday Morning
to Stratford, and the Ostler came back in the same Coach, but he could say
nothing as to the matter of Fact.

The next Witness was the Coachman that carried them, who gave in Evidence that
he took up the Four aforesaid persons at the Horsbooe Tavern in the Strand, and
that they bid him Drive them to Stratford, where he lest them and brought the
Ostler back.

The next Witness was one Mr. Jones the Innkeeper at Stratford; who proved
that the Prisoners and Smith, Dined at his house on Monday in the Afternoon,
about Three a Clock, and that he Le^t them two Horses to go to my Lord
Peters's, near ^^^^rstone: (as they told him) and that he had his Horses again
by Eight a Clock the next Morning.

The next Witness was one Mr Gibson, an Innkeeper at Rumford, who gave in
Evidence that the aforesaid four persons, Dined at his house the day before the
Robery was Committed, but he could not tell what time they went out of his
house, for that he was very busy amongst his Guests.

The next Witness was one Mr. Wright, who gave in Eviadence, that Hawley and
Condon were brought in before him, and that he Exhorted them to make an
ingenious Confession, and that he did Examine them, and caused them to be
searched, and that Condon put his Hand in his Pocket himself vountarily, and
brought forth about Five and Forty Pieces of Foreign Gold, and some
Duccatoons, which were produced in Court; and that he owned it to be the same
Gold that was taken out of the Male, as aforesaid.

The Prisoners both owned the Examination, that it was their own Hands that
Subscribed it; and it was Read in Court, which was, That Hawley did Confess
that Alborrow and Smith did Commit the Robery aforesaid: And that the Money was
shared in Long-Acre, at Condon's House; and there they divided the Spoil, etc.

There were some other Witnesses upon the Trial, that proved the Matter of Fact
very fully upon them, that they were Accessory and Abettors to the said Robery;
and they making but a very frivolous and weak Defense for themselves, speaking
nothing material to the Matter in their own Defense, whereby it might be made
appear to the Court that they were not concerned in the said Robery: And
furthermore, having no Witnesses on their Sides, but their own Words; the Court
thereupon proceeded to sum up the Evidence; which was performed by Mr. Justice
Wythins; who informed the Jury that the Case was very plain before them; and
that if they believed the persons at the Bar to be the persons Access^ry to the
Robery, then they ought to find them Guilty; and that the case being so clear,
he would not acquaint them what was Evidence and what was not, and that he
would not trouble them any further, but leave it to their own Consciences; and
if they found it that the two Prisoners at the Bar were concerned as
Accessaries to the other two, then they must be hanged for it, etc.

Then the Jury went out for the space of half an Hour, and returning, brought
in their Virdict; that they were both Guilty of the Rob^ry, alleged against
them in their Indict^^^^.

Then the Keeper took back his Prisoners to Newgate in a Coach, and the Court
Ordered him to bring them down (...) Morrow, to Receive Sentence as the Law
Directs.

This may be Printed,

R. P.
the 22d. of June. 1686.


FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by E. Mallet, next Door to Mr. Shipter's Coffee-House, near
Fleet-Bridge.


