AN ANSWER TO THE Pretended Speech, Said to be spoken Off-Hand in the HOUSE of
COMMONS, By one of the Members for B -- l; and afterward burnt by the Common
Hangman, according to the Order of the House.

The said Pretended Speech is faithfully repeated, Paragraph by Paragraph; the
Falsehood of its Reasoning, and the Malice and Sedition couched in it, plainly
Demonstrated and Confuted.

London, Printed in the Year, 1694.

An ANSWER to a Pretended SPEECH said to be made off hand in the House of
Commons by one of the Members for B -- l.
THE Honorable House of Commons have already answered this Speech in a manner
suitable to its Design; viz. They have committed that to the Flames it self,
which was designed to raise Flames amongst others: and it is very probable, that
if this Speech had been Spoke within as it was Printed without Doors, that the
Author had undergon the same Fate to which he would have condemned the Bill for
Naturalizing of Foreign Protestants, viz. he had been kicked out of Doors, and
then perhaps shut up in the Tower. But seeing the Faction do look upon those
things as unanswerable, which are many times not answered, because indeed
unworthy of a Reply, I hope it will not be thought unbecoming any true
Englishman to make his Reflections upon this Seditious Speech, and testify his
Concurrence with the Honorable House in their Just Censures of it.

This following Speech (says my Author, Page 11) being spoke Off-hand upon the
Debates in the House of Commons, you cannot expect in it the Exactness of Roman
Eloquence, but you have the Freedom and Bravery of the Old Roman or true
English Spirit, zealous for the Good of their Country, and bold in all its
Dangers.

It Is but reasonable to conceive that Ill Designs should have a Bad Foundation,
and therefore Natural to our Author, who designed a Superstructure of Falsehood
to lay the first Stone with a Lie: He would persuade us that the Speech, as it
follows, was spoke in the House of Commons, so that he might very well take
upon him to publish it, seeing they had the Patience to hear it. What height of
Impudence is the Faction arrived to! they would not only value themselves upon
the Friendship of the particular Member on which this Speech is fixed, but make
the World believe that the Whole House of Commons, who are the Representatives
of the Nation, concur with those Seditious Reflections which it abounds with
throughout; or at least that they would never have taken notice of them, if
this Speech had not been printed: So that at once it would insinuate, that the
Parliament is wholly dissatisfied with His Majesty's Title and Conduct, and yet
concur to support him in that which they themselves condemn; which being duly
considered, the Honorable House must needs be esteemed very Moderate in their
Censure, though at the same time they have given a sufficient demonstration of
their Resentments against such an Injurious Reflection, which might have been
prejudicial both to His Majesty's Affairs and their own Reputation.

But our Author is more concerned for the Reputation of his own Eloquence, than
either for that of the King or Parliament; and therefore makes an Apology for
the one, but none for the other: but seeing he published a Lie for himself, we
are sure that he would never have writ Truth for them, and therefore they are
at no loss by his Silence; which had he also observed, in respect of himself,
it had been a better Medium to preserve his Reputation than his Extemporary
Speech.

Our Author is resolved to make us a Compensation for his want of Eloquence, by
the Freedom and Bravery of the Old Roman and true English Spirit, if any body
can be so sharp-sighted as to discern it in his Off-hand Speech; but we would
pray him to restrain his Choler, if we tell him that he has entertained us with
more of the New Romists Bravery and the Spirit of the Laudean or
Church-Faction, than either with the one or the other of the Former: for I
never in my lifetime saw any thing more exactly copied according to the
Jesuitical and new Romish Maxim, Columniare audacter, in hopes that aliquid
herebit, than this our Author's Extemporary Harangue, which is so far from
savouring any thing of the Old Roman Spirit, who would not so much as suffer
Lies to be told in Jest upon the Stage, lest they should be imitated in Earnest
elsewhere; that it is every where crammed with Lies or Prevarications, as we
shall have occasion to touch elsewhere, and at the same time to try the truth
of his Pretensions to a Zeal for his Country, and boldness in all its Dangers.

Our Extemporary Orator goes on and tells us, That if other Corporations and
Shires would take the like care as B -- l, they might be as happy in the Choice
of their Representatives; and then, and never till then, may we hope to see
Poor England become Old England again, Rich and Happy at Home, Glorious and
Renowned Abroad: Toward which this Worthy Patrict has set a noble Example; and
that it may inspire and encourage others, and prempt and enable the Country to
distinguish such from Pensioners and Wretched Betrayers of their Country and
Posterity, is the design of making this Public from a Copy which I procured
from a Member of the House of Commons, who took it in Shorthand as it was
spoke.

Here he recommends the choice of B -- l as as a Pattern for all the
Corporations and Shires of the Kingdom. Now there are some who will be so
malicious as to say, that by this the Author recommends J -- ites. which is a
plain Commentary upon his former Text, and a true taste of his old Roman
Spirit; but the mischief on it is, that there are many Shires and Corporations
of the Nation, where, let the Faction take as much care as they can, they will
never be able to make such a Choice except they could revive the Measures of
the late Reigns, when three Votes carried it from three hundred; and if the
Clerks had spelled the Names of the Electors otherwise than they did
themselves, it was reckoned sufficient to deprive them of their Voice; or if
that would not do, they had a never-failing Magazine at the South Side of
Paul's, whence they could thunder out Excommunications to send Men to Hell, that
to be sure they should not give a Vote upon Earth.

But if we could get such a Choice as our Author recommends, then Poer England
would become Old England again; Poor and Old are miserable Epithets, and
therefore our Author adds Rich and Happy at Home, and Glorious and Renewn'd
abroad. What poor Sophistry is here to cheat poor England out of her Senses?
Does our Author think that the Nation has so speedily forgot, that during the
last two Reigns, the Friends of which he does so earnestly recommend to our
Choice, England's Riches were spent upon the Lusts of her Princes, that the
Exchequer was shut up, and the Orphans Money seized; that our Treasure and Men
were interred at Tangier, or buried in the bottom of the Sea, by fighting
against our Protestant Neighbors the Dutch; that we were looked upon as
Effeminate Poltrons abroad, and made Slaves at home by the Violation of our
Magna Charta, and the Seizing of all the Charters of Corporations; that
Protestants were made Tools to destroy one another, while the Interest of Rome
prevailed over both; that Standing Armies were levied in time of Peace, and
encamped on Hounslow-Heath to shoot Butterflies, and their Victuals nor Clothes
not yet paid for; that our Nobility and Gentry were cut off by Sham-Plots, to
make way for the stifling of the Plots of the Papists; that our Navy rotted in
our Havens, while the French King increased his Strength at Sea, had Directions
from our Monarch how to build Men of War, and was supplied with English
Mariners and Stores; that Idolatry was maintained by the King on the Throne,
our Colleges in the Hands of Papists and our Bishops in the Tower; that a Sham
Prince was fobb'd upon the Nation to exclude a Protestant Successor and
maintain Popery; that Catholic Officers commanded our Armies in Chief, and
Irish Cutthroats were our Life-Guards. Now all this, and ten times more being
uncontrovertibly true, let our Author show us, if he can, how England was then
Happy at home and Glorious and Renowned abroad: and though it is true that
England was Richer then than at present; yet those were the Causes that she is
now become Poorer, and brought on the War which does so much Exhaust her.

But to make our Author sensible that we can do more than Recriminate, let him
be pleased to tell us, if ever England was blessed before with a Protestant
King and Queen, or free of suspicion from Q. Elizabeth's time till now, that
Popery was favored by the Court? When was it that ever England's Monarch was
Generalissimo of Europe, and not only Arbitrator of her Differences, but in a
manner her Lawgiver? We used to value our selves mightily that we could turn
the balance, and is it nothing now that we are the Champions of Christendom,
and our King the Head of the Greatest League that ever was made in the Western
World? Was England's Banner ever so much reverenced abroad, and not only her
Terror, but her Armies spread beyond the Aples? Was it ever known till now,
that the Emperor, King of Spain, and Electors of the Empire, would submit to
the Arms and Conduct of an English King, and command their Generals to obey his
Orders? Was there ever such a Congress of Princes and Ambassadors in Europe, as
assembled to Consult His Majesty at the Hague? Was ever the Roaring of our
English Lions heard with so much Majesty, not only in Ireland and Flanders, but
in the Bowels of Italy? Was there ever a more Glorious Victory obtained at Sea
than that over the French under King William's Banner, which laid Lewis XIV
th's Glory in the bottom of the Depths? Had we ever a King of England who
signalized himself personally in so many Battles, though there be more Danger
in one now than there was in twenty in former Ages? Or had we ever any who
undertook so many perilous Voyages by Sea, for the Honor of the Nation, as he
has done? Had we ever a Prince who did so gloriously rescue our own Religion
and Liberty, and not only ours, but those of Europe, and who is not merely a
Nominal but real Defender of the Faith? does not send counterfeit Assistance to
Foreign Protestants as K. Charles I. did to those of Rochel, and at the same
time ruin them by his Men of War, but has actually restored the Ancient Church
of the Waldenses, who under his auspicious Protection have regained their
Country, and reestablished their desolate Churches. Had we ever a Prince
before, who made it his Business to hinder one Party of our British Protestants
to destroy the other, and evidences a truly paternal Care over all his
Subjects? Had we ever a Prince who by an unparalled Clemency to his Enemies,
was almost cruel to himself and his Friends? Or had we ever a King before who
could command both England and Holland, two of the most formidable Powers in
Europe? Or could boast of an Universal Kindred or Alliance with almost all the
Sovereign Princes in Christendom? So that for the Point of Glory, he has made
England higher than ever; and that she is not Richer is none of his Fault, but
justly chargeable on those of our Author's Principles, who betray his Counsels,
obstruct his Measures, prevent his having the united Service of his Protestant
Subjects, and study more, under a Notion of humouring the Church Faction, to
ruin the Church her self, by keeping up of Divisions amongst Protestants, and
to overturn the Church of Scotland, and the Liberty of Old and New England,
than either to promote their Countries Good, or their Sovereign's Honor, by a
Cordial Opposition to the French King, who is the Common Enemy of Christendom
himself, and in League with those who have always owned themselves to be such.
And this I hope is sufficient to demonstrate whether the Choice of B -- l ought
to be a Pattern to the Nation, and to enable the Country to distinguish betwixt
such as are really Pensioners to the French King and those who are falsely
esteemed such to King William, because perhaps his Servants or Officers, and
willing rather to grant him their early Assistance against the Common Enemy,
than tenaciously to contradict him in such things as some of our Author's
Kidney have labored to persuade him, are his incommunicable Prerogative which
he ought not to part with, on purpose to make a Rupture betwixt him and his
Parliaments, that so they may take advantage from our mutual Confusions, and
like this venomous Libeller endeavor to procure Tumults, and betray their
Country and Posterity to Popery and Slavery.

But now, Gentlemen, Si vobis placet audire fabulam, here is one for you with a
couple of Lies in it is Belly spick and span new from the Jacobite Mint.

Mr. Speaker, (says my Author) I have heard of a Ship in a violent Strom in
danger of perishing every Momem; [ It was not such a sham Sterm we were lately
entertained with in the Gazette which deceives the People, that many Ships
going for France laden with Corn and several sorts of Provisions for the use of
our Dutch Allies, to enable them to live Cheap by making the same Dear at Home;
perhaps some was for the suppert of our half starved and unpaid English
Soldiers now in Flanders, when perished likewise more than 700 Sailors, who
have left thousands of Widows, Children and poor Relations to curse our Conduct
at Sea; the Cause of this Calamity in such a dreadful Storm it was that the
foresaid Ship was in]; when the good Commander seeing the Danger and
apprehending Death, desired his Crew to assist with Resolution, and preserve
themselves and the Ship; which the Sailors refusing to do, be retired to his
Cabin, humbled himself in Prayer, and implored the Powers that alone can save
in time of Need, that though the Ship and the Company might be justly swallowed
up for the Disobedience of the Sailors, yet that he and his Cabin might suffer
no Damage.

It were an easy Matter to turn over Aesop's or Phedrus his Fables, and repay
our Author in his own Com, but I shall content my self with an Animadversion on
his Moral, and take his Lies to Task which are more material. To begin with his
Lies, they are foisted into the middle of his Fable with a very huge and bulky
Parenthesis; but our Author was full of them, and out they must tumble: Well,
that you may be sure he himself is a Man of Truth, he begins and charges the
Gazette with a Lie; and that which is worse, that it deceives the People. But
by our Author's leave, If the Loss of the Ships bound to France with Corn was a
Lie, it was made by their own Friends the Danes; and though perhaps the Number
might not be so great as at first given out, yet the main of the Story does
certainly hold; nor do I believe that our Author has better Correspondence than
that which comes to our Secretary of State, and is published twice per Week in
the Gazette by Authority: but the Mischief on it is, say the Jucobites, That
they agree with the Gazetteer to cheat the People: whether or not our Author
understands French or Dutch, it is not material; but if he had consulted any of
his Friends that do, they could have told him that all the Gazettes which come
from beyond Sea, that of Paris excepted, had the same Relation; and there are
private Letters still to be seen in Town of the same Tenor, and that is more
than I am sure he can produce, except they be of his own and his Friends
forging for his seventy Ships lost on the West of England, which no Body but he
and they ever heard of: but it is no matter to him whether the Story be true or
false, it serves his turn to make the Government odious to the People, as if
they had a Design to starve their own Subjects while they feed and pamper our
Allies the Dutch; and lest his own Prayers should not be successful, they are
backed with the Curses of thousands of Widwos, Children and Relations of 700
drowned Sailors, who curse our Conduct at Sea, the Cause of this Calamity,
though before he had told us that it was caused by a Storm, and that I suppose
may happen where there is the best of Conduct; but right or wrong, our Conduct
must be blamed, else the thousands of Widows left by the 700 Sailors cannot tell
whither to direct their Curses; and that they may do it the more heartily, they
must be told that the Corn was designed for the Dutch, to make them lives Cheap
while we pine for Want: And to give their Curses still the sharper Edg, our
Author would insinuate that the Stars in their Courses fight against King
William, whilst Claudian's Verses are applicable to Lewis XIV. O nimium dilecte
Dee, cui militat Ether, and conjurati veniunt ad Classica Vents. But it is an
easy matter for one who can print such Speeches Without, as were never made
within Doors, to invent Lies and contradict Truths, similes habent sua Labra
Lactucas, Such Causes require such Supports. The Paris Gazetteer is known to be
a Liar all over Europe, and we can point at a Reign or two when the English
Gazetteer labored under the same Infamy; so that it is no wonder that the
Faction, who never were Clients of Truth themselves, should expect nothing but
Falsehoods from others: but blessed be God the present Government neither needs
nor does make use of such Methods to support it; and though his false Story of
seventy of our Ships Joaden with Corn, and 700 of our Sailors being drowned,
may be a Cordial to keep up the drooping Spirits of the Jacobites for a while,
they will find their Informer to be a Cheat at last.

But now for his Moral, he goes on thus:

Sir, I cannot as that good Commander did, be so vain as to hope that either my
self, or the Place for which I serve can be preserved from the general
Inundation which this Bill we are now debating lets in one the Liberties of my
native Country and Countrymen, and therefore be unconcerned for the Good of
England, provided B -- l were Safe. To hope for and expect Happiness in Life,
when all Mankind but my self are Dead, would not be more deceiving, than to
propose Comfort and Security to my self and Corporation, when Strangers are
admitted to possess, and enjoy by a Law, all that is Valuable in this Kingdom;
For this Bill does enfranchise all Strangers, that will Swear and Protest
against Popery, with the Liberty of every Engman, after the vast Expense of
Treasure and English Blood is has cost this Kingdom in all Times and Ages of
our Forefathers, to secure them to themselves and their Posterity.

Here Is a very severe Libel against the Representatives of the Nation, that
none of them have any Concern for the Public Good but himself; not one Soul
more who will help to keep up the Banks against a Deluge of Foreigners which is
ready to overflow us; for it seems by him that all the rest are like the
perverse Sailors who deserve to be swallowed up for their Disobedience, and Sir
J. K -- and his Corporation only to be safe. But not so fast, Can any Man of
common Sense think that so many Gentlemen, who have ventured their Lives,
Estates, and all that is dear to them for the Defense of their English
Liberties, should be all of a sudden so enamoured on Foreigners, as to suffer
them tamely to swallow up all without opposition, if there were any such
Hazard, or that Sir J. K -- should alone see the Danger, and all the rest be as
blind as Beetles? This seems every whit as unreasonable in our Author, as that
which he himself ridicules in the next Paragraph but one, That we should reckon
our selves Wiser than our Forefathers; for here he prefers Sir J.K's Sight and
Sense to that of the whole House of Commons, who are his Contemporaries, and in
all Circumstances not only Equal but Superior to him or any one single Person
in Foresight and Judgment: whereas the Absurdity is not so great, if as to the
changing of mutable Constitutions, we pretend to be as good Judges as our
Forefathers, seeing we stand upon their Shoulders, and must in the Sense of all
Mankind know our own Circumstances better than they could do, except they had
been all of them inspired with a Spirit of Prophecy. But that which sticks in
our Author's Stomach is, that all Strangers that will Swear and Protest against
Popery, should be admitted to possess, by a Law, all that is valuable in this
Kingdom, with the liberty of every Englishman. He would do well to explain
himself, whether it be this Test or not that vexes him; perhaps he is angry
that they should be obliged to abjure Popery, which is contrary indeed to his
Roman Spirit, and according to the Charity of the Laudean or Church Faction, it
would have been a much more acceptable Test to have made them abjure
Presbytery, and so unchurch all those of the Reformed Communion Abroad for want
of Episcopal Ordination, according to the new Method of Charity to the French
Protestant Divines, to deny them a Benefice without they submit to a
Reordination, and cut off a Third or a Fourth of the Peoples Bounty from those
who do not Conform, though they were obliged to swear in the Confession of
their own Church, that they believe no Ecclesiastical Order of Divine Right
superior to that of a Presbyter. But further, what if the promoters of that
Bill do find it requisite to have an Alloy of Foreign Protestants, who will be
true to the Interest of their Religion, and consequently of the Country where
it is maintained, and not so inconsistent with either as a certain sort of Men
amongst us, who will needs be called Protestants and Englishmen, and yet
promote the Interest of the late King, or rather Lewis XIV, to the utter
overthrow of our Religion and Liberties? and seeing those Foreigners were
Instruments under God and our Gracious Sovereign, to rescue that Religion, and
those Liberties which have cost so much English Blood and Treasure, when both
of them were so basely betrayed by those who (si diis placet) will needs be
called Englishmen and Protestants; I say, why may not those Foreigners who
were the Instruments to rescue them, be useful Instruments likewise to preserve
them, especially when they are no more Foreigners, but Englishmen by
Naturalization, and so will be obliged to defend our Rights and Liberties as
their own?

But to return to our Extemporary Orator, he goes on thus.

Wherefore, Mr. Speaker, I must beg Pardon if at this time I cannot be silent,
but express a zealous Concern, as well for the Kingdom in General, as for the
Place I represent in Particular: And I am more moved thereunto, whilst I see so
many Members sent here by their Country for the Conservation of the Englishmens
Liberties, so warm as to part with all to Strangers with one Vote.

I durst venture an even Wager, that this Gentleman will be very angry at any
Man who defends Extemporary Prayers to God, and yet he thinks himself extremely
well qualified for Extemporary Speeches to Men; His General and Particular Zeal
do so fill his Heart, that it looses the Strings of his Tongue, this being
indeed such an occasion as would have made Craesus's dumb Son to speak, to see
those who are entrusted with the Conservation of our Liberties to part with all
to Strangers: Whereas I believe that the Bill intended them only a share, and
this Gentleman finding the House grow warm upon the Matter, was resolved to
expel one Heat by another; and it seems the Commons approve of his Method, for
they have dealt pretty warmly with his Speech, which I hope has in some
measure driven out his unnatural Heat.

His general Zeal made him discharge furiously against the Bill; and now his
particular Zeal falls on the Arguments made use of to defend it.

The Argument of the Honorable Person near me (says he) to render all the Care
of our Forefathers of no Esteem amongst us, who are or ought to be the
Representatives of the Kingdom, was to prove, that this Age and Generation are
wiser (he did not say Honester) than the former.

I remember (continues he) that a West-country Man, many Years past, undertook
to prove the same to me and my Company Beyond Sea, by declaring his Father was
a Fool to him: I yielded him that Point, by concluding both to be such; and yet
our Forefathers might be wise. Men. I shall not at this time question the
Wisdom of those who promote the Bill, or their Fathers: For my self I declare
in behalf of the Wisdom and Honesty of our Predecessers, nor can I assent to
the yielding up of the Liberties and Laws they derived unto us, only because
some Gentlemen think better of themselves, and perhaps mistakenly, than of
their Parents.

The Burden of all this Crambo is, that Sir J. is very angry that the present
Generation should pretend to know better what is fit for themselves than the
Generations past could possibly do as to a mutable constitution, which I have
answered already; and shall only add, that I believe he injures the House in
alleging that to be the only Reason they had for the Bill, That some Gentlemen
think better of themselves than of their Parents; for he himself pretends to
answer three more, as we shall hear anon: And in truth the West-country Man
might have been quits with him here, in a Complement almost of his own Coin.

It being a very material Point to know how our Author came to have such a
Deference for his Ancestors, he informs the Speaker thus concerning it.

Sir, I was easily instructed in a Principle of Deference to the Wisdom of our
Ancestors; and at this time I tremble when I reflect on the Correction given me
by my Master, that I might not forget, but imitate and defend in all Times this
Rule. Let them only be accounted Good, Just, and Wise Men, who regard and
defend the Statutes, Laws, Ordinances and Liberties which their Forefathers
Wisdom and Experience obtained for themselves and Posterity. Now it is my
Opinion, Mr. Speaker, that if those Gentlemen who approve of this Bill, had not
only been taught that Rule, but as well corrected as my self, they would be of
my Judgment: And I wish that they who depart from that Rule, and sacrifice our
English Liberties to a number of Mercenary Foreigners, may not meet with a much
more rigorous and exemplary Chastisement from their enraged and ruined
Countrymen.

The Sum of the Matter is this, that our Author was whipped into this Principle,
and in truth it is pity but that he should be whipped out of it again; that as he
trembles when he reflects on his former Correction, he might quake when he
reflects on the latter. This I hope the good Readers will not think severe,
when they consider that our Author does not think such Whipping, as he himself
had, enough, but would plainly seem to wish for a De-Witting upon those Members
that were for the Bill. And for this End I conceive it was that such great
Bundles of his Speeches were sent to the Silk-Weavers, etc. in Spittle-fields,
that they might come and chastise the House into better Manners. But to come to
his Argument, which sinells strong indeed of his Roman Spirit; They must only
be accounted Good, Just and Wise Men, who regard and defend the Statutes, etc.
which their Forefathers Wisdom and Experience obtained for themselves and
Posterity. If this be the only Rule by which we must try Good, Just, and Wise
Men, we must allow it to other People and Nations as well as our selves: And if
so, then other Nations have as good reason to put a Value upon the Wisdom of
their Ancestors as we. And thus, if a Reformation of Religion were proposed in
Spain; No, say the Spaniards, they are only Good, Just and Wise Men, who regard
and defend the Statutes, etc. which were obtained for us by the Wisdom and
Experience of our Forefathers. But the Wisdom and Experience of our
Forefathers obtained those Statutes which settle and establish the Catholic
Religion. Ergo, We cannot be Good, Just and Wise Men, if we admit a
Reformation. And thus our Author, from his excellent Roman Spirit, has
furnished the Romanists with an Argument against our Religion; And if those who
were entrusted with the Education of our Ancestors, for two or three
Generations backward, had taken as much care to whip this Principle into their
Pupils, as our Author's Tutor took to whip it into him, the World had not been
troubled, as at this Day, with the pestilent Northern Heresy, but we had still
been of the old Roman and true English Spirit: And yet I Am afraid, that if the
Matter be duly searched, our Author's Receipt will want a Probatum est; for I
think there was sufficient Care taken in the late Reigns, to whip the Nation
into the Principles of Passive Obedience and Non-Resistance, and a stupid
submission to the dictates of that Faction, who in spite of Sense and Reason
will needs be called the Church; and yet we see that it will not do, so that we
must even imitate that Physician, who after he found himself mistaken in
prescribing of Bacon as an infallible Remedy against a certain Distemper,
because he saw an Englishman cured by it, qualified his Recipe with a Tantum
Anglis: So must we infer, that this Receipt of Whipping Men into Principles,
will be only successful on those of our Author's stamp; for no thinking-Man
will be whipped into any Principle contrary to his own Sense and Reason: And
thus we saw that neither the Degradation by the Clergy, nor the Lashing by the
Dispensing Judges, could whip Passive Obedience into Mr. Johnson, though they
lashed him soundly from Newgate to Tyburn; and yet half that Pains would have
taught an Animal of our Author's kind both to fetch and carry.

The Arguments used for the Bill, (says my Author) are in substance these:
First, a Want of Purchasers for our Lands; Second, of Merchants; Third,
Manufacturers, who can work cheaper than the English; Fourth, Husbandmen to
till the Ground. To all these I shall return short Answers; but if I debate not
on them with that Advantage and Reason as our Land-Admirals can (no doubt) with
great Ingenuity on Sea-Politicks, I hope the House will pardon me; for my
Observation never cost the Kingdom such Expense of Money at Home and Losses at
Sea, as has the Experience of those Honorable Persons in Sea-Affairs.

Our Author lays about him on all hands, and if he cannot prevail with the
Silk-Weavers, etc. from Spittle-Fields to come and chastise the House with
Scorpions, he is resolved they shall feel the Scourage of his Tongue, and pours
out his Vengeance upon our Land-Admirals most furiously. What pity but he
himself had been one of them, for by his Behavior it would seem that he has
more than a Month's Mind to some Preferment, and then he may also learn
Experience at the Nation's Cost; for his Principles have already cost them
dear. It was observed to be the Method during the late Reigns, for such Members
as had a Mind to Court-Preferments, to inveigh bitterly against the Proceedings
of the Court in the House; and it is very probable that our Author had a Mind to
try whether the same Methods be practicable in this: and in truth, I think it
were worth the Court's while, though upon no other Account but animi gratia, to
put it to the Trial, that they may see what Mercenary Souls such sort of Men
have. But if he be so much concerned. at our Expense of Money at home, and our
Losses by Sea, why is not he and his Party more active in discovering the
Cause, and bringing the Instruments to condign Punishment? This has hitherto
been prevented by Men of our Author's Principle, though His Majesty gave it in
charge to the House. We know of what Party they were who obstructed the Course
of Justice against the Authors of our first Miscarriages at Sea, and it is easy
to be conjectured of what Side they are who hinder the discovery of the latter;
and yet those Men keep the greatest Noise of any about the Losses of the
Nation, to enrage the People against the present Government, though they
themselves be the Principal Causes of those Losses, and brought this War upon
us which exhausts us with Taxes, and herein they exactly imitate the great
Enemy of Mankind, who first Tempts and then Accuses; and thus they lay the
Government under a Necessity of taking such and such Measures, and employing
such and such Men, on pretense that the Monarchy and the Church will be
otherwise undone, and at the same time throw the blame of all the Miscarriages
of their own Tools upon the Government, to make it hateful to the People, of
whose Privileges they would now have the World to believe that they are
extremely tender, though in the former Reigns they told us, That we must resign
our Souls wholly to the Church, and our Bodies and Estates to the King, and
durst scarcely plead any Property in either, except we would be reputed
Schismatics or Traitors.

But now let us come to our Author's Answer to the Arguments. First, It Is argued
by some, says he, that we want Purchasers for our Lands; this is a melancholy
Consideration. I therefore desire those Gentlemen who approve of this Bill, to
tell me what it is has brought us to this Condition, That the Landed Men of
England are reduced to so low an Ebb that they must sell, and none left able to
buy; unless Foreigners are naturalized; Does this prove our Forefathers wanted
Understanding? or does it not rather conclude it is occasioned by our Want of
theirs, and not following their Examples? Who never taxed their Country to the
Ruin both of themselves and their Posterity: Nor did they expend the Money of
the Kingdom on such Allies as ours; who, as we have been informed by some of
the Privy Council, are not in our Interest, and will spare us none of their Men
for our Pay without great Pensions. Likewise for themselves; Can any Man hope
to persuade me that our Forefathers brought Foreign Soldiers into England and
pay them, and naturalize them likewise, at the same time send the English
Soldiers abroad to fight in a strange Land without their Pay.

Let us but abate our Taxes, and after the wise Precedent of our Fathers, pay
our own Seamen and Soldiers at home, and send the Foreigners back; then the
Money will be found circulating at Home in such Englishmens hands who may buy
the Lands that are to be sold, without naturalizing Strangers.

To our Author's Question, what it is that has brought us to this Condition.
That Landed Men are necessitated to sell, and that none are left able to buy,
except Foreigners be naturalized? It may be answered in short, That the base
Surrender, or rather betraying of our Civil and Religious Liberties in the late
Reigns by those of his Party, brought us to a necessity of inviting over our
present Sovereign, and joining him with our Arms to recover what we had so
lost; and the Treachery of those of his Party whom His Majesty has been forced
to employ, or the Curse of Heaven upon such Instruments has many times broken
his Measures, prolonged the War, increased our Taxes, and ruined our Trade; but
that none are left able to buy, except Foreigners be naturalized, is I suppose
what no body ever said. There may be and are many who are able to buy that are
not willing, so long as they see the Government liable to the Treachery of such
Men as himself, who would inhance the whole Administration of Affairs into
their own hands, and not only exclude Foreigners, but their own Native
Brethren, and a hundred times better Englishmen than themselves; because their
Consciences will not suffer them to take the Sacrament for the obtaining of a
Place or Commission, which they think contrary to our Savior's Design and
Institution; or are not so superlatively Proud as to pretend to a posture of
greater Humility in receiving the same, than was practiced by the Holy
Apostles; and not only for this reason, but also because the Faction represent
the honest and moderate Churchmen as not fit to be employed, putting them
almost in the same Category with Dissenters: And therefore I would very fain
know of our Author what encouragement either of those sorts of Men have to lay
out their Money in buying Land, when they must bear equal Burden with others to
support the Government, while their Enemies enjoy all the profitable
Employments under it, and only watch for an opportunity, not only to deprive
them of their Estates, as in the days of Yore, but of their Lives and all the
Comforts of 'em: For we see so little of the effects of the Faction's
Repentance for their having formerly persecuted their Brethren, that on the
contrary in is evident that they are ready to burst with their Venom; which is
now kept in by the Restraint of Law. And as to the Naturalizing of Foreigners,
though we don't say, that none are left able to buy except that be granted; yet
such a Law would very much conduce to procure Chapman: For there are not only
some French Protestants who are able to purchase, but many rich Merchants, and
others in Holland and Germany, who would be thereby encouraged to come and
plant themselves here, where they might have all Necessaries in Plenty, and the
Freedom of their Religion under a Government which they love, and in a Country
where they might live without any fear, either from the French King, or any
other Oppressor: and if this should be the Case, as it probably would,
considering the horrible Devastations of the Palatinat, the continual Danger of
other Protestants upon the Rhine, and elsewhere, and the little Ground that
there is to be purchased in Holland; where, I pray, would be England's
Disadvantage by an Act of Naturalization? And would it not rather be infinitely
to her Advantage to have their Estates spent here upon her own Product, and her
Strength increased by such a considerable accession of Zealous Protestants, who
know the Principles and Practices of the Papists so well, that they would be in
no hazard, according to the practice of too too many of our English
Protestants, either of espousing the Interest of Lewis XIV, the late King and
his pretended Son, or of undermining the Government of Their present Majesty's?
but this our Author and his Party know too well, and that makes 'em redouble
their Clamor against the Act of Naturalization, though under the specious
pretenses of an Exuberant Zeal for our English Liberties.

In the next part of the Paragraph, the Gentleman charges the House with
ruining themselves and their Posterity by Taxes; as if no other of the Members
had either Estates to be taxed, or Posterity to be ruined but himself. Our
Author's Good Book, (for that is the highest Epithet which he can vouchsafe to
the Holy Scriptures) says, He that provides not for his Family is worse than an
Infidel, an Epithet which the Moderns appropriate to the Turk: but certainly he
that ruins his Family must be worse, and I cannot tell how to explain that
better, than by saying, that he must be as bad as the French King; and so the
Commons are obliged to this Gentleman for his Complement.

Then he tells us, That our Forefathers would not expend the Money of the
Kingdom upon such Allies as ours, who are not in our Interest, and will spare
us none of their Men for our Pay, without great Pensions likewise for
themselves. Here our Author runs high indeed, and brings in Privy-Counsellors
to accuse the King, as if he had made an Alliance with those who are not in our
Interest, which must be a very strange kind of Allies indeed: I think by the
Gentleman's leave, that in such a cafe as this, He that is not against us is
for us; and it is much better to have a Defensive Alliance with the Northern
Crowns than none at all, that keeps them from doing us hurt if they can do us
no good; and as for their not letting us have their Men for Pay without
Pensions to themselves, if they furnish their Quota's for their Concerns in the
Empire, we have the less reason to be angry; I don't known that any Prince or
State have reason to part with their Men, which are their Strength, for bare
Pay, without any other Consideration: and if His Majesty think fit to grant it,
I know no reason why this Gentleman should cast such an Unmannerly Reflection
upon it; a Provocation as small as this brought Charles I. with an Armed Force
to demand five Members from the House of Commons: but let the King do what he
can, our Author will never be pleased; if he sends Englishmen abroad to fight,
then he cries out that they are sent to be knock's on the head without their
Pay; and if he hire Foreigners, then he expends his Money upon such Allies as
our Forefathers would not have done, though at the same time His Majesty has
very few or no Allies but what at some time or other have been in Alliance with
our Forefathers, and had of their Money too when they had not so much to spare.
As to the bringing of Foreign Soldiers into England, and Naturalizing them,
while at the same time he sends English Soldiers abroad, etc. it is very hard
that a Foreign Prince, who riskt his All to save us from being swallowed up by
Popery and Slavery, should be denied some Troops of his own Countrymen for his
Guards, in whom he may confide upon all Emergents: This Reflection is so very
Malicious, that nothing but Jacobite Impudence could have published it; but if
our Author had been a Man of Thoughts, he would have forborne this Cavil merely
out of respect to the French King, the God of his Party, who has always Swiss
Guards about his Person, when natural Frenchmen are sent abroad to sight; and
it was his Custom formerly to have Scottish Guards too. Then as to our
Englishmens want of Pay while Foreigners have it, it is more than I dare say our
Author is able to instruct; but if he can any ways make the King odious to the
Nation, he cares not by what means, so it be but accomplished. But as to our
Troops not being paid in Flanders, it is strange how they come to gain Credit in
that Popish Foreign Country without Money, and that the Natives of the Country
should not complain of it, which to be sure if it were true they quickly would,
and Gazettes and Letters would as quickly mention it, which seeing they do not,
we must let it pass for a Jacobite Forgery: Then as to the Naturalizing part;
The number of the Foreign Soldiers which we have here is so very
inconsiderable, that the Naturalizing of them, if they should require it, would
do us no damage; and it is what in Gratitude we could scarcely deny, that of
those who hazarded their Lives to save our Liberties, a small number at least
should partake of 'em with us. But it is not to be supposed that many of the
common Soldiers will trouble themselves about it; and for their Officers, if
they do, it adds to our Strength, and obliges them to spend what they save
amongst us; whereas otherwise they might carry it elsewhere: but there are not
many Soldiers who are hoarders of Money; so that we need not be
over-solicitous who shall be Heirs to their Estates. And in short, as to the
Matter of Naturalization, we need never be afraid that any other but those of
Estates will be at the Expense of coming from beyond Sea to reap the benefit of
it; and if any such come, they will be worth their room. But notwithstanding
all this Noise against Foreign Protestants, I believe there is few of the Party
who would refuse their Sons for Apprentices, provided they may have 'em on
their own terms, and then they must be Enfranchised whether they will or not;
so that it is plain, that this Spite against Foreign Protestants flows not from
any Damage that their Naturalization can do us, but merely because they are
firm to the Government. Then as to the sending of Men to Flanders, that is a
mighty Grievance to our Author. The Netherlands have been formerly thought our
Barrier, the securing of them was the securing of our Selves; so that it is no
wonder he should be angry that we send Men thither, because it gives the French
King such a Diversion, that he has no leisure to restore the late King: and
could Monsieur but once secure some good Harbors in that Country for his Men
of War, he would very quickly make us a Visit, and as speedily ruin our
Protestant Allies the Dutch; which would mightily rejoice our Author's Heart:
For it is easy to perceive that he cares not though the War were in our own
Bowels, when he is not willing that we should meet the Enemy beyond Sea and
keep him at Home: And that we may be further-convinc'd of his Good Will to the
Nation, he presses hard for the Abatement of our Taxes. If the Case would admit
it, I believe that every body would be glad of it as well as himself, but if
the Taxes be abated, how shall the War be maintained, and not only our Honor,
but our Religion and Liberties be secured? If England should fall off, the
League would quickly dissolve, the French King would speedily gain his Point,
and make us pay more in one Year by his Military Contributions, than we have
done yet during the War; he would take care to put us out of a Condition to
trouble him any more beyond Sea, to cast the balance of Europe, or maintain
the Protestant Religion abroad; and as he has had no Mercy on his own Country,
we have no reason to expect he should have any on ours: and yet our Author must
set up for a Grand Patriot to his Country, because of his Noble Speech,
advising us to withdraw our hand from that which we had better never have
begun, than to leave unfinished; for the Case is come now to this Point, that
either we must render the French King incapable of troubling his Neighbors any
more, which (blessed be God) his Majesty is in a fair way of effecting, or else
we must follow his Triumphal Chariot, and instead of our Liberties, hug our
Chains.

Our Author's next Advice is, To pay our own Seamen and Soldiers at Home, and
send the Foreigners back; Then will the Money circulate at Home in such
English-mens Hands, who may buy the Lands that are to be sold, etc.

Here Is somewhat to do about paying our Soldiers: but he would do well to
acquaint us by what way it may be effected, without the Taxes which he is for
abating. And whether it be the King's Fault that they are not paid? Had the
Arrears of his Army been as long unpaid, as the Victuals and Clothes of K. Chapter
II: Had he spent his Money as he did, upon Ladies of Pleasure, and maintaining
B -- ds: Had he shut up the Exchequer, or defrauded his Creditors; or had he
refused to give the Nation an Account of their Money, there had been some
ground for this Clamor. But if any of our Author's Party, or of the
high-Church-Faction, have misapplied the Money which was designed for that End,
why do not our Murmurers concur to bring them to punishment? I am confident
they may have the King's Leave. As for the sending of the few Foreign Troops
which we have back, I have touched upon the Ingratitude of that already. And as
to the paying of our Seamen and Soldiers at Home, the former are never paid
any where else; and for the latter, we had better pay them in Flanders, to keep
the French at a Distance, than expose our selves to a French Invasion by
withdrawing them, for in that Case we must pay them and the French both: And
for the few Foreign-Souldiers which we have among us, I Am sure they have
neither their Clothes nor their Victuals from Holland, and therefore their Pay
must needs circulate in England.

Our Author goes on thus. Secondly, It Is said we want more Merchants: Whom may
we thank for bringing so many to Poverty? But I shall forbear grating, and
desire the Liberty to consider in short how the Trade of England has hitherto
been carried on. Gentlemen have placed their younger Children to Merchants.
Their Masters observing their Honesty and Diligence, when they have gained some
Experience in the necessary Parts of Trade, generally send them Abroad, to
Turkey, all Parts of the Levant, to Spain, Portugal, East and West Indies; and
all Parts where England holds any considerable Commerce, there the young Men
are employed by, and entrusted with the Stocks and Estate of their Masters and
Friends, whereby all Parties, both the Principals at Home, and the Factors
Abroad, are advantaged, and England enriched, (for therein end all Centers);
and at last, when they are satiated with Gain, they return to their Native
Soil, their Friends and Relations, for Ease and Enjoyment, making room for a
younger Generation to succeed in their profitable Employments. Thus hitherto
this Kingdom has advanced in Riches, whilst Foreigners could not with Success
plant their Factories on us through the Advantage we had by our Laws. Let us
but turn the Tables, and consider the Consequence; suppose we pass this Bill,
and the Dutch ( who no doubt will take the Oaths as this Bill directs to, and
protest against Popery and Paganism, and on occasion Christianity too, as at
Japan) send their Servants and Factors hither, and we naturalize them, and let
the Capital Stock, which gets an Employ to these new-made Englishmen, belong
to their Masters and Friends, who never did, or ever will live amongst us: Will
it not then follow that the Profit will be theirs, and not England's? And will
not the new-made English (yet Dutchmen still) return to their Country and
Friends with their Gain, as our People hitherto have done? We may observe by
our Inland Trade, that it is seldom they who made the Manufacturies gain
Estates, but those who employ their Stocks in buying and selling what others
made. And it is the same with the Merchants, those that Export and Import are
the Gainers; the first Maker very seldom, the Consumptioner never.

The Conclusion then of this Experiment must be this, That what has hitherto
been Gain to England, by English Merchants and Factors, will be turned to a
Foreign Land by the Foreign Merchants, naturalized for their own Good, not
England's.

Here Is a long Paragraph, but little to the Purpose. As to our Author's
Question, Whom we may thank for bringing so many of our Merchants to Poverty?
It may easily be answered, Even those of his Stamp, who give the French notice
of all our Motions by Sea; or being entrusted with the Management of our
convoys, etc. let them fall into the Enemy's Hand, either by Treachery or
Cowardice. Then as to the Return of our Factors from Turkey, Spain, Portugal;
the Indies, etc. with Riches to themselves and Masters, after they were
satiated with Gain, it must be obvious to every Man that those Factors bought
the Product of those Countries where they were employed, and lived upon the
same while there: So that our Money for the said Products did circulate in
those Countries, or at least that which was equal to Money in Value; and
consequently were profitable to those Countries as well as to our own, both by
exporting their Product, and employing the Natives in the several Manufactures,
Carriage by Land and Water. And in the same manner may we reap Advantage by
Foreign Protestant Factors, and yet Expedients found out, by the Wisdom of
Parliament, to secure our own Trade by Exportation. But further, I would
enquire of our Author, whether he thinks there is no difference betwixt Foreign
Protestants living here, and English Protestants living amongst Pagans, Turks
and Papists, in such Places where neither the Climate, Religion nor
Constitutions of the Country are agreeable to them, especially if they be such
as have any Zeal for their Religion; I say, I would fain know if it be not much
more probable to think that our Plenty of good Provisions, the Pleasantness of
our Country, Healthfulness of our climate, together with the Wholesomeness of
our constitutions and firm Establishment of our Religion, without fear of
Oppression by Potent Neighbors, are not like to be more powerful Attractives
to induce Foreign Protestants to settle here, than any thing that can be found
in those Countries which our Author has named, to induce Englishmen to settle
there, especially when those Protestants are Naturalized? But our Author's
Rancour against the Dutch, has so much blinded both the Eyes of his Body and
Soul, that he can neither see nor consider, that it were an easy Matter for the
Parliament to provide against all those Inconveniences, Real or Imaginary,
which he has heaped together, and yet make an Act of Naturalization, not only
profitable to our selves, but advantageous to Foreign Protestants, without
planting their Factories on us, so as to ruin our own Trade, or permitting
those who shall raise Estates in this Kingdom, to go and spend them elsewhere.
And it had been much more deserving the Title of a Patriot, which our Author is
so fond of, if he had modestly propounded his Objections, and desired the House
to consider of those supposed Inconveniences, than to libel the
Representatives of the Nation by Seditious Pamphlets, to bring them under a
general Odium by the People whom they represent at Home, and in hazard of their
Lives by the Silk-Weavers, etc. here.

As to his Reflections on the Dutch, for denying their Religion at Japan; Envy
and Spite will make us look at our Neighbors Faults through a
Magnifying-Glass, or find Faults where there are none. I know that in Charles
Il's Time, when it was thought fit, for the advancing the Protestant Interest,
to destroy our Protestant Neighbors the Dutch, all the Calumnies that Malice
could invent were published against them, and this amongst others. But what if
it be true? why should all the Dutch be chargeable with this, more than all
Englishmen are chargeable with the Renegado's of their own Nation, who fall
off to Popery and Mahumetanism but too frequently?

Our Author continues thus. But this is not all, for at once the Art of
Navigation will be rendered useless; whence then will be a Nursery for Seamon?
for Foreign Merchants will naturalize Foreign Seamen: and when the
Press-masters find them, they will Dutcher spreaking, ye Min-heer, and avoid
the Service. But at the Custom-House, Exchange, and in all Corporations they
will be found as good Englishmen as any be of this House; from whence it
follows that Trade will be only carried on by Foreign Merchants and Seamen,
and the English Seamen condemned to our Men of War, and perhaps live there as
hitherto, without their Pay, till another Million be owing them for Wages; and
in the interim have this only Consolation and Reward for Service done, and to
be done, that their Wives and Children may be subsisted by the Alms of the
Parish, whilst Foreign Soldiers are maintained at Home and Abroad with their
Pay.

Here the Gentleman thinks he has hit the White, and that surely the Nation
will never have any more regard to the House of Commons, who would render their
Navigation useless, by which we have increased our Wealth and our Glory: but
the height of our author's Passion wont let him see his own Inconsistencies: I
hope if the Foreign Seamen be once Naturalized, their speaking Dutch will not
exempt them from the King's Service; and any Man of half our Author's
Invention, may find an Expedient how the Press-Masters shall know whether they
be Naturalized or not; and if this be done, then we shall be able to provide
our Fleet with more ease than at present, when we cannot only Impress our own
Native Seamen, but our Naturalized Foreigners. As for our Seamens want of their
Pay, while their Families are maintained by Alms, it has been sufficiently
answered already; and if the Causes were truly inquired into, and the
Instruments duly punished, I am afraid that some of our Author's Stamp would
pass their time but very sorrily. Then as to the maintaining of Foreign
Soldiers at Home, their Number is so very few, and every Day like to grow
less, that there is more of Malice than any thing else in the Objection. And
for those we maintain Abroad, there are the more of our Countrymen saved, not
only from the Fury of the Sword, but the raging Distempers of the Camp, which
generally proves fatal to great Numbers, till they be once seasoned: but our
peevish Author can no ways be pleased; he is angry that Englishmen should be
sent Beyond Sea, and yet will neither let his Majesty have Foreign Soldiers at
Home nor Abroad.

A Third Argument, says this worthy Knight, for admitting of Foreigners, is
upon a supposed want we have of Manufacturers, especially such as will work
cheaper than the English. In my Opinion, this Reasoning is Extraordinary, and
ought not to take Air out of the House, lest the old English spirit should
exert it self in Defense of its Liberties; for at this time when all Provisions
are become excessive dear by the great Quantities exported to Holland, which
puts the poor English Manufacturers on Starving in most Parts of England, for
want of a full Employment to enable them to support their Families by their
honest and painful Labor and Industry, shall an English Parliament let in
Strangers to under-sell our Country, which they may easily do whilst they live
in Garrets, pay no Taxes, and are bound to no Duty? How shall we answer this to
our Country who sent us here? when by so doing, instead of making the Kingdom
more populous, we provide only for the Subsistence of Foreigners, and put our
Countrymen to the Choice of starving at home, or to turn Soldiers and be sent
to Flanders, and starve there for want of their Pay; for it is well known that
at this time more Commodities are made in England than can be consumed a broad
or at home, which makes the poor Manufacturers so miserable.

That there are several Manufactures which we used to import from France and
elsewhere in time of Peace, because we could neither have them made so cheap
nor so well in England, is what I think no body can deny; and if by
Naturalizing French and Dutch Protestants, we can have those Manufactures made
as cheap here as they had them there, and cheaper and better than the few that
make them in England can do, will not the Good of the whole be more than a
sufficient Compensation for the loss of a few, which may also be provided
against by the Wisdom of the Parliament, either by incorporating our own with
the Foreign Manufacturers, and making them the Managers or Overseers of the
same if capable, or by such other Methods as the Promoters of this Bill and the
Prudence of the House shall suggest: and by this means, will not the Money
which used to be exported for those Commodities be spent and circulate at home,
and the Foreigners who now live meanly and in Garrets, to avoid the Sour
because they must reap none of the Sweet, be encouraged and enabled to live
after a better rate, marry and set up Families, (whereas now many of them live
single because of their Poverty) pay House-Rent and Taxes, wear better Apparel,
and spend more liberally in Housekeeping; by which Method the fruits of their
Labors will circulate to the remotest Corners of the Kingdom, and the Nation
become fuller of People, who will help to spend the Commodities made in
England, which our Author says are more than can be consumed either at Home or
Abroad, and occasions the Misery of our Manufacturers: and if the Dutch teach
us their way of making Linen, and the French theirs of making Paper, will not
great Sums which are continually returned beyond Sea for those Commodities, be
spent at Home? So that we may easily perceive our Author's Clamor against the
House to be very unreasonable, and his Suggestion of the danger of their
Arguments taking Air without Doors extremely Malicious, and altogether the
Product of his J -- ite Roman Spirit, which prompted him to send his Libels
amongst those that he thought would be the most easily imposed upon by them, in
hopes (as is manifest from his hint of the old English Spirit's exerting it
self in defense of its Liberties, which plainly points at former Insurrections
against Foreigners) to procure an Uproar; which as it would have endangered the
Parliament, disturbed the Peace of the Nation, and given the Jacobites an
opportunity of acting under a disguise, would have also prevented His Majesty's
going beyond Sea himself, or sending his Forces thither, and by consequence
have promoted Lewis XIV's and the late King's Interest; and no doubt our
Author's miscarrying in this Attempt, will afford new matter of Reflection to
the Paris Gazetteer, like that which he had in his Gazette of the 6th of March,
That those Members of the House who are for the Public Good have not been
successful in their Endeavors against the Pensioners; for I question not but
our Author has taken care to give notice of his Efforts to the Court at St.
Germains, and his Libel will make the French believe that England is in as bad
a Condition as France. Then s to his Malicious Reflection on the Members for
the Bill, that they take care for the Subsistence of Foreigners, and put our
own Countrymen to the Choice of Starving at home, or turning Soldiers, and be
sent to Flanders to starve there for want of Pay; it is like the Charity of his
Faction, who when the poor French Protestants fled hither from the tyrannous
Persecution at home, would force them to a Compliance with things contrary to
their Consciences here, or else they must starve. But if our Author bad not
been in a mighty haste to produce his J -- ite Birth to the World, he might
have considered that when Foreigners are Naturalized, they are liable to bear
Arms either at home or abroad, as the Exigence of the Government requires, as
much as Englishmen: Nor is it to be supposed that the Parliament would ever be
so unnatural, as he would wickledly represent them, to feed Foreigners and
starve their own Countrymen. I believe there is none who will think that Sir J.
K. alone has all the Bowels of Compassion for his Country, and that the rest of
the Members have none. This pretended Zeal for the People, is but like the
Jack-daw's counterfeit Dress of Pigeon's Feathers, that he might the better get
into the Dove-house to destroy the Eggs and the Young; but being once
discovered by his Cawing, that he was not a Pigeon of the right kind, the rest
expelled him the Dove-house; and it is pity, as was said by an ingenious Member,
that if this be Sir J. K's Cawing, but he should undergo the same fate. This
outrageous Clamor, all Circumstances being considered, looks very like such a
Signal as that which a Frenchman, of whom I have read, gave to one of the
Childericks of France, who had been driven from his Throne for
Maladministration, that he might venture to attempt the recovery of it again:
and I wish that our Author, and some others, may not be of that Traitor's
Kidney, who run out into a mighty Zeal against the deposed Childerick, till he
had run his Successor into the same Measures for which he was deposed,
frustrated or retarded his Designs; whereby he forced him to make his
Government grievous to the People by hard Taxes, and then by exclaiming against
his Administration, paved the Way for Childerick's return Mezeray's History of
France.


Then our Author proceeds thus, All Country Gentlemen within this House, have
for several Sessions labored what they could to raise the Price of the
Provisions which their Lands produce, and some think it not great enough yet,
and they would despise that Man who should endeavor to lower the Rates by
proposing a free Importation of Irish Cattle and Corn, though he had no other
Design, than that Charitable and Necessary one of relieving the Poor; and yet
these very Gentlemen are for this Bill, because they would have the Labor of
the Poor brought to a lower Advantage. In my Opinion, this is a very unequal
way of reasoning, that whilst we raise the Price of the Product of the Land,
for the Gentlemen to live in a greater state, at the same time our Consults are
how to make the half-starv'd Manufacturers that live by their daily Labor,
more and more miserable. What Opinion will the common People of England have of
this House and the Gentlemen of the Kingdom, whom nothing can please but what
is made by Foreigners, or comes from Abroad?

That none of the Members may escape our Author's Fury, and that of his Party,
he takes care to accuse first All the Country Gentlemen, and then all the rest;
the first of starving the Poor to keep up the price of the Provisions which
their Lands produce, and hindering the Importation of Irish Corn and Cattle for
the Relief of the Poor, because they would have their Labor brought to a lower
Advantage, and then all the rest, of consulting how to make our half-starv'd
Manufacturers more miserable: Can any Man whose Charity is of the largest size,
look upon this way of Libelling any otherwise than as the sounding of an Alarm
to such Tumults as those of Jack Straw and Wat Tyler's Rebellions, and
calculated on purpose to make the poor Laborers and Tradesmen not only knock
all the Members of Parliament, but all the Gentry of the Kingdom on the head;
that so during our Confusions, the late King's Party might declare for him, now
that the Spring is advancing apace, and the Jacobite Humors all afloat? So
that though we cannot tell this Gentleman what opinion the common People will
have of the Parliament, etc. yet we are sure they can have none worse than what
he endeavors to inspire them with, but all in vain; as is seen by the Event,
and the Silk-Weavers bringing in his bundles of Libels to be burnt in the
Flames; by which it appears that the Pigeons have discovered the Jack-daw by
his Cawing. -- But if there be any of the Members so criminally Uncharitable as
he represents them, may the Justice of Heaven and the Nation find them out: It
had been more like a Patriot and a good Countryman to have expostulated the
case modestly with them, than to enrage the Poor and set them on to worry them,
though very undeservedly, considering the Kindness which they have showed to
our own Manufacturers, both by an Act for Importing Italian Silk, and the care
they have taken to improve the Woollen Manufactures.

To return to our Author, he says further, That our Palats for a long time have
been so nice, that nothing but a French Cook could please: nor could we
persuade our selves that our Clothing was good, unless from head to foot we
were A-la-mode de France. The Gentleman was not well served without a
Frenchman, and the Lady's Commode could not sit right, if her fine French Woman
did not put it on. Now of a sudden the Change is as violent in favor of the
Dutch, who are great Courtiers, and the only taking-People, and our English are
a sort of Clumsy-fisted People, if compared with the Dutch Hans and Fro; and in
short, the Englishmen are fit for nothing but to be sent to Flanders, and there
either to fight, steal, or starve for want of Pay. There is one thing, Mr.
Speaker, which comes into my Mind, with which I shall close this Consideration,
What reason was there for blaming the Mayors, Aldermen, Common-Councils, and
other Governors of Corporations for Surrendering the Charters, though they still
retain the Rights for Englishmen only to come into new Charters, and at the
same time hope to justify our Proceedings, though we throw up the Great Charter
of our English Liberties, to admit Strangers?

The Gentleman's Reflections on the French, are just like the short Clause
against Papists that used to be in King Charles Il's long Proclamations against
Protestant dissenters, which came merely in as words of course; and though I
shall be far from defending our Apish Imitation of the French in their Garb,
yet I think it much less Criminal than to covet their Government, as it is but
too too apparent our Author does by his Concern, that the Surrender of Charters
should be condemned, which would have brought us to the Blessings of Arbitrary
Government in a trice, and have saved our Kings the trouble of Pensions; for
then they might have had a House of Commons of their own making, to have suited
a House of Lord's of Charles Il's begetting, and a Church of Cassander or
Bishop Laud's Constitution: Nor is our Author any happier in his Comparison
betwixt the Surrender of our Charters and the Bill of Naturalization, than in
his History of the Dutch being as much in Vogue for Courtiers with our nice
Palats now, as the French were in former times; though if it were so, I am of
opinion that no solid Men, nor good Protestants, would be sorry at the Change.
But we shall have somewhat more to say to him anon as to his Treatment of the
Dutch.

A Fourth Pretense for this Bill, (says my Author) is a want of Husbandmen to
till the Ground. I shall say little on this Head, but request the Honorable
Person below, me to tell me of the 40000 French which he confesses are come
into England, How many does he know that at this time follow the Plough-tail;
for it is my firm Opinion, that not only the French, but any other nation this
Bill shall let in upon us, will never transplant themselves for the benefit of
going to Plough, they will contentedly leave the English the sole Monopoly of
that Slavery.

This worthy Knight may please to consider, that abundance of those French
would be glad to follow the Plough-tail in England, if their Languge and other
circumstances would but admit it, rather than be in the starving Condition that
many of 'em labor under. Such of them as have been Farmers, are neither
acquainted with our way of Manuring, nor have they Stock or Credit to procure
Farms; most of them have been brought up in another way of living; for it is
sufficiently known, that the Protestants in France had the greatest part of the
Trade and Manufactures in the Nation. Many of them are Gentlemen, Officers and
Scholars, and consequently unfit for such an Employment; and our Farmers have
not commonly so much respect for the meaner sort of them, as to make use of
their Service either for Plough or Cart; and for such as would come hither to
reap the benefit of being naturalized, it is probable, that they may be Persons
of better condition than ordinary Farmers, and their Stocks might be more
advantageously employed in the Kingdom; while at the same time the increase of
People will require an increase of Provisions, and by consequence make Farming
and Plowing both more frequent and profitable than it is at present.

Our Author's next Paragraph is thus: Upon the whole, Sir, it is my Judgment,
that should this bill pass, it will bring as great Afflictions on this Nation
as ever fell upon the Egyptians; and one of their Plagues we have at this time
very severe upon us, I mean that of their Land bringing forth Frogs in
abundance, even in the Chambers of their Kings; for there is no entering the
Courts of St. James's and Whitehall, the Palaces of our Hereditary Kings, for
the great Noise and Croaking of the Froglanders.

The truth is, so long as we have so many hard-hearted Pharaohs as our Author
and his Party, who do so much oppress their Native, and so maliciously revile
their Foreign Protestant Brethren, we have reason enough to dread the Plagues
of Egypt; for our Author and his Faction, who did so violently persecute
dissenting Protestants in the late Reigns, especially at B -- l, are still very
unwilling to let them go; and all that our Moses has hitherto been able to
procure for his oppressed Brethren at the hand of these Pharaohs, is, that they
may go and serve God as they please, but they must leave all the Places of
Power and Profit to them: just like the Liberty that Pharaoh gave to the
Israelites, that they might go and sacrifice to God in the Wilderness; but they
must leave their Flocks and Stocks behind 'em. And now that the Presbyterians
of Scotland are quite escaped, and the Dissenters in Old and New England enjoy
their Liberty, our Author and his Party are so eager to be up and after them,
that nothing will be able to put a stop to their Career, but some such
remarkable Judgment as the drowing of the Egyptians in the Red Sea. --

As to our Author's Scurrilities upon the Dutch, they are but the poor efforts
of an unmanly, impotent, and unbridled Passion, and such as bring more disgrace
on himself than the worst he intends to them: For, if we consider them either
as part of the ancient Belgae, they have been famous in all History; or if we
consider them as the old Batavi, they are no less Renowned; if we take them as
a Colony of the Germans, as undoubtedly they are, then they are of the same
Original with our selves; and therefore ought not to contemn them. Whatever
difference the situation of their Country and way of Living may produce in the
Lineaments of their Bodies, or whatever difference their form of Government
makes betwixt their Customs and ours, yet that the predominant part of our
Language is from the same Radix with theirs, there is no Man who knows the one
and the other that can doubt; and that this is one of the best Arguments to
prove a People to be of the same Original, the greatest of Antiquaries will
allow: but if we consider the Dutch, as having gallantly struggled with, and as
gloriously overcome the Power and Pride of the Spaniards, who were Predecessors
to the French in their Enmity to the Protestant Religion and Common Liberties
of Europe, there is no Encomium high enough for them; and if we will give our
selves leave to consider to what a prodigious height of Power and Greatness
they have raised their Country in so short a time under the fortunate Auspices
of the Illustrious House of Nassaw, since the Reformation began to dawn amongst
them, and how they have hitherto been as a Bush burning and not consumed,
though several times set on fire by French Papists, and our Author's sort of
Protestants, under the Conduct of Lewis XIV. and Charles II. we can look upon
them as no less than the Darlings of Heaven, and a People over whom Providence
has had a peculiar Care, thereby to make them the Instruments of doing great
things in the World, such as the effecting of our stupendous Revolution, by
which they gratefully repaid us for the Assistance which they received from our
glorious Q. Elizabeth, and for which we owe to them and our Gracious Sovereign,
their Stadtholder and General, the Preservation under God of all that is dear
to us as Englishmen and Protestants: but I know that all these Topics of
Commendation is a sacrificing the Abomination of our Author and the rest of his
Egyptian Faction in their own sight; and therefore shall come nearer him thus.
I wonder how they who pretend to adore the Memory of the two Charles's, dare
thus treat a People to whose Stadtholder and General the First married his
eldest Daughter, and the Second his Niece, and also the eldest Daughter of the
late King; Matches which the Emperor himself would have been proud of: Or how
those who pretend to be Men of Honor, can speak so despicably of a People who
have been honored with a Race of the greatest Hero's for Princes that the
latter Ages have seen. But let the Faction treat this People as they please,
and esteem them as Frogs, or what else their Malice can invent; for my own
part, if it be so, I will declare my self a Protestant Ranelite on their
account, as thinking my self under as great an Obligation to reverence and
esteem these Dutch Frogs, since they must be so called, for plaguing our
Author's beloved Kings, and infesting the Chambers and Houses of them and their
Egyptian Faction, as ever the Jewish Sect called Ranelites, thought themselves
bound to reverence those Frogs which plagued Pharaoh and his court: and that
which shall heighten my Reverence is, that from amongst these Froglanders, as
he calls them, we have now not only an Hereditary King, but one whom God and
the good People of England have chosen; though I doubt not but to our Worthy
Knight and Men of his stamp, the noise of the Locusts, or the Priests and
Jesuits which were formerly hatched in the Chambers of our Kings, was a much
more Melodious Music than that which he calls the Croaking of the Dutch Frogs:
and thus I chastise our Author's Contempt, because the basest are always ready
to despise the best; and as our Author's Surname would denote him of Dutch
Original, and his Extract to be from the meanest of their People, it is no
wonder that he should thus despise a Nation where his Predecessors were never
above the sphere of an Ordinary Servant; and so much his Name will tell him,
let him search for the Etymology when he pleases.

Our Author in the next place goes on thus: Mr. Speaker, This Nation is a
Religious, Just and Zealous Nation, who in some of their Fits and Zeal, have
not only quarrelled and fought for the same, but have murdered and deposed
Kings, Nobles, Bishops and Priests for the sake of their Religion and Liberty,
which they pretend to prove from the Bible; We are the Religious
Representatives of this Religious People: Let us therefore learn Instruction in
this case before us from that Good Book, where we may be informed, that St.
Paul by being born Free of Heathen Rome, escaped a Whipping, and valued and
pleaded that Privilege; and the Chief Captain of the Romans prides himself,
that he with a great Sum obtained that Freedom, and feared greatly when he
violated St. Paul's Liberty, only by binding of him: and shall we set at naught
the Freedom of the English Nation, who are a Religious Christian Kingdom, and
part with the same to Strangers for nothing unless the undoing of our own
Countrymen who sent us here, but not on this Errand? Certainly we should follow
the Example of the Roman Captain, and fear and tremble when we consider the
just Provocation we give to the Kingdom, who will expect that we preserve, and
not destroy every Englishman's private Birthright.

Now the worthy Knight begins to pull off his Mask and declare himself openly,
and if it had not been altogether a Layman's Harangue, we might justly have
reckoned it the Second Part of Dr. Birch's Sermon, for which it is probable he
expected Thanks. Our Author shows himself to have a mighty Veneration for our
Religion, when he charges it with the murdering and deposing of Kings. This
looks indeed like somewhat of the Resentments of a Roman Spirit, to be revenged
on our Religion, because we justly charge such Practices upon the Romanists, as
the natural result of theirs; and this Spirit of his is further incensed, that
we pretend to prove our Religion from the Bible: but if he pleases to peruse
the Debates Pro and Con about the deposing of the late King, for he is all that
has been deposed, since we durst be so bold as to bring Arguments from the
Bible, he will find the lawfulness of that Practice to be sufficiently proved
from thence; but perhaps that may lessen his esteem of the Bible, which now, I
perceive, he thinks may be called a Good Book; tho it had been no Hyperbole in
one who reckons himself a Protestant, to have called it the best of Books. Then
as to the Instructions which we may have from this Good Book of his, to value
our English Liberties as much as the Romans did theirs; we heartily agree to
them, and especially seeing he must needs allow from his own Argument, that
this Just and Religious Nation was not Unjust and Irreligious in proving their
Liberties from the Bible: And now that he has drawn one Instruction thence, we
hope that he will give us liberty to draw another, and that is, that those
Romans, whom he proposes to us as a Pattern, did not only allow Strangers, such
as St. Paul who was a Jew, to have a share of their Privileges, but did also
fell them on occasion, as here to this Captain whom our Author mentions; and I
hope as he proposes the wise Senate of Rome for a Pattern to us in the one, he
will also allow us the liberty to imitate them in the other. And thus our
Author has condemned himself out of his own Mouth, and given a very good
Argument for Naturalizing of Foreign Protestants; and hence we perceive the
Kindness of honest Dame Nature, which has ordered it so, that many times the
most Venomous Animals carry their own Antidote with them. And I would fain know
of our Author, why we may not as well make an Act for a General Naturalization,
as naturalize Foreigners by Fifty at a time? And whether it were not more
generous for the true English Spirit to exceed the old Roman Spirit of selling
their Privileges by granting them to Foreign Protestants freely? But I am
afraid that Sir J's making mention of the Captain's having bought this Freedom,
will be interpreted by some as if he in particular expected a Bribe from
Foreign Protestants; for we know the best way of stopping the Mouths of some is
to give offam Cerbero. Before I absolve this Paragraph, I must take notice that
this pretended Atlas of our English Liberties, founds the Alarm once more to a
Rebellion, by insinuating such Causes of Terror as had the Commons been
faint-hearted, might have made them all run out of the House, and then Sir J.
might have had the Ball at his Foot, and kicked the Bill our after them: But
for all his Clamor, we find that his Counrymen whom he courts so much to a
Tumult, cannot see those frightful Consequences that attend this Bill, except
our Author will be pleased to lend them his J -- ite Spectacles; the one of
which I suppose to be a Magnifying, and the other a Multiplying-Glass.

But our kind Author gives us another Lesson thus: Sir, we may further learn
from that Book the Fate of the Egyptians, who experimented on the score of
Charity, what it is People may expect from admitting Strangers into their
Country and Councils; Joseph was a Stranger sold a Slave into Egypt, yet being
taken into Pharaoh's Council, he by Taxes and other fine Projects, brought the
seven Years Plenty that God had blessed Egypt with, into the Granaries of
Pharaoh; but when a Dearth came on the Land, and the People cried to their King
for Relief, they were sent to the Stranger Joseph, who gets from them for
that which was once all their own, their Money, their Cattle, their Lands, and
last of all their Persons into Slavery; though at the same time he did far
otherwise by his own Countrymen, for he placed them in the best of the Land,
the Land of Goshen, and nourished them from the King's Stores. This Example
should teach us to be wise in time, seeing all this was done by the Advice of
one Foreigner in Privy Council; and what may that Country expect where the Head
and many of the Council are Foreigners?

You may perceive that our Author is now drawing near a Conclusion, because he
reserved the sharpest Sting for the Tail: But it is a Question, whether he be
more profane in playing thus with Scripture, than false in misapplying it? for
it is plain, that it was no Charity to Joseph which made Pharaoh and the
Egyptians advance him, but Charity to themselves, because they could not find a
Man so fit as himself, Genesis 41.38. in whom the Spirit of God was, to find out
Means to prevent the ill Consequences of the Famine which the Spirit of God had
foretold him of. And if this do not border on Blasphemy, to call the
Suggestions of the Holy Spirit to prevent the Ruin, not only of the Egyptians,
but the peculiar People of God, Taxes, and other fine Projects to bring the
Plenty of Egypt into Pharaoh's Granaries; I submit it to the Judgment, not only
of Divines, but of all Men who have any true Sense of Religion: And if this
Odious Character which he gives of Joseph, as having tricked the Egyptians into
Slavery, be not contrary to that Character given of him by the Holy Ghost, when
he is reckoned in the Catalogue of the most famous Old Testament Saints, Heb.
12. let any Man judge. Or whether it be reasonable to suppose, that Joseph who
durst not sin against God in complying with the lustful Desires of his
Mistress, would have so little Conscience as to cheat a whole Nation into
Slavery, let common Sense determine. But if our Author had been so good as to
have had more frequent Converse with this good Book, he might have found that
Pharaoh was as Absolute before Joseph was of his Council as after; for, Genesis
41.40. he told him, That according to his Word should all his People be ruled.
And, ver. 44. That without him No Man should lift up Hand nor Foot in all the
Land of Egypt; which Pharaoh (could never have promised had it not been in his
Power. Neither was it the whole seven Years Plenty that he brought into
Pharaoh's Granaries, but only the fifth part of it, as appears from ver. 34.
Nay, so far was Joseph from enslaving them, that though he had actually bought
themselves and all that they had for Pharaoh, that he not only saved their
Lives, as they themselves did acknowledge, and kept Bread in the Land of Egypt
when there was none elsewhere, but left them in as good a Condition after the
Famine, as they were in during the Plenty, as may be seen from Chap. 47.26. by
giving them four parts of the Land to themselves, and taking only a. Fifth for
Pharaoh, as he had in the Years of Plenty; and though Joseph brought this into
an Established Law, yet it is more than our Author can prove, that it was not a
Custom before, seeing he directed Pharaoh to lay up the fifth Part, Chap.
41.34. And that we hear of no Opposition made thereunto, nor unto any thing
else that Joseph did in the Government; but on the contrary, the People did
thankfully acknowledge him as the Author of their Preservation, and willingly
obeyed him, even when he transplanted them from one City to another: Which it is
probable they would never have consented to, had they looked upon it as a
bringing of them into Slavery: for our Author may remember, that though a great
many of his Party surrendered their Charters in the late Reigns, and became
voluntary Slaves, yet the Nation in general could never be brought to it. And
as for Joseph's planting his own Countrymen in the best of the Land, it was by
Pharaoh's Command, and because it best suited their way of living, and was a
Place where they were likely to be least offensive to the Egyptians, as appears
from Chap. 46. ver. 34. because every Shepherd, and such were the Israelites,
were an Abomination to the Egyptians. And in the last place we have reason to
conclude, that all this was done by the special Direction of that God who sent
him into Egypt to preserve his People, Chap. 45. v. 7. and not according to our
Author, to cheat the Egyptians into Slavery.

And thus having discovered how falsely and impiously our Author has wrested
this History of Joseph, I shall now consider his Application, than which
nothing can be more Treasonable and Malicious; for having ascribed all the
Mischiefs which came upon the Egyptians to their entertaining of one Foreigner
as a Privy Counselor, What, says he, may that Nation expect where the Head and
many of the Council are Foreigners? which is directly aimed at His Majesty, the
Earl of Portland and others, whom God has, to the Confusion of our Author and
his Faction, made use of to deliver us from their Egyptian Thraldom. But our
Author, that he may discover all his Design at once, does in the former part of
his Speech endeavor to stir up the Country against the Parliament, and now he
attempts the like against His Majesty; but is he so foolish as to think that
his Parallel holds as to Joseph's Management in Egypt? Is all our Corn brought
into His Majesty's Granaries? Is there not Plenty enough in the Kingdom, though
some narrow-soul'd Men, like our Author, keep it at an Excessive rate in and
about London? Has His Majesty either made a purchase of our Lands, our Cattle,
or our Persons, any otherwise than by a Conquest of our Hearts? What Colony of
Dutch has he planted in the best of our Land? or how can he be reckoned a
Foreigner who abstracted from his being King by God and the Peoples Choice, is
Son to an English Princess, Husband to an English Queen, governs by English
Laws, and fights with English Armies for the Preservation of our English
Liberties? But if our Author will needs be making Comparisons, we hope that he
will allow us the same Liberty, and then we shall agree that he resembles
Joseph, in being sent hither by God for his Peoples Deliverance, and keeping
England in Peace, while all our Neighbors are or have been involved in Blood.
But if those other Practices of Joseph's be culpable in buying the Lands,
Cattle and Persons of the Egyptians for Pharaoh's Use, we know of a Copy which
outdoes the Original, and that is the God of his Faction Lewis XIV, who has
not bought, but plundered from his Subjects and Neighbors, all that could
render their Lives comfortable. But further, we have no reason to fear any
Encouragement to the Invasion of our Liberties, or being made Slaves by the
Concurrence of the Naturalized Dutch. They who have been accustomed to live in
Liberty and Freedom at Home, which they purchased with the best of their
Treasure and Blood, are not like to be fond of concurring with such Measures as
may render them Slaves Abroad: But though there is less hazard in this Point
from the Dutch than the French, yet all along our Author is severer upon the
former than the latter, and makes a terrible Outcry against the sending of Corn
to Holland, but speaks not one word of the great Stores which his Brethren the
J -- ites transport by stealth into France.

But now for our Author's Conclusion. Sir, says he, I perceive some Gentlemen
are uneasy, perhaps I have offended them in supposing they are Religious
Representatives, or concluding that their Religion is to be proved from the
Bible: If that be it which displeases, I beg their Pardon, and promise not to
offend again on that score, and will conclude all with this Motion, that the
Sergeant be commanded to open the Doors, and let us first kick the Bill out of
the House, and then the Foreigners out of the Kingdom.

In truth these Gentlemen might well be uneasy to hear a Fool triumph in his
Folly; but why they should be offended to be told that their Religion was to be
proved from the bible, whence our Author can never prove his own, is not so
easy to be imagined, though they had reason enough, indeed, to be displeased to
see an Ass strutting in a Lion's Skin; and yet I cannot tell how they could
refrain from Laughter to hear the dull Creature discovered by its braying. And
thus seeing our Author began with one Fable, I hope that I may be allowed to
end with another; and shall only add, that let him Caw, and Bray, and Kiek, and
do what he pleases, it signifies nothing, so long as he kicks against the
Pricks, whereof I hope that by this time he himself may be persuaded;
especially if he consider the disgraceful Exit which the Commons have given to
his Speech, and he may thank his Stars for having escaped so well.

FINIS.

