AN ACCOUNT OF THE PROCEEDINGS AGAINST THOMAS SAXON, Who was Tried at the
Kings-Bench-Bar at Westminster, and found Guilty, On Monday the Eighth of
February, 1685. of Wilful Perjury, for falsely Swearing High Treason against
Henry Lord Delameer, Baron of Mere in Cheshire.
This may be Printed, February the 9th, 1685. R. L. S.
OF all the Horrid and Flagitious Crimes, perpetrated by depraved Man, there is
none of a deeper Dye, or that calls for Divine Vengeance, more than the Sin of
Perjury; which is so Odious to God Almighty; and by which his Sacred Name and
Authority is so profaned and abused, by calling him (who is all Truth) to
Witness to the Heinousest Lies and Falsehoods, witness the Case of Otes, who
was Convicted of two Horrid Perjuries, whereupon the Foundations of the
pretended Damnable, Helish, Popish Plot, were blown up into the Air; and all
the hopes of his Cursed Accomplices defeated. The Remainder of them wandering
up and down, like so many Cain's over the Face of the Earth, Crying, Our Sins
are greater than we can bear, Miles Prance the Silver-Smith having lately fled
also from the Summons of the Court of King's Bench to give Evidence at the Trial
of one Mr. Vernatti, whom he had formerly Accused for the Death of Sr.
Edmund-Bury Godfrey, of which the said Mr. Vernatti was the Ninth Instant
Acquitted. But alas, who can gather up the Innocent Blood which these
Miscreants have spilt like Water; And a farther Instance of the wickedness of
these Instruments, you shall find in the following Relation.

The Lord Delamere having been Tried for High Treason by his Honorable Peers
appoined by his Majesty; Thomas Saxon appeared as Evidence against him,
Deposing that he, the said Lord Delameer, with others Conspired to Raise a
Rebellion in this Kingdom, and his Sacred Majesty to Destroy, etc. For the
proof of which, the aforesaid Thomas Saxon Swore to Time and Place; which
appeared to be False by several Material Circumstances and Credible Witnesses,
produced by the Lord Delameer. Upon which he was Honorably Acquitted by his
Peers; and it plainly appearing that Thomas Saxon was Perjured, his Majesty out
of his Princely Justice, and to Deter others from the like Crimes, in fasly
Accusing any of his Subjects, was Graciously pleased to Order an Enformation of
Perjury, to be drawn up against him, which was accordingly done; and being
Arraigned at the Kings-Bench-Bar Westminster, he was on Monday the 8th of this
Instant February, Tried by a Jury of Loyal and Substantial Men; where the Fact
being plainly proved against him, and he making very little Defense for
himself, was by the Jury found Guilty of the said Perjury as laid in the
Enformation. After which he was Remanded to the County Gool of Newgate, in
Order to his Sentence.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for S. Norris, 1686.


