AN ANSWER TO TWO LETTERS, CONCERNING THE EAST INDIA COMPANY.

Printed in the Year 1676.

SIR,
IN your last, I received two Letters in Print, Concerning the East
India-Company; which, considering that you have been acquainted, how great a
part of my Estate is entrusted to that Society, I cannot but take it as a
Friendly Advertisement; for which, be pleased to accept my Hearty Thanks. And I
assure you, whatever my Sentiments are of the affair, I do and shall own it for
an evident Demonstration of your Affection, that in the midst of your great
Affairs, you should be so mindful of my Concerns.

I have perused the said Letters, and can see no reason to believe that such
Discourses should be published by any person whose Estate was entrusted to the
said Company; or that had any real desire of receiving or giving satisfaction
concerning the security of Money lent to them. No Creditor can be supposed to
act so contrary to his own interest, as to make it his endeavor to weaken or
lessen his security, by Exposing and Ruining his Debtors Credit; or teaching
him a way to defraud himself, which is the Language of those Papers. It must
therefore be some other Person then a Creditor, and some other Design than a
doubt about Security, that occasioned the Publishing these Letters. There has
been a report that the Dutch had in Design to propose at the Treaty at Nimegen,
a Restraint of the Importation of Callico into Europe, because it hinders the
consumption of French, Holland, Flanders, and German Linnens: And lately some
here did Decry the East-India-Company and Trade, because Callico (as they said)
hindered the vent of Fustians and some other Native Manufactures. These
corresponding so exactly, give ground to think they proceed from the same
Council, and the Author of these Letters may be of that Caball.

He first endeavors to destroy the Credit of the Company, by telling us, That
their Seal is less security, than the word of any one sufficient man among
them; for that not any one of the Companies Persons or Estates, (he means
beside what is in the joint stock of the Company) whether Real or Personal is
thereby bound, neither can any of them be arrested or impleaded by virtue
thereof, Who is there so ignorant, but knows this? though the Gentleman
supposes all are such Fools, that have lent money to the Company, that they
were like fish drawn into the Net, by vainly imagining that every member in the
Company in his Particular and Private capacity was bound to answer for the
same. I dare say not one of forty that have lent money to the Company thought
so. I have heard indeed of one that had a considerable sum there, who upon
the advice of some Council of this Gentleman's Capacity, demanded his money,
which being presently paid him by the East-India-Company, he lodged it in
Lombardstreet, where it lies (and is like toly) till the opening of the
Exchequer. I suppose he rendered the GEntleman no thanks for his advice, nor
accounts himself the wiser man for following it. If it be seriously considered,
on what grounds, persons have chosen to put their money into the
East-India-Companies hands, rather than to entrust it elsewhere; it will appear
they were no such Fools, as they are charactered for, nor the Security so
slight, as the Gentleman would have us believe it to be.

The Gentleman preferrs a sufficient man's word, (I will suppose his bond which
is more valid, in regard of the uncertainty of life.) It Is difficult to know
who is sufficient; all is not Gold that glisters, or every man sufficient that
is thought so. If he be sufficient when you lend the money, who can assure
himself, he will Continue either sufficient, or honest. Men are changeable, and
their Estates subject to accidents. Does not experience evidence, that losses
at sea, losses by fire, losses by bad debts, and other Casualties, have rendered
Persons insolvent, that had great Estates and Credit, as also that sometimes
Persons have purchased lands in their Childrens names, and otherwise so
conveyed away their Estates, that their Creditors could never reach them; and
if they seize their Persons they can live in the Rules, and laugh at their
Creditors. As for lending money on Mortgages and real security, which is
esteemed the best security; Is it not very troublesome to attend on Council,
to examine Titles, to make Conveyances? And when all is done with the greatest
advice and circumspection; is it not very hazardous, in regard of bad Titles,
Dormant Conveyances, and Precontracts? can the most eminent and subtle Lawyers
secure themselves? have ot some of them been overreached? And sometimes when
the security is good as to the main; yet what difficulty, trouble, and vexation
is there to arrive at satisfaction, by attending long Suits in Chancery,
accounting for profits, The Creditor being oftentimes made the Debtors steward,
and that without Salary or Compensation for his pains. And on such Securities
who can depend on his money to answer his Occasions.

If he have a Daughter to Marry, a Son to prefer in Trade, or a Purchase to
make, all his designs are frustrated, His money being (if not in Hell
unretreviable, yet) in Purgatory, whence it cannot be delivered but in a long
Tract of time, and that by patient undergoing the smarting Torment of Tedious
and Chargeable Suits. It must be acknowledged, that there is no absolute
certainty or assurance of any thing in this World; and whoever believes
otherwise, is gone beyond the bounds of Reason and Religion; and fit only to
reside in the new Palace in Moorfields. All that can be desired in the putting
out of money, is to have a visible fond engaged, that is morally (not only at
the time of lending) most sufficient to secure it, but also in probability most
likely to continue so, and to answer the Occasions of the Lender.

1. Then, They that lend Money to the East India-Company, on their Common Seal,
have a visible fond engaged that is sufficient to secure the same. Though the
Members of the Company are neither responsible in their Persons, nor private
Estates for what is taken up thereupon, yet all the Moneys, Goods, and Effects
belonging to the Joint stock of the Company are engaged, as the Gentleman
himself is necessitated to acknowledge. His insinuations concerning the case of
the Merchant-Adventurers, and Grocers Company, are not to the purpose; those
Companies never had any Joint Stock, as a visible fund to secure what they
borrowed, but were trusted upon their bare Reputation and Credit. It is far
otherwise here. Suppose there has been lent to the Enst-Iudia-Company 5 or 600
thousand pound, the Lenders either do or might know, that there is in the
Joint Stock of the said Company in real value upwards of 900 thousand pound, (I
may say a Million of pounds sterling) besides their dead stock, which is also
considerable. All which, being together a Million and Half of pounds sterling,
stands by their Common Seal bound and engaged to pay their Creditors. The
Gentleman does Ignorantly, if not Maliciously assert, page 4. That the
East-India-Company trades wholly with their Creditors Money, and that it is
seldom that they have above 600 thousand pounds in value in their India
Factories, and on the Seas at the same time. To demonstrate the falsity of
which, take but an account of what they sent out this last year, and it will be
found to be upwards of 450 thousand pounds: And to that add the value of the 3
Ships already arrived this year from Bantam; and the 5 Ships from Surrat; with
the other 6 or 7 Ships expected from the Coast Surrat and Bantam, which will
amount at least to 800 thousand pounds (and as Sales may prove, to a great deal
more) so that there appears to have been above 12 hundred thousand pounds value
on the Seas at one time, beside all the remains of Goods and Debts in India and
in England. There being then such a stock, it cannot be denied but that there
is a visible and sufficient fond to secure the Creditors the Moneys that they
have lent. But the Gentleman tells us, page 4. The Indians or Infidels may
destroy their Factories, and Goods in India; their Ships and Cargo's may be
lost or taken in War, or by Pirates, and the Company may make a Divident to
secure their own Estates, and leave the Creditors to find a thing in the
Clouds. Therefore it will be necessary in the next place to evidence that the
joint stock of the East-India-Company is on Moral and Rational grounds, most
likely to continue sufficient to secure the moneys lent thereupon. That which
might render it insufficient according to the Gentleman's suggestions, is either
losses arriving from Foreign accidents, or dishonest practices either by
concealment, or by making dividents of the stock amongst the Members of the
Company, without regard to the payment of the Debtors.

1. As to Casualties, whereby losses may happen to the stock; The Gentleman
mentions a Concatenation of Evils, Destruction from the Indians, Losses by
Storms, by War and by Pirates. Should we wrack our fancies to find out, and
then suffer our thoughts to dwell on the consideration of the accidents that
may fall out in Humane affairs, we should never enjoy quiet in our Minds; or
else we should be deterred from resolving or setting upon any affair. For as
the wise man tells us, He that observes the Wind shall not Sow, and he that
regards the Clouds shall not Reap. It is sufficient, that we take the most
probable ways of Security, and leave the rest to Divine Providence. Now if we
consider the affairs of the East-India-Company without prejudice, we cannot
but conclude that their stock of 1600 thousand pounds, will always be
sufficient to answer 600 thousand pounds. For the whole at no time, is hazarded
in one bottom, as it often falls out in private men's dealings; Some part is in
England in Goods and Debts, some part in India in Trade and Voyages, and some
part is at Sea, Going and Coming; not in one Ship but in 30 Ships or more, not
in one Course or Voyage, but in several: So that though a loss should happen to
some part, yet in the ordinary course of providence, there is Rational ground
to believe there would be always enough preserved to answer the Engagements.

2dly. As to dishonest practices, is it Rationally to be supposed that a Number
of men can so easily engage in wicked and cheating actions? The Government of
the East India stock is committed to 26 Persons, and no Affair can be
Transacted without 13, so that if the Major part be Persons of Honesty and
Conscience, you are secure; nothing can be done unworthily. Yea if there should
be but one Honest man of 13, yet you are sure, seeing such an act of knavery,
as would defraud the Creditors, would be detected. The Gentleman tell us, (
page 3.) You may sue the Company on their common Seal, and have Execution
against their Goods, but then asks where shall you find the Goods of the
Company to pay 5 s. in the pound: and withal adds, That were there Goods of a
greater value, the Company may divide them amongst themselves, and so the
Creditors have never a penny, unless they can catch it in the Indies.

Since the Establishment of the East India Company in this present joynt-stock,
which is now near nineteen years, was ever any person that lent Money to the
Company on their common Seal, forced to sue them? Have not all men been paid
their Money readily whenever they demanded it?

How is it possible that the Companyes goods should be concealed, that must
pass through so many hands, and are in such vast quantities, and of such sorts
as may easily be distinguished from others? It has been formerly a Maxim
amongst the Committee of that Company (as I have heard) never to take up more
money at Interest, than they had real Effects in England, in Debts or Goods to
satisfy. If for the last two years they have exceeded, to expatiate and extend
the Trade for the Benefit of the Kingdom; It is however but for a very small
time that it is otherwise, for at the arrival of their Ships from India in
June, July, and August, they have constantly a vast Estate in England over and
above what will answer all their Debts. And if there be not always so much at
the latter end of March, when their Ships are dispeeded for India; in a few
months after, when the former years Ships return, there is an abuudant
Surplusage. So that if it should fall out (which never yet has done, nor is it
probable it should) that any person should sue the Company for Money lent them
at Interest on their common Seal, and Execution against their Goods should be
obtained, I say in such a Case every person concerned, might easily and without
any difficulty find Effects in England, to discharge all he can claim or
challenge, nor is he left to find a thing in the Clouds, nor yet send to India
to catch it; which Expressions the Gentleman might well have spared.

That the Company should make a Divident among themselves of their Goods and
Estate, to defraud their Creditors, is not only very uncharitably, but also
very irrationally suggested. No Dividend can be made but by the Committee which
(as before noted) consists of 26 Persons, and those (or at least most of them)
of the best Reputation for honesty and integrity in the City of London, and can
it be in Charity supposed, that they would join in such an Act? I am confident
they do abominate the thoughts of it. Besides it is not in the power of the
Committee, according to their Constitution, to make any Dividend in Goods. All
Dividends are to be made in Money, and Goods are not to be sold by private
Contract, but at a public Sale. So that it is impossible, according to the
present Rules and constitution of the Company, that any Dividend can be made to
the prejudice of the Creditors, but they must have sufficient notice thereof,
and may secure themselves. But could it be imagined, that such Dividends might
be made, and that the Committee should so far degenerate from all Principles of
Honesty, yet notwithstanding what the Gentleman insinuates, viz. That this
might be done so as to leave the Creditor remediless in Law, I cannot believe,
but rather think, the Gentleman is mistaken, and that he has not well studied
or considered the Case.

N. lends 1000 l. to the East India Company on their common Seal, on this
ground, that there is at that time a joynt-stock of the Companyes, of the value
of 900 thousand pounds to secure and answer his Debt; the Committee divide this
Stock of 900 thousand pounds (after the lending of the Money) amongst
themselves and other the Members of the Company: I now enquire, whether the
Committee that made this Divident, be not in their own Persons and Estates
obliged in Law or Equity to answer the Debt to N.

For N. did not trust his Money on a vain Fancy, that the individual Members of
the Company were in their private Capacities obliged to respond for his Money,
but on this Foundation, That the joint stock of the Company was to be his
Security and guarant. This joint stock was entrusted into the hands of the
Committee to manage for the Benefit of the Adventurers, before they took up
Money at Interest; but when they had taken up Money at Interest, then the
joynt-stock is in the hands of the Committee in trust, in the first place to
answer and satisfy the moneys taken up at interest: So that now the Committee
are Trustees for N. till his Debt be paid. If Losses and Accidents in the
Course of Trade should render the Stock incapable to answer the money to N. he
must be content to sit down by the loss; but if the Committee by any wilful
act of theirs dispose of the Stock, and convert it to their private use, before
they have paid N, they are guilty of breach of trust, and thereby have rendered
themselves answerable in their own private capacities to make satisfaction to
N. This was the opinion of one of the most eminent and famous Lawyers of his
time; (Sergeant Glyn;) and it seems so rational, that I am easily persuaded to
believe it to be so. And were it but a doubtful Case, would it not be a most
imprudent act of the Committee, to divide the Stock among the Members of the
Company, and expose themselves in their own private capacities and Estates to
answer the Creditors, or at least to be liable to Suits and Molestations.

As to what the Gentleman observes, ( p. 4.) That the King who empowered the
Company to use a common Seal, thought it not sufficient security for his
Customs: But provided in their Patent that they should give good and sufficient
bond with surety for the payment thereof. However, whether it be so, or no, in
the Patent, I know not; But this I Am well assured of, that it serves little to
the purpose he intends it; it being evident that those words were not inserted
out of any doubt that either the King or his Ministers had of the Companyes
security by their common-Seal, but put in as words of course, a form usual in
such cases, for that the Kings Officers have never refused, but always readily
accepted the Companyes Obligation by their common Seal, for the payment of the
Customs.

The Gentleman believes, as he tells us, ( page 5.) That the Company had never
been such Bankers, as to have deserved Court Letters about their Officers, if
they had given Bond with Sureties for the Money they have borrowed. (p. 2.) It
seems what passed between the Court and the Company, was not such a Noli me
tangere, but he would have one fling at it. To this he subjoyns a foolish
insignificant pity, in reference to the Lombard Street Bankers, to which I say,
that as I leave him to his own belief, so for his pity, I am sure I shall never
need it, upon the account of lending my money to the Company. Nor did the
Gentleman's Friend deserve a reproof, for not advising with him before he parted
with his money to the Company, though he might have had it so unusually cheap.
For he may (if he have not already) receive his money from the Company when he
pleases: But when he has so done, he will be at a loss to find-where he may
place it upon such rational grounds for security, it being evident by what has
been said, That there is such a visible Fond engaged by the Companyes Seal,
that is not only more sufficient at present, but also more likely to continue
so, to answer the Occasions of the Lender, than is any where else at this time
in England.

The Gentleman in the next place, that he may effectually carry on his Design,
having insinuated p. 5. That the Company has no firm legal Foundation, and so
was in no probability of standing, gives us a Transcript of some Clauses in the
Companies Charter, and then takes the liberty to arraign the Kings Grant; Calls
it a Monopoly, and a Monopoly of Monopolies; Quotes the Statute of 21 Jac. cap.
3. cites some Law-cases; talks of Turkish and French Vassals; tells us, that he
wonders, yea protests that he is astonished, to think how any durst draw such a
patent; To omit other expressions of the like, if not a worse complexion.

It would be improper for me, who you know am no Lawyer, to take upon me to
answer these matters. The Gentleman is pleased to name Mr. Solliciter, and Mr.
Attorney General, and they are able to do it to purpose. However I am
persuaded, notwithstanding all the bluster and noise he makes, his zeal in the
Design (rather than in his profession) has carried him beyond his
understanding, and that he is mistaken in the whole matter. He quotes the
Statute of 21 Jac. c. 3. as the Devil does Scripture by halfes; for in the said
Statute it is thus expressed. Provided also, and it is hereby further intended,
declared, and enacted, that this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not
in any wise extend, or be prejudicial to the City of London, or to any City,
Borough, or Town Corporate within this Realm, for or concerning any Grants,
Charters, or Letters Patents, to them or any of them, made or granted, or for
or concerning, any Custom or Customs, used by or within them or any of them,
Or to any Corporations or Fellowships of any Art Occupation or Mystery, or to
any Companies or Societies of Merchants within this Realm, Erected for the
Maintenance, Enlargement, or Ordering of any Trade of Merchandise. But that the
same Charters, Customs, Corporations, Companies, Fellowships and Societies,
and their Liberties, Privileges, Powers and Immunities, shall be, and continue
of such Force and Effect, as they were before the making of the Act, and of
none other, Any thing before in this Act contained to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding. At the time of the making that Act, the East-India-Company was
in being, by virtue of a Charter granted to them by King Jams not much
differing from the present Patent (as I am informed,) And by the abovesaid
proviso, the Parliament did Confirm and Allow, rather than Censure the same.

The Gentleman gives us a Definition of a Monopoly, and then tells us ( page
6.) the Statute provides that all Persons, Bodies Politic and Corporate, which
then were or thence after should be, should stand, and be disabled, to have
use, or exercise, or put in use any such Monopolies. The word such, is not in
the Statute in that place; and if we take the subsequent words in that Statute,
to Define or Explain what a Monopoly is; It refers only to matters within the
Realm, which will not concern the present case. But suppose the Definition the
Gentleman gives of a Monopoly were as he expresses it (by the Law Books) to be
an institution or Allowance, by the King, by his Grant, Commission or
otherwise, to any Person, Body Politic or Corporate, of or for the only
buying, selling, or using of any thing, whereby any Person or Persons are
sought to be restrained of any Freedom or Liberty which they had before, or
hindered in their lawful Trade and Traffic. May we not understand this to be
within the Kingdom only, for can any Subject of England lawfully Trade or
Traffic with any Foreign Nation, without the allowance of the King, who has
the undoubted Prerogative of making War and Peace, upon which the same depends.
I shall readily grant that as the King is Common Father of all his Subjects, so
his Care and Protection of, and Provision for them, is in the General Equally
and Indifferently to be extended. But in some Cases, and under some
Circumstances, has not his Majesty a Prerogative (nay, ought he not on the
same right of Fatherhood) as to prefer the General Benefit, to that of
Particular; so sometimes to extend special Privileges and Grants to some
Particulars for the General Benefit, though other particulars may seem to
receive prejudice thereby? Is not this the case of most of the Corporations in
England? which yet neither our Barrister nor any other will account Monopolies.
And that this is also the case of the East India Trade, will appear when it is
considered, that this Trade is not to be managed and carried on for the General
Benefit and Profit of the Kingdom, so well in any other way as by a Company in
a Joint Stock.

Besides, if a Monopoly be a restraining of Persons from the freedom or
Liberty they had before: I ask whether ever the People generally had the
Freedom and Liberty of the East India Trade? Except it was in the late unhappy
times from 1653 to 1657? In which little time the Trade was almost totally
ruined as to the Nation, The Experience whereof necessitated the then Powers,
with the universal good liking and approbation of all persons, to resettle the
Company.

Suppose a Country that was undiscovered, or a Country that for the
difficulty of passage to it, or chargeableness and hazard of the adventure, no
Euglish had traded to formerly; and that some English men at their own Hazard
and Charges should discover the One, Purchase land of the Natives, Settle a
Collony, and Establish a Trade; and on the Other after great hazards and
Adventures, with vast Charges and Expenses, arrive to the knowledge of a
profitable Trade, and by presents obtain Liberty of Trade from the Prince of
such a Country, Peculiarly for Themselves and their Assigns: May not the King
by his Prerogative Confirm those Capitulations, and grant the Privilege of the
Trade to the Discoverers and Adventurers, and their Successors, thereby to
encourage others to the like Noble undertakings, for the General good of his
Kingdom? How could such a Grant be within the Compass of a Monopoly, Since no
English man was denied or debarred of any Liberty that he before exercised or
enjoyed? Is there any thing more reasonable, than that they who at a vast
Charge, with great Hazard and Difficulty purchased a trade, should have the
enjoyment of it? Shall not he that planteth a Vineyard eat the fruit thereof?
And what can be more unjust than that another should come in and reap the
fruits of my Achievements, that was either idle, ignorant, or afraid; that
knew not, would not, or durst not adventure to obtain the same? May there not
be a right of Propriety in a Trade, as well as in Lands and Houses? this is the
Case of the East India Company in a great measure.

Further, Suppose there be a known Trade, that may be very advantageous to the
Kingdom, and that for the obtaining and settling, and carrying on of which
there is a necessity to be at a vast Expense, to settle and keep Factories and
Agents in several places, and with several Princes, and on Occasion by War to
force those Princes to perform their Capitulations, and to erect Forts and
maintain Garrisons for security of the Trade, as also to cope with and prevent
the designs of Enemies that would debar the English of such a Trade; all
which could not be done, but on a public Charge of the Nation by some General
Tax, or by some United Body of Men encouraged to undertake the same by special
Privileges and Immunities, granted to them and their Successors; Suppose I say
in such a Case that the King, to compass the obtaining and carrying on of such
a Trade for the General benefit of his Kingdom, without a Tax on his People,
should propose to give and grant to all his Subjects, that would voluntarily
unite their Stocks in such an Affair, certain Privileges and Immunities, and
amongst others the sole enjoyment of the Trade of such places to them and
theirs, excluding all others that should refuse to join therein. On such an
invitation and Proposal freely offered to all without exception, only a
certain number of persons come in, Accept the Terms, and receive the Grant
confirmed and settled, under the Broad-Seal of England. In some Process of
time, after great hazards and vast Expenses to the Undertakers and Adventures,
the Trade proving more advantageous and profitable to the particulars
interessed, than at first was apprehended it would; Those others that would not
intermeddle at first, make great exclamations because they are excluded, Cry
out a Monopoly, a restraining the Subject the freedom and liberty of Trade.
Have they any reason so to do? was not the fault their own? It was freely
tendered to them, they had the liberty to have come in on the same terms that
others did: Shall they that voluntarily excluded themselves, be angry that they
are excluded, and charge it as a Crime either on the King that invited them, or
on their Fellow Subjects that would at first have been glad of their
assistance? Is not this most unjust and unreasonable? This is the Case of those
that so highly exclaim against the East India Company, which I suppose being
rightly understood, the Companyes Charter will not deserve the name of a
Monopoly; nor shall the Companyes Creditors need to sear that the Company
should be rendered Insufficient to pay their Debts, by being condemned in
Treble damages, or fined at the Common Laws for accepting such a Patent, (p.
9.) to which our Barrister, without understanding, (if not without consulting
his Books) thinks them liable.

The Gentleman in the close of his Letter would insinuate, that the East India
Trade is of no Benefit to the Nation, and if it were, yet that it might be more
advantageously managed than by a Company in a Joynt-Stock. This I guess to be
his meaning, but lest I should mistake, I will repeat his own words, page 10. I
that am no Trader know that the Parliament could, if it be an useful Trade to
England, (which I am no proper Judge of) have established legally such Rules
whereby the Trade, might have been managed, and Factories, Forts, and Castles
maintained; and the liberty of Trade might have been preserved to every
Englishman, and five times the trade gained, and the price of our own
Manufactures of Cloth and others advanced, by the multitude and freedom of
Buyers; and the price of the goods imported much lessened to the English, and
much more Trade with these Commodities gained into other parts of the World. An
Instance of this is well known in the Turkey Company, where no Merchant can be
excluded or denied to trade with their particular Stock; yet the same pretense
might have been for restraint, that some do vainly suggest in this.

Who is so bold as blind Bayard? they that know least, are apt to think they
know most. Ignorance and Confidence are often Companions. The Gentleman tells
us, though he be no Trader, yet he knows. what does he know? he does not know
whether the Trade to the East Indies be an useful Trade to England; that he is
not a proper Judge of, as he says. He might with little study or observation
have known, that it is a Trade all Nations have and do court at the highest
rate: A Trade that the Dutch have adventured their All to purchase; A Trade
which as it is carried on only by a Company in the way of Joynt-stock, so the
gain thereby accrewing, maintains the Republic in Honor, Power, and Opulency;
A Trade whereby they have so increased to Riches and Strength, as almost to
become Masters of the World: A Trade wherein the English Company employ and
maintain above forty Ships, from 3 to 500 Tuns, and upwards of 3000 Seamen; a
Trade that supplies the Nation with necessary Commodities, at a tenth part of
the price the Nation must otherwise pay for them. Pepper would be as dear as
Nutmegs, if the Dutch were sole Masters of it; Callico must be supplied by
French, Dutch and Flanders Linen; A Trade that makes us Masters of the
Saltpeter, enables us to defend our selves, frees our houses from those
Vermin, (the Salt-petre-men) that dug up our rooms; A Trade that upholds our
foreign Trades, by bringing us Commodities to carry abroad to France, Spain,
Italy, and Turkey, to a farther increase of our Navigation. A Trade that
besides the Customs to his Majesty, which are very considerable, brings an
Annual Addition, of several 100000 pounds to the real Stock of the Kingdom.
There are besides these, diverse other advantages, too many to enumerate. All
this is so perspicuous, that the Gentleman might easily have discerned it, were
his sight clear, and not clouded by prejudice, or obstructed by the
intervention of some private (if not foreign) interest. But though he knows not
whether the Trade be useful for England, yet he knows if it were, the
Parliament could have established such rules, etc. Excellent! how comes it to
pass the Parliament has not done it all this while? The Reason is suggested,
It was not an useful trade for England. But might it not have been made an
useful Trade, If such Rules had been made to have gained 5 times the Trade, to
have advanced the price of our Manufactures, and lessened the price of Goods
imported, and have gained much more trade into other parts of the World?
Certainly the Parliament has not been of the Gentleman's mind, neither to have
Judged the Trade useless, For then they would have put it down; Nor yet to
think that such Rules as he Imagines could have been made to effect what he
fancies, for then they would have established them. The Gentleman might have
done well for the Benefit of his Country (if he intended it) to have suggested
(if he could) what these Rules were, that they might have been considered; and
till he declares what Rules he means, I can make no other construction of his
words, than that he knows that the Parliament, could have made such Rules,
though he knows not what. I Readily grant, the Parliament, (which is the
Wisdom, and Supreme Authority of the Nation) can and will make all necessary
rules for the good of the Kingdom, and to say such Rules could have been made
and yet never were, (though many Parliaments have been since the first
Establishment of the East India Trade) seems too much to reflect on that great
Assembly. The Gentleman tells us, an instance of this is well known in the
Turkey Company. An Instance of what? that the Parliament could have Established
such Rules as to have gained 5 times, the East India Trade? sure that cannot be
the meaning; the Parliament having never made any Rules, much less such Rules
for the Turkey Company. The Gentleman sure was so astonished, that he was in a
Labyrinth, and lost his senses.

To help him therefore out, though this be no Instance of the Parliaments
making Rules, yet may it not be an Instance, that if the East India Company did
admit all Merchants to trade with their particular Stocks, (as he says the
Turkey Company do, though therein he mistakes; for its only their own Members
that have liberty,) it would have increased and augmented the East India Trade
five times more than now it is? This certainly must be the thing he intended,
yet I cannot find how it is an instance. The Turkey Company never were in a
Joynt-stock (that not being so necessary and suitable to that Trade) so it
could never be known what Increase the alteration from one to the other would
have made; and it is evident, that the East India Trade has been more
increased and enlarged within these few years under a Joynt-stock, than the
Turkey-trade has been under a Regulation. It is also certain (as before noted)
that the East India Trade in three or four years time of open Trade was almost
totally ruined, and could not have been upheld so much to the Interest and
Benefit of the Kingdom, unless it had been reduced into a Company, and
Joynt-stock.

The Inconfistency of maintaining and carrying on the East India trade in a
Regulation without a Company and a Joint stock, the great mischief and ruin it
might be to the Kingdom, both in point of Wealth and Strength (which includes
all,) If we should lose or be cheated of that Trade, and what may be further
done for the securing and augmenting of it, are Subjects would require larger
Discourses than my time at present will admit of. I hope, Sir, what I have
said, may be enough to satisfy you, that the Joynt-stock of the East India
Company is a sufficient security, and that the said Company is neither so
obnoxious, nor my self or others that have lent Money to them, so ill advised,
as the Gentleman in his Letter would insinuate. This is all I intended in
answer to yours.

Bristoll the 30 June, 1676.
The Bookseller to the Reader.
THis Discourse coming accidentally to my hands, I presume so far upon the
Author, as without either his Authority or Permission to commit it to the
Press. If he be offended to find that offered to public View, which he
designed only for the satisfaction of a private Friend, I shall say, that
besides its being a Vindication of a Society, all whose Measures are just and
honorable, and their Undertakings great and successful, it is a service also
to the Kingdom, to which so many Advantages are derived by them.

FINIS.

