AN ANSWER TO THE OBJECTIONS Against the Earl of Danby, Concerning his being
Accessory to the Murdering of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey.
When man by Fate, or his ill conduct, tumbles from the Precipices of Honor,
his Molehill Crimes straight turn to Mountains, and his former Splendours
trampled in the dust, each man his fond Objection lays, and at his tottering
Basis levels round about; Fate seldom strikes, but Ignominy waits him at the
heels, and creeps into the gaping Wounds he makes; sinister Reports, like
wandering Atoms, glide in the vast track of souls that Innovation seek, and
makes them think their fond Opinion best; which may be emblem'd by the turning
Spheres, whenas the glorious Lamp of day descends beneath this Earthly Ball,
the lesser Fires disperse their seeds of light, and each takes place in a
superior Orb; even those that in prosperity could flatter most, and cringe
beneath the Footstool of a Power to serve their Ends, and to promote their
Interest nothing was too much, no Obligation e're was thought too great, nor
nothing done in vain that could acceptance find; Protestations and dissembled
Vows, Service, and Friendship, with a thousand antique motions did attend. Yet
these are but like Swallows, who whilst warmed with kindly rays, do chant unto
each morning wake, but when the storms of State grow high, and blustering
Autumn's lofty winds the mighty Cedars shake, each pluck a twig, and sire from
thence unto a warmer Sun, or with its weight assists the Tempest, till it crush
the mighty bole, nay and aggravating Crimes to that extent, though only upon
weak suspicion, that they seem more dreadful to the vulgar eye, even in their
bare relation, than (if true) when acted at the first; and wounds from
treacherous Friends we always know are far more grievous than from open Foes,
for where a man confides, and rests the Axis of his Soul, from thence he ever
expects no ill; or if he did, he would not (if himself) rush void of fear upon
premeditated ruin; yet often it is seen in Politics of State, when Greatness is
detracted and made vile (the which much like an Adamantine Rock environed with
Metals, heretofore could draw admiring Eyes, and make it self a pleasing
prospect) then loses all its virtue, and regardless (...), whilst its Adherents
all withdraw, and, restless in th^^^ motions, still run biass to the Mighty
with this C^^^^cter (when asked concerning their degraded Fr^^^) It Is true, I
once was conversant with such a one, b^^t ^^^^^s past, and I now stand on surer
ground, 'till the next ^^^pest comes, against which my care is to provide.

Even so now fares it with a late considerable Member of our English Nation,
the Earl of Danby, whose too aspiring thoughts, it is probably conjectured, have
exposed him to these furious Gusts of State, which bend his Honor, and have
laid him open to the slander of his private Foes; for when Ambition gets the
Rains, and wilful Passion does overflow the bounds of Reason, it makes
Prosperity a Curse, and is the only way to heap up Foes against that time when
Purple Greatness shall withdraw, and adverse Fortune break the Barricades, and
let them in like raging Torrents on every side, and then you may be sure they
will wreck their Spleens.

For amongst the rest of the Crimes already laid against him) one more is here
objected, and imposed on him, as he being accessory to the same; the which
alone might blast bright fame, and render his memory detestably odious for
future ages to abhor; the which is that execrable Murder of the worthy
Gentleman Sir Edmundbury-Godfrey, a large Narration of which has been published
to the World; The which upon a serious view is thought to have been suggested
by some of his heretofore public Friends, but now private Foes, the weight of
the whole matter depending upon Circumstances only; first, that because he
having Correspondence with the said Sir Edmundoury Godfrey concerning diverse
Affairs, the which tended and related to the discovery of the late Plot, that
he upon that account should contrive his Murder, is but a very weak inference,
seeing that he could not well be greater than he was, and that if the Romish
Faction had prevailed, his Honor (as it has been attested by the Deponents
that has hitherto made any discovery of the said Plot) was confiscated and
disposed of to others; whereupon it more imported him, if it had lain in his
power, to have made a froe discovery himself, or at least, if Sir Edmund, who
having taken the Depositions of Dr. Oats and Dr. Tongue, as is objected,
communicated any thing to him, he should have closed with his Propositions, and
have joined with him in such a blessed discovery, had it been barely upon the
account of securing himself in what he was; for he or any reasonable man must
expect, if a Nation is subverted by Treason or the power of the Sword, the
Conquerors will not admit any of the former Grandees to continue and execute
their places of Authority, lest they, watching their opportunities, should soar
above them.

And farther, the Objection being made, that by reason Sir Edmund coming often to
the said Earl of Danby's house, it was more in his power than in any other to
murder him; it follows not, that men which have opportunities are endued with
such Diabolick minds as to take away caulesly the lives of their Friends; but
rather, if such violence should be offered by any other, to resist the
Assassinates, and defend the Assaulted to his power, for Murder is so execrable
a Crime, that surely no Christian can think upon it without horror and
amazement; and it is far beneath a generous and heroic Soul to dye his hands
in innocent Blood, especially: when unprovoked: Farther it is objected. That
the same Morning that Sir Edmund was conjectured to have been murdered, he was
at the said Earl's house, and that the Earl of Danby's Gentleman that day went
over the Water with Sir Edmund; the which the Attestators of the Murder
confute, declaring that he being watched out of his house by those that
assassinated him, and so directly to London-ward, about which places they
traced, and with narrow observations followed his steps, staying for him at
several places, till at last it growing dark, upon his return homeward, he went
into a house near St. Clements-Church, and that whilst he stayed there they
sent one of their Accomplices to give notice at Somerset House, the other still
watching him; who, after he came out of that house, went directly toward his
own home in St. Martins in the fields, whereupon the Assassinates, when he came
against the Watergate of Somerset house, got him in by a Stratagem, and then
strange led him; the which, had it been for the Earl of Danby's interest to
effect, he could probably with more convenience procured it, and not have
trusted so dangerous a Secret in the Breasts of so many ill affected men, whom
he might conjecture, if they had ventured it for gain or hire, might upon the
like Sum and promise of a Pardon, declare who employed them in such a
pernicious design; but it plainly appeared, their Priest being concerned in the
same, and by their obstinate denying to the last, that they were prompted on by
blind Zeal to commit that horrid and execrable Crime for the propagating of the
Romish Cause; and that it cannot reasonably be thought any otherways performed,
what suspicions or probabilities soever may be offered; for no man ought, out
of private revenge, to make that case worse than it is, the which at best may
prove bad; but all men learn to pity those whom frowning Fortune tramples down,
lest one day fate may wheel about, and they themselves vainly may the like
implore.

FINIS.

