THE ANTIDOTE Proved A COUNTERFEIT: OR, ERROR DETECTED, AND Believers Baptism
VINDICATED. Containing An Answer to a Nameless Author's Book, Entitled, An
Antidote to prevent the Prevalency of Anabaptism.

By HERCULES COLLINS of Wappin.

LONDON, Printed for William Marshall, at the Bible in Newgate-Street, where is
to be Sold Mr Knowles's Exposition on the whole book of the Revelation, price
bound 2 s. 6 d. And Mr. Bunyan's Works in Folio, price bound 14 s. And Mr.
Claridges Looking Glass for Princes, price bound 6 d* And likewise most of Dr.
Owen's and Mr. Beverley's Works. MDCXCIII.

THE Preface to the Unbyas'd Reader.
WE live in a divided and opinionative Age, and men's sentiments of things, for
the most part, being as various as their Complexions; Books have their Dooms,
according to the different apprehensions of their Readers. Some Tracts have
been applauded more for the Name of the Writers, or Opinion they espouse, than
for any substantial Worth to be found in them: Other are too often rejected and
decry'd, because their Authors are not of their Persuasion; tho they have Plain
Scripture, the most Authentic Evidence for any Gospel-Doctrine or Practice, to
plead for them. Some are the better treated for their Learned and Polite
Styles, tho they want that which should give them just recommendation, namely,
Truth; while Other which have it on their side, meet with hard usage; and that
(which is to be lamented) from Good Men too, because not set off with those
Artificial Embellishments, which gain so fast upon a Fanciful Generation, that
Rhetorical Paint passes for true Beauty.

But if thou art such an One, as the Preface calls thee, an Unbyast Reader; One
who art fully and solely for God, not regarding the Names or Writings of Men,
any further than they accord with the Revealed word of God; if thou art free to
receive Truth, for its own sake, and resolvest to hearken only to him that
speaks from Heaven; then may it he hoped, this Vindication of Believers
Baptism will find a cordial Welcome with thee.

Thou can not, if thou have read any thing, be wholly a stranger to the
Controversy about the Proper Subjects and Right Administration of Baptism,
between those that are for Sprinkling, or Pouring of Water upon Infants, and
those that Dip or Plunge under Water the whole Body of Professing Believers
only. I do confess on the one hand, it is sad to consider what strife there is
for Victory; but on the other, I rejoice to see Christ and his Truth Triumph,
as they do in Believers Baptism. Great has been the Opposition made against
this Holy Ordinance; but greater has been the Defense of it. Every Age has
afforded some Testimonies for this Truth, but now we are encompassed with a
Cloud of VVitnesses. Never was any Point more fully proved or better cleared
than this has been. That one would think our Opposites should either alter
their mistaken Practice, or be wholly silent.

But since they still go on in their Error, and cease not to argue against this
Ordinance, it is necessary it should be guarded from the Attempts of its
Assailants.

The worthy Author of the ensuing Discourse has Traveled formerly, with good
success, in this Field of Controversy; and now with no less, against him who
calls his Book, An Antidote to prevent the Prevalency of Anabaptism, etc. Here
thou have the Cavils and Objections of the Adversary, answered; Infants, or
little Children proved to have no Habitual Faith; the dissolution of the Old
Covenant-State demonstrated, and the Infants of Believers to have no Right, as
the Seed of such, to Holy Baptism. In a word, the Antidote is thoroughly
examined, and proved to be a Counterfeit.

I shall add no more, but my hearty recommendation of this Book to thy Reading,
desiring of the Lord, that thou may so Read as to Understand, and so
Understand that thou may Practice.

London, 20th. of the 5th. Month, 1693. Thy Souls well wisher in the Lord our
Righteousness. Richard Claridge.

A Plain and Impartial Inquiry into the Antidote, and upon Examination found a
Counterfeit.
COULD any have expected less then that this Gentleman's Book, in the Body of
it, should have answered the Title Page, namely, Infant Baptism Vindicated;
which indeed proves nothing but a Bravado, and flourish; for if it be
Vindicated, it must be either because Christ commanded it, or some of his
Apostles practiced it; some commended for its Observation, or others reproved
for its Neglect; but not one word of all this appears in his whole Discourse:
Then how can Infant Baptism be Vindicated? Also he comes as short in the other
part of the Title, An Antidote to prevent the spreading of Anabaptism, he means
Believers Baptism. Can he stop the course of the Sun, the ebbing and flowing of
the Water? Can he number the Clouds and Stars, or weigh the Wind, and the Fire,
or the great Mountains? Then he may answer his Title. What! is this Man
resolved to set himself in a posture of War against God and his Word? Does he
think in this to prosper? Will he endeavor to prevent the spreading of that
which our Lord Jesus Christ has given his Ministers in Commission to spread?
He seems to be grieved at our Translation of a Book concerning Baptism, from
English into Welsh; but if this be to be Vile, we shall be more Vile. What can
be expected when a Man shall be an Advocate against the Truth?

HE tel's us of some few Reflections upon some remarkable Passages in a Book of
H. C. of Wapping. What should be the Reason this Gentleman did not answer that
Book? He has not said any thing to the Argument of it; but picked a little
here, and a little there, which he thought he could deal withal; but the
Argument of the Book is untoucht. He calls them, a few Reflections; he may well
call them a few; for in 139 Pages he has not spoken to as much Matter as Three
Pages contain. As for Argument, in his Book, it is so little, that I was dead
to the answering of it a long time, not fearing his making many Proselytes to
Pedo-baptism, nor hinder the spreading of the Truth, tho he did his Endeavor;
but the Book being so full of Scurrility, base and abusive Language, and he
being, as it is to be feared, blinded with Prejudice, when he wrote it, could
not see his Evil; therefore these few Lines are intended, in the room of an
Oculist, to open his Eyes to behold his Error in Judgment and Practice, before
he leaves the World. I have in my Book laid down several Arguments to prove the
right Mode or Manner of the Administration of Baptism to be by Dipping, not
Sprinkling, and that the Subjects are to be Understanding Believers, not
Ignorant Infants. I have spoken to above 20 Objections, but he does not pretend
to give the least Answer to either, what should be the Reason that he did not
take Paragraph by Paragraph, and answer it fairly, like a man of Sense and
Reason? Some are ready to argue thus, and they cannot help it; It is either
because he could not, or would not: Not because he would not, for that would
argue little warmth for his own way, yea, a kind of betraying his Cause. I will
conclude he is more true to his own Principle; therefore some say Ergo, in the
Negative, he could not; but if he can, the Press is yet open for him, or any
other: and if he be conscious to himself he cannot respond to it, let him fall
in with the Counsel therein given.

AS for the Eight Queries, they are reducible to Five, because the 4th, 7th and
8th, are all of one import. As for the major part of those Queries, they affect
not us; only he makes a Man of Straw, and fights with it, or his own shadow.
It Is certainly an Argument of profound Confidence, for a man to pretend to the
World the discovery of the Errors of a People whose Principles he knows no
more, comparatively, than I know Vtopia; or else why does he begin with this
question, Whether it be possible for children dying in their Infancy, to be
saved? But if it be not from Ignorance, then it is from a worse Root; for it is
apparent enough that he labors to insinuate unto the world, as if we imagined
no Infants dying in their Infancy unbaptized could be saved; but if his Book
were well considered, he rather deserves Austin's Title, the hard Father of
Infants. Now, tho I know none of another mind, but that Children must stand in
the Day of Judgment before God's Tribunal, yet his Topics and Mediums, I
think, are not sound to prove it by: He quotes a Text which tells us, That
every person shall be judged according to his Works. This Text cannot affect
little Infants, which have no Works, good nor bad. Was the Scripture written
for the sake of Infants, or the Adult? Was not this written to the end Men
should look to their Works, that they might give a good Account. It is well
this Man is not the Peoples Eyes, for if he were, I fear they would be all
quickly with him in the Ditch of Error: What! because Rev. 20.12. says, I saw
the dead small and great stand before God; that therefore the Small here are
little Infants. The latter is exegetical of the former, every one being judged
according to his Works, argues, That the small are either the poor opposed to
the rich in the world, or those not come to the perfection of Men, in
opposition to them which were, yet knew good and evil, so were judged every one
according to his Works. Those in this Text are judged according to their Works;
but little Infants have no Works, good nor bad; therefore they cannot be here
intended.

THE second Query is, Whether Infants are saved by any other way than by Faith
in the Imputed Righteousness of Christ? In page 5. he asserts Infants are saved
by Habitual Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; That Infants are saved by Christ,
we have asserted, because we know of no other Name but Jesus; but that they are
saved by Faith; Habitual Faith in Christ; I must confess I never read it in all
the Book of God; I wish he could show me the Chapter where Christ said any such
thing, That Infants are Saved by Habitual Faith. What! would this Man make a
New Bible, have a new Rule to tell us of things never heard of? Had he the
Notion by Inspiration he should have told us so. Now I do not wonder the man is
so well pleased with an unscriptural Baptism, when he asserts an unscriptural
way of saving Infants; and yet this Gentleman will adventure to prove this in
such a way, and by such Topics and Mediums, that both the Universities could
hardly ever think of; for he brings, to make good this Thesis, all those
Scriptures which speak of the absolute necessity of the Adult, of Men and
Women's Regeneration, and believing, and applies them all unto little Infants;
as that in Mark 16.16. He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved; but
he that believes not shall be damned. (We have not left out the latter part of
the Words now, for I remember the false charge.) But to this Text in Mark, when
Christ gave a Commission to his Apostles to go into all the World to preach the
Gospel, and to inform them, If they believed, and were baptized, they should be
saved; but if they believed not they should be damned; were they to preach this
to little Infants? That they were to believe upon the penalty of Damnation; (I
do not say, baptized upon the penalty of Damnation, tho you have unwarily
asserted some of us are like the Jews in Judea, who asserted no Circumcision no
Salvation, so no Baptism no Salvation) But to our business, it seems Ministers
are bound to go into the World, and preach to Infants as well as the Adult,
that they believe upon the penalty of Damnation; for this is the great Text
brought once and again for Infants Baptism, because they have faith; but how
came they by it? was it by hearing the word preached, according to the
Commission in that place? No, no, says the good man, it is habitual Faith
inspired. Why then does he bring this Text? because he is almost at his Wits
end, and famished for want of Arguments, and so will catch at any thing.

PRAY take one argument to think on before we go further, If none are here
intended in Mark 16. but Men and Women Capable to Hear, and actually to Believe
the Gospel of Christ, then Infant Habitual Faith is not here intended; but the
former is true, therefore the Latter (you see the man's great Bullwark is thrown
down at once.) It is a wonder to me that a man who has been so long a professed
Christian should be so long ignorant of the word of God; what was the Scripture
Calculated and written for? to be preached (...) why then did he not carry his
children when Infants to (...) says no, the Gospel was not written for
Infants, why then does he bring that Text that has no manner of relation to
Infants, but only to the Adult? You are in the pound, Sir, get out if you can.
Then he comes with a home question; But may some say how shall we know that
Infants have habitual faith? How shall we know it indeed? for my part I cannot
tell how, I wish this Gentleman could ell me; for he has oftentimes asserted
no Faith no Salvation, neither for Old or Young. But how do you think he
Answers this question? by asking another, and as weakly answering it; How do we
know any children, says he, are saved but by the Judgment of charity, and some
Scriptural Intimations? Ah, poor man, this had been better in then out, by some
Scriptural Intimations? pray give us some Scriptual Intimations that Infants
have faith, and we will say no more. Your bringing a Prophecy of Christ out of
the 22 Psalm 9, 10. will not do it, and though I give you all you can desire
that it may also be applied unto David, it signifies nothing to the point;
Thou did make me hope when upon my mothers breasts; that is, thou did give
me sufficient ground for hope and trust if I had been capable of acting that
grace and v. 10. I was cast upon thee from the womb, thou art my God from my
mothers belly; that is, I was like one forsaken by his parents and cast wholly
upon thy Providence; see our late Annotations. But for all this Infants have
habitual Faith, says our Antagonist, but his arguments are so feeble that
maintain it, that it is like a tottering Fence; well, but what if I should ask,
what do you mean by Habitual Faith? I think there cannot be less in the word
than this, that they have an Inclination to believe, and that they have Power,
Might, Ability to believe; and if it be so, what is the reason they do not
believe? surely if they have Power, Strength and Ability to believe, is it not
reasonable they should be damned if they do not believe? which are his own
words, page 17 no Faith, no Salvation neither for Young nor Old. If by Habit he
meant an Inclination to believe, a disposition to believe, then let him prove
they have such a disposition; and what it is that hinders their believing; we
say a person that is disposed to a thing, has power actually to do it. If he
do not understand the meaning of the word habitual, why did he write it? was it
to confound the Ignorant with the word Infant Seed of believers being in
Covenant; what is meant by being in Covenant? there are thousands of themselves
know nothing of it. Seeing they do not mean the Election of Grace for my part I
think Transubstantiation, habitual Faith, and the Infant seed of believers in
the covenant are terms equally allowable and probably equally understood among
their various Professors; this habitual Faith in Infants is much of the
likeness of our Athenian assertion, that Infants have faith Potentia, tho not
Actu visibli; so you say they have habitual, though not actual visible Faith;
for my part I think it calls for a prodigious Faith for any man to believe
Infants have faith potentia, or habitual; all you have done is only begging
when you should have been a digging: But I think you have given away your
Cause, and habitual Faith too, in page 26. in these words, God is a free Agent,
and bestows his Gifts of Grace and Mercy upon whom he pleases. May not an
earthly King bestow his bounty upon a poor dumb Cripple that can neither ask
nor go to him for it, no, nor return him vocal thanks? Is not this to allow and
say what I have said, That Infants are happy through the imputed righteousness
of Christ; tho as poor dumb Cripples that can neither ask nor go, nor return
thanks? So that tho in effect he says, as I do, yet calls my Sentence a
strange Sentence, which asserts Infants sins are done away by the Imputation of
Christ's Righteousness, page 18. And would any man, but one void of common sense
urge such Scriptures for Infant inherent Faith, as Romans 3.26. God is the
justifier of him that believes in Jesus, Ephesians. 2.8, 9* By Grace are ye saved
through Faith not of works, lest any man should boast, Gal. 3.22. But the
Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise by Faith of Jesus
Christ might be given them which believe. And Mark 16.16. He that believes,
and is baptized, shall be saved. And Gal. 6.15. For in Jesus Christ neither
circumcision nor Uncircumcision avails any thing, but Faith which works by
Love, or a new Creature. And he might as well have added, 1 Cor 7. But the
keeping of the Commands of God, Romans 5.1. being justified by Faith, we have
peace with God through our I L^^^ ^^sus Christ, Romans 3.28. Therefore we
conclude a Man is Justified by Faith without the deeds of the Law. Does this
man think in his Conscience that ever these things were written or Preached
unto Infants, or in any sense intended that Infants should have the comfort of
it; if not, why are all these Scriptures applied unto them, when God never
intended it for them? I hope he has been taught better to Expound the
Scripture; But still he positively asserts Infants have Faith, and do believe,
and proves it by two Infallible Witnesses, as he thinks, the one is Mark 9.42.
And who so shall offend one of those little ones which believe in me, it were
better for him a millstone were hanged about his neck and cast into the Sea.
These little ones he asserts are Infants; but I would fain know, had I a mind
to offend a believing Infant, how should I know which were him? There is no
more appears in one Infant than another. Secondly, Men must know such a one
which owns Christ, for it is because he owns Christ that any of the wicked
offend him: But how shall I know the Infant with his Inherent Grace and Faith,
what Family he is in, where he dwells, should I have a mind to offend him?
Again, how shall the Infant know I am offended with him for his believing in
Christ? Mark, Reader, the verse before, Whosoever shall give a Cup of Water to
drink in my Name, because they belong to Christ, shall not lose his reward.
Then the next words are, And whosoever shall offend one of these little ones
which believe in me. So that you see these little ones Christ speaks of, are
such as go under the notion of Christ's Disciples, making a visible profession;
and if we do the least kindness for them we shall not lose our reward. But how
shall I know which Infant it is that has habitual Faith, that stands in need
of this Cup of Water? It cannot discover its own thirst, and so the poor Infant
may Die, though I had a mind to relieve it. The Eighteenth of Matthew, is
brought in by Christ upon the same account to abate the pride of the Disciples
who were disco^rsing who should be greatest and be the highest in Heaven; upon
this Christ calls a little Child, and tells them, except they were Spiritually
what that Child was Naturally, in Meekness, Humility, free from Revenge and
Pride, They could not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. So he goes on, whosoever
shall offend one of those little ones which believe in me; not the little
Infant or Child called and set in the midst, but those Believers that were like
them in Humility, wrought by Faith in Christ; for had I a mind to please or
displease an Infant with his habitual Faith, I know not where to find him; and
surely our Lord did not speak of such who were never like to be known: Oh, when
will you cease to pervert the right word of the Lord? How disingenuous are you
in saying, I owned they were Infant-Children, but would not own they believed?
My speaking those words was not from those Scriptures, but two others, namely,
Luke 18. and Matt. 19. See my book, page 35. 36. where Children were brought to
Christ to be touched; from whence some infer they were Baptized. But I need not
wonder you are so unfair with me, when you are so with the very Word of God,
when God says, Acts 16.34. That the Jailer believed in God with all his House;
you positively say, here we read of none but the Jailer which did believe, and
yet notwithstanding, say you, his whole Family was Baptized. I hope, Sir, you
believe there is a Judge. Mr. Charnock speaking of an Habit, tells us, It is an
inward Frame enabling one to Act readily and easily, as when an Artificer has
the habit of a Trade; the new Creature consists in gracious qualities and
habits, which beautify and dispose the Soul to act righteously and holily:
Hence habits are as Seeds which make the Earth capable to bring forth good
Fruit; but what good Fruit has an Infant with all his habitual grace? This
habit, says he, is expressed by a fountain of Living Water springing up to
Eternal Life. Page 75. Some say indeed that Regeneration is conferred in
Baptism upon the Elect, and exerts it self afterward in Conversion; but how so
active a principle as a Spiritual Life should lie dead or a sleep so long, even
many years, which intervene between Baptism and Conversion, is not easily
Conceivable. Where these habits are, there is a Spirit of Love, of Grace,
whereby as their understandings are possessed with a knowledge of the Excellencies
of his ways, so their wills are seasoned by the power of this Habit: And
further, as Christ had a Body prepared him to do the work of a Mediator, so the
Soul has a habit prepared to do the work of the new Creature as the corrupt
Nature is the habit of sin, so the new Nature is the habit of Grace; God does
not only call us to Believe, Love, Obey, but brings in the Grace of Faith and
Love and Obedience; this habit receives various Denominations, either from the
Subject, or Object, it is subjectively in the Essence of the Soul; but as it
shows it self in the Understanding it is called the knowledge of God; as it is in
the Will, it is a choice of God; as in the Affection, it is a motion to God; and
from the Object it is diversified; as it closes with Christ Dying, it is Faith;
as it rejoices in Christ Living, it is Love; as it lies at the Feet of Christ,
it is Humility; as it observes the Will of Christ, it is Obedience; as it
submits to Christ afflicting, it is patience; as it regards Christ offended it
is grief; yet all arises from one habit; but where does any of these things
appear in the Infants habitual Faith; he tells you further, where the habit of
true Grace is, there is a ready disposition to every good work, because
Seminally in every renewed person. -- And, says he, as it is ready in respect
of disposition, so it is in the activity of motion; yea, it is naturally active
according to its divine Nature, moreover it is voluntarily active, where these
habits are there is a kind of natural necessity of motion from life and habit;
yea it is fervently active, the nobler the Being of any thing is, the greater
degree of activity it is attended with; yea, it is unboundedly active, also
powerfully active, easily active, and pleasantly active, the entire
inclinations of the Soul stands right to good actions. Mr. Charnock, 2 vol.
page 85. to 94. Now let all those Characters of Habitual Grace be put together,
and ^hen consider whether any of these things can affect little Infants. I hope
by this time you have enough of Infants Habitual Faith. I will only add this
further, page 94. There is in this habit an orderly motion and activity, and a
permanent activity, a Spring of perpetual motion, even unto everlasting Life;
how then can all the infant Seed of Believers have this Habitual Faith, when so
many of them make their Parents Hearts to ache? This is like Mr. Marshall's
Notion in his Sermon before the Parliament, God does Seal the Infant presently,
and puts their name into the Deed, and that God accepts of such a Seal on their
parts as they are able to give in their Infant age, expecting a further
Ratification when they come to riper years, and that in the mean time affords
them the favor of being in Covenant with him; and that the surety of the New
Covenant is pleased to be their surety, yet says, when grown men, they may
refuse to stand to this Covenant and nullity all: Oh amazing! How inconsistent
is this with perseverance? Take this Ar^ument for a close of your second Query,
and Answer it, Those Children of Believers which Die in an Unregenerate State,
either never had the Habits of Grace or else if they had them, they have lost
them; But there is no losing Habits of Grace; Ergo, they never had them. If you
say they had them, and have lost them, that is against your own principle about
perseverance: If you say they never had them, then you contradict your own
^ook, which assert, That all the Infants of Believers have it, and therefore
you Baptize them: get out of this Prison as well as you can*

FOR your third Query* What if I allow all Believers are wholly passive in
^^generation, and can ^o more ^egenerate th^mselves, than a (...) that is all
(...) Faith? Is this a concluding Argument? Surely no; Pray Sir go to School
and learn better Logic, for this is no Argument in Barbara; There is no more,
say you, in Children to hinder Grace, than in the Adult: Ergo, they believe,
(what think you Sir, is this good Arguing) Christ can raise of stones Children
unto Abraham, Ergo, stones believe, or Stones are wholly passive, and have
nothing to hinder Regeneration, Ergo, Stones are Regenerated; When you bring
better Topics and Mediums to prove your Argument by, more may be said to it;
but you may think I have said too much to discover your Ignorance of Divine
things already. Here we may give a hint to your fifth Query, Whether Children
may not have the Golden Oil of God's Free Grace, as well as Adult persons?
Answer, What little Infants have, or what they may have, lies not within our
Sphere; secret things belong unto God, Revealed things unto us; but the
question is, how this Gentleman will prove that infants have this grace which
qualifieth them for Baptism; my neighbor is capable of being King of Vtopia,
Ergo he is king of Vtopia, does this Conclude? the Scripture says Men and
Women ought to believe who are capable of knowing good and evil; therefore
infants do believe who know neither good nor evil. Your 4th, 7th, 8th. Queries
look one way, and we do assert infants may be fit for the Kingdom of God, as
our Lord has said; and yet not qualified for Gospel Ordinances: Can it be
showed that ever our Lord Instituted Gospel Ordinances for Infants? Could it be
made appear that Infants have Repentance, Faith, and are taught of God, have
the answer of a good Conscience professedly, they would have a Right to the
Ordinance of Baptism; but this Logic will never pass the Schools. My Child
shall be heir to my Inheritannce, ergo, he is capable of understanding the
signing and sealing of it at eight days old; had you said he had been capable
of understanding the sealing this Estate over unto him at One and Twenty, it
had carried more of Truth and Reason in it. Why are Children denied the Lords
supper if fit for baptism? what, are Children believers, and kept from the
Lord's Table? do we ever read it was denied to a true Believer? what, are
Children New Creatures, Regenerated, Born again, and deny them the Elements of
Bread and Wine: Oh! hard Father of Infants Men as wise as your self gave
Infants the Eucharist for several hundred years, from some of your own Topics,
and will you deny it them? all your long harangue about Infants being capable
of one Ordinance, and not of another, is but wind; will you say in the
Ordinance of the Lord's Supper, there must be inherent Grace, and also Grace
exercised; but a state of Grace, tho not exercised, say you, is sufficient for
Baptism; But how does this Gentleman know Infants are in a state of Grace to
qualify them for Baptism? the word does not help him here, and if he conclude
so from Charity, then there is the same reason to have the same Charity for
Children of Unbelievers, and more too some times, because the Believers Child
often falls from a pretended Covenant, State, Faith, Inherent Holiness, New
Birth, Regeneration, when the Unbelievers, Child abides in all Truly. But how
comes this Gentleman so bold as to Assert and Print, That Actual Grace is not
necessary to Baptism? Did not Philip call for Actual Grace of the Eunuch before
Baptism? If thou Believe thou may: How then can Persons be wholly Passive
in Baptism? Did the Eunuch go down into the Water, and come up out of the
Water? Did Christ go almost Forty Miles to be Baptized, and did it as an Act of
Righteousness, and yet wholly Passive? If you can show me another Bible where
Christ since has said, Persons need not Actual Faith, and are wholly Passive
in Baptism, I may change my mind. Whereas he does Magnify the Lord's Supper so
much above Baptism; I do Assert what ever is Sealed to a Believer in one
Ordinance, is Sealed to him in another; nay, there is more particular words of
Encouragement added unto Baptism, than to the other: It Is true, it is all
comprehended in this, This is my Body broken for you, and my Blood shed for the
Remission of your Sins, but for Baptism in Acts 2. you have the promise of
Remission of Sins and gift of the Holy Ghost: In Acts 22. it is said to Wash
away Sins Symbolically, Mark 16. Salvation is annexed unto Faith and Baptism;
the Lord's Supper was never so Dignified as Baptism by the Procession of the
Holy Ghost; and it is a Symbol of Regeneration and Justification, Romans 6. Do I
see my Sins Pardoned, my Person Justified, God Reconciled, my Person
Sanctified, Heaven assured at the Lord's Supper? I behold the same in Baptism,
there I see my Sins Buried in his Grave, as in the other Nailed to his Cross;
here I behold my Soul Washed in his Blood, Justified by his Righteousness,
Saved by his Death; and is not this a Marriage Feast? And ought I not to have
the Wedding Garment now as at the Table of the Lord?

BUT this Gentleman tells me, I have Written several strange Positions; I am
not ashamed the World should see them: You must know one of the first Arguments
of the Church of Rome for Infants Baptism, is, That it Washed away Origional
Sin: Now because I say in opposition to that, we know a better way to Wash away
Original Sin, namely, The Imputation of Christ's Righteousness: This is one of
my strange Positions. But pray which is most strange, this, or the applying all
those Texts, which speak of Regenerated Men and Women unto little Infants, and
what they speak of the necessity of Faith in them, to apply it unto Babes, who
neither know Good nor Evil.

2dly, ANOTHER strange Position is, because I say, That as Circumcision was the
Door into the Jewish Church, which was National; so Baptism is the Door into
the Gospel Church, which is Congregational: Now this being true in his own
Opinion; why should it be a strange Position? Why, Because I will not allow, it
came in the room of Circumcision: Cannot I make two Doors to my House, but one
must be a Type of another? Or rather, Cannot I pull down my Old House and Build
a New; but my Door of my First House must be a Type of the Door of my last. The
Door of God's Gospel-House is larger than the Door of his Legal House; that
Door was only large enough for the Jews, and few poor Proselyted Gentiles; but
the Gospel Door entertains all comers, Jews, Gentiles, Barbarians, Sythians:
So that the First Door could not be an Exemplar or Type of the Last; Then only
Males were Circumcised; now Males and Females Believing may be Baptized;
therefore Circumcision could not be the shadow of Baptism; the Subjects that
enter the Door are not the same; one are Ignorant Infants, the other Persons of
Understanding. Under the Law the Subjects were wholly Passive, but now Church
Members must be Active in the Operations and Acts of Repentance and Faith; not
only those called Conformists, but the Non-Conformists also have lost the Door,
and the Subject that should enter the Door; for here are they wholly Passive,
when they should be Active; so that the very Essence of the Ordinance is lost;
here is neither right Form, nor right Subject, and what are they that enter not
in by the Door, but climb up and come in some other way into the House?

READER, consider whether this saying of mine be so strange as his, which he
has put in two Mercuries, showing I was not the Author of his Book, which I
would not have been for the World: He tells the People, I was never guilty in
Writing nor Preaching of any such Extensive Evangelical Truths: Is not this a
piece of Arrogance with a witness? How has he exposed his Profession and Name
to the World? besides he knows not what my Preaching is, nor has Read, I
suppose, a third of what is written; so that he speaks in the dark. And whereas
he says, I never was guilty of Writing or Preaching such things, I hope I
never shall. Again, Is not that a strange Position of his, page 25. Because I
say, John Baptist required, Matt. 3. of the Pharisees and Sadduces Repentance
from dead Works, in order to qualify them for Baptism and Gospel Church
Membership; every Tree, says the Text, that brings not forth good Fruit is
hewn down, and cast into the Fire.

HE from hence concludes, and tells the World, that my judgment is, That little
Infants, because they cannot bring forth good Fruit, must be cut down by the Ax
of Divine Wrath, and cast into Eternal Fire: and says, I and my party are for
saving Infants, by and for good Works. Did ever man speak more impertinently,
and wrong his Antagonist more unreasonably? What, cannot I speak to the Adult
and say, Unless you Repent you shall all perish, but I must intend Infants who
are not capable of it; and except you believe, you shall be damned: And when I
say, He that sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption, but must
intend Infants: Surely the Doctrine of the Gospel was never Calculated for
Infants; these Lines of his must be Written through Ignorance, Inadvertency or
worse; however it was, he ought to do his Neighbor right by a public
Recantation; and also of that in page 24. where he says, I smell rank of Rome,
Popery, and Free Will, because in my Book I give a reproof to the Seekers who
put a slight upon the Blessed Ordinances. See page 60, 61, 62. I little thought
he would have been an Advocate for them. As to my Judgment, about Justifying
Faith, it is well known both from the Pulpit and from the Press; but this is
like the rest of his Writing, who labors all he can to blacken the ways of
God, and render the Professors of it as odious as possible, or else he would
never have raked into the Grave of one Godly Minister who has been Dead almost
twenty Years: He mentions several who have Apostatized from the Truth, Judas
being one of them, Accumulates the Errors of some in Principles, and others in
Practice, and jumbles them all together to make the name of a Baptist Odious;
nay, Publishes one particular passage of a Faithful Minister of Christ
(wherein he supposed some Weakness, tho there was none) who is now Living, and
an Honorable Person in the Church of God, whom he calls a Pastor of a
Congregation, page 49. And because we with hold from Infants what Christ would
not have given them, he tells the World we make no better of Infants than Dogs,
page 11. That we have Crafty Positions, uncouth Glosses, that we mince and
limit the Fundamental Doctrine of Man's Salvation, page 48. Does he not acquire
the name of an Exquisite Calumniator, when he tells the World, Some of them are
Arminians, some Socinians, some gone back to Judaism, others of them
Gormandizers? page 51. Now Courteous Reader, consider what dreadful work should
we make in the Church of God, if we should Preach and Publish in Print the
Errors of some of the Pedo-Baptists, both in Principle and Practice; but while
we are Mourning under the Evil of others, I hope we shall not fall into the
same our selves: He endeavors to make those Hearts sad God would not have made
sad, by Misrepresenting our Opinion to the World, as if we held no Baptism no
Salvation; and that we account all Babylon, and none of the New Jerusalem but
them of our Opinion, and very straight in our Love and Affection: Is not this
the Man David speaks of, That Travelleth with Iniquity, Conceived Mischief, and
brought forth Falsehood? Remember, remember John Child, whose chief cause of
Desparation, was his speaking and writing against those very People of God you
now do.

NOW I come to your Challenge in your Book, page 12. I Challenge all the
Anabaptists in the World to produce but one plain Text of Scripture either in
the Old or New Testament, from Genesis 17. to the very last of the Revelations, to
prove that ever the Children of Believing Parents were cast out of Covenant by
any Authority from God, and then I will Submit unto them.

MY fear is, this person is so prepossest that all a Man can say, tho never so
much to the purpose, it will not be regarded; however, because he has made so
fair a promise, we will try if we can make him submit; but, pray Sir, do not
Answer this Book and these Arguments as my first Book, for I expect a full
Answer if you Write.

YOUR demand is, That we prove Infants In-covenanting, and the privileges
Children once had with their Parents, repealed.

THEREFORE that the Covenant of Peculiarity made to Abraham, and his Natural
Seed, as such, is Abolished, I prove from these four or five Arguments
following, laid down in so many Enthymems.

Argum 1. THE Natural Branches are broken off, Ergo, Childrens visible
Incovenanting is Repealed; the Antecedent of this Enthymem is cleared from the
Apostles Assertion, Romans 11.19, 20, 21. The Branches are broken off, By the
Natural Branches, without Controversy is to be understood the Natural Seed of
Abraham, and the breaking off must either be meant from a Visible Church
Membership, and External Privileges thereunto belonging, or the everlasting
Covenant of Grace; it cannot be the latter, because that Covenant is Immutable,
therefore it must be the former: God showed Zachariah the Prophet, Chap 11.10,
14. upon a Prospect of the Jews Unbelief in the Messiah, and their putting him
to Death, that he would take his staff of Beauty, and his staff of Bands and
break it, to signify he would break the Covenant he had made with Israel and
Judah, who until this time were accounted the only Visible People of God in the
World, tho now the Partition Wall is broken down, and all the Gentile Nations
in the World are with the Believing Jews, all one in Christ. Hear worthy Mr.
Cotton on the Covenant, page 15. John Baptist's Ministry, says he, did burn
like an Oven against all the Scribes and Pharisees, and left them neither the
Root of Abraham's Covenant, nor the Branches of their own good Works, Matt.
3.9. In the Preface to Dr. Owen's True Nature of Gospel Church, he says, God
took that numerous Progeny which came from Abraham's Loins to himself in one
Visible Body and Visible Church Membership. The whole Nation being the same
Politic Ecclesiastical Body, says Mr. Tombs, which Church state was only
Carnal, as their Ordinances were; but, says the Preface, when God had divorced
that People, Abolished their Mosaical Constitution by breaking their Staff of
Beauty and Bands; then he erects his Gospel Church, calls in Disciples by his
Ministry, forms them into a Body, and furnishes them with Officers; so that
this Covenant is taken up by the Roots, and the Natural Branches broken off,
none excepted, but the Natural Branches which remain so by Faith in the
Messiah, and so they broken off, may be Grafted in again; but until then, they
remain broken off, ergo, the Visible Incovenanting of Infants is Repealed, for
they could not be broken off the Everlasting Covenant of Grace, therefore it
must be the Covenant of Pecularity made with Abraham.

Arg. 2. NONE are Christ's Disciples but such as take up his Cross and follow
him, ergo, Infants are not Disciples, and so no Visible Members of a Gospel
Church.

The Antecedent is fully proved from our Saviors Assertion, Luke 14.26, 27. If
any man come unto me, and hate not his Father and Mother, and Wife and
Children, and Brethren and Sisters, yea, and his own Life also, he cannot be my
Disciple, and whosoever bears not his Cross, and comes after me, he cannot
be my Disciple, twice repeated, as if our Savior had foreseen how men would
boldly assert Infants Disciples who were wholly incapable of it. Let this put
you to everlasting Silence from mentioning Matt 28.18. your great Bulwark you
always run unto; now you may plainly see our Savior did not mean Children,
when he said, go Disciple all Nations; if he had intended Infants to have been
Disciples also, he would have made that exception; but our Lord knew they were
in no wise capable of being taught, taking up Christ's Cross and following him,
without which it is impossible, says our blessed Lord, you should be my
Disciples. Thus you see that Children are excluded the Commission; because they
cannot be Disciples, being wholly incapable to take up the Cross, and so
consequently not Visibly in Covenant, nor Church Members; therefore that
Covenant of Peculiarity with Abraham and his Natural Seed is Repealed.

Arg. 3. The Promise of Remission of Sin, and the gift of the Holy Ghost unto
the Children of Believers, is upon the terms of Repentance and Obedience, Ergo,
the Promise is not to the Fleshly and Natural Seed of Believers as such.

The Antecedent is proved from Gods word, Acts 2.38.39. where the Jews upon
Conviction by St. Peter's Sermon, of their being the Murderers of the Messiah,
cries out unto the Apostle, Men and Brethren, what shall we do? Peter Answers
them, Repent and be Baptized in the name of Jesus Christ for the Remission of
Sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost; for this Promise is to
you and your Children also, yea, to the very Gentiles afar off, if they are
called. Repent, Believe and Obey the Messiah, for tho you called for the Guilt
of Christ's Blood to be upon your Heads, and your Childrens, yet for your
Comfort it shall not be upon either. If both have these Qualifications before
mentioned, therefore the consequent roundly follows that the Promise is not
made to the Natural Seed of Believers as such, therefore the Covenant of
peculiarity made with Abraham and his Seed is Repealed. But if you will not yet
comply with this plain sense of the Words, but that the Promise of God in this
Text is to the Infant Seed of Believers as such; consider your task; if God
has made such a Promise as Sins Remission, and the Gift of the Holy Ghost to
all the Natural Seed of Believers as such, then you are to make this appear
that the Believers Infant Seed as such, are indeed Partakers of these Promises
which God has here made, or else you Reflect unfaithfulness on God for
nonperformance of his Covenant, so that unavoidably all the Infant Seed of
Believers, as such, must be Saved, since God has made the promise of Sins
Remission, and the Gift of the Holy Ghost unto them, unless you suppose some
may Eternally Perish which have these Gifts; but if you will add, and say, we
never believed they should be the better for the Promise, without an Actual
taking Hold of the Covenant; then show us what Promise and Privilege the Child
of a Believer has, more than the Child of an Unbeliever, or Gentile afar off,
if they do also actually take hold by Faith of God's Covenant. Thus you see
that the Promise is not to the Fleshly Seed of Believers as such, but upon the
terms of Faith and Obedience; therefore the Covenant of Peculiarity made with
Abraham, and his Natural Seed, is Repealed.

Arg. 4. Abraham's Seed under the Gospel Dispensation are only Actual true
Believers, Ergo, the Covenant of Peculiarity made with Abraham and his Infant
Seed, as such, is Repealed.

The Antecedent is clear, from Gal. 3.29. If ye are Christ's, then are ye
Abraham's Seed; you boast, says Christ, Abraham is your Father, but you are
the Children of the Devil, for ye seek to kill me, so did not Abraham; boast
not of your Birth Privileges, it signifies nothing except you are born again,
for the Children of the Flesh, tho the Children of Abraham, are not the
Children of God, but the Children of the Promise, viz. The Children of Faith
are counted for the seed, Romans 9.8. The consequent follows naturally, That the
old way of Infants Visible Incovenanting is Repealed, unless you think Infants
do believe; so that whatsoever was comprehended in that Promise made to Abraham
and his Seed, Genesis 17.7. can no ways affect the Seed of Believing Gentiles, as
such for my Seed, as a Gentile cannot be the Natural Seed of Abraham, a Jew;
nor the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, because such are reckoned according to the
Spirit and Faith; So that that Text, Genesis 17.7. has been very improperly
applied all along to the Seed of Believing Gentiles, as such, being neither the
Natural nor Spiritual Seed of Abraham: And to advance a little further, know
this that no particular Believer can infer they are a Holy Root to their
Posterity; because Abraham is called the Father of the Faithful, for Abraham is
accounted a Spiritual Father, but we are accounted Natural; So that the
Covenant of Peculiarity made with Abraham and his Natural Seed, as such, must
be Abolished, because we are not accounted Abraham's Seed now, but as we
believe in the Messiah, and for a Gentile Believers Natural Seed, as such,
cannot be the Seed of Abraham, neither in a natural nor Spiritural Sense,
therefore cannot in any wise affect them: Here you have brought your self again
into a Noose, and I cannot help it. Now seeing the Seed of Abraham are Actual
Believers, therefore the Covenant of Peculiarity made with Abraham, and his
Natural Seed is Repealed.

Arg. 5. Infants are not capable of the Qualifications of Gospel Church
Membership, Ergo, Infants Incovenanting and Church Membership is Repealed.

THE Antecedent is clear from their being wholly incapable of being Taught and
made Disciples, by taking up Christ's Cross and following him; also of
Self-Examination. In the Covenant of Peculiarity made with Abraham; the Infant
Church Members were wholly Passive in suffering the sign of the Covenant under
the Legal Economy. But Members of a Gospel Church are Active; the Corinthians
gave themselves first to God, and then to the Apostles, by the Will of God, in
a Church State; in a Gospel Church they are Innitiated after Conversion, or a
least a Profession of it: It Is said of such. They that gladly received the Word
were Baptized, and they eat their Meat with gladness and singleness of Heart,
and went to their own Company, lift up their Voice in Prayer, and were Obedient
to the Faith; but Infant Church Membership no ways agree to a Gospel Church
State, who are said to be Sanctified in Christ Jesus; Saints by calling. Holy
Brethren, Living Stones, Christ's Spiritual Temple, and House of God. Church
Members, now are to be Active; they are not to go, as Austin absurdly says of
Infants going to Baptism with others Feet, believe with others Faith, Covenant
with others Tongues. I am sure Christ went upon his own Feet to Baptism near
forty Mile, and the Eunuch also, and believed with his own Faith, and
Covenanted with his own Tongue. Now for the Conclusion, I say, Infants are not
now Visibly in covenant, it not being within my Sphere what they are as to Gods
Decrees, yet conclude well of all that Die in their Infant State. But seeing
there are so many Qualifications required individually to Gospel Church
Membership, your task is to prove, that Infants have them; or give up the
Cause, according to your Promise, and confess the Covenant of Peculiarity made
unto Abraham, and his Seed, is Repealed.

Whereas you mention Jeremiah and John Baptist Sanctified from the Womb; on
Jeremiah, our Annotators say, I have Appointed and Approved thee as a fit
Minister for the Work, I have Prepared and Ordained thee for Public Service,
viz. not with Saving Grace, tho that need not to be excluded; and of John the
Baptist, they say, being filled with the Holy Ghost from his Mothers Momb; this
is true both as to Prophecy, which is an extraordinary gift of the Holy Ghost,
and also of the Holy Ghost considered as a Sanctifying Spirit; Now consider,
our Annotators lay the great stress of those two Men Sanctified from the Womb,
upon their being fitted for public Work, for as much as they had insuperable
Difficulties. which in those degenerate and corrupt Times they must unavoidably
Encounter with; but what if it should be granted those two Men were not only
Sanctified from the Womb? That is, set apart to public Work, which the word
Sanctified sometimes imports; but that also they were Savingly Sanctified in
their Hearts: Is this a good Argument to prove, that all the Infant Seed of
believers have Habitual Faith from their Mothers Womb? If so, how comes it to
pass that so many of them Die unsanctified? Logicians will tell you, its unsafe
Arguing from particuliar Instances to general; is this a good Argument? Solomon
was a very Wise man, ergo, all men are very Wise. Sampson was a Strong Man,
therefore all Men have Sampson's Strength. Abraham was a great believer^
therefore, all Men have great Faith. Moses was a Meek Man, therefore, all Men
are Meek, and all Men Patient, because Job was such; I hope we shall never have
these instances urged any more of John Baptist, and Jeremiah, for to prove that
all the Infant Seed of believers have Habitual Faith.

SEEING some have queried, where you find that Children are forbidden to be
Baptized, tho you know it is rather your work to prove the Positive, That there
is a Command for the Baptising of Infants, than for me to prove the Negative,
That there is none; for if you would but prove the former, you would save me
the Labor from proving the latter; however I shall attempt it for once.

TO prove the Baptism of Infants Forbidden.

ALL positive Commands Prohibit whatever is repugnant thereunto; but the
Baptism of Infants is repugnant to the positive command of Christ for that
Ordinance, ergo, the baptism of Infants is prohibited.

The Major is undeniable, the Minor I thus prove: I^ Ignorance be opposed to
understanding, the want of an act of Repentance, Faith and Obedience be opposed
to the Act, and Teaching be opposed to them not capable of it. If a few drops
of Water be opposed to a burial in Water: In a word, if a wrong Subject and a
wrong manner of Administration be opposite to a right Subject and manner of
Administration, then Infants Baptism is repugnant to Christ's Command for that
Ordinance, and therefore roundly Prohibited; for no man of Sense can imagine
that our Lord can allow of any Practice repugnant to his own Commission; the
word all Nations, in Matt 28. is referable only to the Teaching of all Nations;
all positive Commands, prohibit whatever is repugnant thereunto We might
Illustrate when we are commanded to Worship God in Spirit and Truth, it forbids
all Ignorant Devotion, Formallity and Hypocrisy, and when commanded to Worship
God, all Idols and Idolaty is forbidden; to eat bread and drink Wine in
remembrance of Christ, forbids a belief of his Corporal Presence; what need I
do any act to put me in remembrance of him who is Corporally Present, when
God's Word asserts we are saved by Grace, it forbids Works as Meritorious; so
when God Commands Persons that Profess Faith and Repentance to to be baptized,
it Prohibits all that are incapable of those Qualifications. Take heed of
incurring Divine Displeasure, by commanding that in the Name of the Lord, which
he never commanded: Oh! what a dreadful Judgment did God threaten against
Jerusalem for doing those things which God Commanded them not, In offering
their Children to Molech in the Valley of Ben Hinnom, which I commanded them
not, says God, neither came it into my mind, Jer. 19.5. The Geneva Note on
that place, says, Whatsoever is not Commanded by God, touching his Service, is
against God's word, because not commanded: Was not Nadab and Abihu prohibited
false Fire when commanded to take Fire from the Altar? Is not Tertullian's
Notion true, every positive Command of Christ includes a Negative? by this
Argument you may set up a great part of the false Worship in Rome, by
Interrogating where it is forbidden, read Matt. 28.18. Acts 2.37. Mark 16.16.
Romans 6.4 Acts 8.36, 37. Acts 10. All which Scriptures show, that Infant Baptism
must be Repugnant unto that Baptism which is from Heaven, therefore is
Prohibited.

Syllogistical Arguments against Pedo, and for Believers Baptism.

Arg. 1. THAT which has no Divine Command nor Example, none Commended for its
Observation, nor Reprehended for its neglect, cannot be of God, or Divine
Authority; but the Baptising of Infants has no Divine Command nor Example none
Commended for its Observation, nor reproved for its Neglect ergo, the Baptising
of Infants is not of God or Divine Authority.

Arg. 2. THAT which has a Divine Command and Example, some commended for its
Observation and others reproved for its neglect, must be of God and Divine
Authority; but the Baptism of Believers has a Livine Command and Example; some
commended for its Observation, others Reprehended for its neglect ergo, the
Baptism of Believers is of God and Divine Authority, Mark 16.15, 16. Luke 7.29,
30.

Arg. 3 THAT which was the Practice of the pure Primitive and Apostolic Times,
about Initiating persons into the Church, ought to be the same unto the Second
Coming of Christ: But to Initiate persons into the Church by Baptism, upon a
profession of Faith, was the Practice of the pure Primitive and Apostolic
times; ergo, to Initiate persons into the Church by Baptism upon a profession
of Faith, ought to be the same unto the Second Coming of Christ. This Argument
does stand Immovable against the Churches for Pedo-Baptism; unless they can
assign the time and place where Christ altered the Constitution of his
Churches, and changed the manner of Initiation into them, or e^se to their
Peril be it, who Constitute Churches any other way, or Initiate Members
contrary to the Apostolic Practice.

Arg. 4. THAT which is contrary to the Doctrine and Practice of John, Christ
and his Apostles, is of Human Invention.

BUT the Baptism of Infants is contrary to the Doctrine and Practice of John,
Christ and his Apostles, ergo, the Baptism of Infants is of Human Invention.

FOR the Minor; That the Baptism of Infants is contrary to the Doctrine and
Practice of John, Christ and his Apostles, the whole New Testament Witnesses:
That the Subjects of this Ordinance were Understanding Believers, not Ignorant
Infants, and Dipping, not Sprinkling, the manner of Administration; and
therefore the consequence of the Major is true, That Infant Baptism is of Human
Invention.

Arg. 5. That Practice which has no Promise Annexed unto it, either of Sins
Remiss^on, Divine Presen^e, the Gift of the Holy Ghost, nor Salvation, cannot
be of God, or Divine Appointment.

BUT Pedo-Baptism has no Promise annexed unto it, either of Sins Remission
Divine Presence, the Gift of the Holy Ghost, nor Salvation, ergo, Pedo Baptism
cannot be of God, or Divine Appointment.

Arg. 6. That Practice in the Church, which has the Promise of sins Remission,
Divine Presence, the Gift of the Holy Ghost, and Salvation annexed unto it, is
of God, and Divine Authority.

BUT the Baptism of Believers, upon Profession of Faith, has the Promise of
Sins Remission, Divine Presence, the Gift of the Holy Ghost, and Salvation
annexed unto it, Mat. 28.18. Acts 2.38. Mark 16.16. Ergo, The Baptism of
Believers, upon Profession of Faith, is of God and Divine Authority.

Arg. 7. THAT manner of Administration of Baptism, which no way answers the
Commission nor Intention of Christ the Lawmakers, cannot be Authentic.

BUT the Administration of Baptism by Sprinkling, Pouring or Dropping, does no
way answer the Commission, nor Intention of Christ the Lawmakers, ergo, the
Administration of Baptism, by Sprinkling, Pouring or Dropping, is not
Authentic.

The Minor is clear, That the Administration of Baptism, by Sprinkling,
Dropping or Pouring, does no way answer Christ the Law maker's Commission,
because he Commands the Subject to be Dipped, Immersed, Buried; in pursuance of
which Command, the Apostles did always so Practice. Secondly, It can no way
answer the intention of Christ the Lawgiver, because his Intention was, That
it should be a lively representation of the Death, Burial and Resurrection of
Christ, together with the Believers Death to Sin, and a Resurrection to a new
Life; all which appears, Romans 6.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Colos. 2 12. Now what
Similitude or likeness is between Sprinkling, and Christ's Death, Burial and
Resurrection, I leave to all the Judicious to consider; would Christ take such
care to have his Death set forth in Lively Figures at the Lord's Table in
breaking Bread, and pouring out Wine? And would Christ appoint a Dead Figure in
Baptism? No, no.

Ar^ 8. THAT Baptism which has manifest Absurdities cannot be of God;

But the Baptism of Infants has manifold Absurdities, ergo, the Baptism of
Infants cannot be of God.

The Minor is thus proved; It Is full of Absurdities, because asserted by some.
That persons have Regeneration in their Baptism before Vocation, and may be
visible Church Members before Conversion; moreover that persons may be baptized
by another Faith, and making a National Gospel Church, instead of a
Congregational, and bringing in a Carnal Fleshly Seed into Christ's Church, in
the room of a Spiritual Seed.

That Faith and Repentance is required of persons before baptized, yet confess
that Children, unto whom they apply it, have neither.

Again, They profess that Baptism is a Demonstration of a Spiritual Marriage
between God and the Believer, and yet Assign it unto One as incapable of such a
thing as a Stock or Stone: Moreover, that the Baptismal Covenant enters into
the Visible Church, yet deny Church Members the Lord's Supper.

Arg. 9. That Baptism that Introduces Gross Errors into the Church, cannot be
Divine, but Human.

But the Baptism of Infants introduces gross Errors into the Church, ergo, the
Baptism of Infants cannot be Divine, but Humane.

The Minor thus appears of its introducing Errors; It was first used to wash
away Original Sin which nothing but Christ's Blood could do. Again; It Is used
to work Grace and Regeneration, and Effect Salvation by the Work done; and
against all sense some say, It is an Apostolical Tradition, and that Children
have Faith, are Disciples of Christ, that all Children of believers are in the
Covenant of Grace, defiling and polluting the Church with false matter, and
confounding the Church and the World together, introducing many Traditions and
Inventions of Antichrist with it, as Gossips or Sureties, Bishoping or
Confirmation, Chrism, Exorcism, Consignation; finally, it has made a great
deal of Contention in the World, and filled many with prejudice.

Arg. 10. The proper Subjects of Baptism are such who are capable of hearing
the Word, and Teaching, of Repenting, Confessing of Sin, believing in Christ,
and doing it as Christ's Commission, a part of Gospel Righteousness, as Gods
Council, and as the Answer of a good Conscience, and ought to do it as a Symbol
of Christ's Death and Resurrection, together with our own Death unto Sin, and
Resurrectito a New Life, ergo, Infants are not the proper Subjects of Baptism.

Mr. Perkins says, The Greek word (...), Interrogation, 1 Pet. 3.21. of a good
Conscience, signifies a Stipulation or Promise which the person Baptized makes
in Baptism; and further says, He has a double Interrogation, one from the
Minister, which he Conscientiously Answers, to perform the things Covenanted;
and the other Interrogation is of his Conscience unto God, whether he will
accept him, if he Dedicate himself as his Faithful Servant, tho a poor
miserable sinner? But how can these things affect Little Infants? How does it
appear they have the Answer of a good Conscience in Baptism?

To Conclude, Courteous Reader, I pray grant me one request, and that is, That
you would be pleased to take my book of Baptism, and consider my Antagonist's
Answer unto it: I also desire you would seriously compare my Answer with his
Book, and I hope you will find nothing material left unanswered, tho he has
not spoken to the Matter contained in three pages, of one Hundred Thirty and
Nine of my Book of Baptism; pray consider, if he does give any Answer to my
Answer, or whether he says any thing to the Arguments or Argumentative part of
my Books, and be not put off with Shadows instead of Substance, nor with a
Shell instead of a Kernel; for you have Reasonable Souls, do not therefore
suffer your selves to be imposed upon to take Brass for Gold, Nonsense for
Reason, nor men's Inventions for Gods Institutions; but like the Noble Beraeans,
search the Scriptures to see whether those things be so, or no; and believe
nothing because I, or any other Man says it, but because Divine Writ affirms
it. In so doing you shall profit your self, and oblige him who wishes you
Everlasting Prosperity.

FINIS
Advertisement.
CHrist alone Exalted: being the complete Works of Tobias Crisp, D.D.
containing XLII. Sermons on several Select Texts of Scriptures: Which were
formerly Printed in Three small Volumes, by that late Eminent and Faithful
Dispenser of God's Word. Who was sometime Minister at Brinkworth in Wiltshire;
and afterward many of the Sermons were Preached in and about London. To which
is added Ten Sermons, whereof Eight were never before Printed faithfully
transcribed from his own Notes: Which is all that ever will be Printed of the
said Doctor's.

The Texts of Scripture of the late Addition are as follow, viz.

Sermon. I. John xx. 19 Blessed are they that have not seen; and yet have believed

Sermon. II. Romans viij. 32. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up
for us all, how shall be not with him also freely give us all things?

Sermon. III. IV, V, VI. (the Matter being undivided) Titus ij. 11, 12 For the
Grace of God that brings salvation, has appeared to all men; teaching us,
that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts we should live soberly, righteously,
and godly in this present world.

Sermon. VII. Amos iv. 12. Because I will do this unto thee, prepare thy self to
meet thy God, O Israel.

Sermon. VIII. Matt. xvi. 24. If any man will come after me, let him deny himself.

Sermon. IX. Gal. iij. 5. Wherefore then serves the Law? it was added because of
transgression, till the seed should come, to whom the promise was made.

Sermon. X. Mr. Brunsel's Funeral Sermon, on Gal. i. 8.

Mollificium Chirurgie. or the Marrow of Surgery. An Anatomical Treatise.
Institutions of Physic with Hippocrates's Aphorisms largely Commented upon The
Marrow of Physic showing the Causes, Signs and Cures of most Diseases incident
to humane Bodies. Choice experienced Receipts for the Cure of several
Distempers The Fourth Edition, enlarged with many Additio^s, and purged from
many saults that escaped in the former Impressions Illustrated in its several
parts with twelve Brass Cuts. By James Cook of Warwick, Practitioner in
Physic and Surgery.

Both Printed for William Marshall, at the Bible in Newgate-Street.


