AN APOLOGY FOR THE English Presbyterians, WITH A DEFENSE OF THE Heads of
Agreement Assented to by the United Ministers, in the Year 91.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by the Booksellers of London and
Westminster, 1699.

TO THE READER.
IN the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth, and James the First, the English
Presbyterians were represented to be for such a Church Government as was
Inconsistent with, and Destructive of the King's Supremacy in Matters
Ecclesiastical, as well as of the Diocesan Form. And that the Civil Magistrate
might be induced to Believe it, Three Articles were proposed to be Subscribed
unto; the First about the Supremacy, the other Two about the Government,
Liturgy, and Ceremonies of the Church; whereupon they, who refused Subscription
only to the Second and Third, were said to do so, because they would not Allow
of the First.

This Accusation was the more generally Received, because the English
Presbyterians Corresponded with their Brethren in Scotland, (who deny the
Supremacy) about Episcopacy, the Liturgy, and the Ceremonies; and among the
Conforming Clergy, there were some, who would have introduced the Classical
Government, under the Name of Diocesan; which moved Archbishop Bancroft to
Publish his Scotizing Dangerous Positions and Survey. Besides the Classical
National Government being founded on a Divine Right, was the more frightful to
the Queen, her Nobility and Gentry, who would never suffer the Divine Right of
the Diocesan Government; knowing that the Divine Right of a National Church
Government of any sort, and the Regal Supremacy can never simul and semel dwell
in the same Kingdom, the Setting up of the One, being a Subversion of the other.

The English Presbyterians, Observing the Nature of the Accusation, and the
Arts, used to insinuate the Belief of it into the Minds of their Governors,
judged it necessary to do their Part to clear themselves from those
Imputations, which they did, in their Protestations, Petitions, and other
Writings, by a Free, Open and Vndisguised Representation of their Principles
about the Nature and Constitution, and Power of Particular Churches; and also
about the King 's Supremacy, making it Evident, that in all these Points, they
agreed entirely with the first Reformers, even with them who sat up a Church
at Franckfort, in Queen Mary's day; and had a Chief hand, in Reforming the
Church of England, under Queen Elizabeth, who settled Parochian Churches (which
for their Form, are the same with Congregational) as the only Churches of
Divine Institution, recognizing all the Superiorities and Preheminences which
the Diocesan Bishop has above the Presbyter to be only Jure Regio, or
Parliamentario, so that as the Parochian Presbyters are of God's Institution,
the Diocesan Bishop is of the Prince's making; and accordingly, as every
Creator takes care of his own Creature, as God has Provided a Maintenance for
the Presbyter, the King has also Endowed the Bishop, which is as I take it,
the true reason why Sr. Thomas Ridley, a Person Zealous for the Church, in his
View of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Laws, Par. 3. Cap. 5. Affirms, That God
has by his Word made Tithes due to Parochian Churches, but not to Diocesan
Bishops, whose Indowments stood in good Temporal, and Finable Lands, which
Gracious Princes, and other good Benefactors of former Ages bestowed upon them.

The English Presbyterians keeping tightly to those Principles, on which the
Reformation began, were Esteemed by the Nobility, and Gentry to be Men of such
Peaceable Principles as might be safely Indulged; who therefore often in
Parliaments made Application to the Prince on their behalf.

On these Principles the late Union between the Congregational and Presbyterian
was entered into, giving so much Security to the Church of England, that no
Sincere Approver of it, can have any hand in setting up that Government, which
endangers it; Their being for any such Model, is a being for what destroys
those Churches, which they themselves Believe to be of God's Appointment. Nor
Indeed can they be for the Divine Institution of any other Particular Churches
than what are Congregational, unless upon this Principle, [That the
Catholick-Church-Visible is a Governed Society, that has a Supreme Power under
Christ, Monarchical, Aristocratical, or Democratical, Authorized to Govern the
Whole by Legislation and Judgment;] Which is a Notion so contrary to what not
only all true Protestants in general, but the English Presbyterians, as well as
the Congregationalists in particular are for, that they detest, and abhor it.

A Clear Conviction of these things, upon mature Deliberation, and a serious
Observation of the Sentiments of our Wisest and most kind Friends, with a
sincere Desire, that my Brethren may be cleared from those Aspersions, (which
either through the Inadvertency of some of themselves, or the Crafty
Insinuations of their Adversaries) has been cast upon them, and that they may
continue in the Peaceable Enjoyment of that Liberty, which through the
Auspicious influence of the Government they are Possessed of, has moved me to
make this Apologetical Representation of their Genuine Principles: Being
strongly Persuaded, that as our Governors will consider the Real difference
there is between the Principles of the English and CLASSICAL Presbyterians, and
notwithstanding their Indignation against the Latter, will always extend their
Generous and Christian Compassions toward the Former; So my Brethren of the
Presbyterian Denomination, will give some Evident Demonstrations of their
sincere and Constant adherence to those Principles of the English
Presbyterians, as Delivered long ago in their Protestations, etc. and lately in
the Heads of Agreement, and Particularly to those Articles of it, by which they
are set at the greatest Distance from Intermedling with the National Church
Form.

Farewell.
ERRATA.
PAge 49. line 20. for Especially, read Specifically. p. 61. l. 6. for as, read
and; l. 16. for Ecclesiastical, read Classical.

AN APOLOGY FOR THE English Presbyterians.
THE Prejudices, which are, in the minds of many, against the Presbyterians in
this Kingdom, arising from some mistaken Notions, entertained about the
Principles, which Men of that Denomination are said to embrace, there cannot be,
I think, a more Effectual Apology made for them, than what is done by an
Impartial Representation of those Principles they do really own; and what, though
laid to their Charge, they do with the most Indignation and Abhorrence disavow.
I will therefore faithfully propose what the English Presbyterians, for whom
alone I make this Plea, do, and do not, hold; And for the greater satisfaction
of my Reader, I will set in the clearest Light I can, the Notions espoused by
the Classical or Scotch Presbyterians, with which the English could never
comply; though upon the Supposal, that they are zealous Defenders of that
Classical Government, they have fallen under the Displeasure and Contempt of
our Civil and Ecclesiastical Gonours.

SECT. I.
What are the Principles about Church Government, held by the English
Presbyterians, wherein they do differ from the Classical-Scotch-Presbyterians.

.1. THE Principles held by the English Presbyterians about the Constitution,
and Power of Particular Churches, and their Subordination to the Civil
Magistrate, are briefly these.

1. That a Governing Church is of no larger Extent than a Worshipping
Congregation.

2. That the Ruling Power of their Officers is not to be stretched beyond the
Bounds and Limits of their Worshipping Congregation.

3. That what Power besides this is requisite to reform the Disorders in
Particular Churches, such as the Removing Scandalous and Heretical Teachers,
etc. is vested in the Civil Magistrate.

4. That it belongs also to the Civil Magistrate to convene Synods, or
Assemblies of Ministers, when there shall be an occasion for them, whose Power,
when convened, is only Persuasive, not Coercive.

.2. The Principles, which the Classical or Scotch Presbyterians, who assert the
Divine Right of a National Church Government, do advance, are,

1. That One Governing Church is made up of many worshipping Congregations.

2. That the Ruling Power of their Officers is extended beyond the Bounds of a
single Congregation. For, by asserting the Catholic Church Visible to be a
Governed Society, or Organnick Body, they must necessarily, and do professedly
own, that the Ministry, Ordinances, and Censures are given firstly to the
Catholic Church Visible, and secondarily to particular Churches, which,
whether Congregational, Classical, Provincial. etc. are not properly Churches,
but only Parts or Members diversely combined) of the Catholic Church, which is
the only proper Visible Church, whereupon all Church Power is habitually seated
in the Officers of the Catholic Church Visible, as such, and therefore
extended beyond the Bounds of single Congregations, even to the utmost Limits
of the Catholic Church Visible.

3. That the Ruling Officers in their larger Assemblies, viz. Classical,
Provincial, National, Patriarchal, and Ecumenical, have a Power inherent in
them to reform the Disorders of particular Churches, and to remove scandalous
or Heretical Teachers.

4. That it belongs to the Church and not to the Civil Magistrate, to convene
Synods or Assemblies of Ministers and other Ruling Officers.

.3. In these particular Instances, you have a full, though brief Account of
what is embraced by the English, and by the Classical Presbyterians. And it is
now my Part to vindicate the former from those Reproaches unjustly cast upon
them, and show that the Charge can not be fairly laid at the Door of any
Presbyterian, but the Classical.

.4. That I may do the English Presbyterians Justice, in the representing their
Principles I must consider what the miserable State of the Church was before
Luther; upon what Principles the Protestants went in their Endeavors to reform
the Church; and then evince, that the English Presbyterians stuck firmly to
those Principles, upon which the Separation was made from the Church of Rome.

SECT. II.
The Miserable State of the Church before Luther, the Principles on which the
Reformation was begun and carried on, with a state of the Controversy between
Papist, and Protestant. The English Presbyterians constantly adhered to the
Reformed about Church Government, particularly Cartwright etc.

.1. ABout the time that Luther with many others endeavored a Reformation of
the Church, the Great Evil complained of was the Intolerable Tyranny of the
Ecclesiastics. The People were then so very much under the Power of the
Clergy, that they were perfect Strangers to the least Part of Christian
Liberty, besides, the Inferior Clergy so grievously Oppressed by their
Superiors, and all so much Slaves to the Pleasure of the greatest, that
throughout all Europe, the Miseries of the People were so great and pressing,
that none durst open their Mouths in favor of their Ancient Rights, and
Privileges. Yea,

.2. The Domination, and Tyranny of Popish Prelates, who aimed more at Worldly
Grandeur, than at the advancing Christ's Glory, was grown to such a Height,
that they did whatever was good in their own Eyes, and that they might do it
with the greater Countenance, they asserted, that there was a Catholic Church
Visible; that this Catholic Visible Church was One Governed Corporation, or
Society, under one supreme Governing Power, to which they ascended by sundry
steps, from the Diocesane to the Provincial, from thence to the Patriarchal.

.3. The first Reformers, as many of their Forefathers, such as the
Wickliffists, Hussists, etc. groaning under these Insupportable Burdens, and
thoroughly understanding from whence they had their Rise, laid the Ax to the
Root of the Antichristian Tyranny, denying that there was a Catholic Church
Visible.

.4. Here the Reformed fixed their Foot, affirming, that the Universal Church
was made up only of Elect Believers, and was Invisible: that those special
Privileges, which the Papists appropriated to their Catholic Church Visible,
belonged only to the Invisible Church, and hereby left no foundation for the
raising a Catholic Church Government upon, for Sublato Fundamento tollitur
Opus, and thus their Catholic Government fell to the Ground. The Government,
in Controversy, being External, as well as Catholic, must have a Visible as
well as a Catholic Church for its State; so that where no such Catholic
Church, there can be no such Catholic Government. On the other hand,

.5. The Papists being fully convinced that the Reformers had taken the most
effectual way to subvert their Church Government, and divest them of that
Authority they assumed to themselves over the Consciences of the People, owned
it, and in Opposition unto them, held that there was a Catholic Church
Visible, under an External Polity, or Government. So Alphonsus a Castro advers.
Haeres. Lib. 1. The Wickliffists, Hussists, and Lutheranes do stiffly insist on
the Invisibility of the Catholic Church, and is the strongest Shield they have
to defend themselves against whatever is urged from the Church's Authority,
which is the sharpest Weapon we can use against them. Gregory de Valentina
Anal. Fid. Cathol. lib. 6. Chap. 3. If the Universal Church be Composed only of
those who are Predestined, and truly Righteous, the Government of the Church
of Rome can never be defended. And Rodericus de Arriago confesses, ( de Divin.
sid. Disp. 7.. 1. Number. 3.) That the true Reason, why they lay so much stress
upon this Part of the Controversy, is because the Support of the Papal Power
Depends upon it. Many other Authorities may be at any time produced for the
Confirmation of this Point, but the thing it self is so clear that it is not
needful.

.6. The Reformed in this Kingdom agreed with the Wickliffists, Hussists, and
Lutheranes, owning that the Catholic Church was no otherwise visible, than as
it might be seen in Particular Church Assemblies, which closely examined
amounts to more, than that there is no Church, properly speaking, Visible, but
what is Particular, and no External Church Government but what is seated in
Particular Churches; that the Reforming such Disorders, as cannot be done by
that Power which is Peculiar to Parochial, or Congregational Churches, belongs
to the Civil Magistrate, viz. such as the convening the Assemblies of
Ministers, and the removing Scandalous, Turbulent, and Heretical Teachers. But

.7. If all that Power, which is merely Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, be
appropriated to particular Congregations, then all that Power exercised in
Classical, Diocesane, Provincial, National, Patriarchal, and Ecumenical Synods
or Assemblies, falls to the ground, together with their having Authority to
determine Controversies of Faith; for sublato fundamento tollitur opus, as has
been already observed.

.8. This being for many Years after the Reformation began in this Land,
generally received, the English Presbyterians took Advantage against that Part
of the Church of England, which retaining too much of the Catholic Church
Leven, would fain have preserved somewhat of the old Papal Power. Some feeble
Efforts were put forth in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth and James the First, but
re infecta; and in the Reign of Charles the First, by the help of Archbishop
Laud and his Followers, great Advancements were made toward the Restoring this
Power; But

.9. The general Vogue of the Episcopal, as well as the Cry of the
Nonconformists, being against the Exercise of any such Power, the Difficulties
the Archbishop met with were next to insuperable; especially upon the account
of the Different Copies, about the Twentieth Article of the Church of England,
for as some Copies begin thus, [The Church has Power to decree Rites and
Ceremonies and Authority in Controversies of Faith, it is not Lawful etc.] So
others begin at, [ It is not Lawful, etc.] Whereupon Laud's Party found it
necessary to oppugn the old Doctrine about the Authority and Government of the
Church, and whereas the 20th Article in some Ancient Copies of the Queen's
Reign began at, [ It is not Lawful for the Church to Ordain any thing that is
contrary to God's Word, etc.] 'twas such an obstacle in the way of their
Designs, that they were hard put to it, and found it necessary, if possible, to
remove it. And accordingly

.10. Dr. Heylin, a chief Instrument in this Design, did on the 24th day of
April, Ann. 1627. answer in the Divinity-Schools at Oxon, upon these two
Questions, viz. (1.) An Ecclesia unquam fuit invisibilis? And (2.) An Ecclesia
possit errare? Both which he determined in the Negative. And in stating of the
first, he fell upon a different way from that of Dr. Prideaux, in his Lecture,
De Visibilitate Ecclesiae, and other Tractates of and about that time, in which
the Visibility of the Church, was no otherwise proved, than as scattered
amongst the Waldenses, Wickliffists, Hussists, etc. For Heylin, not liking this
manner of Proceeding, because it utterly discontinued the Succession in the
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy chose rather to look for a Continual Visible Church,
in Asia, Ethiopia, Greece, Italy, and Rome it self.

.11. In the Year 1633. Heylin was at Oxon to Answer for his Degree of Doctor,
and insisted on the Authority of the Church, as formerly he did on the
Infallibility, and Visibility of it. His Questions were (1.) An Ecclesia habeat
Authoritatem in Decernendis fidei Controversiis? (2.) Interpretandi Scripturas?
(3.) Decernendi Ritus and Ceremonias? all which he held in the Affirmative;
declaring it to be the Plain and Positive Doctrine of the Church of England in
the 20th Article, which runs thus, in terminis viz. Habet Ecclesia Ritus sive
Ceremonias statuendi Jus, and in fidei Controversiis Authoritatem: But,

.12. Dr. Prideaux, then in the Chair, expressed great Dissatisfaction with
Heylin, charging him with falsifying the Public Doctrine of the Church, as
others accused Laud and other Bishops, for making this Addition, the better to
support their Power and Tyranny. But, says Heylin, in his Examen Historicum,
Archbishop Laud in his Speech in the Star Chamber, June 15. 1637. made it
appear, that the said Clause was in a Printed Book of Articles, published in
the Year 1563. being but very few Months after they had passed in the
Convocation, which was on the 29th of January, 1562. in the English Account;
and more than so, he showed unto the Lords a Copy of the 20th Article,
exemplified out of the Records, and attested by the hands of a Public Notary,
in which that very Clause was found, which had been charged upon the Bishops
for an Innovation. And thus much I can say of my own Knowledge, that having
occasion to consult the Records of Convocation, I found this controverted
Clause verbatim, in these following words; Habet Ecclesia Ritus statuendi Jus,
and in fidei Controversiis Authoritatem, so far Dr. Heylin, p. 144. who further
adds, That in the Year 1571, (the Puritan Faction beginning to grow very
strong) the Articles were again Printed in Latin and English, and this Clause
left out, Published according to those Copies in the Harmony of Confessions,
Printed at Geneva, Ann. 1612. That the Archbishop in his Speech, p. 71. was of
this Opinion too.

.13. There was, we see, a great deal of stress laid on this Clause of the 20th
Article, because the Assertion, that the Church has Authority in Controversies
of Faith, is so necessary to National and larger Synods and Assemblies, and the
laying aside this Clause so accommodated to the Principles on which the
Reformation was begun and carried on. For which reason I will offer what I know
of this matter, and therein be very impartial.

.14. (1.) That this Clause is not either in the Latin or English Copies,
Printed Ann. 1571. is granted by Dr. Heylin, and I have by me a Copy in Latin,
published by John Day, Ann. 1575. in which it is not. (2.) I have seen a Copy,
Ann. 1563. in which it is, and so it may be in the Records of the Convocations,
as has been suggested, for ought that I do know to the contrary. However (3.) I
do affirm upon my own Knowledge, and in most humble manner address my self to
the present Archbishop of Canterbury, who was of C. C. C. C. to Dr. Green,
Master, and to the worthy Fellows of that College, for their concurrent
Testimony, that in the Manuscript Library, given to that House by Archbishop
Matthew Parker, there are the Articles of the Church of England, which I cannot
call thirty nine because they are more) subscribed by the Bishops, in the Year
1562. with the number of Pages, and of every Line in each Page in which the
Articles are; and that the twentieth Article is exactly the same with the
twenty first of Edward VI. without this Clause; whence I conclude, first, That
the leaving of it out being, as is acknowledged by Archbishop Laud and Dr.
Heylin, most adjusted to the Principles of the Nonconformists, the true and
genuine Reason is, because the first Reformers of the Church of England, and
the Nonconformists were of a mind in this Particular, and opposed the Papal
Tyranny upon the same Foundation. Secondly, That although in the beginning of
the Queen there were some otherwise minded, who added this Clause to the Copy
of 1563. yet the Bishops unanimously adhered to the Copy which laid this Clause
aside. But to return; It is manifest,

.15. That the Old Nonconformists, whom I call English Presbyterians, being firm
Adherers unto the first Reformers, did in their Opposition to the Papal
Tyranny, hold, first, That there was no proper Visible Church, but what was
Particular; secondly, That Particular Churches were of the same Extent with
Single Congregations; and the Power of those in Office was confined to the
Limits of a single Congregation.

.16. The Learned Mr. Cartwright, a Person of that esteem amongst the
Nonconformists in the Reign of the Queen, as to be chosen by them to defend
their Principles against Dr. Whtgift, expressing their sense with much Freedom
and Clearness, I need insist on no other to prove what I affirm of them; and
who-ever is conversant with the Books then written, will see, that their
Authors so generally and frequently referred themselves to his Writings; and so
constantly undertook his Defense as to be satisfied, that the mentioning what
was pressed by others is altogether unnecessary.

.17. This Learned Cartwright, writing in Defense of the Admonition tot he
Parliament, (Published in the Year 1572. Answered by Dr. Whitgift,) does not
only make a Reply to that Answer, which was in the Year 1574. defended by
Whitgift; But in his Reply to this Defense of the Answer, Anno 1575. expresses
himself fully to this effect, I both mention Cartwright's Reply to Whitgift's
Defense of the Answer, and do inculcate it, because Fuller, Heylin, and Walton,
have told the World, that the Defense of the Answer kept the Field with all the
Marks of an absolute Victory; whereas it is most manifest, that Cartwright made
a Reply thereunto in two Parts, the First, Anno 1575. and Anno 1577. he
Published the rest. And what is Remarkable, Fuller, in the same or very next
Page, where he so confidently avers, that Cartwright never Replied to the
Second Answer, does himself refer to the first part of the Reply, that was made
unto it. See his Church Hist. Cent. 16. l. 9. p. 102. Now in the first Part of
this second Reply, Cartwright fully Confirms the Truth of my Assertion, That
every Particular Church should have her Bishop, is manifest by Paul to Timothy.
For seeing the Description of a Bishop which he gives does Agree unto the
Minister of every Congregation, and nothing there required in the one, which is
not in the other, it follows, that the Minister of every Congregation is the
Bishop thereof. For the Description agreeing with every of them, the things
described must likewise. Secondly, unless he do by this description of the
Bishop set forth the nature of every Minister of the Word in his Congregation,
in describing the Offices of the Church he has left out the Principalest
Members, and was more careful in describing the Deacons Ministry, not occupied
in the Word, than the teaching Ministries, But that is absurd; it must follow
that he understood them by the name of Bishop: Furthermore St. Paul's Bishop
was appointed to the same Place, whereunto his Deacons: But his Deacons were
assigned to a Particular Congregation -- St. Paul also there assigning the
Charge and Care of the Bishop over the Church of God, must either give him
Charge over the Whole Body of the Catholic Church, or over One Particular
Congregation; or of the Faithful Company of one House: But he extends not
the Charge over all the Catholic Church, for that were to make a Pope not a
Bishop; nor restrains him to the Faithful of one Household, considering that
he opposes the Government of his House to the Government of the Church: It
follows therefore that he appoints him to one Particular Church. That by
this Word [Church] must be understood one of these three Significations, it
stands upon this Ground; that in none of St. Paul's other Epistles, or St.
Luke's Writings, that word [Church] is ever used otherwise; and never
signifies the Church, either of a Province or Diocese, Rep. 2. Part. 1. p.
360. and in page 687. says he, I have showed that Scripture uses not to call
a Province or Diocese, a Church, but either the whole Universal, or else a
Particular Congregation. Thus you see how Mr. Cartwright does, not only hold a
Presbyter and a Bishop to be the same office, but that the office of a
Presbyter is Appropriated to a single Congregatio, and that the Holy Scripture
never speaks of a Diocesane or Provincial Church, but only of the Universal
(which is Invisible) and a Particular Church, and therefore not of a Classical
Church. But

.18. What I shall offer from the multitude of Nonconformists, whose Sorrows
increased on James the First's coming to the English Throne, will evidence what
I affirm to Persons of the meanest Capacities. For Dr. Ames, who gathered up
the sense of these Old Nonconformists, whom he styles, in his Preface to his
English Puritanism, [Rigid Presbyterians,] declared positively, that they Hold
and Maintain, That every Company, Congregation, and Assembly of true Believers,
joining together according to the Order of the Gospel, in the true Worship of
God, is a true Visible Church of Christ; and that the same Title [ viz. of True
Visible Church] is Improperly given to other Societies, Combinations, or
Assemblies whatsoever -- That Christ Jesus has not Subjected any Church, or
Congregation of his to any other Superior Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction than
unto that which is within it. self. So that if a whole Church, or Congregation,
shall err in any Matter of Faith, and Religion, no other Churches, or Spiritual
Church Officers, have (by any Warrant from the Word of God,) Power to Censure,
Punish or Control the same: But are only to Counsel, or Advise the same, and
leave their Souls to the immediate Judgment of Christ, and their Bodies to the
Sword and Power of the CIVIL MAGISTRATE, who alone upon Earth has Power to
Punish a whole Church or Congregation -- They hold, that every Established
Church ought (as a special Prerogative, wherewith she is endowed by Jesus
ChrisT) to have Power and Liberty to choose their own Spiritual and
Ecclesaistical Officers -- They hold and believe the EQuality in Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, and Authority of Churches and Church-Ministers, is no more
Derogatory and Repugnant to the State and Glory of a Monarch, than the Parity
and Equality of Schoolmasters or Masters of Families. Chap. 2.. 1. 5. 11.
There was also about this time a Protestation of the Kings Supremacy made in
the Name of the Afflicted Ministers, in which they declare. That they confine,
and bound all Ecclesiastical Power within the Limits only of one Particular
Congregation; holding, that the greatest Ecclesiastical Power ought not to
stretch beyond the same: And that it is an ARROGATING PRINCELY Supremacy, for
any Ecclesaistical Person or Persons whosoever, to take upon themselves
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction over many Churches -- That it is utterly unlawful
for any one Minister to take upon himself, or accept of a sole Eclesiastical
Jurisdiction over so much as one Congregation. And therefore some of the most
Honest and Godly in the Congregation, ought to be adjoined to the Minister, in
the Spiritual Regiment of the Souls of the Congregation, of which he is a
Pastor -- That those Ecclesiastical Persons, that make claim to greater Power
and Authority than this, especially they that make claim Jure Divino, of Power,
or Jurisdiction to meddle with other Churches than that one Congregation, of
which they are or ought to be Members, do USURP UPON THE SUREMACY OF THE CIVIL
MAGISTRATE.. 24, 25, 27. And a little before,. 12. We hold that the King has
Power to Remove out of the Churches, all Scandalous, Schismatical, and
Heretical Teachers. And,. 14. That the King only has Power within his
Dominions to Convene Synods, or General Assemblies of Ministers.

.9. Soon after this Protestation, a Christian, and Modest Offer of a most
Indifferent Conference, or Disputation about the Main and Principal
Controversies betwixt the Prelates, and the late Silenced Ministers in England,
was made; in which, viz. P. 2, 3. the Nonconforming Ministers undertook to
prove, That there is no true Visible Church of Christ, but a Particular
Ordinary Congregation only; that every true Visible Church of Christ, or
Ordinary Assembly of the Faithful, has by Christ's Ordinance, Power in it
self, immediately under Christ, to Elect and Ordain, Deprive and Depose their
Ministers; and to Execute all other Ecclesiastical Censures: That the Pastor of
a Particular Congregation is the Highest Ordinary Ecclesiastical Officer in any
true Constituted Visible Church of Christ: That the Civil Magistrates ought to
be the Overseers of Provinces, and Dioceses, and of THE SEVERAL CHURCHES
THEREIN: And it is their Office and Duty enjoined them by God, to take
Knowledge, to Punish and Redress all Misgoverning, or ill Treating of any
Church, or Church Officer.

.10. What is here affirmed by these Deprived Ministers is so full, not only
against the Diocesan, but Classical way, that it may tempt some to take it for
Granted, That whilst I profess to set down the Principles of the English
Presbyterians, I am only describing the Brownists, in which they will, perhaps,
be confirmed, when they consider, that in this same Offer it is asserted, That
the Pastor alone ought not to exercise Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction over his
Church, but others ought to be joined to him by the Assignment of the same
Church, NEITHER OUGHT HE, AND THEY TO PERFORM ANY Main, and Material
Ecclesiastical Act, WITHOUT THE FREE CONSENT OF THE CONGREGATION: However it is
very manifest, that these Nonconformists were far from closing with Brownism,
as appears from what they Answer to the 11th Opposition, in which it is
demanded, [Why do they not wholly with the Brownists separate, and get them to
Amsterdam, to their Holy Brethren there?] Where they Protest, that they are
Persuaded, that many of the Conforming Ministers are true Ministers of Jesus
Christ, endowed with Gifts from Heaven for that Holy Function: And that the
Holy Churches, which they teach are true Churches; which was sufficient to
clear them from the Reproaches of being Brownists.

.11. And as they so freely express their own true Sense in these Matters, so it
is with an Assurance, that none of the Conformable Clergy were so much against
the abovementioned Assertions, which they undertook to maintain, but would
rather Close with them, than Expose themselves to the Lash of such Penalties as
the Deprived Ministers lay under: Their Words are Page 16, 17. The former
Propositions are such, that there will not be found, (as we are verily
persuaded in our Consciences) any one Conformable Minister, except he be a
Masked Papist, that will Refuse to subscribe to ANY ONE OF THEM, if so be it
would please the King and State by Law to Urge them thereunto, under such
Penalties as the Ministers are urged to subscribe unto the Articles, devised by
the Prelates -- Yea, we are out of all doubt, that the Prelates themselves, if
the case stood but upon the saving of their Temporalities, (which else they
should lose) would with HEART, and HAND subscribe to ANY ONE of the aforesaid
Propositions. Besides,

.12. These English Presbyterians were so fully convinced of the Truth of the
aforesaid Propositions, which they offered to defend, that they were persuaded
they were such, that if the Ministers should not constantly hold, and maintain
the same against all Men, they cannot see how possibly (by the Rules of
Divinity) the SEPARATION of our Churches from the Church of Rome, and from the
Pope, the Supreme Head thereof, can be Justified, p. 11. But,

.13. As this offer for a Conference was made in the Year 1606, so 'twas
followed Anno 1609, with a Petition of the Deprived Ministers, in which they
declare themselves (...) As we hold, That your Majesty within your Dominions,
have Power to call Synods, and to Dissolve them, so we hold likewise, that
RULING Synods, and UNITED Presbyteries, exercising Government and Imposing Laws
and Decrees upon several Churches, and the Pastors of them, are not only Humane
Institutions, but in regard of the said Government and Authority of Imposing
Laws altogether UNLAWFUL, and USURPING upon the SUPREMACY of the Civil
MAGISTRATE -- We acknowledge (as has been above remembered) no other Power, and
Authority for the OVERSEEING, RULING, and Censuring of Particular Churches (how
many soever in number) in the Case of their Misgovernment, than that which is
Originally Invested in your Royal Person, and from it derived to such of your
Laity, as you shall Judge Worthy to be Deputed to the Execution of the same
under you; so as the Favor humbly solicited by us is, That whereas our Lord
Jesus has given to each PARTICULAR CHURCH, or ORDINARY CONGREGATION this
Right, and Privilege, viz. To Elect, Ordain, and Deprive her own Ministers;
and to Exercise all other Parts of Lawful Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction under
him. So far the Petitioning Ministers ( P. 13, 14.) who (in P. 18.) say, That
in this Church (speaking of a Particular Church, and the Officers thereof)
which is confined within the Bounds of a Parish; one is a Pastor, another a
Teacher, others Elders, and others Deacons.

.14. These Quotations out of the old English Presbyterians, do sufficiently
evince, that they held, that properly speaking, there was no other Visible
Church, but what was Congregational, that the Power of their Officers is not to
be stretched beyond the Bounds of a single Congregation; that what Power is
needful besides this, for Reforming Particular Churches, is Invested in the
Civil Magistrate, to whom it does also belong to Convene Synods, etc. And it
must be also Remarked,

.15. That in these Instances the English Presbyterian, and the
Congregationalist are most entirely Agreed, as appears, not only from what is
in the Preface to the Savoy Confession, where it is Declared by them in these
Words: As for our selves we are able to trace the Footsteps of an Independent
Congregational way, in the Antientest Customs of the Churches, as also in the
WRITINGS of our soundest Protestant Divines, and (that which we are much
satisfied in) a full Concurrence throughout, in all the Substantial Parts of
Church Government with our Reverend Brethren, the Old Puritan Nonconformists --
See Puritanis. Angl. by Dr. Ames, as the Opinions of Whitehead, Gilbe, Fox,
Dearing, Greenham, Cartwright, Venner, Fulk, Whitaker, Rainolds, Perkins, etc.
But also from what is in the Preface to the English Presbytery, (of which more
in due place) where the Author, mentioning Dr. Ames his Puritanism, adds, To
which Presbytery is, at least, a Piece of a Successor. And thus it continued
till the Meeting of the Assembly of Divines at Westminister in the Year 1641,
without the putting forth of any Efforts for the Classical by Nonconformists.

SECT. III.
The Setting up of the Classical Presbytery in this Land Attempted by the
Scots, and by their Interests in the Assembly at Westminister; but met with so
much Opposition, not only from the INDEPENDENTS, but from sundry others, that
it could never take amongst us.

.1. THE English Presbyterians, considered in Contradistinction unto the
Brownists, and other Dissenters from the Church of England, prevailing from the
beginning of the Reformation, till the Assembly at Westminister, met with some
Check from the Attempts made upon them, as well as upon the Church of England
by the Scots, and their Influence on the Assembly; but the English
Presbyterians were so powerful in this Nation at that time, and the
Independents, who, in the abovementioned particulars, Agreed with the English
Presbyterians, had obtained so great an Interest in the Parliament, and Army,
and the Multitude of them, who Dissented from the Church of England, DOING SO,
upon a Principle that did set 'em as much against the Classical Church
Government, the Obstacles which lay in the way of the Assemblies setting up the
Classical Presbytery, were so many, that they never adventured to Assert the
Divine Right of that Form; and the Parliament would never allow of all the
Assembly presented to 'em. And what was by an Ordinance of both Houses
Established, could never get Reputation enough amongst the People to be
generally Received.

.2. This being a Point of extraordinary Importance, in the present Case, I will
be the more Distinct in my Attempt to clear it. And seeing it is Granted on all
hands, that notwithstanding the most the Scots and their Friends either in the
Parliament or Assembly could do, the People of this Nation could never be
Prevailed with to Submit to the Classical Church Government, I will only show
what were the True Reasons, why it could gain no more amongsts us, and the
rather, because not only Mr. Robert Bailey, in his Disswasive from Error, but
also the Learned Mr. Baxter, in the Narrative he gives of his own Life, p. 73.
do charge the Independents for being the only hinderers. Mr. Bailey with
Unchristian bitterness, and sundry false and Railing Accusations, says, that
all the Prelates and the Papists cannot, nor do hinder so much the work of
Reformation, as the five Dissenting Members, viz. the Independents; But Mr.
Baxter with more temper, says, that the five Dissenting Brethren, Joined with
the Rest till they had Drawn up a CONFESSION OF FAITH, a Larger, and Shorter
Catechism; but when they came to Church Government they engaged them in many
long Debates, and kept that Business as long as possibly they could,
Undetermined; and after that, kept it so long Unexecuted in almost all Parts of
the Land, saving London and Lancashire, that their Party had time to strengthen
themselves in the Army and the Parliament, and hinder the Execution after all,
and keep the Government determined of, a stranger to most of the People of this
Land, who know it but by hearsay, as it was Represented by Reporters. So far
Mr. Baxter, who to the shame of Mr. Bailey (whose Classical Zeal transported him
him beyond all Bounds of Truth, when he Accused the Independents, for
Patronizing all manner of Abominable Errors, and Heresies,) has confuted him,
and done them the Justice of Leaving it on Record, that they Joined with the
Assembly, in the Confession of Faith, larger and shorter Catechism. But

.3. My design is chiefly to clear the Truth and show, that as the Independents
did undoubtedly their Part to hinder the setting up of a National
Church Government, which would have Ruined those Churches, which are of
Christ's Institution; so there were others, who attempted the same that the
Independents did; for both the Prelatists, and the English Presbyterians had,
upon different Reasons, their hands in the Opposition, and also the Body of the
People.

.4. 1. That the Prelatists had their share in the hindering it, is Apparent from
what is in the Letter sent by the Assembly to the Belgic, and other Reformed
Churches, p. 7. in which they declare, That in those Troublesome times the
Honorable Houses of Parliament called the Assembly to give them their best
Counsels for the Reformation of the Church, etc. -- And in this Work (say they)
we are now excercised, though the Enemy has stirred up the Heart of our Dear,
and Dread Sovereign AGAINST us. Now, it is well known that none so Powerful with
the King, as the Church of England, who did, you see, their most to prevent the
Assemblies erecting the Classical Government, by setting his Majesty against
them. But,

.5. 2. The great Impediment that lay in their way, was the Power of the English
Presbyterians, who had Leavened the Gentry as well as the Common People, with
Principles opposite unto the Scotch Church Government, and most conform to the
Rule settled by the first Reformers, in Defense of their Separation from Rome.
And whoever will consider what the Parliament did in Calling, and Directing
their Synod, and in Approving and Rejecting what was Presented to them by the
Assembly, will see reason enough to conclude I am in the Right. For,

.6. 1. This Synod was not called either in the Diocesan, or Classical way, as
Mr. Baxter observes, but the Parliament, as if Resolved to take the English
Presbyterians for their Conduct, chose the Assembly themselves. The Parliament
(says Mr. Baxter, ubi seq.) not intending to call an Assembly, which should
pretend a Divine Right, to make Obliging Laws, or Canons to bind their
Brethren, but an Ecclesiastical Council, to be Advisers to themselves, did
think they best knew who were the fittest to give them Advice, and therefore
chose them all themselve. Thus touching their Calling, which was most Remote
from the Scotch-Classical way, and conform to the English-Presbyterian
Principles, who are only for Persuasive Synods.

.7. 2. This Assembly when thus called, could not proceed by virtue of any
Inherent Power in themselves, but in all their Debates were confined by the
Parliament; so Mr. B. This Assembly was confined by Parliament, to Debate only
such things as they Proposed to them. And many Lords and Commons were joined in
Commission with them, to see, that they did not go beyond their Commission. So
far was this Synod from being formed according to the Classical Model. Whence I
infer,

.8. 3. That one Reason, why the Assembly never adventured upon the settling the
Divine Right of their Government, was because the Parliament would never endure
it. I say, that this is one Reason; for they had another which moved them to
wave the Jus Divinum, namely, their getting the greater Advantage against their
Dissenting Brethren, by putting 'em on the Proof of diverse other General
Propositions, as necessary to evince, that the Presbyterial Government over
many Congregations might not be; Whereas, if the Assembly had Asserted the
Divine Right of the Classical Government, or that it rather should be, the
Debate might have much sooner come to an Issue; but their putting it only on a
[may be,] left it in such Ambiguous and Incomprehensive Terms, as to
necessitate their Opponents to those Delays, that were in this Debate.

But as this was one Reason, so the Parliaments being against the [must be,]
had some Influence on the Assembly, and greatly Distressed them. And that the
Parliament was against their Divine Right, is manifest from their Rejecting
what did in the least look that way, as it is related in the Preface to the
Savoy-Confession, where it is thus. The Honorable Houses of Parliament thought
it not convenient to have Matters of Discipline, and Church Government put into
a Confession of Faith, especially such Particulars thereof as then were, and
still are Controverted and and under Dispute by Men Orthodox and sound in
Faith. The 30th Chapter therefore of that Confession, as it was presented to
them by the Assembly, which is of Church Censures; as also Cap. 31. of Synods,
and Councils, by whom to be called, of what Force in their Decrees and
Determinations. -- These were such Doubtful Assertions, and so Unsuitable to a
Confession of Faith, as the Honorable Houses in their Great Wisdom thought fit
to lay them aside. So manifest it is that the Parliament would never allow of
the Church Government according to the Scotch Model, nor suffer any thing to
look like their Synods having an Obliging Power over their Brethren; and
considering the State of Affairs in that juncture, nothing but a Conviction,
that the English Presbytery was more agreeable to the Scripture Rule, than the
Classical, could have hindered their Compliance with the Scots in this Matter.
It is also further to be observed,

.9. 4. That the Author of certain Considerations tending to Peace amongst
Protestants, Printed by Parkhurst, Anno 1674, does express himself thus, viz.
The late Presbyterian Assembly, if you will have it called so, DIFFERED MUCH
FROM THE ASSEMBLIES OF THE CHURCH of Scotland. They at Westminster (says
Heylin) Attribute Power to the Civil Magistrate, not only of calling Synods,
and Church Assemblies, but also of being Present at them, and to Provide, that
whatever is therein concluded, be done agreeably to the Mind, and Will of God.
As to the Matter of Church Government, the Divine Right of their Presbyteries
-- not a Word delivered. Besides, their National-Assemblies were to be
Subordinate to the Power of the Parliament, -- by the Ordinance of the 14th of
March, which makes it quite ANOTHER THING from the SCOTTISH PRESBYTERIES, and
other Assemblies of the KIRK, which hold themselves to be SUPREME, and
UNACCOUNTABLE in THEIR ACTINGS, without respect to the KING, the PARLIAMENT,
and the Courts of Justice. So Heylin, in his History of Presbyt. p. 476. So
that tho the Scotch and Classical-Presbyterians labored hard to set up their
Government, yet could they not do it. Something of the Shadow of it they had,
but not the Thing, and what they had, gave not satisfaction to the London
Presbyterians. For,

.10. 5. The Presbyterians of the Province of London, considering the
Church Government Established by the Ordinance of March 14. 1645, did, in their
Considerations, and Cautions from Sion-Colledge, June, 19. 1646. declare, That
there is not a Complete Rule of these ORDINANCES: -- That there are many
Necessary things, NOT YET ESTABLISHED; and some things WHEREIN their
Consciences are NOT SO FULLY SATISFIED. And at this time they Published in the
same Paper, Their Joint Resolution to Practice in all things according to the
Rule of the Word, and according to these Ordinances, SO FAR AS THEY CONCEIVE
THEM CORRESPONDENT TO IT. Besides,

S.11. 6. That Part of the Assemblies Confession, which gave most Countenance
to the Classical way, as it was Rejected by the Parliament, so was it hastily
Published from the Scotch Copy, where it had an Approbation; and such is the
Integrity of Zealots for the Classical Government, as to conceal the Approved
Copy from the World, and Publish what never had an Imprimatur from that
Government, which called the Assembly.

.12. These Considerations may convince the Impartial Reader, that how much
soever the English Presbytery took in this Nation from the Beginning of the
Reformation, yet the Classical way would not go down either with the Gentry or
Common People; tho Episcopacy was laid aside, and Scottish Influences very
powerful, yet could not the Parliament be prevailed with to Establish the
Classical Government, and that their having somewhat like it, was enough to
frighten the Sober People of England from a Closure with it. For,

.13. Tho in many Places the Ministers were for it, yet as Dr. Du-Moulin, When
the Presbyterian Government came to the Execution and Practice, there was not
one of ten Thousand of the People, that wuld submit unto it. -- And one of the
Ministers, who was the most Eminent, confessed to me, that being Pastor of the
Greatest Parish, in London, he was never able to establish in it a Consistory,
nor find any that would be of it, but a Pitiful Scotch Tailor. Vid. Confor. of
the Independent Government, with that of the Primitive, p. 36.

.14. The Cheshire Ministers in their Attestation to the Testimony of the
Reverend Brethren of the Province of London, express their Grief, because so
much of the Classical Presbytery as was Established, prevailed so little in
most Places, and impute the true Reasons of it, Partly to the
Mis-representations of it to those that should submit unto it; For to some it
is (say they) rendered FORMIDABLE, as if it were MORE OPPRESSIVE than ever the
Prelacy was; to others DESPICABLE, for want of a Competent Power to proceed to
Effectual Reformation of Offenders: That is, the Parliament annexed no
Penalties to be Inflicted on them, who could not in Conscience conform to this
National-Church-Constitution. Moreover,

.15. There were amongst the Ministers a considerable Number, who entered into
Associations, and set up another sort of Government, comprehending the Moderate
Episcopal, and the Independents, upon the Principles maintained by the English
Presbyterians. For Mr. Baxter, who was an English Presbyterian, was the Great
Promoter of it; who freely declared, he could not agree with the Assembly in
every Point of Government ( ubi sup. P. 73.) and in P. 97. he mentions the
Progress made of their Associating Design.

.16. Thus great Endeavors were, during the time the Assembly sat, for the
bringing in the Classical Church Government, but 'twas so contrary to the
Genius of the Nation, that no sort, neither the Magistrate nor People, could be
entirely for it, nor could the Shadow of it find acceptance amongst us, the
Sober Party, who Dissented from the Diocesans, being for the most part English
Presbyterians, and Congregationalists.

SECT IV.
The ENGLISH PRESBYTERY after the Restoration of Charles II. prevailed again,
and so continued till the late Union commenced. These things shown out of the
Writings of Dr. Collings, and Mr. Baxter.

.1. WHen Charles II. was Restored, soon after the Presbyterians were cast out,
and the Episcopal put into their Places, whereupon the Nonconformists, who were
not of the Independent way, did soon, by their Practice, and the several Books
written in Defense of their Nonconformity, convince their closest Observers,
that they were for those Principles, which the English Presbyterians had from
time to time Asserted. And that thus much may with the greatest Clearness, and
to the most satisfaction be evinced, I will refer to what Dr. Collings, and Mr.
Baxter have offered on this Occasion.

.2. 1. Dr. Collings, who labored much, and wrote well in the Controversy
about Church Government, gives an Account of the main Opinions of those
Ministers, and People in England, who go under the Name of Presbyterians, and
calls his Book ENGLISH PRESBYTERY.

.3. 2. In the Account he gives of their Opinions, he tells us, That they were
for a Catholic Church Visible, which the Old English Presbyterians would never
own; but the it must be observed, that he does not represent them as Asserters
of a Catholic Church Visible, formed into one Governed Society, or an Organick
Body. For he carefully appropriates the Governing Power to fixed single
Congregations, in which the Ruling Officers may have the Knowledge of every
Member under his Care -- His Words are, They Believe, that Christ has
Appropriated Ministers of the Gospel to this Visible Church, who may Preach the
Gospel, and Baptize in any Parts of it, but CAN ONLY Exercise an ordinary
Jurisdiction, in those particular Parts of it, over which God has given them a
particular Oversight as Pastors and Teachers. The Exercise of Acts of
Jurisdiction, REQUIRING A PARTICULAR KNOWLEDGE of PERSONS OPINIONS, KNOWLEDGE,
and CONVERSATION, which no single Person can have as to all the Members of the
Visible Church, P. 6.. 4. and in the same Page, 6. it is added, They Believe
Persons thus set apart, (as in a foregogoing Paragraph) to the Ministry, are
fully Authorized to Preach the Gospel, and to Baptize in any Place, where they
are called to it, AND TO ADMINISTER THE LORD'S SUPPER, when they shall be FIXED
IN ANY CONGREGATION, that they may Administer it knowingly to Persons, that are
able to discern the Lord's Body -- and to EXERCISE ACTS OF JURISDICTION in
THEIR FIXED CONGREGATION. And P. 10.. 2. An Admonition, which is a Church
Censure, is the Act of the whole Congregation, or the officers of it, as well
in the Name of Christ, as IN THEIR NAMES, showing a Person Offending, his
Error from the Word of God, and Exhorting and Warning him to Reform. This they
say, may be often Repeated. -- 4. Excommuniation being the Highest Censure,
they Believe, ought not to be Denounced by any Persons, but those whom God's
Word has appointed thereunto. -- The Persons Decreating it, must be the
Church, by its Officr, or Officers, (they agreeing thereunto --)

.4. 3. The Doctor, in these Paragraphs, as he truly Represents the English
Presbyterians to be of Opinion, that Christ's Ministers may Preach and Baptize,
whenever in the Visible Church they are called so: He adds, That they say, the
Exercise of Jurisdiction belongs to the Minister, as he is fixed to a
Congregation; that he is to Admonish Ecclesiastically in Christ's and the
Churches Names; that the Persons decreeing to Excommunicate, must be the
Church, by the Officer, or Officers; allowwing unto the Christian Magistrate
more Power in these Matters than Classical Presbyterians, as in P. 8, 9, and so
far from making the Catholic Church Visible, a Governed Society, or Organnick
Body, that you see they Appropriate the Power of Jurisdiction unto a fixed a
Congregation, without mentioning a Subordination of Classical, or Provincial
Assemblies of the Ruling Officers, unto a National, or other Greater Synods.
But,

.5. 1. The Learned Mr. Baxter, who about the Nature and Constitution of
Particular Churches, has been more Elaborate, and Convincing than most, in
Desending their Nonconformity unto the Church of England, does most exactly
describe the English Presbyterians, fetching his Arguments from the
Inconsistency there is between the Diocesan Government, and the Specific Nature
of Christ's Instituted Churches, Ministry, and Discipline. And,

.6. 2. That he may the more clearly show where the Strength of his Arguments
does lie, he distinguishes between particular Instituted Churches, and the
Catholic Church Visible; affirming, that they are Specifically Distinct from
each other, upon the account of the different sorts of Communion, that are had
in a Particular, and in the Catholic Church. For, says he,

.7. 3. Communion, which is the Essentiating End of these Societies, is twofold,
The One sort is in the same Species, or kind of Worship only; and the other, in
the same Individual Acts of Worship: Adding, that the Communion, which is in
the same kind of Worship only, may be between them, who are at the greatest
distance from each other, and consequently with every Member of the Catholic
Church Visible, which therefore he calls Catholic Communion, and seeing it
can be only in kind, it cannot be more visible, as such than the Species of
things are. But Communion, in the same Individual Acts of Worship, is by
joining in the same Ordinances of the Word, Prayer, and Lord's Supper, and
they, who have Communion with each other, in this way, must meet in the same
Place, at one and the same time, and it is therefore called Personal-Presential,
or Local Communion, which is therefore Proper, and Adaequate to a particular
Congregational-Church. This is a thing that must be Inculcated, viz. Communion
in the same Individual Acts, can be had only in a single Congregation, because
there alone they can actually join in the same Worship; whence it necessarily
follows,

.8. 4. That that Communion which is stretched beyond the Bounds of one single
Congregation, being only in the same kind of Worship, is of the same sort with
Catholic Communion. And seeing the Members of a Diocesan, or Classical Church
can have no other Communion with each other than what is Catholic, they want
that Communion, which is Essential unto those particular Churches which are of
Divine Institution, and specifically distinguished from the Catholic Church.
And on the other Hand, the Asserting Diocesan, or Classical to be particular
Churches of the Lowest Rank and Order, is quantum in se, a destroying Parish,
or Congregational Churches; and as stretching particular Churches to a larger
Extent, is to make the Ends of their Constitution impossible to be attained: As
Mr. Alsop, in his Misch. of Impos. It is very Lawful to build a Ship, or a Man
of War as big as two or three Yachts, which may do better Service; but it is
folly to make one that would reach from Calais to Dover, which must lie like a
Log unmeet for Sailing, and the Ends for which all Ships are Built. Which he
mentions to show, that the extending a particular Church beyond the Bounds of a
single Congregation, does frustrate the End of its Institution; or, as Mr.
Baxter has it, makes the Impossibility of Christ's Discipline in our Churches
undeniable.

.9. 5. This Point being with much earnestness stated by this Learned Person, he
declares in the Narrative he wrote of his own Life, P. 339. "That one Charge,
which the Nonconformists brought against our Prelacy is, That it destroys the
Species, or Form of Particular Churches, Instituted by Christ. The Churches
Instituted by Christ, are [ Holy Societies, Associated for PERSONAL Communion
under their Particular Pastors.] But all such Societies are Destroyed by the
Diocesan Frame. -- Ergo, It is destructive of the Form of Particular Churches
Instituted by Christ. They [ viz. the Nonconformists,] distinguish between [
Personal, Local Communion of Saints by Pastors, and their Flocks] and [
Communion of Heat only -- ] we have Heart-Communion with all the Catholic
Church throughout the World -- But [a Holy Communion of Souls, or Individual
Persons, as Members of the same Particular Church, for Public Worship, and a
Holy Life] is ESPECIALLY distinct from the former, as is apparent by the
Distinct End: 2. The Distinct Manner of Communion; yea, and the Matter of it.
And, in his Treatise of Episcopacy, more fully. We cannot Subscribe to that
Form of Church Government as God, or Lawful, which in its Nature Excludes or
Destroys the ver Specifical Nature of the Particular Churches, which were
Instituted by the Holy Ghost, and settled in the Primitive Times --

But such we take the present Diocesan Form to be. Ergo,

The Major will be denied by very few that we have to do with. -- The Minor I
thus prove.

The Species of a Particular Church, which the Holy Ghost did Institute, was
[One Society of Christians united under one or more Bishops, for PERSONAL
COMMUNION^ in Public Worship, and Holy Living.

The Diocesan English Frame is [ Destructive of, or] Inconsistent with the
Species of a Particular Church.

Ergo, The Diocesan English Frame is Inconsistent with (or Destructive of) the
Species of the Holy Ghost's Institution.

In the Major, 1. By [Bishops] I mean Sacred Ministers, Authorized by Divine
Appointment, to be the STATED Guides of the Church, by Doctrine, Worship, and
Discipline.

By [Personal Communion] I mean, That the said Churches were no more numerous
than our English Parishes, nor had more Assemblies; or no more than could have
the same Personal Communion; and that there were never any Churches, Infimae
vel primae Speciei, which consisted of many such Stated Assemblies. I shall
therefore now Prove, That the Churches of the Holy Ghost's Institution, were no
more Numerous, or were such Single Congregations.

1. From the Holy Scriptures.

2. From the Confession of the Diocesans.

3. From the Testimony of Antiquity.

All proving fully, That the Ancient Episcopal Churches, were but such single
Societies, or Congregations, as I have described.

.10. 6. What Mr. B. here affirms, respects chiefly the Communion of the Church,
and upon this account he does from the Specifical Difference there is between
Catholic, and Particular Church Communion; and from the Inconsistence there is
between Diocesan, and Parish, or Congregational Churches; and the Destructive
Nature of the Diocesan Government, as it is framed to destroy Congregational
Churches; from these Topics, he brings those Arguments, by which he defends
our Nonconformity to the Church of England, which he could never have done,
were he not full well assured, that the Nonconformists generally held
Particular Churches to be Congregational. And,

.11. 7. That he was satisfied his Arguments were as much against Classical, as
they were against Diocesan Churches, evidently appears by what he has in his
Treatise of Episcopacy, Part 1. C. 7. P. 120. when he says, That by a Diocesan
Church, WE mean all the Christians within that Circuit, who have but one Bishop
over them, though they be of MANY PARISH CHURCHES, yea FEW PRESBYTERIANS take the
Word so Narrow as this. For, (I think) too many of them do with Rutherford
Distinguish between a Worshipping Church, and a Governing Church, (and SADLING
THE HORSE FOR PRELACY TO MOUNT ON) do Affirm, that many (about Twelve usually)
of these Worshipping Churches, like our Parishes) may make but one Governed, or
Presbyterial Church.

.12. What more directly belongs to the Government of the Church, we shall
consider, if God will, elsewhere; and will only Note in this place, That
whoever will consult Mr. Baxter's Treatise of Episcopacy, and what he says of
the Ministry and Discipline of Christ's Instituted Churches, will find that the
English Presbyterians, whom he describes, were as much against the Classical
Presbytery, as the Congregationalists are. We will in the next propose the
Sentiments of those English Presbyterians, who entered into an Union with their
Congregational Brethren.

SECT. V.
The Difference between the Classical Presbyterian, and the Congregationalist
stated. The Design of the late Union, and the Principles, upon which 'twas
founded, consistent with the Established National Chuch Form, and such as
Justify the Separation of the First Reformers from Rome. The Classical odel
Destructive of them, and therefore Rejected.

.1. THAT it may be the more easily understood what Principles the
Presbyterians, who were Men of Sense and Integrity, must be supposed to be of,
when they United with their Congregational Brethren; I will give an Impartial
State of the Controversy about the Nature and Power of Instituted Churches, as
discussed by them, who were for the Classical Church Government, and by the
Independents forty or fifty Years ago.

.2. This Controversy, as to that part of it which concerns my present Purpose,
may be reduced to these Heads.

1. Whether there be a Catholick-Visible-Political-Church?

2. Whether there be a Particular Church Essential Vnorganiz'd, vested with a
Power to choose their own Officers? Or, An Ecclesia Institute sit Genus? An
Integrum?

.3. In the Writings of Cawdrey, Hudson, Hooker, Stone, Allen, Sheppard, and the
Dissenting Brethren of the Westminster Assembly, there being an Impartial State
of this Controversy, I will, out of their Writings, set it in as clear a Light
as I can.

.4. 1. The Learned Mr. Cawdrey, who agrees in Opinion with the Judicious Mr.
Hudson, and the London Ministers in their Jus Divinum, does, in his Vindiciae
Vindiciarum, and Review of Mr. Hooker's Survey, declare not only for a Visible
Catholic Church, but That this Visible Catholic Church may, in a fair and
candid Sense, be said to be POLITICAL, and that the Notion of CHURCH-ESSENTIAL,
or HOMOGENOUS, is but the Modus, or State of a Church, applicable both to the
whole Chuch, and every complete Congregation, consisting of Visible Saints and
Officers -- But, it is not possible there should be an Essential-Church
existing without Officers -- If we would speak exactly, neither a Classis of
Officers Assembled, nor a Company of Visible Saints combined, can properly be
called a Church. They [ viz. the Independents,] deny a Classis of Officers to
be a Church; and We [who are for Classes,] deny a Company of Saints, combined
without Officers to be a Church, being both of them but PARTS of a Church; part
of the Matter of a Church, and therefore PROPERLY no Church. The Truth is, though
both a Classis, and a Company of Saints combined without Officers, have by
Custom, obtained to be called Churches, yet PROPERLY they are but Parts or
Members of the whole Church diversely combined -- But we add, If we will speak
exactly, a Particular Congregation consisting of Officers and Members, is not
PROPERLY a Church, but a Member of the Catholic Visible POLITICAL Church --
And, if they, much more some Members of that Member; Visible Saints, without
Officers, are Improperly called a Church -- Again, here lies one of the great
Mistakes in the Independent way, That they imagine a Church without, and before
any Officers, and then give them Power to make Officers. -- So far the Learned
Mr. Cawdrey.

.5. 2. The Judicious Mr. Hudson, states the Controversy after the same manner,
but more elaborately, and with greater Logical Exactness, and expressly affirms
the Catholic Church Visible to be a Totum Integrale, or POLITICAL Society; to
be a Corporation, or Body Politic, in which there is a Governing, and Governed
Part. And on the Supposition, that the Catholic Church Visible is a Totum
Integrale, 'twill unavoidably follow, as Learned Mr. Calamy has happily
expressed it in his Preface to Mr. Hudson, that the Congregational Government
is not right. The Truth is (says he) the Position there held forth, would
utterly overthrow the Grounds and Pillars of the Congregational Government; for
if there be a Catholic Church Visible, and this Church be not only a Church
Entitive, but a Church Organical, and a Totum Integrale, having all Church
Powers habitually seated in the Officers of it, which they have Commissions
from Christ to Exert, and put into Act upon a Lawful Call; and if particular
Congregations are Integral Parts and Members of the Church Catholic, as the
Jewish Synagogues were of the Jewish Church; and if the Ministry, Orders, and
Censures were given by Christ, first to the Church General Visible, and
secondarily to the Church Particular, then 'twill follow, that the particular
Congregation is not the First Receptacle of Church Power; and that all Church
Power is not Entirely and Independently in a particular Congregation. So far
Mr. Calamy, to whom I add, That according to this Notion, Visible Saints
combined for Church Communion without Officers, are not a Church Essential, and
have not a Power to choose Officers, etc. For upon this Principle, it is
manifest, yea it is owned, That to the Catholic Church Visible, which is a
Totum Integrale, or an Organized Body, a POLITICAL Church, the Administration
and Immediate Participation of Government, and all other Ordinances are firstly
and immediately given; yea further, it must be granted, that particular
Churches, whether Congregational or Classical, Provincial or National, are not
Properly Churches, but Integral Parts of the Catholic Visible POLITICAL
Church; that whoever is a Visible Christian, has an Immediate Right to all
Ordinances; and that the Relation of every Minister is firstly and habitually
unto the Catholic Church Visible, and secondarily to this or that Particular
Church, which is not Properly a Church; that wherever any single Christian
comes, he is a Member of the Particular Church in that Place, and has a Right
to all Ordinances, tho he never joined himself to any; and whoever is ordained,
he is a Pastor of the Catholic Church, may Administer all Ordinances, whither
soever he comes, and Excommunicate Delinquents. Though, for Order sake, his Power
is not exercised, yet the Power remains Entire in every Ordained Minister, even
in them who are called to take the Charge of any particular Church.

.6. 1. On the other hand, the First Reformers of all Persuasions subverted this
Notion in their Opposition unto the Papists, by denying such a thing as a
Visible Catholic Church, Sublato Fundamento tollitur opus. And they who now
own, that the many Visible Christians, scattered through the World, may be
called the Catholic Church Visible, yet do strenuously oppugn its being a
Political Church. And these Congregationalists affirm the Church Catholic
Visible to be Totum Universal, Genericum, or as they sometimes express it, a
Totum Essentiale; that this Totum Genericum gives Essence unto its Species, or
Parts, and is its Cause, and in order of Nature before its Species, as a Cause
is before its Effects, But then it must, (to prevent mistake) be carefully
observed, that by [Church Universal Visible] they mean a Congregational, or a
Particular Church Essential, which including the General Nature of a Church,
they call General or Universal; but such as has (where the Combination is) its
Essentials existent, antecedently to the Consideration of its being an
Integrum, or a Body Politic, and as such is dressed with a Power of choosing
its Officers, and of becoming thereby a Totum Integrale, or an Organick Body.

.7. 2. Fit Matter Combined, before formed into an Organick Body, is, (with
them) the Church Essential; the only immediate Seat of Church Power; or, to
express it in the Words of Mr. Allen and Mr. Sheppard, ( Def. of the Nine
Proposit. p. 88.) The true Form of all Church Societies, Instituted by Christ,
to which he has given the actual Administration, and Immediate Participation
of Church Government, and all other Instituted Ordinances, as the Subject
thereof, is Congregational.

.8. These two Reverend Brethren do not, (I confess) think themselves obliged to
encumber this Controversy with those Logical Niceties of a Totum Genericum, a
Totum Integrale, yet do they hold, That the true State of this Controversy
lies here, concerning the NATURE, ORDER, and FORM of such Visible Societies, as
Christ Jesus, by Divine Institution in the Gospel, has reduced his Visible
Members unto, for the Actual and Immediate Enjoyment of all his Instituted
Ordinances. And the Chain of their Principles lies thus.

First, There is a Particular Church Essential, which is Congregational; this
Congregation is made up of Visible Saints, who upon their Mutual Consent and
Agreement to walk together according to Gospel Rule, have an Immediate Right to
Stated Communion in all the Special Ordinances of the Gospel; that as they have
Power to Combine together, as aforesaid, so being combined, they have a Power
of choosing their own Officers, as being furnished with such, have received
Authority from Jesus Christ to Exercise Government, and of enjoying all
Ordinances of Worship within themselves.

.9. These then are the Points wherein Mr. Cawdrey, Hudson, and others, who were
for the Classical Churches and Government, differed from the old
Nonconformists, and the English Presbyterian and Congregationalist. For, the
Ecclesiastical Presbyterians held the Catholic Church Visible to be a Body
Politic; the first Seat of all Ordinances, and that the Pastor's Office was
with Relation to the whole Catholic Church; that they might Administer all
Ordinances of Worship and Discipline wheresoever they came. The Congregational
Presbyterian, in opposition unto 'em, denied the Catholic Church Visible to be
a Body Politic, or Governed Society, that Visible Saints combined for
Communion in all Odinances, whilst without Officers, were a particular Church
Essential; tha these Churches had Power to choose their own Officers; and that
the Ruling Power of these Officers was confined within the Bounds of
Congregational Particular Churches.

.10. Well then let us in the next place compare these distinct Notions with the
late Heads of Agreement, and see whether the United Brethren fell in with the
English Presbyterian Principles in this Matter, or not?

.11. 1. If we do but impartially observe the Design of this Agreement, we shall
find it to be nothing else than an Improvement of our Liberty, in such a way as
may most effectually convince them of the Church of England, that nothing is
more Remote from our Thoughts, than a making the least Incroachment upon, or in
any wise an Intermedling with the National Church Form; and whereas the
Congregational and English Presbyterian Principles are best adjusted to this
end, as well as most Conform to the Gospel Rule, we took special care in
drawing up the Agreement, to Assert, and Explain their Principles. And
therefore, as we did in the Preface, and in the Title of the first Page,
positively declare against Intermedling with the National Church Form: So,

.12. 2. We did express our Dislike of that Principle, on which either a
Diocesan, or Classical Church Government, is erected: For by the first Article
in the first Section, the Catholic Churches being a Totum Integrale, a Society
under an External Polity or Government, is Disclaimed in these Words, viz. But
as for the Notion of a Visible Catholic Church, as it may signify its having
been collected into any Formed Society, under a Visible Head on Earth; whether
one Person singly, or many collectively, we, with the rest of Protestants, do
UNANIMOUSLY DISCLAIM IT.

.13. 3. Agreeably hereunto, a particular Church ESSENTIAL, with its Rights and
Liberties, is Asserted, and Described, first more generally, Art. 2. We Agree,
that particular Societies of Visible Saints, who under Christ their Head are
statedly joined together for ORDINARY COMMUNION with one another in ALL THE
Ordinances of Christ, are Particular Churches. That is to say, a Congregation
of Visible Saints, statedly joined together for these Ends. So that here is a
Particular Church Essential asserted, that this particular Church Essential is
Congregational also cleared, and as such agreed unto; for it is said, that they
are statedly joined together for ORDINARY Communion with one another, in all
the Ordinances of Christ, which cannot be but in one single Congregation. But,

.14. 4. There is special care taken to secure this Principle by declaring in
the second Article, That these Societies are to be owned by each other for
Instituted Churches of Christ, than which nothing can be more plainly
delivered, in opposition to the Classical Government.

.15. 5. This particular Congregational Church Essential, is more particularly
described as to its Matter and Form, Art. 3. and 4. Besides,

.16. The Right of this Church Essential to choose its own Officers, is secured
by Art. 6. That each Particular Church has Right to choose their own Officers,
and being furnished with such as are duly Qualified and Ordained according to
Gospel Rule, HAS AUTHORITY from Jesus Christ, for EXERCISING GOVERNMENT, and
of Enjoying ALL the Ordinances of Worship WITHIN IT SELF. This then being the
Turning Point between those who are for a Catholic Church Government, and
these, who are for a Particular Congregational Government; I will be the more
distinct in showing what depends on a Right, or wrong stating it.

.17. 1. If this Article contains not the Truth, then indeed the Cause must be
yielded to the Classical, Diocesan, Provincial, National, Patriarchal, and
Papal Church Government. For, upon the same Reason the Government is stretched
beyond a single Congregational, to a Classical Church, it must be carried to
the outmost Bounds of the Catholic, which is the Papal: For it is impossible
to carry it to a Classical, or Diocesan, upon any other Reason, than as it is a
Larger part of the Catholic Church Polity, which still must pay a Deference
unto a Larger, until you come to a larger than that, and at last to the Largest
of all, viz. the Papal; which is a Truth that has been so fully cleared by Mr.
Baxter, and is in its own Nature so very Plain and Obvious, that a small
Measure of Attention will help an ordinary Capacity to see into it.

.18. 2. But, if this Article, of the United Brethren DOES contain the Truth,
and a particular Church Essential has Power to choose its own Officers; and
being furnished with such, has received Authority from Christ to exercise
Government, and enjoy all Ordinances of Worship within it self, then it
unavoidably follows, that Congregational Churches are in a Proper Sense
Particular Churches; that all Church Power does firstly belong unto them; and
that Classical, Provincial, National, Patriarchal, Churches are not Properly
Churches, nor have they a Power over Particular Congregational Churches.
Besides,

.19. 3. If the United Brethren, namely, the English Presbyterian and
Congregationalists, do herein Assert no more than they are Authorized to do by
the Gospel of our Lord Jesus, then the First Reformers in their Separation from
ROME, and their setting up Churches of another sort, than what were established
by the Pope, did no more than what they were empowered by Jesus Christ himself
to do, as will clearly appear by an Impartial Proposal of the Judgment of the
Learned Gilbertus Voetius, Meinardus Shottanus, and Carolus de Maetz, Divinity
Professors at Vtrecht, which upon such Mighty Considerations, as relate to the
Vitals of the Reformation they gave, in the resolving some Cases proposed unto
them, on the Forming that Particular Church, of which one Mr. Park was chosen
Pastor, who has said enough to justify what the United Brethren have Asserted
about a Particular Church ESSENTIAL, and the Power of choosing her own
Officers. Consider then that the Questions proposed were,

1. Whether such Faithful Persons, as without the Authority of any
Ecclesiastical Society, either Classical, or Presbyterial, by Combination
forming themselves into a Society for Communion, in the Ordinances of the
Gospel, may be Acknowledged to be ESSENTIALLY a Church?

2. Whether this Church ESSENTIAL has Power to choose a Pastor?

To the first they answer, That it is, and may be said to be Essentially a True
Church of Christ, [ Distinguenda est, (say they) Ecclesiae Particularis
Essentia ab INTEGRITATE, and Perfectione ejus ORGANICA, Voet. Pol. Eccles.
Part. 1. Lib. 1. Cap. 3.] to wit, an External, Visible, Instituted, Parochial,
Particular Church. Their fourth Reason for it is this. If the contrary Opinion
should be admitted, we cannot (say they) see what may be the Consequences
thereof, with respect to those Difficult Controversies with the Papists, about
the Perpetual Succession of the Churches some Years before Luther, about their
Separation from Rome; about the first Gathering and Constituting Reformed
Churches; and calling of Ministers before, with, at, and since the Reformation.

.20. The Strength of what they offer on this Occasion, lies here; namely, in
case Visible Saints combined for Communion in the Ordinances of the Gospel,
have Power, by Virtue of Jesus Christ's Institution, to call and choose their
own Officers: The first Reformers, in combining thus, and choosing their own
Officers, acted in pursuance of the Authority given 'em by Jesus Christ, and
are Justified. But had they not such a Power, their Case is not easily
defended. These Great Divines therefore in Answer to the second Enquiry,
affirm, That a Church Essential has a Power belonging unto it, to call a
Pastor. So that these Learned Men, have urged Arguments sufficient to justify
what the United Brethren have done, in defining a Church Essential, and in
showing how it becomes an Integral, Organical, Political Body: And what they
have urged from the Consideration of the Fatal Consequences of the contrary
Doctrine, with respect to the First Reformation, has enough in it to satisfy
any considering Mind about the Reasons that have Influenced the United
Brethren, to fix their Foot on this Principle about a Particular Church
Essential, in the framing the Heads of their Agreement. Once more,

.21. As the United Brethren have Asserted Particular Churches to be
Congregational, so it is evident, they have confined the Power of their Officers
to their own Churches: For in the Section of Communion with other Churches,
Art. 2. it is agreed, That none of our Particular Churches shall be Subordinate
to one another; each being endowed with Equality of Power from Jesus Christ;
and that none of the said Particular Churches, their Officer, or Officers,
shall Exercise any Power, or have any Superiority over any other Church, or
their Officers. So clear it is, that this Article, by denying unto one Officer
singly, and to many Officers collectively, any sort of Power, or Superiority
over one another, does lay an impregnable Bar against the setting up of
Classical, Provincial, or National Assemblies, invested with a Power to govern
Congregational Churches. For, it must be acknowledged, that in forming the late
Heads of Agreement, special care was taken to convince them of the Church of
England, that there was no place for us to make the least Encroachments on the
Established National Church Form; That the Mounds and Barriers we raised to
keep all within the Confines of the Tolleration granted us, were such, that no
sincere Approver of the Union, can have any Hand in erecting any thing like a
National Church Form; and therefore can never be for Classical, Provincial or
National Assemblies of Ministers: Their going about any such thing, is a
breaking down the strongest Mounds, a violating the most Solemn Engagements,
and a tearing up the very Foundation, on which the late Union was built, which
can never be answered to our Country Brethren, nor to their own Consciences,
much less unto a Holy and Jealous God. For,

.22. By the Heads of Agreement, as all that Church Power we claim is confined
to Particular Congregational Churches, and a Superiority of Power denied to any
one Officer or Officers of Churches; so Particular Churches were no further
concerned to give any account of their own Actings, beside what the Civil
Magistrate requires, but what on some special Occasions might be needful in a
Brotherly way to Neighbor Congregations when desired, and 'twas for the
removal of Scandals, or the rectifying Mistakes. But for stated Classical,
Provincial, or Natural Assembles, and the coming under the Obligation of making
a Diligent Observation, and a Faithful Report of the State of their
Congregations, unto any of those larger Assemblies, there is not one Word in
our Agreement. Nor, can any of our Number consent that our Ministers should
take upon 'em the Office of stated Inquisitors, or Informers: For, as such an
Employ is as likely to Ruin, as it is to serve its chiefest Contrivers, so
it is Unworthy of Men, in so Holy a Function, and contrary to that Work, Christ
Jesus has called his Ministers unto; which, lying in strenuous Endeavors to
further the Salvation of them committed to their care, cannot be faithfully
performed, but by keeping within the Pale of their Single Congregations. And
seeing this is what is granted to us by the Toleration, to which we have
hitherto confined our selves, we declare it to be our Firm Resolution, always
to do so; being as much Dissatisfied with that Church-Form, which endangers the
Established Church, as any in that Church can be, For,

.23. That very Form of Church Government, which alone can give just Ground of
Suspicion, is as Destructive of those Churches we believe to be of Divine
Institution, as it can be of the Established Church Form. The Jure Divino
Classical Government, that Rivals it with the Episcopal, does as really destroy
Congregational Churches, by making them but Parts of a Proper Church, as it
would subvert the Diocesan, were it set up amongst us. Yea, if we more closely
look into this Matter, we shall find the Classical Government more Hurtful to
our Church way, than it can be to theirs, seeing it allows of Diocesan, under
the Name of Classical, and strikes only at their Rulers, and not at their
Church State, whilst it Vnchurches all our Congregations, and Divests the
Officers of that Power, which we think Christ has given them; and are therefore
more Formidable unto, and Dreaded by us, than by the Church it self; which
Consideration will, we hope, satisfy our Superiors, and every thoughtful
Person of the Church, That they are in no Danger from us.

.24. That they destroy our Church way, is farther evident, in that they bring
every Paroch and Congregation under the Government of their Classical, and
other Larger Assemblies, by the Obligation of a Divine Law; and that they may
to their own greater Satisfaction, prove thus much, they make the Catholic
Church Visible to be one Governed Society, or Body Politic, which must
necessarily be under a Governed Head, either of One single Person, or of many
Collectively; whereby they run so far, as to destroy not only Congregational
Churches, but to subvert that very Principle, upon which the Reformation was
begun in this Land, and do lay a Foundation for that Papal Antichristian
Power, which in its Exercise, has shed the Blood of Thousands, who are now
under the Altar, crying, How long Holy and True do thou not Avenge, etc. and
against which, we have, by the Oath of Supremacy Sworn: So that though we agree
with our Classical Brethren of Scotland, in affirming Bishops and Presbyters to
be of the same Order, (which only is against the Divine, not REGAL Right of
Episcopacy) and do greatly Honor them for their Zeal against Superstition, and
Profaneness, and for their Soundness in the Faith; yet must declare, in the
Words of Mr. Baxter, [in his Discourse against the Revolt to a Foreign
Jurisdiction, which would be to England, its PERJURY, CHURCH-RUINE, and
SLAVERY, Page 365.] That we are Displeased with those Scots, that have
causelessly Quarreled with the Oath of Supremacy, and SO HELPED TO Open a Door
to a FOREIGN JURISDICTION, which the Kingdom is Sworn against. And therefore we
cannot, in Confcience, have any Hand in setting it up in this Nation. However
we must do 'em so much Justice as to add,

.25. That we are fully persuaded, their Soundness in the Faith is such, that
they will never approve of the late Classical Project, as it is designed by some
of its Contrivers. The true Faith has obtained so great an Interest in their
Hearts, that they will never be wheedled to join in the same Comprehension with
either Quaker, or Unitarian, though they pretend a Zeal for the Classical
Government. If then the late Projectors propose their Model with an Expectation
to decoy our Scotch Brethren into a Compliance with it, they will find
themselves, I doubt not, to have greatly failed in their Politics; seeing, in
the Issue, their Project cannot but appear to be as vain, as the Unitarians
threatening the Church of England to be for the Classical way, is Ridiculous,
which yet they have done, as may be seen in their Agreement with the Catholic
Church, P. 13. where it is thus: I wish the Church had not given, and may never
give cause to the Unitarians, either by Exclusion, or Persecution, to have
Recourse to Mr. Calvin's Expedient.

.26. I might here take notice by whom this Classical Model was hatched, and how
it was nourished under the Encouragement and Warrant of a late State-Minister,
and was, in its first Projection to be of the same Extent and Comprehension
with the Friendly Society, that there might be a more easy Coalescence, when
it should be most for the Advantage of those that were at the Head of it. But
to be over nice in the Enquiry, were to make the thing it self now too
considerable. For whatever might have been expected from so hopeful a Design,
whilst it was to be carried on with all possible Privacy, it has the
Misfortune, like some Medicines, and Perfumes, to lose both its Virtue and
Savor too, by being exposed to the open Air. But, if we consider it in the
first Contrivance, it would be hard to give an Instance of a more Bold and
Undigested Undertaking ever attempted by Thinking Men, which makes it the more
surprising to find a Statesman tampering with it, were it not that some Men
delight in Paradoxes, of which of late Years, we have had not a few Instances;
and how far it is from being one, to think either, that our Brethren in
Scotland could be prevailed upon by these Gentlemen, or the Orthodox Church of
England frighted with the Ghost of a Classical Government; I leave Wiser Men to
judge.

To Conclude.
.27. When our Governors, in their great Wisdom, shall consider how strongly
the Principles of the English Presbyterians, and Congregationalists, do Oblige
'em to confine themselves to Matters merely Spiritual, in their single
Congregations, how many Barriers are in pursuance of their Principles, set up
against their Intermedling with the National Church Form; and that the very
Government, from which alone they are in danger, if it should prevail, would at
the same time destroy that Church Form, for which we plead, will be fully
satisfied in that Security our Principles do give unto them. Nor can we think,
that our Nobility and Gentry will be fond of a Jure Divino National Church
Government of any sort, much less of the Classical; which though it has been in
most Esteem amongst the Presbyterian Nobility and Gentry in Scotland, yet now
is become too heavy a Yoke for them to bear; who therefore have lately
discovered their disbelief of its Divine Right, by a Legal Establishment of
several Parochian Congregational Churches, exempt from the Classical
Government; which they would never have done, had they been of Opinion, that
the Classical way was enjoined them by a Divine Unalterable Law; so that as the
Divine Right of the Classical Presbytery could never be Established in England,
in like manner it is not like to continue much longer in Scotland. And,
considering the true State of Affairs Ecclesiastical, at this time, we have
good Reason to hope, That as the Divine Right of any other National Church
Government, never yet gained a Legal Settlement amongst us, so it never will;
and that therefore we may, upon good Grounds, reckon our selves to be, in point
of our Liberty, Safe: For, as our Principles will not suffer us to harm the
Church; so our Legislators will never bring themselves and Posterity into the
Bondage of any Jure Divino National Church, upon which Account, and no other,
can they think themselves obliged to disquiet Peaceable Dissenters.

FINIS.

