THE PRIVATE LEAGUE Betwixt the LATE KING JAMES II. And The FRENCH KING.

LICENSED,

May 2. 1689. J. Fraser.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE PRIVATE LEAGUE BETWIXT The Late King JAMES the Second, AND
THE FRENCH KING.

In a LETTER from a Gentleman in London, To a Gentleman in the Country.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXIX.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE Private League BETWIXT THE Late King JAMES the Second, and
the French King.
In a Letter from a Gentleman in London to a Gentleman in the Country.
SIR,
I Am surpised at the unbelief which your Letter informs me, has seized some
of your Neighbors, who after a publication in Print, that in the Year 1670*
there was a League concluded between Lewis the Fourteenth, and Charles the
Second, for the Introducing of Popery into England, Scotland, and Ireland, by
overturning the Fundamental Laws of the Land, have the face still to demand,
where the so much talked of League is, between Lewis the Fourteenth, and James
the Second. They complain, say you, that those who had given them hopes of
seeing the Original Treaty, have not been as good as their words. To speak the
truth, Sir, I find something in this their unreasonable proceeding, that at
once surprises and confounds me. I never knew that our Nation had the ill
repute in the world of being senseless and stupid: Our behavior in a case that
concerned our Religion and Liberty, has made it conspicuous to all Europe, that
we know the importance of the one and the other, and that we are not insensible
when such dear Interests lie at stake. But in the mean time, what will all
Europe think, when they hear that some English men do still doubt of a matter
so evident, and are resolved to continue so, till they see the Original of that
League produced, and have liberty to peruse it. King James say they, has flatly
denied that he had made any such League with France. First, By the Marquis d'
Albyville at the Hague, 5. October. 1688. in the Memorial he presented to the
Deputies of the States General. Secondly, since the Prince of Orange's
Declaration had renewed this Suspicion against him, the Earl of Sunderland has
lately writ from Holland, that he knew nothing of any such League.

These, forsooth, are the two convincing proofs they rely upon, who will needs
doubt of this matter of fact, and who by these doubts against all sense and
reason, endeavor to make this truth pass for suspected. Well, suppose for
once, that my Lord of Sunderland knew nothing of it, and if that which he
pretends of his continual opposing himself against the Popish party be true,
it is no strange thing, if they were loath to commit their Secrets to him. But
can his ignorance in a case which without imprudence was not to be communicated
to him, because of his great zeal for the Protestant Religion, and the interest
of the State, be a sufficient ground for us to call the matter in question?
King James the II. positively denies it, in the Memorial presented to the
States by the Marquis d' Albyville, and after that in the Answer which a Popish
Lord has writ in his name to the Declaration of the Prince of Orange, And one
would think all this might pass for a palpable proof, and incontestable
conviction of the falseness of this pretended League. Will you give me leave,
Sir, plainly to tell you, what my thoughts are of those upon whom this
Declaration of King James makes such an Impression, in spite of the Evidence
they may have to the contrary. They seem plainly to me to renounce the use of
their Reason, and to be willing that the rest of Mankind should in complaisance
to them, do so likewise. They cannot be ignorant, that King James II. has for
many years been of the Jesuits Fraternity, or at least that he has been
continually under the conduct of their Councils.

I cannot believe their Memory is so short to forget how at the time of his
Shipwreck in going for Scotland, he suffered many Persons of great Quality to
perish, that he might save some of his Fraternity of the Jesuits Order,
disguised one of them in the Habit of a Valet de chamber, and the other in that
of a Cook. They know, that after he had made himself the Head of their
Conspiracy against this Kingdom, whilst he was yet only Duke of York, the
effect of this his being guided by the Jesuits, proved no less than the total
overthrow of all the Laws which he had Sworn to maintain, at his coming to the
Crown, as soon as he had got an opportunity to Execute those Projects with
Authority, which the Love of his own Quiet, and fear of hazarding all, had made
King Charles his Brother to Suspend: And yet after all this they can by no
means induce themselves to believe that James II* should dare to deny by his
Minister, that he was engaged in any League with France. Pray let us take a
view of what he did, and therefore durst do, in contempt of the Laws of the
Land, which he had Sworn to observe; he sends his Ambassador to Rome, to
testify his Obedience to the Pope. He gives way to a Nuncio from thence, to
reside at his Court, in order to advance the Interest of the Church of Rome,
which he could not do without being Perjured and Cruel; he makes a Jesuit one
of his Privy Council, in the Face of all England, yea, of all the World, that
is a Person guilty of High Treason, for having set his foot on) English ground,
and a Member of that Bloody Society, who became liable to the Punishment
inflicted on Traitors, because of their Equivocations, Perjuries, and
Conspiracies, which are the distinguishing Character of that Fraternity. And
yet in spite of all this, we will believe James II. so scrupulous, as not
daring to hide, or disguise a Truth, in a case, which the Interest of the Roman
Church, and the designs he had Formed for that End with his Jesuits, did oblige
him to keep most secret. Well, if it were so indeed, we must suppose it was a
very difficult thing for that Prince to obtain a particular dispensation of the
Pope, for this concealing of the Truth, if the general one, he had already
obtained of him, for breaking his Coronation Oath, as made to Heretics, would
not serve the turn.

But pray, Sir, is not this a willful hoodwinking of our selves to lay any
stress upon this Negation of James II. whilst we have a certain knowledge that
there always was a strict League between the Duke of York and the French King;
and to assure us, that this League has continued since the Duke of York has
been advanced to the Crown of England. We have an Authentic Declaration of the
French Ambassador at the Hague very express to that purpose. I say we cannot
in the least doubt, but that there always was a strict League between the Duke
of York and the French King. To be convinced of this, we need only to cast an
Eye upon the War of Holland in 1670. It Is certainly known 'twas a War of
Religion undertaken merely for the propagation of Popery. The French* Minister
manifested plainly in his Speech to the Emperors Council, which has been since
Printed in French, that the Hollanders being Heretics, who had forsaken their
God, all good Christians are bound to join and unite to extirpate them, and to
implore Gods Blessing upon so good a Work. But how cunningly did they proceed
in the Dukes Cabal, to dissemble the part they had in such a Design. 1. They
reformed the Cabinet Council, and turned at once out of the Committee for
Foreign Affairs, Prince Rupert, the Duke of Ormond, the Lord Keeper, Trevor
the first Secretary of State, that was ever kept out of a Commission of that
nature. 2. They advised His Majesty to Prorogue the Parliament according to the
French Kings desire. 3. They sought a Quarrel against the Dutch, by sending a
Yatch with order to Sail through the Dutch Fleet, and require striking to His
Majesty's Flag: Although the Dutch Fleet was then at Anchor, not far from their
own Coast. 4. They fell upon the Dutch Fleet of Smyrna without any Declaration
of War, when the Dutch Ambassadors had offerred all possible satisfaction to
the King upon this affected Quarrel. 5. The English Fleet fought for the French
so bravely, and interprised themselves between the French and the Dutch with so
good a success, that when the English Fleet, the Strength of our Nation, which
was to be lessened for the execution of their Designs, was reduced into a sad
condition, the French Squadron came off as fresh and as entire as when they
first Sailed out of their Ports. 6. When they sent the Duke of Buckingham and
my Lord Arlington into Holland, they gave their instructions for the insisting
in the behalf of the French, although the second head of the French demands was
upon a public Exercise of the Roman Religion in the United Provinces, the
Church to be divided, and the Romish Priests to have a maintenance out of the
Public Revenue.

After this we shall do well to make some reflections upon Coleman's Letters to
Sir W. Throgmorton, the Duke of York's Agent at the Court of France. See how he
expresses himself in one of them dated February, 1674/5. For you know well,
that when the Duke comes to be Master of our Affairs, the King of France will
have reason to promise himself all things that he can desire. For, according to
the mind of the Duke, the Interest of the King of England, the King of France,
and his own, are so close bound up together, that it is impossible to separate
them, the one from the other, without ruin to all three; but being joined,
they must notwithstanding all opposition, become invincible. Those who knew
nothing of the League concluded between England and France in the Year 1670.
were extremely at a loss what to make of those words of Coleman, words so
express and precise, as nothing could be said more. But they who have seen the
extract of that League, published by the Abbot Primi, easily conceive, that
they referred to the secret League of 1670. and that the reason why the English
Court has been so industrious to maintain and cultivate the Union with France,
was only in order to preserve those hidden Interests, they judged inseparable,
though the true Interest of the State was indeed diametrically opposite to the
entertaining any Union with a Crown, all whose designs were levelled at the
ruin of England and the Protestant Religion.

We find much the same style in a Letter of Father la Chaise, Jesuit and
Confessor to Lewis the XIV. to Coleman. He says, Page 110. That the French
King considers his own Interest, and the Interest of the Duke of York, as one
and the same thing; and that if the Duke would undertake to Dissolve the
Parliament, the French King would assist him, with his Power and Purse, to
procure such an one afterward, as might be favorable to their designs. Now I
should think, that when one offers ones Power and Purse to a Prince, that this
supposes a Treaty with him, and that Prudence would not permit a King to write
to a Prince to employ his Interest for Dissolving a Parliament of England,
without knowing himself engaged in the greatest confidence with him. Some, it
may be, will imagine that this was only an ordinary Treaty. But Coleman has
expressed himself so clearly in the Case, that he has not left us room to mistake
him. See what he writes to Father la Chaise, We have here a mighty work upon
our hands, no less than the Conversion of three Kingdoms, and by that perhaps
the subduing of a Pestilent Heresse, which has domineered over a great part of
the Northern World a long time. There were never such hopes of Success, since
the Death of Queen Mary, as now in our days, when God has given us a Prince,
who is become (may I say to a Miracle) zealous of being the Author and
Instrument of so glorious a work, page 118. collect. of Letters. This was the
grand design carried on in 1675, which makes it evident that the Treaty made by
the Duchess of Orleans was not forgot, but that the same was inviolably
observed, and stuck to. Had we the other Letters of Coleman and Father la
Chaise, as well as of the rest of the Agents of the English Court, which
Coleman declared were still in White Hall, when he was examined, where the rest
of these Letters were, it would be easy to judge, that matters have been still
carried on in the same strain, between the Duke of York and the French King.
There are Men enough that know, that the choice was made of the Letters that
were to be published: they eclipsed and suppressed those, wherein the Court and
Duke of York were more particularly concerned. But without putting our selves
to the trouble of guessing, we have but too many Evidences, to leave us the
least Shadow of a Doubt. Can we in England forget the things that past, at the
time, when the Popish Plot was discovered by Oats, Bedlow, Prince, Everard,
Smith, etc? Can we forget the indefatigable Pains the Duke of York took, to
turn the Conspiracy, in which he was so deeply concerned, upon the
Presbyterians; as appears from Dangerfield's Discovery, published Anno Domini
1678. Can we forego the remembrance of those remarkable Events which happened
soon after the Assassination of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, the Sham put upon Mr.
Roderick Mansell, the Depositions of William Lewis and Laurence Moubray: The
Oaths of Secrecy and the Litany of the Papists, published by Robert Bolron? Can
we forget the Conspiracy of the Papists in Ireland, to subject that Kingdom to
the French King, as long as we have before our Eyes the Narrative of Thomas
Sampson Printed 1680. and the Depositions of Mac-namara, Fitzgerald and Nash,
besides the Papers, about the same Subject, sent in 1680. by the Duke of Ormond
to the Court. All these particulars appeared so evident to the Parliaments of
Westminster and Oxford, that they judged it impossible to reserve for the Duke
of York any hopes of his Succession to the Crown; and that the Court Party and
Favorers of the Duke, would have thought themselves to have gained much, if
the Duke, who was looked upon as the Author of all these Intriegues might only
have retained the Title of King, with leaving the whole Administration of the
Government to the Prince of Orange.

We Englishmen, having since that, been so good natured, as to admit the Duke
to the Crown, after the Death of King Charles II. whom the Papists had
conspired to Murder, on purpose to make place for the Duke: Let any one judge
whether there be any likelihood, he should have renounced his League with
France, which he had always looked upon as absolutely necessary for the making
his designs to bear: notwitstanding a public Neutrality that was to be
heldwith France, as he was Guarantee of the Treaty of Nimeguen. After all this,
a Man must have lost both Sense and Memory to suppose that he broke this Treaty
since his coming to the Crown. Moreover we have seen James II. an unconcerned
spectator of Lewis XIV. seizing of Orange, and of the Desolation of his
Son-inLaw's Subjects, who were forced to embrace the Romish Religion, by the
Violence of Dragoons. All Europe have seen the accommodation of the Business of
Bantam suspended, without any other Reason, but the design of having a Pretense
in reserve to break with the Hollanders; as also there were equal pains taken
in 1670, to find out a plausible one, to unite with France, and to ruin a
State, which endeavored to preserve the Liberty of Europe, and the Protestant
Religion. We have seen JAMES II. affording the Algerines a free retreat into
his Havens, and the Convoy of his Frigates, that they might safely carry away
with them the Dutch and French Protestants they had taken between England and
Holland. We have seen JAMES II. take the Government of Ireland from the Earl of
Clarendon, to put it into the hands of the Earl of Tyrconnel, to the end he
might new model the Army, by putting out Protestants, and supplying their
Places with Papists, as being more suited to carry on his Designs against
England and Ireland. We have seen him send Prince George into Denmark, to
hinder that Crown from joining with the Protestant Princes, and from quitting
his Engagements with France, whose Assistance and Power were of absolute
necessity to him. And within his own Kingdom, what is it he has not attempted,
to advance his Designs and overthrow the Government in conformity to his Treaty
with France, and the Directions of Barillon, his Ambassador? He has put all
places of Strength into the Hands of Papists; he has kept on foot a numerous
Army, to suppress all those who might oppose his Designs; he has, against Law,
established an High Commission-Court for Ecclesiastical Affairs, to violate the
Rights of the Clergy and the Universities. He has introduced Popish Bishops
into England: He has allowed a free exercise of that Religion in all Places:
All which things he durst never have undertaken so openly, and with so high a
Hand, had he not been supported with Hopes, derived from the Treaty he had with
Lewis XIV. whose Arms he looked upon as able to bring about the Designs he had
projected so long since.

It seems to me, that these Proceedings are an abundant proof, that he was
engaged in a League with France: But beyond all this, behold here another
Argument, which cannot be gainsaid:

The French Ambassador, the Count d' Avaux, was a public Person at the Hague,
he spoke, with order from the King his Master, and that in the Assembly of the
States General; he there peremptorily declares the Ninth of September last,
That there was an Alliance between the King his Master and James the Second; he
makes use of this League to interpose himself, by his Master's Command, upon an
occasion; when Lewis XIV. believed, that the States were forming some
Enterprise against James the Second: He delivers his Memorial to the States,
and communicates it to the rest of the Ambassadors, at the Hague, Sept. the
9th. The Memorial was conceived in these Terms:

THe, sincere Desire the King my Master has to maintain the Peace of Europe,
will not permit his Majesty to be a Spectator of the Great Preparations your H.
and M. Lordships are making by Land and by Sea, without taking those Measures
wherewith his Prudence, the inseparable Companion of all his Actions, does
inspire him, to prevent the Mischiefs which without doubt will be the
Consequence of them.

And though the King be well assured of the Wisdom of your Counsels, and that it
is not to be imagined, that a Commonwealth should lightly betake themselves to
Arms, and kindle a War, which at this Juncture cannot but prove fatal to all
Christendom; yet his Majesty cannot believe, that your H. and M. Lordships
would ever engage your selves in so great Expenses, as well within as without
your State, or suffer so many Foreign Troops to enter your Country, and in a
Season so far spent put so numerous a Fleet to Sea, or prepare so vast a
Warlike Train, in case they had not formed a Design corresponding to the
Greatness of those Preparations.

All these Circumstances, My Lords, and so many more which I must not here
relate, persuade the King my Master, that these Preparations have an eye to
England: And therefore the King my Master has charged me in his* Name to
declare, That the Engagements of Friendship and Alliance which he has with the
King of Great Britain, will not only oblige him to succor him, but also to
consider the first Act of Hostility your Ships or Landforces shall exert
against his Britannick Majesty, as a manifest Breach of Peace, and open Rupture
with his Crown.

I leave it, My Lords, to the Prudence of Your H. and M. Lordships, to consider
the Consequences of such like Undertakings: And his Majesty has ordered me to
make this Declaration to you in his Name, no otherwise than in the sincere
Intention he has (as I have often had the Honor to declare to you) to prevent
whatsoever might trouble the Peace of Europe.

Subscribed, Done at the Hague, the 9th. September. 1688. The Coun d' Avaux.


Than which, as it seems to me, nothing can be said more plain and express.
What does the English Ambassador hereupon? Some days after he presents a
Memorial to the Estates, and this plainly of concert with the French
Ambassador, because this his second Memorial did refer to that which the French
Ambassador Presented; and contents himself to assure them, that James the
Second had no Treaty with France, but what was made Public. See here the
Memorial of the Marquess de Albyville.

THe underwritten Envoy Extraordinary from the King of Great Britain, has
received Order to represent to your Lordships, that although His Majesty had
believed, that what he had already declared to your Ambassador in England, and
the Orders he had given to his said Envoy Extraordinary upon the same Subject,
might have satisfied your Lordships, that there is no other Treaty between His
Majesty and the Most Christian King, than those that are Public and in Print.
Yet since a great deal of Artifice and Industry has been made use of, to make
the world believe, that the King his Master is entered into other Treaties and
Alliances with the Most Christian King; His Majesty, to show the great regard
he has to the Friendship and Alliances which are between him and your
Lordships, and his desire to continue the same, has commanded the said Envoy
Extraordinary, in his Name, to assure your Lordships that there is no other
Treaty between His Majesty and the Most Christian King, than those that are
Public and in Print. And farther that as His Majesty extremely desires the
preservation of the Peace and Repose of Christendom, so he shall also be glad
to take such measures with your Lordships, as may be most convenient for
maintaining the Peace of Nimeguen, and the Truce of Twenty years, concluded in
1684.

Given at the Hague the Fifth of October 1688.

This Memorial pleasured the World with a fit of Laughter, to see it so
contrary to the Memorial of the French Ambassador, notwithstanding he was very
well acquainted with the Contents of the Memorial presented before by the Count
de Avaux. But for all that, both the Marquess de Albyville, and those who had
dictated the French Memorials, spoke nothing but the Truth. The Marquess
maintains, in the Name of the King, that there was no Treaty between England
and France, but those that are in Point; the Count de Avaux Asserts, that Lewis
the Fourteenth is engaged in an Alliance with James the Second, and both of
them speak true. The Count de Avaux speaks with respect to the Treaty of 1670.
betwixt Charles the Second and Lewis the Fourteenth, and supposes, as indeed it
cannot be doubted, that the said Treaty has continued ever since, with design
to destroy England and the Protesant Religion, which at first gave birth to the
said League. He builds upon this Principle, That the D. of York, who was the
great Promoter of it, and who, whilst he was in that Station, acted in
Conformity with the said secret Treaty, had sufficiently ratified the same
since his coming to the Crown; which Promotion of his was therefore so
Passionately desired, to the end he might more vigorously execute the said
Treaty, which Charles II. did not, for fear of troubling his own Repose. The
Marquess de Albyville, knowing that this Treaty had been Printed at Paris 1682.
in the History of the War of Holland by the Abbot Primi, but soon after
suppressed at the Instances of my Lord Preston, supposed he might say with a good
Conscience, with respect to the self-same Treaty, That his Master had no Treaty
with France, but what was in Print. So that the seeming Contradiction
vanishes, as soon as we consider the Persons that speak. The one is the
Minister of Lewis XIV. who is not at all careful to husband the Interests of
his Allies, and who thinks he may speak whatsoever pleases him, as he thinks he
can compass whatsoever he wills, and accordingly declares the Truth with a
great deal of Frankness and Liberty: The other is the Minister of James II.
whom the Society of the Jesuits and their Maxims, have modeled for disguising
the Truth; and therefore dares not expose it, but under covert of an
Equivocation; by which means, if he owns that which is true, he reserves
himself always the means, and the right of denying it, when the owning of it
might prove a prejudice to him.

But not to make any further Enlargement here upon the Jesuitical Character, of
which the Marquess d' Albyville had a competent share, without which
Qualification he would scarcely have been made choice of for an Extraordinary
Envoy: For my part, I cannot see how any thing could more evidently confirm the
Truth, than the foresaid Memorial of the Count d' Avaux, wherein he positively
declares, that there was an Alliance between Lewis XIV. and James II. And I
cannot see, how the most resolved Prejudice can object ought against this
Proof, besides these Three Things, which are equally ridiculous:

The First is, That King James II. is not bound to make good the Words of a
French Ambassador* spoke at random.

Secondly, That the Reason why the English Ambassador did not more punctually
contradict the French Memorial, proves only at the most, That he was willing
enough to see the Hollanders affrighted with the Apprehension of this Secret
Alliance between both those Kings, though he did not think fitting to confirm
the Belief of that League, by the Memorial he presented to the States General
the 5th. of October; whence it follows, That it may be there was no such League
at all, notwithstanding the French Ambassador thought necessary to advance such
a thing, contrary to Truth.

The Third, is, That if the Marquess d' Albyville, were Guilty of some Fault on
this occasion, that it is not just to lay the blame of it upon his Master; and
the rather, because he was never looked upon as a very able, and refined
Minister.

But in answer to these, First, The World knows, That the Memorial of the
French Ambassador, was contrived at Paris, with the Concurrence of Mr. Skeleton,
the Ambassador of James II. So that we cannot pretend, that this Declaration
was made by the French King, without knowledge of the K. of England. And tho
Mr. Skeleton, upon his return from France, was committed to the Tower, for
having had a hand in that Memorial, yet we know this was only a Pretext, being
set at Liberty a few days after, and made Colonel of a Regiment; and not long
after, returning thither, not as a Prisoner, but to be the Governor of it: All
which makes it as clear as the Sun, that this was only a feigned Imprisonment,
and not the Punishment of an unfaithful discharge of a Trust. 2dly, I can no
way conceive, how any can imagine, that the French K. should take the Liberty
peremptorily to assert an Alliance, when there was nothing at all of it, only
because he thought it was his Interest so to do; and that at the same time it
was not permitted to James II. to dissemble, in a Case where such a
Dissimulation was of use to him. But I go further, and say, That for to
discover the Mystery of the affected Dissimulation of the English Ambassador
about the League with France, we need only to examine the Behavior of James
II. after that Declaration of the French Ambassador to the States General. If
the French Ambassador, or the King his Master, had advanced an Untruth, in
declaring that there was an Alliance between Lewis XIV. and James II. which
could not be without an Infraction of the Treaty of Nimeguen, of which the King
of England was declared Guarantee, was it not of absolute necessity for K.
James to disavow that Untruth, as soon as he was informed what had past at the
Hague? Ought he not to have made Reparation of the Fault the Marquess d'
Albyville had committed, by ordering him to explain himself fully about the
false Supposal of the French Ambassador? Was it not visible, that his Honor
was extremely concerned in the Declaration of France; and that it was contrary
to his Word given to the States General, after his arrival to the Crown, and
which he had so often since renewed to their Ambassador in Ordinary? Was it not
natural for him to express himself plainly, instead of suppressing the Fact, as
it was done in the English Gazette, published by the Authority of the Court,
and reviewed by his Ministers; where we find indeed the Memorial of the
Marquess d' Albyville, given into the States the 5th of October, but not a word
of the Memorial of the Count d' Avaux, presented before. Who sees not that this
his Silence, after the Declaration of the French Ambassador, is an evident and
solid Conviction of the Truth of the League between him and France? For any one
to answer the Objection, by saying, that K. James II. did disavow the thing
openly, in his Answer to the Prince of Orange's Declaration, is to say nothing
that may satisfy a Man of Reason. Every Thing has its Time; a Man that holds
his peace, when he ought to speak in his own Justification, is presumed to be
convict of the Thing laid to his Charge. It Is a Maxim of the Civil Law, that to
evident Presumption, Proofs must be opposed: Wherefore in the Case he was
indispensibly obliged to deny the Fact whereof he was accused, and to refute
it, at that Time, and in those Circumstances; for that Opportunity being once
let slip, his denying cannot be looked upon otherwise, than as the Effect of
Fears, and extreme Necessity, which often obliges Men to disguise and deny the
Truth. And surely if we only please to cast an Eye upon the Design he had of
delivering Portsmouth to the French, and suffering several of their Regiments
to take possession of it; which Affair took up much of the Time of the Secret
Council in October and November 1687. we cannot with any Reason doubt of the
Truth of this Secret League between Lewis XIV, and James II. The Thing was not
so secretly carried, but that the different Advices given thereupon, came to
the knowledge of some, as well as the Names of the Authors of them, and the
Reason which hindered the King from following them in that Circumstance. The
Hopes which he had of getting a Parliament to his mind, that is, such an one as
might overthrow the Laws of the Government, that was opposite to Popery and
Tyranny, was the chief Reason, as is well known to many Persons of Quality,
that hindered him from taking a Resolution to make us feel the Effects of that
League, before it was declared in Public.

Let us also cast an Eye upon all the Proceedings of James II. till his
retiring to France, as well as upon those of Lewis XIV, in favor of him, and
we shall find them all but so many Effects and Consequences of the Secret
League. Lewis XIV, always influenced the Court of England in the Time of
Charles II, during whose Reign England could not but be sensible of the Effects
of the Secret Treaty of 1670, Memorandum, about the Proposition made to the
States by the English Ambassador, 1672.
by the War against the Hollander, by the frequent Dissolutions of her
Parliaments, and at length saw the whole Mystery laid open, in the Conspiracy
of Coleman, Secretary to the Duke of York, who acted nothing without express
Order of his Master. Since this, it is become notorious to all, that Charles
II. who went under the Name of a Protestant, and who, notwithstanding his
outward Profession, did, by Secret Treaties, design the overthrow of the
Protestant Religion within his three Kingdoms, died a professed Papist: And after
all this, cannot we persuade our selves to believe that James II. a declared
Papist, who had a Nuncio to prompt him, and a Jesuit to counsel him, did
confirm or renew a Treaty with Lewis XIV, for the Destruction of the Protestant
Religion in the Kingdom, especially when all his three Kindoms are Witness,
that for the advancing of Popery, he has neither had any regard to the Laws of
the Land, nor to the Oaths he had taken to preserve them. Thus much I assert
boldly, that since it cannot be denied, but that there was a Secret Treaty
betwixt Lewis XIV, and James II, we can less doubt, but that the End and Aim of
the Treaty, was the Ruin of the Protestant Religion.

1. We must needs conclude so from the Secret Treaty managed by the Duchess of
Orleans, between Charles II. and Lewis XIV. published by Abbot Primi, in his
History of the War with Holland, with privilege of the French King. This Treaty
expressly tells us, that the French King did promise Charles II. to subject his
Parliament to him, and to re-establish the Romish Religion in his Kingdoms. We
may easily guess whether these Things could be accomplished any other way than
by Force of Arms, that is, by the Violence and Cruelty of his Dragoons.

2. Who is, so blind as not to see that K. Charles II. had ever since that
Treaty, cast about to furnish himself with Foreign Force to enslave his
Subjects to his Arbitrary Power? Those who find difficulty to believe this,
need only to consider the Secret Treaty he had made with Spain, who was to
furnish him with 8000 Men upon occasion; and it was to assure himself of their
good Service, that Charles II. demanded Money of his Parliament in 1680.

3. Can we be so wilful, as not to trace the Current of the Design throughout
all Coleman's Letters, which contain nothing else but the Conspiracy of the
Jesuits and Duke of York, against the Government, and the Protestant Religion.

4. After that James II. came to the Crown, notwithstanding the Just
Oppositions of the Commons in the Westminster and Oxford Parliaments, who
easily foresaw all that is since come to pass; did not he give undoubted
Evidence, that he still followed the same Measures, when after the Defeat of
Monmouth, he declared to the Parliament, that for Time to come, he would make
use of Popish Officers, as well as keep an Army on foot, contrary to the Laws?

5. Have we not seen the whole bottom of his Designs unravelled, by the Care he
took to fill that Army with Irish Papists at the same time that he disbanded
all that Protestant Army and Soldiers that served him in Ireland, that he
might always have an Army at hand in that Kingdom for to invade England. It
appears beyond a possibility of doubting, that all these Proceedings were only
founded on the Continuation of a Design, which could never be executed without
a secret League with France, and without a very express Assurance of being
vigorously supported from thence when the nick of time should come. I do not
here set down only Supposals and Guesses in the Air, when I assert that this
League was to prove of most fatal Consequence to the Government and Protestant
Religion. For, pray tell me what else can be supposed from a Union with Lewis
XIV, when we have seen him, after having violated the Laws of his Kingdom, and
the Oaths he had taken, exercising so outrageous and barbarous a Cruelty
against his own Protestant Subjects, as well as against those of his Neighbors
in Piedmont, and the Principality of Orange. Give me leave to make one other
Reflection more, viz. That it is altogether incredible, if James II had not
been strictly leagued with France by such a League as they were pleased to term
Sacred, but that he must have acted after another manner in favor of the
Prince of Orange, whose Subjects were oppressed by the French King, and his
Principality ravaged, in order to the rooting out of the Protestant Religion
there. His soft way of treating this matter with the Court of France was so
public a Testimony of the Intelligence he held with Lewis about destroying the
Protestant Religion, that we must of force conclude that James II. was
conscious to a Treaty which was of greater Concern to him, than all the
Obligations of Blood or Alliance, which ought otherwise to have made him the
Protector of the Prince of Orange, his Nephew and Son-in-Law, and consequently
the Husband of the Presumptive Heiress of the Kingdom. I only touch at these
Points, and I pass over many others that evince the same Truth. As for those
affected doubts which you tell me do remain still in the Minds of some of your
Friends; they seem to me to be of the nature of those that troubled the
Pharisees, and of whom we say, that seeing they see and do not perceive,
because they are resolved not to yield to the most clear and incontestable
Truths. I bewail their Condition who so wilfully blind and hoodwink themselves,
and I wish they may never be undeceived if nothing less will do it than by the
French King's sending over his booted Apostles with the Original of the League
he has with James II into England, as he has already done into Ireland, of
which I presume by this time, neither Papist nor Protestant has the least doubt.

Sir, I am Yours.


