An Account of the PROCEEDINGS AGAINST Capt. Edward Rigby, At the Sessions of
Goal Delivery, held at Justice-Hall in the Old-Bailey, on Wednesday the Seventh
Day of December, School. for intending to Commit the Abominable SIN of SODOMY, on
the Body of one William Minton.
Printed by Order of the Court.
AN Indictment was found against Captain Rigby, for that he, the Seventh day of
November last, did Solicit, Incite, and as well by words as otherways,
endeavor to persuade one William Minton (of about the Age of Nineteen Years)
to suffer him the said Rigby, to commit the Crime of Sodomy with him the said
Minton. And the said Rigby did also Endeavor and Attempt, to Commit the Crime
of Sodomy with him the said Minton; and did also do and perpetrate diverse other
Enormities and abominable things, with an intent to Commit the Crime of Sodomy
with the said Minton.

Captain Rigby being sensible of his Guilt, and unwilling the same should be
disclosed to the World, would not therefore Plead Not Guilty to his Indictment;
neither would he confess the same, but Demurred to the Indictment, in hopes, as
his Council alleged, that they might find some Fault therein; but upon Arguing
the Demurrer, the Court were of Opinion the Indictment was good, and therefore
Judgment was given against Rigby, which was the same as if he had Pleaded
Guilty. And on the last day of the Sessions, the Council for the King demanded
Judgment against him, which could not be Adequate to his Crime; and for the
Information of the Court, in order to give a Just and Exemplary Judgment,
prayed, That several Affidavits which were produced might be Read, which
accordingly were Read; whereby it appeared, That on Saturday the Fifth of
November last, Minton standing in St. James's Park to see the Fireworks, Rigby
stood by him, and took him by the hand, and squeezed it; put his Privy Member
Erected into Minton's Hand; kissed him, and put his Tongue into Minton's Mouth,
who being much astonished at these Actions went from him; but Rigby pursued
him, and accosted him again; and after much Discourse prevailed with Minton to
tell him where he lodged, and to meet him the Monday following about Five a
Clock, at the George-Tavern in the Pall mall, and to Enquire for Number 4.
Minton the next day Acquainted Charles Coats, Esquire (with whom he lived) with
what had happened to him the Night before, and desired his Advice and Direction
therein; who with a Worthy Divine then present (being willing to detect and
punish the Villainy designed by Rigby) directed Minton to apply himself to
Thomas Railton Esquire a Justice of the Peace for Middlesex; who being informed of
what past between Rigby and Minton, appointed his Clark with a Constable, and
two other Persons, to go with Minton to the George-Tavern, who were to stay in
some Room adjoining to the Room whereinto Minton should go: and if any Violence
should be offered to him, upon crying out (Westminster) the Constable and his
Assistance should immediately enter the Room.

That on Monday the Seventh of November last, about Four of the Clock in the
Afternoon, Rigby came to the George-Tavern, and left Number 4. at the Bar, with
Directions, That if any Enquired for that Number, to send them to him; after
Rigby had been about an Hour at the Tavern, ( Minton not coming) Rigby called
up one of the Drawers, and in a Passionate manner, bid him go to Minton's
Lodgings, and enquire for a young Gentleman; and if he were within, to tell him
a Gentleman staid for him at the George-Tavern; the Drawer accordingly went,
but Minton not being within, the Drawer returned that Answer to Rigby.

That about six a clock Minton came to the George Tavern, enquired for Number
4. and was showed into the room where Rigby was, and he Constable and his
assistance were placed in a Room adjoining; Rigby seemed much pleased upon
Mintons coming, and drank to him in a glass of Wine and kissed him, took him by
the Hand, put his Tongue into Mintons Mouth, and thrust Mintons hand into his
(Rigby) Breeches, saying, He had raised his Lust to the highest degree, Minton
thereupon asked, How can it be, a Woman was only fit for that, Rigby answered,
Dam'em, they are all Poxt, I Will have nothing to do with them. Then Rigby
sitting on Mintons Lap, kissed him several times, putting his Tongue into his
Mouth, asked him, if he should F -- him, how can that be asked Minton, I Will show
you answered Rigby, for it is no more than was done in our Forefathers time;
and then to incite Minton thereto, further spoke most Blasphemous words, and
said, That the French King did it, and the Czar of Muscovy made Alexander, a
Carpenter, a Prince for that purpose, and affirmed, He had seen the Czar of
Muscovy through a hole at Sea, lie with Prince Alexander. Then Rigby kissed
Minton several times, putting his Tongue in his Mouth, and taking Minton in his
Arms, wished he might lie with him all night, and that his Lust was provoked to
that degree, he had -- in his Breeches, but notwithstanding he could F -- him;
Minton thereupon said, sure you cannot do it here, yes, answered Rigby, I can,
and took Minton to a corner of the Room, and put his Hands into Mintons
Breeches, desiring him to pull them down, who answered he would not, but he
(Rigby) might do what he pleased; thereupon Rigby pulled down Mintons Breeches,
turned away his shirt, put his Finger to Mintons Fundament, and applied his
Body close to Mintons, who feeling something warm touch his Skin, put his hand
behind him, and took hold of Rigbys Priv^ Member, and said to Rigby, I have now
discovered your base Inclinations, I will expose you to the World, to put a
stop to these Crimes; and thereupon Minton went toward the door, Rigby stopped
him, and drew his Sword, upon which Minton gave a stamp with his foot, and
cried out Westminster; then the Constable and his Assistance came into the
Room, and seized Rigby, who offered the Constable a Gratuity to let him go,
which he refusing, carried Rigby before Sir Henry Dutton Colt, before whom
Minton charged Rigby (who was present) with the Fact, to the effect before
related; who being asked by Sir Henry Colt, Whether the Fact Minton had charged
him with were True, Rigby denied not that the Charge against him was true, only
objected against some inconsiderable Circumstances, which no ways tended to the
lessening of the Charge.

That after all the Informations were read, Rigby was asked by the Court, What
he had to say for himself, he desired that a Gentleman's Affidavit who was
present when this matter was transacted might be read; the Court told him, That
that Gentleman stood Indicted in the same Indictment with him, for being
Aiding, Advising, and Assisting to him, in committing his Crime, and therefore
could not be an Evidence for him. Rigby was asked by the Court what further he
had to say, he insisted on his Innocence, that he was misadvised by his Council
in Demurring to the Indictment, which if he had known had been Confessing of
the Fact in case the Court had been of Opinion that the Indictment was
sufficient, he would not have done it; but seeing the Law was so he must submit
to it; he said he was Drunk, and might kiss Minton several times. To which it
was answered by the Kings Council, That his (Rigbys) Council had well advised
him, and he knew his Guilt to be such, That it would be proved by Three or Four
Witnesses beyond all contradiction, and therefore Rigby Demurred to the
Indictment, in hopes thereby his Crime would not be Disclosed, as it must have
been if he had pleaded Not Guilty to his Indictment, and submitted to a Trial;
but as the Fact had now been made public in Court; and it also appearing that
he was not Drunk when he Committed it.

It was therefore prayed by the King's Council, that the Court would give an
Exemplary Judgment against him, for that Crime of which, by his own Confession,
he stood Convicted, and was not in its Nature to be Aggravated.

And the Judgment which was pronounced by the Court against Rigby, was, viz.

That he stand Three several Days in the Pillory, for the space of two Hours,
from Eleven of the Clock to One, in each of those days. The First day
over against the George-Tavern in the Pall Mall; the Second day at
Charing Cross, and the Third day at Temple Bar. That he pay a Fine of 1000 l.
to the King. That he lie in Prison for a Year, after he shall have paid his
Fine. And that before he be discharged out of Prison, he shall find sufficient
Sureties for his good Behavior for Seven Years.
London: Printed by F. Collins in the Old Bailey. School.


