AN ACCOUNT OF THE PROCEEDINGS AGAINST THE RIOTERS AT GUILD HALL: ON
Midsummer-Day, 1682. With the Judgment past upon them at the Court of
King's Bench Westminster, on Tuesday the 26th of June, 1683.
WHereas an Information against the Lord Gray of Warke, Sir Thomas Player,
Alderman Cornish, Thomas Pilkington, Samuel Shute, and Slingsby Bethel,
Esquires; Mr. Jinkes, Mr. Jeakell, Mr. Goodenough, Mr. Freeman, Mr. Deagle, Mr.
Wickham, Mr. Swinnocke, and Mr. Keys came to be Tried in Easter Term last, at
Guild Hall, before the Lord Chief Justice Saunders for a Riot, by them
committed at the Election of Sheriffs on Midsummer day last, and the said
Persons thereof found Guilty, That when it was expected Judgment should have
been given against them on the last day of the said Term, part of the said
Persons appearing by their Counsel moved in Arrest of Judgment entering
severally into a Recognizance of 500 l. to appear the first day of this Term,
at the Court of King's Bench, Westminster, which they doing accordingly, their
Appearances were then Recorded. But the hearing what their Counsel had to offer
by way of Exceptions, why Judgment should not pass upon them pursuant to the
late Verdict, was put off till Friday the 15th, and from thence to Tuesday the
19th, of this present June, on which day a Motion being made for the Judgment
of the Court upon the said Persons, several things were urged by their Counsel,
as Exceptions against the Verdict, relating to the Award of the Venire for
return of the Jury to Try that Information: also one of their Counsel urged,
That they having been lawfully Assembled could not commit a Riot, or be Guilty
of the Assault upon the Lord Mayor, etc. but that the Persons only that made
such Assault were Guilty. Very much was said in their behalf, six Counselors
speaking for them one after another, after which the kings Counsel answered all
those Objections and continued to pray Judgment, by having the Fines set upon
them, etc.

The Court then delivered their Sense of what had been said, and were of
Opinion, nothing urged by way of Exceptions had validity enough in it to hinder
Judgment; particularly taking notice it was a new Argument, that maintained a
Riot could not be committed where persons were lawfully Assembled: It being
asked by way of Answer, If many People were lawfully Assembled at Church for
Religious Worship, and there rose in a Tumult and pulled down the Church, or
used other violence, Whether it would not be a Riot, etc.

But one of the Judges being somewhat Indisposed; also the hearing of
Affidavits, on both sides, like to be long, the Matter was further put off till
Wednesday the 20th of June instant.

On which said 20th of June, there being hopes that one of the Judges, who was
then sick, did recover and would in a few days be able to come to Westminster
(there being only two Judges upon the Bench) and for some other Reasons, it was
a fourth time put off to Monday the 25th of the same Month. But the said Judge
not being so recovered as was hoped as also on the said 25th day one of the two
Judges before mentioned being likewise very much indisposed in his health it
was a fifth time put off, but ordered to be moved again the next day in hopes
he might then be better.

Accordingly on Tuesday, the 26th of June, 1683. It was the last time moved and
the Judgment of the Court prayed against them. Eleven of the said-Ryoters being
present in Court, and only three, viz. The Lord Gray, Mr Keys and Richard
Goodenough wanting.

The six Counselors at Law herein already mentioned severally using what
arguments they could to Moderate and make easy the Fines. But the Kings Council
very easily answered all their Objections and appealed to them all to produce
any one President that ever the Sheriffs of London, had the superiority of the
Lord Mayor. That in Mr. Bethel's time when all these disorders took their
beginning yet then Sir Robert Clayton, being Lord Mayor, reserved the power of
adjourning the Common Hall as appeared at the Trial, etc.

In conclusion after much said on both sides and that the Court had severally
given their opinions they proceeded to Judgment and Imposed upon the said
persons the Fines following.

First, upon Mr. Pilkinton the Court were so favorable by reason of his
present Imprisonment, etc. to Impose only five hundred Pounds (or five hundred
Marks) upon Mr. Shute one thousand Marks, upon the Lord Gray one thousand
Pounds (or a thousand Marks) upon Alderman Cornish one thousand Marks, upon Mr.
Bethel, one thousand Marks, upon Sir Thomas Player five hundred Marks, upon Mr.
Jinks three hundred Marks, upon Mr. Deagle four hundred Marks upon Richard
Freeman three hundred Marks, upon Richard Goodenough five hundred Marks, upon
Mr. Keys one hundred Marks, upon Mr. Wickham, one hundred Marks, and upon Mr.
Swinnock five hundred Marks. Several of them were Ordered also to stand
committed until the said fines shall be paid.

It is Observable that before each of the said Persons were fined, such of them
as were in Court, spoke also severally for themselves. Some by way of Excuse
that that they did not stay longer at Guild Hall, but till they Poled, others,
that they were not at the Hall the day when the Riot was Committed, some that
they had but small Estates, and were not so Rich as the Kings Counsel affirmed,
one of them th^^ he had spent much of his Estate in the Kings Service, etc. All
which Particulars were likewise Considered by the Court.

FINIS.
London, Printed by George Croom, in Thames Street, over against Baynard's
Castle, 1683.


