THE Antichristian Principle fully Discovered, In a Brief and true ACCOUNT OF
All the Hellish Plots, Bloody Persecutions, Horrid Massacres, and most Inhumane
Cruelties and Tortures, exercised by the Papists, on the Persons of Protestant
Dissenters from the Church of Rome, for the cause of Religion only; as well
abroad as here in England, Scotland, and Ireland, from the very beginning till
this present year, 1678.

Faithfully Collected out of diverse both Ancient and Modern Histories, Records,
and Writings, for the Information and undeceiving of the People.

Psalm. 137.8. O Daughter of Babylon who art to be destroyed, happy shall he be
that rewards thee as thou have served us.

With Allowance.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1679.

THe Church of Rome, growing great and mighty, Rich and Proud, at once lost its
humility, and purity of Religion, and assumed pollitick, and tyrannick
Principles, which caused her defiled hands, to lay aside the sword of the
spirit, and to make use of that bloody one of Persecution, and to run into
bloody and murtherous Practices, hellish plots, and contrivances, devilish
Machinations, and horrid, and barbarous Massacres, There is nothing can better
demonstrate this Antichristian spirit than to give you a short specimen of all
her bloody Acts, to show you her sword reaking with the goar of the Innocent,
and I think it ought to be more prevalent, than all the force of Arguments, and
disputations in the World; for let even those of her own Religion be judge,
whether so many horrid, and barbarous Persecutions, Deaths, and Torments,
inflicted on men and women, for the sake of Religion only, (and which we shall
here briefly enumerate) can be according to the spirit of Christ, or the
Doctrine of the Apostles, and do not rather entitle those, who command and
execute such inhumane Acts, as to take away the life of man, and with fire and
sword to lay wast Countries; to subvert Kingdoms, and destroy States under the
Notion and name of Religion, and holiness; to be called Tyrants, bloody and
wicked Persecutors, and the principles by which they act, and seek to justify
such horrid monstrous, and bloody Persecutions, to be Diabolical, and
Antichristian. Let I say all the world judge, by all the bloody Tragedies which
the Church of Rome has acted, and promoted; whether that murtherous Principle
be of Christ, or Antichrist, of God or the Devil; or which is more near to his
holy doctrine, and commands, to love our Enemies, and to do good to those that
dispightfully use us, or to burn, hang, draw, torment, and put to Death, all
such as will not be of our minds, and Religion.

The first then that flung away the spiritual Keys, The Persecution of the
Waldenses.
and stoutly began to brandish the bloody sword of Persecution, was Pope
Alexander the 3d, who with it began to hack and hew the poor Waldenses, so
called from Peter Waldo, or Valdo of Lions in France; whom God had raised up,
to oppose the many corruptions of the Romish Church, as the consecration of
Images, Relics, Oil, Candles, etc. Merits, auricular confession, Supremacy
of the Pope, adoration of Images, Indulgences, false miracles, Purgatory,
praying to Saints, prayers for the dead, Extreme Unction, and the like: so
early were these things questioned and preached against. The persecution of
this Valdo and his followers, (which were increased to a very great Number,)
began in France in the year 1160. Valdo himself being forced to fly into
Daupheny, many into Picardy, where they were called Picards, many into
Flanders, and into Alsatia, (...) tinu^^^ for many years in Picardy. Planders.
Germany.
and so they spread themselves, for the safety of their lives into all places.

In Picardy by the Command of King Phillip, three hundred Gentlemen's houses
were burnt, and several walled Towns destroyed, and in Flanders whether those
of that party fled, several were burnt for this cause of their Religion.
Neither were they safe who fled into Germany, for at Mayance, the Bishop there
caused no less then thirty five Burgesses of that place, to be burnt in one
fire, and eighteen in another. And at Strasburg at the same time, by the Bishop
there, eighty persons were burnt together, for professing the same Tenants.
Many then that fled into England for shelter, England.
were cruelly put to death at Oxford. At Collen in Germany 1163. were four men
and one woman burnt. And in Spain by ^rolamation 'twas made Treason, to relieve
these people or to suffer them to live in that Country; but liberty was given
to use them at will and pleasure, and none to be called to account for it. But
these people still increasing, caused the Pope to set on work the bloody
Inquisition, which with Racks, Fire, torments, and other cruelties, have sent
so many good and holy men, for their Conscience sake out of this World. France.
Anno 1201 at Paris, was burnt a Noble Knight called Enrandus, and this
persecution still continuing, the people of the Valley of Loyse flying from
their barbarous persecutors, Daupheny.
into the caves of the Mountains were all smothered in those caves by their
cruel Enemies, where were found afterward, no less then four hundred Infants,
stifled in their Cradles, which some Mothers had carried thither at their
backs, and in their dead Mothers Arms. In Daupheny many were also burnt, and
the raging fire of persecution flamed through the whole Land. Piedmont.
And also in Piedmont, where there was scarce a Town or City that many had not
been put to death. And at Turin one of them had his Bowels torn out of his
Belly, and put into a basin before his face, and after that they Martyred him.

These Countries being so hot with the fire of persecution; many of these poor
people fled into Calabria, Calabria.
where they began to plant and to build Towns and Citys, as St. Xist La Guard,
etc. Where they continued till the year 1560. where they were grieviously
persecuted by Pope Pius the 4th. forcing them to leave their Houses, and
Habitations, and to fly into the Woods for shelter of their lives, but being
there pursued by the Order of the Viceroy of Naples, most of them were cruelly
and barbarously put to death by the Soldiers, and when they could not kill with
the Sword, kept them so beseiged, that they dyed with Famine. At which time
they rackt one Charlin so horridly, that his guts came out at his belly: and
another they tormented eight hours upon the Rack, to make him confess strange
lies, invented against their Religion, which he would not. Some were stripped
stark naked, and whipped, to death with Rods of Iron, some drawn through the
streets, and burnt with fire brands, others thrown down from an high Tower, and
some slashed with sharp knives. And in one place by the Order of the Inquisitor
Panza, eighty had their Throats cut, as Butchers do sheep, then causing them to
be divided into four quarters, he made their Limbs to be set upon stakes, for
the space of thirty miles, a bloody spectacle. Sixty women were cruelly rackt,
so that the cords peirced their Arms and Legs to the bones, and then being
cast into prison dyed, all but nine of the handsomest, who were taken away from
thence, and never heard of more: And thus they continued their cruelty, till
they had quite rooted out and extirped, all professing that Religion in
Calabria.

The Waldenses in Province, who had fled thither out of Piedmont, Province.
Daupheny and other places, increasing and being near Avignion, the Popes Seat,
he soon raised against them an horrid persecution, but the greatest was in the
year 1360. in the time of Lewis the 12th. in which many suffered, and continued
more or less rigorously, to the year 1540. in which was the cruel Massacre, by
the means of the Popes Agents, at Merindol and Chabriers, Pepin, and other
places. Where the Towns were fired, wholly destroyed, and all the Lands about
laid waste. The poor people were slain, the young Virgins ravished and
barbarously used, Children pulled alive out of their Mothers Bellies, the
breasts of diverse women cut off, and their sucking Children left on the floor,
to dye with Famine, or sucking the gore, that ran from the wounds of their dead
Mothers. At Cabriers there being but sixty six weak men left in the Town the
rest being fled, they caused them to be brought all forth to a field, and there
the bloody Papists cut them to pieces. And all the women they found in the
Town, with their young Children they locked up together in a Barn, and so set it
on fire and burnt them: and some that endeavored to escape through the flames,
they knocked on the head with their Halberts, and ripped open the bellies of
others that were with Child, their Children falling under their feet: and
others being bound back to back, were broached in sport upon one Sword. So that
in this place were slain, above a thousand, Men, Women and Children, that could
not lift up their hands to resist! At Costa another Town, they committed great
slaughters, and where they used several Women and Malds, that fled into an
Orchard for safety, with so much cruel and inhumane beastliness; that they dyed
most thereof. This long and bloody persecution of these Waldenses, Collected
out of Luthers Forerunners. Cades Justification of the Church of England.
lasted near five hundred years, in which time they spread their Tenants over
Bohemia, Austria, Germany, Flanders, England, Poland, Italy, Spain, Dalmatia,
Oroatia, Sclavonia, Greecia, Livonia, Sarmatia, and Bulgaria, in all which
places they were persecuted, and tormented more or less, according as the Pope
and his Ministers had power, and Influences over the Princes, of those Countries.

The persecution also of those called Albingenses was very notorious, The
persecution of the Albingenses.
they were of the same principles, and Tenants as the Waldenses, and differed
only in Country and Name, being Inhabitants of the Country of Albi, the chief
of whom was Arnold, from whom they were called Arnoldists. Pope Alexander the
third began with them, and his successors followed his steps, and Pope Innocent
the third, raised a War against them, calling it the Holy War, and gave out the
same pardons, and Indulgences, for encouragement of those who went against
these people, as he did to those that went into the Holy Land, against the
Saracens, in which War he so thundered against Raimond, Earl of Toulouse that
he was forced to submit, and for penance to be led publicly, stripped to his
drawers with a cord about his neck, and so whipped by the Friars, nine times
about the grave of one Peter the Hermit, killed in that War: And then would
have forced him against his Conscience, to have fought against the Albingenses.

His Legate playing the part of a General, In Beziers.
besieges and takes Beziers by storm, seting the whole City in fire, and burnt
it to ashes, and slew all they could meet with without distinction, both
Catholics, as well as those they termed Heretics, for there were of both in
the City. At which time they slew in this City 60000 persons.

Their next morsel was the Town of Carcasson, Carcasson Town.
which the Holy Pilgrims, as they called themselves, took also by storm,
burning, destroying and slaying all, as they had done before at Beziers.

After that they set upon the City of Carcasson, Carcasson City.
defended by the Earl of Beziers, and when they offered to Capitulate the Legate
would grant no other conditions, but that the Earl and twelve more should come
forth, with their baggage, but all the rest both men women and children, should
come forth stark naked, without covering of either Shirt or Smock, and humble
themselves before him. But they disdaining such unworthy, and ignominious
terms, stand it out till they had told the Earl forth of Town, under pretense
of parley with the Legate, having given his Oath for his safe return, but having
him, without regard thereto, stormed the City, to the amazement of the poor
amazed Citizens, who looked for nothing less, but there being a certain Vault
under ground, which went to a Castle not far of, most of them conveyed
themselves away by it, leaving their City and all therein to the fury and rage
of the unholy Pilgrims.

Then they surprised the Castle of Beron, Beron.
where they pulled out the Eyes of an hundred Albingenses, and cut off their
noses, leaving only one with one Eye to guide the rest to Cabaret. They took
also the Castle of Menerby, Menerby.
defended by the Lord of Terms, whom they flung into a filthy Prison till he
dyed, his wife, sister, and daughter, who was a Maid, they burnt in one fire,
because they would not recant their Religion. And after that they cast into one
fire for the same cause, 180 men and women at the same place, who dyed
rejoicing.

At the taking of the Castle of Lavaur, Lavaur.
by Simon Monford who succeeded the Legate, in his Generalship, all the
Soldiers therein were put to the Sword; except 80. Gentlemen, whom that cruel
Earl caused to be hanged, and the Lord Aimery on a Gibbet, higher then all the
rest: And the Lady his Sister east into a ditch, and there covered with stones.
The rest of the people who were about 400. persons, were forced into a great
fire, made purposely for them, and so burnt, except those that for fear
recanted their Religion, which were sew.

At this time one Reynard Lollard, by his preaching stirred up the English in
Guienne, to assist the Albingenses, this Lollard was a holy man and a Prophet,
and afterward was burnt at Collen by the Papists: those in England of that
Judgment, were from him afterward called Lollards. These men still proceeding
in their cruelty against the Albingenses, take the Town of St. Anthonys, St.
Anthonys.
where they caused thirty of the principal men to be hanged in cold blood,
after they had granted them their lives, and several other Towns, where they
put all to the sword without distinction of Age or Sex.

In the year 1213. near Muret, a Town upon the Garronne, Muret.
there were slain in battle in the pursuit, and afterward, about two Millions
of Albingenses, with the King of Araagon, who then took their parts.

In the year 1215. Friar Conradus of Marpurg, the Popes inquisitor, most
horribly tortured all that made profession of the Gospel, or were but
suspected, marking them with red hot Irons, and then giving them to the secular
power to be burnt, so that neither Noble, nor Ignoble, Clerks, Monks, Nuns,
Burgesses, Citizens, and Country people escaped the slames, by the-means of
this bloody Inquisitor.

The Town of Miromand being taken, by Prince Lewis of France, Miromand
he destroyed there of the Albingenses for the same cause, to the number of
five thousand men women and children.

In the year 1234. many of these Albingenses being fled into Spain, Spain.
the Pope caused a Croisado to be preached against them, whereby a great Army
of Pilgrims assembled together, were sent by Pope Gregory against the
Albingenses, whom they slew, with their Bishops and Teachers, burnt their
houses, destroyed their Towns, and plunderd and carried away their goods. And
about the same time, those who retired into a fenny place, on the borders of
Germany were also all slain. At the same time also, many of them were slain and
burnt in Millain, and other parts of Italy, beyond the Alps.

In the year 1242. there were burnt in Toulouse, 200. of these Albingenses,
Toulouse.
being taken in a certain Castle hard by, and the year following 220. more, in
the same place.

In the year 1281. a great persecution was raised against them, in Albi by one
Gourdon, so that they were almost all extirpated and rooted out, and forced to
fly for safety of their lives, to all parts. Albi.
At the same time by the Popes Order, many of the chief preachers of the
Albingenses bones, were dug up and burnt, 20. and 30. years after they had been
buried. Luthers Forerunners, and Cades Justification. The perse cution of the
Bohimians. Ex-Hist. Persecutionum Ecclesiae Bohem.


The persecution of the Bohemians begun betimes, even near the year 977. by
Pope Hildebrand, and afterward by Celestine, continuing down to the times of
Mathias of Frague, 1375. and to John Hus, and Jerome of Prague, who were both
burnt, in defense of the Gospel at Constance, notwithstanding the public
faith of Germany given them for their security.

At Cuttenburg where there are many deep Mines in the year 1420. they threw
into one of them 1700. persons, and into another 1038. and into ^ third 1334.
persons.

In the year 1421. at Litomeritia, twenty four of the chief Citizens, among
whom was the Son-in-Law of the chief persecutor, and Magistrate of the City,
were thrust into a great Tower, and almost famished to death, from whence being
at last drawn, because they would not abjure their Religion, they were
condemned to be all drowned, in the River Albis, which was accordingly done,
their hands and feet being bound, and so thrown into the midst of the River,
and if the stream brought any of them to the sides of the bank, they were
goared to death with Iron forks and Pikes. The daughter of the chief
persecutor, seeing she could not move her Father, by her tears and prayers, to
save the Life of her Husband, flung her self after him into the River, and
embracing his body, perished with him, and was found the next day with him fast
in her Arms, and were buried in one grave.

About the same time at Prague 4. men, 4 boys, and a Minister were then burnt
in one fire, because they administered and received the Sacrament in both
kinds. Many and indeed innumerable were the Murders, and torments, and
unheard of babarities executed both publicly and privately on those poor
wretches, by those bloody Executioners.

About the year 1523. Martin Luther began to shine as a great light in Germany,
and his Doctrine to overspread those parts, even to Bohemia, which caused more
violent persecutions, wherein multitudes of Saints lost their Lives, by the
means of Ferdinand the first, and Charles the 5th. so that it would be almost
endless, to enumerate every particular.

In the year 1549 there were no less then 200. Ministers banished, out of this
Kingdom, and the Baron of Schanow because a Lutheran, but under the pretense of
a Conspiracy, was laid upon the Rack, but he magnanimously cut out his own
Tongue, and being asked the reason, he wrote, that it was lest the torments of
the Rack, should make him speak falsely against himself or others.

In the year 1617. Ferdinand the Second, being obtruded upon by the Bohemians,
he siding with the Papists raised up a very great persecution against the
Protestants, which was the cause of Electing Frederick Palatine of the Rhine,
King of Bohemia and the cause of all those Wars and embroylments: In which
suffered many a godly Minister, and other holy pious and harmless men, by the
sapistical Soldiers, with that barbarous cruelty, that Christian Ears cannot
hear, nor Tongue relate, without indignation and abhorrency. For some of them
were stoned to death, others hanged upon a beam, with a soft fire made under
them, roasted to death, others cut peace-meal. And one Minister they laid on his
back, and ramming his mouth full of Compowder set fire to it, and blew his head
all to pieces. Another they hanged up by the privy Members, being 70. years
old, and burnt his own books under him, and at last shot him, after he had
endured a world of torment and pain.

In the year 1621. all the Ministers were banished out of Prague, and out of
the Kingdom of Bohemia, and all the provinces thereunto belonging; never more
to return, and made it death to harbor or conceal any one of them. Also at
Cuttenburg 21. Ministers were banished about the same time. Anno 1624. a Popish
Captain caused a Ministers hand first to be stricken off, and then his head,
his bowels to be taken forth, and wrapped in his shirt, and his 4. quarters to be
set on 4 stakes, and his head on another. At that time also 50. of the Nobility
were condemned, some to death, some to perpetual banishment, and some to
perpetual Imprisonment, 27. were executed, some of their right hands and heads,
were hung upon the Tower of the Bridge, who all dyed with great constancy of
mind, and fervency of spirit, sealing to the Protestant cause with their
blood, whose heads were afterward solemnly buried, by Gustavus Adolphus, King
of Sweden. Next came forth an Edict to banish all the Protestants, and to take
away the children from them, that they might be bred in the Romish Religion.
And then another to banish all the Wives of such as were Catholics from their
Husbands, unless they would turn. Then they enacted that those who were not
Catholics, should be prohibited all traffic, and commerce with them. There
was hardly a City or Town, that escaped their barbarous cruelties. And at
Prachatice they slew the Major, and 1600 men women and children, letting their
bodies lie unburied, for diverse days in the dirt and mire, and all the
remainders they cast into prisons, keeping them in a miserable condition,
several Months. Bibles, and godly Books, were prohibited, also marriages, and
burials, and Baptism, denied all such as would not turn Catholics. Some were
thrust into Cellars, and holes full of Snakes and Toads, and such like
creatures. Others into places full of spikes, so that they could neither sit
nor stand. Others into narrow places over water, so that if they but moved
their bodies they would fall into the water: others they gagged, and thrust the
host down their throats, others again were beaten on the calves of their legs,
till they could not stand, but fall down on their knees, that they might adore
the Host. And thus much for their cruelties acted on this Stage.

The next Theater, The persecution of the Protestant, in Germany, by the
Papists. Out of D. Vincents Collections.
where we may behold these sort of people, acting their bloody parts is
Germany; miserably torn and rent to pieces, by their doings, and endeavors to
extinguish the light of the Gospel, shining forth through Luther, and others
then stirred up by God, to perfect the work of Reformation. This persecution
began Anno Christi, 1523. by the Popes stirring up the Emperor Charles the 5th,
to destroy the Protestants as Heretics, allowing him 200000 Crowns toward the
raising Soldiers for that end, with an engagement also, to raise at his own
cost 12000 foot, and 600 Horse. Thus he began with the sword, that he might end
with the faggot. The Duke of Saxony, and the Lantgrave stand up for the
Protestants, and are taken prisoners 1547. and wherever they got the day, all
sorts of Cruelties, murders, torments, racks, sire and faggot followed: So that
all Germany was at once in a flame, and combustion, and in a most miserable
condition, flying and dying in all places, for their Conscience, and Religion.
At Meldrop they took the Minister, a godly man, out of his bed, and forced him
to go many miles on foot, in frost and snow upon the ce, barefooted, and
bare-legg'd, beating, cutting and flashing him, and pricking him with halberds,
and at last they barbarously roasted him on coals to death, his name was
Sutphen. At Vienna many were drowned, and put to several sorts of death. At the
sacking of Miltenburg, many suffered; one Minister they hung up by the hands,
with a mighty stone fastened to his seet where he remained 6 hours in that great
torment. Death was accounted a mercy, and hanging they thought to easy a
punishment: At Schalt, at Merspurg, and Munchen, and several other places, the
rage of their malice and spite was shown, in putting to death many poor Souls.
At Pasewalk they committed many villainies, ravishing the women, deslouring the
maids, killing the men, burning the houses, and smothering the children with
straw, set on fire in the cellers, whether they had crept for safety. At
Mudenburg they did the like 1631, where they burnt the whole City to ashes, and
where they put at least 20000 persons to death, 6000 were drowned in the River
Elb. Ladys and Gentlewomen were yoaked together like beasts, and so turned out
to the woods, where they were ravished and abused, and then had their hair and
ears cropped off, and disfigured. At Hocster 1634, they spared none, neither man,
woman nor child, but put all to sword, and then threw their bodies into the
Weser. At Grippenbourg they tormented the Senators, and chief of the place to
death, with smoke and starving. At Heildeburg they shut up in prison a great
many Ministers, seeding them only with bread and water. At Frankendale,
contrary to agreement, and Articles, they put many to death, and others to
unreasonable ransoms. In Saxony, they tortured the Protestants, by pressing
their Thumbs between wheels. In Pomeren, they forced them to eat their own
excrements, and if they refused them, they thrust them down their throats till
they were choked. Some they tormented with cords about their heads, till they
twisted their eyes out, and that the blood run out at their ears, noses, and
mouths. To others they tied burning matches between their fingers, yea to their
eyes, ears, noses, tongues, cheeks, breasts, legs, and secret parts. Yea they
crammed the secret parts of several women with gunpowder; and so setting fire to
it, blew up their bellies and wombs, most barbarously. Others they tormented
with Bodkins, and Knives, and to some they made holes through the sleshy part of
their Arms, thighs, and Legs, and so thrusting cords through them, tormented
them after that fashion. Some they hung up in the smoke, drying them with small
fires, and sometimes giving them small drink, or water to refresh them, that
they might not dye too soon, and be freed from their torments. Some they
roasted with fire made of straw, others had their hands and feet bound so hard,
till the blood sprung forth of the ends of their fingers, and toes. Some had
their hands and feet bound backwards together, and their mouths stopped with
rags, to hinder them from praying. And several they hung up by their privy
parts: They plained the faces of others with Chisels, others they caused to
draw on boots, filled with scalding Oil, and so roasted their legs over the
fire. Some they gelt in the presence of their wives and Children: Others had
their bodies hung up by cords, and every joint dislocated by tying of weights to
their several limbs. Some were gagged, and with Tunnels had stinking water and
piss powered down their throats, till their bellies swelled like Tuns, whereby
they dyed with most horrid torment. Then they thrust down the throats of some
knotted clouts, with a string fastened to them, whereby they pulled them out
again, and putting them to miserable torment, by misplacing their bowels, that
many became blind, dumb, deaf, and lame for ever. Some they sawed off their
legs alive, one Minister they bound upon a Table, and placing a great Cat upon
his belly, so provoked the Cat, that she scratched his guts forth of his belly,
with its teeth and nails, till he dyed. At Madenburg, they ravished the wife
and daughters of one of the Ministers before his face, and tore from the
Mothers breast a sucking infant, and stuck it on the top of a Lance, and after
they had made him see all this, they brought him into the street, and burnt him
with his own Books. Yea such was the abominable beastliness committed at this
time, that no pen can write it. In Pomeren they made the Parents sing Psalms,
whilst they ravished their daughters before their faces. Nay they spared not
their dead Corpses, but lay with the women after they had out their throats: At
Basil and Friburg, and other places they did the like, eating the young
children, and wearing the noses, and ears, as a bravery in their Caps.

Thus these Massacres, and bloody Murders defiled the whole Land, and Germany
groaned under the oppression, till the peace of Munster, and Osnaburg 1648.
which put a stop to the Persecution, they being forced to it, by Gods bringing
in the King of Sweden, who overrun Germany, and revived the cause of the
Protestants, As also in Hungary.
almost overthrown by so many thousand persecutions.

These bloody Tyrants, vented their rage and fury, not only in Germany, but
also in Hungary, and other parts: they committed there also the same Tragedys
where they had any power, and the Ministers were generally banished, and put to
death, and the same picture of their cruelties, which you have had represented
to you in Germany, might have been acted over again in this Kingdom, but we
have not room at this time for the like relation; only one new sort of death
read of, used to a Minister in Hungary by tying about his naked body, Hens,
Geese, Ducks, and Hares, and so seting dogs upon them, baited him to death,
tearing and renting his flesh, till he dyed.

Their rage in the Low Countries, The Low Countries. Hist. of the Netherlands.
and Sleidens Commenta.
or Netherlands was no less, nothing but fire, and faggot among them, by which
suffered many a worthy and Godly person, of every Age, and Sex, as well in
Holland, as else where.

At Antwerp, one Nicholas a pious holy man, was bound up in a sack and so
drowned.

In Holland, Pistorius was burnt, being carried to the stake, with a fools Coat
on his back, and also a widow called Wendelmuta, who showed much constancy.

Several Ministers were beheaded, among the rest one George Scherter, who some
time after he was beheaded, his body lying on the belly, turned himself on the
back, and crossing the right foot over the left, and his right hand over the
left, so continued, to the great admiration of the spectators, and the
conversion of many.

Several were drowned, others made away in Prisons, others shut up in dark and
noisome places, and none suffered to come at them, fed only with bread and
water, till they were famished.

At Lovain, several were Martyred, some by fire, others beheaded.

In the years 1543. and 1544. There was a very great persecution all over
Flanders, so that there was neither Town, nor city, in all the Country, wherein
some were not banished, beheaded, or condemned to perpetual Imprisonment,
neither was there any respect to either Age, or Sex: But especially at Gaunt,
many of the chief men were burned for Religion, The like was in Brabant and
Artois, insomuch that 200. men and women, were made away at one time, some
drowned, some buried quick, and some privily Murdered, so that the hands of
the hangmen begun to be tired, and weary with Executions.

At Delden, at echlin, at Dornic, several were put to death, among the rest two
Noble Virgins sisters, and one Mother, and her 3. Sons, who all dyed owning the
Gospel, and exclaming against the cruelty of the Papists.

At the same time they miserably punished one Bertand, for trampling the host
under his feet, in his zeal, by tormenting him thrice upon the Rack, and then
because he would not recant, in the market place of Lornick, they put a ball of
ron into his mouth, to keep him from speaking, and then crushed his right hand
betwixt two flat red hot rons, till the form of his hand was changed; and after
that, they did the like by his right foot, which he enduring with admirable
patience, taking the Ball of iron out of his mouth, they cut out his Tongue,
and then thrust in the Ball again; then tying him with a chain about the
middle, with a pully, hoisted him up, and making a fire underneath, let him
down by degrees into the fire, and so continued hoisting him up, and letting
him down, till he dyed, and was burnt to ashes, which they cast into the River.

At Valence also, several were executed, and also at Lisle, where one of the
Judges pronouncing the sentence of condemnation, said, This day you shall go to
dwell with all the Devils in hellfire.

But the great instrument of ^ersecution, in these Countries, was the Duke of
Alva, who boasted, that besides those he had slain in the wars, he had put into
the hand of the Common Hangman, to be executed, within the space of six years,
no less than 18000. persons, permitting his Soldiers to ravish honest matrons,
and virgins, and many times causing their parents, and husbands, to stand by
and behold it.

His Son Don Frederick following his Fathers Steps, committed many cruelties,
and at Zutphen he hanged, drowned and murdered a great number of the
inhabitants, showing infinite cruelties upon their wives, and Virgins, not
sparing the very Infants; and also in Naerden in Holland, where entering the
Town without resistance, he committed such abominable Cruelties, that never
Turks, Seythians, or the most barbarous, and inhumane Nations in the World,
exceeded them. Here treacherously he commanded all the Burgers, and chief of
the inhabitants, to assemble themselves together, that he might acquaint them
with some Orders, and when they were all assembled together, in the Chapel of
the HOspital, he commanded his Soldiers to murder them all, without sparing
any one. The men were all slain, and the women of the Town first ravished, and
then barbarously murdered, the children, and infants had their Throats out, so
that the whole Town was destroyed; and neither man, wife, maid nor child,
young, nor old, spared, and the Town was rased without pity, or mercy.

The same Don Frederick, at Herlem, exercised the like perfidiousness; for when
they had been forced to deliver up their Town, through Famine, having eat for
hunger, bread made with linseed and turnips, and lived upon Horses, Dogs, and
cats, they made a composition, by which they paid 240000 florins to redeem
their Town from spoil, yet being entered, according to that wicked Principle of
theirs, that no faith is to be kept with Heretics, he commanded all the
Townsmen to bring in their arms, and to assemble themselves in the Cloister of
Zyel, and all the women in the Cathedral, and all the Soldiers into another
Church, where he made his Soldiers guard them, whilst the persidious Spaniards
plundered their Houses: The next day he caused 300 Walloons to be hanged, and
beheaded, and two hundred and forty seven Soldiers more to be drowned, in the
Mcre at Harlem. The day following 300. Soldiers and Burgers, lost their heads,
and the next day many more, and several Ministers: and also all the English,
and Scots they could find, and to fill up the Sea of blood, all the sick and
wounded were beheaded at the door of the Hospital. And a party of Soldiers that
were in an out-Sconce were all starved to death.

At Valenciennes they hanged up all the French Soldiers, all the Protestants,
and ministers they could take in the Town, and consiscated all their goods
which amounted to a great vallue.

At Antwerp they drowned one John de Boscane a Protestant in a Tub of water,
and because he was tall, and the tub of the shortest, so that they could not
stifle him, they stabbed him with daggers, and so both killed and drowned him at
once. In the same place abundance more were martyred for the Truth, and
cleaving to their Religion, embraed death cheerfully.

Also at Breda diverse suffered for the same cause, and indeed all Flanders
over, their dead Bodies being cast forth, to be gazed on in every place; and
multitudes, both men and women, were imprisoned for their belief and
Conscience. In the City of Valence, they executed 57. persons, most of them
Burgesses, only because they professed the true Faith of Jesus Christ, and
dissented from the Religion of the Papists.

And to conclude the sad Catastrophe, Strada.
we may also remember, that Prince William of Nassaw, Prince of Orange, was
shot by a villain called Joanville, encouraged thereto by a Jacobine Friar, who
was hanged for the Fact, though it proved not mortal. But that attempt not
being enough to satisfy these blood-suckers, and Prince-killers, they hired
one Gerard a Burgundian, who taking better aim, shot this Prince, the head of
the protestants, so that he dyed immediately, as he was coming from dinner at
Delf in Holland; 1584.

Let us now stepped into France, France. Histr of France, Hist. of the Tragical
Massacres in France.
and see whether the gospel has any freedom there, from their persecutions,
you will then behold the same picture of cruelty, murder and Blood; they
change not their principles with the air of the Country, they are not bloody
and cruel because they are Spaniards, but because they are Papists, it is infused
into them by the Priests, and as principles of their Religion, and not sucked
into them from without, they are the same in France, as elsewhere, bloody and
murtherous persecutors of such as fall not down and worship the Idol of their
setting up: mere Nebuchadnezzars, and cruel Tyrants.

They began there ill the year 1209. with several learned and good men at
Paris, who dissenting in some points were burnt.

At Metz in Lorraine, for professing the Gospel, and throwing down some Images,
they caused one John Clark who denied not the fact, to have his right hand cut
off, his nose to be pulled from his Face, with snarp pincers, and his arms and
breasts pulled off by the some instrument, and then cast into the fire, and
consumed to ashes.

At Paris, at Melda, in Limosine, at Fountains, Rutiers, Roan, Troyes,
Bourdeaux, St. Michael, Lions, Meaux, and Fera, and in several other places, a
great number were burnt, racked, whipped, beaten, and diverse ways tormented to
death; at last they made a Law, that all that were condemned to be burnt, if
they recanted not at the stake, should have their tongues cut out, that they
might not with their holy and dying speeches, move others. And this was
dilligently observed.

In Paris one Florent Venote a Minister, was imprisoned in so narrow a place,
that he could neither stand nor lie in it, in which they kept him 7. weeks,
whereas there was never a malefactor that could endure it 15 days without
growing mad or dying. Afterward they cut out his Tongue, and lastly was so
merciful as to execute him.

The Duke of Guise another of the Popes Instruments of persecution, upon the
Hugonots as they call the Protestants in those parts, committed, with his
Soldiers, many bloody and barbarous murders, among the rest at Vessy, he put
several hundreds to death, of men, women and children, that were assembled to
hear a Sermon, mangling their Limbs, and strewing them about the seats and
galleries of the Church.

At Sentis many suffered, some were beheaded, some murdered, some whipped, some
beaten, and sent to the Galleys, not sparing the simple women. And the same
also at Charlons, where they tortured one Fournier a minister, by straining his
thumbs with a small cord, till the blood came out at the ends of them, being so
tied fast behind his back, with another Rope they hoist him up by the Thumbs,
twitching him up and down, then tying great stones to his great Toes, let him
hang so till his Spirits failed him; and then suddenly loosing the rope, let
him fall with all the weights on his face upon the hard floor, and then casting
him into prison, would not let him have the benefit of a Surgeon, with which
barbarous usage, being above 50 years old, he not long after dyed.

At Amiens, all the Bibles, Testaments, and Psalm-books were burnt, and the
ministers Pulpit, with diverse persons, men and women. At Abbeville they slew
the Lord of Harcourt, and dragged some along the streets with their faces in
the kennell. At Meaux there were about 400. of the religious Citizens slain,
besides a 1000. villainies committed, the women, and maids ravished openly in
the streets, and marketplace; men, women, and children massacred, some forced
to be remarried, and others to be rebabtized. The very Priests slaying diverse
with their own hands. At Bar the same cruelties and murders were committed, if
not worse, for some pulled out the hearts of these poor wretches, and most
inhumanely gnawed them with their teeth, rejoicing that they tasted of an
Hugenots Heart. At Sens an hundred protestants were barbarously massacred, and
their naked bodies thrown into the River, their houses plundered and then
burnt, together with the Church. At Crant the like, many murdered. At Auxerre
the like. At Nevers, and Chastillen the like horrid murders were committed,
where they left no manner of cruelty unacted, neither upon women, or Children,
old nor young, not sparing the children in their mothers bellies, but ripping
them out and dashing their brains against the pavement. At Guyen they used all
the cruelties could be invented, where some Italians cut a child in two, and
eat the Liver in hatred to its Religion. At Montargis they committed many
outrages against those of the Religion, and had done more but that they were
opposed by the Lady Rene, Daughter of King Lewis the 12th, and Duchess Dowager
of Ferrara.

At Monlins many suffered: At Man's 200. men, women, and children were put to
death; and such as fled, had their houses pillaged, and were executed in
Effigy, and their children made incapable of inheriting their goods or lands.
Above 120. men, women, and children, Murdered in the Neighbor-villages, some
hanged, some beheaded, some drowned: And one Captain flung above 50. persons
into his fish ponds, to feed his pikes, and as many more were drowned in the
ditches.

At Angers they committed the like cruelties, and above 80. persons executed at
one time, and an aged Gentlewoman of above 70. years of age, beaten to death
with pistols. And one Gentleman they broke upon a Cross, and so left him
hanging, with many other unspeakable Villainies. At Liguel they did the like,
putting out the Ministers eyes, and then burning him with a small fire. The
Village of Aze they burnt to the ground, drowned the Minister of 70. years old,
and Massacred 30. persons. In Tours they Murdered an 140. and cast them into
the river, sparing not so much as the president, because he favored them, for
after they had beaten him with staves, and stripped him to his shirt, they hanged
him up by one leg, with his head downwards in the water, up to the breast, and
whilst he was yet living, they ripped up his belly, plucked out his guts, and
slung them into the river, and sticking his heart on a Lance, they carried it
about, saying, This is the heart of the President of the Hugonots. Shortly
after some hundreds of the richest and best sort of Citizens were murdered,
the Duke of Monpensieur seting up Gibbets, stakes, and wheels in all places, to
execute them on, and when any man, or woman was put to death, they entered their
houses, Murdered their Children, and took all their goods.

At Ponteale Mer was also used all kinds of cruelties, and where many suffered.
And at Roan many hundreds suffered, among the rest 3. Counselors were hanged,
and the Town sacked for 4. months together; at Vire, Valougnes, Again, and
Remes, such horrid cruelties were acted as I am weary to relate, and such
beastiality used toward the women, as cannot in modesty be set down. In the
last of these places, there was 500. hanged upon Gibbets, among whom was a
grave Conncellor in his gown and square Cap: one poor man they mangled, and cut
his body, and filled all his wounds with salt.

At Blois several were executed, among the rest several women flung into the
river, and if any came to shore by swiming, they were thrust back with pikes,
and halberts. At Guil^^^ they flung many from the top of a Rock, upon other
under-lying rocks, by which their bodies were torn to pieces.

In Souraize many perished with several tortures, among which one woman had her
mouth forced open with a dagger, and crammed with lime and then piss poured
down her throat, and besides used very cruelly, by beating, and with cords.
Another man one Peter Roche they caused to dig his own grave, and to go into
it, to see how it would fit him, and then buried him alive. At Marsans they
rowned one woman with Thorns, then whipped her, and lastly stoned her to death.
The like they did by another called Janctta Calvin. In Mont de Martin they put
several to death, and buried one quick. In Toulouse was a very great massacre,
there being in that City at least 30000 Protestants, so that the River was
covered over with the Bodies of the slain. In Limoux, all the cruelties and
villainies that could be devised, were acted, and also at Carcasson, and at
Nonnay where they knocked out the brains of a naylor upon his own Anvill,
because he would not give himself to the Devil, several thrown from an high
Tower; others dragged about the streets, and stabbed: wives and virgins openly
ravished. At Foix, Aurange, Grenoble, Cisterno, Beaune, and Mascon, were no
less (all partaking of the general calamity) than all the fore-rehearsed
villainies committed, in as barbarous a manner; so that all France reaked with
the blood of the Innoeent, and their goar defiled all the Land.

But to conclude this Tragical Scene, we will now end with the great and
notorious massacre of Paris, at the end of the Civil war of France, Aug. 24.
1522. Thuanus.
which happened upon that unholy League between the Pope, the Kings of France,
and Spain, the Duke of Savoy, and the Guises. Peace being seemingly concluded,
between the Leaguers, and the Protestant party, and all differences ended, and
adjusted, though through the private instigations and counsels of the Queen
mother, nothing less was intended; the marriage betwixt the King of Navar and
the Lady Margaret the Kings Sister, being made the stale to draw all the Heads
of the Protestant party into the Net, and with the Heart and Soul of them (as
they called) Coligny Admiral of France, to out off all the rest. The plot was
laid, and with great artice and dissimulation, the chief of all the Protestant
NObility in the Kingdom, are drawn without suspicion to Paris, to assist at
these Nuptials, invited by the King, with all amicable signs of Love, Peace,
and kindness. Coligny among the rest though dissuaded by many of his Friends,
would not seem to suspect the Kings kindness and Royal word. But at the time
appointed, which was at the tolling of the Palace bell before day, in the
morning, all things being before prepared, and ordered by the Guises, the
wicked and bloody instruments, the Massacre begun, the Papists distinguishing
themselves, by hankerchiefs on their Arms, and white Crosses in their hats.
The Admiral Coligny was the first they set upon and Murdered, and then the
rest of the Protestant Nobility and Gentry, who were most lodged in a quarter
together, and then through the whole City, where ever they could find them, so
that there was nothing but blood, horror, death, murdering, and slaying
through that great City, at which time fell by this barbarous means 10000
Protestants. The body of that Noble Admiral they dragged about the streets,
having cut off his hands, and head, which was sent as a present to the Pope at
Rome, and then hung it on a Gibbet, and making a fire under it, used it with
all the dispight imaginable. But this was not enough to satiate, and glut their
bloody minds, immediately the King causes Letters, to be sent away post,
through all his Kingdom, to the chief Citys, and Towns to do the like. And
presently all France is filled with Murders, and slaughters, and the Earth is
bathed with the blood of the Hugonots: In some places more, in some less, as
the Governors, and Magistrates were more or less cruelly, and popishly
affected. At Meaux, at Troys, at Orliance, at Roan, Bordeaux, Toulouse,
Angiers, Lions, and several other Cities, Towns, Villages, and places, nothing
but Massacres, flaughters, Murders, blood, torments, and cruelties were
enacted: so that the dead Corpse in every place lay like dung on the face of the
Earth, and they gathered the fat and greese of men, and women, sold it about at
3 s. the pound, the Rivers were pestered with carcasses thrown into them; and
nothing but horror and confusion, reigned in all places. So that at that time
by computation at least 30000 fell, besides those in Paris, but some reckon
more, for the King himself confessed he had a list of 7000. slain, as Cicarela
relates, in vita Greg. 13. And of all this blood, and Murders, and Massacres,
the Popes Legate publicly absolved them, who were the chief Actors in it.

We will not after this, mention to you the siege of Sancre, 1573 in which the
poor Protestants, were fain to eat Dogs, Cats, Rats, Mice, Moles, Horse hoofs,
Horns, Lanthorns, Calves, and Sheepskins, Girdles, and all their furniture
for their horses, and one eat the head and brains of his own daughter, that
dyed for famine, nor the seige of Rochel, 1575. in which they endured famine,
misery, and hardship, nor of the seige of the same place, in the year 1628. in
which also the famine was so great, that they eat the very buttocks of the
dead, and at the taking it, a bushel of Wheat was sold for 20 l. a pound of
bread 20 s. a quarter of Mutton, 6 l. a pound of Butter, 30 s. an Egg, 8 s. an
ounce of Sugar, 2 s 6 d. a dried Fish, 20 s. a pint of French Wine, 20 s. a
pint of Milk, 30 s. a pound of Grapes 3 s. etc. -- Nor speak of the
persecutions of the Protestants since, by pulling down their Churches, grievous
fines, imprisonments, and banishment, being still wearied and oppressed,
groaning under the yoke of their Egyptian bondage. I am almost weary with
writing, and perhaps thou art with reading, these Massacres, and slaughters,
therefore I will here mention no more, but briefly proceed.

We will now leave the Kingdom of the most Christian King; Spain.
and passing over the Pyrennes, see if the Gospel can have any harbor,
Gonsalvus Montanus Discovery of the Spanish Empress.
or its professors peace in that of the most Catholic King. But alas! the same
Tyrannic cruelty if not worse, we shall find exercised against all that
dissent from the Church of Rome. Spain cannot afford so many Martyrs as France,
because there the professors of the Gospel were but few, being kept from
thence by the terror of the Inquisition. They have been here so careful as to
crush all appearance of the Gospel in the Bud, and such care and inspection is
taken, and such diligent search made, and such horrid punishments inflicted, by
these inquisitors, that it is almost impossible, any Protestant should be in
the Kingdom of Spain, and not to be found out and punished. Yet in the year
1545. several Protestants at St. Lucar, Validolid, Siril, and other places in
Spain suffered death, 30 at one time, and 1550 man more. There were Francis
Romans, Rochus Calculla a Doctor, John Pontio, Gonsalvo a Priest, Juliano,
Leon, Arias Losada, a Physician, with a Lady and several women, and Virgins,
burnt at several times, in several places, and 20. others in one fire, after
they had endured all the horrid torments of the Rack, the Pully, the Trough,
the Barnacle, the twisting Cord, and the like horrid inventions of tortures, in
the Prison of the inquisition. Burton, Bakere, Burgat, Burges, and Hooker,
Englishmen, were there burnt, and horridly tormented, by these cursed
Inquisitors, who have their Agents in every corner, to find out and betray all
such, as they have but the least suspicion of, for favoring Heretics as they
call Protestants: These Agents they name Familiars, who like spirits insinuate
into the bosom of people, to deceive and betray them, and others Flys, who are
also busy in taking up such, as their Familiars betray. So that by these
cruelties subtle arts, and sly practices, they have stifled the Protestant
Faith in Spain, and though there are privately many who own the truth, they are
forced to keep it so private, as scarce to communicate their minds, to a
Brother, or a Sister, for fear of the torments of the Inquisition, which is
much more feared then death.

As Portugal is but a little Kingdom, Portugal.
and the power of the Pope and his Instruments great there, as well as in
Spain, they have mightyly suppressed the truth with their tortures, yet some have
there also suffered, and among others, one William Gardner, an English man,
whom they put to death with most exquisit torments at Lisbon, 1552.

We will pass over the Alps into Italy, Italy.
which being so near the particular Inspection of the Pope, we may well suppose
it does not harbor many Protestants, at least such as dare appear to be such,
and to own the profession publicly, by reason of the same strict Court of
Inquisition, Clerks Martyrology.
at first instituted against the Moors and Jews, in Spain, and now used only
for the finding out of good Christians, and for their torture, and punishment;
yet there have been several that have owned the Gospel, even in Rome it self,
and in several Cittys of Italy, and have sealed their profession with their
Blood; as Arnold of Brixia, Fannius at Ferrara, Dominicus at Placentia,
Gelacius Tricius at St. Angelo, John Mollins at Rome, 1553. Francis Gamba at
Milan, Algerius at Padua, 1555, Aloysins at Rome, Bovellus at the same place,
all martyred for their Faith. Pope Pius the 4th. raised up a very hot
persecution in all the Terriitorys of the Church of Rome, wherein many
suffered: And it grew so hot in the year 1560. in the Kingdom of Naples, that
many noble men, and their wives, and diverse others were slain and butchered:
88. at one time, being thurst up in a close pen, and one by one being taken
forth, and being blindfolded, and led a little way from the place, the
executioner commanded them to kneel down, and so cut their throats one after
another, like sheep, leaving them half dead on the ground, returning with the
bloody knife in his mouth; and muffler in his hand, goes to the rest, till he
had cut all their throats. This was in Calabria, 1560.

The City of Venice kept it self free for a long time, Venice.
from this plague of the Inquisition, till the year 1542, at which time the
Pope so far prevailed, as to set up there the Inquisition, and then began a
terrible persecution, wherein many a servant of Jesus Christ, suffered; Here
they found out a new way of murdering them that they condemned to dye, which
was accounted the more merecifull Judgment, than their Racking, whipping,
beating, and water torments, they fastened and Iron Chain about their middles,
with a very heavy stone tied at it, then were they laid upon a plank, between
two Gondelo's, or small boats, and rowed to an appointed place in the Sea,
where the boats parting asunder, they immediately sunk to the bottom and were
drowned. In the year 1566. a minister, and many others, suffered after this
manner, and diverse sent to Rome, where they ended their days by slaughter, or
else more miserably, in stinking and nasty dungeons, not being permitted to
have any thing to lie on but straw. About that time suffered also at Venice by
drowning Anthony Bicetto, Francis Spinola, Sega, and others. And 1595. a young
Englishman at Rome, whom they used cruelly, having led him from the Capitol,
his upper parts naked, on his head a cap, made in shape of a devil, his
Breeches painted like Hellfire, with devils in it, and thus being brought to
the place of execution, they cut off his right hand, alive, and because he
began to praise God, they gagged him, and then seared all his flesh with hot
Irons, and at last burnt him at the Stake.

It is not the Rocks nor the fastnesses of the Alps that can keep out this
monster of persecution, he even ascends those precipices, The Valtoline.
and in the Valtoline, or the Country of the Grisons, he scratches graves for
the faithful with his murtherous Claws. There had been for a long time, a free
exercise of the Religion, which invited many to fly into those mountains for
safety, but when the power of Rome got among them, it made an horrible
slaughter, and a bloody edict was procured, by the Papists at Rome, for the
killing, and murdering all the Protestants, in those parts, and which was soon
and cruelly executed at Tell. Tyrane, Bruise, Sondres, Malenco, Caspano, Trahen,
and other Towns in the Valtoline, where a very great company of all Sects,
Ages, and Conditions, were as barbarously used, and there murdered, as in any
other place, and this in the year 1620. Many were drowned in the River Alba,
and Adda, some had their Cheeks slit up to their ears, some strapadoed, others
their mouths and ears filled with gunpowder, and so fired; others slashed, and
cut, and so miserably driven to the mountains, others again flung from those
high rocks into the deep valleys, and so broken to pieces, and most of them one
way or other destroyed, without any commiseration, or pity.

In the Marquisate of Saluces are several Churches of the Protestant Religion,
as Pravillem, Biolts, Bietone, Dronier, The Marquisate of Saluces.
and diverse others who lived peaceably for a long time, under the Government of
France, notwithstanding the many attempts of the apists against them, but after
the massacre ot Paris, the Kings Letters were sent to the Governor Monsieur
Biragu^, to destroy them all, but his prudence put a stop to it for the
present, only imprisoning the chief heads of them, till he had orders for their
release; but after this Marquisate came to the possession of the Duke of Savoy,
he made a cruel edict that all persons that would not within 15 days, renounce
their Religion, and go to Mass, should depart for ever out of the Marquisate,
giving them only two months time to remove in; upon pain of Death. This was
published 1601. so that there was nothing to be seen all over the Country, but
packing up, and marching away into banishment, leaving their Houses, Fields,
and Country, which they had for Ages enjoyed; some retired into France beyond
the Alps, some to Geneva, and some to the Valleys of Piemont, none being
suffered to stay, but such as would submit against their Consciences, to go to
mass and to worship Idols: but their neighbors are not free, no place is
exempt, where ever the power of this beast reigns, as we may behold in the
adjoining Valleys.

The poor and distressed Protestants, in the Valleys of Piemont, The valleys of
Piemont.
quasi Pede montium, at the foot of the mountains of the Alps, have been very
great sufferers by the popish Tyrany. They are under the Government of the Duke
of Savoy, and are the offspring of the old Waldeneses, and from that time,
professing that Religion, having Evangelical Churches in the several Valleys of
Angrognia, Bobio, Villaro, Valguicharda Rora, Tagliaretto, La Ricca, di Boneti,
La Torre, St. Martino, Dcrosa, Roccapiata, Lucarna, St Barthelmo, in all which
the Inhabitants were most Protestants, and had been long indulged in their
Religion by the Princes of Savoy, Sir Sam. Morlands Hist. of the Evang Churches
in the valleys of Piedmont.
to whom they were Subjects. But in the year 1565. a cruel edict was published,
that all such as would not comply with the Church of Rome, and go to Mass,
within ten days should be banished from their Country and habitation, but by
the intercession of the King of France, and the Elector Palatine of the Rhine,
this Edict was recalled, and they continued quiet till the year 1655, wherein
the late great massacre was committed against these poor men for their Religion
Sake: Though all along the Papists had by many cunning plots and contrivances
endeavored their subversion, by endeavoring to stir them up to Rebellion, and
by planting Colleges of Emissaries amongst them, which like goads in their
sides still annoyed them, and proved a great trouble and affliction to them:
always procuring some cruel, and harsh edict against them, by their complaints,
and lies raised against them, as 1602 an edict for the banishing all private,
and public Protestant Schoolmasters as incendiaries; and 1622. That no
strangers either Ministers, or Schoolmasters, should be entertained among them;
1634 an Edict came out, that all the Protestants of Cumpiglione, should be
banished: and 1654 the same was done against those of the valleys of Martino,
and Perosa. These Missionary Fathers behaving themselves among them, more
cruelly than Turks, or Barbarians. But resolving to root the Protestants from
among them, and thoroughly to do the work of their Father, the Pope, in the midst
of winter, which is very sharp in those mountains viz. 25 Jan. 1655. they
procured an Order, for the Banishment of all the Protestants, out of the
valleys of Lucerna, Lucernetta, St. Giovanni, La Terre, Bubbiana, Fenite,
Compiglione, Bercherassio; and St. Secondo, within three days after pubcation,
unless they would turn Roman Catholics, and this extended to all in general,
none exempted, of what rank, degree, or condition soever.

And thus these poor creatures, were forced in compliance to this cruel edict,
to fly to save their Lives, and consciences, in the depth of the snow, and all
the valleys covered with waters, women with child, some brought newly to Bed,
old women, and decrepit men, leaning on their staves, young children crying and
lamenting, dragged over Ice, through Rain, Snow, Waters, and a 1000.
inconveniences, and hardships, so that it would have grieved the heart of a
Barbarian, to have seen them leaving their goods behind them, or selling them
for little to the Catholics, who took no pity of their bitter tears, sighing,
wringing of hands, knocking of breasts, mourning, complaining, and lamenting,
'twas but as the bleeting of Sheep, or the lowing of Kine in their ears, and
they rather rejoiced, than any way commiserated these poor wretches. They were
no sooner out of their houses, but they were pillaged, rifled, and ransacked of
all they left, pulling down their houses, cutting down their Trees, making
havoc, and devastation of all things, and turning all into a Wilderness.

This cruel edict was put in execution by Gustaldo, and others; but this is not
all, they had a further design of extirpating and rooting out all Heretics as
they call these poor Protestants; it is not enough to have banished these few,
they could have no redress at Court, and all their humble Petitions, and
remonstrances were not heard, for they had more wicked and bloody designs,
instigated by the Ministers of Rome, who had great influence over his Royal
Highness, and Madam Royal.

Upon the 17th. of April 1655. whilst the Protestants Deputies were detained at
Turin, and delayed sometimes with hope of redress, some Soldiers of purpose
fell upon the Protestans unexpectedly, who peaceably attended the issue of
their petitions, which begat some bustle, they being but few, the Protestants
made some resistance, whereupon many thousands got together, under the Marquess
of Piadessa, and on the 21th. of the same month, began the most horrible
Massacre among these poor Protestants, of these Valleys, as ever was heard of.

There was nothing to be seen through the Protestant Valleys, but Churches
burning, Towns smoking, Houses Flaming, men, women, and children massacring,
nor any thing to be heard, but the confused cries of people flying, the peircing
groans of some dying, and horrid screeks of others tormented: so wicked, and
barbarous was their usuage, that it is scarce to be expressed. In one place they
cut off the heads of 150 women got together for shelter, and all their
childrens brains they dashed out against the pavements and Rocks, some they
slit in two, and roasted: And one of the Soldiers afterward related how he
surfitted by eating too much of the fried brains of a Protestant.

It was afterward certified from very good hands, of all these execrable
murders committed upon these poor people, by people of Honor and credit, and
many of them eyewitnesses. One Sarah Vignes, because they could not make her
say, Jesus, Maria, they ripped up alive, by putting a Sickel into her privy
parts, and so slit up her belly: Others had their breasts, Hands, noses, and
privities cut off, and so left for miserable spectacles. Another they stabbed
often in the soles of his feet, then cut off his privities, and fried them, and
gave their comrades to eat, as a delicate dish; then they seared his wounds
with staming Candles, cut off his ears, and then tore off his nails with
burning pincers, and all this to renounce his Religion, which he still
persisting in, they tied one of his Legs to a mule, and so dragged him about
the streets, till he was almost dead, and lastly binding a cord about his head,
they twisted it with a stick, till his eyes and brains burst forth, casting his
body into the River.

Another one Peter Simond of Angrogna, they bound hand and foot, and slung him
down a fearful precipice, but in his fall, by the way, lighting on the stump of
an old tree, growing in the Rocks, he there hung in a most languishing
condition, for several days, ere he died, not being able to help himself, and
the precipice being so great, that no other could come at him.

One of 90. years old they hacked limbmeal, and then cut off his head: Others
had their bellies ript'd up, and their Gutts hung upon the hedges in the high
ways. One very old woman had her hands and nose cut off, and so left.

They sliced all the flesh from the bones of another woman, and chopped it like
mince-meat: The daughter of Giovanni Carbonier of la Torce, they took, and
putting a long stake into her privities, carried her so on their shoulders,
till being weary, they stuck the stake fast into the ground, and so left her.
Andrea Michalim saw three of his Children torn limb-meal before his face, and
the youngest being the fourth, its brains dashed out against the Rocks. Others
they tormented by slaying off their skins alive, in long slices, to make them
points: several drawn at the tayls of their mules through the streets, and
others following them with brickbats and stones, miserably brusing them till
they dyed.

The daughter of one Peter Fontana, a beautiful Girl, being about ten years
old, taken by these lecheerous beasts, because she was not capable of being
forced in an ordinary way, they tore her so inhumanly, that they left her
almost dead, wallowing in her blood.

The daughter of one Moses Long, about ten years old, they brauched upon a
pike, and roasted her alive, with a fire made upon a broad stone.

One of the Elders of the Church of Bobio, they took, and binding his hands and
privities together, hanged him up by them upon a Gate, and so left him in
exquisite torments, in that shameful posture; and several others they hanged
up by their privities, and their hands bound behind them.

One Rostagnal of Bobio, being 80. years old, had his nose, ears, and other
Parts of his body cut off, and so left languishing in the snow till he dyed.

Four Brothers, and a man, and his wife, all at one time, had their mouths
crammed full of gunpowder, and so being fired, their heads blown to pieces.

The Schoolmaster of Roras being stripped naked, after they had torn off his
nails with pincers, and made a 1000. holes in his hands with their daggers,
they dragged him through the Borough of Lucerna, with a cord, the Soldiers
standing on each side, hacking and cutting off collops of his flesh, as he was
hauld along, still crying to him, will you go to Mass you dog? at last, they
cut off his head, and slung him into the River Pelis.

Another of the same place, they took, and put out his eyes, then cut off his
privities, and thrusting his yard into his mouth, exposed him in that posture
to their public scorn several days together: and after that they flayed him
alive, after a most inhumane manner, and then cutting his skin in 4 pieces,
hung it in the windows, of 4 of the principal houses of Lucerna.

They took out the brains of one Daniel Cardon, and frying them in a pan, eat
them up like Canibals.

Four old women, being 80. and 90. years old apeece, they burned alive.

Several they cut to pieces, and gave their flesh to the dogs.

In another place having taken 11. men, they heated a great Furnace, and forced
them to sling one another into it, till they came to the last man, which they
flung in themselves.

Others they stabbed with impoysoned knives, in the legs, and feet, and so left
them in torment till they dyed. One Chiairet was flayed alive and his grease
taken out of his body. The like was done to several others. One B^rtino had his
nose, paps, and privities cut off, and then his head cleft in twane. Several
Infants were in the snow. Several stoned to death. One Gros the Son of a
Minister, being taken by them had his flesh cut off alive, by small gobbets, in
the presence of his wife, and children, which they murdered before his face.
One woman with 7. children, were all barbarously murdered in their Beds. One
Daniel Rambant of Villaro because he refused to say, Jesus Maria, or pray to
the Virgin Mary, they first cut off one finger, then another, till they had cut
them all off, then his hands, and arms, till fter this manner, they cruelly
mangled him to death. Others they shut up between two stone walls, and
miserably starved them to death. No kinds of death, and no kinds of torments,
were wanting to these poor miserable people. And it would be an endless piece
of work, to go about to give a particular account, of all that were put to the
sword, drowned, burnt, shot, starved, smothered, knocked on the head, and cut
to pieces.

These horrible doings, caused the rest of the Protestants to fly to their
Arms, which they termed Rebellion, though it were only to defend their lives,
from these bloody cutthroats. Those who were so good at Massacring and
murdering, are not so good at sighting, the Protestants get the better, and
with their Arms in their hands, defend themselves, till by the mediation of the
Neighbor Protestant Princes, and especially the English, who also contributed
above 30000 l. to the relief of their distresses, the breach is made up, and a
peace made, but so as these poor Protestants remaining, live under the Tyranny
of their Popish taskmasters, and are forbid all manner of traffic; they rob
them of their goods, and Estates, often times forcing them to sell their birth
rights, for little or nothing; banishing their Ministers, ravishing their
Virgins, reviling and mocking the Matrons, beating and abusing the men, so that
their vailies are become like dungeons, in which they are kept as slaves, kept
in and secured, by strong Forts possessed by the Papists. Thus you see a brief
prospect of what this monster of persecution, this Antichristian spirit has
committed in these places. We will proceed.

You have beheld many sad and doleful spectacles, and if thou art a Christian,
Poland. Lesnae Exccidium. And Adam Hartuians Declaration.
thy heart must bleed, at the relation: we will therefore epitomize their
bloody cruelties, in Poland, for there is no place where they have fixed
themselves with any power, but they have also set up the standard of
persecution. The Churches of Christ in Poland, have likewise sufficiently
tasted of the Cup, and have drank deep of the dregs thereof, especially
whereover the Jesuits, those wicked Incendiaries, and Boutfeaus of Religion,
had any residence, for there is scarce any massacre, Firing, and devastation
but they have a hand in it, or it is projected by their secret plots and
Contrivances. They are still going about like so many Lions, seeking whom they
may devour. Their Garments are dyed red with the blood of the Saints. They are
evermore stiring up the common people to fury, Rage, and Combustion, against
all that do profess the Gospel. All the same things that we have related to be
done in other places, are acted also in this, we will not use tautologies, and
repeat the same things over again, nor grow tedious. But we cannot but tell
you, that many thousands of the Protestants, and professors of the Gospel,
have been destroyed in this Kingdom, and especially at Karnun, Dumbnick,
Skocky, Carieuzin, and Lesnio, all destroyed and burnt for the cause of their
Religion. The last mentioned City being one of the most ancient, and most
flourishing in all the Kingdom of Poland, wholly ruined, and laid in Ashes,
which was three whole days in Flames, ere it could be consumed, in which
perished many hundred souls, besides an inestimable treasure and wealth, no man
resisting or opposing. Here they pulled off the noses of some, and put out the
eyes of others, cut off the tongues hands and feet, of many; gave quarter to
none, but killed and destroyed, all that they could any ways come at. They
pulled the dead out of their graves, rifled the Tombs, abused their dead
bodies, and committed all the outrges could be devised by the wicked heart of
man, scarce to be matched by Infidells, Turks, or Barbarians. The Goths, and
the Vandals, could not exceed them.

In the lower Poland, many suffered, whole families were butchered, men, women,
young, old, murdered without distinction. And in the year 1654. fell a
grievious slaughter among them, putting to death with exquisiti Torments all
they could lay hands on: One Samuel Cardus the Pastor of the Church at
Czaertzinon, they used cruelly, first putting out his eyes, and so leading him
about for a miserable spectacle, then pulling off his fingers ends with
pincers, then they powered down his mouth molten Lead, and while he was yet half
alive, clapped his neck between two folding doors, and so violently severed his
head from his Body. So they served the Minister of Dembnick, and his Colleague,
after having several ways tormented them, cut their throats with a Razor, and
then while breathing, flung them into a pit, and dung, and filth upon them.
They chopped off the head of another young Minister, with a Sithe. At Lesna they
cut off the hands of a pious matron, and three children which she had, they
murdered before her face, cutting off their heads, laying one at each breast,
and the other by her side. Another woman having her hands and feet cut off, and
her tongue cut out, they enclosed in a Sack, and so left her for two days, in
which she lived, making a most miserable lamentation. At Zich^^n they dragged
many out of their Graves, sparing not so much as the bodies of Noblemen, and
brave Commanders, because they were not Catholics.

The same cruelties, Lithuania. John de Kyaino. Krainski 's Relation.
the barbarous and bloody Cossacks acted against the Protestants in Lithuania,
in the year 1648. slaughtering all that were not Catholics, without
distinction of Age, or Sex. Here many had their Skins pulled over their ears,
whilst they were alive, others their hands and feet cut off. Some their bowels
taken out alive. Others had their Shinbones bored through. To some they powered
melted Lead in at the wounds made in their Heads, and Bodies. Some their eyes
were pulled out, and those that were hanged up, and down, in every place were
not to be numbered. That was accounted a mercy to be shot, or beheaded, and
killed outright. Their wives, and Daughters were every where ravished, their
houses and goods fired, and all their Country, and Churches laid waste, and
those that were left alive, and escaped the slaughter, were banished; in every
place was seen nothing but massacres, and the blood of suffering Christians,
ran like streams through the streets of Towns and Citys.

The Ministers were chiefly aimed at, and always cruelly tormented, among the
rest one Adrian Chylnisky noted for his great piety and learning, and
reverenced for his age, was roasted alive, by these barbarous wretches, having
his hands, and legs tied together, and that leasurely, that he might feel the
more torment. In another place, there were above 40. suffered several sorts of
deaths. Near Vilna, the chiefest City in Lithuania, both Father and Son,
Ministers, called Smolsky had their heads sawed off with a Sickle. Another at
Holowczen had his flesh cut off by pieces till he dyed. And Ministers, and
others to the number of 1500, were bound to stakes on the tops of mountains, in
the winter, and so starved to death with cold and hunger. All the several
tortures, which these poor, and miserable Souls endured, and the several deaths
they were put to, no History can describe.

Thus you have beheld the rage and flame of persecution abroad, The Islands of
Great Britain and ^eland.
all Europe full of Slaughters, Blood, Massacres, and Cruelties, by reason of
this Antichristian principle; every land, and Region desiled, fire and faggot in
every place, burning, and consuming those that dissent from the doctrine of
Rome. But this perhaps seems but a Landscape, things done at a distance, you may
not be so much concerned, as if at home, and before your doors and eyes,
perhaps it may not affect you so much, as the sufferings of your own
Countrymen. The sire is but painted, it does not heat and scorch you, the smoke
does not trouble your eyes, and you weep not at these Tragedies, and are not
sufficiently affected at these persecutions abroad, and at a distance. If it be
so, there is reason to let you know, some of the sad and horrible effects of
this monsters rage at home, as well as abroad. Do not deceive your selves to
think Seas can stop him from coming to you, or waters keep you safe from this
paw of the Beast; no, he can stretch out his claws over the British Frith; he
can reach even from Italy into England, from Rome to London; you shall behold
the same monster, using the same cruelties, and scratching up the earth to bury
the Bodies of his opposers. Wherever the Religion of Rome is established in
its pride and power, there you shall be sure to sinde this monster, she rides
upon this terrible beast, and with it crushes the Sons of the earth, and
tramples on the Carcases of the slain, and wades through the blood of Martyrs to
her Throne, where she sits boasting in her Iniquity, and ruling Nations with a
rod of Iron.

And that you may see, the frozen North is not able to affright this Beast, but
that he has gone beyond the wall of the Picts, and established its dominion as
far as the Orcades, I will (still observing the method I began, in leaving our
own concerns last) show you also some effects of its power and rage in
Scotland; from thence we will pass over S. Georges Channel into Ireland; and
lastly behold the sufferings and martyrdomes of the Protestants at our own
doors, and thoroughout England, but with the same brevity, as we have done all
the rest.

In the year then 1527. Scotland. Hist. of the Reformation in Scotland.
Paeric Hamilton having been in Germany, brought home with him into bis own
Country, the doctrine of Luther, and was the first that began to oppose the
blind superstition, and gross ignorance of the Church of Rome, and no sooner
had he began to open his mouth, but Cardinal Beven, Archbishop of St. Andrews,
mounts the Beast of persecution, and devours this poor Saint at a morsel. He
strait is condemned to the fire for his errors, (as they call them) and suffers
at St. Andrews, 1527. In the years 1534. suffered also by burning, David
Stratton, and Norman Gourlay, and not long after Thomas Forret a Dean was burnt
by the same Cardinal. And in 1538. the Gospel still increasing, four more were
burnt in one fire. The next year Jerome Russell, and Alexander Kenedy likewise
suffered by the same Cardinal, and for the same cause, 1543. the same
persecuting Cardinal Archbishop, coming to Edenborow, caused many to be hanged
only for suspicion of Heresy, and one for being only suspected to have eaten
of a Goose on a Friday. And a woman with a child sucking at her Breast to be
drowned, because she would not pray to the Virgin Mary. He caused many to be
banished, and many to be imprisoned, at St. Johnstons; among the rest one John
Rogers a Minister whom he caused to be murdered in prison, and his Body to be
thrown over the walls. 1546. George wischard was burnt by Cardinal Misle,
another persecutor of the Saints. This Wischard was a very learned man, and one
who had been brought up a student in Cambridge, and had prophesied many things
concerning his own Country, which was Scotland, and which afterward came to
pass. He suffered very courageously at St Andrews: The said Cardinal and diverse
other Prelates, looking on, and leaning at the window of the Castle, on Velvet
Cushions. In the year 1563. one Henry Forest was burnt, having nothing against
him, but what he had uttered in consession to a Friar, they had sent on purpose
to betray him, having only a suspicion of him, and all that he confessed, and
for which he was burnt, was, that he thought well of the Articles, that Patric
Hamilton maintained, and for which he suffered. 1558. Walter Mill, who had been
a Priest, was burnt. He was the last man that suffered by the Papists for
Religion in Scotland.

If that we do not sinde any marks of this ravenous beast, persecution in
Ireland, before the year 1641. in which that grand execution, Ireland. Sir John
Temples History of the Rebellion in Ireland.
and Massacre of the Protestants broke forth, it is not because they wanted a
will, and desire thereto, or that there were not many professors in that
Kingdom, but because they wanted power, and opportunity to execute their
malice. For the English and the Protestants, had been watchful of all their
actions, and careful in hindering their designs, they stood upon their guard,
and with their Arms in their hands, as if they dwelt among Wolves, or robbers,
so that it was no easy matter to fulfill their desires, by attempting upon
those, whom they saw so well guarded: but they no sooner found them secure, and
that a long and amicable living together, had made the English and Scotch
Protestants fearless, and consident of their amity and friendship, and that the
troubles in England, gave them a desired opportunity, but instigated by the
Priests, and Jesuits, which came over from Spain, Flanders, and other parts
beyond the Seas, the Nobility, Gentry, and commonalty of the Irish Papists,
conspire together utterly to extirpate, root, and branch, all Protestants out
of Ireland, of what Nation, or condition soever. The Priests telling the
people, that they were Heretics, and therefore ought not to live among them,
or have any commerce with them. That it was no more sin to kill one of them,
then to kill a dog, and that it was a mortal, and unpardonable sin to relieve,
succor, or assist any of them, and a meritorious act to kill, and knock them
on the head, and that such who should dye, or be any ways slain in the
execution, or performance of these acts, should go immediately to Paradise,
should be free from the pains of Purgatory, should have all their sins
pardoned, and they should dye Martyrs. By these means and wicked artifices,
they so exasperated the people, who believe all things their Priests say, that
as soon as the opportunity was given, they showed the horrid effect, in the
most bloody and barbarous Massacre, as ever was committed. Nay those wicked
riests, many of them gave the Sacrament to diverse of the Irish, upon condition
that they should not spare, either man, woman, or child, of the Protestants,
and said that it did them good, to embrew their hands in the blood of
Heretics, and threatened them with excommunication, if they should relieve,
harbor, or succor, any in their distress, and told them, that to take from
them their goods, and Estates, was no more then to take a bone out of a dogs
mouth; and before the Massacre began, the people were dismissed from their
Mass, with free liberty, to spoil, and take away from the Protestants, whatever
they could lay hold on, and to kill them, wherever they could meet with them,
for that they were worse then dogs, being devils, and such as were accursed,
and condemned to hell and detestation. These were the pious benedictions of
these Holy Fathers, and Brothers, the Priests and Friars, so that it was no
wonder, that the rascally rish were so merciless and cruel, believing they
merited Heaven thereby, though afterward some of them met with a halter for
their pains.

All things being prepared, by the opish Agents, and this Massacre long before
secretly plotred, and cunningly contrived, on the 23d. of October, 1641. it
broke forth, at once through all parts of Ireland, Dublin excepted, where the
conspirators were discovered, and prevented: But in all places else, the whole
Land was in a combustion and nothing but blood, murders, rapes, robberys, and
barbarous usages, of the Protestants in every County, Village, Town, and City,
that it is not to be expressed. As it would be too tedious to give you a full
relation of it, and which has been formerly done by others, so we cannot pass
it altogether in silence, without remembering some of their most horrid, and
unparralel'd cruelties.

Multitudes were killed by the Sword in cold blood, some in their beds, some in
their houses, some in the fields, in all places wherever they could light on
them. At Lisgol there were above 150. men, women, and children, consumed with
fire. At Moehan above an 100. knocked on the head. At Tullagh after fair
quarter given, they were put to the Sword, and murdered without mercy. At
Lisnaskey, they hung above an 100. most of the Scottish Nation: at which place
Mac Guire made the keeper of the Castle, Mr. Middleton, to hear Mass, and to
swear he would never alter from it, and then immediately caused him, his wife,
and children, to be hanged. There were a 1000. men, women, and children,
drowned at one time, at Portadown Bridge, and in several places of that County
4000. more, driving them into the loughs, and Rivers, pricking them forward
(being all stark naked) with their skenes and butcherly knives. Many to whom
they had given passes, to go to some place of shelter, or to Dublin, when they
had let them go to some convenient place, they sent Soldiers after them. Many
Towns they laid waste and in ashes, among the rest Armagh and the Cathedral
Church there: and in some parishes two hundred Families were murdered, and a
common butchery, was through the whole County, and in all parts of it, many
thousands peris^ed by Sword, Famine, Fire, Water, and all other manner of
deaths, that rage and malice could invent. Nay, they would not spare the very
cattle, horses, beasts, sheep, were all destroyed, not to eat, but out of
spite, leting thousands lie stinking and rotting up and down in the fields and
highways. In Colrain the living could not bury the dead, and the slain
carcases were flung in wide and waste holes, and packed one upon another, like
herrings. In Killoman were 48. Families murdered. In one house 22. Protestants
burned. In Kilmore 200. Families Massacred: The villains were so wicked, that
they would not give them leave to pray, before they dyed. Some they buried
alive, and some they half buried, others they set up into the Earth, and so
left them to starve. Some they put into deep dungeons to perish at leisure;
others they mangled, and left languishing in the high ways. Some being
grievously wounded, they hung upon tenter hooks, some thrown into bogs, others
hanged up by the arms whilst they slashed their bodies with their skenes, to
know how many cuts, an Englishman would endure ere he dyed. Many women great
with child were hanged up, others ripped up, and their guts pulled out, and their
children thrown to the dogs and swine. Some they cut to pieces by gobbets, and
collops. Multitudes were drowned in Turf-pits, and thousands were starved to
death, with cold in the bogs, whether they were driven or sled for shelter.
Children were forced to execute their parents, and parents their children, and
brothers and sisters one another. The women were as barbarous as the men, and
as ready in their bloody executions, nay, they taught their children to kill,
and showed them to kill an Englishman. Some they boiled to death in Cauldrons,
and they hanged one woman near Caterlaugh on a tree, and her daughter in the
mothers hair; another had his feet burnt off by a slow fire; their spite and
malice reached to the graves, and Tombs, which they opened, and dispightfully
mangled the dead carcases, of all they could meet with.

It is impossible to recollect, or express the abominable wickedness of their
mischievous inventions, or the horror of their bloody executions, performed
with all kinds of circumstances, that might aggravate the height of their
cruelty toward them, and that did express their inveterate malice to our
Religion. Alas! who can comprehend the fears, terrors, anguish, bitterness, and
perplexities of the souls of these suffering wretches, their dispairing
passions, and consternations of mind? or relate truly their deep groans, heavy
sighs, loud schreches, sad lamentations, bitter tears, and horrid trembling,
and astonishment? Their reviling speeches, and wicked boasts and brags,
increased their misery. To see candles made of the fat and grease of thoir
friends, and kindred, to burn before them; and to hear them cry, they are
almost tired with slaughtering, and that a young Cowboy should boast, to have
slain 36. Protestants as a meritorious Act; they never dispatched any without
expressing great malice and hatred, and usually with this their ordinary
sarewell, anim a duel they soul to the devil. They used several blasphemous
speeches against God, and the Scriptures. At Kilkenny on a Marketday they
brought 7 Protestants heads, and set them in the Market place, one of them
being a Ministers, they slit from the mouth to the ears, and putting a leaf of a
Bible before it, they bid him preach, for his mouth was wide enough. Another
they took, and riping up his belly took out the end of his guts, and tying it
to a post, whipped him and pricked him with their skins round the post, drawing
forth his guts by that means, that they might see how long his puddings were.
Some women in Labor, and with their children half born, they flung into the
Rivers and bogs, without any pity or regard. Some they burnt to death, with
seting fire to the straw that the poor wretches had tied about them, to hide
their nakedness. Others they worried to death with dogs.

The number was great of all those that fell under their many cruelties. About
Dangannon were 316. Protestants slain. At Charlemont ^00. about Tire was 6.
barbarously murdered. At Laugh 200. drowned. In another place 300. drowned,
and in the Parish of Kallamen were murdered 1200 Protestants. They roasted one
Mr. Watson alive, and cut collops out of his Buttocks. They broke the back bone
of a poor youth, and so left him in the fields, and some days after he was
found, having knawn all the grass round about him, and eaten it for sustenance,
not being able to wag from the place: yet they would not kill him out right,
but removed him to a place of better pasture, and there left him.

In the County of Antrim they murdered in one morning 954 Protestants, and
afterward in the same County about 1200. Near Lisnearvie 24 were burnt in one
house. And that bloody butcher Philim O Neal, boasted he had flain 600 at
Gargauh, and that he had not left man, woman, nor child at Munterlough. And in
another place he murdered in their houses above 200: so that many houses were
filled with dead bodies. About 12000 were slain in the highways, as they fled
toward Down: some thousands were drowned, and many starved to death with
cold: so that in the province of Vlster only, there were about 15000. murdered
by sundry kinds of torments and death. A boy not above 14. years of age one
night slew 15. Protestants that were set in the stocks with a skeen. And
another that was but 12. years old, two women and an English woman; A Papist,
killed 7. men and women, her Neighbors, in one morning, forsaking nature, and
Country, and all humanity, having imbibed those horrid principles, distilled
into them, by their Ghostly Fathers.

He that has a mind to be more fully satisfied of all their bloody butcheries,
may read Sir John Temples Book of the Irish Rebellion, and that they are not
falsely or maliciously put upon them, they may there see the parties names, and
the several witnesses, who gave in upon oath all that has been here related, so
that it is still upon record, and among the Rolls of that Kingdom, and will not
be forgotten by posterity. The slaughter and butchery was great, the beast had
here a full feast, and he was gorged and glutted with blood; for according to
the strictest account and computation that could be taken, there was murdered
and made away in cold blood, by these execrable Irish Papists (besides those
killed in sight) from the first beginning of this horrid Rebellion, to the
cessation of arms, Sept. 15. 1643. which was not full two years, above 300000
British Protestants, English, Welsh and Scotch.

Let us now return home and leave this Land polluted with blood and Murders,
and let us see if our own Country had escaped from becoming a prey to this
Monster: England.
Englishmen are naturally of a kind and loving heart, of a merciful nature and
pitiful disposition; they are apt to be touched with the miseries of others,
and they are not in their own natures bloody, barbarous, nor cruel: But we
shall anon behold the marks of their rage, we shall behold the land flaming
with the bodies of Martyrs, and the streets running down with blood, this fair
Island to become an Acheldama, a field of skulls and Martyrs bones: We may see
Tragedies Acted in every place, and the Monster glutting himself with the fried
flesh of Saints. It is then from the principles of their corrupted Religion,
the Englishmen, as well as others obtain this cruelty and fierce nature, and
become so unrelenting, and hardhearted, as to cut the throats of their friends,
Neighbors, and acquaintance. It is this horrid Monster of perfecution, which
this Popish Religion rides, and which bears in triumph the pomp and pride of
men, and by which Rome maintains its power and greatness, over as well the
Souls as bodies of poor and ignorant wretches, and carries Kings Captive in
chains, and makes the great ones stoop to its greatness, and humble themselves
at his feet, and by which the Pope and his conclave have intruded yoaks and
fetters, on the hands and necks of Princes, and enslaved the whole Christian
world. This is it that alters the very nature of Englishmen, and makes them
like Turks, Infidels, and Barbarians; The venom of this Monster being sucked in
with the principles of Popery, infects the blood, and envenoms the Soul:
Instead of being meek and humble, it makes them proud and arrogant; instead of
observing the commands of Christ, it performs that of the People, though never
so contrary: If Christ says, hurt no man, pray for your persecutors, submit to
Magistrates, and Governors, the Pope and his Doctrine says, kill every man
that is not of your Religion, curse those that disobey your commands, kill,
stab, depose your King and Governors. This is the Doctrine, these the
principles and commands of the Romish Church, and has been ever since she was
polluted and defiled, and had once bestrid this bloody Monster to maintain her
pride and greatness.

It was very early, English Hist. Fox Book of Martyrs.
that this bloody beast of persecution began to show his fangs, and his sharp
nails, and armed paws, and it was early that this Island found those who began
to perceive, and to testify against the corruptions, and superstitions of
Rome. As high as the year 1200. When John of Salisbury, plainly set forth the
oppression and burden of the Pope, and his creatures, and after him John
Grosthead Bishop of Lincoln, who wrote to the Pope, and admonished him, for
which he had like to have suffered. But the Monster did but yet show his teeth,
and waited for the bloody banquet, he afterward obtained. But we may find
more early testimonies against the corruptions of the Romish Church, so that
they need not tell us, as they often impertinently do, of Luther, and the
newness of our Religion, for in the year 884, John Patric Erigena a Britain,
ordained the first Reader at Oxford, by King Alfred, who was condemned and
Martyred by the Pope, for writing a Book concerning the Sacrament. In the year
960. many Divines wore the marks of this beast in their face, being by order
from the Pope, branded in their faces with red hot irons, for dissenting in
many things about the Mass and Purgatory, Monkery, and such like, and for
calling Rome Babylon, and Cloisters the Nurses of Sodomy; and 1126. one Arnold
an English man, and a preacher, was but chered at Oxford, for preaching against
the pride of the prelates, and the wicked lives of the Priests. Anno 1160. the
Waldenses came hither for succor, and were persecuted and condemned, burnt,
whipped, and stigmatized for their Religion, both at Oxford and other places.

Almost in every year, God raised up many learned and good men, to give their.
Testimonies against the corruption of Rome, both by preaching, disputing, and
writing against them, as 1170. Gualo, and Gilbert Foliot, Doctor in Divinity.
1200. Silvester Gerald. 1207. Alexander a Divino. 1210. Gualter Maxes,
Archdeacon of Oxford. 1255. Sebald Archbishop of York. 1260. William
Stringham, Doctor of Divinity. 1270. Roger Bacon, fellow of Merton a Divine,
and Mathematitian. 1290. John Scotus the great Schoolman. 1320. John Baranthorp
Doctor. 1326. John Lyran a Divine of Oxford, 1330. John Okeham called Doctor
singularis. 1340. Thomas Bradwardine. 1351. Nicholas Orum. Doctor of Oxford.
1355. Rich. Filzrulf Chancellor of Oxford: and about the same time Doctor John
Wicklif: and our famour Poet Jeffery Chaucer. 1379. William of Wickham, Bishop
of Winchester. 1382. Phillip of Repington. 1429. Alexander Carpenter of Oxford.
1440. John Felton of Magdalen College. 1460. John Capgrave Doctor of Divinity
at Oxford. 1470. Henry Parker. All these grave ample testimonies, by their
public writings, against their many corruptions, and evil Doctrines, and
sup^rstitions worship of the Romish Church, with the hazard of their lives,
Honors, Liberties, Estates, and Fortunes. So that many were persecuted, and
some burnt under King Henry the 2d. 1174. and 1380. Vtred Bolton, and John
Ashwerly endured persecution. 1382. John Ashton. 1390. Walter Brute, and John
Pateskul. 1392. Doctor Crump were persecuted. 1400. William Sawtree a Divine of
Oxford was Martyred. 1401. William Swinderly was burnt in Smithfield. 1407.
William Thorp suffered. 1420. Lawrence Redman and six others grieviously
persecuted. 1417. Lord Cobham was burnt in St. Giles's fields. 1421. John
Purvey Martyred. 1428. William White burnt: and the same year Richard White.
1433. Peter Clark a Divine of Oxford, for maintaining publicly the Doctrine of
Wickliff was fain to fly, but was taken beyond the Seas, and his tongue cut
out, then hanged, and afterward burnt. 1442. Roger Ovely was hanged and
quartered. 1447. Humphry Duke of Gloucester was Murdered in prison by the Popish
party, for being a favourer of the preachers of the purer Religion. And several
others, that were diverse ways persecuted, for the sake of Religion, before the
rising up of Luther: God having in ages, raised up some to testify to the
truth, and to maintain the purity of his Gospel.

We have mentioned to you only the Divines, learned and great men, that
suffered by the cruelty of persecution, but there were also sundry, and diverse
lay men, that then openly owned the truth, and suffered for it, for 1409. John
Badly, a Tailor was burnt in Smithfield. William Thorp, John Ashton, John
Purvy, and others suffered for Wicklifs Doctrine. And as the number of the
faithful increased, who now began to be called Lollards, so persecution grew
hotter, and the rage and malice of the Papists were augmented. 1413. In the
Reign of King Henry the 5th. Sir Roger Acton, John Brown, and John Beverly,
were put to death in t. Giles's fields, and diverse others to the number of 36.
1436. John Claydon, a Coriar of London was burnt: and with him Richard Turning
a Baker, 1416, Benedict Vlleman was Martyred, and several others, to a great
number imprisoned. 1422. in the Reign of King Henry the 6th. William Taylon a
Wickliffian was burnt in Smithfield. 1422. Henry Web, and John Florence were
cruelly whipped, 1428. and 1431. about 120 men, and women suffered, many of them
burnt. 1428. William White was Martyred, and at the same time two were burnt at
Colchester. 1430. Richard Hoveden, a Citizen of London, was Martyred for the
same cause, near the Tower: and diverse more cruelly whipped and handled. 1431.
Thomas Bailey Minister was burnt in Smithfield. 1439. Richard Wiche a Minister
burnt at Tower Hill. 1433. In the Reign of King Edward the 4th. John Goose was
burnt. 1494. In the time of HJenry the 7th. one Joan Boughton, 80. years old
was burnt in Norfolk, and another in Smithfield. 1506. Several were
stigmatized; and many did penance, and William Tilsworth was burnt in the Town
of Amershant where they forced his own daughter, to set fire to the faggots,
that were to burn her Father. And two years after Thomas Bernard, and James
Melton were burnt in the same place, and one Roberts at Buckingham. 1506.
Thomas Chase after many and cruel usages and hardships in prison, was there
murdered. 1507. One Thomas Norris was burnt at Norwich: and Lawrence Gust at
Salisbury: and a woman at Coippingsadbury: with diverse other per2ons, in the
Reign of King Henry the 7th.

In the Reign of Henry the 8th. the flame began to increase, and abundance
suffered in every place. 1511. William Sweeting, and John Brewster, were burnt
in Smithfield. The same year William Carder, Robert Harrtson, and Agnes Grebyl
were burnt, they forcing the husband and daughters of the woman, to come in as
withesses against her. Also Mr. Style with his Book of Revelations in English.
25. burnt, and 5. other persons accused for reading an Heretical Book, which
contained many damnable opinions, being the Evangelists in English. 1514.
Richard Hune murdered in the Lollards Tower, and afterward burnt. 1517. John
Brown was burnt. 1518. John Stylman was burnt in Smithfield: about the same
time Thomas Man in Smithfield, and Robert Cousin in Buckingham were burnt.
1518. Christopher Shoemaker at Newbery. Richard and Robert Bartlet, and John
Scrivener burnt: the children of the last mentioned, being forced to set fire
to their Father. And it was most usual to compel children to accuse their
parents, parents their children, Husbands their wives, wives their husbands:
bosom friends, and Brothers, and Sisters one another. And many hundreds were
forced to abjure against their Consciences, or else be burnt.

But now two things greatly increased the professors of the truth in England,
which were, the bold owning the Gospel and the true profession thereof by
Martin Luther in Germany; and the Art of Print"ing, whereby it was more easily
promulgated and dispersed through every County, and in all Languages. And now
the beast began to rage, and lay about him, persecution and slaughter was
raised every where; thorowout the Kingdom, against the Lutherans; and 1519.
many Prorestants were apprehended in Coventry, imprisoned in nasty dungeons,
and 6. burnt. And two years after in the same place Robert Silkeb. 1423. Thomas
Harding was burntat A Chesham in Bucking ham-shire. 1529. One Sigal Nicholson
was hung up by the privy members, for having Luthers Books in his house, being
a Stationer at Cambridg. Several were abjured. William Tracy Esquire; burnt two
years after his death. 1530. Thomas Hitton was Martyred at Maidstone. 1532.
Richard Bayfield, a Monk of Berry after he had been whipped, and most cruelly
handled in Prison, gagged, beaten, bound, and degraded after a shameful manner,
he was burnt with much druelty in London, continuing half an hour alive in the
flames, for want of fuel, and when his left Arm was burned off, he rubbed that
side with his right, till it fell also in the fire. And about the same time
John Tewksbury was burnt also in Smithfield. Several imprisoned, and fed with
bread made of sawdust. Many set in the stocks, with Iron collars about their
necks, and several racked till they were lamed. 1532. James Baynham was also
burnt in Smithfield. John Bent at the Devises: and one Trapnel, at Broadford in
the County of Wilts. Three were hanged in chains, for burning the Image or Rood
of Dover-Court. John Frith, Andrew Hewet, and diverse others were burnt Thomas
Bennet, William Tyndal, John Lambert, William Leiton, and Collins, a Lawyer
burnt, and Robert Packington Murdered. And one Peck burnt at Ipswich. Doctor
Barns, and Thomas Garrat in Smithfield, and also William Hieron in the same
place; John Potter Murdered in Prison. Thomas Bernard, and James Morton. 1544.
Robert Testwood, Anthony Parker, Henry Filmer, at Winasor. 1541. about 500 in
and about London, either dyed in Prison, or fried in the fire in Smithfield.
Danlip, Dod, Saxie, and others slain. One Henry at Colchester, Kerby, and Clark
at Ipswich, and Bury. And 1546. Anne Asken after she had been most cruelly
rackt, (and that by the Chancellor himself, who having a more cruel heart then
the Executioner, racked her to the highest extremity,) was burnt in Smithfield.
At the same time also Belerrain, Adams, and Lacells, and one Rogers in
Shropshire.

But all this was nothing, to the rage and Executions of bloody Bonner, and
wicked Gardyner, two notable agents of cruelty and Tyranny, and who stoutly
spurred on the raging beast of persecution, in the days of Queen Mary. Then the
Protestants fell by heaps: then suffered George Hooper, Rogers, Tailor,
Bradford, Sanders, all samous then. And 1555. Thomas Tomkins, whose hands
Bonner burnt in Prison with a Torch, to make trial of his constancy, and
afterward caused him to be burnt in Smithfield. Then William Hanter cruelly
used and burnt. Higbed, and Raily in Essex. Pigot, Knight, and Lawnence, at
several places in Essex. Doctor Ferrar Bishop of St. David's burnt there.
Rawlins, White, at Cardiff. George Marsh at Chester. William Elower at
Westminster. John Cardmaker a Minister in Smithfield: and with him John Warn,
Sympson, and Ardley, in Essex. Thomas Hawks, at Cogsh ill in Essex. Walls,
Osmond, Banford, Osborn, all burnt also in Essex. Bland, Shetterden, Middleton,
Frankesh, all burnt. Also Hall, Wade, Harpole, Joan Beach, and Margery Boly, in
Kent. Carver, Launder, Ireson, Denby, Newman, Packingham, Hook, all Martyred in
several places. Coker, Hooper, Lawrence, Collier, Write, Stere, at Canterbnry.
The Prisons were now full in every place, and nothing but cruelty, and
oppression through all the Land. Robert Samuel, Minister suffered Martyrdom at
Norwich. Anne Potten, and Joan Trunchfield at Ipswich. William Allen at
Walsingham. Lo in Suffolk. Cob at Thetford. Five more in the Diocese of
Canterbury. Two more at Litchfield. Glover, and Bonge, in the same Diocese.
Oliver Richardine in Shropshire. Wolsey, and Pigot at Ely. The famous Ridly and
Latimer at Oxford. Four more at Canterbury. And Mr. Philpot in Smithfield.

Anno 1556. still continues their wicked, and bloody rage, the land still is
all in a flame, and Blood and cruelty reigns in every place. The bloody
persecutors begin the year, with the martyrdom of 7 persons in the first month,
who were all burnt together in one fire in Smithfield. and immediately after in
Canterbury 5 more, men and women. And then followed the same year, Doctor
Cranmers Martyrdom at Oxford, who had been Archbishop of Canterbury. Three more
at Salisbury. Six more condemned by Bonner and burnt; two more at Rochester in
Kent. Six at Cholchester. John Hullier Minister suffered at Ely. Two at Bow:
Four more in Smithfield; two at Gloucester. Three at Beckles in Suffolk. Four at
Lewis in Sussex. And two more presently after in the same place. One at
Leicester: and 11 men and two women, at Stratford-Bow. Roger Barnard, at St.
Edmunds Bury. Two at Newberry; three women in the Isle of Guernsy, one of which
being great with child, as soon as the fire took hold of her, had her belly
burst, and the child sprung forth alive, being a boy, but was adjudged
presently to be flung into the fire, and burnt, which was accordingly done.
Four more burnt at Greenstead in Sussex. Thomas Moore at Leicester. Joan Waist
at Darby. Edward Sharp at Bristow: Another in the same place: Four more in
Sussex. Two in Glocestershire, and 15 in Canterbury. 5 more in one fire in
Smithfield. Two in S. Georges fields in Southwark 7 in one fire at Maidstone. 3
men and 4 women more in the same Diocese. 10 more all burnt together in one
fire at Lewis in Sussex: being 6 men and 4 women. One burnt by the Bishop of
Bath and Wells. Two at Lin. Rose Allen had her hand burnt with a Candle till
the Sinnues cracked asunder. 6 more at Colchester. 3 more at Norwich. Two in
Rochester. Mrs Lewis in Warwickshire. 4 more at Islington. Two women at
Colchester. John Noys at Laxelield in Suffolk Cicely Orms at Norwich: several
at Chichester. Thomas Spurdame in Bury. 5 more in Smithfield, Cuthbert Symson
cruelly racked, 3 times in one day, and then burnt with 2 more in Smithfield.
William Nichols at Haverford west in Wales: 3 more at Norwich. 3 more at
Colchester: 13 more in Smithfield: and 6 at Branford. Thomas Hinshaw was
whipped by Bonner himself, with willow rods, and dyed in prison. John Wills
also whipped by Bonner, at his house in Fulham: Yeomans a Minister at Norwich.
Thomas Benbridg at Winchester. 4 more at St. Edmunds Bury. A man and a woman at
Ipswich. 3 more at Bury. A woman at Exeter. 3 more at Bristol, and 5 more at
Canterbury, Queen Mary being then sick, and those were the last that were
executed for Religion in England.

We have given you a very brief account of those who suffered in this
persecution, which though but for the space of 5 years, was very sharp and
cruel; we have omitted many, besides numbers that dyed in prison, others whipped,
beaten, and tormented several ways, many forced to fly, many to recant against
their Consciences, with the like tyranny and oppression every where, and in all
places, raving and raging against all that professed the Gospel, and did not
fall down before the power of the Beast.

But now the Death of Queen Mary, and the succession of Queen Elizabeth, put a
stop to the open rage and persecution of this m^^^^er. God took pity of his
distressed people. The pride and arrogance of Rome was taken away, the monster
of Persecution was banished the Realm: The power and authority of the Pope
vanished, and peace, and Rest, and Liberty, for all the good people of this
Land ensued. The bloody sangs of the Beast, were pulled out, his Claws paired,
and the Scorpions sting in his tail pulled forth: and all his bloody
Instruments of Rome left to the Judgments and punishment of God. But do not
think, that this monster can be quiet, though he be banished the Kingdom, and
the Dominions of that glorious Queen; and though he cannot act in power and
show himself openly in the streets, and in the market places, for which he
grinds his tusks in anger, yet he is restless; and the agents for this Beast
are a seditious and unquiet generation. They now become miners and Sappers of
Kingdoms, and the Emissaries of the Jesuits, put on their disguises, and are
become dark-lanthorn Men to act their villainies by stealth. They are the Spades
and mattocks of Rome, they undermine, and work into the Consciences of those of
their Religion, to disturb the peace and tranquillity of Nations. They are the
fireballs of the Pope, wherewith he puts Nations in a flame at a distance.
These are his ponyards and daggers, wherewith he murders Kings, and stabs
Princes. These are the cunning engines, and framers of massacres and private
murders, and by these sort of men, he stirs up cunningly the sanatical party
in a Nation, and the discontented, the dissenting, and the Schismatical parties
in a Kingdom. They are in all shapes and disguises: They are rich and full of
coin, to carry on all their designs, and to bribe the covetous. They know how
to satisfy all Scruples, and to please all humors, they creep into all
Courts, and are in all places. They are dilligent in their wicked vocation, and
it is their whole study and employ, how to propagate the greatness and power of
Rome, and to subvert all that oppose them: They inculcate into the ears of
their people dangerous doctrines, and establish in their minds wicked
principles. They tell them, that Princes not professing the Romish Religion,
are absolutely fallen from their title and authority, that they are no longer
Princes but Tyrants and Usurpers: and that the Pope may excommunicate them, and
that being so excommunicated, their Subjects ought not to obey them, but are
absolved from all ties of allegiance; that they ought to be thrown out of the
seat of their Authority; the Scepter ought to be wrung out of their hands, and
that it is a meritorious act to depose or to kill such Princes; that the clergy
are exempt from the Jurisdiction of Secular princes, and are not bound to their
Laws, That the Pope of Rome has the full and chief power and command over all,
throughout the whole world, even in Civil matters. That the Magistrates of this
nation are Heriticks, and therefore not to be accounted Magistrates, nor
obeyed. And that after the Bull of their holy Father the Pope is pronounced
against a Nation, that all that shall be then acted, shall be accounted null
and void. That faith is not to be kept with Heretics: and that the Pope has
power to absolve all vows, promises, oaths, how strictly so ever made or done;
with many others of this stamp, whereby they alienate the hearts of subjects
from their Princes, and place all the bonds of Duty on the Pope.

These principles well planted in the Hearts of the people, have caused so many
risings and Rebellions in England. How did they persecute King John and at last
poison him in Swinstede Abbey, what commotions raised Thomas a Becket, that
proud and stubborn Prelate, against King Henry the 2d,, so that he made him
weary of his life, and to commit murder to be rid of him. How many other
Rebellions have they stirred up and promoted in this Land? and what Seas of
Blood have they shed? and how many thousand Martyrs have they destroyed here,
and elsewhere? They exceeded the rage and cruelty of the Heathen, and
abominableness of the Barbarian: they murdered more, and shed more blood, then
all the 10. persecutions. There are reckoned in France only in the persecutions
of the Waldenses and Allbingenses, to have been slaughtered, a Million of
people; and in less than 30 years 150000 Christians, to have been made away by
the Inquisition.

It Is to bring us again to this pass, that these sort of men struggle with all
dissiculties, that we may fry with sire and faggot, and that they may again sit
here as cruel Lords and masters, that make them so industrious to animate the
blind and ignorant people, to their own destruction, Queen Elizabeth having
sent them all packing, with all their trinkets of Superstition, and established
her Reformation and Religion; many penal Laws were industriously made against
them, that they might not be able to do hurt and mischief, which if put in
execution, are sufficient to keep them under, but the indulgency of our Prince
has taken off the sharp edge of their execution, in hopes to oblige them to a
fidelity and compliance, and to live in peace and quiet, but it is impossible by
these means to subdue them, whilst their Priests have the opportunity to
distill their dangerous principles into their minds, they think it is better to
obey their earthly God the Pope, than their Lawful King and Governor, and to
rise in Rebellion at the command of their Ghostly Father, than to live in quiet
under an Heretical Prince, as they call all such as submit not their power and
Authority to that of Rome.

Pope Pius the 5th. Gregory the 13th. and Clement the 8th. all sent over their
Breves and Bulls from Rome against the Queen, which roar and thunder forth
excommunications, Anathema's, and Curses against her and her Subjects. In which
they take from her all her Royal titles, Dignities, and Rights to the Kingdom
of England, and Ireland, declaring her illegitimate, and an Usurper, absolving
all her Subjects from their Oaths, Faith, allegiance, and obedience to her,
Foulis Hist. Popish Treasons, and Life of Q. Elizabeth.
(...) threaten all of what condition soever, under danger of the wrath of God,
not to assist her, in any wise, but to employ all their power, to bring her to
condign punishment, promising ample reward, to all those who shall lay hands on
this proscribed woman, and shall punish her, and to be paid out of the Treasury
of the Church, and a full pardon of all their sins who shall engage against her.

But when they saw these would not effect their desires, and that her subjects
were too faithful in England, Suintilla King of Spain deposed by Childerick
King of France, murdered 665. Childerick the third King of France deposed.
Charles le gross Emperor deposed. Henry the 4th Emperor deposed by Pope Gregory
the 7th. Lewis the King of France interdicted.
they proceed to secret and horrid machinations to take away her Life, from
which she was still preserved by miracalous providence. Their many wicked
attempts against the Life of this blessed Queen, may be fully seen, in several
printed Books, largely showing the manner of their proceedings there; my intent
only is, to put my Countrymen in mind, of the continual practices, against
both Prince and people, in this Nation and elsewhere, and wherever they
dissented, or opposed the wicked and Tyrannical Power of Rome. 'Twas these very
men, agitated by these their divillish principles, of King-killing, that
violently took away the Lives of the two Henrys the 3d. and 4th. of France, the
one by the hand of Ravilliac, the other by that of James Clement a Jacobin,
encouraged by the Jesuits, set on by the Pope, and the case resolved by the
Prior of his Covent, that if he undertook it not for private revenge, but
inflamed by the Love of God for Religion, and the good of his Country, he might
do it with a safe Conscience; and not only so, but he should merit much before
God, and without doubt if he should dye in the Act, his Soul should immediately
ascend into the Quiers of the blessed. This was the good council of this Holy
Father, and for which he was afterward torn to pieces, by 4. horses, but
Clement accounted a Martyr, and his murtherous act extolled openly in France,
both in their Sermons, and printed Books. These are the monsters of men, that
would do the like to every Prince, that opposes their Lusts. Witness their
murdering of the Lord Darnly the Father of King James: of the Prince of
Orange, and of others, of lesser dignity, and of meaner rank, all that fall
under their displeasures.

The providence of God, which takes care of Princes, protected this Queen of
blessed Memory, from their many and wicked Conspiracies, and bloody
machinations. As that in which Robert Bidulph, and the Duke of Norfolk was
engaged 1566. and wherein Northumberland suffered at York. This was followed by
that of Leonard Dacres, and with the like success, 1569. Then the invasion of
Ireland by Steukley, at the great charges of the Pope, happily prevented 1578.
Then James Fitzmoris 1579. is sent into Ireland, and Saunders with Legantine
power, and consecrated banners. And the next year 1580. San. Joseph to them
with 700. talian and Spanish Soldiers, with the Popes promise of 10000000.
Crowns to carry on the work of Rebellion. To them joined the ^^ish
confederates, the Earl of Desmond and his brothers, but were all happily
defeated.

These projects failing them, they conspire the death of the Queen, and make
several attempts to Murder her. First by Somervil, and Hall a Priest, who
being condemned was found secretly Murdered, lest he should betray others,
1583. Then the practices of Mendoza the Spanish Leiger here, with Throgmorton,
and Parry, who had Letters of plenary Indulgences, pardon, and remission of all
his sins, sent him by the Pope, wrote by Cardinal Como, and besides the merit,
he should obtain thereby in Heaven, the Pope promises to remain his debtor, for
killing the Queen: for which attempt he was exeeuted in March, 1585. The same
year Savage, made the same vow, to kill the Queen, being instigated thereto by
Gifford, and Hodgson Priests, and 1586. the same is taken up by Babington, upon
the same principles, inculcated by Ballard a Jesuit, for which they were
convicted and executed, and by the Popish party esteemed Martyrs. Then by means
of the French Ambassador, they dealt with Stafford, and Moody, the latter
proposing to lay a bag of gunpowder under the Queens bed chamber, and that way
to blow her up, but this also was discovered.

These secret plots and wicked combinations failing, the Pope stirs up his dear
Son the King of Spain, openly to invade England, which he does in the year
1588. the Pope having bestowed England and Ireland upon him, and which he now
sends to take possession of, with that vast and as they call it, invincible
Armado, of 150. Ships, extraordinarily well furnished. 20000. Soldiers, 8000.
Mariners and Seamen, 2000. Gally slaves besides Gentlemen, and volunteers in
abundance, so that there was scarce a Family of note in Spain, who had not
either a Son, Brother, or Cosen in the Fleet. Of Brass and Iron guns 2050. with
Powder, Bullet, Match, Muskets, Pikes, Spears, Swords, and all things
proportionable, with Knives, and Daggers, and Skeens, to cut the throats of the
Heretics: and with them swarms of those Locusts, Capuchins, Jesuits,
Mendicants, and the Officers of their sacred Order, (as they call it) the
Inquisition. Besides all these lay ready in Flanders, 50000. Old Soldiers, and
288. Vessels ready for their transportation, and all the King of Spains best
Soldiers, drawn from all parts, even as far as from America, to this
expedition, and had cost the King of Spain before they had set out 12. Millions
of Crowns. But the goodness of God, at that time defended England, from the
gaping jaws of destruction, and discomfitted this mighty Armado, and all its
preparations, and sent them home full of shame, loss, and confusion. The
greatest part of this Fleet was lost and scatterd, and about 10000. of their
men perished, by the English, the Dutch, the Seas, Rocks, Sands, and Tempests,
being utterly broken scattered and consounded.

But yet these sort of people, will not take notice of Gods Judgments, upon
their wicked designs and enterprises, for all this they shut their and will not
see that God is against them. They no sooner recover breath, but they send over
new missions, more emisseries, disguised in all shapes into England, with new
plots, contrivances and designs. Lopez and his accomplices, Cullen, York,
Williams, Squire, and Hesket, enter into a Conspiracy to poison the Queen,
still uncouraged by the Jesuits. and the Spanish Ministers of state. 1594. and
then 1599. Tyroen is stirred up to a new Rebellion in Ireland, having the same
Indulgences, and pardons sent him, as used to be given by the Popes, to those
who were to go to War against the Turks: And 1601. The King of Spain sends to
assist the rebels John Dr. Aquila, with a great Fleet of Soldiers, who land at
Kingsale in Ireland. But notwithstanding all these wicked, and execrable
designs, this Heroic Queen having out lived 4. Kings, and 8 Popes dyed in
peace, and leaves her flourishing Realms, to her successor King James.

One would think now, that the succession of a Protestant King, to the Crown of
England, thereby uniting into one body that of Scotland, with England, and
Ireland, and making up one entire and glorious Monarchy, should have dashed all
their hopes, and that so long and well settled Reformation in Church, and State,
could not be very easily broken and confounded, but these sedulous people, like
worms cut into several parts, retain life and sense, in each divided bit, they
are not easily to be overthrown, and though they have seen so many of their
hellish designs succeed so ill, yet they will not give it over, but encourage
one another, in their wickedness. Two Breeves were brought over from the Pope,
whereby they hoped to put by King James from the Crown, and had others in their
eye of the Nobility of England, whom they would have persuaded with false
Titles, great promises, both of money and men, to have laid claim to the Crown,
seeking at the same time, to raise suspicions and dissentions among our selves,
and sowing discord between England, and Scotland, and dealing again with the
Nobility and Gentry in Ireland to promote new stirs, exasperating also the
puritans, and separatists in England, with many other ways and endeavouts, to
ruin this Nation, so they might bring in Popery and set up themselves. But God
continuing to frustrate all their designs, and King James establishing the
Religion, and service of the Church of England, so very opposite to their
principles, and to all their hopes, they now as it were growing desperate,
enter upon the most barbarous and hellish plot and contrivance that ever was
hatched in the brains and hearts of men: that which we call the gunpowder
Treason, and which we yet yearly commemorate, on the 5th. day of November, the
day, that not only the King, as the head of the Kingdom, Anno 2604.
should have then destroyed, but with him his Queen, all his Royal Issue, the
Bishops, Nobility, and all the chief of the Gentry of the whole Kingdom, should
have perished together at one blow, and have become a Sacrifice to the enraged
Lusts of these bloody-minded Papists. A plot and contrivance that no Age never
could parrallel, no Country ever could produce the like, and which was as
miraculously p^^vented, and detected as it were by the immediate finger of God,
Thuanus. Foulis. Hist. Hist. of the Gunpowder plot.
who pointed out their treasonable practices, even within their dark vaults and
cellars, ^hen the very train was laid, and fire almost put to it. And for this
horrid Conspiracy not only Catesby, Percy, Faux, Digby, Garnet, Hall, etc.
Priests, great contrivers, and promoters of the business, and all sworn to
secrecy, with horrid Oaths and imprications, and taking the holy Sacrament, and
engaging themselves, one to another thereby, and their Faith by the Holy
Trinity, never to shrink from the execution of this their hellish intention,
till it was performed. The King of Spain having also promised them Ships, and
men, and ten hundred thousand Crowns to carry on their work, though perhaps he
might be ignorant as to the way they had intended, to begin the execution; for
I cannot conceive any Royal breast, could have admitted the perfect knowledge
of so wicked, and monstrous an Act without detestation and abhorrancy.

It is not my design, to give you any Narative or Relation of this horrid
Conspiracy, that has sufficiently been manifested, and the truth asserted and
made plain, though at first (an usual artifice with them, and learnt of Nero,
who when he had set Rome on fire laid it on the Christians) they intended to
have laid the wicked Acts upon the Puritans, and since that, they have
endeavored to make the world believe 'twas only a plot of King James his
Contriving, seeking by these means, when they could not blow him up with
Gunpowder, at least to blast his good name, and to make him odious. But three
Kingdoms are not so easily to be deluded, nor our Governors so horridly
Impious, to mock God so solemnly, with annual prayers and thanksgiving, for the
deliverance from nothing, from danger of their own making, and to execute and
take away the lives of men, for false intended crimes; yet these are the
stories these sort of people relate, and buz about, endeavoring to take off
the Odium, and scandal from themselves, and to lay it upon their adversaries.

King James is no sooner gone, but they begin new disturbances, these Protenses
now vary their shapes, and transform themselves into Angels of Light, many of
the Jesuits were known to be among the Presbyterians, and there is none of the
Sectaries without them, in their conventions: they can whine, and pray with the
one, they can rant and thunder with the other, they can cant, and speak
nonsense with these, they can blaspeme, and speak loud with those, they can as
well speak in the Tub, or at the Table, as in the Pulpit, and in the Desk: they
are all things to farther their designs. And we are not now to learn, that the
indulgence granted them in the time of the late King, instead of making them
quiet, gave them fresh hopes, of turning all into a flame, and it is
sufficiently manifested, that these people had no small hand in our late
troubles, and in subverting a most glorious Monarchy, and bringing in an
Anarchy and confusion, in pushing forwards the business of Religion, till they
had brought all to propha^^^ess, in turning a flourishing and peaceable
Kingdom, into a dismal stage of Blood, and War; and exasperating the subjects
of 3 Kingdoms, till they turned Rebels, and by their means brought one of the
best Kings, that ever reigned on the English Throne, to the Scaffold, and to
his Martyrdom.

There are no light proofs of all this that I have mentioned, and we may boldly
affirm, that it was these sort of men, that Converted the most famous City of
Europe into ashes, and were the Incendiaries who gave fire to London, confessed
by Hubert the Frenchman, that was Executed, and others, and it may be more
than suspected, it was by the same hands that Southwark was also fired.

But nothing can quiet these sort of Beautfous: what is it they would have?
Could they in reason expect, or desire greater Indulgence and favor than has
been shown them, by the best, and most merciful of Kings? have they not been
admitted to Honors, to places of Trust, and profit in this Kingdom? have they
not with the rest, enjoyed a perfect tranquillity and happiness? not in the
least molested, nor their Consciences oppressed? has not all the fair means
that could be invented, been used to with these people to fidelity and loyalty,
and yet see it will not do, nothing can convert them from their principles,
they must reign, that they may persecute, and will still endeavor, though with
the overthrow of a Kingdom, to attain their desires. It is not the favors of
a mer^iful Prince can win them: it is not the kindness of Governors, and
Magistrates can persuade them; it is not mercy, or Indulgence, can invite them
from their Treachery, their Plots, and Contrivances.

They are still the same people, and have still the same ends; and we are still
liable to all those dangers which their Hellish plots do threaten us with.
Witness now this new Plot, no question deeply laid in the foundation, with
Jesuitical mortar and daubing, and which we are not yet able to see into, and
which has been years in contriving; but the same God, who has still waked for
England, and has hitherto in a great measure subverted, and confounded all
their designs, has in some measure manifested, and made known miraculously
their horrid designs, against the King and Government, and against the state
and Religion: and will I hope in a short time, more fully bring to light the
depth and fullness of their malice, and pernicious designs, which no doubt
were very bloody and abominable, by the little essay which they have given on
the Body of Sir Edmondbury Godfry, so barbarously murdered, for his Loyalty to
his King, and for his activity in doing his Country Service, and endeavoring
to find out and detect the bottom of this most horrid and bloody Couspiracy,
and to bring to condign punishment, those who would have turned the peaceable
Reign of a merciful Prince into Blood, and slaughter, and Confusion; and who
would have changed the face of a flourishing Nation to Horror and Sadness: who
would have overthrown our Altars, and our Religion, who would have enslaved our
Consciences, or else have burnt our Bodies; who would again have set up the
Monster of Persecution, and have made us all slaves and miserable. This is it
they would be at, and to this end they sacrificed the life of that worthy
Gentleman, and would have done as much to the person of his Sacred Majesty, as
is sufficiently proved against some of those execrable wretches, had not the
hand or the Almighty which defends the persons of Kings and Princes interposed
as a shield, and proved his defense.

I have thus given you a draught of the bloody Beast, but it is but in little,
what a horrid sight would he be, drawn at his full proportion? But look upon
him as he is, view him, and behold the ferror of his Looks: his eyes are flames
that consume the Bodies of so many thousand Martyrs: see his mouth like Hell
gaping for his prey: Blood gusnes out of his open jaws like Rivers; his bloody
Tusks are Racks and tormenting Engines, wherewith he grindes the bones of the
Saints. His tail is armed with the Stings of Scorpions, wherewith he lashes
Kingdoms; from his throat he belches forth Curses and excommucations, and
denounces Judgments and Death upon all that oppose him. It is this monster of
persecution that the servants of Rome have set up in all places, where they
have any power and authority; and by this you may best judge of their principles
and Religion, by these evil Fruits you may judge of the Tree, and of what
Spirit they are. Their hopes doubtless were great, and their confidence mighty,
but Heaven has blasted their designs, and overthrown their machinations, and
redeemed his people from slavery; for which we have cause to rejoice, and to
bless the Lord of Heaven and Earth, and to praise him in the Congregation. Let
there be no more difference and disagreement in opinions, but gather your
selves together as one man, to oppose this armed Beast of Persecution, and let
us conclude in the words of the Royal Psalmist, Psalm. 5.10, 11, 12. Destroy
thou the wicked and murtherous Persecutors, O God, let them fall by their own
counsels: Cast them out in the multitude of their trangressions, for they have
rebelled against thee: But let all those who put their trust in thee, rejoice:
let them ever shout for joy, because thou defendest them: let them also that
love thy Name be joyful in thee. For thou, O Lord wilt bless the righteous,
with favor will thou compass him as with a shield, Amen.

FINIS.

