AN ANSWER TO THE RECTOR'S LIBEL OR, THE BISHOP'S CASE TRULY STATED. SHOWING I.
That the Rector has Stated the CASE disingeniously. II. That the Rubric and
Canons which he quotes in his Justification do manisestly turn to his own
Condemnation. III. That the Three Queries (1. Whether a Rector has Power to
Suspend any of the Parishioners committed to his Charge, from a Temporary
Reception of the Sacrament? And in what Cases he may exercise that Power. 2.
What is the Bishops Office in such a Case? And whether he may restore such
Persons so Suspended, without a Judicial Cognizance of the Crime objected. 3.
Whether in such a Case the Bishop may regularly command the Rector, and whether
such commands are obliging?) Upon which he builds the whole Resolution, are
(modestly speaking) impertinently put, and falsely, or impertinently Resolved.


Revilest thou Gods High Priest.

Act. 23.40. Siquis Clericus Episcopum contumelia affecerit deponitor.

Apos. Can. 54. DUBLIN, Printed by Richard Wild in Skinner-Row, and are to be
Sold at his Shop in Cork Change, 1694.

AN ANSWER TO THE RECTOR'S LIBEL, etc.
SIR,
THE other day I met with, and read a Pamphlet, Entitled, The Rectors Case
concerning the Power of Suspension from the Sacrament, etc. which sent me (in
Indignation against so false and scandalous a Libel) to my Study, where in a
very little time, the Rectors Weakness rather than my own Skill, enabled me to
give the following Answer, which shows, I. That the Rector has stated the Case
disingeniously. II. That the Rubric and Canons which he quotes in his
Justification, do manifestly turn to his own Condemnation. III. That the Three
Queries upon which he Builds the whole Resolution, are (modestly speaking)
impertinently put, and falsely, or impertinently resolved.


I. That the Rector has Stated the Case disingeniously) will in part appear
from the plain matter of Fact here impartially related. In the year 1693. April
14. being Good Friday, The Rector sent a Letter to Mr. M. S. Steward to the
Bishop, and another Letter to the same purpose to Mr. T. N. the Bishops
Gentleman, wherein the Rector said, He thought himself by Conscience as well as
Law, Obliged to Admonish the aforesaid Gentlemen, being his Parishioners, not
to approach the Holy Table the Sunday following, for that they were Vnqualify'd
to receive the Holy Sacrament: Because, as he was told by some, (naming no
body) That they were concerned in a Conspiracy against his Life. Upon these
Letters the two Gentlemen, though wholly innocent, and declaring their Charity
with the Rector and all the World, did in submission forbear the Sacrament at
that time, lest the Rector might, by publicly, and, it may be, indecently
repelling them, give occasion of Scandal: But a year clapsing, and the Rector
during all that time, neither by Word nor Writing, before the Solemnities of
Whitsuntide or Christmas, nor any other time again Admonishing the said
Gentlemen, nor Prosecuting, or Proving the heavy Charge of their being
concerned in a Conspiracy against his Life; therefore the said Centlemen on
Easter Sunday 1694. came up Reverently to the Rails (and were not brought in by
the Bishop vi and armis, as the Rector maliciously and falsely suggests Page
13.) there to receive with other Communicants in the Cathedral Church of the
Diocese, where the Bishop in Person Administered, and the Rector Assisted: But
just as the Bishop was about to begin the Service at the Altar, the Rector
stepped to the two Gentlemen, and forbad them the Sacrament; the Bishop
observing the same, spoke to the Rector not to trouble himself, or words to
that purpose; and after when the Elements came to be distributed, the Bishop
Administered the Bread to his two Servants, as he did to the other
Communicants; but the Rector giving the Cup to the rest wilfully omitted the
aforesaid Gentlemen, and passing them by, placed the Chalice upon the Table,
which the Bishop observing, commanded the Rector to give them the Cup; but the
Rector replied positively and passionately that he would not, adding these
Words; Let it be between me and God; upon which the Bishop, without a word
more, or showing any concern; gave them the Cup. Now observe, that in the
Rector's State of the case, there is 1. No Notice taken of the Bishop's
Administering the Sacrament in his own Cathedral. 2. The Rector is there said
actually to have Suspended the two Gentlemen; whereas his own Letters to them
say only he thought himself obliged to Admonish them, but not a word of
actually Suspending them. 3. The Reason he gives, is their Notorious, Malicious
Contrivances and practices against himself, for, as it is worded in one of his
own Letters, against his Life; whereas in the same Letter he owns it was but a
hearsay without mention of any Proof or Author. 4. He says he acquainted the
Bishop herewith: It Is true he wrote a most impudent and scandalous Letter to
the Bishop, falsely charging both him and his Servants with Heinous things, but
all General, without descending to particulars then, or ever offering to prove
any since. 5. He says the Bishop interposed passionately for his Servants, than
which nothing can be more false. 6. He modestly says, He declined giving them
the Cup; whereas he flatly and passionately refused it, and like Christ's
Crucifiers, imprecated the Guilt thereof upon himself. -- I come now to show


II. That the Rubric and Canons which the Rector quotes in his Justification,
do manifestly turn to his own Condemnation.
1. The Rubric; the first Paragraph whereof says, That they who intend to
partake, should signify their Names at least some time the day before; which
as the Rector truly urges, Page 20. was no doubt so Ordained, That the Rector
might know who intended to Communicate, and that accordingly he might Instruct,
Comfort, Counsel, Reprove or Absolve, as there was Cause, as it is said, or
implied in the latter end of the first Exhortation to the Communion. But did
the said Rector ever in his Life, use the Parish to, or acquaint the people
with this Rubric and Intent thereof? Or did he, as by the 19th Canon he was
obliged, give Warning the Afternoon before, by tolling of a Bell, or any other
way, for scrupulous persons to repair to him for Comfort? Or did he, pursuant
to his Admonition to the two Gentlemen, either come to them, or send for them,
to Examine them seriously as to their pretended Crimes, and their obstinacy in
them, or sorrow for them, or innocence of them? Did he any time in the year
following thus acquit himself? Surely this was his Duty, and far more Decent
and less Offensive, than to surprise them at the Rails a year after his first
and only Admonition, which he seemed to give them in a heat.

As to the second Paragraph of the Rubric; so far were the Gentlemen from
being obnoxious to it, that they bear infinitely a better Character for their
Lives and peaceable Behavior in the whole Country, than the Rector himself,
which I am sorry for? but yet so sure of, that we will venture the whole issue
upon that point; and in the mean time can produce under the Churchwardens
hands of the Parish, a Presentment made against the Rector, among other things,
for his repelling the said Gentlemen, as giving offense to many; forasmuch as
they are persons (as it is worded in the body of the presentment) of good Life
and Conversation, not reputed Notorious or Scandalous Livers, or any way
vitiously inclined, nor Contentious among their Neighbors, or Offensive to the
Congregation. Now this is such a Character, and upon Oath too, as the Rector is
far from deserving; nor can he procure such a Testimony from the Hands of his
best Friends in the Neighborhood, unless they be notoriously Scandalous, who
do not value or Esteem their Reputation.

The Third Paragraph is likewise Answered under the said Church Wardens Hands,
who declare the two Gentlemen, neither to be Contentious, nor any wise
offensive to the Congregation; and consequently there was no necessity of their
making satisfaction, no scandal being given by them, nor taken against them by
any person but the Rector himself: But on the contrary, it is Notorious, That
the Rector is Contentious and Litigious, and that as the Rubric words it, He
continues still in his frowardness, that he has been of a long time and still
is, involved in Lawsuits with his Neighbors; that he has given, and does
still give Scandal and Offense to the Government, by disaffected Words and
Actions, to his Bishop by most Undutiful and Scurrilous ones; (for Which we
refer to the Visitors and Proceedings in the late Triennial Visitation) and to
the whole Parish and Neighborhood, by his Moroseness and Negligence in his
Office: For so the Churchwardens in the aforesaid Presentment have
Authentically Taxed him, as with horrible neglect of his Duty, to the great
Injury and Dishonor of our Church; so also (which is most to the matter in
hand) with Peevishness and Contentiousness of Humor, and addictedness to
Strife and Lawsuits; and therefore, if in any thing the Bishop was
blameworthy; 'twas in admitting the Rector to the Sacrament, before that he,
who had given such Offense, had made a suitable satisfaction. Again, as to the
two Canons, which the Rector quotes (though one would have served, being Verbatim
the same in the English Edition) it is evident from what has been said, that
it is the Rector who has maliciously contended with his Neighbors, and not Mr.
M. S. who had no Suit, nor any difference with any body; nor Mr. T. N. who only
had a Suit at Law with the Rector himself which raised his Spleen. It Is the
Rector offended the Congregation; and even at that they detered many worthy
persons from that comfortable Feast. As for instance, Sir J. M. who declared
that he would have received the Sacrament that Easter, but that he could not
forbear taking Offense at the Rector, upon the score of his Abusive, Railing
Sermons continually about that time; and particularly, for that the Rector
declared himself out of Charity with Mr. A. B. and when the said Mr. A. B.
asked the Rector whether he was not to give and Receive the Sacrament the
Sunday following, the Rector answered he was, but yet was not in Charity with
him: Likewise Mr. T. D. told the Churchwardens, That he would have Received
the Sacrament that Easter Sunday, if any Minister but the Rector had
Officiated; but was afraid the Rector would have refused him the Sacrament, or
have publicly Affronted him: The very same thing likewise Captain R. J.
declared, as by the said Presentment may appear. Now let the Rector prove, that
ever so much offense, or indeed any Offense at all, was given to the
Congregation by either Mr. M. S. or Mr. T. N. And also let any Man judge whether
the Rubric and Canons which the Rector has quoted in Order to justify
himself, do not condemn him; and if so, then he is condemned, as himself well
observes, Page 5th, by the Judgments of the Convocations and Parliaments of
both Kingdoms.

III. The next thing I have, to prove is, That the three Queries, upon which
the Rector builds the whole Resolution, are (modestly speaking) impertinently
put, and falsely, or impertinently Resolved.
1. Impertinently put, for that no Man denies; First, That the Rector of a
private Parish is presumed ordinarily to be the best acquainted with the
Qualifications of his Parishioners, and may repel from the Sacrament for a
time, any of them who is a notorious ill Liver, or an open Malicious Contender
with his Neighbors. And as to the Second Query, it is granted, that upon
regular information to the Bishop, he is to proceed against such a Notorious
Sinner, in case he continues obstinate, according to the Canon. And as to the
Third, during such the obstinacy of the aforesaid Offender, the Bishop ought
not to command the Rector to Administer him the Sacrament: So that, it is plain
the Queries were Impertinently put.

2. That the said Queries are also falsely, or impertinently Resolved by the
Rector, will also appear by the following Observations.

As to the first Query, the Rector, Page 6. quotes Dr. Hammond for affirming
that by the Words, Whose Sins thou do forgive, they are forgiven, and whose
Sins thou do retain, they are retained, is meant the Power of Binding and
Loosing, and that this is no other than the Power of admitting to, and
Suspending from the Sacrament. Now that this is a great part of the said Power,
the Dr. and we all grant; but we cannot grant it to be the whole Power given in
those Words, till the Rector does furnish us with some other Texts, whereupon
to found the Power of that ordinary Absolution, which we daily pronounce, both
publicly in Church, and privately to sick Persons and Penitents, when there is
no Celebration of the Sacrament. To my knowledge the great Andrews chooses those
very Words for his Text, St. Jo. 20.23. when in a Sermon Preached at Whitehal,
he undertakes to prove this Power of Absolution: The Rector likewise there
affirms, that he has Power to Suspend any person from the Sacrament, that
appears to him unqualify'd. Now observe Dr. Hammond Prac. Cat. p. 394. says,
That Christ himself Administered the Sacrament to Judas, tho he knew his heart
to be full of Villainy; and that therefore it is lawful to admit Sinners to the
Sacrament: It Is true, he desires, this to be understood warily, and owns that
Governors of the Church may inflict their Censures upon Willful, Scandalous
Sinners, and withdraw the Sacrament by way of Discipline, and in Charity to
their Souls; but yet in case the said Offenders be not actually under the
Church Censures, and do press for the Sacrament; the Minister may Communicate
with them at the Offenders own Peril; from which it appears, that in case our
two Gentlemen were Scandalous Sinners; yet they being under no Ecclesiastical
Censure and pressing for the Sacrament, it had been no Sin in the Rector to
have admitted them: And further, that they must have been wilful, Scandalous
Sinners, otherwise the Rector had no Right to repel them: And indeed, that
every person so to be repelled, must be an open, and Notorious ill-Liver, or an
open Contender, who gives Offense to the Congregation; and consequently whose
unqualifiedness appears to others, as well as to the Rector himself, both the
Rubricks and Canons affirm: And so do the Ancient Canonists. Reccatoribus
notoriis Eucharistia non est Administranda; but then is added what Notoriety is
required; Notorium Peccatorem dici; qui manifestus est vel per sententiam, vel
per confessionem factam in judicio, out per evidentiam rei, quae nulia
tergiversatione celari potest; Aug. Bar. Cap. 20 n. 20.21. So that it must not
be the surmise of the Rector himself, or a bare hearsay; but such an
immorality, as is notorions by a sentence, or Legal Confession, or Evidence of
Fact, so commonly known, as cannot be concealed; otherwise, neither the Rector
nor Bishop ought to repel. Now let the Rector prove the two Gentlemen thus
Notorious, if he can. Oh, but, says the Rector, Page 7. It Is left to my own
discretive judgment whom to Suspend: It Is true, the Ruorick seems to make him
Judge for fourteen days, but not for the whole year, as it was in our Case:
Now, either the Rector did not legally inform the Bishop within the fourteen
days, and then himself Transgressed the Rubric; or if he did, then not the
Rector, but the Bishop, after such Information given, is become the Judge, and
may Punish, or Pardon, as he sees Cause. And further observe (as the Rector
himself well Objects, and could not Answer) that the Rector Suspended them for
Malice, and Injuries and Contrivances against himself; and therefore ought not
to be a Judge in his own Cause; to which I add, That first, non constat, no
such Malice in the two Gentlemen is proved; Et quilibet presumitur bonus, donec
probatur in contrarium. Next, That though in the Case of Malice or Contention
between two Parishioners, the Minister is presumed an allowable Judge, yet not
so, where himself is a party: And lastly, whereas the Rector Answers, that this
must be allowed in this case; because there is no third person to intervene; I
say, This is a mistake; for the Bishop is a proper person to intervene in the
aforesaid Case. The 9th Can. Con. Case. makes the Bishop the proper Judge of
Clergymen; and our Rubric makes him proper Judge over the people, to censure
them according to the Canon: And indeed he being the common Pastor of his whole
Diocese, ( Nam ipsi commissus est Dei populus, and pro animabus eorum ipse
redditurus est rationem: Apos. Can. 40.) And seeing the Rectors in their
Parishes are but his substitutes over the people; none can so properly mediate
in a difference between his substitute and people, as the common Ruler, who has
equally an Authority and Care over both.

2 All that is material under his Second Query, is, that the Bishop was
negligent of his Duty in not censuring the Suspended persons; but instead
thereof admitting them to the Sacrament; Page 12. And Secondly, That the Bishop
had not the Right of Administering the Sacrament there. As to the first, I say,
It Is true, that upon Information given to a Bishop by the Rector, who Suspends
a Notorious Offender from the Sacrament; the Bishop is to proceed against such
Notorious Person according to the Canon; but it is with this Proviso, that such
notorious person persist obstinately in his Fault, not otherwise; for so the
Rector owns, Page 8.9.10. If more gentle means prove effectual to reclaim such
Sinners, if friendly Admonition do the Work, then severity is not requisite,
and the Bishop may accept of their present Sorrow, and Promises of future
Amendment. And all this for ought the Rector knew, might have been done in the
present Case. Oh, but, says the Rector, When the Offense is an Injustice, and
an Injury to a Neighbor, there Restitution; and when a Scandal is given to the
Congregation, there Public Satisfaction is required; at least the Offender
must be made to declare himself ready so to satisfy. All this is granted, but
then there is nothing of this in the present Case; for the Gentlemen were never
known to be Men of either Scandalous, or Malicious Principles or Practices; but
as has been said, Of a far better Reputation than the Rector. That, They
Conspired against his Life, is an Allegation founded upon a hearsay, as in the
aforementioned Letters, under his Hand himself does own: And no body living of
tolerable Credit, will say, or believe they are such persons as he has
represented them; or if they were, why did not the Rector make it appear before
the Bishop, being bound to justify what he did, and to prosecute them for what
he laid to their Charge? Or, Why did he not proceed against them at Common Law,
in case he thought the Bishop would be too favorable? But, he letting near a
whole year pass, without any such Animadversion, or even a second Admonition;
and they on their part having Solemnly declared to the Bishop, and to others of
the Clergy of the best Dignity in the Diocese, that they had no personal
prejudice to the Rector, more than a dislike to him upon the score of his being
an Ill and Disaffected Man, and that they were in Charity with him and all the
World; and upon this stock of Innocence and Charity desiring the benefit of the
Sacrament: Let any Man judge, whether the Bishop had most reason to regard these
Solemn Asseverations of his two Servants, whom he personally knew to be Men of
Integrity, or to regard the unwarrantable heat, and Malicious and groundless
Allegation of the Rector, who is known by all to be an Obstinate, self-willed,
and ill-natured Man. But,

Secondly, says the Rector, The Bishop had no Authority to Administer the
Sacrament there and therefore it was an Invasion of my Right. To this, First,
That the Bishop has Power to Administer the Sacrament in Virtue of his Order,
whether it be the same with that of Priest, or a Superior; I suppose the
Rector is not so utterly beside himself as to deny. But, Frustra est potentia
quae non reducitur in actum: Therefore this Power must be Executed somewhere;
and if the Bishop may Adminster any where, it must be, either in Cathedral and
Collegiate, or in Parish Churches: No, says the Rector, in neither. For though
the 24th English Canon seems to allow the Bishop sometimes in Cathedrals, where
there are no Parochial Cures, to Administer; yet our Rubric, which is a far
better Authority, gives the Right of Consecration in Cathedrals to the
Prebendaries, and in Parish Churches to the Rector or Vicar, and this exclusive
of the Bishop; because it is only reserved for him to pronounce the Absolution,
and give the Blessing, Page 13. Never was there such a Mess of Ignorance and
Arrogance: For Bishops have the Original Power of Consecration, and the
Presbiters have it by delegation from them: The Presbiters have the Power to
Consecrate, in actu signato, upon the score of their Ordination, which they had
from the Bishop; and likewise they have the exercise of this Power from the
Bishop, by Virtue of their Institution; whereby a certain Congregation is given
them to Administer to: But surely when a Bishop impowers another, he does not
divest himself. No, this he cannot do, if he would, this Power being Inherent
to his Office by Divine Institution: Nay, in the first Ages of the Church, e're
Presbyters had their appropriated Parishes, we find that the Presbyters could
not Consecrate without the Bishop's License, tho he were absent: So St
Ignatius, who lived anno 101. says in his Epistle to the Smyrnaans, Let no Man
do any thing of what belongs to the Church, without the Bishops leave, (...),
etc. Neither Baptize, nor offer Sacrifice, but let that Eucharist be looked
upon as firm and good, which is either offered by the Bishop, or by him whom
the Bishop shall permit. And even after Congregations were Assigned as proper
Cures to Presbyters, and the Bishops had given them an ordinary License once
for all to Consecrate, yet notwithstanding, when the Bishop was personally
present, they did not Administer without a new leave; so St. Leo in 86th
Epistle to the Bishops of Germany and France, Sed neque coram Episcopo licet
Presbyteris introire Baptisterium, etc. Nec eo present, nisi jubente,
Sacramentum Corporis and Sanguinis Christi conficere: i. e. It is not lawful
for Presbyters to enter into the Baptistery, etc. nor to Consecrate the
Sacrament of Christ's Body and Blood, if the Bishop be present, without his
Command: And so says, Con. Carth. 2. Can. 9. Quisquis Praesbiter present and
inconsulto Episcopo agenda in quolibet loco voluerit celebrare, itse honori suo
contrarius existit: If any Presbyter without leave of the Bishop, he being
present, shall Celebrate the Sacrament, be the place what it will (Cathedral or
Parish Church) is an Enemy to the Bishops Dignity: And Con. Sen. seems to
explain the matter, both as to time and place, Episcopi in suis Diaecessibus,
etc. in Festivitatibus Solemnibus per se in Ecclesiis suis celebrent: i. e.
Bishops in their Diocesses shall in their own Persons (not by their
Prebendaries) celebrate the Sacrament upon the solemn Festivals in their
Churches. To which the 24th English Canon almost literally agrees. And it is, no
doubt, the Bishop's Authority extends through his whose Diocese, and to every
Church therein, the Charge and Care whereof is committed to him, which he can
never free himself from; and though he has committed part of it to others,
because he cannot be present every where, yet where he is present, the Rector
or Vicar being but his Substitute, are, if he please to officiate, pro tunc
superseded; In proesentia majoris cessat potentia minoris. But however this be,
it is certain that of the Cathedral, as Rebuff. says, (Episcopus est proprie and
immediate Parochus) the Bishop is the proper and immediate Minster. And so the
24th English Canon, chiefly intitles him to the Right of Administering there,
though not exclusive of the Dignitaries: And thus it is practiced and allowed
all over England no body (I believe) in that whole Nation ever knowing that it
was refused to the Bishop, or thought an Usurpation in him to Administer the
Sacrament in his Cathedral.

Again, the Rector Abuses the Rubric; it is true, it says, That the Minister
(not mentioning what Order) shall first Receive the Communion in both kinds
himself, and then proceed to deliver the same to the Bishops, Priests and
Deacons in like manner (if any be present) and after that to the People: The
true meaning whereof must be this, that he who Administers the Sacrament, shall
observe this Order in the distribution of the Elements; First, to Administer to
the Clergy according to their Order; as first to Bishops, Whether of other
Diocesses, that may happen to be present on that occasion, or the Bishop of the
Diocese, who in ease to his Age or Indisposition, may admit the Priest to
perform the Office: Next them to Priests, then to the Deacons, and after to the
Laity. And, that neither this Order, nor my sense of it are New, I refer you,
for some thing much like this, to the great Council of Nice, Can. 14. Pervenit
ad Sanctum Concilium, quod in locis quibus: dam and Civitatibus, Praesbyteris
Sacramenta Diaconi porrigant; hoc neque regula, neque consuetudo tradidit, ut
hi qui offerende Sacrificii non habeat potestatem, his qui offerant Corpus
Christi porrigant, sed and illud immotuit, quod quidam Diaconi etiam aute
Episcopum Sacramenta sumunt; haec ergo omnia amputentur, and accipiant secundum
Ordinem, post Presbyteros ab Episcopo vel a Praesbytero, Sacram Communionem.
Which implies, That the Bishop may Administer, and that the Clergy ought to
Receive according to their Order.

Again, it is to be considered in the present Case, that the two Suspended
persons (as the Rector calls them) were the Bishops chief Domestics. Now
surely, no Rector is presumable to know his Parishioners Qualifications better
than a Bishop may be allowed to know the fitness, or unfitness of his Servants;
it being one Qualification of a Bishop, that he know well, and govern well his
own House, 1 Timothy 3.5. Oh, but, says the Rector, Those Servants were my
Parishioners, and therefore I had the Right to Administer to them, and not the
Bishop. This is a hard Case, That Bishops must neither Administer in
Cathedrals, nor Parish Churches, to the Inhabitants of the Diocese at large,
nor even to those of his own Family. But let this be the Bishop's Comfort,
whatever the Rector says, others know, that Bishops may Administer to any, or
all the aforesaid; and so particularly says Aug. Bar. page 308. n. 12. Quem
libet posse, otium invito Parocho, Episcopum adire pro Sacramento suscipiendo,
cum illi principaliter commissa sit Cura omnium animarum suae Diocesios, i. e.
any Man may, whether his Minister will or no, repair to the Bishop to Receive
the Sacrament, because chiefly to him is committed the Care of all the Souls in
his Diocese.

From the whole then, I think it is plain the Bishop had sufficient Authority,
and Good Reason to Administer the Blessed Sacrament, especially in his own
Cathedral, and chiefly to his own Servants, of whose fitness he was assured,
and therefore had no Cause to proceed against them, according to the Canon, as
against Notorious, Scandalous, Obstinate Sinners.

Thirdly, The Third Query is, Whether in such Case the Bishop may regularly
command the Rector, and such Commands are obliging?

Most of what the Rector says on this Query, no body needs disprove, as that
great Care ought to be taken of reclaiming Sinners, and fitting persons for the
Holy Sacrament, and of preventing Scandalous Communicants: And therefore let
the Bishop Answer for admitting the Rector; for as the matter appears to me
upon the whole from the good Character the two Gentlemen bear in their Country,
and the ill one the Rector has; and from his Rude and Passionate Deportment
toward the Bishop himself, and his Servants, before, at, and since that Holy
Sacrament, the Rector is the only unqualify'd person; who discovered his Malice
in the very Celebration of those Mysteries, which are a Contradiction to every
thing that is not real Love and Charity.

What more is worthy our Observation upon this Query, may be comprehended in
these three Things.

I. That the Rector, page 21, savs, Episcopacy is not a distinct Order from
Presbytery, but only the superaddition of a New Office to it. II. That the
Power of Bishops is only fraternal, to Admonish, but not to Command; at most
they had but a Negative Voice before the Popish Usurpation. III. That the Oath
of Canonical Obedience is also a Relick of Popery, and that the imposition of
it is Unjust, and the Rectors taking of it uncertain, page 18.
1. That Episcopacy is not a distinct Ordeo from Presbytery, etc. It cannot be
expected I should here enter into this Controversy, and show you all the
Authorities from Scripture, Antiquity, and the consent of all Christian
Churches for 1500 years, but a^ll that I shall urge, ad hominem, is to show how
the Rector has by this Position exposed his own baseness. Know then, he has
twice at his Ordinations subscribed to the 4th Canon, which maintains the three
Orders of Bishops, Priests and Deacons; and three or four times more subscribed
it at his admission to Benefices; and has as often subscribed the 39 Articles,
whereof the 36th maintains the said Orders; and has declared the same (I
believe) ten times, in reading his Assent and Consent to all things contained
in the Book of Common Prayer, and Administration of Sacraments, and the manner
of making, Ordaining and Consecrating Bishops, Priests and Deacons; and has in
his late very Pamphlet owned and declared the Rubric of the said Book, to have
the strongest Authority, that Statute Law can give it: Yet this Rubric before
the form of Ordination, runs thus; It is evident unto all Men diligently
reading the Holy Scriptures, and Ancient Fathers, that from the Apostles time,
there have been these Orders of Ministers in the Church, Bishops, Priests and
Deacons, etc. Now that any Man professing himself a Minister of the Church of
England for at least 20 years, and still from time to time declaring,
subscribing, and owning the three Orders, should give the contrary under his
Hand, and Print it to Eternize his Villainy, and to render himself obnoxious to
the Penalties of the Laws both Canon and Statute, is a demonstration that he is
Mad, and fit for Bedlam. Let him not think to come off with his owning
Episcopacy to be a Superior Office, for the Rubric calls them expressly three
Orders, and the Canon and Articles must accordingly be so understood, and that
Power of Ordination appropriated to Bishops, shows it to be an Order, since it
is the Power that makes the Order, and manifests it unto us.

2. The Rector says, That the Power of Bishops is only Fraternal, to Admonish,
but not to Command; at most they had but a Negative Voice before the Popish
Usurpation.

It Is true, Bishops and Priests are Brethren, and should treat one another as
such, and not be Tyrannical; but between these two there is a Medium, and an
allowed Power in Bishops over Presbyters, and all this before the Popish
Usurpation. So Dr. Cave, prim. Christ. par. 1. Cap. 8. says, It was not the
business of the Bishops barely to preside in the Assemblies of the Clergy; but
to call them to Account, and Suspend them if they deserved it. And if Baronius
may be allowed to speak, he tell us, ad annum 57 and 319 That the Judiciary
Power of Bishops over Clergy and Laity was Instituted of God, Exercised by the
Holy Fathers, and confirmed by the Emperors. And indeed Eusebius in the Life of
Constantine hints the same, Cap. 27. which Valesius refers to a Law of
Constantius extant in the close of the Theodosian Code. But (methinks) the
Rectors own Negative instance from Ignatius, That nothing be done without the
Bishop, implies an Affirmative, That every thing be done by his Direction and
Command. And so does the Apos. Can. 40. Praesbyteri and Diaconi praeter
Episcopum nihil pertentent. And sometimes in some Cases, the Clergy are
expressly said to be under the Bishops Command. For instance, Con. Laod. Can.
42. No Minister of Gods Altar, nor any Clergyman must take a Journey, but per
jussionem, by the Command of his Bishop: Nor must they, disrespecting the
Bishop, make Conventicles apart, or set up Altars, upon pain if Deposition.
Apos. Can. 32. and so Con. Gang. Can. 6. It were endless to quote Authorities
of Authentic Canons and Fathers to the same purpose. As for us, our own
Canons, particularly the 71st, sufficiently impowers the Bishop to Suspend,
Deprive, or Depose the Inferior Clergy upon just Causes; and so does the
Statute in England, 1 Eliz. Cap. 2. make every Spiritual person, Dignitary or
Parson, Visitable by the Bishop or Ordinary; who thereby is Authorized to
enquire into and punish their Faults, by Admonition, Excommunication,
Sequestration, or Deprivation.

3. The Rector says, That the Oath of Canonical Obedience is also a Relick of
Popery, and that the Imposition of it is Unjust, and the Rector's taking of it
uncertain.

To these things, I say; First, That Obedience is due, and has been always from
Presbyters to Bishops, as the quotations in the former Paragraph do prove: For
Command and Obey being Relatives, whatever proves the one, proves the other
also: But beside the 18th Can. of the Con. Arl. 1. held ten or twelve years
before the Nic. says, The Deacons must not take upon them on their own
Accounts, but let Honor be reserved to the Presbyters; and that Presbyters
likewise do nothing, but conscientio Episcopi, by the Privity and Consent of
the Bishop; in which is sufficiently implied the great Deference, Submission
and Obedience, which the Inferior Orders owe to their respective Superiors.
And the Counsel of Calc. Can. 8. first setting forth the Bishops Authority over
the Clergy in their Parishes, etc. does then enjoin their Submission and
Obedience, At si noluerint subjacere, in case they refuse so to Obey, let them
be Punished Canonically. And Con. Agath. Cap. 1. Let the contumacious Clergy be
Corrected and Punished by their Bishops; which plainly proves the Power of the
one, and the Obedience of the other. The like says Ignatius in his Epistle to
the Magnesians; and so say many more. Now Reason it self must tell us. That
when there is a Superior Power in the one to Command, there must be an
Obedience to answer in the other Party: And therefore, an Oath obliging Men to
that Obedience, which was so much their Duty before, can be no unreasonable, or
unjust Imposition: But if it be unreasonable and unjust, then all the Bishops
in England and Ireland are so too; and so is the Law that seems to enjoin it.
Cook's Inst. Part 4th. fol. 324. And the Rector by charging the said Oath with
Popery, is as severe a Slanderer of our Church in this point, as the most Rigid
Fanatic, whereof himself is a Chip, and patri simillima proles.

But of all things I cannot tell how the Rector can Answer his declaring the
uncertainty of his ever taking the said Oath, though thrice beneficed, and so
consequently as often obliged by Law to have taken it. Now, if he did not take
it, then he imposed on the Age and Easiness of the Venerable Old Prelate Bishop
D. who Entitled him to his Rectory, and who either did, or should have put
this Clause into his Institution (praestito primitus juramento Canonicae
Obedientiae) and if this be left out, 'twas certainly through the Rector's own
Craft, who was permitted to direct the Draught of his Institution, and upon a
Principle (as it would now seem) of denying, and with a design of refusing any
such Obedience to any Bishop. But says the Rector, If any such Obedience be
due, it must be in licitis and honestis; very true, and who doubts after what
has been said, but that it is lawful and very fit for a Bishop Administering the
Sacrament in his Cathedral, to Order the Rector his Assistant, to give the Cup
to two worthy Communicants in the Esteem of all Men, but the froward Rector:
And I think it is scarce a Query, whether the Rector, refusing that just
Command, was not forsworn, in case he took the Oath of Canonical Obedience; and
whether he be not something like it, in case he by a Trick avoided that Oath
which de jure he ought to have taken: And whether he is not liable to the 13th
Canon, Con. Aurel. 2 Clerici qui officium suum ad implere despiciunt, etc. Loci
sui dignitate priventur: At least to that of the Canonist; Clericus nolens
Administrare Eucharistiam ubi and quibus obligatur Arbitraria paena est
puniendus: Aug. Bar. Cap. 17. n. 43. That is, if a Clergyman refuse to
Administer the Sacrament where and to whom he ought, he is to be Punished
according to Discretion. But, Oh, this Word (Command) is a Terrible Despotic
Word; it is another Rag of Popery, page 21.22. Now, since to Command in the
Bishops, and to Obey in the Clergy, are both Rags of Popery, there must be a
Reformation to produce such a Church, wherein no body must Command, and no body
must Obey, and by my Consent, the Rector shall have the Glory of this rare
Invention.

But to conclude the matter seriously, I bid the Rector Defiance to give one
instance in any Age, where ever any Presbyter Assisting a Bishop in the
Administration of the Lords Supper in his own Cathedral, or elsewhere, did
Assume the confidence to repel any Communicant, invito Episcopo: Or did, in
contradiction to the Bishops Order, withold the Cup from any person, upon any
pretense whatsoever. But seeing our Rector did these ill and irregular things,
and many more, that were injurious, both to the Bishop and his Servants;
therefore, according to his own Rule, page 11. He is under Obligation by the
Laws of God and Man, to Acknowledge, Revoke, and make satisfaction for the
aforesaid Wrongs as far as he may, and to court the forgiveness of the injured
Parties.

As he is a most profligate Reviler of a Bishop, Ancient Canons require he
should beg Pardon, or be irrevocably degraded, Con. Carth. 4. Cap. 57. Clericus
Maledicus maxim in Sacerdotibus cogatur ad postulandum veniam, si noluerit,
degradetur, nec unquam ad Officium sine satisfactione revocetur. And as he is a
litigious Clergyman, his Testimony ought not to be Received: Cap. 58. of the
aforesaid Canon. Clericus qui frequenter litigat, and ad causandum facilis est.
Testimonium nemo absque grandi examine recipiat. And indeed, whoever considers
the Rector, as he has here been truly set forth, will never much regard what he
says against any Man, much less against his Bishop, who bears so great and
clear a Reputation: Whose Learning, Charity and Hospitality render him a worthy
Prelate, and whose Birth and Education have made him an Accomplished Gentleman.

PAX VOBIS.
The Printer's Advertisement.
THis Answer had been Printed three Weeks sooner, had not the Press been very
much engaged in Business that required Expedition; however, it is not doubted
but it comes soon enough for the Rector, who will find it no easy Task to
clear himself of what is laid to his Charge, and fully to Answer a Book so well
written.


