AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST Dr E. Stillingfleets Unreasonableness of SEPARATION. Being
a Vindication of the NONCONFORMISTS From the heavy Charges of SCHISM and
SEPARATION, Wherewith they are loaded By the Doctor, and Two Anonymous Authors.
In Two Discourses conjoined, and seasonably published.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Janeway, in Queens-head-Alley in Paternoster-Row.
MDCLXXXI

To the Reader.
THOU art here presented with two Discourses conjoined, in Vindication of
Protestant Dissenters, the publishing whereof is become highly necessary, by
reason of the heavy charges wherewith the Nonconformists are lately loaded by
the Reverend Dr. Stillingfleet Dean of St. Paul's, in his Unreasonableness of
Separation; and by the Authors of two Answers to a Letter from a Minister to a
Person of Quality, showing some reasons for his Nonconformity.

There has been already published a modest and peaceable Inquiry into the
design and nature of some of those Historical mistakes that are found in the
Doctors Preface to the aforenamed Book, wherein the innocence of Protestant
Dissenters is cleared up and vindicated from the Doctors indecent censuses; and
these Discourses come after to encounter the body of his Book.

In the first Discourse we appeal to all our Neighbor Protestants, touching
our sincerity; giving them an Historical Account of the rise and growth of
those thing which are the causes of our divisions; and then leaving them to
judge where the faut lies, and whether these heavy charges of the Doctors are
not unmerited.

The second is principally calculated for the Meridian of the two Anonymous
Authors of the aforesaid Answers, where human invention is elevated many
degrees above Divine Revelation; but may indifferently serve for an answer to
the Doctors charges of Schism and Separation.

It may be here objected, Is this a time to dispute about these smaller things,
when the Church is like to be swallowed up of Popery, and the Holy Cloy it self
ready to be trod under foot of the Gentiles, and our common Enemy will rejoice
to see Protestant against Protestant, (that they may divide the spoil) and so
great a Champion of the Protestant Cause assailed?

To this several things must be said.

1. The Doctor himself as a Protestant ought to have considered this, and not
have given this provocation.

2. And as the Doctor and his Party may write for their Way when they will, why
should others neglect the year of release, which falls out but once in an age?
It is not long since we were under the Hatches, and had not leave to give our
Reasons against Conformity, nor were allowed to be once heard, till about Two
thousand Ministers were silenced.

3. As to the Reverend Doctor, he has done so worthily in this our Israel,
especially in his so learned Writings against the Papists, that he deserves
well of all good Protestants; but yet seeing the learned Doctor seems to have
repented of his former Writings, particularly his Irenicum [having since the
writing of that Book to much applauded and congratulated the happy restitution
of the English Prelacy to its wonted luster and grandeur, far enough from his
formerly desired reduction to Primitive Presbyteries] I know not but he may
find as good reason here for his repenting this his Book against Dissenting
Protestants. For the end of his Epistle to Irenicum may be recanted, but never
reconciled to the beginning of his Episile to Archbishop Land's Defense against
Fisher.

What pity so grave and great a man should thus expose himself by a Contest too
palpable between Principle and Preferment. Now though this his Book has the last
word, and carries it with the world, yet the elder Brother will be accounted
the honester with the wise, because born of the Freewoman; while the
after-seed was conceived and brought forth in bondage.

4. It may be judged a fit season of asserting the Kingly Power of Christ, in
settling the government of his own House, when men so liberally give away the
Lords prerogative. Our Pulpits now so ring with a Catholic Jus Civil, that
there is scarce any Jus Divinum left, but of Tithes, which I hope they will
hold to the last, being good Church men. A fair Charter has Christ sealed to
his Church with his own blood, giving her Officers, Ordinances, and free Courts
within her self; all which some unfaithful children with profane Esau, often
sell for Morsels of Meat.

Now could men let Christ alone to govern his own House in his own Way, by his
own Officers and Ordinances, how happy should we be? Who can better reprove the
Atheism of the world in setting up man's post by Christ's, than Doctor
Stillingfleet has done in his other Works, while he says, that to say a man
may be of any Religion according to the laws of men, is to take it for granted
that there is no such thing as Religion in the World. And again, that no men do
so dangerously undermine the foundation of Civil Government, as those who
maguifie it to the Contempt of Religion. Politicians and Court-Parasites must
not dare to form a Religion in the flexible mould of State. A Municipal
Religion would many fain promote, following Reasons of State, more than Rules
of Conscience; like the Heathens, who first built Cities, and then instituted a
Religion sit for the Inbabitants. The Roman Inspire flourished, while virtue
was nourished; to show, faith Austin, how happy they should be, who should have
Religion superadded. And indeed they had no better Subjects than Christians:
for none can give onto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, upon any valuable or
holding Account, who make no Conscience of giving unto God the things that are
Gods.

How the learned and unprejudiced (if it fall into such hands) shall find this
Defense managed, Judicium sit poenes lectorem.

Now may the most High, after all the encroachments on the Scepter of his Son
in the World, bring back the hearts of this People to himself, making them
yield to the internal Government of his Spirit, and the True Apostolic and
ancient external Government of his house; that the Glory of the latter House
may be greater than the Glory of the former, even a Spiritual Glory of the
Power of the Lord may appear among us; and the work of the Lord may prosper by
his own Ordinances in the hands of his own appointed Servants, as the beauty of
his house, and the blessing of his chosen, Amen. Even so Lord Jesus, let thy
Kingdom come!

Jan. 24th. 1680/1.
An Antidote against Dr. Stillingfleet's Unreasonableness of Separation, in a
Vindication of the Nonconformists from the Charges of Schism and Separation,
etc.
FOR the full and clear understanding of the state of the controversy between
Conformist and Nonconformist, it will be absolutely necessary (especially since
we appeal to Protestants abroad) to give an historical account of the rise and
growth of our Differences from the beginning of the Reformation. Know then,

1. That the first reformers in the days of King Edward the 6th, though of
several judgments about the external part of the Government, were all of honest
Principles and Sentiments in their Doctrine, and had the same mind and design
to purge the then present Church of its Idolatry, Superstitions and gross
Errors, and to bring in the same pure Doctrine that was professed by Calvin and
the Reformed Churches in France, and which has been, and is still retained by
the Nonconformists in England.

2. That the said first Reformers being divided in their Opinions about
retaining that which was good, and taking away whatsoever was amiss in the
Romish Church, as to the outward Government, the Opinion that the Reformation
could not be thoroughly done for matter of Government and externals, as it was
possible for matter of Doctrine, prevailed so far with Bishop Hooper, Rogers,
and others that wished it had been otherwise, as to make them forbear any
further urging of a complete Reformation, in hopes that when the people that
were instructed in the true saving Doctrine, should be more numerous, the
opposition to a thorough Reformation in all points would be less.

3. That this rude draught of Reformation, suitable to that time, had very bad
success, because the Conformable Party prevailed to have it a standing law,
which was neither to be repealed nor altered, and which drew along with it
Non-Residency, Plurality of Livings, and entward Pomp and Grandeur, as best
suiting a worldly interest, whilst another Party, who were then called
Puritans, and now Nonconformists retained, and still do to our days, a desire
and longing after a thorough Reformation, and they have endeavored by
Conferences, Remonstrances, and Writings, to have it introduced.

4. That yet the Conformists were not all of one mind, there being still a
party among them very peaceable and orthodox, and at less distance from the
Non-Conformists, especially among the Gentry, that were no Courtiers, and in
great Towns, Cities, and Corporations, whilst the other Party, made up of
Conformists, grew corrupt, and so far from hearkening to a further Reformation,
that they made nearer advances toward Rome.

5. That Jealousies and apprehensions daily increasing, and fears of inclining
to Popery, and the Troubles in Scotland intervening in the Years 38, and 39;
and the Discontents rising up in England, the King was forced to call a
Parliament, which began in 1640.

6. That that Parliament, both Lords and Commons, was most, if not all,
composed of such peaceable, Orthodox Church of England men I have but now
mentioned, and all conforming to the Rites, Ceremonies of Episcopacy and
Hierarchy, but yet greatly averse to Popery, Tyranny, and the Corrupt party of
the Church of England that inclined to wards Rome; Witness the many Speeches in
Parliament they made, as of the Lord Faulckland, Sir Benjamin Rudyer, Digby,
and others, with whom Good and Honest Bishops joined.

7. That the Ground and Rise of the Civil War in 1640, and 43, was in
opposition to such as Bishop Land, and other bad instruments.

8. That the Lords and Commons in 1642, and 43, were all in perfect Conformity
to the Church of England; so was the Army too that they raised; for the
General, the main Body of the Army, the Officers and Captains both by Land and
Sea, were all conformable to the Church of England, and none of them Puritans,
Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists, Sectaries, or Conventiclers.

9. That likewise, the Assembly of Divines in Westminister, chosen by the
Parliament, were all Conformists, and none of them Silenced Ministers, except
8. or 9, and 4 Scots.

10. That the first Intentions of the Parliament was so far from subverting the
Government of Church and State, established by Law, and from taking away the
House of Lords and Bishops root and branch; that it was only to reform the
abuses of both, and to settle such a Model of Church Government as was
recommended by the Pious and learned Bishops, Usher, and Hall, and which did
not much differ from that which our Gracious Sovereign that now is, recommended
to his parliament in his Declaration 1660. about Ecclesiastical Affairs.

11. That the parliament had no thoughts of bringing in the Covenant into
England, had not the necessity of their Affairs forced them to join with the
Scots.

12. That no man was obliged by it to take away Bishops, but only as they are
in Conjunction with the English Hierarchy.

13. Neither was it the Intention of the Lords and Commons, at first, to take
away Deans and Chapters, but to make them more serviceable and useful, to take
away Pluralities, Non-residencies, and to settle a more proportionable
Maintenance for Ministers.

14. That the Change, or Subversion of Government, the taking away the Lords
House, and with them the Bishops, and excluding the greatest part of the House
of Commons, and last of all, the taking away the King, and all the Confusions,
and Disorders, that happened thereupon, did arise from a third Party, viz. The
Army, that was neither for the King, nor parliament; Neither for Conformists,
nor for Non-Conformists, but was an Enemy to them all, and sought their
absolute ruin and destruction.

15. That the Non-Conformists, who usually no go by the name of Presbyterians,
Fanatics, Independents, Rebels, Sons of Belial, etc. by the corrupt
Church-party, that have been always making advances toward Popery, were so far
from being the first in Arms in opposition to the King, our late blessed
Martyr; and being contrivers of his Death, and of taking away Monarchy; that on
the contrary, it was the only party (while the others of the King's Friends
sat still) that appeared before, and since 48, in his behalf, to the hazard of
their Lives (witness Mr. love,) and that in 1660, had a chief hand in restoring
our gracious Sovereign Charles the II. to his Throne; for which never enough to
be valued Benefit and kindness, although it was but duty, no Party has been
more severely persecuted by the Corrupt-party of the Church of England; But of
this, more anon.

16. That the Declaration of the King, mentioned in the Tenth Consideration,
was a confirmation of another former Declaration.

17. That whereas, when the King came over from the Hague, there was a great
expectation that his Printed Declaration for Ecclesiastical Affairs, would be
sufficient to compose all differences and heats, and unite all Parties, by
taking away the stumbling block of subscribing to those Ceremonies that were
not warranted by the Word of God; but just on the contrary, the Clamours of the
Corrupt Party of the Church of England at length prevailed for restoring of
those Ceremonies. All which good Bishop Brownrig foretold, a little before his
Death, in saying, That there would continue the same Confusions and
Animosities, that were before; and, with them, the same spirit of Persecution
which the Corrupt Church-Party before 1640, was the cause of.

18. That the Zeal and Fervor of the prevailing Corrupt Church-Party in
England at this present juncture of time, in writing so many Books against the
Papists, and standing up so stoutly against the Horid Attempt upon the King's
most Sacred Life, and introducing of Popery, and hearkening to some terms of
Reconciliation with the Non-Conformists, to make the opposition the stronger
against Papists, does no way seem to be the effect of a Christian Moderation,
but a mere worldly Interest, like the zeal of Jehu, the union of Aristides, and
Themistocles, two Mortal Foes against the Common Enemy. Or like that of
Augustus, Brutus, and Cassius, against Antony: It Is the goodness of a stubborn
Boy, just so long as the Rod is over his Back; for had another spirit moved the
corrupt party of the Church of England, than a Worldly one, it would have
appeared above these 10 Years; when (alas!) no such attempts were made by the
Papists against their Lives, and Livings, when a Hundred Remonstrances were
made to them, with Prayers and Tears, for the removing of the offending Rites
and Ceremonies; and of the great inclination they had for Popery, in
depopulating England, by driving men away to Colonies abroad: but could never
be heard.

21. Things being thus stated, one may rationally and strongly conclude, That
it is a most horrid untruth, and calumny to make the Presbyterians and
Conventiclers, or Non-Conformists, not only the first authors, and abettors of
the Civil Wars, and of the first taking up of Arms in opposition to the Evil
Counselors about the King in 42 and 43, but also the Murderers of King
Charles the First; when as they have been, and still are the great preservers
of the King's Person, Life, Honors, Dignities, and Prerogatives; the best
Christians, the best Reformed, and the best Subjects of the King.

22. And the false and unworthy stiling of these Restorers of the King, Rebels,
Fanatics, Sons of Belial, etc. does carry along with it the same devilish
Malice; which makes it now become a common Proverb in the Mouths of this
corrupt Church of England-Party, That they had rather be papists, than
Presbyterians; and that were there a Turn of State, (as God forbid) they would
sooner turn papists, than presbyterians.

23. besides, the idle, foolish, senceless, but also malicious mistake, to make
the holiest of the Non-Conformists to pass for presbyterians, who, though they
love their persons, and the holiness of their Doctrine, and Lives, yet either
they are wholly avense to the Presbyterian Government, or else they do not very
well know what it means; Since the Well-affected follow their Preaching, and
imitate their Lives, but yet by no means upon any account of their Government.

24. That the worst thing in the carriage of the Conformists toward the
Non-Conformists, is their rash, uncharitable, and unchristian judging of the
hearts and Insides of men, (which are only known to god Almighty, who is the
Searcher of hearts,) as if they were made up of Deceit and Hypocrisy; and
alike construing their unblameable behavior and carriage, as if it were but
formal, and extrinsecal, and of the pure, Orthodox Doctrine of their Sermons
and Writings, though never so much summed up in Scripture phrases, as if all
was but Cant and Tone, and taking of God's Name in vain; when they make a quite
different Judgment of the Conformists, both of their Lives and Doctrines, and
when they make use of the same Scripture terms as the others do; for in their
esteem they are looked upon as true, sincere, and holy Christians, though their
out ward deportment do somewhat differ from that of the other.

this I intend, by God's assistance, to make dear to you in a larger Discourse,
from the testimony of Dr. patrick, who doubtless cannot, in handling of the
Nature of Justification by Faith, but agree with the Non-Conformists, in making
use of the same Scripture-Expressions, and commend such as Bishop Davenant,
Donnam, Usher, Hall, and Hooker, all Conformists, for doing the like, and who
will tell us, that this Justification by Faith is a Recumbency of a poor Sinner
upon the Lord Jesus Christ; a casting of our selves upon him, relying on his
Merits, laying hold on him, closing with him, going to him, and shrowding our
selves under the Robes of his Righteousness: Most of which are Scripture
phrases: But yet for all this, the very same Expressions, being uttered by such
Non-Conformists, as mr. Baxter, Dr. Owen, Manton, Annesly, Jacomb, Bates, Mr.
Jenkins, Alsoph, Cradock, Silvester, Watson, and others, for the better setting
out the nature of Justification by Faith, are looked upon by Dr. patrick, as
mere Imposters, Charms, Incantations, artificial Jugglings, Terms of Modist and
Courtly Faith, by which this Doctor makes good the saying of pliny the younger,
Epist. 21. multum interest quid a quoque fiat, Eadem enim facta claritate aut
obscuritate facientium, aut tolluntur altissime, aut humillime deprimuntur.

That such a prejudice against the Generation of God's Children, that make it
their grand design to get an assurance of Heaven and of Eternity, as are, not
only many of the Peaceable and Moderate Conformists, but such as they miscall
and nickname puritans, Presbyterians, Independents, Rebels, Sons of Belial,
and worse than papists. That such a prejudice, I say, is the great distemper of
that corrupt-party of the Church of England, who have for these 100 years been
making their advances toward Popery.

I shall insist very particularly upon some very considerable Inferences and
Conclusions which I shall draw from some Hypotheses that I have already taken
notice of, but which cannot be too often inculcated; the truth of which is
known sufficiently by those that are most Eminent in Piety and Holiness of
Living, and in Learning, of the Church of England, by the Bishops Hooper,
Smith, Rudd, Carleton, Grindall, the two Abbots, Usher, hall, and by other
Doctors that were as Conformable as those Bishops.

1. That though the first Reformation in the time of Edward the 6th, was
wxtremely pure as to its Doctrine, it was notwithstanding very defective and
imperfect as to the exterior Government, because it was adjusted to that
present time where the papists were twenty, for One, that was reformed in
England.

2. That the first Reformers imagined, that when the People, converted to the
true Faith, should be more Numerous, and more disposed to receive a more
perfect Reformation, The Successors of the first Reformers would apply
themselves to it with more Earnestness and Zeal.

3. But it never came into their thoughts, that their Successors would be
guilty of so great a fault, as to act the quite contrary to such a good Project
and Design, in persuading both Princes and Parliaments to bring the first Rude
Draught of Reformation into a standing Law: but only to have it established for
a certain time, until they themselves should see they were able to effect a
more perfect Reformation.

4. That the Practice of these Successors of the first Reformers has been
unreasonable, wicked, impious, and cruel; in the Imposition of several things,
which they themselves have owned not to be necessary, and at best but
indifferent, under pain of deprivation ab officio and beneficio; although all
the Conformists have not been equally guilty, for some among them have approved
of these measures they have taken toward the Non-Conformists, but yet have
connived at them either by their submission, or their silence, and have not
vigorously enough set themselves against the Corruption that so much prevailed.

From all these Hypotheses, I gather these Conclusions, which naturally follow
the aforesaid Premises.

1. That several Bishops and Doctors of the Church of England, as Dr. Floyd,
Dr. Tillotson, Dr. Stillingfleet, Dr. Patrick, that are acknowledged by the
Non-Conformists to be Persons of great Learning, Worth, and Piety, but who are
Extreme Admirers of the Episcopacy of England, and all its Consequences, and
who have also preferred its Government to all other Establishments in Europe,
have by an unlucky accident, contributed more toward the Reputation of the
English Hierarchy, and its Practices, and toward the perpetuating the Feuds
and Quarrels between the Conformists, and Non-Conformists, than it has been
possible for any other Corrupted Party to do by all their Irregularities, and
advances toward Rome.

2. That it may be said of these good Bishops and Doctors before mentioned,
what the Politic Sages have observed of Anselme, Bernard, Thomas Aquinas,
John of Salisbury, and Gerson, That by their great repute of Piety, and
Learning, they have contributed more to the strengthening of the Pope's
Tyranny, and Religion, in the Minds of the People, than a hundred such as
Gregory the VII, and Boniface the VIII. were able to effect by their Tyranny,
and the wickedness and impurity of their Lives, for the discrediting of the
Pope and his Religion.

3. That it is not to be believed how much the Non-Conformists of England
suffer in the Esteem of our Great Men of the Protestant Party in Europe; who,
hearing people talk of the Learning and Piety of so many English Bishops and
Doctors, all Conformists, and who resemble those four Doctors I have just
before named, say aloud, that the Non-Conformists must needs be very
unreasonable, and of a very nice and fantastical Piety, for refusing to Conform
to the Church of England, after the Example of those four Doctors.

4. That how good soever the Intentions of some of the Bishops and Doctors of
the Church of England may be, that are of the same temper of spirit with these
four Doctors, and what kindness soever they may have for the Non-Conformists;
it is impossible They should ever come over to them, and consent to terms of
Reconciliation and Moderation, so long as they remain in this Judgment and
Opinion, That of all the Established Ecclesiastical Governments in Europe, that
of the Church of England is the most excellent, and the most Apostolical, and
that there is nothing of defect in it; and so long as the multitude of their
Benefices, and the great honor they are in, in the World, blinds their
Judgment, there being no likelihood, nor hopes, that those, who are raised so
high, and that live in honor and abundance, richly, and fatly, (unless they
will imitate good Dr. Floyd, who bestows most of his Church-Revenues on the
Poor,) will diminish any thing of their greatness, both as to their Retinue, or
their Kitchen, and will descend from high to low; and that a Bishop, who now
goes before the Barons, will quit his Place, to be only a poor simple
Moderator, and Watchman over a small company of Priests, such as were St.
Cyprian, and St. Austin: For this Eminence of Fortune and Dignity does
absolutely shut up the door to all the Overtures of Reformation, which we learn
from Mounsieur Claude in his Defense of the Reformation of the Churches of
France, where he tells us, That the Cardinal du Prat, for this very reason, was
the most violent of all men, and the most enraged against Luther's Reformation,
because he was provided of Five Bishoprics, and I know not how many other good
and fat Benefices.

That for these Reasons, Methinks, it might be expected from these good Bishops
and Doctors, that by a Christian condescension, they would endeavor to incline
their Brethren the Non-Conformists, to abate something of their heat and
vigorousness against the Non-Conformists; but so long as they themselves are
neither sensible of any error or defect in their Church, it is not to be
expected, or hoped for from them, that they should go about the doing of any
such good work, how great and eminent soever they be, no more than it ought to
be expected from the Romish Doctors, so long as they do look upon, and verily
believe, their Church to be infallible.

And therefore it cannot be considerately imagined, that the perfect day of
hope, of the Church of England's Reformation, and of the Reconciliation of the
Conformists to the Non-Conformists, should break forth from these good Bishops
and Doctors, nor from any of the Clergy, but from KINGS, and the Princes of the
People, whose hearts are in God's hands, and who holds them as the Rivers of
Waters.

25. As for the Odium that is cast upon the Congregational Way, and those who
are called Independents, as being the more immediate anthors and abettors of
the King's Murder, and of taking away Monarchy, it can be easily wiped off,
and made out, That Oliver Cromwell's Army, like that of King David's in the
Wilderness, was a Medley or a Collection of all Parties that were discontented,
as some Courtiers, some Episcoparians, few of any Sect, but most of none, or
else of the Religion of Thomas Hobbes, and Dr. Scarborough, not mentioning the
Papists, who had the greatest hand in the Death of King Charles the First; the
success of which made them so daring and impious, as to contrive another most
Damnable and Hellish Plot to cut off the Life of his Sacred Majesty that now
is, how Royal Son, and our most Gracious Sovereign.

26. That since the Non-Conformists were a generation of men, either of the
first date (as it is most likely,) or, at least, that rose in England at the
same time as the Conformists did; and since they were for number and quality,
as great, or rather greater, and more considerate than the other, and who, in
their Judgment, came nearer, as to the outward Government, and Purity of
Worship, not only to the first Reformers, Zuinglius, Luther, and Calvin, but
also to the Apostolical Practice; and who, indeed were the TRUE PROTESTANTS,
most Conformable to that Party in Germany, who so styled themselves
Protestants, in opposition to the Imperial Edicts of Worms and Spire, it must
needs be a great wickedness and cruelty too in the Conformists, because they
had all the while the Countenance of Princes, and the longest Sword, to
persecute the Non-Conformists, and to deprive them of the liberty of setting up
Purer Ordinances in Conventicles, and of sharing in the Public Maintenance for
the Ministers.

27. That it is a most barbarous, improper, uncharitable, and unchristian
language in the Corrupt-Party of the Church of England, to style themselves the
only true, and properly so called, PROTESTANTS, and to discard all others in
Europe, from the right to that name, for want of such Episcopal Ordinations as
are in England: as if that 500 men possessing the three parts of the
Church-Revenues in England, should better deserve to be called Protestants,
than the first so called in Germany; whereas what ever Bishop Bilson, Andrews,
Dr. Floyd, Dr. Tillotson, and Dr. Stillingfleet, could say in the behalf of the
Government of the Church of England, (as being the most Apostolical and
Primitive,) there is none more opposite, not only to that of the first
Protestants, but also to Scripture, Reason, and Antiquity.

28. These being the Material Heads, or a Summary Idea of the whole, to be more
largely and particularly handled hereafter, (if God gives Life and Time to the
Author,) I shall excerpt much from the Scrinia of the Reverend and Learned
Divine Mr. Richard Baxter, but yet so, as to take the liberty to follow my own
Method and Genius, as to the menage of it.

29. So then the main design of the Subsequent Book, whereof this is a brief,
but full Specimen, shall be to show, prove, and make clear to You, the
unreasonableness, unconscionableness, and consequently the ungodliness of
retaining, urging, and pressing the things in debate between the Conformists
and the Non-Conformists, and of persecuting those, that refuse to submit to
them, or at least to approve of them.

30. That Dissenters could not, cannot, ought not, neither in reason, nor in
Conscience, to submit to them, at least for the assenting, and consenting to
them, and the approving of them.

31. That those Conformists, whom I call Peaceable, and Orthodox men, such as
were the Members of the Parliament of 1640, and those of Westminster assembled,
and their Predecessors, and all others, however otherwise, most upright,
sincere, Orthodox, holy, and well-minded persons, since the first Reformation
in King Edward the Sixth's days, and Lovers of the Non-Conformists, that have
hitherto been Conformists, were all guilty of prevarication, and of a sinful
yielding, complying, assenting, and subscribing to a Church Way, which
doubtless is sinful.

32. And therefore, that the Non-Conformists, who ever since King Edward's
days, in Conformity to the true Doctrine of those of the best sort of
Conformists, kept gathered Churches, and Meetings out of the Parishes, had
right Reason, and Scripture on their side, and walked with a purer Conscience,
were the best reformed from Popery, and those that preserved the true
Apostolical Doctrine, Worship and Government, and conveyed it to Posterity.

33. The Author may Incidently speak of the nature of the Church, Synods,
Associations, and Fraternities by a confederate discipline, but cannot by any
means hear of a National Church-Tribunal, independent on the Magistrate, to
whom only he allows the setting up of a National Worship, by Persuasion and
Commendation, but not in the least by forcing men to it, by penal Laws, except
they be Papists, or disturbers of the Public Peace.

FINIS.

