Antiquity REVIVED: OR THE GOVERNMENT OF A Certain Island Anciently called
ASTREADA, In Reference to Religion, Policy, War, and Peace.


Some hundreds of Years Before the Coming of Christ.

Veritas, si oppugnata, magis Elucescat.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1693.

Antiquity Revived, etc.
WHen Alexander, surnamed the Great, had subjugated to his Will and Power the
most flourishing Dominions of Greece, together with the famous City of Athens,
that had the highest Repute for Literature, and Civil Government, being forced
to submit to that mighty Conqueror: When not a few of Her Citizens despairing
of their former Freedom, and those Encouragements to Erudition and polite
Science, which She had with so much Renown formerly enjoyed, left her Dominion.
Amongst which a Senator, a Philosopher, and a person of Sacerdotal Function,
took shipping, with intent to land in Persia where Darius then Reigned, and was
afterward overcome by the abovementioned Alexander.

But the Winds not favoring their Voyage, they were forced by a Storm on a
certain Island that had been anciently called Astreada: which denomination, as
some affim, was derived from the Goddess Astrea, celebrated by Poets as the
Tutelar Deity of Piety and Justice; which Deity, as they relate, had anciently
a Being on Earth, till the depravation of Mankind both in respect of Divine
Worship, and their Integrity to Laws and Civil Government, caused this Goddess,
as affronted by all sorts of Impieties, to abdicate her Person from the Beings
of Men; whether for the Reason that the Precepts of this Celestial Guide had
been longer retained in this Island, than in any other Region, might give
occasion to its Inhabitants to call it Astreada, I will not positively affirm:
But this I dare aver, That never any Country deserved more Esteem for
preserving the Soundness of Her primitive Faith and Manners.

The Three Persons before expressed, being the Chief of those that the
tempestuous Rage of the Ocean had cast on this lsland, our Discourse shall be
here limited to them, and a few such of the Inhabitants of Astreada as
courteously gave them Reception.

This lsland was of large Extent, if not great and powerful, both in the
Number, Grandeur, and Valor of Inhabitants, and Opulency of Soil, and
Convenience of Situation, prefe^able in most Respects, if compared with other
Neighboring Dominions; and had not visibly deviated, in any known Age, from
requisite Greatness or Virtue.

As soon as these Athenians landed, the next Inhabitants to the Shore, received
them very courteously, and took care for their Accommodation in all things as
was requisite to their Distress: And discerning that of these shipwrack'd
Persons, Three of them, by their Habits, had an important distinction from the
rest, they gave notice of their Quality and Function to one of the chiefest of
their Fidefendons, whose Office was to examine Strangers, and take care that no
Religion differing from theirs should be diffused within the Island of
Astreada. This Fidefendon being accompanied with one of their Civil Superiors,
who from the Duties of his Place was called a Jussinedos, or principal
Magistrates of that Principality; which was so happy, as neither the Imputation
of Tyranny in their Monarchs, or detestable Sedition and Rebellion of their
People, had any sanguine Records amongst them.

As soon as they had kindly saluted the Athenian Strangers, and given them such
Entertainment as was suitable to their Condition, the Fidefendon took occasion
to let them know, That as they pitied their Sufferance in their past Voyage, so
he could not but dissuade, for the benefit of their Souls, their manner of
Worship, if dissenting from his in worshipping of the Divine Powers. And since
he'perceiv'd that one of them was habited in the Vestments of a Priest and
Sacrificer, according to the Custom of their Nation, he was willing to take
cognizance of his Persuasion, and endeavor, if he found it erroneous, to inform
him better.

The Athenian Priest gravely returned his thanks to the Fidefendon for his
offered Favor; but told him withal, That their Religion consisting, for the
most part, of Ceremonies and Sacrificial Duties to the Gods, which long
continued Usage had been traditionally conveyed, and of which they had no
greater Proof than Writings and Records, the Wisdom and Discipline of their
Country had thought fit to allow, it would not be thought convenient for him to
venture their Persuasion so received, and which he could not otherwise
demonstrate, on the force of Argument. Adding besides, That he was obliged by
his Function and Interest cautiously to discuss, at least not to allow of any
Motives or Arguments, if prejudicial to the Tenants he was to profess.

The Philosopher that was of the same Nation, was inwardly ashamed, as he
observed the Evasion made by the Priest, telling the Fidefendon, That if he
would oblige them so far as to undertake to inform them better than they
hitherto unde^stood, on the Divine Account, he assured that it should be
gratefully received by him, notwithstanding the present aversion of his
Countryman the Athenian Priest, which he hoped did not proceed from obdurancy
of Mind, in case his Reasons were appositely prevalent.

The Jussinedos likewise readily declared That after the Fidefendon had
delivered what was fit to be understood in reference to the Religion of
Astreada, that he would acquaint them with such Laws and Politiques of State as
had been the long approved Support of their Monarchical Dominion.

The Athenian Senator, that had not yet spoke, acknowledged the Obligation
great, being no less desirous than the Philosopher, to hear the Maxims of that
Island's Government explained, unto which other Countries were estranged both
as to their Constitution and Practice.

The Fidefendon, by the Prerogative of his Office being first to speak, in
respect that the Concern of Religion ought to have the precedent Discussion, he
began to deliver himself after this manner:

He told them, That he was very inclinable to treat favorably their
Persuasion, both as they were Strangers, and because the Civility of their
Island, and Complaisance of their Morals, obliged them not to reflect with
bitterness on the Persuasions of others that had been introduced by Custom, and
as it were sucked into their Understandings with the Milk of their Mothers:
hoping that of themselves they would discern their Errors, if perspicuously
unvailed to their Judgments, by which they would soon apprehend what sort of
Men ought to be charged with such Enormities and Absurdities in Belief, as were
too frequent with Mankind.

After which, the Fidefendon, with a steady Countenance, delivered himself in
this manner:

Know, said he, that the Worship we acknowledge, and to the observance of which
we devoutly erect the eyes of our Souls, essentially consists on these
following Particulars.

1. That as the World had a manifest Continuation from Providence, so likewise
was it founded on its Power, though not to be otherwise searched or explained:
And consequently that all definitions of the Deity, that it was totally
spiritual; or as some held who had celebrated Demy-gods, after the manner of
others, who attributed half Divinity to some Instructers of Worship, as well as
to their reputed Heroiques, were no less ridiculous, than absurd. It being
impossible that Religion should be so near allied to Mortality, or be obliged
to a Founder of human Denomination. And if the World was governed by a visible
and constant Providence, there was no Reason to doubt that Religion was
deducible from thence, and no less manifest and perpetually extant to Sense, as
palpably as we behold the Sky and Stars above our Heads. Wherefore that this
supreme Tenent ought to be allowed and reverenced as the most clear foundation
of Belief, concluding that it had been as generally conceded, had not the
Inventions and Frauds of Men opposed so clear and known a Truth. Adding, That
he desired to hear what could be opposed to this Notion, before he proceeded to
other Principles of their Worship.

The Athenian Philosopher, judged that the Method proposed was highly rational,
and of divine and natural Simplicity: And turning to the Athenian Priest told
him, That it was incumbent on him to justify the reasonable Integrity of the
Worship he professed, if in the compass of his understanding, lest his Devotion
were held unrighteously applied to Heaven, and Altars polluted by the cruel
Sacrifices of Creatures, whereby the Divine Power might be rather incensed,
than propitiously implored to the advantage of Humane Frailty.

The Grecian Priest, was not a little concerned that he should be thus wooed to
a Disputation of this Nature, which he was very prone to avoid: But judging
that it was for the Credit and Interest of his Persuasion and Function, to act
polemically in their Defense, he replied to this purpose:

That he would not undertake to prove any other Evidence of the Belief he
professed, than what redounded from Usage and allowed Reception, as it had been
written, or traditionally conveyed by such that were not manifestly liable to
the Imputation of Fraud in what they delivered; who, as they were Founders of
Worship, were likewise esteemed inspired, if not oraculously instructed from
above. That Men from Men, in respect of outward Rules and Certainty, had been
propense to acquiesce in sueh Notions, though not otherwise demonstrative.
Neither did he deny that general Providence, as the Fidefendon alleged, was
more apparent and visible than any particular Tenent of Religion, however it
came to pass that Maxims of Worship were so extremely various in diverse
Nations, though within the compass of one entire World, and Divine Conduct.
That it were to be wished that every Article of Faith had been as discernable
as the Orb of Light, nay, written with a Sunbeam on every Object we behold:
But this general Conviction being not to be perceived, Men ought to follow such
Doctrines as have gained most Credit on their Understandings.

The Fidefendon told him, That he commended him for wishing that the Essentials
of Divine Worship had greater Evidence than human Relations or Tenants
prescribed by the Pen of Man, by reason that it was not apparent how far they
ought to be credibly allowed, or accompanied with any sensible Demonstration
that Invention or Deceit did not manage the Contrivance: For though a Book may
with sufficient assurance deliver a Math^matical Certainty with a quod erat
demonstrandum: It is much otherwise as to any Fundamental of Faith as it should
respect Heaven, which teaches the Soul visibly to apprehend the Illuminations
without Book from above; to which undeniable Conviction all the Faculties of
the Mind, and what can be attributed to every Sense that operates in Mankind,
fully assent.

Suppose, he added, that I should inspect such Writings of yours as are no less
esteemed by you than sacred Records, and should find there such Acts of your
deified Jupiter, as you grant Miraculous: Were it therefore as clear, in the
judgment of any indifferent Understanding, that your Deity either did such
Wonders, or delegated by Inspiration any Persons to convey them to others; when
you neither produce or rely on any visible Fact, or universal Manifestation of
his Omnipotent Power, together with the Reverence incumbent, from thence, on
the Soul of Man. Our Intellects are sensibly assured, That we ought to pay
Adoration on our Knees to what we see not, from what we ocularly behold in the
admirable Frame and Structure of the Universe, in whose Circumference should
not the fixed Stars stand at one constant distance one from another, and the
diurnal motion of the Orbs above perpetually keep the same time, no Individual
would, in probability, last a moment: But we reflect on you Grecians, no less
than on other Nations of the Earth, that by invented Denominations and Beliefs,
presumptuously impose on Heaven what is not to be discerned from thence by any
actual Object or Propriety.

And could any thing be more perfectly or necessarily perceived, than what
obviously result^ from the Conduct of the Universe above and below: It were
impious to concede, that it would not be effectually conveyed and seen by our
Eyes no less undoubtedly than requisite to terminate and convict our
Understandings, which to deny were very absurd, and consequently would force on
Providence a defect.

Some there are who confidently affirm, That the Conduct of the Universe does
dependantly subsist, and guided in all its Operations and Effects, by a
spiri^ual Being; but how a spiritual Essence can actuate on things of a
corporeal Nature, that are limited and qualified accordingly, is not
intelligible, we may imagine, to the highest degree of Purity, that one
Substance may be more refined and dignified than another, as we behold from the
Figure and Beams of the Sun, and other of the Celestial Bodies; yet not be able
from thence to define a Spirit, or to attribute to a Divine spiritual Essence
the contiguous order and disposal of Substances terminated by material parts
and effect^ of Sense, as are our human Bodies, and whatsoever has Vegetation or
Life; to affirm otherwise, is not easily, discharged from Contradiction.

In like manner it seems no less naturally repugnant to Reason, in such as do
maintain that spiritual Worship is due from the human Soul; which as it has its
Being, and actuates in the Body of Man, can have no proper Idea of any
spiritual Existence. Let any one that would be thought to believe otherwise,
prostrate himself as devoutly as he can, and he will find, in opposition to
this Maxim, That his Contemplation will furnish him with something or other
that resembles Body and Parts, and most likely such as are of human Similitude,
suitable to the Deities that for the most part are worshipped, for which the
Fictions of the Priesthood ought to be accountable. This Example, in stead of
other Argument, I hold fully sufficient to convince Opposers, that the Notion
of spiritual Worship is neither reasonable, or naturally allowable: In stead of
which I will clearly propose, when I touch that Particular, such a sensible and
proper Worship, though annexed to no denomination of Deity, in any kind, as
shall manifest the Religion we Astreadans profess, to be more rational than
what can be urged to the contrary by any opposite Persuasion.

The Grecian Senator, very gravely observed the preceding Discourse; and though
he was inclined to esteem the Laws and Usage of his Country both on the Divine
and Civil Account, he readily acknowledged that neither of those were valuable,
if not of sound and unbiased Construction; wherefore he was very desirous to
attend the Period of this considerable Debate.

When the Philosopher, his Associate, who had been positively educated in the
Athenian School, acknowledged by the World for the most exquisit Seminary of
Letters, where he had gradually arrived to the height of Philosophical Science,
was somewhat earnester than the Senator, to understand if reverential Worship
could be apparently deducible from the exterior and sensible Acts of
Providence; assuring the Priest, his Companion, That unless he could make out
his particular method of Adoration, the Altars and Sacrifices, however
beneficial they had been to Men of his Function, would sink in Repute,
notwithstanding the Esteem they had formerly received. At which words the
Priest being not a little concerned, and rubbing of his Forehead hard, with not
a little Priestly Confidence, began in this manner:

I well know, that Universal Providence, however it may seem disguised or
perplexed, by the various Opinions and Religions of the World, ought to have a
Divine Attribute revere^c'd by Mankind; and that the Conviction is no less
apparent, than that there is Day and Night, Heat and Moisture, and other
elementary qualities, by which the Universe does subsist: That not a few, of
profound Erudition, have affirmed, That the whole Bulk and Fabric of the
Universe is animated, preserved, and governed by one Soul or Providence; on
which Account they acknowledge, that there is an actual Supreme Conduct as
clearly manifest, as we know by Sense that Earth, Water, or Air, have their
proper Qualities and Beings. But this general Soul of the World being
impossible to be viewed or resembled by Shape or Figure, no more than the Soul
or Life, that actuates the Body of Man, is to be seen or described, they allow
it a supreme and essential Conduct on which the conservation of all above and
below depe^ds. For which Reason they hold it absurd to give a definitive Name
to any thing that is not perceptible to Sense, how excellent soever they grant
its Being and Conduct.

And though I am of the Priesthood, my Ingenuity does oblige to grant, that it
is not easy to give a Denomination to an invisible Power, or a supreme Cause,
whose Essence is absconded, and can no otherwise be reverenced, than by the
Effects it produces.

On which ground they argue. That an uncertain Name or Notion of Divine Power,
as it may be signified by the Word Providence, is less temerarious, and of more
practicable Intelligence, than Definitions of Men that pretend to explain a
deified Essence.

And thus, continued the Priest, we are severely censured, and pretendedly
recriminated for proposing to the World such Tenants as undertake to furnish
the Understanding with a more superlative Intimacy with the Divine Power, than
by any Fact or Conduct of Heaven, is manifestly explained. And likewise reflect
on our usual Worship, as the Catalogue of superstitious Frauds and Devices,
notwithstanding it be clear both to us and them, that unless it be granted that
Devotion be explained, after our manner of Adoration, in reference to Divinity,
Religion can have no Certainty, or practical Observance.

The Fidefendon replied, that the Athenian Priest, had conceded enough in that
he granted, That the Omnipotent or Supreme Being might have an implicit
Demonstration, though not the essence known by the word, as in the example you
mentioned of the Soul in the Body of Man: the word Soul does not explain the
Being of the human Soul, though by its conceived Operation we give it a name,
by which we rather would know than certainly able from thence to express its
nature. In like manner, We Astreadans, after the rational form of Worship
professed by us, attribute to the Denomination of Providence, an Omnipotency or
Divine Conservator and Disposer of the total World, as it is either composed of
whatsoever we behold, or of what we do neither discern or apprehend: And yet we
do not definitively infer from any of these Expressions, the Essential Nature
or Modality of Existence in reference to the Supreme Power which we devoutly
celebrate: In your City of Athens, where Literature has been so anciently
Famous, you deify an Omnipotent Being; but instead of defining his Essence, you
dedicate your Worship to the unknown God, as the public Inscriptions on your
Temples and Altars declare. By which it is evident, That you renounce all
Tenants that pretend to Definitions of the Nature of the Deity you adore, by
which the Prudence of your Republic judiciously avoided the intolerable
Absurdities that otherwise would have been propagated amongst you.

And had your Citizens been allowed the freedom of Discussing, or suffered any
Tenants that had undertook to explain the Divine Essence, your City had been
infectd with more contagious Errors relating to Belief, than you do at this day
profess. For if you had allowed any Corporeal Figure or Being, to what you
Divinely celebrate; you must have represented it in the likeness of Humanity,
or other Animal. On the contrary, if you had given it a spiritual Attribute,
you had then determined more Exorbitantly, and less Intelligible. Because the
understanding can have no comprehension of any spiritual Existency that is in
no kind the Object of Sense. Nor can any, however confident they seem to be,
with the least shadow of Reason affirm, That a bodily Eye can discern that
which has no Body; which were a Contradiction to the undoubted Principle of
Optics, and no less wide from the Understanding, or impossible to fall within
the compass of its knowledge; according to that clear Philosophical Maxim, That
nothing is in the Intellect of Man, but was first the Senses; whereas it is
evident from what is here alleged, That a spiritual Being cannot be in any
kind the Object of the Understanding or Senses.

To conclude, Whatsoever is not to be seen or felt, is impossible to be
apprehended or notional to human Conception. And I think no Man will undertake
to demonstrate, that a Spirit is either to be touched or seen. And these
Reasons I conceive enough to invalidate all spiritual Definitions and Notions,
by whomsoever asserted.

And yet I grant, said the Fidefendon, That from the sublime Effects and
Proprieties of a Cause sensibly apparent, I may concede that it is supreme and
ineffable; by Reason of the actual dignity of its Operation, notwithstanding it
be far impossible for me to apprehend the manner of its Existence or Being; as
is manifest from the Example of Providence, before mentioned; the excellency of
whose actual and continual Benignity in the wonderful Order and Conservation of
the Universe, and all things it contains, is apparent to our Understandings, by
the undeniable allowance of all our Senses; as Seeing, Hearing, Tasting,
Smelling, Touching; these assure us of a Providential Being. How remote soever,
or absconded the Modality of its Existence, is from our Apprehensions: Like to
some admirable Structure, from whose Composure, Furniture, Parts, and
Proportions, I admire the perfect Abilities of the Architect and Founder,
though unknown to me the superlative Skill and Materials that completed the
Fabric. And I cannot but reiterate, That there is nothing more fallible or
absurd, than positively to affirm, That in allowing of a Supreme Cause, they
must necessarily grant a spiritual Existence; it being very possible, that such
an Efficient, howsoever superlative allowed in its Essence, may be no Spirit,
as some undertake to define, nor of bodily substance in any corporeal Sense or
Attribute that can be apprehended by us. And in Speculation we may acknowledge,
that an extraordinary Cause may be notionally understood to be of a refined
Nature, yet not therefore termed Spiritual, no more than the Notion of a
distinct fifth Essence, which Philosophers attribute to the Aetherial Bodies of
the Sun and Stars, does imply a spiritual Being, or contrarily any Similitude
of Subsistence, if likened to Elementary Composition.

If the World did explain by any Work, or Thing, the Cause of its own Original,
or any Creature that subsists in it, we could not be destitute of knowing, nay,
seeing of it as perfectly as we do our selves: Though we must not conclude from
thence, that the total Compass of the World does not diffuse the Cause of its
Being; And it were a very groundless and improper Notion, to imagine that any
such Original Cause should have an Existence beyond the vast Extent of the
Universe; which were no less absurd, than to imagine that something may subsist
where there is nothing: For I take it as granted by all of us, that the
capacity of the World above and below, must be large enough to include its
supreme Cause; We ought therefore to conclude, that the Reason why it cannot be
discerned, is because it is absconded by its effectual conduct and manner of
Operation, in order to the conservation of the Universe. For if it animate all
things, or be diffused, as a Soul, of which every individual Being
participates, as was precedently mentioned, it cannot be perceptible in whole,
or in part, no more than the human Soul is to be discerned, in its Figure or
Proportion that gives Life and Motion to the Body. All which does sufficiently
manifest, that a Supreme Cause may be visibly existent in the Effects it
produces; yet so, as not to be otherwise defined or apprehended.

On which grounds we of this Island of Astreada adore Providence, without
giving to it the name of Deity, or obliging our selves to give a denomination
to a Being or Essence that we cannot intelligibly express, and so be
necessitated to devise an equivalent Term or Notion of Divinity at a Venture.
Whereas we conceive that we are pertinently devout, if sensible of its Effects,
however obscure its Being, if we pay our Adoration in that method for the
Benefits we receive: And that as an undiscernible Foreseer, Provider, and
Disposer of all things, for the Glory of it self, and humane preservation and
subsistence, we celebrate Providence; not with less reverence than such as
would be thought strictly to worship and implore what they think fit to deifie.

'Twere more tedious than necessary, should ^ entertain you, who are Strangers
to our Climate, with an elaborate Repetition of our Forms of Prayer, and manner
of Devotion: which, in sums, is no other, than that we reverence on our Knees
the ineffable Disposer and Giver of the Blessings we receive; like to a Man
that should have a Bounty conveyed to him by an unknown hand, and who, in that
Case, would not think himself tacitly obliged to return his acknowledgment,
though he was ignorant of the Motive, Nature, and Dignity of the Person that
was the Bestower.

On what account the Tenants and Superstructures of others, not to reflect on
their notorious Frauds and Devices, have hoodwinked the understandings of Men
that are not united to us by the sensible method of our Persuasion, I leave,
concluded the Fidefendon, to your judicious Examination.

The Philosopher observing that his Countryman Priest was somewhat troubled to
reply, or ruminating of what Argument wa^ fittest to be insinuated in defense
of his Persuasion, spoke to the Fidefendon in these words.

I am apt to grant both as a Philosopher, and as far as Reason ought to
convince me, that there is an implicit Reverence, as you have judiciously
maintained, due to the sensible operations of Providence; all which I do as
clearly perceive, as that the Sun has warmness in his Beams, and that Day and
Night have a reciprocal management, as they beneficially vary and commode the
several Climates of the Universe: or that Mankind, and every Animal and
Vegetive is nourished and supported by operations of a Cause predominately
absconded.

To which, I likewise condescend, That you aptly give the denomination of
Providence, without undertaking to define its Essence; as he that sees Light,
feels the effects of the Suns heat, is capable of understanding what he intends
by either of the words, but not therefore apprehensive of the composition or
essential nature of the substance from whence they proceed.

Neither can I dissent from you, as you celebrate under the Notion of
Providence the Devotion you apply; in respect that what I am rationally obliged
to admire as an ineffable Supporter and Disposer of all things, I may
undoubtedly worship in a general Sense without other definition: to explain
which, the Reasons you have precedently alleged are so many and perspicuous,
as they need no Illustration: So that as a rational Man and a Philosopher, I
readily concede, that the Belief you Astreadans profess, is both Natural and
Philosophical; neither can any other religious Proposal, however reputed divine
or inspired, deter me from allowing my highest Admiration and Reverence to the
methods of that Persuasion that is evidently familiar to my Soul and Senses, in
the same manner as you deduce your Creed from the conduct of Providence; and
why the Devotion of the World should not be universally united in that
primitive one entire and obvious mean^ of Worship, is not easily understood.

To which the Fidefendon readily answered, ^elling the Philosopher, that he had
proceeded ingeniously in his Concession relating to what had been discussed:
And that he concluded with a very considerable mark on the deplorable Folly of
Mankind in being so absurdly divided by their Beliefs, considering that as the
World is one, so there can be but one true Proposition or Motive in order to
worship. As in the Instance that has been given of Providence, if that be
clearer to the apprehension, as it must be because sensibly perceived, than any
Notion different from it, that ought to be made the Proposition that should
generally unite and terminate hum^ne Worship. And I do not think, said the
Fidefendon, that the most confident of the Priesthood, will affirm that either
their Oracles or Inspirations that they conceive most authentic, are so
feelingly manifest, as the operation^ of Providence, or of like Antiquity; the
latter being as old as the World, the other of dated and known Original.

And turning to the Grecian Priest, added, that hi^ Function could not deny
that their Jupiter, and other of their Deities were allowed by Priesthoods to
have been born, and lived on earth, and I doubt not but their Ends were
likewise mortal.

But how Religions of that sor^ should continue so long, and yet propagated
from so mean a Beginning and Date, or in substance no other than Creeds
conveyed by the practice of Men for secular Esteem, Advantage and Interest;
even contrary to the obviou^ Devotion and Belief avowed by us; I cannot imagine
otherwise to arise, than from the prone Facility and credulous Impiety, too
prevalent with Mankind, in believing a Story or Fiction, plausibly contrived,
superior in poin^ of evidence, to the palpable information of our Senses. On
which account the credence of such Doctrines has been subtly introduced, that
has not only allured, deceived, and opposed Men's understandings by the various
defiance of their Tenants, even to Wars and Slaughters, but has presumptuously
taught them to believe, that there have been Gods in humane shape, and
sometimes Men that ought to be halfway deified, as Heroes of old were
fictitiously celebrated; that is to say, worship as God and Man united.

All which, not to particularize the Ends and Interest of Impostors, have been
suitably conveyed in order to captivate the Intellects of vulgar persons, as
the greatest part of Mankind, and therefore more usefully imposed on, who being
taught to pin their Faith on the Relations of such as had greatest reputation
of Piety and Learning, though in truth ^he mistakers or abusers of both; soon
prevailed with them to acquiesce in believing of things they never examined,
though not undertaken to be proved by the Proposers.

And thus the Tales and Forgeries of a few at first, gained by degrees the
approbation of multitudes, who because they observed nothing above or below
that did by words declare a supreme Cause, or any providential Benignity
derived from thence, as if the universal World, Sun and Stars were to be less
admired because speechless, they easily consented that such as with the highest
vogue and applause of opinion presented themselves for Tu^ors, ought to be
received as commissioned by Heaven. And this Error was diligently continued by
the craft and for the advantage of their Guides and Directors; well knowing
that a Worship that depended upon sensible assurance, would invalidate all
Persuasions that had nothing but verbal Affirmations. Neither had any of those
Men, who pretended most to Divine Inspirations and Records divulged to that
end, attained the repute of Founders, or as it were the original Monarchs of
diversity of Persuasions and Sects redounding from thence; if they had
undertook to inform Men no farther than the conviction of Seeing and Feeling,
according as we deduce our providential Worship, because that method had put
Men in mind of what was as palpable to them as it could be to such who
undertook to be their Directors.

As it can be for no Bodies advantage to assure Men that there is a
Mathematical Certainty, or that they may demonstrate how far they ought to
believe, in point of Religion, as surely as they can know any thing by their
Senses. True it is, that Erectors and Founders of Worship have alleged, to
credit their Doctrines, Divine Illuminations and Miracles, that have been
better known, or at least so pretended, to themselves, than to such they
undertake to inform. But with what confidence can they affirm, that such
Propositions are either sufficient or large enough to convict the World
replenished with Men; or why there should not be one Belief as evident to
Sense, as that Men discern the Operations of Providence.

If contrarily you can clearly explain, concluded the Fidefendon, that your
Persuasion ought to dissent, I am ready to consider the validity of your
Proposals; in the mean time I have set forth, in their genuine dress, the
ground and motives relating to the Worship that we Astread^ns maintain, and
devoutly profess.

The Priest touched to the quick to hear the Authority of his Creed, and
Interest of his Function so attacked by the force of the Fidefendon's
Discourses, almost wished that he had been drowned in his late tempestuous
Voyage, rather than preserved as he saw hi^ endeared Belief thus catechis'd and
opposed; wherefore, suitable to the usual confidence of Men of his Robe, with
Fervor in his Looks and Visage, he told the Fidefendon, That it was too
strictly severe to require a Demonstration from Sense for Articles of his
Doctrine; or to prove it annexed to Providence in the manner of the Astreadan
Persuasion. And since the Tenants of us Grecians are derived, as we allege
them from spiritual Inspiration, that have both defined the Deity, and the
manner of Worship celebrated by us, undoubtedly, as we conceive, delivered by
our known Records and long Usage; we canone lessen its sublime Authority by
departing from what we received, because we cannot prove, otherwise than as it
is testified by writing, that it was heretofore inspired: And should we grant
the contrary, we must deny the spiritual Illumination we pretend to, though I
grant it is not intelligible in what manner a spiritual Act or Thought can have
to do with our Senses; and consequently invalidate every Function of
Priesthood, and the Reverence attributed to them in numerous and glorious
Nations. How many of our Robe have been allowed of sanctified Repute, nay such
^s have prophetically foretold Kings and Potentates what should succeed, and
how far their Affairs are favored by Heaven. If our Presages have sometimes
erred, none can deny that we have not been now and then in the right.

True it is, that Men of plain apprehensions have occasionally taxed our
Doctrines for shifting of Sides and Parties, or seeming inspired in behalf of
the most: prevalent Faction or Dominion: But we thank Heaven we are not
abashed, or put out of countenance by such low Recriminations, whilst by the
strength of spiritual Reputation we prosper under such variety of Times and
Change of Rulers, that amaze the Brain of vulgar Persons, as they too
frequently judge that they are taught, by us, to suffer most, and apprehend
least.

That there is an excellency that ought to be dispensed to some Orders and
Callings of Men, merely from what they represent, is evident to all that
apprehend the Nature and Time of Ecclesiastical and Temporal Politiques. Does
it not appear from thence, that such as were esteemed the most profound and
excellent Institutors of Governments, have been reputed Divinely taught and
gifted; not that there was really any such Attributes due to them, but as they
were admired and reverenced for the superlative Prudence that was allowed to
their Laws and public Constitutions: And I doubt not, said the Priest, looking
earnestly on the rest, that our sacred Office may claim as sublime Reputation,
if not more, considering the dignity of our Function.

To conclude, We do not undertake to prove, with the same evidence of Sense as
you do the operations of Providence, that by whomsoever. our Precepts were
originally conveyed, on which were first founded our Priestly Qualifications
and Capaci^ies, that he was either inspired or conversed with a Deity: But
rather affirm, that he ought, in one kind or other, to be so reputed, in
respect of the credit and value allowed to the Principles of Worship conveyed
by him. After this manner the titular Grandeur of heroical and excellent
Persons, received divine Names and Epithites; not that they in nature were so
near of Kin to Heaven as to be half way deified, as of old some were entitled,
but from the admiration paid to their actions and endowments that highly tended
to the benefit of others.

And since the World will not be easily persuaded, that there ought to be such
a sensible Worship as you propose, which I confess was to be wished: Particular
Nations will stand upon the Credit of their Priests, and what they receive from
their Instructions; nay hold themselves obliged to support and defend, as much
as in them lies, the esteem of one sort of Priesthood above another.

Moreover, when we assert a Proposition in Religion that is not demonstrative,
as by declaring in what manner the Deity is represented or personated, or how
operative on Men by way of Inspiration: It ought to be received as our way of
speaking, whereby we teach Men more superlatively to reverence the Doctrines we
deliver; which could not be received with plausible respect and admiration, if
not supposed to have proceeded from a Divine Founder. Insomuch that the
Po^emicks of Nations, on which depend their controverted Creed, have no other
Original than which of them ought to be preferred as they relate to the
celebrated Qualifications of their first Proposers.

The Athenian Senator, observing that the Priest his Associate was more
perplexed and obscure in vindicating of his Tenants than he expected from his
Undertaking, gravely told him, that he thought it would be no advantage to his
Creed to debate it farther: And turning to the Fidefendon, gave him thanks for
the Explanation he had given them of his Astreadan Persuasion; adding withal,
That it would be no less grateful to him and the Philosopher his Countryman, if
he pleased to deliver what wa^ the Doctrine received in that famous Island,
tending to the Immortality of the Soul, and the Condition of Mankind after this
Life.

The Fidefendon soberly replied, That by his precedent Discourses, he doubted
not but it was apparent to all of them, that Religion was clearly the Object of
Sense, and conveyed by universal Providence; on which account all particular
Beliefs, and singular Per^uasions whereby this or that People annexed their
Creeds, on pretense of Divine Inspira^ion revealed by written Records, or
Rela^ions of Men tending to that purpose; were Notions no less absurd than
impossible, because no Miracle written or related, is an equivalent proof of a
Miracle in Fact: so that if a Man does not palpably discern what he is told or
reads, it cannot be hi^ actual Conviction.

Neither can any Man be otherwise persuaded but he must particularize and limit
Providence, as he supposes that it has conveyed his profession of Faith in a
partial Bounty, as ^t respects one sort of Men or Nation more than the
generality of Mankind. This obvious Reflection plainly discovers the erroneous
and contradictory grounds of such as would be thought singularly illuminated in
order to their Forms of Worship: All which ^ thought fit previously to
instance, as being necessary to the explaining of our Opinion of the World,
which you Grecians call the other.

If humane Understanding has no actual Evidence by what means or fact the Earth
we tread on, or the Globe of the Universe which our eyes with admiration
behold, was produced: how is it possible that the Intellect of Man should
display any sufficient Notion of an undiscernable World. And wherea^ Providence
has given us a sensible assurance, as has been already proved, of its
Operations in the Universe we inhabit, we have no such Conviction of any other.
And it were no less then a Contradiction to affirm, that this World is sensibly
perceived, but not that which some term the the other; and consequently that thi^
only was providentially disposed, in order to the conviction of our Senses:
which must render Providence defective, and opposite to it self; or visible
here, but an invisible Guide as to our Perception, by its means, of another
World.

And whosoever shall assert a Tenent o^ this unintelligible Extent, does, in
effect, affirm the existency of two distinct; Deities, that by a dissimulary
Conduct govern thi^ and the other mundane Place and Situation. For if the Order
and Operations of the Supreme Power be perciptible only in such Objects as are
familiarly apparent to our Understandings and Senses, as has been already the
Being of another World must be totally different from this, as also the nature
and effects of the Omnipotent Cause by which it is actuated and preserved, in
no kind of similitude to the Rule and Disposition of the Universe we inhabit;
or that there is a spiritual World and Being ordained for the Reception of the
humane Soul, as they conceive it an immortal Spirit.

Neither can any sufficiently allege Divine Inspiration, as has been observed
by me, to corroborate a Doctrine so opposite to humane discernment, because no
one Man can explain to another by what means he was inspired, or how he was
illuminated by a spiritual Conversion: It being widely impossible to Reason,
that he who sensibly understands not the existency of a Spirit, should
apprehend the possibility of a spiritual Dialogue betwixt God and Man. The most
ancient Recorders of the delusory and various Beliefs of the World were either
Poets, or Priests, or both; none of your Grecians can deny, as is manifest from
the esteem you give to their Traditions and Writings. Yet the most anciently
celebrated of these, as were Orpheus, Hesiod, and the like, taught Men to
believe, that Gods did beget one another as their Deities of both Sexes were
supposed to engender: A Notion as absurd as monstrous; because it implies that
one Infinite thing can beget another Infinite, or one spiritual Being procreate
its like in Essence; which Doctrine, however extravagant, must be conceded by
all that attribute the denomination and nature of Spirit to the Deity, and
grant that it may communicate its substance in any respect. And I very much
fear that in the Worship, by which many would be thought most devoted to an
Omnipotent Power, that they render i^ impossible to be reverenced in the method
they propose; unless they can prove, as instanced before, how an undeterminate
or infinite Being can be a sensible Object, and comprehensively adored by the
limited qualification of humane Understanding.

Others have so lowered the Divinities they celebrate, as by their Commixtures
with Mankind they either give 'em the Title o^ Demy-godships, as has been
precedently observed, or they express 'em in resemblance to humane Bodies; and
not only knowing of the; Infirmities and Depravations of Mankind, but in the
worst conception, Actors themselves; which polutions of Heaven must have been
politickly, and for Interest devised and complicated with Beliefs, that such as
were so devoted, might with more assurance hope for pardon from their Deities,
whom they judged no less than Men notoriously sinful.

These Particulars, I thought previously necessary to inculcate here, because
they have affinity to the various Extravagancies that some Persons by their
Doctrines undertake to defend in reference to the Immortalising of the Soul
after this Life.

The first is, That the humane Soul consists of a Spiritual Essence, and that
it is by the excellency of its substance likewise Immortal: But how can these
Dogmatizers of Religion, according to this Notion of theirs, not vent an
Absurdity of the highest Nature: For if the Soul of Man be essentially a
Spirit, and that they hold, as they would be thought to do, the God they adore
a Spirit also: Do they not, in effect, d^ifie the animating part of Mankind
after death, it being impossible to distinguish, by any rational Discussion,
how much one Spirit is essentially purer than another. On which ground it
follows, that wh^t is spiritually Immortal, may be allowed to be Infinite. So
little distinction is there, by this Doctrine, betwixt the Soul of Man, and the
Deity they worship; and yet it is well known to all of us, how numerous a part
of the World assert this Tenent as the first Maxim of their Creed.

Others affirm, That the purest Substance or ghostly Form of Life, when
separated by Death, is represented by a shadow of the Body, which some pretend
to have beheld in that Figure, as ocular Witnesses that the Soul of Man does in
that manner outlive the Body: And this your Grecian Poets, to whose Inventions
your Prie^thood is not a little beholding, with their fanciful Glosses
undertake ^o deliver: But of what credit their Au^hority is I need not debate,
who, in being Poe^^ must be granted Divulgers of fabulous Contrivances. And
what can be a greater Solecism to Reason, than a Position so vainly
extravagant; nay, how is it possible to c^nceive, that a Shadow does not imply
the presence of the Body, if it appears as its Shadow, and consequently that
the Soul has no such separative existence after bodily death.

Besides all which, the Absurdities are innumerable that redound from this
Tenent; for if every Body of Mankind were by its Soul to be shadowed or
liken'd, it must follow, that every Man and Woman's Soul are commensurable, and
therefore differenced in breadth and length; and lik^wise in substance, as one
Shadow may be proportionably finer than another, or have more likeness to the
Body it: appertained to.

Notwithstanding I confess, that whosoever was the first Author of this dark
conceit, that the Soul did survive as an umbrage of the Body after life, comes
nearer the confines of Sense than the precedent Opinion; in respect that as the
animating Faculty of Mankind does furnish in due proportion every Member that
it actuates and informs, whilst it resides within the Body, so it should remain
after Corporeal Life in some kind of similitude to its operation, within the
composition of humane Nature, when the Life of the Body was determined by Death.

The third Tenent of the Soul's Immortality appears more terrene, and therefore
not less familiar to the apprehension, and this depends upon believing that the
Soul of all things is essentially the same, and differenced only in its being
in variety of Bodies; as Men, Beasts, Plants, and whatsoever has life and
motion.

This Opinion has had no less Vogue in the World, than long acceptance with
persons held of profound disc^rnment in the universal Series of Nature: to
which purpose they infer, that the continuation of the Universe, or at least of
all corporal Beings within the compass of the sublunary World, depends upon a
perpetual course of Generation and Corruption, from one individual Being to
another, and consequently that whatsoever dies by corruption, does tend to the
generation of some other corporeal Being. And this Position is so far
apparently certain, insomuch as Life, in one kind or other, is incident to
Matter, as it convertibly depends on whatsoever is generated, and consequently
altered into a corporeal Being differently animated to what it was before.

On which Philosophical Evidence, added the Fidefendon, does consist the
ancient opinion of not a few learnedly Famous, who maintained the
Transmigration of Souls, when separated from their precedent Mansions by death,
and that they passed into other Bodies. The Speculation, however naturally
passable, does, in a high degree, lessen the dignity of the humane Soul, by
reason that in such a method of progression from Body to Body, it must at one
time or other animate an ignobler Creature than Man, which gives cause of
Reproof to the Assertion.

Another Doctrine there is, and much insisted on by some, which I shall but
touch, because it seems more extravagant or opposite to the ordinary progress
and course of Nature, than any I have precedently mentioned; and this
undertakes to assert, That the humane Soul is immortally generated: which, in
plain words, is to affirm, That one immortal Thing begets another; or, that the
Soul of the Father does animate an Eternity, in begetting the Soul of the Son:
which conceit is so fictitiously absurd, as it is repugnant to the total method
of the causes and effects of Generation.

However, to repel these Contradictions, the Abettors of this Doctrine assure
us, by an unintelligible method, That the Soul is divinely infused from above,
and spiritually commix'd with the Act of Generation: But how a Spirit, as has
been argued before, can mix with a corporeal Substance, is a Riddle fit to be
left to such Authors to explain.

The last Opinion that remains to be exposed to a free judiciary Determination,
is, That Soul and Body of every Individual of Mankind, is restored to an
immortal Perfection and Union after Death. Which Doctrine has gained a very
plausable Reception with many: Nor can it be thought ungrateful to the
beautiful of both Sexes, if the excellency of their Features and Proportions
accompany them to a future Life; which wonderful Receptacle of the Persons of
Men and Women after Death, not a few of you Grecians, said the Fidefendon, call
the Elysium, or another World, in which Mankind shall have Being, by a
miraculous Restoration after Living here, and where they shall be more or less
happy or unhappy; how long, they have not certainly determined, after made
Survivors in their future Abodes.

But should it be asked of any of these wonderful Tutors, what possible
Assurance they have, that the Persons of Mankind shall be removed, after the
manner they determine, from the visible corporeal World to another, whose place
they are not able to demonstrate, otherwise than by an implicit Belief, that
goes farther with them than real Proof.

I cannot apprehend what Answer they would return, unless they would ingeniously
confess that they do not know, nor can I guess on what they ground their Notion
of transporting the Persons of all after death, from one World to another
pretended; unless it be, that they believe the compass of this World is not
spacious enough to receive the vast numbers of both Sexes, that is to say, all
that have and shall enter the Confines of Mortality by Death: And I grant that
it may be some Question, whether the Terrestrial Globe be sufficiently large to
give entertainment to all of humane Composition after living here; or if room
enough for them to move or stand foot by foot together. But whether moving,
sitting, standing or lying, be the general supposed posture of such as by
future Life shall reside in the Elisium Abodes, is not derermin'd by your
Grecian Dogmatists. But as for the personal ^ppearance of every Individual of
humane kind there, I conceive they allow them to pass thither as naked as they
first came to their Graves and Sepulchers. And if they grant that bodily Organs
are restored to both Sexes, as they survive again, I do not see how they can
deny our corporeal Sense and Appetites in the Elisium they ordain. Neith^r do I
doubt but their Tenent is so indulgent to Beauty, as to concede to Men and
Women such a Renovation as may best refine the Splendors of their Youth and
Features. And who can question but this pleasant Imagination has proselited not
a few, especially the most delicate of both Sexes, in all Ages.

Some, I confess, affirm, That both Soul and Body shall not be only renovated,
but purified from the natural Passions and Affections that were theirs when
earthly Inhabitants: But how they can presume that humane Composition is
capable of such a cleansing or refining in similitude to the practical effects
of Fire or Water, I do as little understand, as they are able to inform me.

In sum, concluded the Fidefendon, We are not averse to any of the before
recited Doctrines, on the account that we would be thought to pretend to
greater assurance by any Notions of our own that relate to future living in
another World. Be pleased therefore to take notice, that we of this Island are
no such Bigots for any Assertions of Belief that are rather problematical and
discussive, than evident to the understanding; nothing being more fundamentally
repugnant to our Creed, than to intermix any dubious Conjectures with Maxims of
our Faith, much less impose them on others; a precipitate hazard, or Crime, for
which too many Religions are at this day accountable.

If Providence, our familier and visible Director, as has been enough
instanced, does not perspicuously guide our Assents as far as the cursory
Doctrines of others extend, it is they that dissent exorbitantly from us, and
not we from them; and whosoever does undertake to deliver Maxims of Faith less
sensibly proceeding from the undoubted manifestation of Providence, or less
ocularly and rational^y certain, than the order and conduct of ^he Universe, in
all respects, must grant his Propositions as palpably deficient, if compared
with ours, as the shadows of Night are to the Illuminations of the clearest
Light. And yet there is no Article of their Worship, that is evident to Sense,
nor any distribution of moral Virtue, or sincere esteem of pious Conversation
and Life, that is not entirely embraced by us.

True it is, that in the punishment, nature, and qualifications of Sin, there
may be some diversity betwixt their Tenants, and the integrity and certainty of
ours; and the Reason is, because they prescribe farther than their
Understandings can accompany their Creeds.

Let this briefly be the Example.
We do not deny that after Death, according to every desert of humane kind,
there shall be future Reward to the good in whatsoever excellency of Being the
providential Disposer of all things has determined; as likewise Infli^^ions on
the evil Deeds and Impieties of others: Which Doctrine is not asserted by us as
a manifest Article of our Faith, but as our comfortable hope and expectation of
Felicity to come after our periods of living here. But not having the same
familiar and open prospect of Providence, whereby we as palpably apprehend the
place and manner of future Life, as perspicuously as we behold the actual
conduct and existence of the Universe in which we inhabit; we do not
dogmatically impose, after their Model, the belief of another World; nor can
any affirm that they have the emphatical and visible as^urance, by any
providential Operation or Object, of a subsequent Being reserved ^or Mankind
either in Soul or Body, or in both conjoined, to possess.

Neither do we, said the Fidefendon,as ^ even now expressed, in any kind re^ect
the comfortable Opinion of future Felicity, though we hold it not as equally
convictive as we are sensible of the Providence that we are demonstratively
obliged to reverence here; in doing of which, we do not infer, that a Tenent
may not be useful for Contemplation and Encouragement, in order to the
attaining of humane Perfection, though it has no intelligible note, or known
assurance from proof.

However, we are indubitably confirmed, that all Wickedness is arraigned by the
discerning Tribunal that Con^cience does erect in every requisite
understanding, besides the public and outward Ignomy that Laws inflict on
enormous and presumptuous transgressions of Life, and where there is sufficient
capacity, the sting of Sin must needs be grievous in the sense of the Offender,
as ^his inward Punishment, and cause a deploring of his Guilt suitable to the
nature of his Crime.

But on the contraty, where invincibl^ Ignorance to scupidity prevails, that
the Sinner is neither considerate, or duly capacitated to penetrate his
Offense, h^ may be notwithstanding held a legal Offender, and punished as an
Inconvenienc^ and Scandal to civil Society, according t^ his Fact, but cannot
be deemed intelligent of his Crime, because every S^^ ought to proceed from the
guilt an^ cause of the understanding. To preve^^ which Imbecility, and want of
Consid^ration in the Soul, we Fidefendons an^ publicly ordained to stir up in
the hea^ a suitable inspection of Sin, as also the most thankful and devout
returns to the Supreme Providence, from whose Benignity and merciful Effects we
enjoy the comforts of Soul and Body. And this is the Sum of our Astreadan
Belief and Worship.

The Philosopher told the Fidefendon, tha^ he had nothing to object against the
natural and manifest way of Devotion which he had delivered as the common
Persuasio^ of his Nation: And turning to the Astreada^ Jussinedos, or
Magistrate there present, he requested him to inform them briefly, By what
Political Rules or Measures the Government of that Island has been so long
happy in not perplexing its Natives by the admission of novel Forms of
Religion, so pernitiously frequent and destructive in many other Dominions to
their public Tranquillity.

The Jussinedo, who had diligently observed the precedent Discourses, conceived
that the Philosopher had given him a fit occasion to speak something, in order
to the Political satisfaction he expected to receive; and which, as a
Magistrate of that Region, he thought convenient to declare.

Wherefore with a Gravity becoming the Quality of his Office, he told them,
That their Religion did effectually disown all subordinate dependency on
Ordinations and Precepts of State. And had it not been so capacitated, it would
have been subject to alterations and change of Government, according to the
practice of other Nations, who make Faith the top of their Dominions, when its
own validity is not able to support its esteem without the aid of Civil
Institutions: which, how variously they are and have been propagated in diverse
Countries is notorious, and likewise the alteration and change of Rule emerging
from thence; so that if the verity and Simplicity of Worship be not sufficient
of it self to withstand temporal Vicissitudes, it consequently must be obliged
to political Establishment, however by that means lessened in Repute, for its
continuation and support

Neither do we at all insinuate our Creed, on the account of Custom and
Education, the usual and grand deceptions of Mankind, whose Allurements are the
Nurseries in which the Children of Religion are educated, in order to believe
as weakly when they arrive to the years of Men.

How little advantageous Decrees of State are either to give Credit, or
intermix Esteem with a Persuasion sensibly apprehended, I need but refer you to
what our Fidefendon has amply explained already relating to Providence, and the
Reverence it ought to produce in the humane Soul, whose Conviction is no less
clear to the understanding than that I am now speaking, or my Senses
capacitated with Seeing and Feeling, on which depends the Evidence and Maxims
of our sole Worship, with all requisite Forms and Order of Devotion necessary
to its Celebration.

Which persuasion of ours, said the Jussi^edos, is so perspicuous to the
Interest of even^y considerate person, as it needs no motives or rigorous
impulsion from our national ^aws; our main endeavor being rather to ^revent
the inadvertency of men, by prompting them to believe what they may, if they
^lease, palpably discern; and to reject all ^ropositions tending to belief,
that are not ^qually manifest to their sense and conceptions. Whereas other
Religions instruct men ^ather to acquiesce in what they undertake ^o teach,
than knowingly or sensibly to apprehended the propositions which such Tutors
^eliver.

And this obscure method has generally ^een the practice and artifice of those,
who, ^o give themselves the interest and reputation of Patrons and Introducers
of Creeds, ^owever erroneous and deceitful, have employed the best of their
talents to aid their persuasions, by allowing their maxims of which liberty to
wander as far as they judge ^onvenient, from the road of humane know^edge; or
in plain words, to direct men to value least what they might most knowingly
believe. As put the case they should be in^errogated, Why a man should not
limit his worship to the open and wonderful appearance of providence in the
divine conduct of the Universe? Their Answer must be, that the proposition is
not enough refined or spir^tual, in respect of the Revelations they endeavor to
defend. And if farther demanded, Whether they can pretend to any Miracle in
behalf of their doctrine, of equal certainty and undeniable conviction,
suitable to what we profess? They must reply That although they cannot present
you with the like miraculous assurance from any sublime Article as they call
it, of their Cree^ in opposition to ours; notwithstanding the^ are resolved to
affirm that their maxims an^ evident, tho palpably such as no man can either
know or contemplate. Which is no other than a desire to be famous for seducin^
humane imbecility, to follow such guide out of sight of their understanding: or
t^ submit, by going farther with principles o^ Faith than they are to be
apprehended, instead of being knowingly certain of tenen^ they believe.

Which intolerable absurdities have no other fond, as was before judiciously
observed by our Fidefendon, than that it could advantage no man's Ambition or
Intere^^ whether Magistrate or Priest, to confor^ men to the credence of
demonstrative Religion; because it would in no kind farthe^ any man's design, to
proselite others to the observance of a persuasion, which was equally in the
compass of every considerate apprehension: Whereas the devices and fictitious
inventions of some, the reputed Patrons of Creeds, have been reverenced as
proceeding from the Grandees of Sanctity and Worship. By means of which
alluring gloss, they found it facile enough to fit their worldly designs, in
every respect, commodiously to their purpose. In sum, concluded the
Jussinedos, our Religion is not supported by our acts of State, but rather our
government beholding to our Creed: Which being of an entire and sensible
conviction, does not admit of any perplexity or fragments of faction to divide
it from our understandings, as has been precedently instanced; nor does it lie
in the power of prevaricated Judgments to outface our belief, by any confidant
insinuation of their opposite doctrine.

The Jussinedos having thus ended, and thanks respectfully given him by all
that were present, the Athenian Senator desired him, that as they had been
fully acquainted with their Religion, and its reference to the essential
Constitutions of his Nation; so he would do them the favor to inform them,
with what brevity he thought fit, of the antiquity and nature of their
political establishments, which he assured himself would not appear less
prudently determined, than the account he had received of their holy Creed, and
the advantage that redounded from it to Civil dominion.

The Jussinedos replied, That he being an Astreadan Magistrate, his
qualification did import that he was conveniently knowing in that Islands
government: Which he told them was perfectly Monarchical, with all the
requisites incident to Sovereignty; that it had continued uninterrupted in the
due course of lineal succession beyond their records of Ages; yet so
established, as by the excellency of Rule, there was no deviation in King and
People from the Original Integrity annexed to the most primitive constitution
of their nation.

The Athenian Senator assured the Jussinedos, that he was not a little
surpised in hearing what had been formerly delivered on the account of the
Astreadan belief, however perspicuous the fond and principles of that worship
were obvious to the most ordinary understanding, considering how busy and
notoriously prevalent the inveiglements of superstitious persuasions had been
dispersed in the world.

But it was more his admiration to hear him declare that the Scepter he obeyed,
and order of government had so anciently enjoyed the felicity of an entire and
uncorrupted repute; when many Nations, precedently famous, were so unhappy as
not only to witness the change and subversion of their dominion, but obliged to
lament its ruin, as wicked accessories, by the depravation of their manners,
to the Calamities of their native Country.

The Grecian Philosopher, having given full attention to what the Jussinedos
had last delivered, acknowledged that he was no less desirous than the Senator,
to understand in what manner the Monarchical government was founded on Virtue,
but likewise by the goodness of its Constitution and Moralities, had so long
continued the original excellencies and prosperities arising from thence: and
because in the Schools of Athens some politiquely learned had thought fit to
allow several denominations to Sovereign Rule, whereby they defined Monarchical
Regiment either absolute, or limited by Laws, or mixed by participating of
nobility, or people, or a mixture of both: He was earnest with the Jussinedos
to declare how far the Astreadan gubernation did concenter with any of these,
or whether totally different.

To which the Jussinedos readily complied, in these words: There is nothing,
said he more generally difficult to humane nature, than due perception and
complaisance relating to Civil Superiority; and this infelicity chiefly
proceeds from not rightly apprehending the original fond of Dominion, and such
measures of Government as ought to oblige their Submission. And it is wonderful
to observe, that man by the prerogative of reason should impose Subjection on
all other Creatures; and yet with the best of his Capacity not sufficiently
completed to give Law to himself, in reference to subordinate duty; which
enormous and pernicious mistake arises from no other sourse of evil, than the
natural depravity of man, in being too pronely averse and contumacious of the
benefits of orderly Tranquillity. This irregular defect and Inclination of the
humane mind, too often biased and enhans'd by worldly Advantage and Interest;
can have no proper Remedy, unless by a rational cure whereby we may discern the
useful Integrity, and happy Obedience, that ought to be paid to Secular
Dominion.

In doing of which, if men would resolve to employ sincerely their
Understandings; the Perplexities and Disputes that seem to pose too many, in
their discussions of the Rights and Measures of human Government, will soon
vanish, together with the abusive Gloss that the depraved and subtle Industry
of some has endeavored to conceal, by the utmost abilities of their Pens and
Science. As to our Government, said the Jussinedos, as I before expressed, it
has been with us perpetually monarchical; To which kind of Regi^ent we grant,
above all others, a natural ^ignity or Right from Nature, and no less
^rimitively obeyed in the first Originals of ^umane Society. And let it be
granted, that ^ut one man and woman, by whatever ^eans created, or produced; or
that num^ers of Mankind had original Being, and ^radually propagated both
Sexes; In eirher of these suppositions there must be an ac^nowledg'd
superiority in some one Person before Government could be established. In ^he
first supposal, he that was the original Father, must likewise be Supreme Lord
of ^he Family begotten by him; and no body ^s so vain to imagine that an
Equality of Dominion was in both Sexes, when but one of each kind were
primitive Progenitors: Which ^f conceded, it would likewise follow, that the
Female Sex ought to participate equally in supreme Dominion, however
disconsonant ^o the natural Course of worldly Rule, that allows Precedence in
public and private ^oncerns to the Masculine side: So that if the abilities
of both Sexes be duly weighed, the Female, however extraordinary in some,
would generally be found too light for joint and gubernative Competition with
the other.

From all which it is very clear, that sole Dominion was the property of man,
if granted the prime Father, or first of Paternal or Family Society; and this
ruling Prerogative must have been originally absolute in him both in respect of
his Issue, and the woman on whom they were begotten; tho allow^ the Queen to
her first Monarch. And wh^ can doubt, that he who was the Paterna^ and
Primitive despotical Lord of his ow^ Generation and Family, was not also
supreamly obeyed as humane Societies increased in the world by reason that
Paternal Superiority could not cease, or probably be negligent in continuing,
by all sufficient regard, its original Right And it is no less undeniable, that
all King that have, or ever had Dominion, are, or, we^^ Fathers of their
People, or the Heirs of suc^ Fathers, or Usurpers of the Paternal Right o^
Sovereignty. From whence we may safely conclude, that there is no multitude of
men, (...) supposed to be collected from all parts of the world, but have in
their number some one man who ought of Right to be their Monarch^ being next
Heir to the first man: And thu^ it appears that every man is by nature, either
a King or a Subject; Neither is the Obedience which Subjects pay to their
Prince, other than the Submission which is due to the supreme fatherhood. And
therefore one of your great Philosophers observes, that a Monarchy or Kingdom
will be a paternal government, and naturally it can be no other. And
wheresoever there is an unjust or forcible Intruder into a Throne, he may by
violence possess the room of a paternal Monarch, but cannot be deemed a
rightful father of people.

When the World increased, and families were numerous enough to give
denomination to Cities, and Nations were distinguished; it is probable that the
paternal Royalty of Kings did (in diverse Countries, to avoid the multiplicity
and trouble of Rule) cease, by their voluntary determination, whereby they
Adopted others to succeed them in the supreme Magistracy. Because no man could
have any title to primitive government, but either as it was his by paternal
Right, or as he received it from him that had power to confer it on whom he
thought fit, as his proper Donation.

And this, pertinently considered, explodes all pretense of original Contract
betwixt the Monarch and People: or comparatively as Immoral as if the Parent
should covenant with his Children for his good behavior toward them: Which
undutiful and turbulent Allegation has not seldom created such a restless
Brain-worm in the noddles of the multitude, that, swelled with this popular
conceit, they have precipitated themselves into such intolerable and
destructive absurdities, as have caused unspeakable Calamities to their native
Country.

The other supposition, that I told you I would examine, is grossly erroneous,
by undertaking to assure us that multitudes of mankind, whether created all at
once by omnipotent power, or by whatsoever means they had being, of which such
Instructors are, in no kind, able to inform us, did numerously assemble, and by
their original consent and stipulation, did elect their first Sovereign; this
conjecture is no less extravagantly wild than the former: If before particular
Countries were called national; for in that case it must refer to the
universality of mankind that had at that time being in the world; and
consequently every individual Inhabitant of the Earth must give his consent to
the erecting of an universal Monarch, instead of a particular Sovereignty of
any one Kingdom or People; a Royal Grandeur which, I suppose, few popular
Patrons would readily admit; yet whether they will or no, this maxim does imply
a most unlimited Contradiction; if, in condition of mere nature, there was a
time when all of humane kind, then living, might be supposed equals: from
whence it follows, that if that sort of natural freedom be granted, there
cannot any one man be chosen a King; unless by the universal consent of all the
people in the world, at one instant, without the contradiction of any single
Person: And if it be true, ^^at Nature has made all men free, and con^equently
equaled in right to all things what^^ever, it cannot seem reasonable that they
should have power to alter the Law of Nature, tho all mankind should concur in
one ^ote; for which reason no people could con^er such a power on one man as
they had not ^n themselves.

If the general signification of the word people be disavow'd, and men will
suppose that the People of particular Regions, or Countries, have power and
freedom to ^hoose Sovereigns, let them observe the con^equence. Since nature
has not distinguished ^he habitable world into Kingdoms, nor de^ermin'd what
part of a people belongs to one Dominion, and what to another; it follows, that
the original freedom of mankind being supposed, every man is at Liberty to be
of what Kingdom he thinks fit; and so every ^etty company has a right to erect
a Kingdom by it self, and not only every City, but every Village, and every
Family; nay, and every particular man a Liberty to choose his own King, if he
please; and he were a mad man that being by Nature free, would choose any
person, but himself, to be his own Governor.

Thus, instead of the Inconvenience of having but one King, of the whole world,
we shall run into a liberty of having as many Kings, as there are men in the
world; which upon the matter, is to have no King at all but leave men to their
natural Liberty, as the Patrons of this Chimera undertake to suppose; and yet
this mischief the Assertors of natural Liberty would pretendedly avoid.

If neither the people of the whole world, nor the whole people of any part of
the world be meant; but only the major part, or some other part, of a part of
the world; yet still the objection will be the stronger: For besides that
Nature has made no partition of the world, or the People into distinct
Kingdoms, and that without a universal Consent, no partition can be agreed on:
Yet if it were lawful for particular parts of the world, b^ consent, to choose
their Kings, their consents would bind none to Subjection but such as
consented; for the major part never binds but where men at first agree to be so
bound, or where a higher power so commands; and there can be no higher power
than Nature but the Supreme above; wherefore if neithe^ Nature nor Omnipotency
appoints the majo^ part to bind the less, their consent is not obligatory to
any besides themselves. And notwithstanding all these stupendous, and
abominable Irregularities are clearly deducible from the fanciful mistakes, and
principles of some who most speciously endeavor to insinuate their political
notions, by affirming that primitive Sovereignty, was first raised ^y popular
allowance. I will so far, added ^^e Jessinedos, gratify their Assertions, as
to ^oncede, that either from Nature, or by a ^eneral consent of all mankind,
the world was ^t first, however improbable the conjecture, ^ivided into
particular Kingdoms, and the ^ajor part congregated of each Kingdom, ^llowed to
choose their Monarch; yet even ^n that case, it cannot be truly said that ever
^he whole people, or the greater number, or ^ndeed any considerable part of the
people of any nation, ever convened to any such ^urpose; for except by some
secret miracu^ous instinct they should all meet at one time and place: what one
man, or company of men, less than the total People, has Power ^o appoint
either the day, or place of Elections, where all are alike free by nature? And
without a lawful Summons it were most un^ust to bind those that are absent; the
whole people cannot summon it self, one man is sick, another is lame, a third
is aged, and a fourth ^s under age of discretion; Yet all these, at one time or
another, or at some place or other, might be able to meet; If they might
choose, according to these circumstances, as men na^urally free would certainly
require.

In Assemblies that are by human constitution, the superior power that ordains
such Assemblies, can regulate, and confine them both for time, place, and
persons, and other circumstances; but where there is an equal^ty, by nature,
there can be no superior power, considering every Infant, at the hour it i^
born, has a like Interest with the greate^^ and wisest man in the world. And
it is cle^^ that those who are the people this minute are not the people the
next minute; for mankind is like the Sea, ever ebbing or flowing every minute
one is born, and another dies no one time can be indifferent to all mankin^ to
assemble, it cannot but be mischievous a^ways, at least to all Infants, and
others unde^age of discretion; not to speak of women especially Virgins, who by
Birth, have a much natural Freedom as any other, and for the most part use it
accordingly, and therefore ought not to lose their Liberty without their
consent.

But in part, to salve this main objection it will be said, that Children may
be concluded by the Votes of their Parents: This remedy may cure some little of
the mischie^ but it destroys the whole Cause: And at last stumbles upon the
true original of Government: For if it may be allowed that the acts of the
Parents bind the Children, then farewell the doctrine of the natural freedom of
mankind; and where Subjection to Parents is indispensable, there can be no
natural Freedom. If any reply, that not all Children shall be bound by their
Parents consent, but only such as are under age; it must be considered, that in
nature, there is no non age: If a man be not born free, she does not assign
him, any other time, when he shall attain his Freedom; or if she did, then
Children completing that age should be discharged of their contract. So that
in conclusion, if it be imagined that the people were ever free from
Subjection, by nature; it will prove a mere impossibility to introduce any kind
of Government, without apparent wrong to a multitude of People.

On the contrary, said the Jussinedos, it is evident from what I have
expressed, that by primitive fatherly Superiority no Inhabitants of the Earth
were ever destitute of a rightful Monarch; and if at any time, by reason of
worldly Alterations, and Revolutions of State the proper Sovereign is unknown;
yet this, is no fault in Nature, but the Negligence, or Ignorance of those by
whom the right Heir ought to be discerned: And if we look gradually backward,
as far as we can imagine the beginning of humane Race, we must conclude, that
it was from paternal Prerogative, and not by Contract, Mixture, or popular
Condescension, that Monarchy was originally obeyed.

The Athenian Senator, returned the Jussinedos his thanks, for the satisfaction
he had received from the prudence of his Discourses, in every particular; and
assured him withal, that his Decision of the Rise of humane Government, which
according to the Grandeur of his reasoning, must exert it self from Primitive
Fatherhood, and enlarged as Families increased; and the world, by degrees was
replenished with People. And I judge, that it is almost impossible to observe
the innumerable Errors, and Contradictions, that redound from the contrary
opinion.

And if, as you judiciously reasoned, there be no distinction of persons, in a
supposed primitive Freedom of Mankind; who can deny, in such a condition of
natural equality, that Children and Servants might not pretend to stand on the
same level Candidates with their Fathers and Masters by their joint Votes, they
having been, wheresoever men were, far more in number than Parents and Masters;
they might, as the major part, overrule the Election of their Superiors, in
order to the Choice of their Monarch.

Pardon me, said the Senator, if I presume to add, to what you have delivered:
not that I conceive any thing you have spoken wants Illustration, but as I
thought fit to confirm you, by the example I mentioned, that I have received no
small Satisfaction, from your Judgment; notwithstanding I have that respect, as
being a Grecian, for my native Country, and the wisdom it claims, that I am
desirous that the opinion of some grand Politians there may be examined, and
why by their maxims of State they undertake to assure us, that there is
naturally such a political Ingredient as mixture in the monarchial Government
that was first introduced.

The argument they produce seems to have a specious regard to Equity, and the
public Security; for how can it be thought, say they, that reasonable men
would be subject to the Pre-eminence and Rule of one sole person, unless he
were conditionally obliged to govern accordingly, or which is all one, bound by
public contract to observe such Laws as the People, the prime Legislators,
judged necessary to annex to their choice of a Sovereign; and turning to the
Philosopher, his Countryman, told him that he being conversant in their learned
Schools, and more accurately knowing in the philosophical and political
disputes than he could pretend to, he desired, that he would briefly acquaint
the worthy Astreadan that spoke last, with such tenants of State, as the
science and practice of his Country had most reputed; that it might be
discernable whither the Politiques of the Asiatiques or Grecians were to be
preferred.

The Philosopher replied, that by the best search and strength of his
understanding, he perceived from the Writings and Discussion of the most
erudite of his Sect, that Monarchy, as the Jussinedos dilucidly proved, was
derived from paternal Superiority, as ancient as the first being of mankind;
and that it could not proceed from any original Stipulation or Covenant betwixt
the Sovereign and People: And if otherwise debated or insisted on by the
popular notions of some, the fond that they pretend of Monarchical Government,
must needs be very instable and perpetually uneasy to King and People; for what
is more pronely conceived and dispersed from the seducing Industry of those who
are desirous to interest themselves in vulgar esteem, than to allure common
Understandings, by teaching them to believe that their assent was primitively
essential, to the erecting of Sovereignty; which plausibly effected, on the
stubborn conceptions, pride, and resolution of ordinary persons, they are with
no less facility intrigu'd, and taught to conclude, that they were makers of
Kings by original contract, and so far, at least, a share in the foundation of
Monarchy. Which maxim, however delusively or seditiously conveyed, has seldom
failed by instigating vulgar apprehensions to contest and quarrel with their
supreme Magistrate as they have occasionally thought fit, and likewise too
often incited them to lift up their armed hands not only to oppose, but to
dethrone their Sovereign, as the lamentable and barbarous effects of violence
and blood, when caused by popular prevalency, deplorably testify to the ruin
of common tranquillity.

In some exigents of state, the sovereign power may reside in the most
considerable part of a nation; as put the case the King dies without an Heir,
the conferring of royal Dignity shall not appertain or escheat to the whole
people, but to the supreme Heads, and Fathers of Families; not as they are the
people, but as they are Fathers of the people, over whom they have a
superintendent power devolved unto them after the death of their Monarchical
Ancestor; and if any can have a right to choose a King, it must be in these
paternal Superiors, by conferring their distinct fatherly prerogatives on one
sole person.

I am not ignorant, said the Philosopher, that Monarchs are not now as they
were at the first planting or peopling of the World, if considered in the
direct sense of fathers of their Subjects and Kingdoms: But howsoever it comes
so to pass, by worldly revolutions, the primitive and natural claim is not
extinguished thereby; because no argument that can be brought from matter of
fact is sufficient to defeat the concern of Right.

True it is, that in some parts of our Grecian precincts, there have been
sovereign dominions, which by the promoters and favorers of such governments
have been termed limited, or mixed in point of Rule by an equality of
Legislative Power in the King and People, but how more than one Paramount
Establisher of legal Constitutions can consist with the nature of Monarchy is
not to be understood.

And wheresoever there are diverse supreme State-holders, there can be no
Sovereignty by reason that Monarchical Regiment is essentially Indivisible, and
therefore not capable of partition or mixture.

If in a Royal Government there be allowed a joint concurrence of King and
People in the Constitutions of Laws, it is reasonable to conclude that it
proceeded from the Grace of the Monarch, for no such right could belong to the
People neither by Nature, as has been explained, or original Contract with the
Sovereign, however the liquorish pretense may gratify some vulgar Pallates, who
too pronely relish the glib Insinuations of factious Contrivers.

And whosoever will imagine that the Monarchical Power can be so intrigu'd or
mixed, must upon maturer consideration, acknowledge that he totally subverts
the denomination and quality of Sovereign Dominion.

And thus I prove it: Let us suppose that in such a pretended Monarchical
estate there should arise a difference betwixt the King and People; as who can
doubt but in that mingle of rule it would too frequently happen, who shall be
the Judge of that misunderstanding betwixt them, or by what means it ought to
be Composed. If the determination be affirmed to belong to the People, the
Sovereign Authority is then destroyed, and consequently the being of Monarchy.
If they grant, as I conceive they ought, That the Judiciary Power is solely in
the Royal Person, they bid adieu, in those words to their so much celebrated
notion of limited and mixed Sovereignty.

Neither is it avoidable, in such a Contest betwixt the Monarch and People,
that recourse must be had, for want of other Judiciary Determination, to the
unruly Conscience of the Multitude; and whether such a method of disorder would
not produce Anarchy and Confusion, I refer it to the reason of every unbiased
Understanding.

The Grecian Senator, tho somewhat more nicely inquisitive than the rest, into
policies of State, assured the Philosopher that he complied with his precedent
discourse in affirming, as the Jussinedos had before Judiciously proved, That
Monarchy in the most early time of humane being, had a rise and institution
from Paternal Right, in whomsoever was the first Father, and therefore King of
his Family.

Nor do the most ancient Records mention other Primitive Rule than perfect
Royalty; so that no Popular form of State but must have a later date than
Kingly Superiority.

Notwithstanding it is apparent that subsequently other Governments have been
introduced, Entitled, Republics or Commonwealths, and sometimes intermixed
with Monarchy, as the total Community have been representatively Interested in
the enacting of legal Establishments.

That this kind of Sovereignty has in some parts of the World, and by such as
value themselves on the supposed Wisdom of their Politics, been highly
applauded, if not preferred in their opinion, before all other.

Witness the Lacedemonian Monarchies in our native Country of Greece, by which
Constitution the Royal Government is limited and mixed with Popular Authority;
in that severe manner too, that the Votes of the People, as they are there
assembled or represented by Persons delegated to that purpose, do not only
overruled the Commands of their Monarch, but render him accountable to them,
whenever they please to question the actings of their King, as is practically
known from the proceedings of the Ephori within that Dominion.

To which the Philosopher Answered, That the qualification and titular nature
of the Spartan or Lacedemonian King was easily distinguished, if duly compared
with the inherent Propriety of Monarchical Rule. And what Grecian does not know
that the Spartan King had nothing to do with the execution of the Laws, or
Civil Government, tho main Kingly Attributes, and was but in effect a Captain
General, for he had no compulsive Power but when actually in the Field, and
therefore no other than Principal Commander of the Army of that State, tho
bearing, for Honors sake, the Name of Sovereign?

Notwithstanding which, there are a sort of perverse and litigious discussers
of the concerns of Kings, that would pretend that the figure of this
Lacedemonian Royalty ought to be resembled by other Monarchical Governments; or
that the Sovereign should be guided and imposed on at the arbitrament of the
People, which were in effect to debase a King beneath the People, and render
Majesty no other than a Property at their disposal. To which purpose, some
Popular Disputants presume to maintain, That all Power was originally in the
People, and that Crowns and Scepters, but as the Pageantries of Thrones, were
bestowed on Kings by common donation, and revocable on breach of such
Conditions as they please to call the original of Laws and Regal Dominion. And
if any Judicious search be made whereby to discover the fond of such
Principles, they may be charged with as much notional obscurity, as the brain
of Man must necessarily encounter, that would undertake to demonstrate the
elemental Congress of the material parts of the Universe, when Chaos was first
dissolved.

And should we so far Indulge this wild and licentious Maxim, as to concede
that the Monarch was obliged not to supersede, or in many cases, alter the
known Laws; and that if he did, that it is radically in the People, under the
notion of original Contract, to Compel or Depose their King. Is it not
absolutely requisite, that those many cases should have been undoubtedly
inserted at the time of this grand bargain, for the initiating of the Monarch
and Subject? Now if it be not clearly so recorded, nay, manifestly legible in
National Constitutions, it ought to be slighted as a most extravagant fiction;
for what is more Absurd, than to imagine such an uncontrollable Power in the
People, yet find no such Capacity, relating to them, expressed by any known
Law, however Essential to the safety and well being of King and Subject, to be
acquainted with their fundamental obligations and punishments in case of
violation; and it were highly unjust, should any opposition or penalty be
inflicted on the supreme Magistrate, and he less safe or priviledg'd than a
common Person, to defend himself; if there be no Law extant that declares, in
what manner he ought to be called to account by the People.

Others, who would be thought no less curious than deep in their political
Sentimenrs, have employed the best of their skill to convince mankind, that no
Government can be more exactly balanced, in reference to public Satisfaction
and Benefit, however, skew'd appears the domination than a complete mixture of
Legislators by a temper of Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy; or which is
the same, a compound of three Estates implied by King, Nobility, and Commons.

Which kind of rule, if duly constituted, does presuppose a suitable Goodness
and Complaisance in order to the promoting of Grandeur, in every respect; on
which ground I readily acknowledge, if the Principal Members of the main body
of a Nation, are of fixed Integrity and Duty, as must be implied by the
intended Virtue and Participation of Rule, committed to the trust of Persons
thus signally concerned, that there is undoubtedly an Excellency, as well as
public advantage and glory, in a Goverument so established.

Whereas contrarily, whenever a body politic, formed as I have specified,
comes to be depraved and consequently fermented and inflamed by Faction, there
is no political Regiment that is more perniciously endangered by practices of
men and convulsions of state, than by this manner of reputed intermixture of
three Legislative powers; when rendered impracticable by means of dissension or
opposition.

And who can doubt, if animosities arive to an uncomposible Breach, betwixt the
Monarch and such as personate these estates, or betwixt those who represent the
Nobility and Commons of a Nation, the Interest of the Royal Magistrate must
suffer in a high measure, until to invalidate that Inconvenience, the Monarch,
who had limited his rule before, finds himself necessitated to assume, if
prevalent enough, an absolute sovereignty.

On the other side, when popular contest and violence is equivalently
predominant, and that the Monarchy is subverted thereby, in such a Revolution
it usually follows, that out of the Ruin of the Sovereign Rule, the the
admired Phoenix, in the opinion of the vulgar, called a Republic, is by their
Potency erected, unless their numerous sway and exorbitancy be deluded to
assist the subtle ambition of a sole Usurper.

And whenever the impetuous vehemence of the People is worst diffused, it is
manifest to every discerning Judgment, that the perverse conceit of an original
contract, betwixt the Monarch and Subject, however unreasonably the People be
seduced in granting the supposition, as has already been proved, is the
uncertain foundation on which this Babel of Popular Confusion is usually
exalted.

Neither can it be properly affirmed, by any calm or unbiased apprehension,
that a King cannot in some exigents of State, deviate from the usual sense of
Law, when the motive is of that extraordinary and grand import, that should he
not be allowed a Superior Prerogative, both Government and Laws would be
totally subverted; let the instance be made in these following par^iculars.

Suppose, as the first Quere, that by the ^urbulent contrivement of Seditious
Persons, in whatsoever station imagined to act, the Sovereign should be denied
the assistance of his People, or that his Subjects should be withdrawn from
their Allegiance, and infected with a mischievous desire to disobey and alter
his Government and established Laws, or give up his Power and Person to a
Foreign Enemy, ought not he, by employing the Purse and Persons of his
Subjects, in any method he judged most proper, to endeavor to obviate and
depress so horrid a guilt and violation of Right within his Dominion?

The other is, that supposing there is in Being a positive Law that declares it
treasonable for any Person whatsoever to convey the King or his Son and Heir
privily out of the Kingdom, might not the Sovereign, notwithstanding this
Statute, in a sudden and highly apparent danger, by which his life and his Sons
would be probably endangered provide for his own and his Child's safety, by
commanding, to that end, the secret assistance of some few of his Subjects an^
Servants? What reasonable man but mu^^ grant that it were below the level of
common sense to deny the Monarch the liberty in both these cases of superseding
the Law And it were all one as to affirm, That the Sovereign ought not to be
allowed the exercife (...) his Understanding, as to argue or quote (...)
Statute against the rational security and preservation of his Person and
Governmen^ when there is no better expedient to provid^ for the safety of both.
By all which it appears, that it is impossible for a Monarch, i^ all
circumstances, to Rule according to Law* nay, that it were sinful in him, in
some exigents of State, not to infringe a legal Ordinance, when it would rather
obstruct or hinder the defense that he might otherwise provide for himself and
People.

And i^ is no less manifest, that whosoever shall assert that there is such a
Government ^s a limited or mixed Monarchy, or a Sove^aignty proceeding from
original Contract with the People, and suitably practicable in all occurrences
and circumstances of Rule, however such a man, by his notional mingle, or
twisting together King and People, may pretend to be of more nice and acurate
Politics than others: He would be found to be as fully impertinent in his
supposed method, as if he had proposed a Speculation in Government that was
neither proper or useful.

To which purpose, our great Philosopher Aristotle determines; where he
affirms, That wheresoever is said to be a King according to Law, there is no
sort of Government or Kingdom at all. His meaning, I conceive, is, That the Law
cannot be supposed superior to the Monarch, but it must be likewise granted
that the Legislators by whose concurrence it is produced have also more supreme
Power than the Monarch within his Dominion.

And I undoubtedly believe, concluded the Greek Philosopher, that conditional
Sovereignty, as some may imagine it relates to King and People, is morally
inconsistent with monarchiual Regiment.

The Astreadan Magistrate told the Philosopher that he was well satisfied with
the Judgment given by him; that enough confutes the perplexed notions of such
as endeavor to pervert and obscure the clear proprieties of Royal government:
Which, said the Jussinedos, have had an unalterable esteem within our Region,
notwithstanding the pernicious Industry that has formerly been used, by uneasy
and fantastical persons, who having been allured by the political Sophistry of
some of your Grecian Schools, they seemed rather desirous to live under no
government, than not to be cavilling disputants in behalf of their notions; by
which they insinuated that a popular allay and mixture was necessary to be
tempered with Monarchy. And this kind of Phanaticism in politiques having
dispersed some of its seeds in Asia, about the time that the mighty Zerxes
planted a Colony of Grecians in a neighboring Country to this Island: Whither
this perverse and wrangling Sect, in their measures of Submission to civil
Dominion, had soon imported their motly Principles. But this endeavor of
theirs did neither far or long propagate their Cavils; by reason that our
Government had in precedent time, provided against such extravagant and
disorderly opinions that might tend to molest or deprave the public manners of
our Natives; as you shall soon understand.

In the mean space I will impart, by your leaves, the sense that our wise
predecessors had of the pernicious tenent of a heteregeneous or mixed
Sovereignty. Well knowing that a paradox in stare, if speciously diffused, no
less than an intricate novelty in worship, meets not seldom with a facile
reception from the multitude; by reason that their Intellects are for the most
part so capricious and uneasy in their esteem of the Rule they are under, as
they judge that no dominion can have a substantial support, unless in the main
bulk it has a gross relish of popular composition.

Which surly conceit, when patronized by such guides whom they are most
inclined to follow, provokes them to conclude that Monarchy ought to be so
intrigu'd and regulated, from whence the consequence has been unexpressibly
inconvenient, and instead of promoting common interest and repose, it has been,
in some Nations, the prevalent sourse of overflowing animosities.

Insomuch that where the Sovereignty has been thought most exactly to
participate of two other Estates, that is to say, of Aristocracy and Democracy,
it has encouraged and produced as dangerous enormities as their several
oppositions could bring to pass. And it is an undoubted truth, that such States,
wherein the Sovereignty is said to be divided, are not rightly to be called
Commonwealths, but corruption in the civil rule.

In like manner, where the people are but taught to believe that they are in
themselves or Representatives, in any kind sharers with the Monarchical state;
such a people are seldom without horrible divisions, seditious contrivements,
which as the height of confusion and misery, too often produce the outrageous
calamities and bloody violence of Intestine War. Neither was it ever observed,
where the Sovereign power has been but reputed devisible betwixt the Monarch
and People, that the disturbance and quarrels for Superiority in Rule, have not
sometimes proved of that pernicious Consequence, as they have turned the State
into Confusion, until by change of Dominion either in one Person, or more, a
new model of Government be introduced by a total Subversion of the old.

If the Monarch by national constitutions provides so favorably for his People
as to have their advise and concurrence in the creating of Laws, which in
Prudence is the best choice that a wise King can make, both as to his
information of public concerns, and in what manner they ought to be provided
for by the most effectual expedients; by reason that such of the People as are
duly appropriated to that purpose ought to be judged most knowing of the State
of the body politic, and how by their assistance their Monarch may be enabled
with most Glory, and content to his Nation, to support the Grandeur of his
Throne and People; does it therefore follow, that any such may so far
prevaricate from this Grace and Complaisance in their Monarch, as to conceive
by their being elected and called for the service of his Dominion, they may
take leave to impose on their Prince, by pretending to have a share in his
Government, or that of right they ought to be so admitted on the account of
original Contract; or as they claim, by their conceited determination, however
improbable or absurd, that the Sovereign power ought to be divided betwixt
their Monarch and themselves. Would not every indifferrnt man conclude, that
such a bold Intrigue of State could tend to no other end but to instigate and
ferment, with more applause, misunderstandings betwixt the Monarch and People.
From all which it is undeniably certain, that the distemper proceeds from an
unnatural Excresce^ce and Growth of Factions in the body politic; when by such
positions men would insinuate the intermixture of either Aristocratical or
Popular estate, or both conjoined in prejudice to the genuine Right of
Sovereignty.

And I dare avow, that wheresoever such maxims are boldest asserted, they are
always designed and patronized, by some Persons, with no other Intention than
by pretending to expedients, in order to redress Exorbitancies in the Throne,
that they might speciously interest themselves by attaining the height of a
more arbitrary or unlimited power over their Fellow Subjects, than all their
Recrimations or alleged failings in their Monarch, if true, could ever import.

Nor has the dangerous increase of those pernicious and unaccountable tenants,
in past time, wanted the severest animadversions from our Astreadan Dominion;
whereby there might condign impression remain in the posterity of those whose
Progenitors had, in precedent Ages, tainted their Allegiance by being
malevolently disposed in opposition to the purity of our established Monarchy.

And thus by the public diligence of our State, care was seasonably taken that
the original Authors, Contrivers, and Abetters, of such perplexed and froward
Principles, should be notoriously disreputed and conveyed to future Memory,
whereby their Names and Families might be distinguished from the Integrity of
sounder Judgments; to which end they stand mentioned in our Annals and Records
with the Epithites of Mungrel, or pied Politicians.

This was done with no Intention to reflect on their posterity, otherwise than
by reminding them that the incompatible and detrimental tenants of their
Forefathers ought to be resented by their Lineage in such a public manner as
by our State was provided to that purpose.

Which virtuous policy of our Government having been, in after Succession of
our Princes orderly regarded by measures proper for its Conservation, the men
of mixed Principles, together with their gross allay whereby they had heretofore
debased the genuine value of Sovereign rule, have not propagated the evil of
their imperfect opinions, in such who were descended from them.
Notwithstanding, that nothing is more dangerously incident to humane Nature
than out of Pride, or Hope of popu^ar Glory, to add to their Crimes the
perverse maxims of their Progenitors.

And I dare affirm, said the Jussinedos, that wheresoever the method I have
expressed ^s not commendably practiced, that no form of Government, tho
supposed the most ex^ct, can in its essential or ministerial parts, ^ave long
Security.

The Athenian Senator told the Jussinedos, ^^at he much rejoiced to understand
by his ^xpressions, considering the depraved Rule (...) Principalities and
States, that Expedients might be found by political constitutions, whereby the
Goodness of public manners, relating to order and common obedience, could be
encouraged and preserved; adding, that he well knew that it might sometimes be,
tho very rarely, the Felicity of a Dominion to be managed by the conduct of
virtuous men; but seldom so refined tha^ that it could arrive to a Habit, or
not too soon vitiated by the corrupt administration of superior Persons;
notwithstanding he readily granted, that the satisfaction e^pected from
Governments proceeds from (...) supposition, at least of the Integrity (...)
their Conducts; and that neither the supe^ intendency of one sole person, or
republic^ establishment could be otherwise design'^ than that Subjects should
conclude, th^^ good was meant them by such as govern^^ by reason it must
conduce to the advantage of all civil superiority to be so reputed. An^ did
they usefully discern, that the obed^ence of mankind could be so dispos'^ they
would acknowledge, in respect (...) the benefit and assurance they might ha^^
from the sound affection of such as are under their Rule, that it was their
sure^^ Interest to advance no other conduct in the State than virtuous.

On the contrary, wheresoever the exten^ and magnitude of Power is more the
contrived Grandeur of Supreme Rulers, than the exemplary value and management
of Virtue; such Governments, as you have pathetically instanced, said the
Athenian Magistrate, turning to the Jussinedos, cannot have safe or long
continuance: because in so doing, Superior Command does extravagantly over-act
the part that ought to be more temperately performed; and in all Dominions, as
they are more or less corrupted, this dangerous evil is accordingly evident:
From whence it often comes to pass, that degenerate and licentious Subjects
presume to reflect on the Justice and Conduct of their Monarch, when the main
growth of miscarriages in State, occasionally springs from their Misdemeanors.
By which means, a bad People does in some degree necessitate a more uneasy and
worse Sovereign than otherwise they might obey, and the reason is obvious,
because when a Prince observes that he cannot overruled the averseness of his
People so gently as he would, he thinks himself necessitated to be severer than
in other circumstances his Inclination would have permitted, there being
nothing more difficult, and perhaps less safe, than to undertake to govern the
Wicked by the mere simplicity of Goodness.

And I am apt to believe, that it is rarely observable that any Supreme Rulers,
however naturally evil, have made it their choice to be rather impertinently
exorbitant, or brutishly wicked in governing of men, than to have executed
their Dominion on a fond of obedient and sound Morality, if possible to be
effected by any general desert of their Subjects: Insomuch, that if the Worlds
most Universal Experience be duly examined, it will concenter with the truth of
this assertion, That no Monarch, or other Magistracy, ever acted so prejudicial
to their Interest, as to elevate their Power above the ordinary height, unless
provoked by the precedent Corruption, and ungovernable Inclination of their
People.

From whence it has too often come to pass, that Monarchy, tho by Paternal
Right the most Ancient and Natural, as is manifest from our former discussions,
has exerted it self, by some unusual method to a securer height, or by the
Irresistible Sedition and Violence of the multitude totally subverted; and
instead of a Lineal descent of Rightful Kings, the Blood of Usurpers advanced
to the Throne. Or if not so, where the vulgar have been more emphatically
successful, they have never failed to convert their predominancy, and
representation of themselves, into the figure of a Republic.

And it cannot be denied, that out of the ruin of Hereditary Monarchy and the
disorder, if not Anarchy, that has risen from thence; the Popular States,
within our Countries of Greece, have had their beginning.

But you Astreadans, as I gather from what the Reverend Jussinedos has
intimated, avowing that your Monarchical Rule is practically managed by a
Political Integrity, above the felicity of other Dominions, I presume to make
it my request, that the method might be declared, that so much conduces to the
stability and happiness of your King and Nation.

To which the Jussinedos readily answered, That the happiness and security of
their Government depended on a few particulars, which had been very anciently
in usage with them, and he hoped would continue unshaken in many Ages to come.

The main Pillar that supports the reverend esteem of our Political
Constitutions, is, That our Religion has had such an entire value and
prevalency in our Nation, that no novelty of Worship has been able to stain the
clearness of the verity on which it depends; and this has effectually, I doubt
not, been explained by the Scheme of our belief, that our Fidefendon has before
expressed: There being nothing more certain than that the soundest props of
legal establishments, will be otherwise too weak to support the bulk of
Government; insomuch, that wheresoever diversity of Beliefs have any tolerable
reception, the Sacerdotal Function will be so Intrigu'd, and Interested
thereby, and the Manners of Men so prevalently biased, that Corruptions, under
the Notion and Authority of Zeal, will debase the obedience that ought to be
acknowledged to the Civil Dominion. And this can no way be prevented, but by
obliging men to believe no more than by the conviction of sense they must grant
true, and with that sincerity and plainness, that every common understanding
shall not want the assistance of a profession, to explain their Creed. And
where the People are fully intelligent to that end, their Obedience and Manners
will be assured, as long as humane Reason can be supposed predominant, against
all sinister Innovations to the contrary. Thus, whosoever rests satisfied of
the conviction of our worship of Providence, without annexing any devised
Articles of Faith, stands most entirely prepared to prefer and obey the
goodness of the Rule to which he owes submission; on which evident foundation,
both the worship of our Natives and obedience does chiefly depend. On the
contrary, as you Grecians must confess, the alterations and subversions of
Governments amongst you, have proceeded from no other cause than the various
changes and deceits of worship, as is manifest from the different forms and
adorations amongst you: so that if the public profession of Faith be not in
its own nature equally manifest to every reasonable apprehension, it must
create Dubitants in Belief, and consequently Despisers of the civil Authority,
as men question the truth of what is proposed or enjoined: But cannot do so if
the maxims of their Creed are as sensibly intelligible as Seeing and Feeling is
generally the capacity of mankind. And whosoever does judge that he is
rationally able to give the lie to the Religion of a Government, would
endeavor to promote his opinion, tho it prove no less prejudicial than faction
in the State, or a means to introduce a change of rule to confirm his
Persuasion.

From all which it is very demonstrable, that where the soul of the Subject does
most rationally Concenter with the authorized belief of a Nation, such a
Government will be more permanently endeared and obeyed than any other, whose
sacred Edicts have not an assurance beyond Polemick Debate or Question.

The Athenian Senator replied, that in their Country of Greece, nothing was
more difficult or less sucessful by the Endeavors of such as ruled, however
claiming under any denomination the most perfection in civil Establishments,
then to be considerable enough to suppress Nonsense, in belief and worship
within their Dominions.

It having been, with them, the constant success of foppish Deceivers to make a
Fool of the Conscience of men, that they might, for their ends, more surely
deprave their manners: So that I cannot but acknowledge, that the grand
corruption of States, have generally emerg'd from the Silliness of their
Creeds; by which their Devotion and civil Obedience is highly impaired: And
this mischief is usually so taking with the Multitude, that sincerity and
clearness in either is most neglected by them. If Laws be ordained sufficiently
useful, both as to divine and humane concern, they who are least disposed to
like any, will always be requiring new or better; so that nothing is harder,
than for Governments to season Establishments suitable to the distempered
Pallats of such as ought to obey; and wheresoever that humor is predominan,
it is a Symptom that the body politic is sick; and the multiplicity of Laws,
the miserable pretense of its Cure: because evil men, and those ever the
greatest part, are the Complainers, and as much as in them lies, the
Obstructors of Emendations in State, being resolved that no expedients, how
numerous soever, shall be enough to provide against their Crimes and Faction:
If under a Monarch, they have Pleas against his Ministers; if ruled by
Aristocracy, they are angry with the Nobility; if Democracy be supreme, then
they blame such as represent it: And I do not find, said the Athenian
Magistrate, turning to the Philosopher, that any of your learned Schools have
made any Decision, whereby to prevent the Growth of this dangerous
Inconvenience.

The Philosopher answered, that he did acknowledge, that no position of their
Schools, or those which the divine Plato had most acutely delivered, could
prevent the vain Superstitions and Fopperies of Religion, that mixed with
Governments. Neither had any of their learned, by any Scheems of Policy,
proceeded farther than to declare, by way of Theory, what sort of Dominion was
in it self the best: In doing of which they have generally preferred
Monarchical Regiment: On this maxim, that whatsoever is most one, is least to
be divided. But in the practick part, which is certainly most useful, their
Treatises are deficient, by reason they have not presented the world with any
sure expedients, whereby the Persons that govern may be suitably qualified to
communicate and preserve the Goodness intended by civil Dominion.

For since it little avails humane Government to have a sound Foundation,
unless its Conveniences be likewise regular and lasting: So where personal
Enormities and Failings, especially such that deprave and weaken the body
politic, are not duly prevented, let the Laws be never so excellent, evil
manners will too soon give Law to them; On the contrary, there is nothing more
certain, that in what kind soever a Government be constituted, that ought to
have the celebrated Approbation, let its name be what it will be, of ruling by
such measures as both incline and secure Obedience from their People, it ought
to be reputed more exact than others, that may perhaps have better pretense to
the Theory or Title, than to such ordinations of State as tend to the
completing of due Obedience in their People; wherefore the Philosopher told
the Jussinedos, that he joined his request with the Senator that spoke last, by
desiring he would particularly declare, the essential method whereby he
conceived the Astreadan Monarchs had so long continued, their happy and famous
Royalty.

To which the Jussinedos readily consented, telling them that he conceived he
had in general effectually mentioned before, how it had been anciently the
prudent endeavor of his Nation to explode motly Religions, no less than
mungrel politics, that had some time endeavored to insest their Monarchy. The
first was easily brought to pass by our professing of a Religion that was more
sensibly Intelligible than any other that undertook to dissent from it; of
which so much has been expressed before, that I need nor, said the Jussinedos,
trouble you with any repetition.

As for our State managements, it has been of long and constant use with us to
prepare Persons that might be most advantageous to the Essential Prosperity and
Grandeur of our Government, and not only so, but by a proper method secure all
subordinate Trusts and Magistracy in a suitable manner, whereby their Integrity
might appear most available to the Public. And this has always with us,
proceeded from gracious allowance of our Kings, and the ready desire of
Subjects.

You much surprise me, replied the Athenian Senator, to hear you speak of
rendering the Persons of Men so serviceable, as you express, to your Nation: And
I grant, could that be effected, the exemplary Integrity of your Prince and
Nation, together with such Laws as consequently must fortify the Glory and
Happiness of your Monarch, would be a President, whence other Dominions might
take Copies in order to their future Greatness.

I doubt not but they would, replied the Jussinedos, if they did not too
peremptorily judge that the Civil manners of Men, as they too often relate to
public Transactions, without having to do with such particular failings as
naturally are incident to Mankind, are harder to be remedied by the endeavor
of a State, than really they would be found, if the Cure be prudently provided.

As in our Astreadan Principality, where it can be no Man's Honor or Advantage
to be otherwise than faithful to the Public, and what is more supreamly great,
no less the concern of the Monarch than the Subject; might not one rationally
conclude, that the continuation and fond of such a Dominion, would have a large
share of remembrance in Records of Time?

By your leave, said the Philosopher, I will make a Query before you come to
particulars: Suppose your King, for I take him to be, as you declare, a perfect
Monarch, should by violent extravagancy alter the form of Rule you mention,
might not the expedient you have delivered fall short of expectation?

I grant, answered the Jussinedos, that had we ever been Ruled by a King that
possibly could be imagined to act so oppositely to his own Greatness, the
objection might have some Validity; but we must suppose him in this case both a
Fool and a Tyrant, purposely to lessen himself. Neither did I ever hear of any
Monarch so foolishly wicked, that he would rather choose to Rule by the
assistance of Evil Men, if the good could do him greater service.

On the other side, if the Supreme Magistrate observes that Factious and
Seditious Inclinations have, in the greatest part of his People, Corrupted,
and, as it were, separated from his Throne, the Morality that ought to be
annexed to Public Duty: To be sure their Prince, if his temper be none of the
best, thinks himself in a high measure provoked to be worse than he was before,
and so blends and spreads his evil Genius with the Impiousness of his Subjects,
that he, in being Wicked, may be more pointedly Supreme in the Grandeur he
designs.

But the mischief is, that a bad and unquiet People will be more scrutinously
Inquisitive into the Morals and Conduct of their Sovereign, than if they were
as Loyal as they ought; or that it were easy for their Prince, by the mere
Philosophy of Goodness, to overruled the Impious disposition of his Subjects.
And tho this implies a Contradictory and Incompatible humor in Men, relating
to such as Govern, it is very much the Topics of the multitude in all Corrupt
Dominions.

But these particulars have been already enough insisted on, I will therefore,
in the most essential manner, according to your desire, declare what remains to
be delivered as it respects Peace and Wars: Which take briefly thus:

Our Monarchy, as I acquainted you before, is perfectly such both in Name and
Nature, not admitting of commixture of Power or Rule, in any kind, with the
Subject. And that this Royal preheminency and greatness, might be more securely
dignified and continued, our Monarch seldom confers Titles of Dignity or Honor
upon any, unless generously descended and suitably accomplished with Abilities
and Manners; and if low Birth does require Advancement, it must be qualified by
Actions and Parts extraordinarily eminent, it having been prudently observed by
our Government, that the exalting of mean Blood, when not thoroughly cleans'd by
the Virtue of Desert, is resented as scandalous, if admitted to have room
amongst Inheritors of Nobility, because Experience assures us that none are
more presumptuously haughty or ^xorbitantly apt to aspire, than persons that
rise from low Originals, they being, for the most part, i^ puss^ up, in their
own esteem, that they are more conceited of their Merit, than prepared to
acknowledge that it can be recompensed by Reward or Dignity; which shows us,
that Pride is very incident to such Complexions, when they ought least to be
uneasy to others, by forgetting from what home they came. And that all
subordinate Magistracy and Trust should be most carefully i^spected, whereby no
Persons with us are held capable of either, unless they pass the Inquiry and
Test of their public Integrity, which by eminent and approved Supervisors
commissioned by Royal Authority to that purpose, must be authentically
signified and recorded by them, provided that such persons as they judge fully
qualified, do under their Hands and Se^ls not only give assurance that they
will duly execute such employments of State, but also indenture with the
public, that in case any Corruption or private Interest be found in their
management detrimental to our Government, that they shall not only be censured
and refund for their exorbitant and avaritious Crimes, but likewise so many of
their Kindred and Posterity reflected on, as was held necessary by our
Magistracy, to their perpetual disgrace and incapacity of public employment
suitable to the nature of their offenses in every respect; for which we have an
irrevocable Ordinance of State, and occasionally executed to that purpose: and
should I call it the unfading flower of our Monarchical Regiment, you may
perhaps, when duly weighed by your intellect, allow it an Epithet no less
deserving.

The Athenian Senator replied, That what the Jassinados alleged was in
subtance actually the same in every well constituted Dominion; where tho all
persons are not required, under the severe Tests he mentioned, to render
themselves capable of national Management and Trust: Yet there is no prudent
State but inflicts grievous Penalties on Criminals according to their demerits,
and upon their Posterity too, both in the forfeiting of Honor, in case they
were so qualified, and likewise of their Estates; but not by any such immutable
Decree, as could not be reversed by the Civil Magistrate, in mercy to the Heirs
of Offenders: and I suppose you limit the severity you mention, as it may be
requisitely abated by compliance or submission of men, when under the unhappy
circumstance of having such Progenitors.

The Jassinedos answered, That the considerable policy of State he mentioned,
had been of long time with that Equity practiced in their Astreadan
Principality, that none could find cause to blame the means that was used for
public security, whereby their Nation was in a high measure preserved from the
malign descent of Tenants and Crimes, that had sometimes infested their
Dominion, when the impious positions of Ancestors had been too depravedly
inherited by the Off spring and near Allies to men, who were not only the
Patrons of such malevolent deeds and maxims, but likewise the Propagators of
the blood of those that too propensely inherited the depravations of
Predecessors, or thought it for their glory to be Assertors of the same
Principle^, without duly apprehending the contagion they derived from their
Predecessors, by adhering to the Enormities of their Tenants and Practices,
that had proved so detrimental to common Tranquillity and Preservation: against
which high Inconveniences, our Government has provided an ample prevention, as
you shall soon understand.

The Grecian Philosopher, being not a little surprised in expectation of what
the Astreadan Magistrate intended to deliver, told him, that he begged a Pardon
from him, is, before he farther proceeded in opening to them the great and
useful Prudence of their State, in providing against the inheritable growth of
Factions in that Nation, he took leave, as a Philosopher, to express the
transcendent Encomium, that he was ready to allow an expedient of that nature,
which he confessed was to be learnt by him; and far surpassed the most ^efin'd
philosophical notions of policy that had at any time exercised the famous
Schools of Athens; none of whose exquisite Ingenuities or literature had ever
been able to form any proper and lasting expedient, whereby soundness might be
restored and conferred to their body politic: Tho very manifest it be, that
within that famous dominion, the partialities and divisions that have by
descent, as it were, proceeded from Father to Son, have a little impaired the
Glory of the Athenian State; and it is too obvious, that from the Pride of
similitude, or as men generally are addicted to value the Maxims and Actings of
their Predecessors, they have proved no less the Offspring of their crimes
than blood. But to ^emedy a Contagion that has too frequently such a pernicious
emanation with mankind, must needs be not easily obtained, tho deserving all
commendation if duly accomplished: For if in the natural body the hereditary
Diseases of Gouts, Dropsies, and other Distempers, are so hardly remedied, how
much more difficult is the means of cure, that must be applied to the
Indispositions of the Soul, when the tincture of her guilt, from the public
transgressions of evil Progenitors, is de^cendently made the crime of posterity.

To which the Astreadan Jassinedos replied, That he ^ranted it might be some
difficulty to such, who had not ^xperimented the possibility and convenience of
the ^revention, whereby malevolent tenants and practices were hindered from
being entailed on succeeding generations: And it is well known to our Records,
how our Nation in former times was pestered with factions (...) many of our
eminent Families. till we cured the ex^rbitancy of that depending evil; nothing
being more ^bservable, as the Philosopher mentioned, than a ^^oneness in men,
out of the obliquity and haughtiness (...) their Spirit, or from a
vainglorious desire of being ^^teem'd no less popular than their Ancestors, on
the account of their positions, to patronage the errors of their Progenitors,
however obnoxious to the public.

The Jassinedos told the Philosopher, that by what had been formerly instanced
he might easily apprehend, that before the Astreadan Profession of Faith was
brought to that entire Efficacy already mentioned, no small difficulty was
encountered, in past times, to expunge the pernicious politics. That many
endeavo^'d to annex to their notions of belief, highly patronized by foreign
States and Principalities, and suitably defended by the prevalency of several
Priesthoods, that made it their business to worship accordingly: Amongst whom,
such as endeavored most to sublimate their Hierarchy, were for erecting a
Sacerdotal grandeur, under the denomination of Arch-Flamens, with other
subordinate Diocesan grandeurs, which tended to a Monarchical Supremacy in
their function: and these were more addicted to fix a^ Ecclesi^stical
pre-eminence in their Priesthood, than to allow it any political Basis on the
account of the Civ^l Magistrate: Others there were that annexed to their belief
a more popular Conduct, either as they held Synods to elect and set apart
clerical persons for the exercise and asserting of their Worship; or were
chosen by parity of Vote, as the ^ay Members of their Cong^etion thought most
requisite for the service of their persuasion, and these last mentioned were
Antimonarchcally principled, that is to say, devoted to Governme^^ by way of a
Republic. In fine, all these factions we^e soon extinguish^d, tho so much
endeared by their seve^al Priesthoods, after our Indivisible Religion had bee^
sufficiently explained. Notwithstanding all which, such persons as had no hope
to perplex the perspicuit^ o^ our devotional belief, were notwithstanding
highly industrious, heretofore, to convey such political Tenants as were very
detrimental to our civil Government, either as they had obtruded and dispersed
positions, the figments of their brain, that tended to a factious commixture of
Aristocracy and Democracy, with the Royalty of our Monarch, for which they were
termed by us mungrel, or pied Politicians, as was already mentioned; or
actually caused, on the acc^unt of their Te^ents, Commotions and Rebellions,
within our Astreadan Dominion. Wherefore to satisfy your desire, by
acquainting you in what manner the Prudence of our State, not only obviated and
prevented the designs of such Members within our Nation, that in past ages had
caused dangerous Revolutions and Convulsions in our civil Government, together
with a vast expense of Blood and Treasure, but also established our Monarchical
Rule and Greatness in the purity that it now injoys: It will be necessary that
I amply declare, as I precedently instanced, the method taken by our
Government, not only to punish the crimes of Malefactors, but also to convey
such Animadversions and Disgraces to their Posterities, that were highly useful
in reference to the Issue^ and nearest Allies of those Persons, who by a just
and signal Infamy were de^erred from continuing the Enormities of their
Forefathers. It having proved of useful experience, within our Dominion, that
^he shame of descending Ignomy has effected more amendment on the opinions and
persons of men; otherwise too prone to endear, if not vindicate, the Maxims and
Oppositions of their Progenitors, however det^imental to our body politic,
than the most severe execution of Laws; which, as they had but a personal
extent, and consequently so terminated, their Disgraces and Punishments on
Delinquents, did little abate the facile inclinations of men to value
themselves by attaining popularity from their Predecessors, tho in Principle as
bad as they could derive from them. From which source of evil, it was
heretofore usual with us, that men took upon them, not only to uphold the
Faction of their near Relations, but likewise to condemn our Government, for
exacting such due Inflictions as were necessa^ily executed on such Offenders.

I confess, said the Athenian Senator, that this ^xp^dient, if made practical
as you allege, does far su^pass all the provisions that our wisest Grecian
Lawmakers have yet composed in their most elaborate legal Constitutions,
whereby they would render an exact integri^y of Rule and Obedience: but could
never foresee, by any useful prevention, how descending animosities, and
exorbitant opinions and factions too apt, as you have well expressed, to be
indulged by the inclinations of men, who in hope of vulgar applause, or to
improve the merit of their ostentation, together with the Interest they
designed, in being esteemed successively Patrons by assimulating the Maxims of
their Predecessors, might be legally prevented by any such compendious
institution as you seem to demonstrate; enough to conjure the Spirit of Solon,
or Lycurgus, to pass by miracle from the other world to be your Auditors, and
return the wonder of your Astreadan Republic to be contemplated by a Senate in
the Elysium Abodes, where the Souls of wisest Legislators a^e supreamly
resident; since what you offer does far exceed the best prospect of their Laws
and Politics. Wherefore not to delay my earnest desire to be thoroughly
informed, be pleased to make ou^ expectation so happy, as to declare the
particulars o^ the extraordinary State invention, that has given to your
Astreadan Monarchy the eminent Tranquillity and Happiness it now enjoys.

The Athenian Magistrate having thus delivered his sentiment, the Astreadan
Jassinedos, with a grave comportment and audible voice, declared unto them, the
the method whereby the prudence of their Monarchial Regiment had obviated
descending corruptions in their body politic, had resulted from the pertinent
reflections that were constituted to clear their Nation from imbibing the
malign positions and enormities of their nearest Allies and Progenitors: which
method was briefly in this manner; If by any notorious opinion, or fact openly
avowed or published, our Government was maligned or debased, to the disturbance
of our common Peace; not only such Offenders were censured and punished
suitable to their Transgressions, but their Posterity and nearest
Consanguinities were to receive a visible disgrace, during the pleasure of our
supreme Magistrate, or till they satisfactorily renounced the pernicious Facts
and Tenants of their most considerable Allies and Predecessors; to which
purpose we had, and is yet extant, should occasion require, a solemn Court of
Renunciation, before whose Tribunal every Delinquent, that was permitted to
have Life or Estate within our Dominion, was called to that purpose, as also
the Heirs and Kindred of such persons, were on their knees to manifest their
abhorrence of such Transgressors; and this to be performed every year, suitable
to the nature of their crimes, so long as by the civil Magistrate it should be
thought necessary, or until they had thoroughly purged themselves by subsequent
merit to the public. If any refused to undergo this method of Purgation, they
were not only rendered incapable of Employment in our Principality, but to be
prosecuted as Outlawries, or banished from the compass of our civil Dominion,
with all imaginable infamy.

Notwithstanding all which, continued the Jassinedos, in some cases even where
offenses were highly capital, our Government has rather thought fit to impress
a visible disgrace on the persons of men, than to terminate their Lives by
legal execution, as a more notorious and transcendent caution to their
Posterity: to which end such Malefactors were obliged to wear insculptions, in
Plates of Steel on their Vests, during their Lives, that employed their offense,
together with the Letter R broadly figured, that signified they renounced their
Delinquencies; the wisdom of our State holding it more conducing to public
advantage, to suffer some Offenders to live with long Reproach, than to be
ended by the sudden act of Execution: Like the story of the man, who chose
rather to give his Dog a living ill name, than ^mmediately to commit him to a
Halter; and by this method we not only exposed, to every observation and
censure, the ignomineous reflection thought fit to be diffused by the supreme
Magistrate, in reference to the quality of principles and actual guilt emergent
from such grand enormities; but likewise conveyed a political caution, even
amongst the nearest degrees of Blood, and al^iance of F^milies, too propense
otherwise to have traditionally imbibed and asserted the Tenants of their
Relations and Predecessors, on the same temptatious account of Ambition or
Popularity; the growth of which spreading Exorbitancies, together with the
pernicious Interest designed thereby, was con^ignly disreputed and hinge^^^ by
these useful inflictions and apprehension o^ subs^quent disgrace; insomuch that
Families gave a check to themselves, by not embracing the obnoxious positions
o^ their Allies or Pa^ents, who usually commit the most co^siderable and
pri^ary trust to their nea^est Consanguinities and Relations, and were, in no
small measu^e, considerably watchful, instead of being partners in conspiracy,
left their alliances should involve them in public disgrace; which proved a
very effectual means of peace and security within our Nation, far above the
obliging the Allegiance of men by the engagement of an Oath, however
significantly intended, to ascertain their duty: It being notoriously known
that where Subjects are factiously principled, or antipathis'd to the rule they
are under, that they will have their Evasions, Cavils, and racite Reservations,
tho tied to the performance of their duty by the strongest knot the Law can
produce in the form of swearing: and who can doubt that such persons will not
much rather venture the abusing of their Conscience, as for their haughty ends,
and oblique interests they favor their opinions and practices, or as they
naturally incline to patronize the Reputation of their Alliances, concenter
with the Enormities of their Families and Kindred, by owning of the same
sinister designs and tenants, than to undergo a visible Reproach, that implies
Shame to themselves and dearest Relations; and no way to be prevented by
intercession, or the highest application that Money can advance. And such was
the constant Regard and Circumspection of our Government, whereby the depraved
politics of men received the useful inflictions I have here noted, which in
future time produced the integrity that has rendered our Monarchy great and
prosperous.

It Is not to be thought, replied the Athenian Magistrate, that any legitimate
Gubernation should be destitute of right, in order to discountenance and
prevent such ante-political deeds and practices, as are detrimental to civil
Obedience and public Tranquillity. And I do likewise readily condescend, that
if the Prudence incumbent on humane rule be judiciously and timely applied,
that it may sufficiently operate by allaying or extinguishing such maladies of
State that are too pronely emergent, and have not seldom a contagious
transition as they are successively endeared and patronized by nearest
Consanguinities; insomuch that it has been thought rather a reputation
vindicated to adhere to such maxims, as have taint^d the Blood of nearest
Relations, than for their Offspring to mani^est by deeds, that they are in soul
separated from the evil opinions and facts of their Alliances; from whence it
often comes to pass, as is manifest to experience, that within the Bosom of the
body politic are contained so many Hereditary Rebels and Traitors. And tho I
much value your Astreadan expedient, yet I cannot but judge that it is
something severe; considering that it reflects on persons who may not have
deserved it from the guilt of any overtact. It being very possible that ^any
allied to such Criminals, did not espouse the destructive prevarication of
their Tenants and Offenses: on which ground I suppose, there might increase
partialities and divisions amongst you, however formerly suppressed, by
excluding at will of your supreme Magistracy, so many considerable of your
people from being capable of any National Trust or Employment, as also to bear
the figures of public disgrace, visible on their persons, for no other reason,
but because they were the Heirs or Alliances of evil men, until your State was
perfectly satisfied of their future Fidelity. And I assure you, if you answer
this Objection, I shall readily embrace your Countries Expedient; as the most
proper care that could be applied to rectify the Principles of a corrupt or
degenerate People.

True it is, replied the Jassinedos, that the Expedient was something disgusted
at first, tho not so considerably as to hinder the convenience of its
operation; like men whose Pallates seem averse to the best of Physic, until
their tempers are aptly disposed to value the Remedy. If other Principalities
have fell short of our methods in securing public Obedience, either as they
were satisfied by a cursory Oath of Allegiance occasionally administered, oftener
sworn than conscionably remembered, and submitted to as it ought; the trite and
frequent abuse by which perverse Subjects too often mingled their tacit
Reservations and Falacies, contrary to the genuine sense of the solemn
Asseveration they had made before the Eyes of Heaven and man; a sophistry of
swearing, very incident to the Nature of some People, whereby their Consciences
stood prepared, if occasion required, to eject a precedent Oath, that they
might yield room to another, in opposition to their former, whenever a change
in State was promoted and welcomed by them: which superlative evil the wisdom
of our constituted Rule has in no small degree prevented, as it does impede the
descending malady of pernicious Tenants and Oppositions, that by a dangerous
commixture have at any time disturbed the due Repose of our Nation; And what
man can be so froward an Opiniator, as to esteem it no requisite provision, if
to overawe and disgrace the impetuous transactions of precedent Offenders, such
outward reproach should be inflicted on their Issues and near Affinities, that
might visibly deter succeeding Generations from inheriting the Transgressions
of their Predecessors: and ^f the letter R signalized on their Habits, shall
ocularly imply, as I formerly expressed, the Renunciation of the Enormities of
their Families, it may well deserve to be so represented: and doubtless the
fear of personal Shame, that bears a public Remark, when applied to the
alliances and heirs of wicked Consanguinities, has affected more, as has been
fully experienced by us, than could be accomplis'd by the internal obligation
of the Soul; men being far more inclined to avoid the detriment and ignominies
of their persons, than to preserve the integrity of their Allegianc^, tho
strictly obliged by the solemnity of an Oath.

And whereas you seemed to apprehend that the necessary correction, in the
method of our State, of obliquities in the body politic, as it reflected on
the personal crimes of original transgressions, in order to purge and vilify
their emanation, in reference to their Allies and Successors, might irritate
and increase the spreading of Factions, Repinings and Tenants within our
Sovereignty: It was soon experimented by the diligence of our civil
gubernation, that the contagion of evil tenants, partialities and sidings
amongst us, were by that means, in a few years, totally extinguished, as to any
prejudicial increase or growth, that could any ways redound from their
contrivances, neither was it necessary for the Prudence of our Government to
inflict the animadversion and censure, I have instanced on many persons of Men,
Families, or Relations, it being well discerned by our Monarchs, that the
eminent of Blood and Alliances, are the most considerable Patronizers of such
enormous Principles and designs, as by their tendency and overt-acts most
dangerously operate against common repose and safety; and this you were pleased
to concede, as an evident inconvenience in your Athenian Republic, where the
supreme in repute, according to your acknowledgment, had perniciously allured
the factious compliance of subordinate Interests; and I doubt not, said the
Jassinedos, but the effects are the same in all Dominions. And thus you may
perceive, how significantly the method of our cure, tending to our body
politic, was adapted to such essentials within our civil Rule, who by their
depraved Examples, Positions and Facts, together with their specious and gaudy
designs, were most signally capacited to seduce the disobedience obedience of
others. Nor is any thing more obvious' than that the dangerous and exorbitant
Guides are few, tho not seldom composed of Grandees in Parts, Title, and
Descent, that sway the most popular compliance: from whence it proceeds, that
perverse and common mistakes, when maliciously and eminently diffused, have
subverted more Principalities and States, than any erroneous, corrupt, or
tyrannical conduct that could be attributed to the Irregularities, or Failings
of the Sovereign Ruler. How vain is then the human endeavor, that, in such a
perplexed condition of the body politic, when positions are countenanced and
divulged, that are antipathis'd to the soundness of its constitution, would
expect an amendment from the suppliment of Laws or Integrity, redounding from
the administration of subordinate Magistracy; whilst not only the best legal
establishments that can be enacted, in a deprav'd-condition of a People, will
find a refractory or disputable reception, either as they suit not with the
various complexion of Opposers, or as the Magistracy is disregarded in their
execution: Whence it usually ensues, that Subjects, when perversely animated and
swayed by the distemper of political notions, are never at ease with the rule
they ought to obey, or laws they are under, how numerous soever appears their
Catalogue; and no less unsatisfied in their expectation when their sum is
increased; nothing being more certain than that the genuine content and
integrity of a people must arise from the improvement and stedfastness of their
principles, rather than from the enlargement and compulsion of legal
establishments.

And this was judiciously perceived by the discreet prevention used by our
government, in order to obviate the spreading dissentaneous problems amongst
our Astreadan Natives; which being found too litigiously intricate, and
factiously involved, to be comprimiz'd by any reasonable application or
conviction, there could be no expedient so notably advantageous as the
conferring outward reproach and ignominy on the evil tenants of persons, and
dignifying the soundness and practical obedience approved in the conformity of
the Judgments of others; and thus by the judicions desert of some, and the
political penance, I before expressed, requisitely inflicted on others; the
prevaricating notions of men in opposition to our Rule, were gradually
extirpated, notwithstanding that they had precedently far insinuated and
corruptly disposed and interested destructive animosities within the compass of
our Nation; either as they uncouthly mixed our Monarchical with the conceited
mingle of popular Regiment; or adhered to the wild notion of original contract,
before consured betwixt King and Subjects, until such mungrel Politicians, and
Tenants, being to their outward shame exemplarily discountenanced, our People
had in all their degrees recovered a commodions and entire duty, both in their
opinion and submission to supreme Authority; from whence it came to pass, that
whereas our public Counsels and Senates, when heretofore convened, had been
uneasy, and passionately addicted to quarrel with their Monarch, by reflecting
on his Government and the Conduct of his Ministers, when the crime of the
Impeachment was rather in themselves: or by requiring such Laws as would
scandalize his Scepter, if by it touched; and when refused, his power
obstructed or impaired by wanting the due Nourishment it ought to have received
by their compliance, if not endangered by a mo^e signal Catastrophe: Yet even
these high inconveniences, and destructive aversions: in our State, received a
happy redress by the method I have briefly related.

I readily acknowledge, replied the Grecian Senator, that the measures used by
your Astreadan Sovereignty, in order to avert and hinder the progression and
assimulate-of evil positions and attempt, as they might otherwise dilate and be
transm^tted to Posterity, to the perpetual disquiet of your commendable
Government were prudently applied: and I cannot but grant, with you, that, very
often the contagious sourse of evils, if not cautiously prevented, are too
pronely increased in the persons of such as spring from refractory and
disobedient Predecessors; nothing being more observable than that erroneous
humanity, is rather inclined to assert and vindicate the impious Misdemeaners
of their Allies and Progenitors, than submissively to concede the evil of their
Transgressions

And I am so far from censuring the proceeding of your State, in the method you
declare, that if a broader token of Renunciation, than the Letter R, in
reference to the Issues and Consanguinities of such Criminals, were visibly
expanded on the Garments they wore, I should judge it a very useful and
exemplary caution to the obedience of others, as it signally relates to the
honor of their Families and Descent. Wherefore this grand expedient of your
Astreadan Government, does not only surpass the many endeavors of the wisest of
our Grecian Legislators, who applied the best of their Learning and Experience
to erect and model such a constituted body politic, as might sufficiently
depress the corruption of Tenants and practices of men, but may be properly
allowed, for its excellent rarity, the Phoenix of civil Regiment; and doubtless
whenever its perfection shall be duly considered, and actually exercised by
other Nations, it will receive a suitable estimate.

The Grecian Philosopher, having duly observed what his Associate and
Countryman, the Athenian Magistrate, had before utterred to the Astreadan
Jassinedos, declared to 'em both, that he fully concentered with their
judgments, in approving of the expedient they had precedently discussed; adding
withal, for its higher Illustration and Praise, that it might well have
deferred the ac^urate esteem and approbation of Plato and Aristotle; had they
been present at the opening of this useful policy of State; which tho not
verbally found in them, or in the erudite writings of others renowned in
Philosophical science, together with their learned Precepts; whereby the
highest Integrity might be accomplished in humane Government: Yet does it
essentially flow from their Dictates, if considered, in general, how they
employed their learned pens, by endeavoring to prevent the emanation of popular
maladies and faction; which could have no considerable diffusion, but as they
originally proceeded and were supported by persons of dignity and influence in
their Nation. And what reason can question, that the giving a disrepute to the
enormous principles and crimes of such as would otherwise convey a derivative
evil to their Consanguinities and Issues, is not a commendable policy; Men
being too propensely disposed and interested in adhering to the crimes of their
nearest Kindred and Acquaintance. Especially if tempted by the same hopes of
popular ends and advantage. For as it is naturally true, that humane
prevarications have a near degree of familiarity in the relations of blood, so
it is no less observable that the ungovernable affections and appetites of
mankind, have a like similitude and propagation in the Alliances and Descent of
Persons: Nor is any thing more manifest, than that the most pernicious attempts
against Principalities and States have proceeded from the Conspirations and
Facts of Hereditary Traitors.

Wherefore tho I commend your latter expedi^nt, no less than your former
relating to divine worship, whereby you declare, that you have with good effect
suppressed disunion of principl^s within your Nation, to the reproach and
extirpation of factious animosities and interests, that tended to the
discomposure and subversion of your Astreadan Monarchy: Yet have I not heard as
I expected from you, how Judges of ^ribunals, Advocates; and Pleaders at Bar,
behaved themselves in times of strictest Trial and Occurrences of Sta^e, before
arrived to that national integrity, which as your common happiness you have
since acquired. Well known to my observation, concluded the Philosopher, how men
of that profession, notwithstanding the gravity of their Robe, have been too
flexible in varying of their dialects suitable to distempered seasons, and
usurpations of the civil power: Whether it be that the political fond of Laws,
tho it ^ught to be of right the far nobler and requisite part of their science,
is too cursorily inspected, or neglected by them in the volumes they read, but
crudely digest, instead of discerning what many erudite Philosophers have
written on that subject: Or that the mechanical part of their profession, in
reference to their Salleries and Fees, be more greedily their diligence and
application, in whatsoever diversity and revolution of Rule, than a firm
adherence to the Basis of their legitimate Government: It being often
ob^ervable, that amongst many of this litigious sort of Gown-men, the obliquity
of their pleading and judiciary determinations, have never been more profitably
advantaged, than when they have fitted the Bias of their Tongues to the wrong
side of the Law. And I remember, that I have heard of an old avaritious
Advocate somewhere, who complimented an Inva^or of a legitimate Throne, by
telling him that he apprehended he should have survived the Law, before his
arrival* when in fact, he lived to see its political death by the means that he
had impiously applauded.

The Astreadan Jassinedos, in compliance to the motion of the Philosopher, told
him together with the Athenian Magistrate, that he craved pardon of them both
for his omitting of the due Recrimination and cen^ure that had been applied in
that Dominion, as a pertinent contumely and ch^stisement of the abuses of the
Law; which in times past, by the preposterous and irregular deviaton^ of some
exorbitant persons of that Robe, tho otherwise of commendable proficiency, had
been depraved to a h^inous guilt, and perpetual disrepute to their vocation;
not only as they openly abdicated the main fond of policy on which the cement
and being of our sovereign Rule entirely consisted; but as they likewise
endeavored to evade, and tender ineffectual the statuted Props and Records that
most firmly sustained the structure of our body politic; from whence it
ensued, that am^ngst th^s sort of Gown-men were found pest ferous Compliers and
Adherents ^o any Revolution of State that was successfully produced. And thus
Rebellions and Usurpations, in former times too frequent with us, had their
rugged violations, in whatsoever shape or figure, more colorably smoothed, as
Renagadoes of this worthy profession, filled Rooms at Bars and Tribunals. Where
finding that notwithstanding the deplorable change of State, and miseries of
their fellow Subjects, they would be of necessity beneficially employed as
Pleaders in behalf of their Clients; not only in relation to their ordinary
Rights, but also as Plaintiffs and Defendants in such Litigations and Trials,
that internal disturbance and violence had perniciously intruded to the
advantage of avaritious and time-serving Advocates.

And I assure you, continued the Jassinedos, that it is manifest from former
computation, that no season has afforded a more impious and plentiful gain to
the Purse of disloyal Pleaders, than when Apostates of that science have placed
their exaltation or thriving on the ruin of the Law. Nor is it to be imagined
that the Usurpers of Dominion will be defective to their necessary varnish in
not conferring reward on the Talents of such as can best palliate the bitter
Reflections of legal Establishments, or attempt to baffle their Validity if
quoted on the part of the rightful Throne.

All which, said the Jassinedos, to the Philosopher, was in substance delivered
in your prec^dent discourse. And as for Condemnations and Punishments, which
you desired to understand, that were heretofore conferred by our prudent
Gubernation on the delinquencies of that Robe, the judiciary inflictions were
in this manner ordained.

If any of that science had capitally and treasonably offended, as they owned
the parts of Advocates or Judges, under any usurped Power or Scepter, some of
the most notorious, or such as were deemed most knowingly Tergiversators and
Betrayers of the Law they were obliged to defend, suffered death suitable to
their demerits.

Others, tho as grand Offenders, were to their living shame reprieved from
dying by the hand of an Executioner; but so, as that they were in effigy
represented hanging in their Gowns, as Malefactors on a Gallows. And thus to
their lasting disgrace, were their figures exposed to view, in the largest
Appartments and Halls of their Society; that their crimes, by these visible
memorials, might occasion a more frequent detestation in the Eyes of old and
young, appertaining to that science* Besides all which, there was an
irrevocable command ordained by our government, that together with the frequent
Readings on Law, to perform which some learned Professors were appointed for
the instruction of Youth, there should be apposite statutes constantly
explained, that most palpably expanded the subversion of Law by the
ante-judiciary proceedings of such execrable gown'd Transgressors. Which useful
determination and inflictions, in time past, after a wonderful Restoration of
our Monarchy, and that by its illustrious shining forth, the monstrous Cloud of
foregoing usurpation was totally dispersed. I do not find, said the Jassinedos,
that delinquencies of this nature were ever recorded within our dominion; not
only as the hope of any future violent intrusion into our legitimate Throne,
was totally frustrated in the unjust support it could expect or allure from the
compliance of enormous Tribunals; but also as the political part of our
Government was cleansed from that absurd and obnoxious commixture, which
cavalling Tongues, in behalf of their factious Clients, had precedently made
the noise and disturbance of Bars, and Seats of Judgment.

The Athenian Senator and Philosopher, assured the Jassinedos that he had
sufficiently declared the necessary reflections and punishments which effected
that soundness in the Astreadan Sovereignty it now so prosperously enjoyed; and
might be of exemplary benefit to other States and Principalities, whereby they
might obliterate seditious Tenants and Principles out of the Subjects heart:
Nothing now remaining to their farther information, if he pleased so far to
gratify their desire, but to acquaint them with the manner of their Policy and
Conduct in war; which they doubted not would deserve their commendation no less
than what he had expressed, as conducing to the civil establishments of his
Nation.

To which Request of theirs, the Jassinedos, with a becoming gravity, replied,
that war was a violence so dreadfully antipathiz'd to humane society and
conservation, that as it was generally applied, it vastly complic^ted all
humane miseries: for what can be more deplorably unjust than when the stronger
without other provocation, endeavors to subjugate the weaker in power. And if
the motives of war throughout the universe were duly examined, it would soon be
found that elate Ambition, and boundless desire of enlarging injurious
Dominion, is the main instigator of that impious fury that ^oils in the veins
of restless States and Princes. As if Providence, that had bestowed the worlds
vast receptio^ for the benefit and repose of mankind, were of too narrow a
space to confine the aspirings of warring Soveraignties. Whereas if but duly
contemplated, and surveyed by them, the Map in which is delineated* the mighty
extension of the earthly element; they could not but observe the void and
unpeopled Regions that are contained in its circumference: how glorious an
ambition were it next for worldly Potentates, if instead of oppressing the
right of Neighbor Nations, they unanimously reprieved from the calamities and
sanguine destructions b^ war, such exuberant numbers of their People that might
quietly enjoy and cultivate a many desolate Climes, that would afford all
necess^ry fertility when so possessed. What national Confederacies, like these,
could usefully oblige the souls of Princes and Subjects; should they disembogue
their Countries of too excessive increase of their people, in removing of them
to soils that want Inhabitants, instead of diminishing of their number by
leading of them to dye, or possess bloody, acquisitions by the oppressive Sword
of Conquest. And this has been not only the constant sentiment of our Astre^dan
Government, but practicably used to the Honor and Advantage of our Natives.

The learned Philosopher assured the Jassinedos, that he had communicated a
notion of policy more heroic in Theory, than had been discussed by the accurate
Pens and Literature of Schools; but conceived, that like the refined definition
and requisites of Virtue, it was more purely estimable in the value of its
Idea, than actually practical with humane kind. And tho it be obvious to every
apprehension, that nothing but universal equity can restrain the arbitrary
conduct of such as most predominantly command or allure the subordinate
compliance and force of men: Yet should the expedient he mentioned be so far
admitted, by the general consent of supreme Potentates; and that the vacant
parts of the Earth, instead of forcing aggressions on neighbor Dominions, were
to be divided amongst them: would they free themselves from Contests and
Quarrels by Arms, by duly accepting of their proportions and dividends?
Certainly no more than they do now acquiesce in the sole possessing of that
they ought to enjoy. Which, however great, is far too little, if compared with
the extent of their Ambition; nor will it be exported by their Wills, farther
from home than the next adjacent soil, if advantageously conti^uous to the
enlargement of their power. Neither is this Infelicity always conveyed from the
facile temptation that the strong in arms have to su^due the weaker: or from
the prodigality or luxury of worldly Rulers: whilst in some situations of
mankind, the exigencies of nature seem to create martial Aggressors. And thus
the cold and barren Climes, too frequen^ly filled with more Inhabitants than
they can commodiously sustain, are by the violent ala^ums of want, summoned to
lead forth, and martially vent their People in the next adjacent Region, if
more fruitful than their own. But had this necessity no being with humanity,
the^e would notwithstanding, on every account, be found a natural instinct in
the soul of man to force Superio^ity; nor is it to be discerned, that Nature
has bestowed on him a more temperate Appetite to predominency over his kind,
than the creatures subjugates execute in theirs: but with this difference, that
the last devour the Animals they destroy; and men, unless such who are
Canibals, only kill one another by several methods, as either Weapons, Famine,
Fire, Earth, Air or Water, may contribute to that end. And could the motives I
have here alleged, be waved by mankind, would they not judge that too many of
them, tho not by necessity enforced to be violent disturbers of themselves or
others, quietly lived, and that the bosom of their Country was not sufficient
to yield convenient repose to their persons, as their numbers increased, to the
strai^ning of their being and subsistence: As also that they could not remove
the inconvenience without exposing to forcible destruction some part of the
whole, that the remainder might more commodiously survive; so that Providence
seems, in a manner, permissively to discompose the sedate felicity that by
rational accord men might otherwise possess; and thus they appear no less the
contrivers of their own destruction, by the violent fate of war, than at other
seasons the fury of malignant diseases compels to Graves no less a multitude;
nor does the rage of Arms, otherwise than in course, seem to have a reciprocal
progression with not a few obnoxious distempers, incident to humane Nature. All
which are fully resembled in the temper and disposition of the subordinate
creature; whose number, were they not impaired for the nourishment and use of
mankind, and also lessened in their sum by accidental infirmities and periods
of life, together with the destruction they make in preying on the bodies of
one another, there would not be room, within the compass of the habitable
world, to give their individuals sustenance or being. Which inclines me to
conclude, that the dispensations of Providence do in some measure comply with
common necessity, tho in the severe epithet of permiting destruction, in the
kinds I have mentioned, to men and creatures. And I would gladly understand,
concluded the Philosopher, if the world does afford any such integrity in a
People who are not, for ends I have expressed, Infringers of their repose, or
not for their advantage ready to aggress a neighboring Dominion. Nor did I
ever hear of national League or Confederacy that was longer preserved than
suitable to their reciprocal benefit; so that men are generally more beholding
for their respites from war to public convenience, than to the conscience of
their supreme Rulers. Which shows us that War and Peace, like the usual
products of nature, are generated and corrupted by their several vicissitudes.

The Jassinedos granted, that the Philosopher had judiciously strengthened his
manner of reasoning with a received notion of his science; but told him withal,
that there was no general observation, appliable to the indirect, conducts of
men, but might admit of some exception, if compared with the upright measures
approved and practiced by others; and this was palpably verified in the actual
methods of War and Peace, constantly adhered to by their Astreadan Monarchy;
insomuch, that our Scepter was never stained with the disposs^ssing of any
rightful Dominion. And tho our Religion, as was formerly proved, is of a more
perspicuous and demonstrative standard than any opposite belief that would
undertake to compare with ours; yet we have never otherwise, than perswasively
int^oduced the evidence of our Creed, or enforced the forfeitures of men's
possessions for not apprehending so clearly as our selves, well knowing that
the delusive pretenses of religious Zeal not seldom accompany the designed
ambitious March of the unrighteous Invader. And if on the account of the
evidence of our beli^f, we h^ve not armed our violence against the persuasion
or right of any legitimate Sove^aignty; to be sure we have not engaged our
Swords on the side of injurious conf^deracies, or endeavored to ^xal^, by our
assistance, any personal Usurpation whereby to exclude the known proprietor of
the Royal Throne; nor could we ever be o^lig'd to support, by our warlike
valor, any alliance whose cause was unjust, or did not act merely on the
defensiv^ ^art. Abhorring even the reparation of wrong* by the spoils of an
Enemy, the frequently the sti^ulated (...) of other dominions, as an outrageous
source (...) whence have widely continued the destructions of (...) ^^om age to
age, tho frequently to the greater loss of such forcible contenders who instead
of repairing by violence the wrongs they have suffered by opposers, increase
their sum, as they are loosers in attempting their red^ess.

Wherefore it is not only honorable forgiveness that induces our constitution
of State not to retaliate I^juries, but a beneficial convenience in sparing of
that Blood and Treasure, that other Soveraignties, out of ostentation and pride
of power, or to dilate their military grandeur, conceive it looks big in them,
if they can enforce miseries on their neighbors, paramount to the wrongs they
have formerly received.

In sum, our War is defensive, yet so judiciously managed, when prope^ly
concerned, that we have been always sufficiently provided to give our opposers
cause to repent the attempts they have made against us. And this we conceive to
have been our safer and nobler satisfaction, when our valor has thus
gloriously merited our national esteem and reward, instead of the hazard of
Reparation for precedent violations from foreign Adversaries. And if desire of
Revenge be no less an Inglorious than Improvident cause of War, or no other in
effect but to retaliate one depredation by the committing of another, tho
perhaps speciously pretended to continue but till the potent claim of martial
damages be redressed, to the con^ent of Aggressors; when it is seldom observable
that Princes will really dispose their hearts cal^ly to balance, and give
lasting satisfaction for their invading and oppressing of a neighboring
principalit^. Nor is any thing, for the most part, so extravagantly computed as
the Arithmetic of S^ates, when the sum of their demands is multipli^d by the
fractions o^ War.

The Ath^nia^ ^enator having at^en^ively considered these mutual discussions,
that extraordinarily related to the ^ighest discussions of Policy and War, told
the Jassinedos, That notwithstanding he highly applauded the Heroic Integrity
of the Astreadan rule and conduct, he could not but apprehend that it was
dangerously exposed, even by the virtue of its measures, to the machinations
and attempts of foreign Invaders; if no other than defensive Arms were employed
to oppose the descent of Enemies from abroad. And what is more usual with the
martial policies of Principalities and States, than in their preparations and
actual force to be first Aggressors; if but suspecting that any warlike
vicinity would be as nimble in assailing of any territories that belong to
them: and this manner of prevention or averting of War, by conducting it to the
doors of their formidable neighbors, lest its tragical and ruinous scene
should be first opened against themselves, has been the subtle expedient of
Monarchs and Republics: tho in construction no other than a furious
devastation erected, on the account of weakening their apprehended adversaries,
by being foremost in violence. But as supreme Rulers will reserve to their sole
arbitrament the perspective of their future d^ngers, so they will not refrain
from employing of such fo^cible means as does not concenter with the exact
standa^d of Justice; it being least in their thoughts, if commodious for the
ends of their ambition and power, what miseries they perpetrate, when they lead
the Monster War to prey on free quarter and spoil of their neighbors by their
warlike attempts.

And it is very observable, that a bold Invader will find more confederated
partakers, in hopes to be sharers In his acquisitions, than a people can
readily engage to their assistance, that act no farther than their internal
defense, without any prospect of enlarging their dominion, or being empowered
by the valor of their Troops to oblige the arms of such as would, on those
terms, be their Allies in war.

Nor is any thing more unsafe, as the affairs of the world are exorbitantly
managed, than for humane Rule to depend so on the simplicity of its prowess and
virtue, as to be in a condition of sufferance from the potency of an Enemy,
before it provides to repulse the attacks that may far endanger, if not
subvert, the fundamental being of a People.

And if your Astreadan Militia be not more than ordinarily spirited by the
Justice of their martial defense, as also from the approved conduct and
fortunate success of their valiant Leaders; I do not perceive how any numbers
of your Natives, however large may be their sum, can on the account of their
power, be sufficient to resist, insome revolutions of State, the dangers that
may arise from the designments of foreign Enemies, and conspiracies at home.

The Jassinedos replied, that since the Athenian Senator had conceded, that the
manner and grandeur of the Astreadan war was highly commendable, as it referred
to the defensible preservation of the People; he could not but grant, that the
maxim was no less heroically great, which prohibited deplored retaliations, tho
provoked by the Sword of an injurious Invader. And this has been so happily
practiced, said the Jassinedos, within our Dominion, that by the entireness of
its force, we have been more than enough powerful, not only in defending our
Country, but in repelling the com^licated aggressions of our Enemies: Neither
have we thought our selves less, in the prospect of our warlike atchievments,
by not having admitted for our reinforcement, the numerous mingle of
confederated Assistants; well knowing that a good cause is seldom made better,
or more successful, from the aid it receives by their detachments.

And if duly considered, the nature and designs of Confederacies, what do they
generally imply other than a commix^ure of so many disagreeable, or indirect
ambitions; either as some would continue, by m^ans of an armed League, the
Poss^ssions which they cannot otherwise defend; whilst others would att^in ^ore
ground on their Neighbors Territories than they ought to overcome. If they seem
to acknowledge any Prince for Head of their League, and Conduct of their Arms,
they are rarely his longer than by him dearly bought. And should the Prowess of
his Troops, commixt with theirs, be at any time considerably prosperous, which
seldom comes to pass by their Intendment or Hazard on his account, count, they
are very inclinable to apply the main glory of the action to their valor and
conduct, together with the interest they design to themselves, instead of
complying with the expectation of Renown, and latitude of Power, that possibly
is the ambition of their capital Guide and Benefact^r. If unsuccessful in his
Conduct and Attempts, it is probable that he may find his mercenary Confederates
his worst Deserters, and so secretly too, that he will not timely be able to
fill their rooms in his Camp, With other Recruits. Per^aps discerning, when too
late, that they have combined to sell him, and his clandestine Intrigues with
them, for money disbursed underhand, to his greatest adversary. So that nothing
is more apt to end to the detriment of the principal Grandee in a league, than
a biassd or fading Confederacy: and doubtle^^ few have reaped the benefit of
such stipulations in the sense they were agreed or paid for.

Do^s not common experience assurse us, that the kindness contracted by
Confederacies is no longer continued than suits with the political
^o^veniencies and advantages of the parties engaged. And is it not as certain,
that either from disgusts or misunderstandings in the management of their
affairs, or from accidental and frequent variation of their measures, they soon
wave their precedent Contracts, however firmly obliged to their observance, as
they ought to employ their Arms and Conduct. And this difficulty proceeds from
their not being able to fit entirely their several Interests, for their common
advantage, to any considerable progression of time: Especially when their
military opposition is required against a powerful and united Enemy in the
figure of a sole Monarch. Well known it is to you Grecians, that Philip King of
Macedon, Father of the Great Alexander tho the extent of his Dominion was
small, if compared with the Territories of his Adversaries, not only withstood,
by the single force of his Arms and Policy, the confederated Power of the most
considerable, if not all the Principalities and States of Greece, when combined
to his opposition, but subdued their strongest Forts and Cities; nor were his
Legions less signally victorious, when attacking in battle their combined
Battalions; till wearied and impaired by the vanquishments they felt by his
Force; they separated from their unsuccessful Confederacy; either as they
submitted on his terms, or at their request were received into his Alliance.
And in this manner was that one Kingdom more prevalent than opulent Greece with
its numerous Adherents; which could not proceed from the fertility or
supernumerary strength of his Territory, considering that the soil and extent
of his Kingdom, was in neither of those respects superior, if compared to the
large Surface of Greece, and the Natives it produced. Wherefore it must be
attributed to the nature and affection of the Macedonians, as they were in soul
duly united and spirited to support and enlarge the glory of their Monarch,
rather than any advantageous or prosperous enterprise that could be attributed
to the Fortune or Conduct of their military Power. And I dare aver, continued
the Jassinedos, that the single Potency of our Astreadan Domion would prove not
inferior, as it now stands constituted, were there more strenuous Confederates,
its Opposers, than I have mentioned, subdued by the Grandeur of the Macedonian
Philip. It being not easily imaginable how any bundles of People associated or
combined in the strictest League of War, shall ever be able to vanquish a
Nation entirely united, could they perfectly cement their undertakings to that
one end, which seldom or never, for the reasons before given, they will
unanimously conspire to do. And thus, in the consideration of us Astreadans, a
foreign Confederacy contrived against our Dominion, would rather provoke our
contempt than fear; believing, our defense to consist more on the soundness of
our Peoples Hearts, and the firm tenure of their Obedience to their supreme
Magistracy; than in number, however considerable, of embattell'd Squadrons:
(...) being rarely discerned that a League of War, tho upheld by the interest
and Treasure of powerful Nations, can far proceed, or endanger a People, that
is not internally depraved and fitted to the designs of Invaders; who seldom
adventure to make their descent, but where they are assured of having
Partakers. Either as they are confident of finding them, or have beforehand
prepared Divisions, in a Nation, suitable to their purpose. And this can in no
kind come to pass, but where the Hearts of Subjects are perniciously retrograde
from the line of their due Obedience, a danger which cannot befall us in the
Rectitude our Government now stands: Having by the prudent conferring of
Rewards and Penalties, removed to the Shame of Offenders, as I precedently
related, such notorious aversions to our Monarchical Regim^nt, that might
otherwise have been pernitiously conveyed in the blood of our Natives. And
dangerous Revolutions must needs be incident to humane Rule that cannot
expeditely provide, by Inflictions or condign Reproach, to avert the
delinquencies of evil Principles from the souls and practice of men. It being
politically undeniable, that wheresorever the antipathy of Tenants and
F^ctions, in opposi^ion to the civil obedience of a People, have any large
progression or interest; that the precipitate Ruin of such a Dominion will
soon ensue, if not cautiously prevented. Nothing being more difficult, than for
a Prince, in such circumstances, to preserve his Rule and Reputation, tho his
personal desert merit acknowledgment from the most opposite of his People.

If he would gratify his Subjects by repose at home, to be sure the factious
part of them will term it his propenseness to Luxury and Ease, and not his
genuine inclination to give them a sedate Tranquillity.

If contrarily, he would advance his, and their Renown, by war abroad; it is no
less certain, that they will detract from his conduct on every account, so that
it is almost impossible for a Monarch so prejudiced by the disaffections of his
People to be tolerably secure, either as he would preserve peace within his
Territories, or repel the insults of his Neighbor Enemies. Wherefore the main
endeavor of a Sovereign, who is complicated with humorous disaffections of any
considerable part of his Nation, to perfect his first Victory at home, by
subduing obnoxious Principles in the minds of his People; and what can be
expected but Seditions and fatal Disasters within his Circle, unless he can
reduce the Persons of such disturbers to a due Renunciation of their precedent
errors, till when it concerns him to hope, little from Subjects so complicated;
whilst too many of them will hold themse^ves obliged, by the obliquity of their
Tenants, to fight against him, instead of venturing their Lives in defense of
his Scepter. Insomuch that a wise and just Sovereign will prove it very hard,
in such a promiscuous and disturbed condition of his State, to select Hands and
Hearts, notwithstanding their obligation by Oaths and Benefits, that will serve
him, as becomes the duty of their trust, in a civil or military Employment, It
being very suitable to the temper of such persons, to recede from their sworn
and known Allegiance, when advantageously tempted with a fresher Interest; tho
they have no better argument to make, for being Criminals in that superlative
degree, than as they were guided by enormous motives to the deserting of their
King, and the Laws of their Country. All which high and terrible
inconveniences, proceeding from disaffection caused by evil Principles, when
patronized by men of popular breadth and vogue in their Nation, have been
happily remedied, within our Astreadan Principality, by the method I have
formerly expressed.

And whereas it is usual in other Dominions, where indirectness and aversion in
Tenants are dangerously prevalent, to provide for the safety of their King and
Government, such a chargeable number of armed Legions as may readily suppress
any internal disturbance or sedition, within the compass of their State: A
provision unnecessary with us, where there is no occasion to maintain a greater
number of warlike Troops, than as a prime nursery of military Discipline and
Glory, are convenient to attend on the Dignity of our Monarch: His whole Nation
being firm in principle, and therefore both his numerous and invincible Army,
whenever he summons, for his royal defense, their ma^tial Assistance. And
thus you, have received an exact account of the essential constitution of our
monarchical Gubernation in reference to Religion, Policy, War and Peace.

The Athenian Senator and Philosopher, jointly assured the Jassinedos, that as
they were highly obliged by the precedent discourses of the Fidefendon, whereby
he had clearly manifested the perspicuity of the Astreadan Belief and Worship,
so they were no less obliged to him for the prudent account he had given them,
both of the civil and warlike managements of his Nation; desiring him to
believe, that by their best sense they should convey the value, to the utmost
of their power, for the judicious approbation and use of Other Nations: which
might worthily be refined by measures deduced from those he had delivered,
tending to divine and political concernments. And this they soon would perform,
if by the permission of providence they might complete their intended Voyage to
Persia and other Dominions; which they resolved with their first convenience to
un^ertake; giving the Jassinedos and Fidesendon abundant thanks for the many
Civilities and Obligations received from them.

The Fidesendon and Jassinedos with a handsome demeanor, received the
acknowledgment made by these worthy Graecians, desiring that they would respite
their Journey till they had accepted a farther welcome, by observing the Court
and Splendour of that Monarch; as also the Situation, Commerce, and Nature of
the Climate, together with such Monuments of Antiquity, as witnessed the long
Renown of the Astreadan Nation.

FINIS.

