AN ACCOUNT OF THE PROCEEDINGS AGAINST Not. Thompson, Mr. Farewell, and Mr.
Pain, AT THE Councel-Board, On Wednesday, April the Fifth, 1682. For their
Endeavoring to SHAMM off the MURDER OF Sir Edmund Bury-Godfrey, Who were all
Three Committed by that Honorable Board, to Newgate, for the fame.
NEver was so great a piece of Villainy hatched or contrived by Human Invention;
and, as far as they dare, backed and fomented by those Eternal Beautefeus of
the Nation, the Observator and Heraclitus, as the late Endeavor to transpose
the Murder of Sir Edmund Bury-Godfrey. As if all the Imagination of Man were
to be summoned to make out If's and And's, How can this, and, How can that
be's? to disprove a Matter of Fact, a Murder done in haste and hurry. How far
that bold Impostor Thompson, has put it, appeared by the Effect; for that His
Majesty's most Honorable Privy-Councel thought it seasonable, in Honor and
Justice, to take notice of it. Thompson, a Vermin, (for a Snake is no other)
that his Native-Country has fostered in her Bosom, to her Ruin, as much as in
him lies. But what has he done? He has, with an impudent Letter, stuffed with
Artificial and Fallacious Queries, amused the World at first; and, as if that
had not been enough, he has in his late Damnable Intelligence, of April 1st.
1682. added a most Impudent, Audacious, and Jesuitical Advertisement to this
purpose; viz. That on Wednesday last, he had appeared before the Lords of His
Majesty's most Honorable Privy-Councel, about the Letters to Mr. Miles Prance,
concerning the Death of Sir Edmund Bury-Godfrey; where he justified, and
produced the Authors, who are ready to prove, (by undeniable and substantial
Witnesses, not in the least accused or suspected of Popery, as the malicious
Party do suggest) that every Tittle and Iota of those Letters are true. And
then proceeds to Desire all Lovers of Truth to suspend their Judgments, and lay
by their private, and first-taken Opinions, till they hear it openly,
publicly, and demonstratively proved. And still more impudently goes on to
tell us; That, in Order to which, he (the said Nathaniel Thompson) and the
Gentlemen his Friends, are to attend the next Wednesday at Council, where they
do not doubt but that Honorable Board will put them into a method, to prove
the whole, or any particular, which their Honors in their Great Wisdom, shall
think convenient to be brought to the Test or Examination. These are his own
words.

Accordingly he (the said Thompson) and his two Friends, Mr. Farewell and Mr.
Pain, appeared at the Council Board on Wednesday April the 5th. 1682. where
Mr. Michael and Mr. Benjamin Godfrey also appeared, having Petitioned the
Council to Examine the Truth of his said Letters, and other matters, relating
to the Death of Sir Edmund their Brother: And after that Honorable Board had
Examined Thompson, and his Crew, they were pleased to commit them to Newgate,
in Order to their receiving a speedy Trial for this horrid Villainy.

Now whereas Thompson tells us, His Authors are undeniable and substantial
Witnesses, not in the least accused or suspected of Popery; let the World take
notice, that Mr. Farewell, one of his Gang, is so far from not being suspected
of Popery, that he was bred up under Langhorn, who was Condemned by the Public
Justice of the Nation, for that Plot, which the Murder of Sir Edmund-Bury
Godfrey gave us the greatest Light into: and for Pain, he is the Brother to
Pain, alias Nevil, who was Entitled, to all the Popish interest of Mrs.
Cellier: And these are Thompsons two Witnesses or Authors, not to be suspected
of Popery; but notwithstanding what has been said, we yet believe they may be
as good Protestants as Thompson himself.

In the Second place, whereas he says, That they doubt not but that Honorable
Board will put them into a method to prove the whole, or any particular, which
they shall think convenient to be brought to the Test or Examination.

Observe here, how greatly this Rascal reflects upon that Honorable Board, as
if they sat there to make Models for Witnesses, to give Testimony in ill
things: but they having taken the business into due Examination, thought it
just and requisite to send them to Newgate for their Impudence; where they may
contrive Methods or Models, with the Assistance of the Condemned Priests, and
their Sister Cellier, to bring the business to the Test and Examination at the
Old Bailey.

FINIS.
London, Printed for S. Gardener, 1682.


