AN ACCOUNT OF THE PROCEEDINGS AGAINST Nathaniel Thomson, UPON HIS TRIAL AT THE
KINGS Bench-Bar Westminster, Who was Tried, and found Guilty on Wednesday the
26th of November 1684. For Printing a Dangerous and Seditious LIBEL, Entitled
the PRODIGAL RETURNED HOME, asserting the POPES Supremacy in Ecclesiastical
Affairs, etc.
THE House of Nathaniel Thompson the Printer, upon Information, that diverse
Seditious Books or Papers, were Printed by him: And especially, a Book
Entitled the Prodigal returned home; asserting the Popes Supremacy in
Ecclesiastical Affairs being searched, etc. A considerable quantity of those
Books, were found and seized by Mr. Stephens Messenger to the Press; as
likewise, a Book known by the name of Doleman about Succession, whereupon Mr.
Thomson by virtue of a Warrant, being taken into Custody, after some
Examination was Committed to Newgate, Bail not being accepted, in a case of
such a dangerous consequence; notwithstanding, he moved by his Counsel at the
King's Bench Bar, for a Habeas Corpus, which after some difficulty he obtained,
and was thereupon removed Corpus cum Causa, to the King's Bench, and charged
with an Indictment of Trespass and Misdemeanors, for Printing the said
Seditious and dangerous Libel; upon which, the Trial come on upon Nisi prius,
on the 26 th of November 1684. when as the Council for the King, after the
Juries being Impanell'd, and sworn, opened the Case, Informing the Jurors that
Nathaniel Thomson the Defendant, stood Indicted, for Printing a Seditious and
dangerous Book or Libel, asserting the Pope's Supremacy above the Kings, in
order to withdraw His Majesty's Subjects from their Allegiance, and to bring a
scandal upon the E^^^^lished Government etc. and that diverse of the said Books,
Entitled the Pr(...)ed home, had been found in his House, that he had been
noted for a Pe(...) had accustomed himself to Print and disperse Libells etc.
which accordingly ^pear to them upon Evidence to this effect the I(...) that
being Informed by one Alexander Banks, not long before in Service with Mr.
Thomson, that several ill Books seditious and dangerous to the Government, had
been Printed by his Master, and that many had been disposed of, and that
himself had helped to Compose part of a Book, called the Prodigal returned
home, and that he doubted not, if search was speedily made, some part of them
might be found in the House, he on the 21 th of October last, taking to his
assistance one Mr. Clinch a Constable, and suddenly entering the House, found
several of those Books in Quires, and that he found another seditious Book, in
the hands of Mr. Thomsons Maid servant, which she had taken from her Mistress,
further urging, that he had formerly Printed and Published the Appeal, and the
Libellous Pamphlet Entitled the Noble Peers Speech, etc. and that Mr. Thomson
since his confinement, had confessed he had Printed Three Hundred of the Books,
for which he was brought upon his Trial, but that he had done them for a gentle
Man, that was to carry them beyond the Seas, not designing to disperse them in
England, and that he had named the Author, but his name he could not well
remember: The Evidence having proceeded thus far against the Prisoner,
Alexander Banks was Examined, and demanded whether he had not Composed part of
the Book in question, who with many abrupt stammerings, endeavored to deny it,
although he had formerly sworn it, and his Examination taken by Mr. Recorder,
produced, for which wilful Retraction, being sharply reproved, Mr. Clinch the
Constable was Examined, who confirmed all that Mr. Stephens had sworn, in
relation to the finding the Books in the House of Mr. Thomson, adding, that
meeting with Mrs. Thomson, and perceiving her to hold something slyly behind
her, he demanded what it was, to which she replied nothing, but he pressing her
to see it, her Maid took it out of her hand, and went about to escape with it,
but was taken, and the Book seized, which imported matter of very evil
consequence.

Notwithstanding, the Evidence being thus full, that the Jurors might the
better understand the malicious design of the Libel, diverse Paragraphs on which
the Prosecution was grounded, were Read, Importing, that the Proselites of the
Reformed Churches, by reason of the Heresy they embraced, were not capable of
Salvation, and that St. Peter being once appointed Head of the Church, the Pope
as his Successor, derived this Power from him, and that all Ecclesiastical
dignities must of necessity hold of him and the Bishops etc. ought to be of his
Constituting, Insinuating how Gregory the Great, had the whole Power of
Ecclesiastical Affairs in his hands, and that Christian Princes intermedled
not therein, when he sent St. Augustine and his Monks into this Nation, who
Established the Romish Religion, and subjected the Ecclesiastics to the Sea of
Rome, In fine, it altogether appeared to justify the Romish Religion, and
plead for the Popes Supremacy, magnifying the Pontifical Prelates, and
justifying them in their Usurpation, and unlawful claim.

To this the Prisoners Council made reply, that he hoped what had been proved,
would not extend to make his Client guilty of publishing the Books (which he
could not deny were ill and not justifiable) for as much as it did not appear,
he had exposed any of them to sail, to which it was replied, that he had
confessed he had Printed them, and it could not be Imagined he designed them
for wast Paper, or to dispose of to any other end, than to disperse them, or
that they might be dispersed, and that such things were of ill consequence, nor
had this been the first Libel the Prisoner had Printed, as had appeared upon
Evidence, when little or no other defense being made, the Right Honorable the
Lord Chief Justice, gave the Charge, fully summing up the Evidence, and minding
them especially, of what the Prisoner had voluntarily confessed, laying open
the dangerous effects such Libells might produce; declaring, that upon the
Evident proof they had before them, and the confession of the Prisoner which
had been sworn, they could no less then find him Guilty, whereupon laying their
Heads together, without going from the Bar, they gave in their Verdict, that
Nathaniel Thomson was Guilty of the Trespass, etc. And he continued in order,
to receive the Judgment of the Court.


