AN ANSWER To the Pretended LETTER, TO A Friend in the Country: Touching the
present Fears of the Nation, and from whence they arise, etc.
HAving by the Post Received an unexpected Letter without the subscription of
any Name, wherein the Author informs me he had received mine on the 10th of
February last past, which has put me to some trouble of searching my Coppies
of that Date, wherein I find three several Letters, one of which was to the
supposed Author: being concious to my self that I have Correspondence with none
of a debauched, lacivious, lewd and scandalous Conversation but that person
(the occasion of which, has been the Emergency, of some Affairs which now are
near a Period) by the sequel of whose Discourse, compared with his former
Letters, gives me full assurance it is the same person, and as I have not the
Art to imbalm a stinking Carrion, nor make Deformity appear Beautiful, so am I
not able to describe our smutty Author in that proper Dress that indeed he
truly deserves, but shall endeavor to take away some of that little Paint that
is upon him, that others seeing him in his propper Colors, may have that
contempt and scorn for him he deserves. But this I cannot but promise, that his
Letter that came to my Hands was penned some Morning after a very debauched
Night, when perhaps he might commit a mistake not in the designed Subject of
his Letter, but in the superscription thereof intending it (indeed) for some
Fomenter of discord, Pope-poisoned Malice and Envy like himself, and that his
Brains being so disturbed by the Lees of his Evening Cups that he penned e'n
any that the Devil or his own abused and corrupted Senses could prompt him to
tending to Coat holy writ, for his Atheistical asseverations, and at the same
time in plain Terms tells us that Prayer, that highly necessary duty is but a
mere Art, and such an Art as a Man (provided he have bui a good stock of
Confidence) may soon attain unto, I do not here design to particularize any
Answer to his smutty Sheet, looking upon it unworthy any other Answer, than to
blazen out the Author thereof according to his demerrits which were it not, I
am persuaded some of those reverend and worthy persons it seems to villifie
would undertake the returning a suitable and seasonable Answer.

First in the Preamble to this Paper, the Author says he Resolved upon mature
deliberation, to give me some satisfaction to my Request, whereas the same is
not only quite Repugnant thereunto, but is a very stinck in the Nostrels of all
sober and impartial Men, no less shallow and silly are his Assertions of the
present Fears and Jealousies of the Nation to arise from the increase of Sects
and Factions (as he terms them) amongst us, because forsooth (says he) these
Factions are so increased since the tolleration, by which Branch of his
Venomous Discourse I gather that the Authors Ears itch to hear of Clandestine
Troubles which he would fain lay upon the Shoulders of others having no doubt
contrived some expedient by what means to patch up his broken Fortunes through
the Murder, Rapine and Rebellion, he would fain be a promoter of, or that his
Debauchery has so consumed that small Patrimony of which he was an unworthy
possessor that he calls to mind the high preferment many of those
Prentice-belov'd Officers, called Informers have attained, and looking upon
himself to be very well quallified for that Office having habitually those
necessary Virtues of lying, dissembling, Flattering and swearing to any thing
for Gain, whether false or true, it makes no matter with him, and for a Crown,
would gladly become a Post-Knight, it is such Monsters as these that trouble
poor England, and ought to be esteemed by all Lovers of their Country as
unnatural disturbers of its Peace and welfare. England has two many such
Weathercock and Timeserving Libellers, and Pamphliteers, who make it their
chief Study and Drift of their Lives to promote discord and Division amongst
his Majesty's faithful Subjects whose work it is, if a Man believes it is his
Duty serve his God, his King, and Country, faithfully to cry him down as a
person dangerous and disaffected to the Government; to which end, they traduce
them as Fanatics, Shismaticks, or favorers of them: whereas such may well be
compared to Sampsons Foxes, which being tied Tail to Tail, and the Firebrand of
bribes in the midst are enough to set a whole Nation on fire.

Nay our Author goes on farther, and says, the of all this is, because the
penal Laws are not put in Execution. Hold, I had almost forgot! Here comes in
Mr. Informers loss, whose Trade by his Majesty's Great Wisdom and Gracious
Favor is much fallen to decay; but wherefore is all this Clamor, and all this
Malice, merely because his Majesty was pleased for a time to remove the sore
Backs of Protestant Dissentors from under the Fcclesiastical Lash, and to
follow his own Royal inclinations in emitting a Declaration of Indulgence, pray
let any Reasonable Man judge, who can more daringly oppose the proceedings of
supreme Authority, than so impudently to Grudge and Grumble at the Generous and
uecessary Indulgence of their Prince, for the public good of his Subjects, as
our impudent Author does, for were there a Reward promised for the apprehending
such whom be seems to Callumniate, the virtue thereof might be a (...) Reason
to prompt him to confer some more liberal Treat (...) his debauched Dallilah;
than in his present condition he (...) capacity of performing, and might have
divertised (...) quaffing his Drunken Cups instead of pausing his swim^^^ (...)
upon this Subject.

(...) other part of his odious Paper being not worthy any o^^^ Answer than to
scourge him with his own Rod, being looked upon by all sober Men of what
Judgment soever, to be the most (...) and brutal Lines that ever issued from
the Press, looking (...) like the Vomits and Excrements of a Devil incarnate,
than anything proceeding from Morality it self; being highly more necessary for
all Protestants of what Judgment or perfwasion soever, to join heart and hand
for the Rooting out of the common Enemy of England, I mean the Papists, (of
whom I am afraid our Author is a Member) than by any Callumnies or endeavors
whatsoever to be divided and distracted amongst our selves, and truly I am of
Opinion, that no Discenters from the Church whatever, or at least but the most
inconsiderable part of them, but would hazard their Lives, their Estates, and
their All, for the preservation of his Majesty's Royal Person and Government,
against those incendiaries of the Pope and Hell, that are plotting our utter
Ruin and Desolation, of which some have highly manifested their unwearied
Industry in the late (I may say present) Plot; and shall faithful Ministers be
afraid of praying to their God in fear of such wretches as our late Author or
his Accomplices, when Papal violence is undermining both Church and State, no
it is far better swimming in the Waterworks of Repentance, than burning in the
Fireworks of Vengeance.

I shall only take notice of some words near the close of his Letter (or father
Rebellious Pamphlet) which tells us that Jesuits come amongst us under the
notion of Presbiterian Ministers, and what inference think you he draws from
thence, why (says he) it is impossible to root the Jesuits our unless the other
party and their Ministers be suppressed, had he said unless the other party be
wholly Rooted our and destroyed, I should have thought he had then spoke
without dissimulation according to the inclinations of his wicked heart, but of
this I hope the most eminent in the Nation are fully satisfied, and grant such
a thing has been found out it does not follow, that that party is the only
backdoor for the Jesuits to come in at, to molest the Nation, for their safety
in that shelter is so Repugnant to Reason that they run the greatest hazard and
had as good be in the Custody of a Jailor, as in a Pulpit upon that occasion if
any of the Auditors colud from thence find the smell of a Jesuit, we have
heard that the Devil himself has transformed himself into an Angel of Light,
no wonder then that Romes Vipers and Vermin do so industriously use all means
to propagate their devilish Designs, but it is worth the Remarking that many
Pamphlets which in these our times are scattered abroad by the Papists (some of
which I could name) have had their main purport to scandalize Fanatics, and
Rail against Popery, not aspersing Callumnies on the former without some bitter
expressions, against the Latter, lest by that means the Vizard be taken off,
and they appear to be whom indeed they are, and so indefatigable in their
underhand endeavors, to bring the Protestants together by the Ears, and then
their work is done; pray under what notion do these Vermin do this, which
indeed if suffered may prove a more dangerous backdoor than the other; of
which number I look upon the Author of the pretended Letter to a Frind in the
Country to be.

FINIS.

