AN ANSWER TO THE SECOND LETTER* FROM LEGORN: BEING AN ACCOUNT Of some further
Discovery of a Continued Plot ABOARD THE Ship VANHERRING.
SIR,
YOurs, Dated December. 10. 1679. came safe to my Hands; I have seriously
considered the Account you gave of the Captain and the whole Ships Company, and
do believe it a True and Ingenuous Account of Matters relating to all Parties
concerned: I have discoursed with many about the Relation, and find them
exceedingly pleased that there is such a Discovery; but are likewise greatly
grieved and perplexed to understand the Danger that the Christian Captain and
his Ships Company are in, by reason of the Mohammedan Lieutenant, and his
Devilish Crew, in Confederacy with the wicked Algerines.

Sir, The more your Letter is read, the better it is understood; so that now
the Generality of People can read it roundly, quite through without, stumbling
at a word in it. I do assure you, it has filled the City with general Fears
and Consternation of mind to admiration, and that which has greatly furthered
the knowledge of this Matter, is, that somebody has gotten a Copy of your
Letter, and Printed it; but I believe this will not issue in your Captains nor
your Disadvantage. I fi^d no other use made of it by the Generality of
Christians, but to be concerned about the Welfare of your Captain, Ship, Goods,
and all the Christian Sailors on Board.

And now, Sir, I will give you a particular anwer to your Letter.

I. as to the Captain, here are Multitudes of good Christians in these parts,
are persuaded they know him well, and speak well of him; as a Gentlemam Nobly
Descended from a Father of great Renown; greatly beloved in his own and other
Nations; and that the Captain (as to his nature) is of a sweet Temper and
Dispositions; But that he is apt to be mislead by some of those that he has
advanced; who seek more their own private advantage, than his public welfare,
which some concluded was the great failure of his Noble Father; and therefore
it is heartily desired, that the Captain would be pleased timely to consider it
for his own present and future good. Sir, I do assure you, that your Captain is
greatly beloved, and Highly Honored in our Country; because he always
professed himself a Christian, and it is generally hoped he will continue so to
the end.

II. As to the Conspiracy of the Mahometans to take away the Captains Life, and
enslave all the Christians-Sailors, and make prize of the Ship and Goods*

Sir, This is heavy and Heartbreaking Tidings to all those that love the
Captain and the Sailors; But there is a great deal of Joy and Satisfaction in
the timely Discovery of this Hellish Design (by those that were privy to it: as
for the Lieutenant whom you say is a Mohammedan, he is well known in our
Country; and many do say that he is nearly related to the Captain, which is
the cause things go on no better; Nevertheless he is far short of being beloved
and honored as the Captain is, because he is a Mohammedan and lives in hopes
of being Captain hereafter, which is not at all pleasing to the Christians
here; because then in all probability the Ship and goods will be made a Prize,
and the christian-Sailors made Slaves, or slain (if they change not their
Relgion) which God prevent.

III. As to your Honest Boatswain, that was murdered for taking the Consession
and Discovery of the Conspiracy. The first Tidings of it amazed all true
Christians; because he was a good Christian himself and a great Lover of his
Captain; he was well known in this City to be a Gentleman of faithfulness,
courage, and of a sweet Disposition; I do assure you here has been very great
mourning for him among the Christians, and his Name will be had in everlasting
Esteem; he being made a Sacrifice for all the honest Sailors aboard the Ship.
The Mahometans being ready, if opportunity presented to act the second part to
the same Tune upon other worthy Sailors aboard: but for our comfort, we hear
from other hands, that the Captain has now a Boatswain no ways inferior (in
Faithfulness, Diligence and Industry) to the former; and that he is a Genleman
of great Courage, and unspotted Integrity; and very faithful to the Captain and
to all the Ships Company that are Christians: constantly seizing guilty
Mahometans. The God of Heaven preserve him from the Inhumane Villainy his
Predecessor met with.

IV. You tell us the Captain called a Council together; and that the first
Discoverer had a fair-hearing before them; though he had been affronted by some
Principal Officers before: and the Conspiracy was plainly discovered; and that
there was a Confederacy between the Mahometans and the Algerines: the Purser
and five other Mohammedan Rogues that had some command in the Ship were seized
and put into the Hold: Doubtless the Counsel are greatly concerned, to find out
and prosecute the Conspirators; the Discoverers having so frequently declared,
that there was a Positive and cursed Design against the Captains Life: And that
the Ships Company Inevitably had been exposed to slavery and Mahumetan bondage,
if they would not readily renounce their Religion: we likewise here that the
Counsel of Officers have the greatest part of their Estates embarked aboard the
Ship; and if so doubtless they and their Posterity will unavoidably be exposed
to utter ruin. Sir, we are exceeding glad to here that so many of the
Conspirators, especially that the Purser is found out and secured, who has so
grossly abused and cheated the Captain, and the whole Ships Company, by
Embezling and wasting so much of the Ships Store committed to his Trust. We are
likewise Informed that it was a difficult thing to seize him, because he
cunningly hid himself in or about the great Cabin; and at last presuming upon
the Captains clemency, and understanding that the Bill was like to be found
against him; and what Goods he had aboard the Ship (which was very great) like
to be Confiscated, he Impudently came out of his hole and surrendered himself,
and was immediately b^ Order of the Chief Officers clapped in the hold; and we
are all big Bellied till we here that he is brought public upon the Deck to
receive condign punishment for his unpardonable Villainies.

V. You acquaint us with a Discovery relating to the Murder of the worthy
Boatswain: And that some of the Murderers have had the Sentence of Justice
Executed upon them, being Hang*d up at the Main Mast; it is good News: and and
asserts the truth of the Old English Proverb, (Murder will out) and we are
hereby Encouraged to hope that what is Concealed will in a short time be
Revealed, and Discovered. You tell us he was Trappanned into the Mohammedan
Cabin and there Murdered: whereas from other hands we understand: That it was
one of the Chiefest Cabbins in the Ship: Particularly belonging to the Captains
Lady.

VI. You tell us that whilst the Counsel was warm in searching into this
Damnable Design: And making Provision for the safety of the Captain and Ships
Company, they were unexpectedly Broken up: And this had been done Diverse times:
Sir, this greatly amazeth all Sincere Christians that here of it: Especially
because we understand from other hands, that two great Counsels have been quite
Dissolved: And the third have not been suffered to sit, since they were chosen:
However we cannot but take good notice of that particular wherein you tell us,
the Wiser sort believe the Captain is Real: because of his constant Professing
himself a Christian Neither will it be for his Interest to be otherwise, and
that he cannot expect a Better Command in the Ship. Besides he has in the
absence of the great Counsel stuck several Orders on the Main Mast: Commanding
all Mahometans to depart by such a Day, 10. Spaces from the Chiefest Cabbins:
And also Encouragaing by Rewards, such as should make further Discoveries, and
Apprehend such as were Guilty. We cannot but acknowledge that these things do
fairly lead to Charitable Conclusions of the Captains Proceedings: But the
Consideration of the Horrible Design against the Captains Life; the Ship and
Cargo withal the Christian Soldiers and Sailors, together with the great
Expectation of the Mahometans, that the Lieutenant shall come to be Captain and
likewise that the Algerines are in Confederacy with the Mahometans, these
things Considered do put all true Christians that Love the Captain at their
Wits end: Because he suffers not the great Counsel to sit, notwithstanding the
Generality, still hope the best as to the Captains Proceedings: But their hopes
are mingled with many, and great fears: Because the Captain has manifested his
Averseness, that the Counsel should Exclude the Lieutenant from Succeeding in
his place. And to Establish a Christian as his Successor: As also that the
Purser being Accused of many High Crimes, and Misdemeanors by the great
Counsel: Instead of being brought to a fair Trial, the Captain has manifested
a Willingness rather to Pardon him. It is also admired that the five great
Conspirators should lie so long in the hold: And not be brought to a Trial
before the great Counsel: Its generally Concluded that the Mohammedan
Lieutenant, and the Steers man of the Pinnace wherein he now Sails, together
with the Algerin Lady: Who is so much in the Captains Affections (and
Acquainted with his Cabinet Counsels): are the chief cause of these things.

VII. You tell us that the Surgeons Mate was likewise accused for Designing
to Poison the Captain, and that he was Acquitted upon his Trial. We do likewise
understand that the generality of Persons that were present at the Trial, were
well satisfied that he was really Guilty; and that it plainly appeared, by the
Evidence given in for the Captain (except to those that quitted him being about
the number of Thirteen): Its reported that a Legion of shining Gods greatly
Influenced his Acquittal: Hour it seems, he durst not abide on Board in the
Captains Presence, but is fled to the Algerines for his Security.

VIII. You tell us, that great endeavors have been used to corrupt some of the
chief Discoverers by false accusations, and to invalidate the strength of their
Evidence, and that a new Conspiracy has been hatched against the Christians,
endeavoring to make them culpable of the same intended mischief against the
Captain, as the Mahometans were guilty of: we cannot but greatly wonder that
the Captain should in the least adhere to such improbable informations, it
being evidenced only by a new-listed Seaman, who was greatly in favor with the
Lieutenant, and one of his own Gang. But in this, we rejoice that this
Sham-Plot fell into the hands of the wise and faithful Mid-ship-man; who has
behaved himself in the Discovery of it to the satisfaction of the Captain and
all the Christian Sailors.

IX. You tell us that several Merchants that had great concerns aboard the
Ship, did humbly address to the Captain for the sitting of the great Counsel;
and that the Captain did make it manifest he did not rejoice in their request.
You tell us the honest Sailors were about such an Address, but the Captain had
showed his dislike of it by ordering a Placaet to be fixed on the main Mast,
which discouraged many of them. But we are informed from other hands that a
great number of them ventured to present it in a very humble manner by some of
the chief men; but the Captain manifested that he was displeased with it. What
to think of these things people are generally at a loss: However some are
willing to persuade themselves that the Captain does this in wisdom to try the
Courage and Faithfulness of his Ships company, in endeavoring to maintain
their own Rights and Privileges; knowing well that if they will not look after
their own Happiness, it is very unlikely they should be concerned about his; and
it is verily believed if at last he should grant their desires, they would leap
for Joy; as when the Noble Captain came first Aboard; and cry out, God bless
the Captain, one and all, one and all; we will live and die with him, we will
live and die for him.

X. Now Sir, to Conclude, I do assure you that the People here generally
(though they are heartily sorry to hear of the danger that attends the Captain
and Ships Company:) yet they are exceeding glad that the Ship is so stout a
Ship, and so well manned with Persons of Integrity and Courage: It Is Heartily
wished that you may have sufficiency of Ammunition against the time of need,
when you may be forced to Dispute the cause with the Algerines and Mahometans,
that so you may preserve your Captain, and not be Enslaved by the Mohammedan
Lieutenant; we do further heartily wish you may have found and courageous
Christians for all sorts of Officers, especially those of the Order of the
Golden Chain, that they may not be Mungrels nor Mahometans, because the
Fore-Castle and Mainmast is committed to their charge; which if they suffer
the one to be Boarded, and the other to be cut off, the Ship would be utterly
Disabled, forasmuch, as it is well known, that the Saving or Betraying of the
Ship does depend on the Faithfulness or Unfaithfulness of the Officers. But we
are glad to hear that the Lord of that Noble Order, and few of his Brethren
have Approved themselves Faithful and Courageous for the Welfare of the
Captain, and Ships Company. We hear there is a very Rare Bird in the Captains
own Cabin, that sings most Pleasantly, but since this Conspiracy, he has
changed his Note, and we are in Doubt, what tune he will Sing next, whether for
the Christians or the Mahometans: But this we leave to Time to discover. Thus
with a Thousand thanks for your Letter, hoping you will as kindly accept of
this Answer, from your Friend and Cordial Lover of your Christian Captain.

PHILOPATRIAE
Dated at the City of Loyalty, in the Kingdom of True Christianity, where the
People Pray for the Weal and Happiness of your Captain and whole Ships Company.
January 21. 1680.
FINIS.

