An ACCOUNT OF THE PROCEEDINGS and ARGUMENTS of the Counsel on both Sides,
concerning the PLEA of Mr. Fitz-Harris, To his INDICTMENT of High Treason, At
the Kings-Bench-Bar in Westminster Hall, on Saturday May the 7th. 1681.
THIS day Mr. Edward Fitz-Harris was again brought to the King's Bench Bar: And,
it being a Remarkable Case, there was a very numerous Auditory, and diverse
Lords, and Persons of Quality; as the Duke of Monmouth, the Earl of Shaftsbury,
Sir Robert Clayton, Mr Sheriff Cornish, etc. The Court was set between 8 and 9
a Clock in the Morning, and Mr. Attorney General maintained his Demurrer.

First, Because, They had made a General Plea.

Secondly, There was no Record mentioned in the Impeachment.

Mr. Williams, the late Speaker of the House of Commons, being the first That
argued the Prisoner's Plea, made a very learned Discourse, and cited many
Precedents to confirm it; That Substance whereof was to make out,

That, the Attorney General, and the KING's Counsel by their Demurrer did
prove the Truth of Their Plea: and, That the Parliament had a Right to impeach
any Commoner. Asserting likewise the Dignity and Excellency of Parliaments: and
the Respect that in all Ages had been paid thereunto, both as to the
Jurisdiction of the Lords, and likewise to the Rights and Privileges of the
Commons: and that when at any time heretofore any such weighty Matters came
before the Judges, they wholly declined being concerned therein, or were at
least very tender in their Determination.

sir Frank Winnington being next, insisted upon the same Plea, and confirmed it
with Three Reasons:

I. That the Commons in PARLIAMENT were the Representatives of ALL the People
of England, and consequently All the People have a share in their Impeachment:
and, therefore can neither be Judge nor Jury.

II. He compared the Impeachment to an Appeal, and, that it was to be heard
before an Indictment for the King: And, That by the Third of Henry the VII. in
case of Murder, The King could not proceed in an Indictment, till a year and a
day was allowed for an Appeal.

III. The Question is, whether, if Fitz-Harris be Tried here and Acquitted,
that will be a sufficient Plea, if the Lords call him to an Account for the
same; and that, if they could, it was contrary to our Law, in regard it would
put a man in jeopardy of his Life twice for the same Crime, it being the
Birthright of an Englishman to answer but once for the same thing.

Mr. Wallop and Mr. Pollexfen backed it with Precedents: As particularly in the
Case of the Earl of Stafford, and the rest of the Lords in the Tower, who being
Impeached in Parliament, it was concluded by all the Judges in England, That
they could not be Tried elsewhere: And likewise in the Case of the Earl of
Shattsbury, who being committed Prisoner to the Tower by the Horse of Lords,
only for a misdemeanour, yet it was resolved by the Court of King's Bench, that
they could take no Cognizance thereof.

Mr. Attorney pressed the insufficientcy of their Plea, and, that the Demurrer
ought to be Granted; adding, That if it were contrary to Law, God forbid it
should be done: and farther said, That, in his Judgment, that Court had Power
to Try him.

The Solicitor General labored to make it appear, That a man might be Tried
twice for the same thing, and that an Appeal and an Indictment might be within
a year and a day.

Sir George Jefferies said, That the Plea was desective in Matter and Form, and
that every man ought to search his own Conscience, and not be Bugbear'd out of
his Reason, nor to decline doing Justice for fear of being called to an Account
hereafter; and prayed his Lordship that it might be overruled.

Sir Francis Within and Mr. Saunders spoke also what they thought necessary to
that point.

After which the Lord Chief Justice told them, He had heard all their
Arguments, but thought it best to take a farther time to give in his Judgment,
and not to run precipitately into matters of that nature; it being a Cause of
great weight, and variety of Presidents having been alleged on both sides, and
that it did therefore require deliberate Consideration to advise upon all that
had been said, before the Court gave their Opinion in the Case, and hereupon
the Judgment of the Court was deferred, and no certain day assigned.

It is Discoursed that Mr. Fitz-Harris being withdrawn, a motion was made that
his Wife might have Liberty to go to see him, as she had done lately, but that
it was objected she had abused her Liberty in that Case; but the result thereof
we know not.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for T. Davies. 1681.


