AN ANSWER TO The Lord George Digbies Apology for Himself; Published JAN. 4.
Anno Dom. 1642.

Put into the great Court of Equity, Otherwise called THE COURT OF CONSCIENCE,
upon the 28th of the same Month, BY Theophilus Philanax Gerusiphilus
Philalethes Decius.

Woe to the world because of offenses, for it must needs be that offenses come,
but woe to the man by whom they come, MATTHEW. 18.7.

Woe to thee that spoilest and thou wast not spoiled; when thou shall cease to
spoil, thou shall be spoiled, ISAY 33. 1.

He that leads into captivity shall go into captivity, he that kills with
the sword must be killed with the sword: Here is the patience and faith of the
Saints, REV. 13. 10.

Nevertheless when the son of man comes shall he find faith on the earth,
LUKE 18. 8.

LONDON, Printed for A. R. 1642.

THE ANSWER TO THE Lord George Digbies Apology for himself, published JAN. 4.
Anno Dom. 1642.
LORD DIGBIES APOLOGY.
IT may be wondered at, that, after well nigh a years groaning under the most
insupportable burden of public displeasure, and censure, I should now
consider my self so much, as, in a general calamity, to make an Apology to
the world; or should hope, that at a time when so great clouds of jealousy,
and disesteem hang over persons of the most clear, and unblemished reputations,
any thing I can say may reconcile me to those affections, which have been
transported with so much violence to my prejudice. But whosoever knows me
well, and the great trouble of mind I endured when I found my self (by what
demerit, God is my judge, I cannot guess) fallen from that proportion of
esteem with my Country (of which I was prouder then I can be of any worldly
preferment) into so ^minent a degree of disfavour with the representative body
ther^of (upon whose wisdom and Authority no man has looked with more
rev^rence, and veneration) that I was marked out as an Enemy to the
Commonw^alth, I am sure cannot but expect from me some discovery of that sense,
and that I should, at least endeavor to distinguish my misfortunes from my
faults, whereby such, who are not engaged in a peremptory uncharitableness,
may find cause to change the Opinion they have taken upon trust of me.

Nor am I out of hope, that the experience men have since had of the times
inclination to calumny, by declining of so many persons of Honor, and
integrity in the popular estimation, may at the last, open a way to so much
justice and ingenuity on my behalf, that all me^ may discern in their own
right, that if they shall so credulously consent, upon geeerall discourses, to
sacrifice a third man's honor, and reputation, they shall open a door to let in
ruin to themselves, and may quickly lose the advantage of their own innocence.

I shall begin my unfortunate story from the beginning of this Parliament;
refle^ting no further back upon the precedent, then in a remembrance of the
great comfort I then received in my Countries acceptance of my first attempts^
in its service, at a time, as some were pleased to express it, when the Court
was at the highest, whether to work upon men's ambitions or fears. Before that
time I am sure I was as unacquainted with Action, as with Envy, having kept
more company with books then with men; and being so well content with that
society, that I had as little ambition, as merit to improve my condi^ion. To
this Parliament I was sent on the b^half of the Country wherein I liv^d, and
truly, if I brought any passion or affection thither with me, it was my former
warmth improved against those pressures, and the persons who begot those
pressures, which were grievous to the people: and against these I will without
vanity say, that I brought as great a resolution to discharge my consci^nce,
and my duty, as any man in that Assembly, and had the happiness for some
months, to receive that testimony. My conversation was, and I made or
ind^avoured to make my friendships, with those, whose experience and abilities
were most eminent for the public service, and to the reputation, and authority
of these men, I conf^sse, for a while, I gave my self up with as much
submis^^on as a man could, without resigning the use of his own understanding.
In any thing that was necessary, or but probably pretended to be necessary for
the ^ommonwealth, we never differed in the least degree; but in improvements,
in ^^^ll alterations, which were to be governed by prudentiall motives, we were
^ot always of one mind. And whosoever remembers the passages of that time,
must call to mind, that the first declination I sufferd from the interest I
seemd to have, was in the business of the Church: in which, having bad
frequent consultations with the chiefest agents for a Reformation, and finding
^o thr^e men to agree upon what they would have in the place of that they all
resolved to remove, I agreed not with the prevailing sense, ^aving not
hardi^esse enough ^o incline to a mutation, which would evidently have so great
an in^^uen^^ upon the peace, pros^erity, and interest of the whole kingdom. And
thus, from the first debate of E^iscopacy, upon the London Petition, all men
(...) the date of my unm^rited favor began to expire.

ANSWER.
MY LORD,

YOur Lordships Apology published the fourth of January, has at length found
the way into the Wildern^sse where I dwell, and I shall hereby give your
Lordship and the world an account of the effect it has upon me, with that
freedom, which becomes a most humble, but faithful ser^^nt of your
Lordships, and a man that has sit consideration of a thing which certainly is
sufficiently understood by all men, and yet by the little regard had thereunto
may seem a mystery of State; which is, that as this Kingdom remaining in that
admirable constitution, wherein it has been founded, and maintained by the
wisdom of our Ancestors, cannot be happy till there be a perfect right
understanding settled between the King and the Parliament; so there is little
hope of our recovering such an intelligence between them, so long as those
persons which are in most credit with the one, are still in least with the
other, rising in their respective favors like Buckets in a Well, which has
hitherto been the peculiar infelicity of his Majesty's Reign, as the contrary^
was the felicity of that of Queen Elizabeth of glorious memory (which His
Majesty and we all sigh after) and a great part of the cause thereof. If
therefore we have enough of the present miseries under which we lie groaning,
almost at the last gasp; in stead of pursuing private animosities, and
fomenting public jealousies (which has bin our work too long) the Court ought
to use all possible endeavors to possess His Majesty with a good opinion of
the Parliament, and of the eminent persons in both Houses thereof, and they
ought to labor as hard to bring His Majesty, and those Ministers of his, upon
whom he reposeth most, and generally all other, of whose affection to his
service the King believes well, and who have ability to serve the State, into
a good reputation with his Parliament and people, and every good man must put
his hand, and his tongue, and his heart to this work without delay, and cry
mightily, and incessantly to God for a blessing upon it; or else, in humane
reason, the s^n of our happy days is going down in a dismal cloud of blood.

I shall begin to others by doing my own duty upon the occasion of your
Lordships Apology, when I have first humbly prayed you to give me leave
throughout to tell you plainl^ (for this work will never be done with dawbing)
how far I am satisfied therewith, and what in my poor conceit remains further
to be done by your Lordship, that you may be firmly redintegrated in that
esteem with your Country, which you once had in so high a degree, and I find,
knew how to value at a due rate.

And truly my Lord, for ought that ever I have heard, your Lordship has
rightly observed the time of the first declination you suffered in the favor
of the representative body of the Kingdom, which, so long as matters are
carried there in the open manner they have bin in your time, and mine, (for I
have heard old, very old men say it has not bin always so) was to your
Lordship, and will ever be to all other, an infallible indication of their
proportionable declension in the good will of their Country. But I beseech
your Lordship to excuse me for asking, whether you made this observation at
that time: For if you did, I believe you will find cause to blame your self for
publishing the Speech you then made touching Episcopacy in print, which I have
been told is a part of the late innovation in the proceedings of Parliament
from the practice of ancient times, and I doubt to no advantage of that high
Senate, or of the Members thereof; the variety of whose opinions, and their
reasons for them; it may be, were better kept within the walls of the
respective Houses, or at least within the cognizance of wise men of their
acquaintance, then made the discourse of every idle youth, silly woman, and
mean fellow that can but read English; to the last of which our wise Ancestors
found inconvenience in allowing so much as a voice in Elections, and I believe
it cannot be showed that any of the first sort were elected in that time,
though in this latter age we have varyed from them in that point also, for
considerations I understand well enough, but whether for the better or the
worse, I refer me to the Testimony of two dead men of known wisdom, who, they
say are the best Counselors. And truly, though much may be said in praise of
Her magnanimity and dexterity to comply with Her Parliaments, and for all that,
come off at last with honor and profit, yet we must ascribe some part of the
commendation to the wisdom o^ the times, and the choice of Parliament men; For
I find not that they were at any time given to any violent, or pertinacious
dispute, elections being made of grave and discr^et persons, not factious, and
ambitious of fame, such as come not to the House with a mal^volent spirit of
contention, but with a preparation to consult on the public good, and rather
to comply, then to contest with Her Majesty. Neither do I find that the House
was at any time weakened, and^ pestered, with the admission of too many young
heads, as it has been of later times; which remembers me of Recorder Marti^s
Speech, about the tenth of our late Sovereign Lord K. James when there were
accounts taken of forty Gentlemen not above twenty, and some not exceeding
sixteen; which moved Him to say, that it was the ancient custom for old men to
make Laws for young ones; but that then he s^^ the case altered, and that there
were children elected unto the great Council of the Kingdom, which came to
invade and invert Nature, and to enact Laws to govern their Fathe^s. Vide
r^liqu^. Sir Robert Naunton his Fragm. R^gal. p. 9. There is a like passage in
Sir Henry ^ootens parallel between the late Duke of Buckingham, and the late
Lord of Ess^x.


But to return to your Lordship, I pray reflect a little upon the censure of at
least fifteen thousand goo^ wo^en of London you then passed, by the printing of
that Speech, wher^in you have dissected their husbands Petition with so keen a
kni^e, and showed your opinion of many ^^mor^, and other diseases abounding
therein, and then imagine what a report such a clamor raised upon you in the
City, would have, and I assure you had in the Country: Whereas if the noise of
that Speech had remained in the ears of them that heard it only, I am not able
to apprehend why, or how the date of your before so well merited favors in
that House, whereof you were then a Member, should begin to expire thereupon.
For having perused it again exactly upon this occasion, I do here make public
profession, that I could readily observe many things in it much to the praise
of your Lordships excellent wisdom, singular ingenuity, precise honesty, and of
that tender care which every Parliament man ought to have of the honor of
Parliaments, as well as of the weal of his Country, if I had a mind to flatter
you. But I can observe very little more then nothing in it, either justly
offensive or unseasonable, or any other way unfit to have bin delivered by a
man of your Lordships opinion: And though I therein differ from your Lordship
as much as that House has yet declard it self to do, yet as that diversity in
my judgment does not so much as tempt me to honor your Lordship any whit the
less, so your Lordship should wrong the Worthies of that Honorable Ass^mbly,
if you should entertain the least suspicion, that any of them might for that
reason be in any measure alienated in affection from your Lordship, for this
passage in that Speech of your Lordships deserves to be written in letters of
Gold; What ever be the event, I shall discharge my conscience concerning this
Petition freely and uprightly, unbiast by popularity, as by Court respects; Sir
I could never flatter the sense of this House (which I reverence) so far as
to suppress a single No that my heart dictated, though I knew the venting of
it might cast pr^judices upon m^; Had my fortune placed me near a King, I could
not have flattered a King, and I do not intend now to flatter a multitude. Thus
your Lordship. I add, whosoever being of a contrary judgment at any time to
that, which he observes to be the sense of the major part of that House, and
having some reason, that swayeth him, which has not been put into the Balance
by any one of the minor part that has spoken, and yet does notwithstanding sit
still, and not rise up boldly as your Lordship did, to deliver his reason with
modesty and submission, for any respect whatsoever, whosoever does give any
manner of interruption, or but the least discountenance to such a person in the
discharge of his duty: And whosoever, when the question is put in any matter of
such importance as this of Episcopacy, (not to say in any the least business
whatsoever) does either give other vote then according to his heart, or does
give none at all for any consideration whatsoever, does as much as in him is to
betray the honor of that House, and something else he ought to maintain and
defend: and if he take a full view of the extent of the Protestation, perhaps
will hardly find how to acquit himself well of a wilful breach of that
voluntary vow; which is a crying sin, and such a one as God who is always true
of his word will surely require. So little ground is there for your Lordship to
doubt (as you seem to do) that, what you spoke in the business of the Church
touching Episcopacy upon occasion of the London-Petition, might in any measure
diminish your interest in that House; though the printing of it might well have
such an influence upon vulgar minds, as might be of force to turn the tide of
your reputation among them.

I wish it were as well in my power to direct your Lordship to the doing of any
thing that might cause a reflux of the strong curr^^t now runs against you,
so strong indeed that a man may sooner lose himself then save you, that has
the courage to attempt it, by going against the stream; yet I have so much
compassion of your undeserved sufferings in this matter (except in that point
of discretion I have already noted) that I am resolved to adventure my se^^, in
hope your Lordship will not be wanting either to ^^^r self or to me, in case
your Lordship should chance to see me carried down in another as violent a
channel, or it may be in the same for doing my good will to help you; Which
that I may do with the less hazard, and more hope of success I must first
give the world notice of an error of your Lordships in this matter of
Episcopacy, from which all the other you have since committed in that business
have bin derived, although I observe that as well in that Speech, as in your
present Apology your Lordship has studiously concealed that mistaken
principle, which has bin so fertile of other mistakes in you, and of you. And
that is, the opinion that Episcopacy was erected by the Apostles, and
consequently in your Lordships judgment so authorized Iure Divino, that it may
not be altered, whereof your Lordship was once so confident, that you wished it
might be made a part of the Catechism of our Church, if I do not misremember;
For it stands so in my memory ever since I had a cursory sight of the Letters
which passed between your Lordship and your Cousin Sir Kellam Digby, having at
that time observed it an hyperbollicall expression, which in matters of
Religion, it is not always safe to use. If your Lordship be still of the same
judgment (which I hope you are not) let me presume humbly to advise you to
resume the study of both those points by an impartial perusal of the Books
have been partly written, and partly set forth in the liberty of these last
years, which I am therefore in hope will be sufficient to alter your mind in
that matter, because they have done mine in the former, which is the fairer of
them, who came to the reading of the Arguments against it with as much
prejudice as your Lordship can do, having contracted it in part by the great
reverence I ever did, and do yet bear to the great wisdom, learning, and piety
of Mr. Hooker, (whom I knew, and heard when I was a boy, and with whom some
friends of mine, who in their time were in the number of the ablest men of this
Kingdom for wisdom and learning, had extraordinary friendship, and were also of
the same judgment with him:) In part by the like reverence I bore to Doctor
Downham since Bishop in Ireland, (who put forth a Sermon, to show the
Jurisd^ction of Bishops over Presbyters was instituted by the Apostles, (when I
was a young man at Cambridge where he was before that in great and good fame:)
but chiefly by the presumption that the Addresses make at the foot of the
Epistles to Timothy and Titus, as Bishops, were of Saint Paul's own writing,
because I found them in my Greek Testament. For if that be first admitted,
there is some appearance of their having been Diocesans by the authority
thereby given them to appoint, and rule over Presbyters in the Churches
committed to their charge: But if this be an abuse, as I have been convinced
that it is, since I returned with an hoary head to a new examination of this
Book controversy, when the sword was taken up to decide it in Scotland, then
there will be no firm ground for a Diocesan Bishop found in the whole
Scripture; but much to the contrary, as has been learnedly proved by Master
Bayne, that succeeded Mr. Perkins at Cambridge, in the Answer he made to Doctor
Downham written soon after, which I never saw till these last years brought it
to light, but has bin the Treasury out of which the Scriblers of this
licentious age have stolen almost all they have of worth, to which they have
added little besides unfit language, which they had not from him; whose name I
cannot suffer to pass my pen without this Elogy, that he was the most
accomplished Preacher I ever yet heard in all my life, having heard very many
of many Nations, and the man that to me seemed most in Heaven while he prayed,
that my eyes ever saw. I beseech your Lordship to take the pains to read his
short Tract upon my recommendation, and that of Gersom Bucer upon the same
subject, not despising the rest which have showed themselves on either side in
this controversy, since some of our Prelates have not been ashamed indicere
bellum Episcopale: and then to do me the honor to let me know whether you
persevere in that you wrote to your Cousin Sir Ken^lme, for I have cause to
believe it is a tenet set on foot in our Church, at the beginning of the reign
of of our late Sovereign of famous memory, not because it was believed by them,
that directed others to broach it among us, but out of a politic design,
(wherein the Jesuits had an unseen hand) invented first out of fear, that his
Majesty who had abolished Episcopacy in Scotland, might at one time or other
be engaged to do the like in this Kingdom: and when they found it took with
his Majesty, then employed further to work upon his pious and bountiful heart
for the reintroducing of Episcopacy in that Kingdom, an Act of Royal
magnificence and princely piety, and if your Lordships opinion of the necessity
of Episcopacy in all Churches as founded in divine right, can be maintained at
the height (as no doubt was powerfully instilled into his Majesty) an Act as
well pleasing to God, as glorious before men: And in the reign of the King our
Sovereign that now is (whom God long preserve) it is evident that the same
Doctrine has been employed to the engaging of his Maje^ty, notwithstanding all
the reluctance of his most eminent clemency, to undertake a War against our
brethren, and his most loyal subjects of that his native Country with an
upright heart. For admitting your Lordships Tenet, (which, it is manifest was
infused into the King, as an undoubted truth) there could be no question of the
justice of that War on his Majesty's part, of which I forbear to make any
further mention least it should prove a controvension of the Act of oblivion,
although I humbly conceive there is something besides exceeding necessary to be
thought upon by His Majesty, and that Kingdom, and this, seeing God Almighty is
not bound by that act.

O Lord, whether do we run through the darkness that is in us, if we once
depart but a little from the light of thy holy word? And where can we stay our
wandering steps? When both the war with this, and the troubles in that Kingdom,
were through his Majesty's goodness, and wisdom at length sweetly composed by
an utter, and eternal abolition of Episcopacy there, as Antichristian in the
opinion of that Church; yet at the same instant, or at least before His
Majesty's return from thence, was this unlucky Tenet of your Lordships taken up
again to induce His Majesty to declare his fixed Resolution, by a writing under
his own Royal hand, continue and maintain Episcopacy in this Kingdom. Which
unexpected stop of the torrent of some men's hopes, as well as desires of a like
through Reformation in this Kingdom, was in my observation (who look on at a
great distance) the first stirring cause of that fierce flood, which rising
soon after, spread it self far and wide, and is now grown to such
violence, and height, that it carries all before it. And yet for their sakes,
with whom I concur in the desire of such a reformation, I hope this will not at
last prove the Cause now in so hot dispute between the King and His Parliament,
though I have observed that His Majesty charge a Faction in Parliament, with
a violent, and undue purfuit of an absolute destruction of the Ecclesi^sticall
Government of this Church. So much hurt has come to the Churches of God in
this Island by that Tenet of your Lordships: Neither has it stayed there. For
by that design, which was begun to be out in practice in Scotland, in a wrong
climate (God confounding the counsels of some, who in corners did not spare to
vent their dis^steem of all other reformed Churches abroad, as having no
Priests, because they have no Bishops) it may too probably, and without breach
of charity be doubted, that they had yet more abominable projects in their
heads: although I believe, they are commonly believed to have been yet more
abominable then they were. Which is an Argument I must not divert into here.

Your Lordship sees how many mischiefs, as well as absurdities, I have
followed upon the entertaining of one erroneous Principle your Lordship thought
fit to be put into our Catechism, which I humbly pray you to take into
consideration, as an aggravation of that error. For if upon the whole matter
you shall be reduced but to the temper of the good Archbishop Whitgife, and of
Mr. Hooker, who, as your Lordship knows, though they held the Government of the
Church by Bishops to be more agreeable to the Scriptures, then any other; yet
have fully declared themselves to be of opinion, that no form of Church
Regiment is so set down there, but that it may be lawful to alter it, even for
a worse, upon Civil respects: I am then very confident, that upon a new
ballancing of the account of the inconveniences of the removing, or retaining
Episcopacie in this Church (as things now stand) your Lordship will be inclined
to an alteration thereof. For in truth (my Lord) that we cannot put down a
Bishop in a Diocese, without setting up a Pope in every Parish; and that no
other Church Government is compatible, either with Monarchy, or with ou^ Common
Law, are mere imaginations of your Lordships, and some other men, sufficiently
confuted by the experience of other Churches and Kingdoms, that of Scotland by
name, which (not to insist on the two former, as evident to every man) has a
Common Law as well as ours, as also other Kingdoms, and States in Europe have
all, though there be a popular groundless persuasion of many wise men to the
contrary. And if upon a review, your Lordship should find sufficient reason to
change your mind concerning the inconvenience, as well as concerning the
unlawfulness of abolishing Episcopacie in this Church; that so ours may be
reduced to an Uniformity with that of Scotland, since the reduction of theirs
to the likeness of ours (which was lately made a matter of great importance)
is now impossible: the publication thereof may well repatriate your Lordship in
the good graces of all, that have had their mouths opened against you upon this
occasion, except it be of a few over hot Zelots. For many wise, and religious
men, differing from your Lordship in your opinion touching Episcopacie, and
concurring with me in mine, are yet of your mind, that it is better to begin
with such a Reformation thereof, whereunto there is a happy unity of Opinions,
not only in the Representative, but almost throughout the Lay part of the true
body of the Kingdom; then to attempt the doing of it all at once, till the
humors (yet very crude) shall be further prepared for such a sweeping
purgation; which for my part I hold to be a politic, that is a doubtful
Problem. And so your Lordship has my thoughts upon that first point, which
has held me too long.

APOLOGY.
Then came on the trial of the Earl of Suafford, in the which I must say, I
failed not of my duty in proving the charg^ and evidence, before those who were
to judge of both. In the discharging of that duty, it was my fortune, by the
unluckie acception of some expressions of mine, to draw upon ^e ^ sharp
malignaty from some persons of much interest in the House, which ^ever fail to
manifest it self, after that accident, upon every the least occasion.

About this time, I was told by a Friend, that I lost much of my credit by
being observed to be so much at Court; I replied, that I had not then the same
justice with other men, who were there more than I, though they avowed it
lesse^ that it was a principal joy to me, to see those persons, who had been
the prime Actors in the happy Reformation of this Parliament, so acceptable at
Court, and like to have so great a share in the chief ^lucs there, and the
conduct of affairs for the future. That since it bad pleased His Majesty to
give so plenary a Redress to all the grievances of His Subjects, and to secure
them for ever from the like invasions, by such a wall of brass as the
Trienniall Bill, I conceived that thence forward, there was no more to be
thought on, but how in a grateful return to His Majesty, to advance His Honor,
and plenty, according as before such happy settlements. I had often heard those
principal intendents of the puqlike good most solemnly profess, and
consequently, that the Court, and Country were, in truth, now to be all of a
pi^ce, and there would hereafter be no more cause of jealousy between them:
Lastly, that, howsoever, I thought my self as likely to do good there, as do
good there, as to receive hurt.

The first evidence I had of the disfavour of the House of Commons, (where I
had served with all faithfulness, diligence, and humility) was upon the
printing of my Speech to the Bill of Attainder of the Earl of Strafford. As
for the Good-Fridayes exercise which the delivery of it in the House procured
me, I reputed that a most comfortable^ and ^min^nt testimony of the continuance
still of much justice and favor toward me in that Honorable House: since,
after a dozen distinct charges upon the several passages of that Speech, urged
against me with great strictness and acrimony, by that number of the most
eminent persons there, both in abilities and interests, and at a time when
certainly most men of my opinion were at their Devotions, they were not able
after four hours debate to expose me, either upon the main matter, or upon
the bye, unto the least reprehension.

For the thing it self, I will say no more of it, but that it happened to be
upon a very unpopular argument; but the cause and circumstance of the printing
it, was this.

I did not find only that it was unfaithfully reported, and uncharitably
interpreted; but was informed, that Copies went abroad of it so falsely, and
maliciously collected, as made the whole Speech a justification of my Lord of
Straffords innocence; and Sir Lewis Dives having beard of such a Copy in the
house of a Citizen of good quality, where he heard me mentio^^d as a person fit
to have his name fixed upon posts, that I might be torn in pieces by the people:
upon that reason earnestly desired me to give him a true ^opy of what I had
said in that Argument; which I did, and he forthwith gave direction for the
printing it, without any privity of mine. Yet if I had consented to it, and
directed it, I profess, I should little have imagined, that (...) when there
was such an universal license taken to print every thing, of how great
irreverence so ever) ^ither to Church or State, with impunity, a Speech made in
the House of Commons, a Speech so narrowly, and severely sifted, and examined
there, and yet let pass without the least censure, either on the Speech it
self, or the Author; that the printing of such a Speech should rise to so high
a nature, as to make me for ever incapable of any Honor or employment in the
Common wealth, I profess could hardly have saln^ within my reason or fears to
suspect. And yet three months after the fact committed, after the printing of
an hundred Speeches more by other m^n, after my having several times sued, and
pressed for a hearing, whilst I was of the House of Commons, after by His
Majesty's favor I had sat six or seven weeks a Member of the House of Peers;
after all this, no less a judgment (as far as the vote of the House of Commons
could contribute to it) passed upon me unheard, over, and above the shame of
having the Speech it self burned by the hand of the Hangman. How I bore this
affliction, with what anxiety of mind to my self, with what temper and
submission to that Honorable Assembly, from whence the blow came, as many of my
near friends can testify the first; so the envy or ma^ice of no man, can
reasonably and justly ^ax me, as unto the other. How other young men, upon no
greater a stock of innocence than mine, might have suffered themselves to be
transported upon such misfortunes (not to give them any other term) I leave to
those to judge, who have not been so long brought up in the school of
affliction.

As this censure sell upon me for many months after the fault objected, so it
rested within those walls where it begun, without ever desiring a concurrence
from that Court, where I was only to be judged, and where I could only answer
for my self, and hope for a vindication; which increased my sufferings to an
unspeakable height, that I could by no means ^lar my self in the place where I
received the wound, nor could take notice of it, where I might be cleared by my
Peers, for fear of breach of privilege of Parliament; Though my censure were
known to all the Kingdom; yea, I may say my infamy in print with foreign
Nations.

ANSWER.
As touching your Lordships carriage in the Trial and Attainder of the Earl of
Strafford, I must not conceal from you, that the report of the latter made a
much deeper gash in your Fame, with us in the country, and I believe in the
City, and in the Parliament too. And yet the making of that Speech your
Lordship did to the Bill of Attainder, was no fault for ought I know; and
accordingly your Lordship need not ascribe it to the Favor, but merely to the
Justice of that Honorable House, that after a dozen distinct charges upon the
several passages of that Speech urged against you, with great strictness and
acrimony, by that number of the most eminent persons there, both in abilities,
and interests, and in your absence, upon a Good Friday to you; yet they were
not able, after four hours debate, to expose you unto the least reprehension,
either upon the main matter, or upon the bye. The offense was the publishing it
in print, after the passing of the Bill, and the execution of that great Lord,
which, your Lordship may please to believe me, gave exceeding great scandal in
the country where I live, and where the reasons, given by your Lordship for
your absolving Vote, were by many maintained to be unanswerable. And by this
your Lordship may guess what harm it did in other countries at home, and
abroad; where, you cannot be ignorant, how apt some are to censure the
proceedings of their neighbors, and to take every advantage to speak the worst
they can of them: nor that they did so upon this occasion ministered by your
Lordship. So that if your censure were known to all the Kingdom, and your
infamy were in print with foreign Nations, yet your Lordship therein received
no more wrong, then the King, and Parliament, and your Country did by your
occasion.

I do therefore humbly entreat your Lordship to resist all temptation to
thoughts of discontent for the censure which passed upon you, and that Speech
of yours in the House of Commons: and to do it equal Justice by distinguishing
their misfortunes in this, and other occasions from their faults, as you desire
other should do in your case. For presuming that the Speech was printed without
your privity, as you now relate, I can find no fault in any man touching this
matter, but in Sir Lewis Dives, and he, besides the assection of a brother to a
brother, and the reason he had to do what he did, has the common license of
the times for his almost sufficient excuse. But an extreme misfortune it was,
as well to the House of Commons as to your Lordship; that you should be
censured by them for the fault of another man; which invincible error of theirs
it is very probable they might come to find after they had committed it, and
for that reason forbore the prosecution of their charge with the Lords, to the
diminution of their misadventure, but the increase of your Lordships in this
affair, because (in my poor opinion as well in your Lordships) neither you, nor
the House of Peers it self could take notice of what had been done in the
House of Commons, without a breach of their privileges, since it was never by
them brought up to the Lords (which I write under correction) so as your
Lordships misfortune in this matter may seem irremediable. And yet to show your
Lordship with how much passion I desire to save a noble young Lord of such
eminent abilities, as may be of great use to the King and Kingdom, from
sincking in his reputation (which will make them altogether useless to the
public) I will adventure to take your Lordship by the hand, and to try whether
I can raise you out of this puddle also, when I have first opened my self to
be the same man, that made the larger Answer to your Lps Speech to the Bil of
Attainder of the said unhappy Lord: which was intended to have been sent to you
so timely, that if your Lordship had thereby received satisfaction in your
Scruples, you might have acknowledged as much in the House of Commons, whereof
you were then a Member, and so have escaped their censure in a fayrer way, then
you did by climbing up into the House of Peers at that time. For so that is
understood: But the throng of lesser Pamphlets was so great, that before this
could pass the Press, (which I am made believe it could not in a month and
more) your Lordships Speech ran the fortune you know, and another briefer
Answer thereunto got through, Of which misadventure, I was much more sorry for
your Lordships sake, than mine own, though by this means I also may possibly
have been censured either for insulting upon a noble person cast down (which I
should hate my self for if it were true) or for having taken the advantage of
such a time to publish my Answer when it was not safe for your Lordship to make
any Reply. But since your Lordship has adventured on other actions, and
writings more dangerous then your defense need to be, as your Lordship may
manage it, I humbly beseech your Lordship to take it into your consideration,
whether you may not do well to make a Replication thereunto, for the reasons I
shall now give your Lordship; and which I am persuaded, ought to have the same
force with you, which they have with me. They are, if that your Lordship do yet
persist in your opinion, that you had sufficient grounds to alter your first
judgment of the Lord Straffords cause, you ought to make a further clear
deduction of them to the world, partly for that unfortunate Lords sake, partly
for your own, a little for your servants, and a great deal for your Countries
sake. For to begin with the last (as being of greatest concernment in it self,
and I believe in your Lordships esteem also) If your Lordship, who have now had
good leisure, and great cause to revolve all your late words, and actions, in
your most serious thoughts, and to bring all the stirrings of your conscience
upon every one of them to a strict examination, be still of the same mind you
were, when you so solemnly washed your hands from the blood of the Lord of
Strafford, which he at his death charged home upon this Kingdom, I wish this
Kingdom all the prosperity and happiness in the world: I did it living, and
now dying it is my wish, I do now profess it from my heart, and do most humbly
recommend it unto every man here, and wish every man to lay his hand upon his
heart, and consider seriously whether the beginning of the happiness of a
Kingdom should be written in letters of blood, I fear you are in a wrong way,
and I desire Almighty God that no one drop of my blood may rise in judgment
against you. viz. Lord of Straffords Speech at his death.
then it cannot be, but you must needs fear, that it lies upon this Land, and
in your apprehension, may be one cause of the present unhappy condition
thereof, which has been so well foreseen, and expressed by my Lord your
father. My Lords, what I have yet said unto you has bin chiefly grounded upon
the apprehensions and fears of our future dangers. I shall say something of
the unhappinesses of our present estate, which certainly, stands in as much
need of relief and remedy as our fears do of prevention; for although the King
and People were fully united, and that all men that now draw several ways,
should unanimously set their hand to the work, yet they would find it no easy
task to restore this kingdom to a prosperous and comfortable ^ondition: If we
take into our consideration, the deplorable estate of Ireland, likely to drain
this kingdom of men and treasure; if we consider the debts and necessities of
the Crown, the engagements of the kingdom, the great and unusual Contributions
of the people, the which, although they be not so much to their discontent (for
that they have been legally raised) yet the burden has not been much eased:
Let us likewise consider the distractions (I may almost call them confusions)
in point of Religion, which of all other distemp^rs are most dangerous, and
destructive to the peace of a State. Besides the public calamities, let every
particular man consider the distracted, and discomfortable estate of his own
condition, for mine own part, I must ingenuously prof^sse unto your Lordship,
That I cannot find out (under the different Commands of the King and the
Parliament) any such course of caution or wariness, by which I may promise to
my self security or safety. I could give your Lordship many instances of the
inconsistencie and impossibility of obeying these Commands. But I shall trouble
you only with one or two. The Ordinance of Parliament concerning the Militia
(now in so great agitation) commands all persons in Authority to put it in
execution, and all others to obey it, according to the Fundamental Laws of the
land; The King declares it to be contrary to the Fundamental Laws, against
the Liberty of the Subject, and Rights of Parliament; And commands all His
Subjects of what degree soever upon their Allegiance, not to obey the said
Ordinance, as they will answer the contrary at their perils. So likewise in
point of the Kings commanding the attendance of diverse of us upon His person,
whereunto we are obliged by several relations of our services and oaths: In
case we comply not with His Commands, we are liable to His displeasure, and the
loss of those places of honor and trust we hold under Him: If we obey His
Commands without the leave of the Parliament, (which has not always been
granted) we are liable to the censure of Parliament, and of both these we want
not fresh Examples; So that certainly this cannot but be acknowledged to be an
unhappy, and uncomfortable condition. I am sure I bring with me a ready and
obedient heart, to pay unto the King all those duties of loyalty, allegiance,
and obedience which I owe unto Him: And I shall never be wanting toward the
Parliament, to pay unto it all those due Rights, and that obedience which we
all owe unto it: But in contrary Commands, a conformity of obedience to both,
is hardly to be lighted on. The Reconciliation must be in the Commanders, and
the Commands, not in the obedience, or the person that is to obey. And
therefore, until it please God to bless us with a right understanding betwixt
the King and Parliament, and a conformity in their Commands, neither the
Kingdom in public, nor particular men in private can be reduced to a safe or
comfortable condition. Earl of Bristolle Speech. May 20. 1642. Vide reliqua.
And may you then, or can you in such a time as this keep the reason of your
fears to your self, which for ought you can know may have the same operation in
the hearts of those, to whom you then so lively represented the heinousness of
the sin of committing murder with the sword of justice, if you think you can
convince them thereof. I need not tell your Lordship the force of naked truth,
not to be told when it comes armed with so complete an eloquence, as ^od has
given your Lordship, And if you could thereby work the like change in the rest
of my Lord of Straffords Judges, which was wrought in you, have they not power
to review their own proceedings, and to repeal the Bill of Attainder, they
passed in this cause? your Lordship knows this is usual in the Republic of
Venice, and if there be no president in our State of any man restored to his
blood by the same Parliament which attainted him (which I am not learnd enough
to know) I conceive such a new president were well made, as many other have
been by the wisdom of this Parliament, by (...) and not by the examples of
former every Parliament ought to be guided: For me, if your Lordship shall
prove to me that your grouuds remain firm after all my endeavors to shake
them, and withal if with the help of the many great Lawyers were of your
Lordships opinion, you can make a satisfactory Answer to the learned argument
of Mr. Solicitor, by which I was much cleared, and confirmed in the judgment
unto which I was lead by mere reason, without having the light of the Law, I
here profess that I shall hold my self much obliged to your Lordp. for
disabusing me, and bound in conscience to make a retraction of my Answer in
Print, since I gave way to the printing thereof. And I believe Master
Saint-Iohn will be of the same mind: the fame I have heard of his Religion
being no less then that of his Law: and the alteration of his opinion, may
prove a principal verb in the^ construction of the Parliament concerning that
case. Your Lordp has therefore no want of foreign inducements to employ your
best thoughts in this disquisition. By the same labor your Lordp. may rectify
your own reputation in this matter, which ought to be more tender to you now
then ever, (as I see it is) And if you can make it appear that you were in the
right, you shall wrong the Parliament more then yet you have done by
entertaining the least doubt, that you may thereby hinder your repatriation
with them, which I wish you had not done by other courses. It is ever better
for the wisest Counsels and States as well as men, to retract an error, then
to maintain it.

But if on the other side your Lordship does now perceive that you might have
condemned the Earl os Strafford, with as free a heart as you accused or
prosecuted him for a Traitor, then (my Lord) a good conscience will need no
prompter to tell you, that you owe the King and Kingdom a public confession
of your judgment (as now informed) in reparation of that high wrong you did
His Majesty and the Parliament, by publishing your Protestation in print, when
you were of another mind; nor that you have much work to do at home, which
can be done by no other, and which it does infinitely concern you not to
slubber over, I need not tell you my reason: yet because the most watchful
conscience may need jogging sometimes: I most humbly beseech your Lordship to
give me leave without offense, to entreat you first to take a re-view of your
Speech by the light you now have from Master Solicitor, and then to set before
your eyes that part of the preface, wherein you wished peace of conscience to
your self, and the blessing of Almighty God to you and your posterity,
according as your judgment of the life of the Earl of Strafford should be
consonant with your heart in all integrity; which I do not with any intention
on my part, to give occasion to any other to infer, that your Lordship went
one hairs breadth beyond your own belief of the integrity of your heart
therein. I thank God I have learned my duty better, and as I ought, do
confidently believe your Lordship has too much of the fear of God in your
heart, to transgress so much as a Mathematical point, willingly and wittingly
in so solemn an execration: But withal I know the danger of making such
imprecations before his face, who is greater then our hearts, and knows more
by us then they do. And if it be true which I have heard from persons of honor,
that there was a time when Sir Thomas Wentworth solemnly wished, that if ever
he gave his consent to the levying of monyes on the Subject without their own
consent in Parliament, He might be set up as a Beacon on a hill for people to
gaze at. We all have occasion given us in this protesting Age, diligently to
call to remembrance, and sadly to reflect upon what ever we may have
inconsiderately uttered in that kind, having all (I suppose) seen or heard,
how his rash words have been verified upon him, by the Bonefires were made on
the tops of many hills in some Countries for his execution; and this by a kind
of instinct in the vulgar sort of people, without any direction from wiser men;
the like whereunto upon the like occasion, I believe was never done in the
World before. Your Lordship will therefore (I hope) forgive me, if out of my
desire to make sure of keeping your Lordship from being hereafter scorched with
the like flames, I presume to advise you to enter into your own heart (being I
suppose like mine own, deceitful above all things) and there to make the
strictest enquiry all your wit and memory can, whether the lying of one thing
or other in the way, did not hinder you from going to the bottom, when you
made that execration; and so from discerning somewhat then, which you may now
possibly see in this business. For to be plain with your Lordship, I am
therefore a little jealous there might be some pretincture in your Lordshipps
own eye, because I observe you could so clearly see, and distinctly describe
all that might bloud-shot other men's eyes in this case; and yet for ought
appears in your Speech, never once took notice of any of those many other
causes of vitiation of judgment, which it concerned your Lordship more to have
looked after. Such were personal respects, as the inclination of one great wit
to take part with another, of one Peer apparent, to take compassion of another
in being, complying with the judgment of the King at that time; hope of favor
from His Majesty from thence, fear of His Majesty's dislike of a person so
able, so willing, and then (as was believed) in so near expectance of
opportunity to do service to the King and State: For I will not wrong your
Lordships Nobleness, by the lightest imagination that your eye saw the worse
by looking a squint at any private advantage in a public employment: And I
will forbear the mention of something might be of more force with you, then
all I have yet touched, because if it were so, your Lordship must needs know
it, and I cannot mind you of it without prejudice to a third Person; your
nimble fancy will quickly represent all other to your memory, by the hint of
these I have set before you. And they, they (my Lord) and such other were the
corruptive of judgment, of which you should have discharged your self to the
uttermost of your power, and not Lapwing like have made so great a cry with so
many awayes there, where your conscience was in no danger. Let every man purge
his heart clear of al passions (I know this great and wise body politic can
have none, but I speak to individuals from the weakness which I find in my
self) Away with all personal animosities, Away with all flatteries to the
people, in being the sharper against him, because he is odious to them; Away
with all fears, lest by the sparing of his blood they may be incenst; away with
all such considerations, as that it is not fit for a Parliament, that one
accused by it of Treason should escape with life; Let not former vehemence of
any against him, nor fear from thence that he cannot be safe while that man
lives, be an ingredient in the sentence of any one of us. Of all these
corruptions of judgment, Mr. Speaker, I do before God discharge my self to
the utmost of my power. L. Dig. Speech, April. 21. 1641.
Mistake me not; I do not say but some other might have need of the warnings
you gave, and may yet have cause to reflect upon what you then said, though
they then gave right judgment. Neither do I think the worse of you for
differing from so great a number of religious and conscionable Patriots. Nay I
should not have thought so well of you as I do, if, not having your
understanding subdued, you should have captivated your judgment to theirs: or
if after you had wiped your heart on the side I have now showed you (and it may
be you only forgot to mention, not to think on by your self) upon the
hearing of the Diametrall opposition between great Lawyers of the House in
their opinions, your Lordships mind stood in aequilibrio (though this were an
imperfection of judgment, I should do wrong to suppose in you, yet if in truth
it were so) I pronounce you ought to have done as you did, at least I should
have done the same had I been in your place: For I conceive that a mind in
that posture is bound, or at least has liberty to incline to the safer side
for it self, though it may be the more unsafe for the State, because a man's own
soul is of more value to him then all the world. And I humbly conceive that in
all cases either of Counsel, or of Judicature (to one of which it may be all
that come within the walls of either House may be reduced) it is ever safest to
incline to that side which goes with him that is in possession, which in this
case of the Lord of Strafford, was that which was against the Bill of Attainder.

After I had written thus much, and more, in answer to your Lordships Apology,
the Kingdoms weekly Intelligencer, his account of the last week came to my
hands, wherein he takes notice of your Apology, and says, your Lordship
therein forgot to mention the first matter by which your Honor was questioned
in the House of Commons, while you served there: And then tells a strange
story, which I cannot wonder enough I should never have heard of before; Thus:
There were (says he) four beside your Lordship of the close Committee,
concerning the Earl of Strafford: There was a paper of much importance
concerning the said Earl, mislayd on a sudden in a private room where they
were, which was mist before they departed, but could not be found, yet next day
they had it at Court. Those four Members particularly made their protestation
in the presence of God, and of the House of Commons, that they were not privy
to the conveying away of that paper: His Lordship did the like, and wished a
curse upon him if he knew any thing of it. Whether this writer were not to
blame in concluding this story with this Epiphonema (God is just, and its
observable, that this Lord has not had many blessings befalne him since that
his imprecation, and asseveration) I leave to the judgment of Divines. As I do
also, whether that Writer himself, if he be a man that has taken the
Protestation, has not given as much cause of suspicion of his having violated
that part of it, wherein he in the presence of God vowed to maintain and defend
the Kings Honor (a word not to be found in the oaths of Supremacy, or
Allegiance) by charging the Cavaliers to have thought to have circumvented part
of the Earl of Essex Army, and to have forced their passage through their
quarters, and to have seized on all the Ordnance and Ammunition in the Earls
Army then at Hammersmith (by breach of faith) For that parenthesis reflecteth
full upon the Kings Honor, and being written after His Majesty has given (as
to me it seems) ample and full satisfaction to that foul charge of the
Writer of the special Passages, The same night after the Messengers were gone,
certain information was brought to us, that the same day the Earl of Essex
had drawn his Forces wi^h great store of Ordnance out of London toward us, upon
which a Council of War b^ing present, and we having there considered, upon
debate, Our present Condition, That being already almost surrounded by his
Forces, some at Windsor, some at Kingston, and some at Acton, if we suffered
the remainder to pos^esse Brainceford, we should be totally hemmd in, and our
Army deprived of all convenience of either moving or subsisting; yet how
necessary soever it appeared, we could not obtain our own consent, to advance
toward Brainceford, and either prepossesse it, or dispossess them of it, till
we had satisfied our selves that it was as lawful as necessary, and fully
wayed all, that not only Reason, but Malice it self (which we knew, to be very
watchful upon our actions) could object against it. We considerd first, that
it could not reasonably be esteemed an Aversion from Peace, and an Intention
to interrupt the Treaty then in expectation, since on the other side we had
cause to believe, by the former rejection of our offers of Treaty, when we were
supposed to be in no condition of strength, That if we would not thus
preserve our selves from being so encompassed, as to come into their powers,
the very possibility of a Treaty would immediately vanish. We considered next,
that much less could it be interpreted any breach of faith, since willingness
to receive Propositions of Treaty, was never held to be a suspension of Arms;
Since otherwise we must (because a mention of a Treaty had been once made) by
the same Logic have been bound not to hinder them to encompasse us on all
parts to Colebrook Towns end; Since no word to that purpose (of any suspension)
was in our Answer; Nay since in that (by wishing their Propositions might be
hastened, to prevent the Inconveniences which would intervene) we employed, That
by this Arms were not suspended; And since their own Votes of proceeding
vigorously, notwithstanding the Petition; and their now actions in sending
after their Messengers great store of Forces with Ordnance so near to us
(having before gift us in on all other parts, and sent Men and Ordnance to
Kingston, after the safe Conduct asked of us) employed the same. The Declaration
of the Kings true Intentions in advancing to Brainceford, page 4.
I conceive the Intelligencers crime is so much greater than his, that I will
be bold to add, That what Protester soever has read his last weeks
Intelligence, and having opportunity, shall not upon reading what I have now
written, make complaint, as well of the Intelligencer, as of the writer of the
Passages (his cousin Germane) has not so far as lawfully he may, opposed and
by all good ways and means endeavored to bring to condign punishment, all
such as have done any thing contrary to any thing in the Protestation
contained. Not excepting your Lordship, who I suppose has taken the
Protestation. But as to the Intelligencers rude charge of your Lordship, all I
dare say is, That your Lordship had very ill luck to tell the story you have
done in your Apology, of that which passed between you and a friend of yours,
who told you, that you lost much of your credit, by being observed to be so
much at Court. For if the about this time with which your Lordship begins
that relation, were the time about which this wicked paper was missing, I
forbear to tell your Lordship what inferences the City wits of this unhappy Age
are like to make of the original rise of your credit in Court; though for my
part I here profess all your Lordship has written in your Apology upon this
occasion, is to my understanding most just and reasonable; and that I am so far
of your mind, that till the Court and Country be in truth all of a piece, and
that there be no more cause of jealousy between them, neither the one, nor the
other of them can be happy, nor the City neither. I am also afraid that those
words in the Preface of your Lordships Speech to the Bill of Attainder of the
Earl of Strafford; I have had the honor to be employed by the House in this
great business, from the first hours that it was taken into consideration: It
was a matter of great trust, and I will say with confidence, that I have served
the House in it with industry, according to my ability, but with most exact
faithfulness and secrecy. And that parenthesis, in this part of your
Lordships Apology, where you again say, you had served the House of Commons
with all faithfulness, may do you no good; especially if the mislaying of the
above-sayd mischievous paper, were in the time of the trial of the Earl of
Strafford, and before the proceeding against him by Bill of Attainder, which is
the part where your Lordship has inserted this parenthesis. For your Lordship
knows much better than I, that the making of these voluntary Apologies to
persons that do not charge a man with the faults, which he goes about either
to excuse, or acquit himself of, are always taken for confessions of guilt,
by suspicio^s hearers; especially if the Apologizer himself take no notice of
the crime whereof he is accused by common fame, which I perceive was your
Lordships case, before you wrote this Apology (If the Intelligencers relation
be true.)

And now that by his help I have ^uggested all I can to ^our Lordship upon
this occasion, I humbly beseech you, be not wanting to your self, but lay your
present condition to heart, remember whence you are fallen in your reputation,
in your hopes: take heed of catching another more ^angerous fall now in the
rode of good wi^s, by thinking you are bound to maintain all that you have
done, or said, be it right or wrong, truth or error, and that you are able to
do it. There is many times but one step between this, and being given over, to
think evil good, and to believe lies. I beseech God direct you to that course,
which may tend most to his glory, your honor, and the public good. Be not
afraid to acknowledge any mistake, or to take any shame to your self, if there
should be any occasion for you to do it, which I hope there is not, according
to my duty though I thus write: but believe steadfastly in his Omnipotence, and
truth, that has said, and never yet brake his word, Those that honor me, I
will honor, and they that despise me, shall be lightly esteemed. There is often
a resurrection of the good names of good men in this life, to give credit to
the promise aforesaid, and to support our faith of the perfect accomplishment
thereof, in that which we look for: But the name of the wicked does rot upon
earth, and in the great day of the Lord, shall rise to universal and eternal
confusion in the presence of God, of his Angels, and of his Saints. God of his
mercy, and by his grace, keep this for ever in your Lordships remembrance, and
mind, and keep us also from despairing of his mercy, if we should be guilty of
so great a sin, which there is no cause for. There is no sin, except that
against the holy Ghost, not the innocent blood of a million of souls, no not
the being guilty of the blood of the Son of God himself, which may not be
expiated by his blood: And yet I have observed, that there could be no
atonement for that sin, wherewith the Intelligencer has so foully aspersed
your Lordship without confession: Levit. 5. verse. ^^ 10.
But upon confession of the sin, there is a full promise that it shall be
forgiven the offender, not by virtue of the offerings enjoined in the Law, but
by the relation they had to a better sacrifice, which I pray God may through
our faith be effectual to all of us, that may at any time find our selves to
stand guilty of so grievous a crime, which I doubt has spread it self farther
in this Kingdom, than we are aware of, and that the Land mourns for it,
because we do not.

APOLOGY.
Under this weight (enough to have broken a body and a mind better prepared for
th^se exercises then mine) I suffered, till the rudeness and violence of that
Rabble, drove both their Majesty's, for the safety of themselves and their
children, to Hampton Court, whither by command I attended them. In this short
journey many Soldiers and Commanders, (who had assembled themselves, jointly
to solicit the payment of their arrears for the late Northern expedition,
from the two Houses of Parliament) waited on their Majesty's, and leaving them
at Hampton Court, provided their own accommodations at Kingston, the next place
of r^c^ipt, and still so used for the over pl^^ of company, which the Court it
self could not entertain. To these Gentlemen^ of whom few or none were of my
acquaintance, and to this place was I sent by His Majesty, with some
expressions of his Majesty's good acceptance of their service, and returning
the same night to Hampton Court, continued my attendance to Windsor, whither
their Majesty's then repaired. I had not been there one day, when I heard that
both Houses of Parliament were informed, that I, and Colonel Luns^ord, a
person with whom I never exchanged twenty words in my life, had appeared in a
warlike manner at Kingston, to the terror of the Kings liege people; and
thereupon had ordered, that the Sheriff of Surrey, and as I conceive, that all
other Sheriffs throughout England should raise the power of their several
Counties, to suppress the forces that be and I had levied.

When first this news was brought me, I could not but s^ight it as a ridiculous
rumor, for being most certain that I had never been at Kingston but only upon
that message of the Kings to forty or fifty Gentlemen, totally strangers to me,
with whom I stayed not the space of half an hour at most, and in no other
equipage, then a Coach and six hired horses, with one single man in the Coach
with me, and one servant riding by: I thought it utterly impossible for the
most remancy it self at so near a distance, to raise out of that any scri^^^
matter of scandal or prejudice upon me. But when soon after I received from
some of my friendz not only a confirmation of that seeming impossibility, but a
particular account of the manner of it: How some information concerning me at
King^ton had been referred to the examination of a Committee of my sharpest
enemies, how the six Coach horses I appeared with there, were turned by them
into six score horses; and that mistake, I know not by what prevalence of my
unhappiness, or of my enemies credit, not suffered to be rectified by other
witnesses there who affirmed the truth: Finding my self in this sad condition;
but twenty miles off, and not knowing how the people in other places might be
terrified, if reports, concerning me should spread, but in a proportionable
rare to remoter distances, they being now derivablo from such considerable
Authors, I must confess I then began to look upon my felfe as a person of the
rare misfortune, that my reputation would not weigh down the most improbable,
or impossible accusation, but fit to receive any imputation of guilt, the most
mischievous or malicious instrument of calumny could invent. And in this
condition, with no other discontent, then not believing my self much indebted
to the world for good usage, I procured^ his^ Majesty's license to transport a
person of so great inconvenience and danger, out of his Dominions into another
Country; and with all possible speed removed my self into Holland, never
suspecting that my guilt would increase with my absence, in the retired private
life which I had resolved on, and did according to that resolution lead beyond
Sea; having the vanity of some hope, that a little time discovering the
falsehood of some things believed of me, would take away the inconvenience of
other things that were but unworthily suspected. Some weeks I rested there
without any hurt, till the falsehood of a person, to whose trust I committed a
Packet, brought it to a hand well contented with any occasion to satisfy his
own particular private malice, and revenge upon me; and so my Letters, one to
the Queens Majesty, and the other to my brother Sir Lewis Dives, were
publicly brought to be read in both Houses of Parliament; from thence new
arguments of guilt are so far enforced against me, and the former displeasure
revived and heightened to such a pitch, that at the same time I heard of the
interception of my Letters, I found my self accused of high Treason too, and
that for levying War against the King, a crime certainly that of all other, I
could least suspect my self guilty of. And to say the truth, it came into my
charge but by accident; for being in general charged of high Treason, and the
impeachment in particular, bearing only that I had appeared in warlike manner
to the terror of the Kings Subjects, a question was raised by a Lord or two
learned in the Law, whether that accusation would amount to Treason or no, and
so leave was desired to amend the charge, which being granted to make sure
work, by the Statute of 25 Edw. 3. it was put in, that I had levied War against
the King. If I were guilty, or suspected of so loud a crime, how it came to
sleep so long, or if not, how these Letters (wherein upon an unpartiall survey
there will not be found so much as an opinion as unto peace or war) could
minister occasion for a charge of my levying War against the King, I leave to
equal consideration. I am far from censuring or disputing the resolution, or
opinion of both or either House of Parliament; no man r^^eives a stroke from
thence with more submission and humility, and the great reverence I bear to it
has made such an impression in me, that the weight of their displeasure has
added many years to me; but in so near a concernment of my life, and my honor,
that grave Assembly may give me leave, without presuming to think their
judgments unjust, to say; their evidence may be untrue, and the persons
trusted by them, not so full of honor, ingenuity, or integrity, so free from
passion, malice, interest, or affection, as they are thought, It will be no
presumption, or dis^respect to that great Council to say, that I have many
enemies, who have used all the ill arts their wit or malice could suggest, to
bring this affliction upon me, and have not in whispers, or in the dark
published their resolution to destroy me: witness the known tampering with
very many persons, both by threats and promises to accuse me, their creating
and cherishing such monstrous untruths of my treating with the Danes, and other
foreign power, of a great treason of mine plotted, and discovered at Sherburn,
with mighty warlike preparations there: of my being at the head of the Rebels
in Ireland, and the like: to make me odio^ to the people, to whose rage and
violence they have of^^^^^ de^voured to give me up a sacrifice; the deep sense
I have of my affliction^ and injuries, shall never transport me to heighten the
repres^n^a^ion of them to the least degree beyond truth: but whoever shall
consider the penalty of Treason, the ruin and desolation it brings to
families, the brand and infamy it fixes on our memories, and shall remember
that this portion was designed to me, for going on my Masters errant, in a
Coach and six horses, will believe that a mixture of sorrow and innocence, with
so much passion as may keep them company, may well be allowed to breath it self
with so much freedom, as to present to the world with a true and sensible life
my sufferings, upon whomsoever the injustice and inhumanity may light, of
having oppressed and bowed down to the earth, a young man and all his hopes, by
such undeserved calamities.

ANSWER.
The next misfortune your Lordship insisteth on is, your having been charged in
generalll with High Treason, the impeachment in particular bearing only, that
you had appeared in a warlike manner, to the terror of the Kings Subjects at
Kingstone upon Thames: and the amendment of that charge, by putting in that you
had levied War against the King, upon a question raised by a Lord, or two,
learned in the Law, whether that former accusation would amount to Treason, or
no. To this I need to say little, because I may well presume that the two
Houses of Parliament, in some sort interessed in this your Lordships complaint,
though not of them, yet of the persons trusted by them, will not fail to give
convenient satisfaction unto your Lordship, and the world, at the solicitation
of those persons to me unknown, concerning whom your Lordship thinks you
may, as you do, put a question, whether they be so full of Honor, ingenuitie,
or integrity? or so free from passion, malice, interest, or affection, as they
are thought, without offense of both or either House of Parliament, or any
reflection upon the opinion or resolution of either of them? All I will, or
indeed can say as to the matter above recited is but this, That, whether your
Lordp. appeared there with six Coach-horses, or six score horses, whether your
Lordships business to that place, where those many Soldiers and Commanders,
who waited on their Majesty's to Hampton Court, and from thence went to
Kingston upon Tham^s for lodging, were only upon a message of the Kings to 40
or 50 Gentlemen among them, expressing his Majesty's good acceptance of their
service; Whether those forty or fifty were totally strangers to your Lordp. (to
which point also the Intelligencer tells an unhappy tale) and by name whether
Colonel Lunsford were till then so great a stranger to your Lordp. that you
had never exchanged twenty words with him in all your life, are all matters of
fact, and the truth of them must remain upon proof; For if there can be no more
proved against your Lordship then you write, then admitting it to be true,
which I find in the Remonstrance of the Lords and Commons (prepared long
before, but ordered to be published upon the second of November last) That
there were at Kingston at that time wagons laden with Pistolls, Carbines, and
Ammunition, great horses armed with Pistolls: And though the Officers to whom
it seems your Lordship was sent, together with the Soldiers and Cavaliers,
were some hundreds (your Lordp. in this Apology avoweth they were many:) And
though they were listed, and taken into pay, and an invitation made to such
Gentlemen as would mount, and maintain themselves for a month, by a promise
that afterward they should be taken into pay, and be his Majesty's Guard for
their lives: And though the unr^ly company assembled there, discharged their
Pistolls, and threatened the Inhabitants that they would have the heads of some
of them within four days, to the great terror and amazement of the poor
people: And though all this put together may amount to a warlike appearance and
preparation, (which that Remonstrance leaves every man to judge) yet how it
should concern your Lordp, if you had no further hand in all this, or in any
part thereof then you have confessed, under the favor and correction of both
Houses of Parliament, I must here prosesse, as yet informed, I am not able to
comprehend: And if your Lordship have misinsormed me, and the world therein, I
think you have done your self as ill a turn, as the worst of your supposed
enemies could have done you.

But whereas your Lordship complayneth, that the examination of these things,
were referred to a Committee of your sharpest enemies, and that the great
mistake of six Coach horses turned into six score horses, was not suffered to
be rectified by other witnesses there, who affirmed the truth; to these two
parts of your Lordships complaint I have one Answer to make, which is, that if
in them both your Lordp. had any wrong, it ought not to be imputed either to
any prevalence of your particular unhappiness, or to the credit of your
enemies, but to be reputed among the common calamities, which may befall any
subject of this Kingdom, by reason of the ancient customs thereof, which seem
exceeding strange to all strangers that hear of them, among whom I have often
had much a do to maintain their fitness, and equity; and yet the wisdom of
this State has not hitherto found sufficient cause to alter so ancient
constitutions. The one of them is, the manner of naming Committees in
Parliament, in which all men see there is exceeding great inequality, and too
much left to the care of the Clearke, who has more power by much therein then
any Member of the House of Commons. But how to remedy this without running the
hazard of other as great, or greater inconveniences, it may be, is not so
easy to devise, Which notwithstanding I have often heretofore, and upon this
occasion, do now wish that honorable House, (to whom nothing that can be
better ordered by humane prudence is impossible) would take into mature
deliberation. The other is that ancient Maxim of our Law, Non accipitur
juramentum contra Regem, by reason whereof, if it be rigorously observed (as
for ought I know it is ever in all trials upon life and death in inferior
Courts) the honor, life, and estate of the greatest subject how innocent
soever may be in danger, if two of the meanest men in the whole Kingdom shall
combine so secretly to take it away that there can be no discovery of their
conspiracy, whereat strangers use to hold up their hands and bless themselves.
For it seems, the Committee above mentioned had the equity of that rule of
Law in their eye for their direction, and that your Lordship had not all the
favor showed you to the Earl of Strafford, who was allowed to produce
witnesses, and cross examine such as were produced against him, and in troth I
believe had as much favor, as was ever showed to any subject in his case,
which is, and will ever be one great justification of the proceedings against
him, whatsoever may break forth in time to show his innocence. But (my Lord)
less favor may be showed to diverse persons accused of the same crime without
any ingredient of private malice, or revenge to the one of them. And yet he
that feels the hurt of the difference is under a strong temptation to
apprehend those to be his private enemies, whom he observes to be keen in
pursuing him, although their consciences may bear them witness that they are
thereunto moved, only, and merely by public considerations: and in such cases
there never want false tale-bearers, who may have told your Lordship many and
strange stories of the ill acts used by your enemies to bring this afliction
upon you; and of their resolution to destroy you, published not in whispers, or
in the dark, but by their known tampering with very many persons both by
threats and promises to accuse you; and they may have damned themselves if all
this be not true. And yet, though I am very confident, that the deep sense of
your afflictions has had no power to transport you to heigthen the
representation of these imaginary injuries to the least degree beyond the truth
of your Lordships belief, there may notwithstanding peradventure be no real
truth in them. Nay (my Lord) it being an observation made by the person of
greatest experience this day living in Europe, that he never knew a spy, that
was not a double spy, (which it may be may hold in Tale-bearers also) why is it
not possible, that the news of your Lordships treating with the Danes, and
other foreign power, of the great Treason plotted and discovered at Sherburn
(which I never heard of till now) and of your being at tht head of the Rebels
in Ireland, may have been at first treated by the same tale-bearers, who have
abused your Lordship? if there be good rewards stirring for such like
discoveries, as commonly there is in such times as these we are failen into,
not more full of false, then of true fears, which gives great advantage to
calumny, and may incline the wisest men sometimeand for a while to lend both
too open and too secret an ear to the conceiving of such untruths, as when they
are produced may prove monstrous. I humbly beseech your Lordship to take good
heed that you do not do the same injury you complain of, and to be as careful
to keep your self free from all uncharitable judgments and traducements of
others, as you desire they should be toward you. A heart top full of a mixture
of sorrow and innocence, with so much passion as is but usual, and natural to
keep them company, being a vessel of such a form as does not stand over-firmly
of it self, may easily be inclined by the best observer of his advantages, and
the quickest catcher, and cunningest handler of them, to sway so much on the
more corrupt side, that a great measure of thoughts and words, unbeseeming a
good Christian, may from thence be made to vent themselves out of the mouth of
the best of us. And if by this and other means, he can prevail to set brethren
at variance, it is his sport to see them fight in any fashion, as it is ours,
to see other creatures ^ursue, and kill one another, knowing (as we do) that
the prey and he that rejoiceth that he has caught it are both his without
repentance: For though we think we have all faith, yet without love to all our
brethren, none of us shall ever see the face of our heavenly father; and how
hard it is to love them in that degree he requires, if we once conceive them
to be our enemies, and that wrongfully, I would we did not all find too well. I
humbly crave your Lordships pardon for this bold, but (as I conceived)
necessary digression, having as much assurance as a constant good fame can
give, of the integrity of one of those persons (a stranger to me) whom I have
reason to induce me to believe, your Lordship intends for one of the enemies
of whom you make so sensible mention. For I was at a great part of the Lord of
Straffords trial, and if I be not mistaken, there took notice of one of those
expressions which your Lordship fortuned to use, the unlucky acception whereof
you conceive drew upon you a sharp malignity from some persons of much
interest in the House of Commons, by the token that the most remarkable word in
one of those expressions, was a noun substantive derived from a verb of
frequent use in Aristotle's historia Animalium, which it is possible that
Gentleman, who I then apprehended might take offense thereat, though he be
learned yet had never read, and then I need not tell your Lordship from what
other root he might deduce it, and so come to take snuff in the nose without
any such cause given by your Lordship, as he might suppose he had^ Whereas I
that knew some reason why your Lordshp and he might be good friends, and had
never heard of your being other, conceived the short Speech then delivered by
your Lordship to have been made in his favor, which I here protest upon the
faith of a Gentleman, and there is a very good friend of that Gentleman's, who
upon some occasion heard me soon after make this construction of that passage
of your Lordships referring to him. I hope he may receive some satisfaction
from this relation of mine: I am sure I should think my self a very happy
man, if I could do any good office between you; and yet I have been told that
when time was I had no great obligation to that Gentleman in a business
concerned me, and, that upon that occasion he let slipp some words at which I
might justly take more offense, then was given him by your Lordship: And
therefore judging of him by my self (as every man is apt to do of another)
your Lordship may please to pardon me that I cannot believe, a Gentleman of
much reputation for Religion, should out of so poor an accident as this^ suck
so much venom as may have been capable to manifest it self upon every the
least occasion ever since. But my desire to do all that in me is toward the
reconcilement of persons whose enmity must needs be prejudicial to their
Country, as well as to themselves, has drawn me too far upon this subject, and
yet I cannot leave it, without craving pardon to make one note to your
Lordship, which it may be, may prove of some use in your life, if you shall do
me the honor to allow it a place in your remembrance, That a sharp wit is
like a sharp knife, with which a man may as soon hurt himself as another, if
he be not very careful to carry it in a good sheath, and to have both his eyes
about him when he uses it.

I come at last to the last part of your Lordships complaint about your being
charged with treason, which is the amendment of the charge by this addition,
That you had leavyed war against the King; of which crime, of all other, I
verily believe some other persons, not long before accused thereof, could as
little suspect themselves guilty, as your Lordship: And yet after that they
were not only suspected of, but charged very loud with so loud a crime, how it
came to pass I know not, but if I do not mistake, the charge slept as long as
that against your Lordship, so that in this you have had but equal dealing
with others. And as for the amendment of the charge, I believe your Lordship
may one day find, that your assembling of Cavaliers at Kingston upon Thames,
(for in those words it is expressed in the third Remonstrance of the
Parliament) was understood by the Lords and Commons at that time to be a
sufficient discovery of your mind, to engage His Majesty into a civil war. So
sufficient, that his Majesty's coming to the House of Commons in the manner he
did; His retiring from London to Hampton Court, and the appearing of those
persons in a warlike manner at Kingston upon Thames, who having been so
assembled by your Lordship, waited upon his Majesty thither, were by the
Parliament (both Houses being then full) thought sufficient grounds for the
committing of the custody of the Town of Hull and of the Magazine there, to Sir
John Hotham, and for his possessing himself thereof by their Authority;
Notwithstanding his Majesty having sent my Lord, the Earl of Newcastle to take
the government of that Town upon him: all which you may observe in the
Remonstrance above mentioned. As you may also another passage, I suppose very
worthy to be seriously reflected upon by your Lordship, amounting to that on
their own part, which my Lord your father calls ultimam admonitionem on his
Majesty's part, to wit. That if those malignant spirits (your Lordship by
perusing the place may see whom they intend) shall ever force us to defend our
Religion, the Kingdom, the Privileges of Parliament, and the Rights and
Liberties of the Subject with our swords, the blood and destruction, that shall
ensue thereupon must be wholly cast upon their account. God and our consciences
tell us that we are clear, and we doubt not, but God and the whole world will
clear us therein. By this your Lordship may fully discern that the charge
intended to be made good against you, is no less then having been an
instrument at least of some other greater malignants to incite His Majesty to
the beginning of a civil war, which will not fail to prove levying War
against the King, if it can be proved against you. And how far those Letters of
your Lordships, in which you are so confident, that upon an impartial survey
there will not be found so much as an opinion as unto peace or war, yet being
laid to other evidences may serve to induce your: Peers to find you guilty of
the making of such a War, may be seen in time, the great bringer of truth to
light.

APOLOGY.
Since that time, other Letters of mine or Copies of Letters (possibly never
sent) have had the same fortune, and been published to the world, and to show
the follies and indiscretions of a man, enough in her disfavour besore, with
Glosses and Comments to inform the people how much of the dangerous and
pernicious Counsels, pretended to be then, and still on foot, had passed
through my hands, and how great an enemy I am to Parliaments, to this latter
most grievous and venomous imputation, I hope God will have preserved me some
kind of Autidote in men's memories, of what part I had the happiness to bear in
the passing of the Trienniall Bill, and to it I shall only say thus much, that
I have had the honor to be a Member of the one House, and must presume to
think My self still a Member of the other, that I value the honor, the dignity
and the privileges of both, infinitely above the pleasures and benefits of
life, and if I ever wilfully contributed, or shall ever consent to the
prejudice of either, I wish the desires of all my enemies may fall upon me.

To that of my having had so great a hand in ill Counsels, which are expressed
to be of his Majesty's removing from London to a place of safety and the like,
I shall be bold to say, that the Letter to the Queens Majesty, from whence my
enemies would make the inference, has not with any confidere^ the least
propending of advice any way, but is merely an account of mine own intentions
to apply my self to His Majesty's service, either by absence or attendance,
according to course, that His Majesty in his wisdom should think fit to take.
Every body knows I never had the honor to be a Counselor, neither have. I
presumed, without being questioned by his Majesty, to interpose in his affairs:
when he has graced me with any question, I have answered with the freedom of a
Subject, and a Gentleman. But had I been a Counselor, having seen what I have
seen, and heard what I heard, I who have known such Members of both Houses,
marked out by the multitude for blessings, and such for sacrifice; I who can
say with truth, that such of that Rabble, cried out; the Kings is the Traitor;
such, that the young Prince would govern better; I who can prove that a Leader
of those people, in the heat and violence of the tumult, cried out, that the
King was not fit to live: Had I been a Counselor, what had I been (as the
learning of Treason was then understood) should I not have advised his Majesty
to withdraw to a place of safety, not from his Parliament, but from that
insolent and unruly multitude, who had already brought into so much hazard the
persons and the liberty of this till then most happy Parliament, and not
staying there, did so lowdly threaten ruin, even to the sacred person of the
King: Advertise his Majesty I did of the danger, advise him I could not, I had
neither the ability nor the authority.

In my Letter to the Queen; at her first coming into Holland, it was observed,
that in that expression, [of welcoming her from a Country not worthy of her] I
^^ewed much venime and rancour to my own Nation. I meant it not, and must
appeal to those who are best acquainted with the Civility of language, whether
the address might not be comely to any Lady of quality, who should upon any
not pleasing occasion, leave one Country for a while to reside in another. And
I hope ere long to welcome Her Majesty back from a place not so unworthy of
her, unto this Nation most worthy of her, without either disparagement to
Holland, or complement to those to whom the unworthy of that Letter was
intended.

For the charge of boldness and presumption in some expressions of those
Letters (though I might be glad to compound my treason for incivilitie) since
the suspicion of that depends upon the right understanding of language and
connection of words; it will be no dis respect to any, through whose hands they
have passed, to believe, that as they were otherwise intended by me, so that
they are capable of other interpretation. However, if in truth, mis
understanding, or ill breeding bath produced the other, I hope the conclusion
will only be that I am an ill Courtier, or an ill Secretary, both which I do
humbly confess, not that I am no good English man, no good Subject. If in any
of those Letters there were any expressions of discontent or bitterness, I
shall say little more, then that they passed an examination they were not
prepared for, and fell into hands that they were not directed to: and I am
confident that many honest Gentl^men, who have had the happiness to preserve
their papers from such ^n inquisition, and shall consider the case they might
be in, if all their secret conferences, and private Letters we^e^ exposed and
produced to the public^^ view, will cast up these Letters of mine, in the
number of my misfortunes^ without making any addition to my faults: and
certainly, whoever shall observe the measure of my sufferings; with any kind of
indifference, will easily forgive such eruptions of passion, as were only
vented by me to a brother, though they came within the reach of any other car.

To draw now to a period of my unfortunate story, which I cannot promise my
self, from the generality, so much charity as to vouchsafe the reading, further
then me^r curiosity, shall lead them: I returned into England not with so much
joy to see my Country, as hope to be admitted upon my humble Petition to His
Majesty, to a fair, regular, impartial vindication of my innocence, and I
protest to God, I look upon the time I may naturally hope to live, with no
other comfort, then as it may make me still capable of that happiness. I have
follies and infirmities enough about me to make me ask the pardon of every
wise and good man, but for treason or for any voluntary crime (either against
my Sovereign or my Country) I say it with all humility, I will not accept a
pardon from the King and Parliament. By the grace of God it shall never be
said, that either the Parliament has brought me, or His Majesty exposed me to
a trial, my own uprightness shall constantly solicit it, and without
recourse in this to either of their favors, I will either stand a justified
man to the world, or fall an innocent. But in the mean time, till it shall
please God to bless this Nation with such a composure of the present
distractions, as that Government and Law may have their rightful and
comfortable course, I implore only so much charity from men, as may seem due to
one, whose good intentions to his Country have been in some sort publicly
manifested, whose ill are yet but obscurely and improbably suggested.

To conclude, let the few years I have lived be examined, and if there be found
any rancour or venime in my nature, even toward particular persons which might
in time contract it self to an enmity against the state^ if I have been a
fomenter of jealousies and debate, or a secret conspirer against the honor and
fame of any man; if I have worn Religion as a mask and vizard for my
hypocrisy, and underhand cherished any opinions that I have not avowed; if I
have been lead by any hopes of preferment to flattery, or by the miss of it,
to revenge; if I have been transported with private ambition, and been inclined
to sacrifice the least branch of the public peace and happiness to my own
ends and advantage, let the complication of all these ills prepare a judgment
of treason it self upon me, and let me be looked upon as a man who has made a
progress in wickedness, that a few years more added to that account, would
render me a prodigy to the world; But if in truth my life has been pleasant
to me under no other Nation, then as I might make it useful to my Country, and
have made it my business to beget and continue a good intelligence amongst
good men; if I have been then most zealous and fervent for the Liberties of the
Subject, when the power of Court was most prevalent, and for the rights of the
Crown, when popular license was most predominant; if by my continual study and
practice of Religion, I have always been a true son of the Church of
ENGLAND, and by my submission and application of my actions to the known rule
of the Law, I have always been a true son of the State of England; if my
actions have been (...) and my words only doubtful; if my life only clouded
with many intersections, I hope the world will believe, I have been overtaken
with too great a measure of unhappiness, and every generous heart will case me
of some part of my burden, by giving the benefit of his good opinion.

ANSWER.
And so (my Lord) I am come to your Lordships Letters, which is all that
remains in your Apology, of which I have not already given you my account,
except it be of your counsel and purpose, as well in the transporting of your
self into Holland, as in your return from thence into England (which you call
the period of your unfortunate story:) Both which will fitly fall in with your
Letters, and I wish did as well agree with them. But sure they were quite out
of your memory, and you could recover no copy of them, when you wrote this
passage in your Apology. I procured his Majesty's License to transport a
person of so great inconvenience and danger, out of his Dominions, into another
Country: and with all possible speed removed my self into Holland, never
suspecting that my guilt would increase with my absence, in the retired private
life I had resolved on, and did according to that resolution lead beyond tqe
sea. My Lord, I hope it will not offend you to be showed by your servant, that
you are not well hidden under this covert, where you may else chance to be
taken by an enemy; In which hope I will presume to observe, that it may be well
believed, your Lordship resolved on such a retired private life on the other
side of the sea, if things had gone on here by way of Accommodation, to which
easiest and compliantest way, it appears, your Lordship doubted His Majesty
might betake Himself. But whether His Majesty showing Himself so extremely
tender of the Peace of the Kingdom, that He was more a wake to the sense of
the calamity and misery that in all probability was like to befall His good
Subjects upon this occasion, then of His own Honor and Dignity, were so well
approved of by your Lordship; you know the judgment of the Parliament in their
observations upon your Letters to the Queens Majesty, and I will leave the
world to judge. My purpose is only to show out of them, that your Lordships
resolution to lead so retired a life on the other side, was not absolute, but
conditionate, a blind man if he could read your letters must needs plainly see.
For you were no sooner arrived at Middleburg in Zealand, but in your first
letter from thence to Sir Lewis Dives, you make mention of another written from
abord Sir John Pennington, wherein you gave an account why you thought sitting
to continue your journey into Holland, going still upon this ground, that if
things went on by way of Accommodation the King would be advantaged by your
absence: If the King should declare Himself, and retire to a safe place, you
should be able to wait upon him from thence, as well as out of any part of
England, over and above the service which you might do his Majesty there in the
mean time. In the same letter to Sir Lewis from Middleburg you declare, that
your purpose to remain in that retired place, and condition, was only till you
received instructions from their Majesty's (which sure were not very necessary
for your employment in a retired private life) you desire him to hasten your
said instructions unto you by some safe hand, you desire him to send you a
Cipher, of which there could be no great need for your giving him an account
how you spent your vacant hours: Or if there were, yet sure that was not the
reason, why you besought the Queens Majesty to vouchafe you a Cipher; or why
you would not adventure to write to her Majesty, but by expresses, till such
time as you had a Cipher. But why do I wast time and paper in making such
inferences? In that letter of your Lordships to her Majesty dated from
Middleburg the 21 of January, you show your self indeed very confident that if
His Majesty after all he had lately done should betake himself to the easiest
and compliantest way of Accommodation, you should serve his Majesty more by
your absence, then by all your industry (to which dark expression I will give
no light:) But withal you show, that if the King should betake himself to a
safe place you should then live in impatience, patience, and misery till you
waited on her Majesty, so short-breathed was your resolution to lead a private
retired life on that side the Sea. Yet truly how long you lived in that manner
I have not heard: But it should seem it was not many weeks: for by the tenth
of March your Lordship had been so long at the Hague, that you thought your
self very sufficiently instructed, and able to inform her Majesty of the
state of that place, both in point of affection and interest ( Quaere in
relation to what) which, considering the many Provinces, and towns, and persons
to be enquired after there, before any good judgment could be made of the
state of that place in either of the respects above mentioned, and the
reservednesse of that Nation especialy toward strangers, I dare say would have
asked some other very busy man three very busy weeks. But God has given your
Lordship much quickness of wit, and your great industry and pains in the
study of books has made the study of men a sport to you, in which it is
certain, that some man may do more in a day, the^ another man can do in a year.
There is therefore no certain inference to be made of the time you had spent at
the Hague by the number of talents you had gained there, in comparison of the
improvement might have been made by some other man. But when in your letter to
the Queens Majesty dated at the Hague before her Majesty's coming thither, you
say you had not so much as mentioned any business to her Majesty since you
left England, may we not thence lawfully infer that there was some business
committed to your knowledge, at least, which you might have mentioned to her
Majesty? And sure (my Lord) when your Lordship wrote to the Kings Majesty with
that hardiness, which you thought his affairs and complexion required, though
every body knows your Lordship never had the honor to be a Counselor, yet I
believe most men will believe, that you either presumed to interpose in his
Majesty's affairs without being questioned (which you say you never did) or
that His Majesty had entrusted you with some part of his affairs on that side
the sea, from whence you wrote; or (which is worst for you) that in some
affairs then on the Carpet, your Lordship was a very secret, and a principal
Counselor, if his Majesty sent to Zealand or Holland to demand your good
advice about them, having my Lord your father, and so many other able
Counselors at that time not far from him.

But I will enquire no further what business you had, or did beyond the sea,
though perhaps it were possible to make an unhappy guess at it, by the two
notes of arms found among your papers. I come to your Letters written from
thence, the falling whereof into hands they were not directed to, I shall be
very willing to cast up in the number of your misfortunes, so your Lordship
will not forget to put this into your reckning, that no misfortunes happen to
any man without the special providence of God, whose hand many men think they
see, in making your own an instrument to discover more against you, then, could
easily have been found out otherwise, though the falsehood of a person you
trusted, and other accidents were used as means to bring this to pass. I dare
not be so peremptory in my observation, or censure, but leaving the
consideration thereof to your Lordship whom it concerns, crave your leave to
say, that these Letters of yours are so full and clear an evidence of your
being an excellent Courtier, and as excellent a Secretary, that I doubt the
world will nere admit your being ill in either, for a good excuse of the faults
have been found in some expressions of your Letters. I shall instance but in
one, not in respect of the unworthy you therein put upon your Country (which
notwithstanding I conceive will be judged by those to whom you appeal, to have
been but a wild piece of civillity to asperse a whole Nation, especially your
own, with the fault of some few, and this in an address to a Lady of so great
eminence, and of another Nation not much given to overvalue ours) but if that
should be suffered to pass for an ill made complement, I beseech your Lordship
what good construction can be made of your saying, it was the first contentment
you had been capable of a long time, that Her Majesty was safely arrived in
Holland, withdrawn from a Country unworthy of her. Which that her Majesty had
any not pleasing occasion to do, I believe was an exceeding great
coffeehouse to many other good Subjects, and good English men, no less for
her Majesty's sake then their own, this having been taken by all men that had
understanding of the times, for a shrewd prognostic of the storm which was
then gathering, and now lies so sore upon us, in the foresight whereof I hope
your Lordship took no contentment, though your words might with little force be
wrested to such an interpretation.

But to pass by other expressions, and come to the matter of your Letters, and
examine whether any wrong has been done you in the Glosses and Comments, with
which you observe they have been published to the world, to inform the people
how much of the dangerous and perni^ious Counsels pretended to be then, and
still on foot, had passed through your hands, and how great an enemy you are to
Parliaments: for these are your words. And you seem to be very sensible of this
latter most grievous, and (as you express it) venomous imputation. Whereas I
find no syllable to that purpose in the Gloss made upon the copy of your
Lordships letter to the Queens Majesty of the tenth of March, which is all that
ever I have seen published with any Gloss, besides those of the 20. and 21. of
January, and I have enquired diligently of some other, who are in a trade of
news, and can hear of no other letter of your Lordships published in print. And
yet that ingenuity I have observed in your Lordship in many other occasions,
will not suffer me to imagine, that in this you have framed a charge against
your self, upon such an article as was never put in against you, that from
thence you might take an occasion to make such a defense for your self, as you
conceived would be to your advantage: Such little plots are women's work,
unworthy of a man of your parts, and when they are discovered (as they seldom
fail to be) ever come home with the giving of a shrewd counterbuffe, and
therefore I will pass this over.

To that of your Lordships having had so great a hand in ill Counsels, which
are expressed to be of his Majesty's removing from London, to a place of
safety, and the like, I will not reinforce the inferences you say have been
made out of your letters by your enemies, because I would not willingly be
taken for one of them: But as your humble servant observe two things to your
Lordship, which I persuade my self you did not well observe in the writing of
this part of your Apology. The first is, that you have therein entered into
such a contestation, as I believe no subject of this Kingdom before you ever
undertook against the two Houses of Parliament. For they in that Declaration
of theirs, wherein they have set forth the Grounds and Reasons that
necessitated them to take up Defensive arms, among others, make mention of the
unjust charging of some Members of both Houses with Treason: of the Kings
coming to the House of Commons with a Troop of Cavaliers to fetch those of that
House away by force: of the pious and generous resolution of the City of London
to guard the Parliament, in regard of this greatest violation of Parliament
that was ever attempted: of certain wicked persons who had engaged the King in
the above mentioned design and practice against the Parliament, and of their
having been so grieved, and enraged by this action of the City, that thereupon
they made his Majesty forsake WHITE HALL, under pretense that His Person was
there in great danger, which they say is a suggestion as as false, as the
father of lies can invent; And yet your Lordship has been bold to aver the
truth of the danger of His Majesty's person was therein; at that time, by
avowing that there were Tumults then, (which the Parliament has denied in one
of their Declarations) and your Lordship says you saw them with your eyes; and
then by giving three several in^tances of most dangerous, indeed desperate
words spoken in those Tumults against the King, two of which your Lordship
says you heard with your own ears, and the third you say you can prove to have
been spoken by a leader of those people, in the heat, and violence of the
Tumult. His Majesty on the other side in his Declaration of the 12. of August,
wherein he has graciously descended to give his Sub^ects an account of the
Reasons of his having taken up Defensive Arms, among other things alleges,
his having done it to preserve the Freedom, Privilege, and Dignity of
Parliament, awed, and insulted upon by Force and Tumults, whereof his Majesty
gives many particular instances, and offers to prove them. And your Lordship
says, you have known such Members of both Houses marked out by the multitude
for blessings, and such for sacrifice. You say, Advertise His Majesty you did,
Advise him you could not, you had neither the ability nor the opportunity. But
you ask, if you had been a Counselor, what you had been, if, having seen what
you had seen, and heard what you had heard, you should not have advised his
Majesty to withdraw to a place of safety, not from his Parliament, but from
that insolent and unruly multitude, who had already brought into so much hazard
the persons, and the Liberty of this till then most happy Parliament; and not
^taying there, did so loudly threaten ruin, even to the sacred person of the
King; which is a most full averment of one great part of the Kings charge
against those, whom his Majesty styles the Factious part of the Parliament,
though not a charging it on the particular persons accused thereof by his
Majesty. And whether this being laid to the early knowledge your Lordship had
of his Majesty's deliberation, whether he should betake himself to a safe
place, and to the many inferences have been made upon your several Letters
(which I will not repeat) may not amount to a probable Argument, that you had
some hand in the Counsel of his Majesty's removing from London; to a place of
safety, and the like, I leave your Lordship, and the world to judge.

By this time I apprehend your Lordship may well conceive me to be in the
number of your Enemies, because I have been so sharp, and pressing upon you in
this last part of your Apology. Which I have been, with an intention to do
your service, by putting you to think, whether you should do well to lie at
this guard, if you should come to be questioned for your lifey; our Lordship
may have heard, (if not, my Lord your father can tell you particularly) how the
great Oracle of Parliamentary proceedings in his time, Sir Henry Nevill by
name, lost himself in the last he was of, commonly called the Undertakers
Parliament. The sum is this, he had done the greatest service to his Country,
that perhaps was ever done by a private Gentleman in a time of peace, by
procuring the Assembling of a Parliament in the time he did, upon the hopes he
gave, that the House of Commons might be induced to grant a supply of Subsidies
to the late King our Sovereign of blessed memory without questioning his power
of imposing, if his Majesty on his part might be pleased to grant them such and
such things upon such and such conditions, which were so much to the advantage
of the Subject, that I doubt we shall never have the like bargain offered
again; yet this great service of his, and of other leading men, with whom he
conferred about it, having been decryed in that Parliament under the title of
undertaking, he suffered that mis-conceit to prevail so far in the House,
before he took the courage to avow what he had done, and (as I have heard from
wise men) might have had thanks for doing in the fair way he did it, that
through that default only, and for no other fault, he forfeited the great
credit he had in the House before, and occasioned an untimely, and most unhappy
dissolution of that Parliament. It may be the like adventure has befallen as
wise a man in a trial for his life. But I will give no more examples, nor make
any other then this general application, That which has happened once or
twice, may have happened thrice, and may happen a fourth time. And yet why should
I hold my self thus in the clouds, I will adventure to descend to a particular
confession, that my self among many thousand other of the Kings loyal
subjects, have been exceedingly offended with your Lordship for having had so
deep a hand, as has been seen under your own, in the ill advise of his
Majesty's removing so far from the Parliament: for distance of place does
naturally induce a proportionable distance in affection between the best
friends, if the time of absence be not very carefully entertained with all
possible means to maintain their amity at the height; but if there were any
jarre between them before, and they come to wrangle about that by letters, it
is almost impossible to prevent an utter breach between them, though they be
men of the best tempered spirits: Besides this, it has ever been my simple
opinion, that if His Majesty after his return from Dover had given over all
thoughts of retiring to York, and gone directly to London, he might have been
able to have quite broken the strong combinatio^s, and conspiracies his Majesty
supposes were made against him, into so many pieces by his royal presence,
and the help of his Nobles, and of those many generous persons in the House of
Commons, who would have lent willing hands to so needful a work, that it could
not have been in the power of the Devil himself to repiece the poor worms so
dissevered, for the best among them would have been found no other, if he had
once lifted up his head against the King his Sovereign; But my imagination of
the unadvisednesse of the advice given his Majesty to quit his Saddle, having
been founded on the confident belief I ever had that his sacred Person was in
no danger by those foolish disorderly friskes of the unmannaged rude people of
his Royal City, till I saw your Lordships Apology, (His Majesty's Declaration
containing nothing but generals to that purpose:) I am now quite out of
patience that the particulars I therein find to the contrary, should have been
kept up so long, to the infinite prejudice of his Majesty's service, of his
good peoples quiet, and of your Lordships honor, who certainly need not have
suppressed your knowledge so long, nor have now made so dainty of owning the advice given his Majesty to retire to a safe place if there were so just a
cause of fear, that His Majesty's life, which is of more worth then ten
thousand of ours, might have been in danger in the tumults at London. But now I
find I can proceed no further in doing your Lordship that service, which ( I
hope you see) I have hitherto endeavored, without taking notice to you of a
thing, of which I perceive you have studiously declined the mention; and which
I should be as unwilling to touch as you, it being the head of that bile, which
puts you to the greatest pain you are in, if the King and Kingdom were not
in as much upon the same occasion. In which respect I am resolved to put a
launcet into it, when I have first most humbly prayed God upon my knees that my
so doing may, through his blessing, be to the ease of his Majesty, of your
Lordship, and of us all, and not to the hurt of any body; which (he is my
witness) is my sincere, and only intention, if I know my own heart. Which,
that your Lordship may not think I resolve on impertinently before the time, I
must first show you how far the matter is prepared. It cannot be unknown to
your Lordship, though in your Apology you seem to make your self ignorant,
that common fame has from the beginning accused you to have bin the suggestor
to his Majesty of the accusation put in by his Attorney against the Lord
Kimbolton, and the five worthy Members of the House of Commons: Or if it be
possible this should have been kept from your ears, which has certainly been
the voice of the people for about a year, your Lordship may find so much, in
express terms in the public intelligence of two weeks of this January with
this addition, that you were the Adviser of his Majesty to come in person to
the House of Commons in a hostile manner with four hundred armed men upon the
fourth of January last: To which it may be thought your Lordship had some
reference by making the fourth of this January the date of the publication of
your Apology. But (my Lord) this dark intimation, which it may be you may
expound in that manner in time to come, does not, cannot serve your turn at
the present. For the plain truth is ( I tell it you for your service, and hope
you will take it so) you may as well raise a dead man out of his grave, as
raise your self, or your reputation from the hate and infamy, under which you,
and it lie, by any thing you can say or do, or all your friends ^or you, until
this popular, odious, and infamous imputatio^ (the heavy gravestone of your
good name) be removed^ And that (as the world goes) cannot be done now, by any
imprecation of your own, no not of his Maj^sties, that you were not the man,
except his Majesty shall produce some other very probable Author of the
sugg^stion; And I much doubt whether that will be sufficient to acquit you. For
that unhappy word, which fell from your pen long ago, [ Where Traitors have so
great a sway]^ and which you would now excuse, as an eruption of passion, or an
expression of discontent vented only to a brother, yet laid to the relation you
have made in your Apology of the danger in which his Majesty's person, and the
persons and liberty of this till then happy Parliament were respectively
involved by the Tumults, of which his Majesty charge the accused Members to
have been the Contrivers^ and for that reason chiefly Traitors, I doubt has
made such an impression in men's minds, that you would hardly be excused, though
some other should take this burden wholly upon him. I am sure, if you were the
man, and have proof (as you say you have) of the treasonable words spoken by a
Leader of the people in the heat and violence of the tumult; and if withal you
can prove, that the tumult in which they were spoken, was an unlawful
ass^mbly, and contrived by all or any of the accused Members; and if this would
have been sufficient to have ^ound them, or any of them guilty of Treason (as
by what I have heard to be Law in another case, I think it would) then your
delaying to take this matter upon you, before your self came to be accused of
high Treason, was the greatest mis-adventure ( I shall speak great words, but I
think I shall make them good) which ever befell your Lordship, or this
Kingdom, by the space of the last 500. years. Your Lordship, for your owning
of the suggestion, upon which the Members of both Houses were impeached of
Treason, before your being impeached of the same crime, had preserved your
estate, life, and honor from that hazard, and your reputation from that stain,
which it got by this mishap, and which will be exceeding hard to be gotten out.
The Kingdom, which to my understanding never was in so miserable an estate
since the last Conquest, as at this present, and into this so lamentable an
estate (let me write it without offense till you have read my reason) I
conceive it is fallen merely and wholly by this omission of your Lordships, if
you were the secret Accuser of those your brethren. For they are all wise
enough to know, that no man legally accused, can ever be cleared in his
reputation without being acquitted from the crime laid to his charge in a fair
legal Trial. And this certain danger would undoubtedly have been of so much
more regard to men of untainted fame, then the hazard the most innocent persons
may possibly run through false witnesses, or a corrupted Jury, that in that
respect no doubt they would have desired to have been brought to such a Trial,
which it seems was intended by his Majesty: Neither could they, if they
would, have avoided it, by pretense of privilege of Parliament, if any part of
their accusation legally charged on them had been such as may now seem to be
insinuated in your Lordships Apology, or as some of the Articles preferred
against them do import, if I do not misremember them. For the Lords and Commons
this very Parliament in their Petition to his Majesty delivered the sixteenth
of July following, desired no more, but that nothing done; or spoken in
Parliament, or by any Person in pursuance of the Commands, and Directions of
both Houses of Parliament^ be questioned any where but in Parliament: Which
sure would not have kept any Member of either House, from being proceeded
against by Inditements preferred at the Common Law, if any of them could have
been proved, to have been the Contrivers of the Tumult mentioned in your
Lordships Apology, or of Treating with any foreign power to invade this
Kingdom, which was one of the Articles, as I remember, for I cannot at present
recover a sight of them. So that upon the whole matter, I humbly conceive;
that, supposing your Lordship to have been the Accuser of the six Members of
Parliament, (which your own confession, that you advertised his Majesty of the
danger, in which his sacred person^ and diverse Parliament men's were by those
tumults, of which his Majesty charge them to have been the Contrivers, put to
the rest I have formerly observed, does well nigh bring home to you) I cannot
see how you can avoid the unhappiness of being reputed the sole occasion at
least of the miserable condition, in which this Kingdom now is. For, since his
Majesty, out of his Princely desire of the continuance of the Peace of his
People, was graciously pleased to have wholly deserted any prosecution of the
accused Members, and since his Honor would (as I humbly conceive) have been as
well saved by the producing, as it was by the suppressing of the particular
suggestions against them, though they should have been acquitted by Parliament,
it is not easy to imagine any sufficient cause, why his Majesty denied the
Petition of both his Houses of Parliament to declare the suggestors according
to the Law in that case provided, besides his care of your Lordship^ in
retribution of your care of him, which was, or might be a truly princely
consideration of his Majesty's, but such a one, as I should have bin most
humbly instant with his Majesty, not to have taken of me had I been in your
place.

I have faithfully represented to your Lordship the hard condition wherein you
are lodged in common esteem, and I wish from my heart it were as easy for me
to help you out as it has been to show you how you came into it: But I doubt
that will prove a much harder matter to do in these two latter, then I found it
in the two former parts of your Apology: yet my making an attempt can do you no
harm; and it may do you some good, if I can but show you that you are not in a
right way to help your self: you say you returned into England not with so much
joy to see your Country, (indeed there was small cause of joy to be seen there
at that time) as hope to be admitted upon your humble Petition to his Majesty
for a fair regular impartial vindication of your innocence. But if any man
should ask, why you then procured his Majesty's license to transport your
self out of England into another Country, what can you answer? For in truth my
Lord I know not, the common opinion of the world being, that it was in part to
decline such a Trial. Indeed to do you right, I must observe, that in your
first Letter to the Queens Mai^stie written soon after your landing on the
other side, it appears you had already some thoughts of returning: But it
appears too, that you intended it not, till you should hear that the King had
betaken himself to a safe place (as you found him at your return) where he
might avow, or protect his servants. And my Lord, I pray did not his Maj^stie
avow many other his faithful servants that were no Delinquents, and protect
them well enough in the place where he resided when your Lordship left the
Court? Therefore you added [From rage ( I mean) and violence, for from Justice
I shall never implore it:] But what cause had you to fear rage or violence,
from which even the Lord Strafford was carefully and easily protected at his
Trial? In your Letters to Sir Lewis Dives you express your self a little
more fully, as one brother would do to another. Thus, God knows I have not a
thought toward my Country to make me blush, much less Criminal; But where
Traitors have so great a sway, the honestest thoughts may prove most
treasonable. This was the first time that ever I heard of the danger of honest
thoughts, of the danger of treasonable thoughts I had read before in a Sermon
of Solomon's. But where was it, that Traitors had so great a sway at that time?
was it in the House of Commons? They either could, or would have done no more
but accuse you, and if Traitors had so great a sway among them, their
accusation would have had the less credit either with the Lords or with the
World. Was it in the House of Peers? I know your Lordship will not say, that
was your intendment, for if you should, it might much aggravate your fault, no
way excuse your declining their judicial sentence, it being notoriously
known, that some time after your Lordship went out of England, the resolution
of the House of Peers was not wholly guided by that of the House of Commons
(witness the two offers at the Militia before that Ordinance passed in both
Houses; and His Mai^sties own Testimony in his Declaration of the twelfth of
August, That the House of Peers could not yet be prevailed with to join with
the House of Commons in their extravagances.) But your Lordship is now
resolved, that, by the grace of God it shall never be said, that either the
Parliament has brought you, or his Majesty exposed you to a trial, your own
uprightness shall constantly solicit it, and without recourse in this to
either of their favors. I would to God you had been of the same mind; when you
procured His Majesty's license to go into Holland, and that in stead thereof
you had been an humble suitor to his Mai^stie, to have distinguished the crimes
he has since laid to the charge of the accused Members of both Houses (in his
often cited Declaration of the twelfth of August) into done out of Parliament,
and done in Parliameut: And to have preferred inditements against them for the
one, but have left the other to the determination of Parliament. For of the
third sort, which is, done by authority or command of Parliament, I presume there
were few, if any, amounting to treason, to be pretended, much less proved, at
the time of their first accusation. By this means possibly Justice might have
proceeded against your Lordship and them, and the Kingdom might have continued
in peace. Whereas now through your Lordships absenting your self, and the
unhappy misunderstanding between his Majesty and the Parliament touching the
Privilege of the accused Members thereof in the case of Treason, the whole
Kingdom, not excepting the Members of both. Houses of Parliament are so
divided, that all that take part with the one, are by the other declared to be
Traitors; and while it so remainath, what pobissility is there, of such a fair,
regular, imparriall trial for any man, either in Parliament or at Common Law,
as your Lordship intends? For your Lordship (as it appears by your
Apology) is not resolved to stand as a justified man to the world, or to fall
as an ^nnocent, till it please God to bless this Nation with ^uch a composure
of the present distractions, as that Government and Law may have their
rightful course: And yet you are resolved not to accept a pardon from the King
and Parliament, for treason, or for any voluntary crime, either against your
Sovereign, or your Country. For ought can be perceived the accused Members are
as fully resolved of this, but in the mean time the poor simple honest Country
man is plundered on both sides, and while your Lordship, and those noble and
worthy Members of both Houses stand so highly upon your innocence, he bears
all the punishment, which I would they and your Lordship would lay to heart,
lest that Cicero in Orat. ad Qu^ri: post reditum. Pro me praesente senatu^,
hominumque praeterea vigenti nullia vestem mutave runt. and Paulo post. Quum
omnes boni non recusarent, quin vel pro me, vel mecum p^^irent, armis decertare
pro nica salute nolui, quod and vnicerc, and vinci lactuosum reipublicae ^erc
putavi. vide Relic
Roman rise up one day in judgment against you and them, who chose rather to
go into a voluntary banishment, then to be the subject matter of a civil war,
and was so rewarded for that piety toward his Country, that he returned in a
more glorious triumph, then by the Laws of that State he might have done, if
all his enemies, which were also the enemies thereof, had been defeated by him.
And yet I would not be judged so partial either to my self or to my Country
Neighbors as once to let such a thought, much less a word escape me, that my
hands and theirs have not been deep in the blood has been shed. His Mai^sties
Declaration to all his loving Subjects, published with the advice of his Privy
Counsel, in Answer to the Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdom, set forth
by the House of Commons the fifteenth of De^ember 1641. before the beginning of
the troubles of this last year, has an Oraculous conclusion. We shall now
conjure all our good Subjects (of what degree soever) by all the bonds of love,
duty, or obedience, that are precious to good men, to join with us for the
recovery of the peace of that Kingdom (Ireland) and for the preservation of the
peace of this, to remove all their doubts and fears, which may interrupt their
affections to Us, and all their iealousies and apprehensions, which may lessen
their charity to each other, and then ( if the sins of this Nation have not
prepared an inevitable judgment for us all)^ God will yet make Us a great and
a glorious King over a free and happy people. It was true most gracious
Sovereign, it was true. Your high wisdom, elevated by that of your godly and
prudent Senators, did well foresee and foretell, how your Majesty and your
People might still have been happy, if our sins had not so far provoked our ^od
to jealousy, that there was no remedy but his wrath must needs break forth
against us to consume us, as it does this day. For else it had not bin possible
that his Majesty and his great Counsel the Parliament should ever have
entertained such a reciprocal jealousy and mutual diffidence of one another
as soon after this appeared, and has since more fully bin discovered to the
whole world, to the great scandal of his Majesty, and of the Parliament, and
to no advantage of the Subject, or of the Nation, else it had not been
possible, that through the same jealousy, His Majesty and his high Court of
Parliament should ever have differed (shall I say) so much or so little about
the formality of proceeding against persons upon information, whether true or
false, accused of high Treason, that although his Majesty ommitted nothing
that could have been done on his part, either for the rectifying of the
mistake, which had already happened upon this occasion, or for the repairing,
and asserting of an involuntary breach of privilege, or for pr^venting of
more, by his desire to be directed by them in the course he was to take; And
though the Parliament on their part did not let to show his Majesty the
original ground of that misprision, in that no Accuser appeared against the
accused, and the House of Commons apart in a Committee thereof, Declared that
they were so far from any endeavor to protect any of their Members that shall
be in due manner prosecuted according to the Laws of the Kingdom, and the
rights and privileges of Parliament, for Treason or any other misdemeanour,
That none shall be more ready and willing than they themselves to bring them to
a speedy and due Trial; yet this misunderstanding brought thus near to a right
understanding, that nothing remained in difference, but whether his Majesty
were to produce the Suggestor before the accused persons were put into safe
custody, could never be reconciled by the help of diverse Presidents since
alleged in the very point. Else it had not been possible that the Ambassadors
of the Prince of peace one great part of whose instructions is to persuade all
the Subjects of his Kingdom if it be possible, and as much as in them lies,
to have peace with all men, should have opened their purses so wide on the on
side, and their mouths on the other, to the beginning, furtherance, and
continuance of so unnatural a war; And that no one of them (that I have heard
of) being all I hope the sons of Abraham, should have remembered us of whose
words of his, Let th^re be no strife I pray thee, between me and thee, nor
between my h^rd-man and thy herd-man, for we be brethren: though the Canaanite,
and Perezite dwell in the Land, and are in great expectance to continue their
possession, if not to drive us out through the advant^ge of this great
contention between us, for, no greater a matter then I have said. Else it had
not been possible, that learned and godly men of this Coat on both sides, The
Resolving of conscience by Henry Fern Doct: D. Sermon of Ier. Buroughs,
^ntituled, The Lord of Hosts, etc. New Plea for the Parliament, And the
Reserved Man resolved. So resolved by him that if he will keep a good
conscience, and observe his principles, then as he has put the case, and
pleaded for the Parliament, the Reserved Man must a^^^st the King, which I
conceive would please the pleader worse then his Newtrallity.
whose only business it is to preach the Gospel, and to advance the Kingdom
of Heaven, should first have played the busy bodies in taking upon them to
resolve conscience in a cause depending merely and entirely upon a point of our
Law, and then to have been so unhappy in this undertaking, as to have done much
more harm, than good to that side respectively for which they have appeared,
if they also had not been as much blinded, that have been misled by them. Else
it had not been possible that among so many wise, and religious men versed in
affairs of State, as are to be found in this Kingdom, one only Fuller Answer
to a Treatise written by Doctor Fern, wherein the original frame, and
fundamentalls of this government of England, togeth^r with these two Texts of
Scripture. Romans 13. 1. 1. Pet. 2. 13, are sufficiently cleared.
(to my knowledge) seeing it thus mis^rably distracted by the involuntary
seduction of silly sheep following their seduced Shepherds, should have put
pen to paper to reduce them into the right way, and that he also should have
mistaken it, who beside his saying that which is of great disadvantage to the
cause for which he pleads, has laid such a foundation, that the whole liberty
of the Commons of England may be in danger to be overthrown, by that
superstruction he has set upon it. And therefore, as one of them I must here
protest against his building for my part. Else it had not bin possible, that
all the many sollicitous endeavors, used by his Majesty and the Parliament to
prevent the kindling of a civil war, while the fire was yet raked up in ashes,
and to extinguish it when it was but newly broken forth, should by the
encounter of a certain fatal kind of Antiperistasis on both sides, have
rather increased, then abated the heat of the smothering fire, and, like water
sprinkled to quench, have made it rise up again into a more furious flame. Else
it had not been possible, that so good a KING, and so good a PARLIAMENT, who
had agreed in the enacting of more good Laws for the ease of the Subject, then
ever any before them did in a like space of time, should, upon so small an
occasion, have come to disagree so far, that they should have charged one
another with a respective purpose to introduce an unlimited, Arbitrary power
over us, and to destroy one another, with the confessed apparent hazard of the
kingdom of Ir^land. Else it had not been possible, that Arms should have been
taken up by King and Parliament in defense of all, and every the very same
things, and that men, who had taken a voluntary Protestation to defend all the
same things, and one another in the defense of them, should thereby have
thought themselves rather obliged to kill and slay one another, as they did at
Edgehill, and in many other places before and since, in the pursuance of their
own private respective sense, then to Petition a public agreement about the
meaning of some words of great latitude, and very extendible in the said
Protestation, and in the mean time for a peace about the thing, signified by
them.

To the reducing of all which incomprehensible possibilities into act, our sins
indeed had made this kingdom ^inder, but the first spark came from your
Lordship in the general bel^ef of the people. And if I unde^stand their
disposition, your offer to put your self upon your Trial, whether it were you
or no, when the fire which now rages so fiercely, shall be utterly
extinguished, will hardly obtain the charity you implore in the mean time. If
any thing will do it, the notice may be taken of your bestirring your self with
all your might, and diligence ^o help, and get help to quench it; if you shall
really and fervently employ your own, and all your friends hands to that
purpose, is the most likely way to save your reputation with them. Your
Lordship knows what has been r^ported to His Majesty, of a Speech of Master
Pyms, That what disservice soever any man has done formerly, if his present
actions were such as brought benefit to the Commonwealth, he ought not to be
qu^stioned for what was past, but cherished and protected. And his Majesty
gives an example of some persons, by whose misinformation and advise the last
unhappy meeting in Parliament was disolved, who are now looked upon under
another Character. I suppose for their good service in this. Up and be doing
the like, and the Lord be with you. You cannot yet be charged to have so much
as occasioned the dissolution of this once happy Parliament through
misinformation. Preserve it from the danger some wise men think it is in of
being destroyed, and all Parliaments in it; and why may you not hope this good
service may preserve you? I know your Lordship can never incline to follow the
example upon the unworthy principles of some men, that have given it, you have
upon all occasions expressed a truly noble heart, and such a one will never
suffer you to entertain base thoughts of complying, and striking in with those
that have the favor of the time, without any regard of the ways taken by
them, or of making your self, and your interest, or subsistence the measure of
your judgment, and proceedings in affairs of State, you say, you walk by other
rules, and I believe it. You have been then most zealous, and fervent for the
Liberties of the Subject, when the power of the Court was most prevalent; and
for the rights of the Crown, when popular License was most predominant. And if
there should be yet another revolution of those Orbs, (whereof I can make no
good judgment in the low valley where I live, but I do not like the Phaenonema
which appear to me there) I am confident the remembrance of the great comfort
you received in your countries acceptance of your first attempts in its
service, at a time when the Court was at highest, will be an effectual motive
to engage you in the same course again, the rather for your being so little
indebted to the world for good usage in the time of your affl^ction; which will
be an excellent Foil to set off the luster of your magnanimity. And in the mean
time, what can be more noble, then for your Lordship to become the secret
advocate of those men, of whom, by common fame you stand charged to have been
the secret Accuser? Or who can be so powerful an Advocate for them with his
Majesty? Or wherein can you do the King more true service, then in doing them
good offices to His Majesty so far, as you may with truth?

I hope with truth so much may be said by your Lordship of them, and by them of
your Lordship, as may satisfy the King and Kingdom of all your loyalties to
His Majesty and to your Country, if you were once put into that way, which I
wish some abler man would endeavor, but I will show my good will to the work.
The time is not long since your conversation was, and you made or endeavored
to make your friendships with those whose experience, and abilities were most
eminent for the public service. Some of the accused Members in all appearance
were some of those men, and I will not despair to live to see your friendship
with them redintegrated the more firmly by the great breach has happened between
you. In any thing that was necessary, or but probably pretend^d to be necessary
for the Commonwealth, you never differed in the least degree. If this be true
(as by that I have heard otherwise, for my part I believe it) they have
opportunity and ability to make it known to the two Houses of Parliament, and
how the repo^t of this is like to spread, and be multiplied among the Common
people in all Countries, if it were once d^rivabl^ from such considerable
Authors, your Lordship has had experience by the contrary. But in
improvements, in real alterations which were to be governed by prudentiall
motives, you were not always of one mind. I am sorry for it, but I do not
wonder at it. I should have had greater suspicion of you and them, if you had
not sometimes differed in such points. I know a man to whom our late Sovereign
King James of famous memory gave a great Schooling for his presuming to differ
from his Majesty in hi^ judgment of his affairs, that either answered, or had
much ado to forbear answ^ring, that although his Majesty was incomparably the
most politic and best Prince in Europe; yet he that made show of being
always in all things of his mind in his affairs of State, was either a fool
or a knave. The reason of which Apothegme may satisfy his Majesty that now is,
and all his people, of your, and their wisdom and integrity to both their
service, the rather in respect of the variety of your opinions concerning it.
Your Lordship it seems went by a good rule not to be too hardy to incline to
great mutations in State. But he was one of the wis^st men of his age Francis
lord Verulam.
(for judgment) that observed, that, Time is the greatest innovator, and then
asked, if time of course alter things to the worse, and wisdom and Counsel
shall not alter them to the better, what shall be the end? My Lord, no man is a
greater admirer of the wisdom our Anc^stors have showed in the ancient
constitutions of this Kingdom than I, according to the small measure of my
understanding in them; And yet, since time has made so great an alteration in
the Domestic grounds of some of their prudent constitutions, and our neighbor
Kingdoms are so much altered too, from what they were in former ages, I will
be bold to say, That neither the King nor Kingdom can attain to that
grea^nesse, nor happiness which all good Subjects ought to wish unto them
both, without a great alteration by mutual free consent in things concerning
them both, from ancient customs and present Statutes. By that light your
Lordship, and the public proceedings have given me, I guess that in this
point your Lordship was too short, in thinking that as soon as the Trienniall.
Bill was passed (in the procuring whereof you had so great a part) all our
other desires would effect themselves, and that we were freed from all public
fears. And they on the other side, after the passing of the Act for the
continuance of this Parliament, were perhaps too long before they came to be of
your mind, That there was then no more to be thought on, but how in a grateful
return to his Ma: to advance his honor and plenty^ as you have often heard
those principal Intendents of the public good most solemnly profess they
intended. But I will not engage my self in this so bold discourse further than
this: That if your Lordship be (as I am) absolutely of opinion, that they do
yet most sincerly intend what they so solemnly professed, your Lordship ought
to do them right to his Majesty in that point, wherein you shall do as much to
your self. Your Lordship relates no particular difference, but one in the
b^sinesse of the Church; and to that I will restrain my self. In that you say,
having had frequent consultations with the chiefest Agents for a Reformation,
and finding no three men to agree upon what they would have in the place of
that they all resolved to remove, you agreed not with the prevailing sense,
having not hardiness enough, to incline to a mutation, which would evidently
have so great an influence upon the peace, prosperity, and interest of the
Kingdom. This very reason of your Lordships would have prevailed with me to
incline to a mutation: yet if this were your only consideration, which I should
believe if I had not heard of another mentioned at the beginning of this
Answer; Or if this and that joined together were all your motives to stand so
stiff for the retention of Episcopacy, what honest wise man can blame you for
it? For me, I have not wit enough to find your fault, And yet I am so much of
another judgment, that I conceive the peace and prosperity of this Kingdom
(diseased as now it is) will not be perfectly recovered without an utter
abolition of Episcopacy, though a reduction thereof to the pattern of the
primitive institution of Diocesans may possi^ly be a fitter remedy for the
present distemper, between which two ^ am much divided in my own thoughts^ but
I rather prope^^d to an abolition, I think the reasons which have been given by
the Church and Counsel of Scotland, The Scots Declaration of August 3. 1642
printed Sep. 1. by the order of our Parliam. together with an Extract of the
Acts of the secret Council of Scotland, Aug. 18.
to this purpose very considerable. But that which moves me m^st is the great
swarm of Sectaries which is up among us, and which certainly will never be well
h^ved under an Archbishops Pall, or a Bishops Miter^ if peradventure they may
be gotten under any government, which I conceive to be a matter of infinite
importance to the quiet of this Church and ^tate; And I see it is so
apprehended by his Majesty. For they are all agreed that Bishops are
Antichristian. The two small Books of one Nonconformist have operated more
toward the staying of good Christians in this Kingdom from separation than two
hundred volumes as well written of the same Argument by Prelates or prelaticall
men could have done. Indeed he was the most judicious, and moderate
Nonconformist, after M. Bain^s that ever I heard of, M. B^ll of Whitmore. And
though I am not of that mind in their sense, yet I co^ceive the institution of
the superiority of B^^ over Presbiters was the first step by which Anti-X^
ascended into his Throne of universal Bishop; and I would therefore have it
taken down in due time, being of the belief that a principio non fuit sic, is
the only right rule of Reformation. But whether this and some other steps yet
standing in our Church should be quite taken down all at once, is (...), a
sceptick question in a matter of State. For the Apostles themselves had respect
to considerations of prudence in the abolition of ancient usages, and so may
we. The reason for the doing of the work by pieces which swayeth with me is
your Lordships, expressed thus, Let us resolve upon that course wherein (with
union) we may probably promise our selves, success, happiness, and security:
which whether we shall do in a present utter demolition of all manner of
Episcopacy so much still affected by many of our grave learned and godly
Divines, I do a little doubt, and I do not see how we can want their labors
without greater inconveniences to our church, then in retaining primitive
Diocesan Bishops or superintendents for a time, till there be a clear plurality
of learned godly Ministers, which can hardly be hoped for, till some Laws now
in force have bin altered some good time. But your Lordp has made a most
prudent motion, That if it stand with order of Parliaments) we may desire that
there may be a starding ^ommittee of certain Members of both Houses, who (with
a number of such Learned Ministers ^as the Houses shall nominate for assistants)
may take into consideration all the Grievances springing from the misgovernment
of the Church, and advise of the best way to settle pe^ce and satisfaction in
the government thereof, to the comfort of all good Christians, and of all good
Commonwealths men. Lord Digbies Speech concerning Bishops.
whereunto, and to many. other passages in your Lordships Speech touching
Bishops, if they that are most against them would take due heed, they would be
less against your Lordship, and their own ends then they have been and are. We
might have had the same ease for tender consciences in the days of Queen
Elizabeth, which his Majesty is most graciously inclined to grant now, if some
fiery Zelots of that time had not answered Secretary Walsingham (employed to
sound whether that would content them) that they would not leave a hoof of
Israel in Egypt. Which rash answer kept them, and so many godly Ministers, and
people since their times so much longer in the Egypt, your Lordp. has so well
described. God give us more wisdom now. Rome was not built, nor will be pulled
down in one day. And therefore I see not why your Lordship, and those other
Parliament men with whom you consulted, might not have well agreed about this
Church-work, or why his Majesty, or any other truly religious man should be
offended either with your temper, or with theirs in it.

Oh but his Majesty has heard of the License taken by them at their private
Cabals to undervalue and vi^ifie the Kings person, and power: Of their having
designed to have taken the Prince his son from him by force; nay to have se^sed
on his own sacred Person: Of a solemn Combination, and Conspiracy entered into
by them, for altering the ^overnment of the Church and State: Of their
soliciting and drawing down Tumults to Westminster to remove all that stood in
their way (Bishops, Popish, Evil, and Rotten No wood is nearer to rottenness.
then some that seems to shine.
hearted Lords) by a kind of force; and by the same means to awe such of the
House of Commons as were not of their minds in all things: Of some of the
Clergy, who were their Emissaries, and chief Agents to derive their seditious
directions to the people, when there was need of their help: Of their treating
with foreign power to assist them as soon as their designs should be ripe: Nay,
his Majesty can prove much of this by their own Letters. I will not here repeat
what I could extract out of the Declarations of both Houses of Parliament of as
many other as strange tales told of designs of his Majesty's so credibly, that
it seems they have been believed by so wise a Senate. I will keep my self to
your Lordships Apology: And that you may reflect the more sadly upon the
condition of these Gentlemen by looking upon your own: Let me in the first
place beseech you to cast your eye upon these passages. What collection was
made of your being observed to be at Court: what report was made in the City of
that you delivered in the House of Commons to the Bill of Attainder: what
censure you incurred for suffering that Speech to be printed without your
privity; and yet could find no means to clear your self: what portion was
designed to you for going to Kingston upon Thames in a warlike manner in a
Coach and six hired horses with one single man in the Coach with you, and one
servant riding by you to the terror of the Kings liege people^ what a dangerous
Letter your first to the Queens Majesty was, by the interception whereof your
going upon your Masters errend in the equipage abovesayd came to amouut to
levying war against his Majesty: what other glosses were made on your other
Letters. Then turn the tables and ask your self whether by like unlucky
chances the accused Members may not have as hard an after game to play as you.
Whether his Majesty, allowing him to be the wisest Christian King in the world
(as I think him) may not yet be more easily mis-in^ormed, and more hardly
disabused, then his two Houses of Parliament. Whether that which his Majesty
has heard of discourses held by them at their private meetings, and of
Messages sent by them to their confederates, be not more subject to misreport
and mis-interpretation, than that which was spoken by your Lordship in
Parliament before so many hundred witnesses: whether as probable tales might
not be told of their design upon the persons of the King, Queen, or Prince, as
of our your Lordships being an enemy to Parliaments, treating with Danes, or
being at the head of the rebels^ in Ireland, and yet as little truth in them:
whether their conferring among themselves, and consulting with others in this
Kingdom, or of a for^eign Nation, of the ways and means, and manner of
altering any part of the government of this Church, or State into a better
form, and of the opposition they were like to find therein; were not as
convertible into a solemn Combination and conspiracy to do it by force, as
the Message you delivered to forty or fifty Gentlemen totally strangers to you,
was to be metamorphosed into the sh^pe it was: whether there they may not have
had as little hand in the Tumults whereof they are charged to have been the
^ontrivers, as your Lordship had in that which your brother did without your
knowledge, and yet whether they may not have met wit^ as great difficulties to
come to clear themselves from the treasonable speeches vented in them: whether
the imp^tation laid upon many godly Ministers of the City and Country may not
be the dreggs of that cup of the Prelates vengeance, which your Lordship has
so lively expressed in your Speech concerning them, Me thinks the vengeance of
the Prelates has been so laid as ^f 'twere meant no generation, no degree, no
complexion of mankind should escape it. Was there a man of a nice and tender
conscience? Him have they afflicted with scandal in Adiaphoris, imposing on
him those things as necessary, which he thinks unlawful, and they themselves
knew to be but indifferent. Was there a man of a legal conscience, that made
the establishments by Law the measure of his Religion? Him have they n^ttled
with innovations, with fresh introductions to Popery. Was there a man of a me^k
and humble spirit? Him have they trampled to dirt in their pride. Was there a
man of a proud and arrogant nature? Him have they borest with indignation as
their superlative insolence above him^ Was there a man peaceably affected,
studious of the quiet and tranquillity of his Country^ Their incendiariship has
plagued him. Was there a man faithfully addicted to the right of the Crown,
loyally affected to the Kings Supremacy? How has he been galled by their new
oath, a direct Covenant against it? Was there a man tenacious of the liberty
and propriety of the Subject? Have they not set forth books, or Sermons, o^
Canons destructive to them all. Was there a man of a pretty sturdy conscience,
that would not bl^nch for a little? Their pernicious oath has made him
sensible, and wounded, or I fear prepared him for the Devil. Was there a man
that durst m^tter against their insolences? He may enquire for his luggs, they
have been within the Bishops Vi^^tation, as if they would not only derive
their brandishment of the spiritual Sword from Saint Peter, but of the
material one too, and the right to cut off ears. Lord Digbies Speech touching
Bishops.
or at the worst may not be imputed to the impatience of those their former
sufferings you have so largely set forth, which is an excuse his Majesty has
been graciously pleased to make for others in as great a fault. And lastly say
that for the Letters of the accused Members which you have said for your own,
and then upon the whole matter judge, whether without breach of charity (which
begins at home) you may not conceive it possible they may be as innocent, as
you know your self to be, and then I hope they may judge the like of you, and
the King and Kingdom may be of your mind and theirs.

But how then came they, and you, and the King and Parliament to have such
strange impressions of one another? Oh that it were a world to be merry in! I
should then dare to say pleasantly, that I doubt the story of this last year
may at last prove a Romans of the Devils making in a great part of it. But I
must be serious, and I will therefore say soberly, The envious man has sown
these tares of jealousy, and calumny (which ever grow up together) while his
Majesty and his Parliament slept, and the watchmen of our Israel slept also
in part, and in part were otherwise too busy, and I, and such as I, thought
good seed sown in so good a season, and ground, would spring up of it self
though we neither watched nor prayed; and it may be gloried and trusted more in
those noble Worthies (for that name we had given them, and it may be they may
have been too ready to assume it) then in God that instructed them how, and
when, and what to cast into the ground. Ex illo sluere, and retro sublapsa
referri Spes etc. -- How should the Devil have upheld his Kingdom if he had
not divided this, when King and Parliament, and priest and people were so well
agreed, and in some sort almost all inclined to advance the Kingdom of Jesus
Christ in it? When the Parliament had procured from his Majesty such redresses
of the grievances of the Subject as were to their and the Kingdoms abundant
satisfaction, and yet his Majesty of his superabundant grace desired, and
desired, and urged and pressed to know what they desired more, by his so often
reiterated Message of the 20. of January (which will be a more lasting monument
of his wisdom and goodness then any can ever be errected for him by the Prince
his Son) and when the Kingdom thus far secured, and offered to be secured at
home, at the same time enjoyed so universal a peace abroad, that it had no
visible enemy in the whole world, either infidel or Christian (as has been
well observed by my Lord your father) how should this envious enemy of mankind
have hindered us of this Nation from being happy, but by kindling and fomenting
iealousies and dissensions, and at length blowing them up into a war among our
selves? What is there never a Loyal Subject in this Kingdom so famous for
Loyalty? Are the best men in it become the worst Subjects? Are all the godly
Ministers in our Church suddenly grown to be Popishly, or Seditiously affected?
Is the most clement of our Kings turned enemy to his Parliament, that is to ^is
people, that is to Himself? Has the best Parliament we ever had, a mind to
traduce, to revile, to destroy their King? Are the many persons of honor and
integrity in this Nation, all in disesteem with King or Parliament? Shall the
accused Members (one of them M. Hamp^^n, which Testimony I give him merely for
love of truth, having been much disobliged by him in my own particular.
being a true Israelite in the belief of all Israel) be made guilty of the
treasonable words utterd by any base fellow, or other person without their
knowledge, by an advantage of Law through your Lordships suggestion? Or shall
your Lordship be found a Traitor through their or any of their instigation, for
the desperate words vented by any Ruffian that mingled himself in his
Majesty's train without His or your Lordships consent or approbation, or for
any such like matter? Now the Lord rebuke thee, O Satan, yea the Lord that
has often miraculously saved this Kingdom rebuke thee.

The great dexterity your Lordship has to manage these things, I have now
suggested, and many more will arise in your own thoughts to the same purpose,
may possibly be so well employed by the good instructions you may receive from
one (known to be as able, and who may be as willing to have his hand in all
this, as Ioab was to prepare the widow of Tekoah to tell her well made tale)
that his Majesty may once more be graciously pleased, not only to have the
supposed fault of the accused Members wrapped up in the bundle of the unwilling
and unknowing errors of his Subjects, and so pardoned among the rest; but to
receive them into his favor. Your Lordship remembers your own words, that it
was a principal ^oy to you, to see those persons, who had been the prime
Actors in the happy Reformation of this Parliament so acceptable at Court. Pray
to God to give you the same joy again. The Kings admirable clemency has
produced many as great wonders in his Reign. My Lord your father is an example
in the very point. And the Kings heart is still in the same hand, that turned
it toward him after as great an aversation. And if your Lordship once find
this great block that lies in the way of the peace of the Kingdom begin to
stir, then put all your own, and your friends strength to it. Have no doubt
that you shall not receive the like favor from the accused Members, though you
never convey to them the least knowledge of that you have done in their
behalf. Solomon has observed, that when a man's ways please the Lord, he
makes his enemies to be at peace with him. And a wiser then Solomon has made
a further observation, that with what measure we meet, it shall be measured to
us again, which it may be your Lordship, or they have found already in ill
measure. He has also promised, that alms done in secret shall be rewarded
openly. Stay not here but do your debvoir toward his Majesty's speedy return
to London, in reparation of the ill advise you were thought to have given about
his withdrawing from thence. And if this breach between your Lordship and them
(the first wound in the representative body of the Kingdom) were once perfectly
consolidated by a general pardon, and Act of Amnesty, why might not his
Majesty safely take his place where he sits as head over that his body, without
the enacting of any more of these new Laws, which one has lately propounded,
Considerations upon the present State of the Kingdom, dedicated to the City of
London in December. 1642.
I hope in respect of the hardness of men's belief (as Moses did his Bill of
divorce) else I must differ from him also in them. But I wholly agree with him
in this, that the most necessary action to be first done, before or on the day
of His Majesty's and his Parliaments meeting, were a most solemn humiliation
for the blood has bin shed (which can never be so put off from one to another,
but it will still lie on the Land) and for the many robberies have been
^ommitted, not by Prince Rupert (who is least guilty of them) but by one
Englishman, one Christian, one Protestant upon another. And in sum for all
those sins, wherewith we, and it may be the King and Parliament have provoked
our God to jealousy; As we have cause to fear in respect of the spirit of
jealousy he has sent among us, and between the^: for the judgments of God on
men, do not seldom point to that sin, wherewith they first grieved him. This
will well set off the action of thanksgiving no less necessary to be performed
for such a happy meeting. And here may be some thing more yet, needful to be
done, for the doing whereof, as no subject is so able, so in some respect no
man is so fit, as my Lord your father, and which if I be not mistaken, would
make him as acceptable to the people, as his extraordinary experience and
abilities have rendered him to his Majesty, which for the Kingdoms sake, I wish
he were, though I have no obligation to him, and some great persons to whom I
am infinit^ly obliged think they have had as little to him as I.

Hark! me thinks I hear a noise of ten thousand times ten thousand people,
making the earth to shake, and the mountains Echo with joyful acclamations.
God save the King, God save the Queen, ^od save the Prince. And after a due
pause, then a confused murmur of as many thousands saying one to another, See
how their Majesty's and His Highness rejoice in the joy of the two Houses of
Parliament waiting on them, and in the joy of all their People. Glory be to ^od
on high for the peace he has given us. And after this a whisper of many asking
every on of his neighbor, Which is the Lord Kimbolton? which is the Lord
Digby? which are the five Members of the House of Commons? Are they also
reconciled and become better friends for their late bitter falling out? And may
we hope that all the Noblemen, and ^entlemen, and all other sorts of people in
the Kingdom will take up the same fashion? This is the Lords doing, blessed be
his holy name. Am I not deceived? No I am not. I will quit my Eremites weed to
go see this great sight, and to give my Plaudite to this happy Catastrophy of
our Tragical Comedy, then return to my Cell, and to my only ambition there,
to attain to that Heaven upon Earth, Francis Lord V^rulant.
which the great Philosopher of our Age and Nation has expressed in his
language, (that is in the best was ever spoken by English man). To have my mind
move in charity, rest in Providence, and turn upon the Poles of Truth.

Madame.
I Shall not adventure to write unto your Majesty with freedom, but by
expresses, or till such time as I have a cipher, which I beseech your Majesty
to vouchsafe me. At this time therefore I shall only let your Majesty know
where the humblest and most faithful servant you have in the world is, Here ^^
Middleborough, where I shall remain in the privat^st way I can, till I receive
i^structions how^ to serve the King and your Majesty in these parts. If the
King betake Himself to a sa^e plac^, where he may avow and protect his
servants from rage (I me^n) and vi^lence, for from justice I will never implore
it, I shall then live in impatience and in misery, till I wait upon you. Bu^
^f after all he h^th done of late, he shall betake himself to the easi^st and
complyantest ways of accommodation, I am confident that th^n I shall serve him
more by my absence then by all my industry, and it will be a comfort to me in
all calamities, if I cannot serve you by my actions, that I may do it in some
kind by my sufferings for your sake; ha^ing (I protest to God) no measure of
happin^sse or misfortune in this world, but what I derive from your Majesty's
value of my affection and fidelity.

Middleborough the 21. of January, 1641.
The Supscription of the Letter. For my Worthy friend Sir Jews Div^s Knight^
at the Earl of Bristolls house i^ (...), LONDON.
Dear Brother,
I Hope you will have received the Letter which I wrote unto you from aboard
Sir John Pe^^ington, wherein I gave you account of the accident of O Neals man,
and why I thought fitting to continue my journey into Holland; going still upon
this ground, (...) if things go on by way of accommod^tion, by my absence the
King will be advantaged: I^ the King declare Himsel^e, and ^^tire to a safe
place, I shall be able to wait upon him from h^^^, as well ^s out o^ any part
of England, ov^r and above the service which I may d^ Him here in the mean
time. Besides, that, I ^ound all the Ports so strict, that if I had not taken
th^s opportunity of Sir John Penningtons forwardness in the Kings se^vice, it
would have bin impossible for me to have gotten away at any other time.

I am now here at Middleborough, at the Golden-fleece upon the Market, at one
Geo^ge P^^r^o^s h^us^, where I will remain till I receive from you
advertisement of the state of things, and likew^se inst^uctions from their
Maj^sti^s; which I desire you to hasten unto me by some safe hand^ an^ withal
to s^nd unto me a cyph^r, whereby we may write unto one anoth^^ fr^^ly. If you
knew how ^asie a passage it were, you would o^fer the King to come ^ver for
some few days your self. God knows I have not a thought toward my ^ountry to
^ake ^e blush, much less criminal; but where Traitors have so great a sway,
the ^onest^st thoughts may prove most trea^onable.

Let Duk S^^^lty be di^patcht hi^h^r^ speedily, with such black clothes and
l^nnen as I (...); and let your letters be directed to the Baron of Sherborn,
for by that name I live unknown. Let care be taken for Bills of Exchang^.

Middleborough. Ian. 20. 1641, Yours

The Lord DIGBYES Letter to the Queens Majesty.
Madam, HAGUE, March 10. 1642.
IT is the first contentment that I have been cap^ble of this long time, That
your Majesty ^^ safely arrived in HOLLAND, Withdrawn from a Country so
unworthy of you.

I should have wa^ted the first upon you, both to have tendered my duty
according to my pre^^dence of oblig^tion abov^ others, and to h^ve informed
your Majesty the timeliest, of the state of this place, wither you are coming,
both in point of affect^ons and in^erests, but that there fly about such
reports, that the Parliament has d^sir^d your Majesty not to admit me to your
Presence, as I da^e not presume into it without particular perm^ssion. The
ground of their mal^volence toward me in this particular, is said to be upon
some Letters, which they have presumed to open, directed unto your Majesty from
me, which I pro^esse I cannot apprehend; for I am certain, that I have not
written to your Majesty the least word that can be wrested to an ill sens^, by
my greatest en^mies, having not so much as mentioned any business to your
Majesty since I left England. To the King I wr^te on^e with that hardiness,
which I thought His a^^aires and complexion required; but that L^tter was sent
by so safe hands, as I cannot apprehend the miscarrying of it. However M^^am,
if my misfortune be so great, as that I must be deprived of the sole comfort of
my (...), of waiting on Your Majesty, and following Your fortunes; I beseech
You, let my doom be so signified unto me, as that I may retire with the least
shame, that well may be, to bewail my unhappiness, which yet will be
supportable, if I may be but assured that inwardly that gen^rous and princely
hearts preserves me the place of

(MADAM,) Your Majesty's most faithful, and most affectionate humble servant.

Master Ellyots Letter to the Lord DIGBY.
My Lord,
YOu have ever been so willing to oblige, that I cannot despair of your favor
in a busin^sse wher^in I am much concerned; The King was pleased to employ me
to London to my Lord Keeper for the Seals, which though after two hours
consideration he refused, yet being resolved not to be denied, my importunity
at last prevailed; which service the King has declared was so great, that he
has promised a reward equal to it; it may be the King expects I should move
him for some place, which I shall not do, being resolved never to h^^e any but
the Queen, being already so infinitely obliged to her for her favors, that I
confess I would owe my being only to her; nor shall I ever value that life I
hold, but as a debt which I shall ever pay to her commands: The favor which I
desire from your^ Lordship, is; That you will engage the Queen to write to the
King, that he would make me a Groom of his Bedchamber, which since I know it is
so abs^lutely in her power to do, I shall never think of an other way, for
which favor neither her Majesty nor your Loydship shall ever find a m^re
real servant. For our affairs they are now in so good a condition, that if we
are nor undone by harkening to an A commodation, there is nothing else can hurt
us, which I fear the King is too much inclined to, but I h^pe what he shall
receive from the Queen, will make him so resolved, that nothing but a
satisfaction equ^ll to the injuries he has received, will make him quit the
advantage he now ^^th; which I do not doubt will be the means o^ bringing your
Lordship quickly hither where you shall find none more ready to obey your
Commands,

York the 27 of May, 1642.

Then your most faithful and humble servant, THO: ELLIOT.

Observations upon the same Letters.
THe Lords and Commons have commanded these ensuing Letters and Votes to be
printed. The copy of a Letter writt^n by the Lord Digby to the Queen the 10 of
M^^ch^ last, of his own handwriting, An origin^ll Letter w^itten to the Lord
Digby, by M^st^^ Thomas Eliot from Y^^ke the 27 of May last, Two notes of Arms,
the one of which is partly His Maj^sties own hand, both found among my Lord
Digb^^s papers: In the Letter of the Lord Digby to the Qu^^n, it may be
observ^d, how he discovers his venomous h^^rt to this Kingdom, in that
malicious censure, that we are a Countr^y unworthy of h^^; unworthy indeed to
be so often designed to ^uine and destruction, to be undermined and
circumvent^d by so many plots and devilish projects of Jesuits, and Priests,
and other the most factious and malignan^ spirits in Christ^ndome, by which we
had been often ruined and destroyed, i^ Gods wonder^^ll mercy had not preserved
us^ and we call his Divine Majesty to witn^sse, that we have never done any
thing against the personal safety or Honor of Her Majesty; only we have
desired to be secured from such plots, from such mischi^^^us Engine^^ that they
mig^t not have the favor of the Court, and such a powerful influence upon His
Majesty's Councels, as they have had, to the extreme hazard not only of the
civil Liberty and Peace of the Kingdom, but of that which we hold de^rer much
than these, yea, then the very being of this Nation, our Religion, whereupon
depends the Honor of Almighty God, and salvation of our souls, Let this Lord,
who was long amongst us, and knew the grounds of our proceedings, and most
secret consultations, produce any thing (if he can) of undutifulnesse, or
dis-respect to her Majesty, expressed or intended by us.

Another discovery in the Letter is this, That this Lord confes^eth that he
writ to His Majesty with the hardiness which he thought His af^airs and
complexion required; what this was, may well be perceived in a Letter from
himself to the Queen, heretofore printed by our direction, his affairs in the
judgment of this Lord required, that he should withdraw Himself from His
Parliament, betake Himself to some place of strength, such was the counsel he
then gave Him, and how well it has bin followed, every man may perceive; but
what His Majesty's Complexion required, that may seem a greater mystery, and
yet this may be collected out of that Letter; That His Majesty in the
appr^h^nsion of this Lord, was too inclinable to an Accommodation with His
Parliament, which in a kind of scorn in that Letter; is called the easy, or
the sage way; this Complexion so beseeming a good Prince, required such a hardy
and vehement provocation to wrath and war against His Subjects, as this Lord
presumed to express in that Letter, and besides his treachery to the Kingdom,
we may herein observe a great degree of insolence and contempt toward His
Majesty, that he should dare in a Letter to the Queen, to tax His Majesty's
Complexion with so much as mildness toward His people, must needs be required
such hardy and bold Couns^ll.

In Master Eliots Letter it may be first observed, That whilst His Majesty
contests with His Parliament for some questionable Prerogatives concerning the
Commonwealth, His own servants do really deprive him of an undoubted
Prerogative, of being the Sovereign disposer of favors and preferments in His
own Family, which this Gentleman does express in that resolution, never to
have any place about His Majesty, but by the Queen, and may be further observed
what these desperate Counsels about the King are most afraid of, and what they
think most hu^tfull to themselves, that His Majesty should be inclined to an
Accommodation with His people; By this they fear to be undone, that is to lose
that prey, the estates of the Parliament men, and other good Subjects, which
they have already devoured in their own fancies, and that they expect to be
preserved from this undoing by the Queens interposing.

By these two Notes may be observed, that at the time whilst so many
Declarations were published in His Majesty's Name, with solemn Protestations
of His Majesty's intentions of raising only a Guard for His own Person, all
sorts of Provision for an Army were made beyond the seas, and this poor
Kingdom designed to the misery and confusion of war, and under the disguise of
defending the Protestant profession, an Army to be raised in the intention of
these wicked Counselors, for the suppressing and destruction of the Protestant
Religion.

A Note of the Arms sent for by the KING from Amsterdam.
C. R.

Two hundred firelocks. 4 pieces of Cannon for battery, viz. 1 Cannon. 1
Demi-Cannon. 2 whole Culverin. 2 Mortars. 4 Petards. 10 field-peeces of 6 pound
bullet mounted. One hundred Barrels of powder. Round shot and case proportioned
to the several Pieces. Two thousand pair of Pistolls. One thousand Carbines.
Three thousand Saddles. Three thousand Muskets. One thousand Pikes.

C. R.
Iran de gerre a Amsterdam and Bartholetti. Agent de la langravine de Hen.
Wickford.
Die Lunae 1. Augusti 1642.
Ordered, that the Letters from the Lord Digby, and M. Thomas Elliot, and the
Note of arms sent for by the King from Amsterdam, be printed: And that it be
referred to the Committee for the Defense of the Kingdom, to prepare a
Pre^mble, and to make some Observations upon these Letters.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Postscript.
TO give my self the honor of becoming your Lordships Gentleman-usher in the
way of retractation, I shall not blush freely here to confess that when I made
that mine Answer to your Lordships Speech to the Bill of Attainder, I had not
observed that the breach of the Sabbath among the Jews was punishable by death
by any Command of God, before that which was given upon the occasion of the
gatherer of sticks, which was a manifest ignorance in me. For Exodus 31. 14. we
find these words, Ye shall keep the Sabbath for it is holy unto you, every one
that defiles it shall surely be put to death, for whosoever does any work
therein that soul shall be cut off from among his People. Whereby it seems
that the question about the stick-gatherer was in the regard of the lightness
of the work he had done; or of some other occasion now unknown to us, but that
makes no difference in the case, in respect of the use I made of the example.
And upon this occasion I cannot forbear to observe, that the gross^ breaches of
all the Commandments of the first Table were made Capital by God; which is a
matter worthy of much consideration by them that have the Legislative power in
all Christian States. There is yet another greater slipp in that Answer of
min^. Where having that in my thoughts which your Lordship has so well
expressed as I have recited it in the beginning of that page. There is in
Parliament a double power of life and death by Bill; a judicial power and a
Legislative power^ the measure of the one is what is legally just, of the other
what is prudentially, and pollitickly fit for the good and preservation of the
whole. I ^n my Answer thereunto expressed my self too short in these words,
But in either of those cases to deny unto that Represent^tive body, the High
Court of the Kingdom, a liberty to do any thing not unjust in it self, (though
not as yet legally declared to be just) for the preservation of that gre^^er
body it represents, when according to the sincere judgment of prudence and
policy it cannot be suffciently secured by Laws already made, is neither
agreed ^e to the Law of nature ^or of the Land, n^r of God, nor to a rule of
your Lordships own. Whereas I should have s^yd to do any thing by Bill. For so
it was propounded by your Lordship, and intended by me, having your words in my
fancy, and such was the case of the Lord Straffords Attainder^ which I was to
maintain, against whom the House of Commons thought better, to proceed by Bill
even after a judicial hearing, to av^yd the inconven^^nce of affirming, or
seeming to affirm an arbitrary power in the House of Peers in their
proceedings by way of judi^^ture, in the c^se of Treason. The use whereof their
Lordships themselves have I think always ^s carefully declined ever since the
Statute of 25. Edw. 3. whatsoever power by that Statute may be thought to
remain in them.

The Printer made many faults which being none of mine I will not trouble my
self to ^mend, nor those he may have made in this my Answer to your Lordships
Apology, But for my own, if in the h^st it was written, any may have escaped
me, which may give the le^st off^nce either to the King my most gracious
Sovereign, or to the Parliament, or to eith^r H^use thereof, or to your
Lordship, or to any man dead or l^ving, I do here humbly crave their pardon who
may take the offense, and retract ^^ as having happened be^ide my intention and
against my will.

To the READER.
I Should do ill to print a half truth, whereof I pretend to be an entire
lover. I must therefore here give notice, that the three former parts of this
Answer were in his hands to whom I r^commended the care of the printing,
according to the date in the Title, which he can testify; but I could not
resolve to let the fourth go after them so soon, for reasons concerning others,
and not my self. And in the mean time I made many great alterations in this
last part, and it has still grown under my hand, at length to the bulk it now
bears, which I will not excuse, because I could not mend.

Non sunt longa quibus nihil est quod demere possis
Sed tu Cosconi Disticha longa facis.
This passage has reference to the Marginall note in fol. 6. at the latter end.
When my Lord of Essex stood in favor, the Parliaments were calm: Nay I find
it a true observation, that there was no impeachment of any Nobleman by the
Commons, from the Reign of King Henry the sixth, until the eighteenth of King
James, nor any intervenient president of that nature, not that something or
other could be wanting to be said, while men are men: For not to go higher, we
are taught easily so much, by the very Ballads and Libels of Leicestrian time.
But about the aforesaid year, many young ones being chosen into the House of
Commons, more then had been usual in great Counsels (who, though of the
weakest Wings, are the highest Flyers) there arose a certain unfortunate and
unfruitful Spirit in some places; not sowing, but picking at every stone in
the Field, rather then tending to the general Harvest. And thus far the
consideration of the Nature of the Time has transported me, and the occasion
of the subject.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 9. line 19. for it an, read it as an hyperbolicall. p. 12. l. 26. dele I.
p. 13. l. 11, 12. read, as all other kingdoms and States in Europe have also.
p. 18. l. 5. for if that, read that if. p. 20. l. 14. for the Law, read our
Law. p. cad. l. 16. for retraction, read retractation. p. 21. l. 2. after you
did, add or at least was done. p. 24. l. pen. after written, add and
cousenting thereunto. p. 27. l. 21. for mind, read mine. p. 32. l. 2. for
were, read was. p. cad. l. 20. for tare, read care.

Lesser faults may be amended by every Reader.


