Virtus unita Fortior Nil sine vobis Per Nos omni^ Pulchritudine tua captus
sum. Ulterius t^ vincium. Per t vi^am Regeneratio tua in (...) Potentia WF fe:


Aphorismi Vrbigerani, Or Certain RULES, Clearly demonstrating the Three
Infallible Ways of Preparing the GRAND ELIXIR OR Circulatum majus OF THE
Philosophers, Discovering The Secret of Secrets, AND Detecting the Errors of
Vulgar Chemists in their OPERATIONS:

Contained in One Hundred and One Aphorisms: To which are added, the Three Ways
of Preparing the Vegetable Elixir or Circulatum minus: All deduced from
Never-Erring EXPERIENCE

By BARO URBIGERUS, A Servant of God in the Kingdom of Nature.

Experto Creed. LONDON, Printed for Henry Faithorne, at the Rose in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1690.

Licensed,

Jan. 13. 1689/90. Rob. Midgley.

TO OUR DEAR DISCIPLES, Honored COADEPTS, AND ALL WELL-WISHERS TO OUR Hermetic
Art.
FInding you, dear Sons, who have through our means attained to the true knowledge
of our first Matter, worthy to receive our farther Instructions in the
remainder of the Process, to extirpate all such Ambiguities, as you may have
conceived in our Absence, to facilitate your Labors, and to precaution you in
the bringing your Work to its highest Perfection, We here, according to your
desire, expose to you, and for your sakes, to the Public, all the most
infallible Rules, necessary for preventing of Errors in this great Undertaking.
And tho you, ever-honor'd Coadepts, could never yet so far prevail on your
selves, as to come to a Resolution of presenting the World with the full
Practice of this our Art, joined to the Theory, we are nevertheless most
certain, that we shall not receive any Reprimand from you for bringing to light
these our Rules, which we have so penned, that even those, who know not our
Person, will not only soon perceive, that all, we have written, is the real
Truth, clearly exhibiting both the Theory and Practice of the whole Hermetic
Art, but also conclude, that these Operations must of necessity have very often
passed through our own hands, from our giving such positive Rules, and infallible
Instructions, elucidating all the most obscure and intricate Enigms of the
Philosophers, and warning them of all the Accidents, that may happen in the
working of our Subject: We are, we say, confident, you neither will, nor can
blame us for this: since you will easily discern, that our Design is purely to
instruct our Disciples, and prevent all the Well-wishers to this most noble Art
from being imposed upon, and cheated, by any false pretended Adept: to the end
that those, who shall from the Divine Benignity, by the help of these our
Aphorisms, or otherwise, have received the blessed knowledge of our first
Matter, which is the very same in all our three ways of producing the grand
Elixir, may through these our certain Rules obtain the accomplishment of their
Desires.

Having in our Travels fortuned to meet with some Persons of true Principles in
Philosophy and Religion, we could not but embrace them, and instruct them
toward its farther Perfection, which cannot be attai'd without the true
knowledge of our Celestial Art, by which comprehending all the Mystery of
Mysteries, we learn also how to serve God in Faith and Truth. And since we have
no Obligation to any living Soul for the knowledge, we possess, having attained
it all by the only Blessing of Almighty God on our Industry and Expenses: being
therefore at more liberty than those, who receive such a Favor from us, or some
other Adept, it is our Determination, whenever we meet with Persons so
qualified, always to do the same. Wherefore being at present in England, tho we
are no Native of this Kingdom, we think it necessary to set forth these our
Aphorisms in the English Tongue, not in the least doubting, but that the
Knowing, minding only the Sense, will easily pardon any Impropriety, they may
find in our Expressions: and when Providence shall carry us into any other
Country, we, having attained to some competent knowledge of most European
Languages, shall again take care to publish them in the Speech of the Place,
where we shall be, that we may the sooner obtain the effect of our Desires,
which aim at nothing, but the undeceiving of the World by setting down certain
and evident Marks, distinguishing the Worthy from the Unworthy, and at the
bringing of Men to leave their unnecessary Forms, by instructing them in the
true way of Serving God, being the only means to render them happy both in this
World, and the next.

Aphorismi Urbigerani, Or Certain Rules, clearly demonstrating the Three
Infallible Ways of preparing the Grand Elixir of the Philosophers.
I.
THE Hermetic Science consists only in the right knowledge of the first Matter
of the Philosophers, which is in the Mineral Kingdom, not yet determined by
Nature.

II.
An undetermined Matter being the beginning of all Metals and Minerals, it
follows, that, as soon as any one shall be so happy, as to know and conceive it,
he shall easily comprehend also their Natures, Qualities, and Properties.

III.
Although some Persons, possessed with foolish Notions, dream, that the first
Matter is to be found only in some particular places, at such and such times of
the year, and by the Virtue of a Magical Magnet; yet we are most certain
(according to our Divine Master Hermes) that, all these Suppositions being
false, it is to be found every where, at all times, and only by our Science.

IV.
The Hermetic Art consists in the true Manipulation of our undetermined
Subject, which before it can be brought to the highest degree of Perfection,
must of necessity undergo all our Chemical Operations.

V.
Our Chemical Operations are these, Amalgamation, Sublimation, Dissolution,
Filtration, Cohobation, Distillation, Separation, Reverberation, Imbibition,
and Digestion.

VI.
When we call all these Operations ours, they are not all to be understood
according to the common Operations of the Sophisters of Metals, whose Industry
consists only in disguising of Subjects from their Form, and their Nature; but
ours are really to transfigure our Subject, yet conserving its Nature, Quality,
and Property.

VII.
This our Subject, after its having passed through all those artificial
Operations, which always imitate Nature, is called the Philosophers Stone, or
the fifth Essence of Metals, being compounded of the Essence of their four
Elements.

VIII.
The Metals and Minerals, which Nature has already determined, although they
should be retrogradated into running Mercury, Water, and Vapor; yet can they by
no means be taken for the first Matter of the Philosophers.

IX.
Our true and real Matter is only a Vapor, impregnated with the Metalic Seed,
yet undetermined, created by God Almighty, generated by the Concurrence and
Influence of the Astrums, contained in the Bowels of the Earth, as the Matrix
of all created things.

X.
This our Matter is called undetermined, because, being a Medium between a
Metal and a Mineral, and being neither of them, it has in it power to produce
both, according to the Subject, it meets withal.

XI.
Such a Metalic Vapor, congealed and nourished in the Bowels of the Earth, is
called the undetermined, and when it enchants the Serpent with the Beauty of
its internal and additional Fire, the determined Green-Dragon of the
Philosophers; and without the true knowledge and right Manipulation of it
nothing can be done in our Art.

XII.
This Green Dragon is the natural Gold of the Philosophers, exceedingly
different from the vulgar, which is corporeal and dead, being come to the
period of its Perfection according to Nature, and therefore incapable of
generating, unless it be first generated it self by our Mercurial Water; but
ours is spiritual, and living, having the generative Faculty in it self, and in
its own Nature, and having received the Masculine Quality from the Creator of
all things.

XIII.
Our Gold is called Natural, because it is not to be made by Art, and since it
is known to none, but the true Disciples of Hermes, who understand how to
separate it from its original Lump, it is called also Philosophical; and if God
had not been so gracious, as to create this first Chaos to our hand, all our
Skill and Art in the Construction of the great Elixir would be in vain.

XIV.
Out of this our Gold, or undetermined Green-Dragon, without the addition of
any other created thing whatsoever, we know how through our Universal Menstruum to
extract all our Elements, or Principles, necessary for the performance of our
great Work: Which is our first way of preparing the Grand Elixir: and since
this our first Chaos is to be had without any Expense, as costing only the
trouble of digging it out of the Mines, This is not unfitly called the only way
of the Poor.

XV.
The Operations in this our first way being in a manner the same with those of
our second, which is, when we join our determined Dragon with our Serpent, we
shall (to avoid Repetitions) in the subsequent Aphorisms give Instructions for
them both together.

XVI.
Our Serpent, which is also contained in the Bowels of the Earth, being of all
created things whatsoever the nearest subject of a Feminine Nature to our
Dragon, through their Copulation such an astral and metalic Seed, containing our
Elements, is also to be brought forth, as can, tho with somewhat more of
Expense and Time, perform the whole Mystery of Hermes.

XVII.
Since our Serpent is of all created things the nearest subject of Feminine
Nature to our Dragon, she is after her Copulation to be taken for the Basis of
our Philosophical Work: for out of her Bowels, without the help of any other
Metal or Mineral, we must draw our Principles or Elements, necessary to our
Work, being retrogradated by the Universal Menstruum.

XVIII.
This Feminine Subject cannot be retrogradated, unless to free her from her
Impurities, and Heterogeneous Qualities, she is first actuated by her
Homogeneous ones, that she may be in a better Capacity to receive the spiritual
Love of our Green Dragon.

XIX.
After our Serpent has been bound with her Chain, penetrated with the Blood of
our Green-Dragon, and driven nine, or ten times through the combustible Fire into
the elementary Air, if you do not find her to be exceeding furious, and
extremely penetrating, it is a sign, that you do not hit our Subject, the notion
of the Homogenea, or their Proportion.

XX.
If this furious Serpent, after it has been dissolved by the Universal
Menstruum, filtrated, evaporated, and congealed nine or ten times, does not
come over in a Cloud, and turn into our Virgin Milk, or Metalic argentin Water,
not corrosive at all, and yet insensibly, and invisibly devouring every thing,
that comes near it, it is plainly to be seen, that you err in the Notion of our
Universal Menstruum.

XXI.
The Serpent, of which I now speak, is our true Water of the Clouds, or the
real Eagle and Mercury of the Philosophers, greatly different from the Vulgar,
which is corporeal, gross, dead, and full of Heterogeneous Qualities, and a
Subject, fallen from its Sphere, like unripe Fruit from the Tree; but ours is
spiritual, transparent, living, residing in its own Sphere, like a King on his
Throne.

XXII.
Tho the vulgar Mercury is such an unripe Fruit, corporeal, and dead; yet if
you know how to amalgamate it with our Dragon, and to retrogradate it with the
Universal Menstruum, you may assure your self, that out of this also you shall
be able to prepare a Sophic Mercury, with which you shall certainly produce the
great Elixir, discover the Secret of Secrets, unlock the most difficult Locks,
and command all the Treasures in the World.

XXIII.
Our Mercury is called the Mercury of the Philosophers, because it is a
Subject, which is not to be found ready prepared to our hand: for it must of
necessity be made by our Philosophical Preparations, out of the first Chaos,
and although it is Artificial, yet is it naturally prepared, Nature, which is
imitated in the Preparation of it, contributing likewise thereunto.

XXIV.
Since our Subject cannot be called the fiery Serpent of the Philosophers, nor
have the power of overcoming any created thing, before it has received such
Virtue and Quality from our Green-Dragon, and the Universal Menstruum, by which
it self is first overcome, devoured, and buried in their Bowels, out of which
being born again, it is made capable of the same, it follows, that such a Virtue
of killing and vivifying is natural to our Dragon and the Universal Menstruum.

XXV.
The Universal Menstruum of the Philosophers is that Celestial one, without
which nothing can live nor subsist in this World: It Is also that noble
Champion, which delivers the uncorrupted Virgin, Andromeda, who was with a
strong Chain fastened to the Rock in the power of the Dragon, of whose spiritual
Love having admitted, for fear of being eternally ruined and devoured by him
(which could not have been avoided, if this noble Champion had not come to her
assistance) She is to be delivered of a Child, which will be the Wonder of
Wonders, and Prodigy of Nature.

XXVI.
If our Virgin in her Confinement, before she is set at liberty, does not
manifest her extreme Beauty with all her internal, diverse, delicate natural
Colors, wonderfully charming, and very pleasant to the Eye, it signifies, that
she has not sufficiently enjoyed the spiritual Company of the Dragon.

XXVII.
If the Universal Menstruum has not totally delivered the Virgin from the Claws
of the Dragon, it is a sign, either that she was not sufficiently free from her
Heterogeneous Qualities, or that she had not received from the external Heat a
sufficient penetrating Quality, or that the Universal Menstruum was too weak to
perform its Undertaking.

XXVIII.
To know, whether the Amalgamation, Sublimation, Dissolution, Filtration,
Coagulation, and Distillation have been Natural and Philosophical, the whole
Body of the Serpent must come over spiritual and transparent, leaving only some
few and very light Feces at the bottom, which can by no Art be reduced either
into a running Mercury, or any other kind of metallic Substance.

XXIX.
After all these abovementioned Operations, and the Separation, if our
Serpent, being amalgamated with any Metal, pure or impure, cannot suffer the
Fusion, it will be in vain for you to go any farther with it: for you may
assure your self, that you do not walk in the true Paths of the Hermetic Art.

XXX.
Our Philosophical Distillations consist only in the right Separation of our
Spiritual and Mercurial Water from all its poisonous oily Substance, which is
of no use at all in our Art, and from the Caput Mortuum, which is left behind
after the first Distillation.

XXXI.
If after the first Distillation an exceedingly corrosive and extremely
penetrating red Oil does not aseend (which as soon as it begins to appear in
the Neck of the Retort, the Receiver must be changed) it signifies, that the
Distillation has not been rightly performed, and by Consequence, that the
internal Fire of our metalic vaporous Water, being burnt up, and corroded by
its poisonous Vapor, and the outward Fire, is still mixed with it, and with the
Caput Mortuum.

XXXII.
In case you should commit so great an Error in the performance of this first
Distillation, although it will never be in your power to prepare the Mercury
Duplex of the Philosophers, unless you should begin the whole Work again from
the very Beginning; yet, if you have any farther Skill in our Art, you may
easily prepare our Mercury simplex, with which you will effect great and
miraculous things.

XXXIII.
This blood red Oil with its only Fumes penetrates every Part and Atom of all
Metals and Minerals, and principally of Gold, out of which Dissolution one may
easily extract the right Tincture or Essence with highly rectified Spirit of
Wine, and bring it over the Alembic with it: which is indeed a great Medicine
for humane Bodies.

XXXIV.
A deep blood-red Tincture of excellent Virtue is to be extracted also out of
the abovementioned Caput Mortuum, accidentally and unfortunately intermixed
with the internal Sulphur of our Mercurial Water, and with the red Oil, with
highly rectified Spirit of Wine: with which after it has been evaporated to a
Powder, imbibed, and Philosophically digested, you may assure your self of
having the Medicine of Medicines, next to the great Elixir, by which you may
imperceptibly and quickly cure all sorts of Distempers, to the great Admiration
of all Galenists, and to the Astonishment of all Vulgar Chemists.

XXXV.
The most part of the Philosophers, whilst their Intention was to go farther to
the noblest Perfection of our Celestial Art, either employed this red Oil,
brought to a Potability, for internal Medicines, or to external Diseases
without any farther Preparation of it, till they had obtained the great Elixir.

XXXVI.
If the Caput Mortuum has not the Magnetic Quality in attracting the Spiritus
Mundi into it self from the Astrums, it is a sign, that at the end of the
Distillation of the red Oil the outward fire was so violent, as quite to burn
up the Magnet, which is contained in the first Feces of our Mercurial Water.

XXXVII.
After the first Distillation, if the least Part of the Virgin Mercurial Water
can by any Art whatsoever be brought to running Mercury, or any other kind of a
Metalic Substance, it is an evident sign, that either the Subject, or its
Preparation and Reduction into Water, has not been real, natural, or
Philosophical.

XXXVIII.
The abovementioned Spiritus Mundi, although of no use at all in this our great
Work, is yet a great Menstruum in extracting of Tinctures out of Metals,
Minerals, Animals, and Vegetables, and in performing great things in the Art,
volatilizing all fixed Bodies, and principally Gold.

XXXIX.
A great many Pretenders to the true Hermetic Knowledge prepare Menstruums, to
dissolve common Mercury, and to turn it into Water several manner of ways, and
by several additions of Salts, Sulphurs, Metals, and Minerals; but, since all
those Preparations are sophistical, any one, expert in our Art, will be able to
reduce it to its running Quality agian.

XL.
The Quality of our Mercurial Water being to volatilize all fixed Bodies, and to
fix all those, that are volatile, fixing it self with those, that are fixed,
according to the Proportion of it, dissolving its own Body, it unites
inseparably with it, conserving always its own Qualities and Properties, and
receives no Augmentation from any other created thing, but only from its crude
Body.

XLI.
Our Mercurial Water has such a sympathy with the Asirums, that, if it is not
kept very close, and Hermetically sealed, it will in a very short time, like a
winged Serpent, fly away in a wonderful manner to its own Sphere, carrying
along with it all the Elements and Principles of Metals, and not leaving so
much as one single drop, or the least remainder, behind.

XLII.
Several Pretenders to the Magical Science prepare Magical Magnets, to draw
from the Air, and (as they pretend) from the Astrums such Menstruums, as they
think necessary for the Production of the Great Elixir; but their Magnets being
compounded of several determinate things, although their Menstruums are great
Dissolvents, yet we do on assured knowledge affirm, that they can never perform
any real Experiment in our Art.

XLIII.
Some are of Opinion, that, unless the Operator is Master in the Magical
Science, and fundamentally understands all its Experiments, he will never be
able by any other Art whatsoever to bring forth any such things, as can produce
the Universal Elixir. Now, although we do not deny, that the Magical Knowledge is
required to attain to the highest degree of Perfection in all Sciences, yet we
are most certain, that it is not at all necessary to the Formation of the Grand
Elixir upon Animals, Metals, Precious Stones, and Vegetables.

XLIV.
Our Virgin Milk, or Metallic Water, being brought to a perfect Spirituality,
and excellent Diaphanity, is called the true Chaos of the Philosophers: for out
of that alone, without any addition of any created, or artificially prepared
thing, we are to prepare and separate all the Elements, which are required to
the Formation of our Philosophical Microcosm.

XLV.
To understand aright, how out of this our Chaos we are to form our
Philosophical Microcosm, we must first of necessity rightly comprehend the
great Mystery and Proceeding in the Creation of the Macrocosm: it being
extremely necessary to imitate and use the very same Method in the Creation of
our little one, that the Creator of all things has used in the Formation of the
great one.

XLVI.
When our Chaos or Celestial Water has purified it self from its own gross and
palpable Body, it is called the Heaven of the Philosphers, and the palpable
Body the Earth, which is void, empty, and dark: And if our Divine Spirit, which
is carried upon the Face of the Waters, did not bring forth out of the palpable
Body that precious Metalic Seed, we should never be able by any Art whatsoever
to go on any farther with the perfect Creation of our Microcosm according to
our Intent.

XLVII.
This Heaven of the Philosophers, after it has separated it self from the
Earth, containing our Philosophical Seed, and the Magnet of our Salt of Nature,
and from the superfluous Waters, is called the Mercury simplex of the wise man:
for whosoever attains it, at the same time attains also the Knowledge and Power
of retrogradating Metals, Minerals, etc. so as to reduce them to their first
Being, to perfect imperfect Bodies, and to vivifie dead ones, conserving always
its own Property and Quality to it self, and to produce the Great Elixir
according to the usual way of the Philosophers.

XLVIII.
After we have separated the Water from the Waters, by which I mean the
Mercurial Celestial Water from the superfluous Water, which is the Phlegm; by
the Blessing of God and the Infusion of our holy Spirit, we do not in the least
doubt, but we shall be able to bring forth out of our Earth such Fruits and
Subjects, with which we shall certainly perform the whole Creation, carrying
our Work to the highest Degree of Perfection.

XLIX.
Our Mercurial Water being of the same Brightness with the Heavens, and our
palpable gross Body, which did separate it self from our Celestial Water,
having the same Properties and Quality with the Earth, none, but Ignorants,
will deny them to be the right Heaven and true Earth of the Philosophers.

L.
If, after the Separation of the Spirit from the superfluous Waters, the World,
in which it is contained, does not appear mighty clear, and full of light, and
of the same brightness with our Celestial Water, it is a sign, that the
Separation is not fully performed, the Spirit being still intermixed with the
Waters.

LI.
If in the space of nine or ten Weeks, or two Philosophical Months at longest,
our Mercurial Water has not done separating it self from all its own Earth,
containing the Metallic Seed, it is an evident sign, that you have either erred
in the working of it, or that its Digestion, having been too violent, has
confounded and burnt up the principal Subject of the Creation.

LII.
This Philosophic Earth, containing our principal Subject, after it has been
separated from all the Waters, is very gently to be dried by some external
Heat, to free it from its extraneous Humidity, that it may be in a proper
Capacity to receive the Celestial Moisture of our Argentin Water, to which it
unites its most noble Fruits, with which our Philosophical Microcosm is
generated, nourished, and saturated.

LIII.
If the Earth, after it has been reverberated, humected with our Celestial
Moisture, does not presently enrich our Air with the divine expected Fruits,
you must certainly believe, that in the drying of it the external Heat has been
so violent, as to burn up the internal Heat and Nature of the Earth, and
consequently spoil your Undertaking as to the performance of the whole Mystery
of the Creation, according to the noblest, richest, shortest, most natural, and
secretest ways of the Philosophers.

LIVE.
In case the Earth should be totally destroyed by the violent external Heat,
although it is most certain, you cannot carry on our noble Creation any farther
with it; yet if you know how to amalgamate our Mercury simplex with your common
Gold, which is dissolved, vivify'd, and renewed by it, you may be sure of
effecting the Great Elixir, although neither so quick, so natural, nor so rich, as
you might have done without it. And this is our third way.

LV.
The Amalgamation of our Mercury simplex with common Gold consists only in the
right Proportion, and in the indissoluble Union of both, which is done without
any external Heat in a very short time, without which exact Proportion and
right Union nothing of any Moment is to be expected from their Marriage.

LVI.
Know then, that this right Proportion is ten parts of our Mercury simplex to
one of your finest common Gold in filings, which is dissolved in it, like Ice
in common Water, after an imperceptible manner, and as soon as the Dissolution
is over, the Coagulation and Putrefaction presently follow, which effects if
you find not, it is a sign, that the Mercury exceeds its due Proportion. Now
when your Gold has been thus well amalgamated, united, putrified, and
inseparably digested with our Mercury simplex, you will then have only our
Philosophical Sulphur, in which time one might easily have performed the whole
Work, working without common Gold.

LVII.
Although our Mercury simplex is exceedingly spiritual and volatile, yet since it
is the right Agent, digesting the Seed or Essence of all Metals and Minerals,
it will, tho undigested, naturally adhere to any of them, although corporeal, that
shall come near it, and will never leave it, unless it be forced away by the
Test, tho kept in a great Fusion for many hours.

LVIII.
This Mercury simplex, which before its retrogradation was of a Feminine
Nature, and before it left all its own Earth, was Hermaphroditic, being
powerful in both Sexes, is now become of a Feminine Quality again, and although it
has lost the Masculine visible Fire, yet it has conserved its own, which is
invisible to us, and with which it performs visible Operations in digesting of
imperfect Metals, after its Determination with any of them.

LIX.
If this our Mercury (the Proportion rightly observed) should be amalgamated
with any imperfect Metal, being first determined with a fixed one, it will
regenerate and perfect the same, not losing the least Particle of its Virtue or
Quantity: Which Metal after the digestion of a Philosophical Month will (as
most Philosophers teach) be able to resist all manner of Trials, and will be
far better than any Natural one.

LX.
The Determination of our Mercury simplex with any of the fixed Bodies is to be
done by dissolving a small quantity of Filings of red or white according to the
Color and Quality of the Metal, that you desire to meliorate, and if you do not
err in the Separation and Union of the Subjects, you may assure your self of
obtaining your desire after a Philosophical Digestion.

LXI.
To examine aright, whether the Mercury simplex is rightly prepared, or come to
its Perfection, one only Drop, put upon a red-hot Plate of Copper, must whiten
it through and through, and must not part with it, although brought into a great
Fusion: Which, if you find, it does not, it will be a plain Demonstration, that
either your Mercury is not well prepared, or that it has not yet done
separating it self from its own Earth.

LXII.
If your Mercury simplex, put upon its own dried Earth, does not presently
unite with the Essence of Metals, appearing deeper than any Blood, and shining
brighter than any Fire, which is a mark of the Reception of its own internal
Fire, and that the Eagle has sucked the Blood of our Red-Lion, it is an evident
sign, that you have erred in the Manipulation of the Earth.

LXIII.
This Mercury, thus impregnated with its Essence, or Sulphur of Metals, is
called the Mercury duplex of the Philosophers, which is of a far greater
Quality, and Virtue than the simplex, with whose Imbibitions in the Salt of
Nature, after its being saturated with the simplex, the whole Mystery of the
Creation of the Philosophical Microcosm is maintained and perfected.

LXIV.
To know, whether your Mercury duplex is Philosophically prepared, and
sufficiently impregnated with its own internal Natural Fire, put one single
Drop of it upon a red-hot Plate of fine Silver: and if the Silver is not by
this Drop penetrated through and through with a deep-red Tincture, enduring the
greatest fire of Fusion, it will signify, that you either fail in the
Preparation of it, or that you have not given it time enough to receive a full
Saturation out of its own Earth.

LXV.
This deep-red Tincture, extracted out of our Philosophical Earth, is called
our Sulphur, our undigested, essentificated Gold, our internal elementary Fire,
and our Red-Lion: for without its Help and Concurrence our Philosophical World
cannot be nourished, digested, or accomplished, being the right Ground, and
true Essence of the whole work of our Creation.

LXVI.
When the Earth has lost its Soul, the remainder of it is the true Magnet,
attracting the Salt of Nature from the combustible Fire after a violent
Calcination for several hours: which Salt, after its Purification and
Clarification, is called the clarified Earth or Salt of the Philosophers,
which, uniting it self with our single and double Mercury, after their
Digestion, is called by our Master Hermes the Universal Spirit earthify'd.

LXVII.
The Extraction, Purification, and Clarification of our Earth or Salt of Nature
is to be performed by our Mercury simplex: which, being put upon the
reverberated Earth, will presently draw it to it self, and unite it self with
it, yet separable by gentle Distillation, after which the clarified Salt of the
Philosophers is at hand.

LXVIII.
Although we use our Mercury simplex in the Extraction of its own Soul out of its
Body, and for the Clarification of the later; yet, since it is a philosophical
and perpetual Menstruum, it loses nothing of its connatural Prerogatives, nor
does in the least diminish in Quantity, being our true Alkahest, as Paracelsus
is pleased to call it.

LXIX.
Those three Principles, or Elements of our Chaos, perfectly separated from
their Impurities, and brought to their highest Perfection, are rightly called
the three Herculean Works: for after the Preparation of them all the Labor,
Trouble, and Danger will be past.

LXX.
Some foolish Operators pretend, that our Great Elixir is to be prepared in a
very easy manner, and without any trouble at all, to whom we will with our
Master Hermes briefly answer, That such Impostors neither know our Matter, nor
the right Preparation of it. Yet we do not deny, but any Healthy Person, of
what Age soever he may be, may undergo all our Herculean Labors, necessary to
the Performance of it.

LXXI.
These our Operations are therefore called Herculean in respect to the rest of
the Work, which is exceeding easy, and without the least Trouble or Danger,
being for that reason called Childrens Play, because a Child or a Woman, that
has any Sense, may easily work it, and bring it to the highest Perfection,
according to the Saying of all true Philosophers.

LXXII.
Although all those abovementioned Operations are, according to the common
Opinion of the Philosophers, esteemed difficult, and dangerous; yet we can upon
our Conscience assure you, that we have our self alone without the help of any
Creature living prepared them all on a common Kitchen Fire, as is very well
known to several Coadepts, our Friends, who could not but admire and approve of
our Industry.

LXXIII.
No true Adept or perfect Artist can deny, but that the whole Work of the Great
Elixir may from the very beginning to the end be performed on one only Furnace,
in one only sort of Vessel, and by one only Person alone, at a very small
Charge.

LXXIV.
Some Impostors would persuade the Vulgar, that Gold, Silver, and many other
Ingredients are required to the making of the Grand Elixir according to our
noblest ways: which the Doctrines of all the Philosophers, and our own
infallible Rules clearly show to be false: for it is most certain, that we
neither use any of their Ingredients, nor yet any Silver, or Gold, (unless, as
we have mentioned, in our third way) till we come to the Fermentation of our
Elixirs.

LXXV.
We do with all true Philosophers assure you, that all things, necessary for
our Philosophical Work, besides the Fuel, Vessels, and some few Instruments,
belonging to the Furnace, are to be purchased for less than the Expense of one
single Guinea, and that every where, and at all times of the year.

LXXVI.
Since neither Gold nor Silver is to be used at all in the Formation and
Cibation of our Philosophical Work, it follows, that the old and common saying
of some Authors, viz. That without working with Gold it is an impossible thing
to make Gold, proves to be only a false Notion of Men, who understood not our
Art.

LXXVII.
When our Herculean Works are brought to Perfection, which is, when our three
Principles, or Elements are prepared, purified and perfected, unless the
Philosophical and unseparable Union of them is exactly performed, the Great
Mystery of our Creation is not to be expected.

LXXVIII.
Our Principles or Elements being brought to a perfect and unseparable Union
and Digestion, it is called the Triple Mercury of the Philosophers, which being
finished, the whole Creation and Formation of our work is crowned.

LXXIX.
All our Work of the Creation from its very Beginning to its perfect End may,
on our certain knowledge, be perfected in less than nine Months by any skilful
and careful Artist, that follows our Rules, unless some Accident should happen
in the Preparation of our Herculean Works: which to prevent, we wrought them
our self in an earthen Vessel, which we count far better and surer than any
Glass, and which is most agreeable to the Practice of the most ancient
Philosophers.

LXXX.
Before you come to the Union of your Elements, your clarified Earth is before
all things to be digested in a moderate and continual Heat of Ashes, to free it
from any unnatural Moisture, that it might have attracted after its
Purification, to be in a fit Capacity to receive your Mercury simplex, by which
it is to be nourished in its Infancy.

LXXXI.
If your clarified Earth, after it has been digested the space of a whole
Month, does not appear exceeding dry, subtle, and frangible, it will signify,
that you have failed in the Purification or Clarification of it, or that the
external Moisture, it had attracted, is not yet parted from it.

LXXXII.
Take great Care, that you do not begin your Imbibitions of your Earth, before
you find it to be very well purified, clarified, dried, and brought to be very
subtle, and extremely frangible: for it would be a great Detriment as well to
your Work, as to your Mercury; and, although it should not spoil your Work, yet it
would be to you a great loss of Time.

LXXXIII.
After our clarified Earth has been brought to a perfect Purity, Dryness, and
Frangibility, it is to be imbibed with the eighth part of our Mercury simplex,
or Virgins Milk, which will in a very short time be soaked into it, as into a
Sponge, which shows the hungry State of our Infant, and then the Fire is to be
continued, till the Infant is hungry again.

LXXXIV.
If in the space of two or three days, or four, at the farthest, the Infant
does not show it self to be extreme hungry by becoming very dry and frangible
again, it will be an evident sign, that you have overcome it by your excessive
feeding of it.

LXXXV.
Great care is to be taken also in the feeding of the noble Infant: for if you
do not well observe all our infallible Rules, you will never be able to bring
it to a perfect Maturity: for in the Notion and Proportion of our Imbibitions,
and the Management of them, the prosperous and unfailable End of our Work is to
be expected.

LXXXVI.
It Is always to be observed, that the Fire be very moderate, as long as you are
making your Imbibitions, for fear of forcing any part of your Mercury to leave
the Earth: for as a moderate Heat makes the Union between the Soul and the
Body, and perfects all the Work: so on the contrary a too violent Heat
disunites and destroys all.

LXXXVII.
The Infant being dry, the Imbibition is to be repeated again, and this Method
is to be used, until the Matter has received its weight of the Mercury: at
which time if you do not find it to flow like Wax, and be whiter then any Snow,
and very fixed, you must proceed with your Imbibitions, until you perceive the
same.

LXXXVIII.
The Imbibitions are not to be made any oftener, than once every three or four
days, in which time you will find your Matter, having soaked up all your
Mercury, to be in great want of Food, which must be supplied, until it be
saturated: the Mark of which will be, when it flows like Wax again.

LXXXIX.
Your Matter being brought to a perfect Fluxibility, uncomparable Whiteness,
and unalterable Fixedness, know then, that you have perfectioned the white
Elixir, which, being fermented with fine Silver in Filings, will be in a
Capacity to transmute all inferior Metals into the finest Silver in the World.

XC.
Before the white Elixir is fermented with common Silver, you may multiply it,
as well in Virtue, as in Quantity, by the Continuation of Imbibitions with the
Mercury simplex, by which it may by Degrees be brought ad Infinitum in its
Virtue.

XCI.
The white Elixir being brought to its Degree of Maturity, desiring to go on to
its highest Degree of Perfection, instead of fermenting it with Silver, it must
be eibated with its own Flesh and Blood, which is the double Mercury, by which
being nourished, multiplied in Quality and Quantity, and digested, the whole
Work is accomplished.

XCII.
As soon as the first Imbibition is made, you will see a great Alteration in
your Vessel: for there will be nothing seen but a Cloud, filling the whole
space of the Vessel, the fixed being in controversy with the Volatile, and the
Volatile with the fixed. The Volatile is Conqueror at the beginning, but at last
by its own internal Fire, conjoined with the external, both are united, and
fixed inseparably together.

XCIII.
It is to be observed, that the Glass Vessel, which must be oval, with a Neck
half a foot long, and very strong, be of a fit bigness, and of such Capacity,
that your Matter, when it is put into the Vessel, may take up only the third
part of it, leaving the other two vacant: for, if it should be too big, it
would be a great hinderance in performing the Work, and if too little, it would
break into a thousand pieces.

XCIV.
After you have cibated the noble Elixir with your double Mercury, before it
can come to its perfect Fixedness, it must of necessity wander through all the
States and Colors of Nature, by which we are to judge its Being and Temperament.

XCV.
The constant and essential Colors, that appear in the Digestion of the Matter,
and before it comes to a Perfection, are three, viz. Black, which signifies the
Putrefaction and Conjunction of the Elements; White, which demonstrates its
Purification; and Red, which denotes its Maturation. The rest of the Colors,
that appear and disappear in the Progress of the Work, are only accidental, and
unconstant.

XCVI.
By every Cibation of its own Flesh and Blood, Regeneration of its Colors, and
Digestion, the Infant will grow stronger and stronger, that at last being fully
saturated and digested, it is called the Great Elixir of the Philosophers, with
which you will be able to perform, Wonders in all the Regions, as well Animal,
as Mineral, and Vegetable.

XCVII.
When your Elixir is brought to a Fluxibility, and a perfect Fixedness, if you
desire to make a Medicine upon Metals, you must determinate or ferment it with
common Gold in Filings, in which Determination it will vitrify, and then you
will have an incomparable Medicine, capable to transmute all imperfect Metals
into the purest Gold, according to the Doctrine of all the Philosophers, tho
our self never designed any thing, but an universal Remedy for the Cure of all
curable Diseases, incident to Human Bodies, as is well known to our Friends,
who have enjoyed the Benefit of these our Labors.

XCVIII.
It is to be observed in the Fermentation, that the Elixir exceed not the
Ferment in Quantity, otherwise the Sponsal Ligament of it cannot be actually
performed, and when the Ferment is predominant over the Elixir, all will be
presently turned into dust.

XCIX.
The best Method of Fermentation is to take one part of the Elixir, and put it
into the midst of ten parts of Gold in Filings, cast through Antimony, to free it
from all its Impurities, and to keep it in a circulary Fire for the space of
six Hours, so increasing the Fire by Degrees, that the two last hours it be in
a good Fusion, and when cold, you will find all your Matter exceeding
frangible, and of the Color of the Granate-Stone.

C.
Common Mercury, amalgamated with Lead, is counted the most proper subject for
making Projection, which being in Fusion, your fermented Matter being divided
into three parts, one part of it rolled, in Wax, is to be flung upon the
Amalgam: then presently cover the Crucible, and continue the Fire, until you
hear the Noise of the Separation and Union: then the second and third part, as
before, and being kept for two hours in a continual Fire of Fusion, let it cool
by it self.

CI.
Whoever shall presume to prepare the Great Elixir according to our most Secret
Ways without following and observing all these our infallible Rules, will
certainly find himself mightily mistaken at last, having after a great deal of
Trouble, Charges, and Pains, reaped nothing but Discontent; and on the contrary
they, that shall walk in our true and infallible Paths, shall with very little
Trouble and Expenses attain to their desired End, which we cordially wish to
all those, who are sincere wellwishers to the Hermetic Philosophy.

FINIS.
Circulatum minus Urbigeranum, OR THE PHILOSOPHICAL ELIXIR OF VEGETABLES, WITH
The Three certain Ways of Preparing it, fully and clearly set forth in One and
Thirty APHORISMS

By Baro Urbigerus A Servant of God in the Kingdom of Nature.

Experto Creed. LONDON, Printed for Henry Faithorne, at the Rose in St. Paul's
Church-year, 1690.

TO ALL TRUE LOVERS OF THE HERMETIC PHILOSOPHY.
HAving in our Precedent Aphorisms clearly delivered such infallible Rules and
Instructions, as are necessary for producing our Grand Elixir, or Circulatum
majus, the only real Secret of the true Adepts, commanding in all the Kingdoms
of Nature, which will, we question not, be no less pleasing to all other lovers
of Sciences, than to our Disciples; and being farther inclined fully to inform
them, how to preserve themselves and others in perfect Health by obviating any
Distemper, that may otherwise overcome them, before they can attain to the
Accomplishment of their Desires: We have thought it convenient to impart
likewise to them our three several ways of making our Vegetable Elixir, or
Circulatum minus, which may be prepared, and brought to its utmost Perfection
in the space of a Philosophical Month by any skilful Artist, who shall
comprehend and follow our certain Directions, laid down in these our subsequent
Aphorisms, where the whole Work is so evidently demonstrated, that none, who is
ever so little versed in Chemistry, can be liable to mistake. Nor do we any way
doubt, but all those, who shall with a sincere and upright Intention peruse
these our plainly-written Aphorisms, will find themselves obliged to bless
Almighty God for his infinite Mercy in having inspired us to open their Eyes,
that they may see, what is requisite for their present Health, and future
Happiness, both which we heartily wish to every one, who, as becomes a true
Philosopher, unfeignedly loves God and his Neighbor.

Circulatum minus Urbigeranum, OR THE PHILOSOPHICAL ELIXIR OF VEGETABLES, WITH
The Three certain Ways of Preparing it.
I.
OUR Circulatum minus in only a specificated Elixir, belonging to the Vegetable
Kingdom, by which without any Fire, or farther Preparation of the Vegetables,
we can in a Moment extract their true Essence, containing their Virtue,
Quality, and Property: which is a great Chemical Curiosity, performing Wonders
in the Practice of Physic, and in demonstrating some Works of Nature.

II.
We call it Circulatum, because, tho never so often used in any Extraction, or
Chemical Experiment whatever, it loses nothing of its Quality, or Property:
which is a Prerogative, pertaining to the Universal Elixir, called also the
Circulatum majus, because it commands in all the three Kingdoms of Nature;
whilst this, being restrained to one only Kingdom, is for that reason styled
Minus.

III.
Out of Dianas undetermined Tears, when Apollo has appeared, after the
Separation of the three Elements, Determination, Digestion, and glorious
Resurrection, we can, without the Addition of any other created thing, prepare
this our determined Elixir: Which is the first, noblest, and secretest way of
the Philosophers.

IV.
The Determination of our Dianas Tears consists only in their perfect and
indissoluble Union with the fixed Vegetable Earth, philosophically prepared,
purified, and spiritualized: for the love of which they are forced to leave
their first universal undetermined Property, and be clothed with a determined
particular one, which is required to this our Circulatum minus.

V.
Our second way of preparing this our Vegetable Elixir is by a right
Manipulation of a Plant of the noblest Degree, standing by it self, or
supported by others: after the Preparation of which, and its Putrefaction,
Reduction into an Oil, Separation of the three Principles, with their
Purification, Union, and Spiritualization, the whole is to be turned into a
spiritual ever-living Fountain, renewing every Plant, that shall be plunged in
it.

VI.
The third and common way is only a Conjunction of a fixed Vegetable Salt with
its own volatile sulphurous Spirit, both to be found ready prepared by any
vulgar Chemist, and since in their Preparation the purest Sulphur, containing
the Soul, has suffered some Detriment by their not being philosophically
manipulated, they cannot be inseparably joined without a sulphurous Medium, by
which the Soul being strengthened, the Body and Spirit are also through it made
capable of a perfect Union.

VII.
The proper Medium, requisite for the indissoluble Union of these two Subjects,
is only a sulphurous and bituminous Matter, issuing out of a Plant, living or
dead, which is to be found in several parts of the World, and is known to all
manner of Men, (the Copavian we find to be the best, and after that the
Italian,) by which, after it has been separated from its feculent parts through
our Universal Menstruum, all the Pores and Atoms of the fixed Vegetable Salt,
which is extremely fortified by it, being dilated, it is made capable of
receiving its own Spirit, and uniting it self with it.

VIII.
To fortify the Sulphur, and open the Pores of the Salt, no other Method is to
be used, but to imbibe the same with the bituminous Matter in a moderate
digestive Heat, as if one would hatch Chickens, and as the Salt grows dry, the
Imbibitions are to be repeated, until you find it so fully saturated, that it
refuses to imbibe any more of the Matter.

IX.
In the Course of Imbibitions the whole Mass is at least nine or ten times a
day to be stirred with a Spatula, or some other Instrument of dry Wood, by
which reiterated Motion, the bituminous Matter receives a better ingress into
the Body, and perfects its Operation the sooner.

X.
Great Care is to be taken, that in the performance of the Imbibitions, no kind
of Soil or Dust fall into your Matter, for the prevention of which your Vessel
may be kept covered with a Paper, pricked full of holes, or any other suitable
Covering, and that nothing come near it, which has its own internal Sulphur:
for the Pores of the Salt being very much dilated and opened, it may easily
determine it self to any other Subject, and so spoil your Undertaking.

XI.
If in three, or four Weeks time at farthest, your fixed Vegetable Salt does not
manifest its full Saturation, 'twill certainly be in vain for you to go any
farther with it: for you may assure your self, that you either err in the
Notion of the Salt or of the real sulphurous Medium, or in the Management of
the Imbibitions.

XII.
When your Imbibitions are fully performed, your Salt will then be in a
convenient readiness to receive its own Spirit, by which it is made volatile,
spiritual, transparent, and wonderfully penetrating, entering of a sudden into
the Pores and Particles of every Vegetable, and separating in a moment their
true Essence or Elements.

XIII.
Although the Salt is fully prepared for the Reception of its own Spirit, yet
unless you well observe the right Proportion of them (which is, that the
volatile always predominate over the fixed) you will never be able to making any
perfect Union between these two Subjects, contrary in Quality, tho not in
Nature.

XIV.
Before you begin your Destillations and Cohobations, after the Addition of the
Vegetable Spirit to its own Salt, a Putrefaction of eight or ten days is to
precede, during which time, the sulphurous Spirit, strengthened by the
bituminous Matter, and finding its Salt fir for Conjunction with it, has the
power to enter into its Pores, to facilitate its Volatilization, and Union.

XV.
If after six or seven Destillations and Cohobations of the destill'd upon the
Remainder, you do not find your Spirit to be extremely sharp, and the Remainder
in the bottom altogether insipid, it will be an evident Sign, that you fail in
the true knowledge of the Vegetable Spirit, which, being exceeding volatile, has
in its Nature power to volatilize its own Body, and unite it self inseparably
with it, finding it capable of its Reception.

XVI.
It is to be observed, that in the Progress of your Destillations the
sulphurous Medium do not in the least ascend: for as it is a real Medium,
concurring to unite the Body with the Spirit, before the Spiritualization of
the Body, and without the Concurrence of which no perfect Union of these two
Subjects is to be expected; so on the contrary in the Progress of the Work its
Concurrence would be highly disadvantageous to to them both, and totally
subvert your Operation.

XVII.
The ascending of the sulphurous Medium, when the Spirit begins to carry over
its own Body, to unite it self inseparably with it, evidently and certainly
signifies, that you do not regulate your Fire, as you should, and that, instead
of giving a gentle vaporous Heat to facilitate the Union, you give a violent
one to destroy it.

XVIII.
When your Salt is brought to its perfect Spiritualization, and real Union with
its own volatile Spirit, then you will have in your power your Circulatum minus,
or Vegetable Elixir, and Menstruum, with which you will be able to perform
wonders in the Vegetable Kingdom, separating in a moment not only their
Principles or Elements, but also at one and the same Operation the Pure from
the Impure.

XIX.
If into this your Vegetable Elixir you put any green Vegetable, shred in
pieces, it will in less than half a quarter of an hour without any external
Heat putrify, and precipitate it self into the bottom quite dead, (which is
nothing but the cursed Excremental Earth) and on the Top will swim a yellow
Oil, containing the Salt and Sulphur, and the Elixir will be of the Color of
the Plant, comprehending its Vegetable Spirit: which if it does not, it is a
sign, that your Operations have not been Philosophical.

XX.
One only drop of this yellowish Oil, given in Distempers according to the
Virtue and Quality, attributed to the Plant, every Morning and Evening in a
Glass of Wine, or any other convenient Vehicle, will infallibly and insensibly
cure those Distempers, and corroborate the vital Spirits, if constantly taken
to purify the Blood in sickly and infectious Times.

XXI.
If you put Coral into this Menstruum, you will see an admirable Experiment:
for although its Pores are compacter, than in any other Vegetable; yet it will on
a sudden transmit its internal Spirit into the Menstruum, and sending its Soul
and Body, like a blood-red Oil to the Top, will at last fall to the Bottom like
a grayish Excrement.

XXII.
If Myrrh, Aloes, and Saffron, of each an equal Quantity, are put into this
Menstruum, the truest Elixir Proprietatis (as Paracelsus terms it) which is a
most excellent Cordial, and almost of as great Efficacy and Virtue, as the
Universal Elixir it self, in curing all curable Distempers, will presently swim
on the Top, and its Caput Mortuum will separate it self into the Bottom.

XXIII.
This Vegetable Menstruum dissolves not only all sorts of Gums, or any other
kind of Substance in the Vegetable Kingdom, but also all sorts of Oils and
Balsams, coming out of Trees, separating their true Essence, by which you may
perform wonderful things both upon living Bodies, and dead ones, the last of
which it preserves for ever without opening or any farther Preparation of them.

XXIV.
Tho this Menstruum is only specificated upon Vegetables, it will nevertheless
in a moment draw the Tincture out of Metals and Minerals; but it will not
separate all their Principles, not being the appropriated Menstruum for such
Operations; and tho such Sulphurs are highly balsamic for the Lungs and Spleen,
yet since our Elixir Proprietatis far exceeds those praeternatural
Preparations, we only give this as a curious Chemical Experiment.

XXV.
Since this Vegetable Menstruum is eternal, you must observe, that you lose
nothing of its Quantity or Quality in separating of it from the Oil, and Spirit
of the Vegetable, which is done by a gentle Destillation in Balneo vaporoso,
the Vessel being very well luted and dried before. The Menstruum, coming over
with the Phlegm of the Vegetable, from which it is by a Destillation in Balneo
to be separated for farther uses, leaves the Oil at the Bottom, united with its
own Spirit, which will easily go over in any common Heat, not leaving any thing
behind it: which is a Mark of its Spiritualization, Purification, and
Regeneration, that it has received from the Menstruum.

XXVI.
Out of this Oil or Essence of your Vegetable so prepared, or by any other
Philosophical way, (as we have mentioned in our second Manner of making this
our Elixir) if you know how to putrify it naturally without any Fire, and to
separate all our Principles out of it, purifying and uniting them inseparably
together, being all made spiritual and transparent, you will then have out of
this second Regeneration the greatest Arcanum in the World, as upon Vegetables,
so also upon Minerals and Metals, except Gold and Silver.

XXVII.
If this regenerated Essence be determined with our first Matter, it will then
be in a Capacity radically to dissolve all sorts of Metals or Minerals, and
principally Gold, which is imperceptibly dissolved in it, like Ice in common
Water, and can never be separated common Gold again, neither by Destillation,
nor Digestion: out of which, after a Philosophical Digestion, Separation of the
three Principles, with their Purification, Union, Digestion, and third
Regeneration, you may prepare the great Medicin of Medicines, of equal Virtue
and Quality with the Grand Elixir upon human Bodies, and with our Mercury
simplex, upon Metals or Minerals.

XXVIII.
The determinating this regenerated Menstruum with our first Matter is to be
performed by its Amalgamation with it, in which the Vegetable Menstruum,
drawing out of it all its Qualities and Properties, and uniting them with its
own, is made capable of the same Virtue and Property, as our Mercury simplex,
in dissolving and volatilizing every created thing, that shall come near it.

XXIX.
Some are of Opinion, that both the Elixirs may be produced out of several
determined things, as Human Excrements, May drew, (which they call also their
Menstruum from above, or Water from the Clouds) etc. as also that the Grand
Elixir may be prepared out of this, or any other Vegetable regenerated
Menstruum; but since we know, that such Menstruums, which they call their
Philosophical Mercury, although they may dissolve and volatilize Metals, yet
cannot meliorate any of them, this Dissolution and Volatilization being neither
natural nor Philosophical, we therefore with good Reason judge all those
Opinions to be only false Suppositions and ill-grounded and imaginary Notions.

XXX.
We with our Divine Master Hermes absolutely affirm, that, Almighty God having,
after he had created all things, commanded every one of them to procreate out
of its own kind, our Elixirs are not to be produced by any of those sophistical
ways, as we have fully made appear in these and our precedent Aphorisms, in
which we have given ample Instructions for the preparing the Universal Elixir
out of our undetermined Matter, and the specificated one out of the Root of
Vegetables.

XXXI.
Out of the true Affection and Charity, we have for all Lovers of Arts, we
advise every one, who shall desire to prepare either of these our Elixirs, only
to follow our Infallible Rules, being the Compendium of the whole Practice and
Theory according to all true Philosophers, and not to mind any other: for some
having delivered things by Hearsay, others from Reading, and very few from
their own Practice, they may easily be imposed upon and deluded by any
Pseudochymist or pretended Adept.

Experto Creed.
A POSTSCRIPT, CONTAINING An Explanation of the Figure, prefixed to the
Aphorismi Urbigerani.
HAving in our One Hundred and One Aphorisms so perspicuously laid open all the
Difficulties, and so amply taught the complete Theory and Practice of the whole
Hermetic Mystery, that any ingenious Lover of Chemistry will not only be
enabled to understand the most abstruse writings of the Philosophers, but also
to effect any real Experiment, which is to be expected in the Progress of our
Celestial Art; and yet being apt to believe, that such, as are not our
Disciples, may perhaps meet with some of the Philosophical Figures, the meaning
of which they may not so easily comprehend, we have judged it highly expedient,
in the Front of this our little Book to place this our Figure, by which, being
a perfect Compendium of all the Philosophical Emblems, the rest may be without
any great difficulty understood. Now since this our Figure, mystically
representing all our Subjects and Operations, cannot but admit of many and
various Interpretations, all which if we should here set down, our Aphorisms
(where they are already delivered, and of which this would then be a
Repetition,) would be altogether useless and insignificant: we therefore at
first esteemed it very superfluous to give any farther Illustration of it. But
our desire being to do all the good, we can, to the Public, we have on second
Thoughts resolved with our wonted Brevity to deliver the following Explanation
for the better Comprehension both of it and our Aphorisms.

The Tree is a Supporter of the Motto, Virtus unita fortior: which, being to be
read from the side of the Serpent, representing by the Half Moon on its Head
the Planet, under whose Influence it is born, is to be referred to it according
to its particular Motto, which signifies, that, if you take it alone, it can do
little or nothing in our Art, as wanting the Assistance of others. By the Green
Dragon is to be understood our first undetermined Matter, comprehending all our
Principles, (as is demonstrated by the Half Moon on its Head, the Sun in its
Body, and the Cross on its Tail,) and denoting by its Motto, that it can
perform the whole work without being joined with any other created or
artificially prepared thing: which is our first way. But this our Dragon, when
copulating with our Serpent, is forced to comply with her, degrading it self
from its undetermined Being for the production of our second way. Apollo with
the Sun on his head, and Diana with the Half Moon, embracing each other, show
our third way, and the Continuation of our first and second. The River, into
which they descend, signifies the State, they must be reduced into, before they
can be in a Capacity of being born again, and before in any of our three ways
they can be brought to a perfect Spiritualization and Union. Apollo and Diana,
coming out of the River in one wonderful Body, Diana having obtained all,
represent our Herculean works, ready finished, and the beginning of their
Conjunction, and by their going to set their foot on firm ground, where she is
to sow the noble Fruits for the Procreation, is to be understood the
Continuation of their Conjunction, till they are fully united and perfected. In
this Scheme also, as well as in our Aphorisms, are mystically exhibited all the
principal Points of Faith and Religion, comprised in the Volumes of the Old and
New Testament: whence it manifestly appears, that the Contemplation of Nature
truly leads to the Comprehension of those heavenly Verities, by which alone we
can expect to arrive at the Enjoyment of that blessed Immortality, to which, as
to the true and ultimate End of our Creation, all our Endeavors are to be
directed.

FINIS.

