THE APPROACH AND Signal Victory, OF K. WILLIAMS FORCES, OVER THE IRSIH ARMY;
ENCAMPED Round LIMMRICK.
ALSO The Fording the River Shannon, together with the Besigeing that importont
Garrison. With an account of Col. Woosleys Defeating a Body of the Irish
Rapperies near Athloane. Sent Express to the Queen.
ONE of the Kings Messengers is arived with Express from his Majesty, to the
Queen at White Hall, with Letters bearing date the 9th. Instant, from the Camp
before Limrick; with an account that Lievt. General Kirk having joined the
Kings Forces from Waterford; and Lievt. General Douglas from Athloane;
Composing 38500 Effective Men, Marched in Three Bodies toward Limrick, and
being advanced within Six Miles of the Town: On the 7th took a Resolution to
attack the Irish Forces the next Morning; which were Encamped and had
Entrenched themselves in all the Defiles leading thereto: having first Plowed
up the Ground, made great numbers of small Forts, threw Timber and Trees
across, and did all that possibly could be done to obstruct the passage of the
Kings Forces: Leaving the Hedges, Gardens, and other places for Five Miles
together, with Musketeers in the nature of an Ambuscade; and their Horse made
show as if they would make vigorous resistance, and stood our first Charge, but
soon afterward gave way to let our Forces in, to be galled by the Irish
Musketeers, but ours so resolutely pushed on, that waithin an hour forced them
in all places to give way, and make them Retreat; they being that Afternoon
driven from all their Posts they so much relied on, and obliged to take refuge
in the Town; they having had above 400 killed in their Retreat, besides diverse
of them taken Prisoners; and ours persned them to the very walls
notwithstanding the firing they made from the Cannon of the Garrison. This
Evening was spent in taking the most advantageous Posts about the Town, and
our Pioners fell to level the great number of Trenches the Irish had cast up
for their defense. The next Morning the King Commanded Livet. General Kirck to
Ford the Shannon, which he did not above a Mile from the Town, with Five
Regiments of Horse and Dragoons and Three of Foot; which he did with that
success and Celerity that the Enemy believing it could not possibly be done:
Scarce ever being fordable before, that they made no opposition, which had they
done might have greatly Destresed our Troops; who so soon as they perceived
them on Clare side fled many of them away, tho got into a considerable Body
quitted all their Outworks. And Colonel Earl was so eager in the persuite that
he might have fell pell mell with the Eenemy into the Town but his Maj.
Commanded his Retreat. And thereupon our Forces have possessed themselves of
all the advantageous Hills; and have already planted two Batteries of Demi
Culverin, and fired into the Garrison, and begin to break ground: And his
Majesty, about noon, sent a Trumpet to fummon them to surrender. And it is said,
a great part of the Garrison, with some of the Officers, were for Capitulating;
but Coll. Sarsfield, who presides Governor, resolutely opposed it making a
Speech to the Garrison, of the great Divisions there were in England; and that
50000 French had made a descent, and said, the Prince of Orange would be
obliged to draw off his Army in few days, to defend the Kingdom of England; and
thereupon prevailed upon them, to stand to their Arms, returning an Answer to
the Summons, That as K. James had entrusted them with that Garrison, they would
recommend themselves to the Prince of Orange by their vigorous Resistance; and
so dismissed the Trumpet with the same firing the Guns after him; but it is not
doubted, they will alter their Sentiment so soon as the heavy Canon comes up,
which is expected the next day, being but eight Miles behind, with diverse
Mortars. A Deserter (...) ^rms, That a French Commander, the Duk of Berwick,
Mr. Fitz. James. Coll. Lutterel, etc. remain in the Town, with some French, who
returned from Galloway, the Inhabitants refusing, at first, to suffer any of
them to come therein.

The Letters farther add, That just at the coming away of the Express, our
Forces had possessed themselves of a Neighboring, Island near that Garrison,
of great Importance to us; and that they had taken Ireton Fort: and they do not
in the least doubt, but to be in full possession of the whole in few days.

The Letters farther signify, That the Enemy has burnt and destroyed every
thing round that might be of use to us, and the Rebels are grown so Insolent
between Mullenger and Atllone, that Colonel Woosly, with his Inskilling
Regiment, has fell in upon, and totally defeated them; killing 56 upon the
place, making diverse of them Prisoners; amongst them two persons of Note.

LONDON; Printed for L. C. near Fleet-Bridge.


