Lo here, the Genius of the great Arguyle
Whose Politics and Ethics in one pyle
Like Anchor Buoys, appear to teach thee Wit
To shun those rocks on which himself was split


Instructions to a Son. BY ARCHIBALD Late Marquess of Argyle. WRITTEN In the
time of his Confinement.

London, Printed for J. Latham at the Mitre in Saint Paul's Churchyard, 1661.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
THat the Author of this ensuing Treatise, was an able Statesman, and of
excellent natural endownments, a Master of reason, and the most accomplished
Scholar of experience, will without scruple be allowed to his ashes: From them,
this product of his notable spirit, these Posthuma (he having envyed the
uncharitable world other remains of his choice literature and observation,)
have taken wing into the world, and by your candid acceptance may surmount his
Fate: He has not at all herein consulted his reputation and esteem of learning
or abilities, which were very eminent in him, but has descended to the
plainness which affections require, without any art or elegancy of Ornament, as
more becoming the sincerity of his paternal love. This was judged fit to be
premised, that the expecting Reader might not be stumbled at the easiness and
common language, with which he has clothed his most difficult cares and
thoughts for his Children; and withal to let you know that this copy was
transmitted hither by a worthy hand, and saving the alteration of some Scoth
words, which would puzzle the English Reader, is faithfully Printed; To them I
commend it, and remain,

Your Friend.

The Contents.
THe Marquess of Argyls instructions to his Son. fol. 1 The Marquess of Argyls
instructions to his Children. fol. 20 CHAP. I. Of Religion. fol. 29 CHAP. II.
Of Marriage. fol. 39 CHAP. III. Of the Court. fol. 49 CHAP. IV. Of Friendship.
fol. 59 CHAP. V. Of Travail. fol. 69 CHAP. VI. Of House keeping and Hospitality.
fol. 79 CHAP. VII. Tenants and other concerns of Estate. fol. 89 CHAP. VIII. Of
Study and Exercise. fol. 98 CHAP. IX. Of Pleasure, Idleness, etc fol. 107 CHAP.
X. Considerations of life. fol. 116 Maxims of State. fol. 125 Miscellaneous
Observations. fol. 169
The Marquess OF ARGYL'S Instructions to his Son.
SON,
I Know there are several books in Print, written Prudently, Politickly, and
Piously of this very title of late years. I confess, most of them were of
particular entendment to their own relations, the reason probably that they are
not of such general observation and use; others designed out of presumptuous
ambition, of exceeding by imitation such rare patterns as went before, in the
accessions of wit and elegant discourse, discolored sometime with urbane,
facete Profaneness.

Ido acknowledge it is a singular and the right way of transmiting of a man's
memory to posterity, especially to his own; it argues a kind of reverence that
men bear to themselves when they can so impartially unbosome themselves in the
account and register of all their Actions, and can show no disliked experience
of them, as to their own proper guilt. I do not hereby understand what concerns
religion, who can excuse or extenuate his failings? but of moral transient
Acts, to the evil of which no man is so strongly inclinable, but by the bias of
a corrupt education.

Many very sententious pieces are extant among Ancient Authors of this subject,
but I know none Testamentary but among the Moderns, and of them we have some
excellent Princes, and renowned Statesmen.

My care of you, whom I would have to consider your self, as the prop of an
ancient Honorable Family, is no way less then theirs, however I am inferior to
them in Dignity and Judgment: and therefore I will trace a beaten way, rather
then lose my self and you in a general discourse; what I come short of here,
you cannot miss in their common places, and so I may be sure I shall attain my
end.

Probably men may think I can add nothing to that store, but if they consider
my station, and how far concerned in these Times, they may rather expect novel
Politics from me, such a variation of the Latitude of the most approved and
received maxims of State lying in the sphere in which I acted; but the
managery of the Counsels of those times, were by success, or the monstrous
guilt and fraud of the Politicians so irregular, that I cannot if I would bring
them under Heads, though up and down as they occur I may point at them.

I confess, 'twas my great misfortune to be so deeply engaged in these Fatal
Times; I know the Nobility of Scotland, have always bickered with their
Princes, and from the insolency of that Custom, not any of our Kings have been
free. It Is also true, the perpetual Family feuds among us, which by all the
industry and Authority of our Princes, could never be so pacified, but that
they revived again, and took upon themselves as they had advantage to revenge
their quarrel; (and yet like sudden floods which violently overrun, and as
peacably return within their banks, abated to their due allegiance,) did easily
persuade me that there was no such apparent danger in the first beginnings of
the contest, betwixt the King and my Nation of Scotland. I had laid it for a
maxim, that a Reformation was sooner effected per Gladium Oris, then per Os
Gladii; and certainly true Religion is rather a setler, then stickler in
Policy, and rather confirms men in obedience to the Government established,
then invites them to the erecting of new; which they neither do nor can know,
till it be discovered and declared. Wherein I did not look upon our intended
Reformation as any way taxable, since it had the whole stream of universal
consent of the whole Nation; I never thought of those dire consequences which
presently followed, till by that confusion my thoughts became distracted, and
my self incountred so many difficulties in the way, that all remedies that were
applied did the quite contrary operation; whatever therefore has been said by
me and others in this matter, you must repute and accept them as from a
distracted Man, of a distracted Subject, in a distracted Time wherein I lived:
and this shall serve to let you know how far I waded unwarily in that business.

I will not however counsel you, if any such lamentable commotions (which God
forbid) should break out, for my unhappiness, to withdraw your self, from
interposing to quench and allay them as much as by your Authority you can,
(however I was mistaken by some in my Actions, I did labor for a right
understanding,) but be sure let your Allegiance keep the balance; by no means
stand like a neuter in the cause of your King and Country. That Decree of
Solons, that every man that in a general Commotion was of neither party, should
be adjudged infamous, is rightly decreed of great men. Popular furies would
never have end, if not awed by their Superiors, who supinely neglecting such
outrages, not ordinarily, are rnined and depressed in their own Estates and
Honors, a late example whereof we had in our neighbor Nation; the People will
soon learn their own strength, that Summa Potestas radicatur in voluntatibus
Hominum; and from thence infer, that the popular power excels the power of
the Noblesse.

Great men therefore, are in some sort as necessary as good men, as power is as
requisite as wisdom, where they are both wanting, Imperium in Imperio
quaerendum est. Your famous Ancestors by both these, have kept their Vassals
(and what is well done in one canton of the Kingdom is like to be imitated
throughout,) in a quiet subjection, and good comportment many generations, and
I question not but you will find the same reverence from them, if you do not
degenerate.

Do not content your self with the bare titles of greatness, Principis tantum
nomen habere non est esse Princeps, that power is vain which never exerts it
self forth into Act.

The looseness of these late Times will require at first a gentle hand, while
you have got the bridle in the mouths of your Family, Dependants and Vassels,
then you may curb them, and reduce them to the former obedience they once
willingly paid. I have had a difficult task with them, yet by one means or
other I kept them in order; nor will they be ever serviceable to their Supreme,
if they be not in a due subjection to you, their immediate Lord.

Take all fair occasions of doing your Soverain service, let that be your only
Emulation with other Noble Houses, supply the great and necessary distance of
your Prince from this his Native Kingdom, by a close application of your self
to his concerns, if not in a public capacity, yet in your private sphere,
which will soon advance you to higher Trusts.

You have a great task to do, you must from the bottom climb up to the mount
of Honor, a very abrupt and difficult ascent; which yet, nevertheless by
observing the sure footings of some of your progenitors, and the slips of
others, particularly those recent slidings of mine own, (for other they are
not) you may at last attain the top, and by your own merit and your Princes
favor, your House may be Culminant again.

If it shall so happen, as I despair not of it, (ancient merit with good
Princes (such as without flattery I may say the most of ours were and are like
to be,) will out-last their longest displeasure,) have a care then of that
Precipice; let no revenge or ambition blind you into destruction; you may poise
your self with your wings of Honor and Greatness, but venture not, nor presume
to fly.

Covet not with immoderate have Lands, Riches, Honor, for it is seldom that
men whose rash desires and designs are laid out that way, compass their full
content, and for the most part meet with a destiny far other then they
expected; and when they are once so disappointed, Fortune or rather Providence
so much amazeth the judgment even of wise men, as in time of danger they know
not what resolution is best to be taken. You will not be necessitated through
the want of these three, so as to reach at them unlawfully, and endanger what
you have in possession, and your self together.

I do not much regret your private life, nor should I labor to bring you into
State Employment, for there is no course more comely, nor any resolution so
well beseeming a wise man, having made proof of his own virtue, as to retire
himself from Court and Company, for so he shall shun the inconveniences of
contempt, and the discommodity of a perpetual trouble.

I have tried and found the many perplexities that attend that life, and have
reaped nothing but calumny and envy, though I do not say this is the fate of
all Statists; this I am sure, the best way of coming there, is without popular
fame or over-vogued merit, especially by the interest of a Favorite.

But who so cannot endure the envy and hate that are the attendants thereof,
must set down with his present condition, and not meddle with, or enterprise
great matters; for great Honors being desired of many, it is of necessity that
he that aspireth unto them, must be for his advancement thereunto envied, and
for his Authority hated; which, although they be well managed and used, yet
those who hate and envy, persuading themselves they might be better handled,
endeavor to oppress that power as fearing it might be worse.

You will have time after the settling of your own private Fortunes to cast
about for some honorable advantages for your self. Time is the best
Counselor, rather let Magistracy want you, then you want it; which you may
effect, if by a wise moderation you can slight those insignia which the world
knows your Ancestors have born with commendation and honor, and who have added
more luster to them, then the want of them can take from you.

Keep a firm and amicable correspondence with your neighbors howsoever, but so
that it be far from giving any suspicion of making parties or factions; this is
chiefly attained by a generous compliance and noble familiarity, that is the way
to be loved and Honored, which works so many good effects, as daily experience
suffices without any express example to prove them of great force. If you be
happy in this particular, this will be your certain repose, and may not be
reckoned within the Externa bona Fortunae.

To compass this, take an exact care that your actions be just, be not offended
at every injury, wink sometimes at your wrong, but beware of unnecessary
revenges. I leave you enemies enough, 'twill be meat and drink (as the English
Proverb) to them, to see you froward and quarrelsome; bear off all the affronts
that be put upon you with an inviolable invincible mind, and let them see you
are above them; Master all your pasfions and affections, and so discipline them
that they may become your most necessary Servants.

You will be freed, by this your retirement from public employment, of
adulation and flattery, and by that means will the better and more plainly and
sincerely converse with your self, and be able to give a near judgment what you
are, and of your abilities and defects, which is the most necessary knowledge
in the world, and which will recompense the disuse of other Policy. E Coelo
descendit, (...)

Demean your self in an equality of mind, that may show Fortune has no power
over you, that her excesses and recesses, her over-flows nor her low ebbs, can
either drown or dry up your virtue. It Is but Common Fate; as the Sea loses in
one place it gets in another; so contrarily, such shakings as these which
through me befall my family, may by your prudence rivet it faster.

This I thought fit in general, as to the Condition I shall leave you in, to
direct and advise you; only one word more: I charge you to forget, and not
harbor any animofity or particular anger against any man concerning me. Such
heart-burnings have been the destruction of many a Noble person in this
Kingdom, and I know not of any person so given, but the very same measure has
been meeted unto him again. The Cup is gone round, and therefore content your
self; but above all I require you to have more regard to Christianity, then
covertly or basely to kill a particular Enemy by secret assault or practice, it
being altogether most unwarrantable either by Faith or Honor.

And this by way of Praemise.

To the rest of his CHILDREN.
Children,
AS you are the greatest part of me, and in whom I may promise to my self a
continuance of succession, so have I also a paternal care (more incumbent on me
now) toward you: I shall therefore in some particular directions to you, as
the monuments of my affection, advise and counsel you, in what shall be
necessary and expedient for your several conditions.

First, therefore make not have to put your selves out of the government or
charge of those to whose care and tuition I have committed you; if any thing
happen that shall offer you advantage in another station of life, then I leave
you, I require you to consult with them first. I have laid a sacred obligation
upon them to assist and aid you in all matters, which if you neglect or
contemn, you will soon find your selves left to the world, as a ship to the
raging sea, without Furniture or Anchors.

Above all, bear that constant filial duty to your Mother, which her piety and
tenderness in your Education, most justly call for at your hands; her great
indulgence toward you, and her entire affection to me in all my suffering of
late, deserve very much at my hand; and therefore I charge you to show that
respect to her for me, which I would have done my self, and in which, in all
the time of our wedlock you have known me to have continued. Fail not in any
outward circumstance of honor and reverence to her, that so by your dutiful
behavior and carriage toward her, some of the harshness and asperity of her
present condition may be alleviated.

To your Eldest Brother, who is the Prince of your Family, show your selves
obedient and loving; he is my substitute, your Honor is bound up in his, in
him it now rests, and may for a while not appear in its luster; take heed
therefore you do not by any dis-respect quite extinguish it; your due
observance of him will preserve it in the minds of all men, who are not
strangers to the ancient worth and merit of Our House.

With one another maintain a mutual love and confidence: This happiness you may
have by my adversity to indear your selves more to one another, lay out no
affection upon the world, but keep the entire stock for your selves. Let that
equal love which I bear you, and which I leave with you, be communicated among
you, by a constant amity to one another; which will be the better Cemented by
your religious and godly Conversation, wherein I trust you have been so well
instructed, that my memory shall not be charged or blamed for your education.

Keep a Decorum in your present condition, value not your selves the worse for
one riot or attempt of fortune made upon me; mind not her temporary outrages;
virtue is the true standard, such allays pass not with her, fix your self upon
your own worth, and no engine of fate can remove you from that Basis. Pusill
animity is a vice almost needless to be warned of, because noble minds do
always niti contra, and bear up against their extremities, till they have
either surmounted them by their bravery, and ascended to their first height, or
levelled them by their patience and equanimity, plained their difficulties, and
made them even with their contented minds.

The small Portions I have left you, (though the world miscounts them as great
matters, and I could wish they amounted to their sums) you must improve as
talents, serve your necessities with them, not your pleasures; what the Royal
Bounty may hereafter do by way of restitution, you may do with it as may be
most subservient to your Honor; you will not be liable to great expenses, you
are free from any dependency on Court, where men spend money, on a vanity
called Hope. As for marriage, (of which I shall speak more largely hereafter
and of which in the beginning of this Monition, I gave you a Caution,) your
virtue must supply dower, though I trust I have left a Competency (with your
virtues) to match you to any family in Scotland.

Behave your selves therefore prudently, decently, and warily to all people,
that so you may gain the general good will and benevolence of all; imitate the
example your Mother has set before you; stand upon your guard against all
pleasures, or other baits or allurements that shall tempt you to any unlawful
actions or desires, which may practice upon you either in your Conscience, or
in your Reputation: and resolve this as a sure rule with your selves, that no
person is wise or safe, but he that is honest.

Fear your Creator, and serve him with all your might, begin all your works and
actions with him, it is he only can succeed and prosper them. If you pursue
your own designs upon your own bottom, the conclusion will be your own ruin,
for he can wither and blast at his pleasure sinful undertakings. I shall never
despair of Gods blessing upon you, nor doubt his all sufficiency for you, if
you apply your self to him, and make his fear the rule of your Lives.

You, see that to be descended of great Personages, is no exemption from the
strokes of fortune; but to be descended of a Heavenly race, will carry you out
of the reach of those misfortunes which are incident to Humanity.

Employ therefore your time in renewing your alliances there, probably your
consanguinity and relations here, may stand off from you, like Jobs friends in
his adversity. Desertions are usual in this case; you need however not much
care for this worldly friendship, as long as you have dependence on the Favor
of Heaven.

What is abated here to you in the transitory felicites and pleasures of the
world, (from which you have no such cause to wean your selves altogether) will
be easily recompensed in your enjoying him who is the foundation of all good,
and from whom all happiness is derived to his Creatures.

To whose Protection I commit you and your ways, beseeching him to bless and
prosper them, to his glory, and your comfort.

CHAP. I. Religion.
THis being your greatest concernment the director of all your actions, I
cannot use my Paternal Authority to better purpose, then in adjuring you and
straightly charging and requiring you, to be constant and zealous in the
Religion now left established in this Kingdom. I will not take upon me now to
decide controversies arisen betwixt ours and the Church of England in matters
of Discipline, they agreeing altogether in Doctrine; all that I shall say is,
that their Ceremonies have not been used here, and you have been bred up
without them, and the Nation of Scotland otherwise affected, and therefore, you
shall do well to continue in this Kirk, though I would rather have it your own
choice, then any other consideration whatsoever. Diversity in any thing
distracteth the mind, and leaves it waving in a dubious perplexity, and then
how easy is it to sway the mind to either side; this is most true and
experienced in Religion; you must therefore obfirmate your ears, and confirm
your judgment, being once satisfied of the Excellency of your profession, and
having received the true and sincere Doctrine.

Neither would I have you only fixed and constant in your Religion, but also
very devout in the practice of it; that as heretofore your ancestors have been
eminent for Honor, you that come short of them by this deliquium or Eclipse of
it in me, may nevertheless exceed them in the true way to it, by your Zeal and
Piety: and remember this, that he that is not truly religious, will hardly be
esteemed such, since nothing is of less continuance then Hypocrisy and
dissimulation, and if your religion be such, such will your greatness and
honor be, a fained thing and a mere shadow.

The observance of Religion, and the exercise of good manners, do become none
so much as illustrious persons, other glories have lifted them beyond the pitch
and reach of men, but this is a ray of the Divinity which advances them near
to the Diety, and like the Diamond out-shines the luster of all other Jewels. A
religious heart and a clear conscience will make you truly conspicuous; it is
as the mother of all other virtues; what brave effects of obedience to Princes
has it wrought in Subjects? look back to the primitive times and the Emperors,
how courageous were they in all enterprises, hardy and resolute in dangers,
liberal to their necessities, ready to do their utmost devoir in the distressed
affairs of the Empire? and this from one pious principle, that in serving their
Prince, they served God, whose Leiutenant he is, nor was there any difficulty
over which their faith did not triumph.

Nevertheless, some have taxed, and it has been along and strong imputation,
that this Kirk of Scotland, does teach sedition against, or at least the
diminution of the Authority of their Princes. For my part I know no such
matter, nor did I ever embrace or adhere to such opinions, though censured for
them; if any man's entemperature has vented such dangerous Tenets, or his rash
presumption ventilated such questions, I have nothing to do with them, I disown
and disclaim them; and therefore to remove this prejudice from you also, I
charge you to make your duty to your Sovereign one of the chief points of your
Religion, so far forth as it may consist with your obedience to God, who ought
to be served best, and in the first place. There is such a reciprocation
between both those services, that commonly they go together.

Whatever the late miscarriages have been by the peoples struggling for their
Liberty of Conscience, as they are past, so they have left the means whereby
they may be prevented for the future: and no doubt the good temperament of the
King, with an easy indulgent hand of his Ministers, will keep Religion from
the scandal of a Civil War.

It Is a maxim of State, that where Princes and People are of a different
Religion, they will not well agree; yet Modern experience, and since the
Reformation arrived to a settled constitution and Church Government, evinceth
the contrary; as at present in the Kingdom of France, and in Germany, where
the quite opposite religions are peaceably and quietly professed. But God be
thanked, there is no such contrariety in the religion professed in these two
neighboring Kingdoms, which may not (without animosity and interest keep the
breach open,) be reconciled, All impatient zeal being turned into an aemulation
of Loyalty to the King.

Cherish and maintain the Ministers of the Gospel, especially, painful able
Preachers. Nothing brings more contempt upon, or aviles religion, and the
service of God, in the eyes of the vulgar, then the necessities, wants and
miseries, of Churchmen; what esteem you confer upon them, will soon redound and
reflect again upon you. What the Heathen said of their Poets, that by their
means and writings, famous men* were transmitted to immortality, who otherwise
would have lain un perpetual oblivion; is very true of Evangelical Doctors,
their prayers, and their instructions, and their recommendations of you,
together with your own endeavor after Holiness, which is the only Fame and
Glory, will transmit and place you hereafter in Heaven, and establish you here
living and dead in the good will and praise of all men.

Let charity be a chief ingredient in your religion, both in giving and
forgiving. As you shall have abilities, indulge the poor, and let them in some
measure partake with you in your outward blessings and enjoyments. For the
other, as you are always liable to offenses, so be always as apt and prone to
pardon or pass them by, which in the greatest adversities you can undergo, will
never be out of your power to do.

Frequent the Church and the Houses of God, let no business invade or intrude
upon your religious Hours; what you have destined to the Service of God, is
already sacred to him, and cannot without great profaness be alienated from
him, and conferred upon others; use private prayers, as well as go to the
public Ordinances.

For other duties necessary for a Christians practice, I refer you to the
discipline and instructions of the Kirk, it being needless to repeat them here,
being so exactly laid down by her, whom I take to be the purest Church.

For search all religions through the world, and you will find none that
ascribes so much to God, nor that constitutes such a firm love among men, as
does the Established Doctrine, (I except the Schisms amongst us) of the
Protestant Church among you: In whose Arms I leave you, and Her to the
everlasting protection and guidance of God.

CHAP. II. Of Marriage.
HAving devoted your self principally to the Service of God, and subordinatly
to your Prince which includes your Country; the next duty or affection, you owe
to your self in the ordering or governing of your life, according to your
several inclinations and dispositions. And among the most important and strong
sways of Nature, I reckon marriage, especially in great and noble Families,
where interest forbids perpetual virginity; nor ever since the suppressing of
Nunneries, and such Monastic Privacies and renunciations to the world, have we
had in this Kingdom, many, if any of the daughters of Jephtha.

Marriage no doubt was one of the greatest favors that God conferred on
mankind, and when he bestows a virtuous mate, whose humility, chastity and
affection, are eminently great, he does renew his first intentions of kindness
to man, and gives grace upon grace, and infinitely happy is he that can find
and make such a choice. 'Twas therefore well said by him, that discoursing of
this subject, affirmed that God did oftentimes reward the good works, the
honesty and piety of a man, by the offer and tender of a good wife; for Parents
could only give wealth and riches, lands and estates to their children, but God
only could give them prudent and discret women.

In the contracting therefore of marriage, virtue is more to be considered then
money, beauty will rival with either of them, and oftentimes gets possession
sooner then both; but then it quickly loses it again, as having not those
stays and supportations which each of the other have in themselves.

I acknowledge, virtue is first to be Courted, and the Primitia, the first
fruits of our Love should be offered up at her shrines; but yet reserving the
stock to sacrifice to the numerous contingencies and accidents, which befall
the wedded state, by the additional helps of handsomness and wealth.

But be not overblinded with beauty, it is one of the greatest deceits Nature is
guilty of; not that it is so in those persons to whom she is graciously and
liberally pleased to bestow it, (for it is the most exact copy of her
illustrious self,) but in the fascination and witchery it darts through the
eyes into the minds of men; you cannot but pay homage to it, but let that
tribute redeem yon from a total Conquest: Remember, that it is but clay, more
refined and set off with a better varnish, and being all on the outside, lies
open to weather and consuming time, and sometimes to present misfortunes; while
that which is internal stands the shock, and endures all brunts, like a strong
fortified garrison, when the other shows like a weak gay Army in the Field,
ready to be vanquished at the first encounter.

Money is the sinew of Love, as well as war, you can do nothing happily in
wedlock without it; the other are Courtcards, but they are not of the
Trump-suit, and are foiled by every sneaking misadventure; virtue is suppressed,
and cannot emerge and dilate it self in the streights of a narrow fortune; and
beauty is betrayed to the necessity of keeping it so, otherwise in a pinching
condition, leanness and deadpaleness would usurp the place where full blown
Roses sat, with Love before Nor was it ever known, that a beautiful woman
driven to want, escaped the offers and importunities of men, who under the
pretense of pitying and supplying her distresses, by degrees have gained upon
her Honor and pudicity, while she satisfies her self, that out of (miserable)
gratitude she could do no less.

I do much approve of cross marriages between families, which have been so
allied for many descents together, so as they be not in that proximity in which
the House of Austria matches. By the race we guess of the production, -- De
fortibus creantur fortes -- and that adds a firm monument to both Houses, being
so incorporated into one another. However men reckon it for glory in Heraldry,
to bear almost the whole arms of the Kingdom in one Escutcheon. Methinks
honor there looks like a river, which branched into several rivolets loses it
self in them; whereas streams that take in another large confluent, carry all
before them, and run directly into the Ocean, and disembogue themselves with a
name.

If you are not affected that way, there is variety enough in Scotland; but
whatever you do, consult with your Honor first, do not embase your blood by
matching below you, it will soon breed distaste and dislike in your self, which
will cause malice and revenge in her, and entail contempt upon your issue and
posterity. Such embraces will be like the twining of the Ivy about the Oak,
suck up moisture from the root, while the branches are withered, and the stock
falls to the ground, never like to reflourish again.

As you match your Peer in honor, let her be so in years, a difference in age
is a secret fire raked up for a time, which will afterward break out and
consume your quiet: when either of your desires and strength answer not the
vigor of the youngest, then the sparkles will fly by such violent collisions
and clashings that will soon set your Family in combustion.

After your choice made and pitched upon, and a vow passed, keep your self
religiously to it, (the breach whereof, is a vulgar common sin in Scotland, and
therefore the more detestable to you) knowing there can be no dispensation from
it, and nothing but misery after it joined with shame and repentance.

In the state of marriage carry your self affectionately and discreetly, and
keep strictly the rites of it, that no jealousy, that canker worm of conjugal
love fret that silken knot which tied you together. Owe nothing to one another
in zeal and fervency of affection, which will soon beget such a mutual
confidence, that the rest of your life will be but an advantageous repetition
of your first joys, and add number to your contents and pleasures, as to your
years.

Let not the secrets of marriage pass beyond the chamber, for he little regards
his own honor or his wives chastity, who blazes or discovers what is done
there, and no slyer debauchery is there to women, then what by such luxuriant
freedom of their Husbands tongues, is prompted to their wandering and strong
imaginations.

I pray for, and wish your good success in this great affair, and commend you
to him, who is only able to grant it you.

CHAP. III. Of the Court.
YOu are not thither bound, and I am not sorry you are forbidden resort
thither, as to any employment or traffic; it is a place difficult of access,
shut up with Rocks, Shallows, and Sands, and not one adventurer in twenty comes
off a saver. Besides, it is a place of a most uncertain air, full of damps and
exhalations, spread with clouds and over-cast, and sometimes again scorching
hot in the sudden rise and depression of favorites.

But if your curiosity shall invite you to the danger, when time may look with
a better aspect upon you, remember these observations of mine own, who both at
distance, and at close view have well considered it.

First then, as to the favor of your Prince, which is the most desirable thing
in the world; it is rather an illustrious care, then a contentful possession;
nor do wise men ever busy themselves about it, because the tranquillity of
spirit, which they seek for, is not to be found amidst the confusions of the
Court: and to guard a man's self from the misfortunes there, and the envy which
the graces of Princes do contract upon their favorites; there is no way better
then privacy and retiredness. You must know that it is mere humane weakness,
which causes Princes to raise favorites, to aid and support them in the
weight and multitude of affairs, and sometimes in such secrets which are
heavier upon the mind then all the rest; the sad effect whereof every age has
given an example.

You must at your entrance, resolve to encounter the accosts of contempt,
scorn, discontents and repulses, with a bold forehead, and take no notice of
slightings and injuries done you by the great ones. A thing I always judged
grievous to a generous mind, and yet these are ordinarily the steps to
preferment.

If you shall find favor at Court, beware your covetousness after new boons,
make you not forget the old ones; and if then you receive denials, guard your
self, that the distaste be not more prevalent to run you into actions of
dangerous consequence, then reason can be to keep you in your duty.

Extraordinary diligence and affected assiduity are to no purpose, whereby men
think to prevene their advancement; on the contrary, if men neglect and seem
careless of promotion, attending when the merit of their actions shall offer it
them, Time or fortune seldom fail to conduct them to true and permanent glory.

It has been an old Adage, a young Courtier, an old Beggar; men spending
estates in riot in such consuming places as Cities, in a fruitless expectation,
and then carry home nothing but repentance.

A choleric person is not fit to be a Courtier, for if he should go about to
revenge himself of the indignities, bravado's, deceits, and tricks put upon
him, he shall suffer more in an hour, then he shall be satisfied for in ten
years.

You must do at Rome, what others do there, be sure to fing no other aires then
which most please the Prince. 'Twas Solons comparison of Courtiers, who
resembled them to Counters, with which men use to cast accounts; for as in
changing their places, they stand sometimes for more, sometimes for less; so
Princes do the same with them, now advancing them in honor and dignity, and
presently debasing them at their pleasure to the scorn and derision of all men,
so that it is truly sad, that men have an opportunity of losing themselves at
Court, and finding of themselves at Home.

Old Courtiers are like old ships, brought into Harbors and there laid up,
never to be put to Sea to any new adventure.

It Is a tart Sarcasme or Satirical pass upon the Court that one said; At the
Court are Bishops and Priests to Baptize, and change names; for there, the
vainglorious ambitious man, is called honorable; the prodigal, magnificent;
the coward, wise; the wise, hypocrite; the malicious, subtle; the adulterous,
amorous; the covetous, temperate; and what confidence can any man repose in
friends there, whose greatness renders them the more intractable. It Is very
difficult to find virtue at Court, but it is more difficult to keep it.

He that sins and repents, and returns again to his sin, sins more grossly then
at first; so to leave the Court, and return again, is such an error that is
not excusable; save with this, that the return was to sell virtue, and gain
wealth, since it is a great kindness of fortune or puissance of virtue, to
escape that gulf.

Against the envy of the Court as against the Plague, there is no better
preservative, then retreat and eloingment; a remedy practiced very often but
with different success; it being very dangerous for popular persons, and such
as have had great Commands to absent themselves without leave or dismission;
for it not only breeds suspicions and jealousies of their disaffection, and
consequently of the danger of a Rebellion, but likewise exposes them to the
unobstructed designs and malice of their enemies, which seldom end but in ruin.

This is generally the complaint of Courts, wherein you must understand there
is not the least concurrence of the Prince to give any such cause for it, but
that by Tradition the Grandees walk by as by a rule; and since Monarchy was,
Court arts have been, and can vie precedence with any mystery. I never knew any
great Favorite, who practiced any new ways of his own: some have been nobler
and more magnificent then others, freer in access and more affable, but yet
still kept close to their Court-lessons, nor could ever their private virtues
gain upon their public Concerns.

It is possible a man may get an Estate at Court, but it is more probable he
may lose one; that which is got there, through how many curses and imprecations
it passes; that which is lost, with how many woos, and tears, and deprecations
goes it! so much is a Court worse then a Lottery.

While you can therefore pay your devotion, your Loyalty to your Prince at
home, and probably be better accepted; what need have you of a dangerous
unnecessary pilgrimage to the shrine, to pay a personal adoration; your
oblation there can be nothing less but your quiet and Estate in lieu, whereof
they will present you with a trinket or some other bauble, which you will be
ashamed to carry home again.

Fear God, Honor the King, Live at Home, and Love your Neighbors.

CHAP. IV. Of Friendship.
SON,
AS you have not that ranging freedom of choice of your society; suspicion on
the one hand, and reason of State on the other hedging you up, and impaling you
within a narrow scantling; so neither can the iniquity of any the worst fortune
leave a man in such a solitude, in which a guide, a friend, (by whose Counsels
and sweet converse either, he may extricate himself from, or avoid the
tediousness of his troubles,) may not be had. What therefore you shall lack in
the multitude of friends, who like flies fasten on the sweets of Honor, Fame,
Riches, etc. you will find no great loss in, if it be your happiness to find
out but one or two, such an Oligarchy of friendship, whose unity in affection
and fidelity, will richly compensate the many Ciphers that attend on greatness.

To make a right choice therefore, you must first propose to your self the
inconstancy of man, the most changeable, alterable creature in the world. Every
breath of wind fans him to a various shape, think not therefore of making a
friendship fixed and eternal. How ardently have men loved some, even beyond the
desire of dying for them, when in a moment, as it were one hasty ebullition of
choler has rendered them exceeding offensive, nay, has sunk them into our hate
and execration? see the fast hold which man does take of man! it is let go and
unfastned in a moment, by the clacking of the tongue, a nod, a frown, or such
like nothing; we cancel leagues with friends, make new ones with enemies, and
break them ere concluded. The consideration of this will keep you from
overw^ning any man, and from a total trust and confidence in him, and beget in
you a severer exercise, and consequently a firmer reliance on your own virtues
and abilities.

Nothing sooner corrupts or rottens friendship, then an overhasty entertaining
of it, like praecoce fruit that is ripe before its season. Jndgement is the only
cement that closes and binds the affections of men: where that is wanting, it is
like building with untempered mortar, the structur's like to fall on our own
head. I never knew any yet so good, but some have thought him vile, and hated
him; nor contrarily, any so bad but some have thought him honest, and loved
him; either the ignorance, the envy, or the partiality of those that judge do
constitute a various man: in some report has foreblinded Judgment, in some,
accident is the cause of disposing us to love or hate. The soul is often led by
secret uninvestigable ways and motions to love, she knows not why. But it is
time alone and long probation, which seldom fail to give right information;
when Nature, Art and Report, may deceive you. Every man may keep his mind if he
lists in a Labyrinth. *It Is a room by us inscrutable, into which Nature has made
no certain window, but as he himself shall please to give you light, which is
in such transient glimmerings that it rarely strikes any thing but the eye,
leaving us immediately to grope again in the dark.

I remit you to your own experience, you have converst in the world
(troublesome enough for many years) with all sorts and all humors of persons;
but for your better guidance herein, I shall give you these properties of
friendship, which my longer observation has found to be true characters of it.

He who is really your friend, will give you Counsel before you ask it, and
that's the reason a man cannot keep a friend by constraint, nor oblige secrecy
by coercion.

Most men regard their profit, and therefore use their friends as men use
beasts, carefully attend and look to them, from whom they receive increase and
advantages, and so deny themselves, and want the most desirable fruition in the
world, which is natural and reciprocal amity; which all the creatures maintain
among themselves, and yet know not nor are able to consider, what and how great
the force of that friendship is; for every one loves it self, not out of hope
of any reward and recompense to it self for it, but, because of the nearness
and dearness it owes it self. Which if the samething be not done in friendship,
it is impossible to find a true friend.

He that loves you extremely, will hate you most deadly, therefore sober,
moderate friendship is the best; and since friends must be had, if your
happiness be to find good ones, beware you incur not that unhappiness of
changing them: Remember, that he is in the best condition who is best furnished
with the best men for his friends, nevertheless, let no obligation to them,
make you dispense with your Conscience or Religion; have always a care not to
trust any thing to your most intimate privado, but what you cannot keep from
time: A small distaste will discover those faults, which a heap of years have
covered. 'Twas Bias his Counsel that men should so love, as if every day were a
renewed enmity, and not to affect repentance.

Let no man (which is the chief law of friendship,) command any thing of you,
which is not lawful, or which is not within your power; nor do you use friends
as men use flowers, smell to them as long as fresh, and green, and fragrant,
and then lay them aside, for so commonly friendships conciliated by interest or
fancy, usually terminate. Beware especially of mercenary love, when your money
fails, that leaves you, when true affection follows beyond the grave.

Your virtues will make and get you friends throughout the world, Love has
Arms which will join the distant Corners of the universe; out the good offices
you do at home, as they keep men's eyes upon them, and serve as well as
remembrancers, will afford you a continued content.

Believe it, nothing will gain you so much respect, (the first and best
ingredient to friendship) as your uprightness and sincerety, greatness was
always suspicious, without any conspicuous proofs of a more then ordinary
integrity; nor will true glory wait long on a false person, observance is her
maidof honor, and what recommendation she gives must be founded on desert.

In a word choose such friends as I have left you, they will be the more yours,
because of your own affiance to them, and so you will have a double interest in
them, your election and mine.

CHAP. V. Of Travel.
THis is in some men a humor and curiosity only, in others wisdom and
design, and accordingly they make their different returns; it has been all
along the practice of this Nation, and with very good success: (to go to a
foreign war is rather a transplantation then travel, passing only out of the
bounds of one Country, into the confinements and limits of another; so I reckon
I have said nothing to you concerning this subject in my maxims of war,) and I
cannot conceive any better divertisement (besides the advantage it will afford
you) for your present condition.

Homer begins his Odysseis in the praise of Ulysses, with this title and
character. -- Qui mores hominum multorum vidit and urbes, as the most
apparentest demonstration of his wisdom. Some men there are, that have seen
more with their eye, then some ambitious Princes did ever comprehend in their
thoughts, It Is a pleasure and felicity when the mind embraces but a glancing
thought of the beauteous fabric of the universe, and is with a kind of delight
transported to some peculiar part of it, whose felicity and pleasures or
wealth, have won upon its running fancy; if this be so in the imagination, what
delight and fruition is there, in the corporal view, and passage, and abode in
the most remarkable countries of the world. Men expect rich returns in
East India Ships, and men that are far travellors, beget great expectation of
their wealth; if they come home empty, they bankrupt their Credit, and dye in
their Countries debt, and that narrow dark prison of their pride, buries them
in utter oblivion, who might have made the wide world their Monument.

The story of the wandering Jew was a pleasant fiction, the punishment consisted
only in his not having a Center, and certainly he could as well want it as the
rest of his Nation. The moral would hint, what an improved man must he be who
has so often gone the Circumference, crossed the Lines, and visited the most
remote and abstruse corners of the world; seen so many varieties in Nature and
Providence, reconciled by the tract of time.

One Journey will show a man more, then twenty descriptions, relations or maps;
what a desolate life do Tortoises live, who cannot be rid of their shells? No
man can endure confinement; and he that has lived locked up in one Kingdom,
is but a degree beyond a Countryman, who was never out of the bounds of his
parish. Nevertheless all men are not fit for travel, wise men are made better,
and fools worse. This inquires after nothing but the gue-gaws, the
antick-fashions, and gestures of other lands, and becomes the shame of all
Nations, by disgracing his own in carrying nothing of worth or esteem from
thence, and by bringing censure and imputation upon foreign places where he
conversed, by importing nothing but their vices. They vent abroad their
domestic vices, and utter here, them beyond sea.

If you would advantage your self by travail, you ought to note, and then
comment upon your observations, remembering as well the bad to avoid it, as
applying the good into use; without committing of these things to the Pen, they
will pass from your memory without leaving any profitable results behind them.

Let no have therefore hurry you through any considerable or remarkable place,
but stay and view what is worthy in it, and be sure to register it with your
pen, it will very much fasten it in your memory; the charactering of a thought
in paper, will fix it ready for your use; he that does this, may when he please
rejourney all his travails at home.

Solid persons are the best proficients by travail, they are not so prone to be
inquinated by the dross and feces of the vices, and taking vanities of foreign
Countries, being abler to compose themselves to such manners, which may sooner
facilitate their inquisition. Pliance and outward freedom, and a seeming
carelesseness is the readiest way to get into strangers, and to learn from them.

Policy and negotiation I commend far before BookLearning, though never so deep
and knowing. When you are abroad, the best way is to converse with the best,
and not to choose by the eye but the ear, (which your own inexperience will soon
warn you of) but follow report.

For the Government, and things relating to the State, your advice and
instruction is no where to be had but at Court, for the Trade, Commerce and
Traffic, in great Cities among Merchants; for their Religion and Church
affairs amongst the Clergy, but I rather choose the universities, where you may
happly meet with an addition of the rest. For the Laws, Customs and Manners,
the Lawyers; and for the Country and rural knowledge, the Husbandmen and such
as we call the Yeomanry.

All rareties are to be seen, and therefore I advise you not to travail without
store of money to be ready at all occasions; especially Antiquities, for these
show us the science and abilities of those times before us; (the moderns always
preferring their arts and inventions to former ages) that by comparing of them
with the present, we may be able to give a judgment, how the world thrives or
goes less in all such learning.

Above all, think no travail too far nor discommodious to see and visit rare
and eminent men, there is no monument like a virtuous learned person; living by
him we shall be sure to be something the better, we shall find somewhat in him
to inflame and excite our minds to strain to the like pitch, and so extern
them, in a brave imitation of his excellent qualities. To such men you must
carry your self with all submiss reverence befitting the dignity of those
excellencies that are relucent in them; and that awe you seem to stand in, will
soon invite his Candor to a free reception and near entertainment of you, for
learned men are rarely proud or stately.

Judgment is the only thing that is necessary for a travailor and therefore I
approve not of your going abroad, nor permitting your children if God shall
send you any, till they have grown to a good competency of discretion, which
yet I would have seconded by the assistance of a Tutor, when it shall be any of
your inchnations this way. I pray God bless you abroad, and return you as an
Honor to your King, Country and Friends.

CHAP. VI. Of Housekeeping and Hospitality.
THis is a generosity very requisite in Noble persons, and the greatest
demonstrations they are so: It Is as well respected for the quality of it as the
quantity, and according to the condition of every man; you may be as free in a
moderate entertainment as in all the excesses and superfluities of your Table,
which then becomes a snare, where it should be a kindness.

Nevertheless, the greater extreme is that of niggardliness, and but a little
less then vileness or baseness, in the eyes of your Neighbors, which will soon
bring contempt and dis-esteem upon you, which you must by all means (as
reckoning it the worst evil can befall noble persons,) avoid and decline. The
English are so careful of their Honor in this point, that they do abridge
themselves of other Grandezza's which their Estates would afford them, in
coming to Court, Masquing, etc. to sacrifice with the due rites to their
Penates their Housholdgods, to whom their Ancestors had devoted their prime
substance, and which the Genius of their neighboring people as by a religious
custom expected from them.

So much was not required at the hands of any Scotch Noble man, as from an
Esquire there of 2000l. per annum, the difference lies in the condition of our
vassals, and their Tenants and Neighbors; which being perhaps now to be more
assimilated, both by some use and understanding our Nation has of the English
Customs, and the greater correspondency and mutual friendship, that is likely
toarise between them, (which is now more advanced by the war, then by the long
projected union;) I would advise you as far, and as soon, as you are able to
comply with the English manners in this particular. It will beget you a good
respect; and favor purchased from hence is most durable.

To this purpose, keep constantly at home, without urgent and necessary
occasions call you from thence. The entertainment your House will afford
strangers, though it be never so ample and abundant, will want that condiment
and sauce of Hospitality, your own company. Men usually affect their Landlords
company, though they pay for it; much more will the honor of your presence
commend your frank and liberal treatments, to the gratitude of all persons who
shall resort to your House and Table.

Be not only courteous your self to all comers, but see your servants be so
too. Kind reception and admittance is as necessary before meat, as digestion
afterward; and he that would have thanks for his entertainment when it is past
must bespeak it before it begin at his board, that his victuals and cheer be
but a rumination of his first kindnesses, and that his Porch be as free as his
Hall.

Keep about you therefore no morose, cross conditioned servants, and as near as
you can retain men of a good aspect, and as far as you can be assured of them
to be of fair and civil demeanor. Such will not only be an ornament and honor
to you, but of much advantage; for as it will invite persons of quality and
civility to you, which will be credible for you, so will it shame and deter the
ruder, and more ungoverned sort of people, who meeting with such dissonant
humors, will soon abstain or soon be civilized.

Let not your entertainments be tedious, knowing that is not the way to keep
them all along the year, and therefore substantial dishes must make up your
bill of fare, in stead of French Quelque chooses. Money and time is fruitlessely
spent in those vanities, and are for no masculine contentment and palate; and
if such be not your guests, your expenses will be thrown away, when others
reckon them laid out.

Above all things avoid intemperance in drink. Luxury in feeding seldom
carries men beyond their stomach and discretion, though never so many
provocations be used to lure them on; but in the abundance of wine men are
sottishly transported beyond themselves, and the excess in it, makes them the
more covetous and raging after it; especially where they think or find they
cannot be welcome, unless they comply with your humor, and can requite your
charges no other ways, then by the loss of their sense and modesty.

I would have you therefore detest that barbarous German mode of drinking to
victory, by a beastly subduing of those, whom you have invited, and humanely
welcomed, and bid to your Table, It Is one of the greatest vices our Gentry has
brought from thence, amidst all those Trophies which they deservedly gained
there, and therefore the more caution is to be used, lest it insinuate it self
easily by their converse, whose company you shall do well always to esteem as
an honor; but yet use your discretion and my experience as an Antidote against
that humor, which you may do plausibly and indiscernible enough.

Suffer no person to depart your house in discontent that shall not by rudeness
or some other unhospitable way deserve your dis-respect; on the other side,
permit no tumultuous disorderly persons to stay within your doors. Every
ordinary man's house is his Castle, but a Noblemans is that and a Palace both,
where there is reverence due to you as well as a bare power and command.

On public Anniversary Thanksgiving days, you must expend above your ordinary
provisions. The solemnity due to those festivals, takes it is weight from the
observation of the Nobility, whose magnificences at those times are the most
forcible impressions to make the people remember and call to mind, (which will
also keep them in their duty,) the mercy's and favors of such days. This will
more especially concern you, who by all means and ways must endeavor to
reconcile your self to the government.

But be surest, that the poor whose condition will not suffer them within your
doors, may not be out of your heart, but that a constant care and provision be
made for them: from whom I assure you, you shall find the greatest return and
thanks, if not by them, yet for them.

CHAP. VII. Of Tenants and other concerns of Estate.
YOu will be at a loss in this particular, by reason of the difficulties I
shall leave upon my Estate, and the several claims made by pretended titles,
besides that which will be escheated to the Crown; it will therefore require
your utmost diligence and circumspection, having so many enemies about you.

I look upon your old demeans of the Family, as the most likely to continue in
your possession, and therefore you must retain and caress with all manifest
demonstrations of kindness, the present and ancient possessors and enjoyers of
those lands, who by their long dependence on your family, are so addicted to
it, that they will not desire upon any ordinary conditions to be alienated from
you, if you seem not to slight them or your own interest.

It is utterly impossible you should be totally deprived of your inheritance
among them, so long as you bear my name; nor do I know my self every part of my
estate there, so far is it out of the reach of confiscation: many were the
Homages and Services done me, which were without book.

For my novel acquists and purchases, they have so much envy of the state
already upon them, that I would not advise you by stirring on them to draw more
upon you: your old rents will be estate enough for you, if you can secure them.
I never looked upon any thing I had from the Estates of Scotland, other then as
a present satisfaction for what I had expended; what it wants or exceeds
therein was never intended to be put to your account.

It Is no time now, nor is it your interest to stand at that distance formerly
maintained; many have been the forfeitures of the Scotch Nobility, yet I never
knew any so dangerous as yours is like to prove; for I will not dissemble that
odium and envy against me, how justly I have said elsewhere. So there lies upon
you a necessity of counterwalking all ways to your ruin: you must move pity,
(and that I think no hard matter in your case) and you will soon find affection
which will easily be improved into trust and condence, the ready way to secure
your Estate.

If by such means, or any other (as I do not, as I said before; despair of your
total restitution, if not to your Dignities and Honor, yet to your Lands and
Revenues,) you shall be possessed, remember you deal gratefully with such, as
have dealt honestly and faithfully with you; and consider you may not strain
thiugs to that height, which usually great men do in Scotland, for that the
wings of your greatness are clipped, and cannot grow out again suddenly; and
that your safety now instead of mightiness, consists altogether in the love,
and not in the fear of your Tenants.

Redeem that hard censure laid upon me, of being a cruel rigid Landlord, and
strive to vanquish those difficulties by a complacent carriage, which to my
best disposed temper (as times were) proved insuperable.

Avoid as much as in you lies all suits and controversies, such collisions
will give light to discoveries; set down by any losses or injuries, which you
cannot remedy without public trial, and give place to such violence as will
overbear you.

Recollect first your scattered fortunes, and let a sedentary quiet life have
confirmed you in the possession of what you have, so shall you not be
endangered (if then you be put to vindicate your right to what you enjoy) by
that which you have not.

Contract your Estate into as few men's hands as possible, change not those to
whom you have let your lands formerly, or used or dealt with other ways;
especially displace not such servants, who are acquainted in the managing of
it, for besides the ease, you will find security in so doing.

As I would not have you suffer under that great depression of worth, a base
poverty, so neither would I have you to be abused by the chargeable report of
being very rich, to avoid both, you must live in a free and open way, neither
like Diogenes nor Dives: but yet the more men are inquisitive after the secrets
of your Estate, the greater will your wisdom be, the closer to conceal it,
and that you may do without danger, for it is in your own defense.

Your Estate will be safer however, in the reputation of things past, (men
looking on my disposal and ordering of it to be providential and munite enough)
then by your own wisdom or any new present, foundation or conveyance, which
takes off a great deal of envy from you,

Keep within the compass of what fortune soever God shall bless you with; if
you can be content you shall frustrate the ruinous designs of your enemies
against you; who can tell but all this may be for the better: greater shocks
have been given to Estates, which have but riveted and rooted them the faster,
instead of overturning them.

Whomsoever you entrust with the stewardship of your Estate, be sure to trust
your self most, and keep a strict account of your disbursements and receipts,
besides, that it is a good divertisement, yon will find it very profitable, and
will contain and preserve your servants in their duty, and consequently in your
favor.

Make not any necessity by your imprudence or prodigality, whereby yon must be
compelled to borrow money by security or mortgage, or anticipate your revenues,
the first will engage you to do the like courtesies for your friend, and that is
never without danger; and the other two are basely dishonorable, and will soon
bring contempt upon your person, and be a moth in your Estate.

Nullum numen abest, si sit Prudentia Tecum. CHAP. VIII. Of Study and Exercise.
THe times succeeding I devine to be very happy and peaceable, and therefore a
course of life befitting the tranquillity of the age you live in, will be to
betake your self to your Studies.

You have read men a good part of your life, and are pretty well versed in that
deep and profound knowledge, that will be of use you in the bustles and
encounters of the world; you must also have some provision to pass away the
quiet; and blessed calm of life: but herein pray observe these Cautions.

1. That the study of vain things is a laborious idleness.

2. That there is no way which leads ingenuous spirits more easily, and with
more certain appearances of honor and goodness, to delicacy, softness and
unmanliness, then learning and study.

3. That to study only to pass away time, is a most inept curiosity, and an
unthrifting of time, and very misbecoming active and noble spirits.

4. Though good letters be the best informers, yet company and conversation are
the best directors for a Noble Behavior and Deportment.

You must therefore so order your studies, that you make them subservient to
the concerns of your Honor, Estate, and Interest, and that they entrench upon
no time, which should be employed about them.

Your vacant and spare hours, you cannot better afford to any thing then to
Books; nay, there is a necessity of making such leisure time, if the
multiplicity of business press to fast upon you; remembering that of a great
Emperor, whose affairs were not only urgent, but full of trouble and care in a
new attained Empire, -- Nulla dies sine linea, not a day must pass without some
improvement in your studies.

Your own choice and judgment will best direct you what books you shall read,
and to what science you shall chiefly apply your self, though I think it
pedantical, and unworthy and unhandsome for a Nobleman or person of Honor to
be affectedly excellent in any one, it seems as ridiculous as Nero's mad
ambition of being counted the chief Fiddler and best Singster the world.

History and the Mathematics, (I may say) are the most advantageous and proper
studies for persons of your quality, the other are fit for Schoolmen, and
people that must live by their learning; though a little insight and taste of
them, will be no burden to you; your knowledge in them joined with your
Authority may be of good use to your Conntry in awing of pragmatick professors,
either of Law or Divinity.

I do not reckon the Laws of the Kingdom any particular study, for they must
be your constant practice, your place many instruct you in them, as to the
executory part of them, for the pleading part of them that is below you.

Keep always an able Scholar for the Languages in your house, besides your
chaplain, who may be ready at hand to read to you out of any book, your fancy
or judgment shall for the present pitch upon, you will find him to be of great
use and service to you, and give him salary accordingly.

Think no cost too much in purchasing rare books; next to that of acquiring
good friends I look upon this purchase; but buy them not to lay by, or to grace
your library, with the name of such a manuscript, or such a singular piece, but
read, revolve him, and lay him up in your memory where he will be far the
better Ornament.

Read seriously whatever is before you, and reduce and digest it to practice
and observation, otherwise it will be Sysyphus his labor to be always
revolving sheets and books at every new occurrence which may require the Oracle
of your reading.

Trust not to your memory, but put all remarkable, notable things you shall
meet with in your books sub salva custodia of pen and ink, but so alter the
property by your own Scholia and Annotations on it, that your memory may
speedily recur to the place it was committed to.

Review frequently such memorandums, and you will find you have made a signal
progress and proficiency, in what ever sort of learning you studied.

After your studies give your mind some relaxation by generous exercises, but
never use them afer fullness, sleep, or oscitancy, for then they abate much of
the recreation and delight they afford after intentness of the mind on any
business; otherwise it is but a continuation of the dream in the stirring
slumbers of sport and play.

In the choice of your exercises, affect none that are overrobust and violent,
that, instead of remitting, unbending the bow, will break it; but let them be
moderate, and withal virile and masculine, such as is riding the great horse,
shooting at marks out of crosse-bows, Calivers or Harquebuse. Tennis is not in
use among us, but only in our capital city, but in leiu of that, you have that
excellent recreation of Goff-ball, then which truly I do not know a better.

Do not make a toil of a pleasure, by over-exercising your self; play not to
wearisomness, which may nauseate the recreation another time to you. As near as
you can, play with companions your equals, but if they are not at hand,
pleasure will dispense with any play-fellow, nor are you tied there to any
strict rules of honor.

Let your exercises be designed to this end, to settle your mind, to beget you
a stomach and appetite, and fit you for other succeeding business.

CHAP. IX. Of Pleasure, Idleness, etc.
BY your recess from all public business, you will be apt and prone to fall
into some supiness and negligence, and indulge your self inordinate pleasures,
if you keep not a strict guard over your incli^ation and bent that way to which
most men naturally are very subject.

Remember therefore, that great actions were never founded in vain delights,
and nothing is less generous then pleasure, and nothing more corrupting the
seeds of virtue, and that finally it ends in dislike and regret.

I acknowledge, that youth the time of delight, is so transient and momentary,
and man such a slave to himself, that notwithstanding all the troubles that
beset him, he will find time, and space to bestow on his voluptuousness; but
you have past those heats of youth, and are arrived to a staid age, in which
your debordery to vice, would be most shameful and odious.

But of all pleasures take heed of gaming, that is the vainest and yet the most
bewitching temptation. A vice which has got footing amain among us, and
alienated many fair lands and possessions from ancient families; you may guess
at its goodness by its extraction, born (as I may say) in a dissolute camp,
where its first stake was the price of life, though contented here with livings
and livelihoods. You have losses more then enough already, do not therefore put
any more to the injurious disposal of fortune, by dicing or carding, or any
other game. That Is the greatest sign of dissoluteness you can give the world,
which will proclaim you a vicious as well as bankrupt person.

Give not your mind to company or drinking, these Bacchanalia are as bad a Game
as the former. This will presently bestialize you, and take away the signature
God has stamped upon you. A drunkard! I cannot name it without abhorrence, if
it divest you of your nature, it will not leave you a spark of Honor, but sink
your Estate and all together, in that Deluge of Ebriety. *It Was observed by
Cato, that none came sober to the destruction or overthrow of that State but
only Caesar; most certain it is, that none shall ever be called to the
maintaining of a State, whose debaucheries have made him incapable of governing
himself.

Avoid converse with women of ill report, that you be not fascinated by their
beauty or arts, to the lessening of that conjugal love you owe your wife; men
take it for a felicity to enjoy the favor of the company of fine women, but
they reckon not to what dangers they oblige themselves, and what burdens they
impose upon themselves to the secret ruin of their Estates, for nothing is so
chargeable as an imperious beauty.

Neither seek nor entertain pleasures when they present themselves in their
gaudy bravery, but with a noble constancy keep your mind fast shut against
their charms and allurements; but find some other diversion, the business
whereof may send those vagrants packing. I do much commend Hunting and Hawking,
and other field pastime.

It Is a dispute and an argument, whether to do ill or to do nothing, Male agere
aut nihil agere, is the worst, and therefore in the next place shun Idleness.
The life of man resembles Iron, which being wrought into instruments and used,
becomes bright and shining, else unwrought the rust eats and consumes it; so is
it with noble persons, if they exert themselves, and put forth their parts to
the service of their Country or in other honorable employments, they become
conspicuously glorious; better, industry should wear out and so polish a man,
then to lie by of no use and service, and wast away in sloth and idleness.

Nothing in the universe stands still, the Heavens and those orbs of light are
in perpetual motion, and though the Earth move not sphaerically, (as Copernicus
fancied) yet there is a continual motus in that too in her productions: An idle
man is a Mare mortuum, whose infectious company spoils and ruins all that come
near his example. I do not admire to see Gentlemen given over to vicious
courses of life, seeing they affect a lazy greatness, without the props of
employment to support it. It Is action that keeps the soul sweet and sound.

I would have you keep no retainers near you merely for show, but only as many
as you can well employ in their several offices; if you do, you must expect no
service nor attendance, till they have first served their own pleasures, and
besides you will have to answer for their lewdnesses.

You will have such a fragrancy and sent from any business you have been
diligent in, as those that stir amongst perfumes and spices, shall when they
are gone, have still a grateful odor with them.

If you grow not better by employing your self, yet this benefit will surely
accrue to you, that you both keep your self from being worse, and shall not
have time to entertain any suggestions of evil from without.

There is a kind of good Angel waiting upon diligence, that ever carries a
Laurel in his hand to crown her; and fortune according to the Ancients was not
to be prayed unto, but with the hands in motion. How unworthy was that man of
the world, or the enjoyments of it that never did ought, but only lived and
died; and it is none of the ordinariest happiness, to be endued with a mind
that loves noble and virtuous exercises.

Life and Honor consist both in action, nor can they find a worse sepulcher
then in the sluggards field. It Is by such slothful men that the monuments of
their Ancestors crumble into dust, and tombestones are obsolited by the
speechless lives of their successors and children.

CHAP. X. Considerations of life.
NO man is so miserable as he whose life is hated by all, and his death desired
by as many.

I have known men that have suffered by fortune unexpectedly, and having the
calamity in their view, have been so far transported beyond themselves, that
their rage and fury even before justice, has proved their sufficient defense.

Our trouble will never be at an end, if we interest our selves in other men's
businesses.

Great deliberation and slow resolution is required in the affairs of the
world, for as in the trade of navigation, the impetuousness of the Sea is
decryed and charged with several shipracks, so is it not otherwise in the
affairs of men, where passion and unruly violence have overset many gallant
designs and enterprises.

In matters in which you seem to have right on your side and justice also, a
speedy dispatch is more needful then to languish through the delay of the
remedy; on the other side, if you suspect the justice of your cause, the
dispute and continuance of the difference is most profitable, and hesitation is
better then resolution, the disease better then the cure.

Be not dejected by knowing you are constrained to begin with small designs,
for great affairs often begin from occasions far disjoined and remote from the
end to which their undertakers aspired, for the beginning of designs reaches
not so far as the issue.

Many small troubles are like letters of a small print they trouble and offend
our eyes, without the help of the spectacles of reason and judgment; but great
adversities we read presently and more easily.

Sundry affections and passions of men may conceal themselves, but gladness is
of the nature of fire, which manifests it self the more it is stifled and
smothered.

Follow not the fashion of the world, who, rather delight in praising of virtue
then in imitating of it.

No life is so full of content as to live by ones self, and meddle not with
other men's matters.

It is impossible for any man to live by such a rule of reason, which the fresh
occurrences of things, time and custom, may not innovate upon, and withal
have informed him so much, that in what he pretended to be well skilled, he is
a mere novice, and that which he esteemed rare and excellent, to be unworthy of
his most undervaluing considerations.

Most happy are those, who keeping a constant tenor of life pass through it
without any danger, in the managery of business, or else live in a continual
quiet and repose in privacy and retirement.

It is a demonstration of the greatness of spirit and of prudence, to forget
that which is lost and cannot be recovered, to give way to thoughts designing
the amends other ways.

The body is pleased and recreated only, during the time only of its pleasure,
whereas the mind of man foresees future contentments and enjoyments, and
suffers not the memories of past felicities to slip her repetition.

Youth gives a taste and indication of what may be expected from men; the rest
of our time and seasons of our life, are appointed and designed to reap, gather
and receive the profits of what was sown in that age.

It Is folly to complain of life, more to be troubled at the end of it, by the
reason we ought more to complain of our birth, that made and produced us
mortal, then of our death, which will render us immortal.

To be long or short lived is no more then this, we come either sooner or later
(no great choice) to our grave. He is very desirous of life, who is unwilling
to dye when all the world is weary of him.

It Is not white or gray hairs, nor wrinckles in the face, beget a present
respect for men, but a life honorably passed, conferrs glory and renown, and
places the deserved wreaths on their Temples,

It Is a strange insatuation in man, that he never takes thought how to l ve
virtuously, but is very careful how to prolong his life from a loose principle,
that it lies in the power of a man to live well, but it is out of his power to
live long.

A life among Roses, ends in a death among Thorns and Thistles, which proceeds
always from those intemperances and disorders our pleasurers sway us to.

Life is a continual longing, and a continual nauseating, and all humane
reason, judgment, and art cannot by any ways remedy it, and who would be a
slave to such vicissitudes?

They are very miserable who have nothing but a heap of years to prove they
have lived long, but infinitely unhappy are they who survive their credit and
reputation.

There is no better defense against the injuries of fortune and vexation of
life, then death.

Make your Estate the bound of your desires, and not your desires the limits of
your Estate, but the best and equalest boundary to both is death.

MAXIMS OF STATE, BY THE MARQUIS OF Argyle.
CHAP. I. The Prince.
THere is nothing in the world which wins more upon the affections of men, or
makes a Prince more reverenced and desired then clemency; it is also necessary,
that he keep himself in a constant tenor, duly tempering that gravity (which
Majesty requires) with debonarity and sweetness; that all accesses to him be
easy, that he caresse and esteem, and give kind reception to all persons of
worth, discountenancing the vicious, and casting out flatterers, liars, and
such like, of whom no service may be expected.

It Is the excellence of a Prince to use his clemency in pardoning such as
offend, and for which offense any reasonable, equitable excuse may be alleged,
as also in abating the rigor of the law to such, who transgress not out of
custom, and are otherways persons of repute and of virtue, and whose faults
are not atrocious; for if he exercise his clemency other then so, without these
considerations, he will be rather cruel, and unjust, then merciful; whereas
counterpoising it with equity; his justice is no way interessed against it,
being reduced and applied to its true cause.

It is less dishonorable for a Prince to be vanquished by Arms, then by
munificence and bounty.

That revenge which a Prince takes from his sense of a personal injury is
always esteemed rigorous and too severe though never so just.

It Is fatal to all Princes, who have swayd Scepters in their minority, to be
embroyled with troubles and seditions in the beginnings of their reign, and
tormented by some of their subjects desirous of novelty; but when they have
attained to age and the full exercise of their power, they have quickly learned
to chastise and punish those insolences and outrages committed against them in
their youth.

Ordinarily Princes do not use to love such, who are acquainted, see and
reprehend their vices; nevertheless, they cannot so carry them, but that notice
will be taken; nor avoid the censure which is become the Towntalk.

Neighbor Princes must not go see or frequent Campagnia's of war, lest in so
doing, they draw upon themselves hatred and envy.

A Prince must be constant in retaining his good friends and servants, and
entertain no sinister opinion of them, without great, just, and apparent cause;
to govern himself by his own counsel, and to be master of himself, that is, of
his affections and opinions, by reducing them to sage and mature advice.

The Prince who is too cruel in the punishment of crimes, whether supposed or
true, gives occasion of censure, that it is out of covetousness after the
condemneds goods, and that he is swayed more by avarice then justice.

Princes must have a care they suffer not any subject, to grow near them in
such grandeur and puissance, which, their boldness may soon make redoubtable to
them; but must cut them in the root: for if that greatness once be radicated,
it is almost impossible to pull it up without the absolute ruin of those who
attempt it, as of late experience Wallenstein Duke of Freidland.

It has often happened that the memory of a good Prince deceased, has been of
good stead to his vicious successors, degenerating from his virtues, and has
made their government tolerable.

A Prince ought to be vigilant and careful, that he be not surprised by the
ordinary importunity of craving Courtiers, in pardoning faults which he ought
to have punished.

Princes must not make use of (like private men) artifices and slights, which
will soon hazard their persons and Estates.

Courageous Princes are most commonly subject to love Mars and Venus, which are
oftimes linked together.

Kings must sometimes visit the remotest parts of their Country, that their
subjects may see by their care of them, that they are truly the Pastors of the
people.

The children of Kings are to be taught to speak low and gravely.

It is necessary that a great Monarch should be universally knowing. Private
men for their direction, content themselves with one single virtue, but a
Sovereign must have all; for who has more need of prudence and wisdom, then
he who deliberates, and resolves, such great and important affairs? who ought
to be more just, then he who governs the laws? who ought to be more reserved,
then he to whom all is permitted? and who has more need of courage and valor,
then he who protects and defends all?

Truth never or seldom approaches the ears of Princes without a disguise, or
blemished by the injury and cunning of those, who would indirectly gain the
favor of the Prince without deserving it.

A Prince ought to take Counsel when it pleases himself, and not at the will of
another; if he be not sufficient of himself, he will hardly be well advised if
he be not committed to the conduct of one particular person, who is solely and
entirely to govern him, and whatever good shall be effected by his Counsels
ought to be ascribed to the prudence of the Prince, rather then his
Counselors.

The best Counsel that can be given to Princes, who are well advanced in years
and in extreme old age, and who must leave unexperienced raw successors, is to
treat rather of peace and alliances with their neighbors, then to enterprise a
war.

A King is obliged as diligently and carefully to keep the goods of his Crown,
as a Tutor those of his Pupil.

A Prince must be punctual in his religion, for nothing so sadly presages his
ruin, as his negligence in that, and therefore his most lively thoughts must be
intent on it, and in serving God without hypocrisy.

It much imports a Prince, to preserve union and friendship with his brothers,
as being the dearest part of himself, and as ready to his assistance, as his
own eyes, his hands, and his feet.

Princes must beware of attempting what is above their strength, or to
enterprise any thing in which they are not sure to come off with honor.

Kingdoms, Treasures, the robe of purple, the Diadem, are not such splendid
ornaments of a Prince, as virtue and wisdom; for a Prince that knows himself
to be but a man will never be proud.

Those Princes then begin to lose their estates, when they begin to break the
ancient laws, manners and customs, under which their subjects have long lived;
for Princes must have as much regard to the safety of their subjects, (which
consists in the protection of the laws) as of their lives.

A Prince newly come to the Crown, must especially avoid giving any occasion to
his subjects, to wish and sigh for the government of his predecessor, as the
people of Rome did under Tiberius, after Augustus Caesar.

When Princes send Ambassadors, they must choose such whose manners and
qualities are suitable and agreeable to the Court whither they are sent.

A good Prince does not only do good to the good by making them better, but
also to the bad by restraining them from being worse; and the felicity of
subjects, is the true glory of Kings.

Princes are mistaken that think to reign over men, without permitting God to
rule over them.

The request of a Prince is equal to a commandment.

Princes sometimes disgrace their favorites for their good, and restore them
again for their hurt.

A Prince who truly is and effectually appears to be religious, is always
feared and reverenced by his subjects, who will never rebel or revolt from
him, believing that he is under the particular protection of God.

Offenses which Princes take are like fixed pillars, but their love like the
spokes in a running wheel.

Princes bestow offices, Favorites give admission, nature good extraction,
parents patrimony, and merits give honor, but w^sedome and discretion come
from God alone, and are not in man's disposing.

Kings have diverse sorts of thunder as well as Jupiter, that which tears and
rends all that resist it in solid bodies; and that which passes the soft and
pliable.

The science which we learn by books, is water out of a Cistern, that which we
gain by experience is living water, and in its spring; so though among
scholastic men we find courageous and refined polite spirits, yet Princes take
not usually such as they intend for their service from the schools though they
be knowing and able persons; for it is business and action that strengthens the
brain, while contemplation weakneth it.

It Is dishonorable for a great Prince or Monarch to defend and maintain with
his Quill, which his prodecessors have acquested with their Lance.

A Prince that would get much, must pardon much; though it is a maxim among
Grandees, especially such as are raised from obscurity, that though they be
mortal, yet the indignities done them are immortal.

It Is folly to solicit tediously great men, for a thing which cannot be
obtained.

The good words of a Prince, accompanied with promises are most forcible and
powerful engines.

'Twas a precept of the Emperor Charles the fifth, to his son King Philip the
second, to exercise himself always in some virtue befitting and convenient for
a King, to the end that holding his subjects in admiration of his actions, no
time should be given their thoughts to entertain other affections.

He must never see the picture of fear any where, but on the shoulders and
backs of his enemies.

It is not only a sign of modesty and clemency, but also of a superlative
courage, when Kings take no notice of ungrateful men's speeches.

Nothing can please a good King so much as concord among his subjects, whereas
that makes a Tyrant to fear them.

A Prince must by all means prevent, (flighting not the smallest things) and
obviate factions and conspiracies; for as the loudest storms and tempests, are
caused by secret exhalations and insensible vapors; so seditions and civil
wars, begin often from light occasions, and which no man would think could come
to such an issue.

The retinue and train of a Prince, let it be never so retrenched and ordered,
is always very troublesome to the places through which they pass.

It Is a true foundation and principal maxim of State, to have an eye, to the
growing greatness of a neighbor Prince, and to have always a jealous fear of
his power; this makes the friendship between them more firm and durable; for
when they have reason alike to dread one another, either of them will but
coldly attempt a breach.

The will of a Prince is to be executed, not interpreted.

Princes commonly pay flatterers in their own coin, for they dissemble the
vices of the Princes, and they dissemble the lies of the flatterers.

At the death of a Prince, it is discretion to seem neither sorrowful nor glad.

A Prince cannot be said to be potent, who is not strong at sea, and cannot
join maritime to his landforces.

When mean Princes pass the limits of mediocrity, they are near past the bounds
of security.

It is necessary, that a Prince defer nothing to the deliberation of his
Council of Estate, which has not first past the Counsel of his Conscience.

It is not good to frequent the presence of a Prince whom you have offended; he
was well advised, who having provoked his Sovereign, protested, that he would
never see his face more but in picture.

They must be strong and downright blows, that can batter down a puissant
crown.

The Treaties between Princes should resemble Drusus his building or Templum
fidei, which were constantly clear, nothing of obscurity, nothing feigned, and
without any coverture.

This should be a lesson and Rule for all Princes, that the faults which they
suffer and tolerate in their subjects, are as so many burdens laid upon their
own shoulder, and of which they must give account to the Majesty of him to whom
they as much as other men are subjected.

Great Princes ordinarily endeavor to bring petty ones into their snares, or
to do their affairs at their expense; they embarck themselves in their
quarrels, and forget and leave them out in the accommodation of them, and under
color of defense and assistance keep those places for their own, which were
put into their hands for gage and caution.

Nothing renders a Prince more contemptible then niggardliness, for it is odious
in all men, but specially in them, who as they are placed in an ampler and more
opulent fortune then other men, ought to be more liberal and free from base,
parsimony and covetousness.

The greatness of that Prince is sure and stable, which his subjects know to be
as much for them, as above them.

A Prince mounted on high will have high aspiring thoughts. 'Twas great
Alexanders speech, that it was proper to good Princes to do well, and to hear
ill.

It were very expedient that a Prince who inherits his Realm, should inherit
also the Ministers of State, to aid him in the government; those that have been
used to the managery of affairs, are of more knowledge then those that newly
enter upon the administration, who being ignorant of the causes and first
designs, either spoil all presently, or so turn the course of the policy of
the State, that confusion follows.

CHAP. II. Of Courage.
IT has been the glory of Scotland, that she has sent forth as many famous
warriors into the world as any Nation whatsoever; of later years more
especially, in the Swedish and Imperial war under that great Captain Gustavus
Adolphus, as also in Russia, Poland, Pruss, and most parts of Europe. Most of
those Hero's were persons of very good extraction and noble families; neither
should I mislike it if any of you, except my son Lorne should undertake an
honorable expedition. His necessitudes and affairs at home, will require more
of the gown then the sword: for truly I do count glory so atcheived, to be the
more solid and durable, as having that stiff composition of the steel in it,
whereas the other comes by the plume, and is apter to take wing and be gone.
Besides, our Name challenges you into the field, our Ancestors were eminent
for the military way, and therefore I shall here lay you down some maxims of
approved use, taken from the most experienced caplains, and some of my own
observations.

Courage is an innate moral virtue placed in the mind, whereby it overlooks and
contemns all difficulties and dangers standing in its way, to the attainment of
glory; It Is the sublimer of all other virtues, by means whereof they do exert
themselves in their greatest strength and beauty.

Courage is an exposing of the body to the utmost hazards and dangers, and
venturing through the most invincible hardships; for of how little concern is
that man that cannot elevate himself above common discourse?

The Laurels and the Coronets are not half so glorious, as the slashings of the
Sword, the explosion of the Musket, and those wounds which men fairly gain in
the service of their Princes.

In a generous soul age enfeebles not Courage.

Nothing more touches a valiant man to the quick, then to see the event not
answer expectation, and that fortune gives law to virtue.

Matters of danger, not despair, are the true objects of valor, every virtue
is tied to rules, and bounded with limits, not to be transgressed, the extremes
alter all goodness if they be pitched upon. Courage loses its merited honor,
if willfullness and overguided petulancy overbear it; a well grounded reason,
without prejudice to a man's honor may justly countermand a rash and
inconsiderate resolution.

Nothing in the world can truly be said to be great, if that heart be not so,
that despises great things.

It Is natural for brave spirits, not to hold their tongues in the very face of
danger, or or in fear of servitude.

A great heart neglects ceremonies, fot by how much the more generous it is,
the less it regards the luster and splendour of exterior things, esteeming it
self its own Theater.

Bees turn not Droanes, nor courages ever abate or degenerate.

By the way, I observe that none have ever arrived to an eminent grandeur, but
who began very young.

There Is no place where a man cannot enter into which a Sunbeam can penetrate;
nothing so constant and so firm, but what a firmer courage can beat and shake
it.

Noble souls are ashamed to see that thing which they cannot remedy.

They are to be esteemed valiant and magnanimous, who repel injuries and not
those that do them.

It Is better to trust in valor, then in policy.

As the light is open to all eyes, so nothing can be shut against valor and
magnaminity.

CHAP. III. Of War.
War is either foreign or intestine, Civil war always has been, and for ever
will be the most destructive and ruinous, more pernicious then all the other
evils of famine and pestilence, which angry heaven can inflict upon Cities or
Kingdoms designed for utter ruin; so passionately Livy expresses its unnatural
fury.

Men enterprise a war, either relying on the strength and assistance of God, or
else upon humane power; when men therefore are provided with neither of these,
when trial is made, captivity, or some such misfortune is the conclusion, nor
are the best armed both these ways, sure of the victory.

In a war that is just, (for I allow no other,) the ancient men ought to
counsel, and the young to execute.

To do nothing out of course or without orders in war, is of very ill
consequence; for while time is spent in waiting for them, occasio res gerendae
perditur, many noble designs are lost; the reason is, because directions being
to be had at a great distance, they usually come too late for execution; and
it is the nature of war to produce every moment some unlooked for difficulties.

It Is better to attain if possible by peace the half of our demands, then by
war the whole, for a war is sooner kindled then extinguished.

War proceeds from the ambition and malice of men, but the success of it
depends on the good will of God.

In domestique broils, the greatest victory is never to be victorious, rather
to level demands by a peace then mount to them by a conquest.

By prevention, revulsion and diversion, oftentimes men have gained by the war,
when nothing but confidence makes men losers.

A Civil war is nothing but the flux and reflux of conquests and losses.

In war it is punishable with death to hold a place, which is not cenable by the
military rules, else every hen roost would make an army stay in its march.

In a fair war, a man may see from whom to guard himself, but in a slubbered
peace, a man knows not in whom to trust.

When the heart of the Soldiery fails, all commands are to no purpose; for
fear casts a mist over their memory, and the practique without courage is to no
purpose in times of necessity.

The events of war are uncertain, small skirmishes end in a set battle, which
is fought oftentimes more out of eagerness and heat of blood, then prudence.

Mischief in the beginning of a civil war, though not well supported at first,
grows higher like the luxuriant branches of a fruit-bearing tree; but if a good
Patriot like a Gardner put in his pruning hook, the suckers are soon cut off,
and the stock remains entire.

All manner of stratagems are lawful in war, though not practicable in
State Policy. The sight and show of new engines of war to the besieged, has
been the only cause of their surrender.

Money is the sinew of the war, but without the fomentation of a large treasure
will soon shrink.

CHAP. IV. Of Command.
Who commands in any place, ought to put a sentinel upon his mouth, that
nothing unadvised slip from him; and bear such a countenance, that the fair
outside may varnish his severity within. Men that are choleric, though they
may be apt for learning, yet are not fit to command.

Negligence is no point of excuse in a governor of a strong important place,
for if a truce or (may be) a peace be concluded on, yet he ought to consider
that he is not concerned in that peace, having in his custody that which is
well worth the breaking of it.

Never think of governing others, till you have the government of your self.

To command and obey that which is commanded, is the most exquisitest art;
these two keep a City free from sedition, and preserve concord.

Diversity of commands is dangerous, for that the execution of them cannot be
semblable, sor when one sees his counsel or command is not followed, he grows
regardless, and may be out of emulation is the cause of hindering the others
(though better) counsel to take effect.

It is convenient and necessary, that those who command, keep a distance from
their inferiors, to beget in them a reverence and awe toward him.

Merit is the only lawful ascent to places of trust, and he who thinks to
climb without it, may at the return miss the steps, and precipitate himself.

CHAP. V. Of Victory.
BY the bloody sword victory is obtained in an hour, but to keep up the
reputation of it is matter of trouble through the whole life.

There is no victory so glorious, as that which is got with the least effusion
of blood on the conquerors side, and which conserves the honor and justice of
his cause.

He only accounts himself vanquished, who is satisfied that neither stratagem,
nor treachery, nor fortune, had any thing to do in his overthrow, but only
clear valor in a noble and just war.

He that has vanquished his enemies, may make no difficulty of subduing
himself.

It is of no great moment, with what provisions or furnitures of men and arms
a victory is achieved, for that conquer rour is more renowned, who by a
handful of men attained it, being succored and seconded by his valor alone.

When the original is lost, men must be content with the copy; and to take all
in good part what the conqueror pleases without replying a word.

Seldom men know how to make advantage of their victories, with that of the
Carthaginian General, -- Vincere scis Hanibal uti victoria nescis.

Anger and victory omit no kind of revenge.

The vanquished have this solace in their overthrow when it is done by the
arms and by the valor and conduct of a noble person.

That Is the best and compleatest victory, which is without destruction.

CHAP. VI. Of Fortune.
FOrtune has more force then reason in the decision of war, yet it can do
little harm to us, so long as it takes not away our honor.

It is not enough to know how to remove the machine of a great design, nnless
we know also when to let it alone, and to comply with time and necessity.

It Is God that dissipates the devices of the Nations, and brings to nothing the
designs of the people; the King is not saved by the strength of his arms, nor
shall the mighty man escape by his great power.

As the understanding of a man is not always in vigor, nor the body in health,
so many times men enterprizing great things, fall and hazard themseves, lose
their hopes and designs, and sometimes their lives.

Idleness and luxury have subdued more arms, then ever were vanquished by
plain force: what a fatal intemperance and sloth was that of the Carthaginians
after the battle at Cannae, to suffer the Romans to make head again?

Mature deliberation ought ever to be used; but when arms are to determine,
speedy execution is best: because no delay in that enterprise is fit, which
cannot be commended before it be ended, and victory has determined it.

Soldiers must be encouraged in all fortunes to stand resolved; that which was
the enemies good luck to day, to morrow may be theirs; they must not be daunted
with any passed misadventure, ever attending a time and opportunity of revenge,
which commonly comes to pass where men's minds are united; for common danger
must be repelled with union and concord.

Some conquests are of such quality, as albeit a victorious Captain merit
triumphal honor, yet a modest refusal becomes his greatest glory; as some
noble Romans did out of bravery of mind before the Emperors, and some for the
envy of it, did forbear it afterward.

To enter into needless dangers was ever accounted madness, yet in times of
extreme peril and apparent distress, bold and hazardous attempts are the
greatest security, and are usually seconded with good events.

To conclude, Melior Tutiorque certa pax quam sperata Victoria.

Miscellaneous Observations.
GReat personages may preserve their honor without taint or crime, but not
free from suspicion; the first is in their own power, the second depends in the
ill will of others.

Toleration is the cause of many evils, and renders diseases or distempers in
the State, more strong and powerful then any remedies.

It most commonly proves true, that a Council composed of diverse Nations, (such
as was projected by Cromwell in England, during his usurpation, in constituting
a representative of three Kingdoms in one body,) are of different judgments
and tempers, though never so well packed together: But yet that is a far worse
diversity, which proceeds from the variety of particular passions, that corrupt
the fountain and source from whence the advice and counsel of public affairs
is to be drawn.

It Is a received maxim among conspirators, not to have any thing pass between
them in writing, but orally and by word of much.

Men would seem to be very jealous of their honor, when for words spoken in
prejudice or diminution of it, they commence fuits and processes against the
speakers of them, but there is nothing so below agenerous spirit, and which
argues more weakness of mind, then that they cannot contemn words that are vain
and uttered in have. I can set my approbation to this, that I never knew any
man that got advantage by so doing.

For men who have high thoughts and low fortunes, it is better to live privately
and meanly in a village, then beggarly and disrespectedly at Court.

Men of virtue and honor steer a course contrary to that of the world, as do
the planets above.

Nothing is so sociable or dissociable as man, the one is caused by nature, the
other by vice.

The pleasure or grief of present things takes up the room in our thoughts of
what is past, or what is to come, so infirm is the most sublimate humane reason
subjected to the attempts of fortune.

Prudence ought to begin all affairs, for that repentance is to no purpose in
the end, wisdom rather prepares then repairs. Wise men walk not always in the
same way, not keep always the same pace, they advise according to the
occurrence of affairs, and vary according to the alterations of time and
interest.

It belongs to prudent men to foresee that adversity and misfortunes come not
before their time, ^then all the wisdom of the world cannot stay them and it
appertains to valiant men, when they are come, to bear them courageously.

Prudence without virtue, is rather subtilty and malice, yea is quite another
thing then prudence.

Nothing ought to be done violently or precipitantly in reformation, you must
wind up the strings gently to make them tunable, the Music sounds a great deal
sweeter, when they are looser, then when straighter wound.

He is sure not to fail, who has virtue for his guide, and fortune for his
companion; but he that travails such away, must begin young, else he will come
late to his journeys end.

It Is certain, that he who deviates from truth, is in the ready way to all
sorts of mischief, and it has often been seen, that such who have laid their
hopes in lying and dissembling to others, have deceived themselves, to their
own ruin.

The most absolute perfection of men cannot be resembled better then to a
Pomegranate, which is never without some rotten kernels.

Nothing more grieves subjects to pay Subsidies and Taxes, then when they see
their money wasted or ill employed, who otherwise where they pay a penny would
willingly give a crown, for they take notice that when once the door is opened
to impositions, under pretense of continuing but so long time, it is seldom
shut again, this is true in all tyrannical or absolute governments.

Nothing appeases or quels a sedition sooner then the presence of the Prince,
nor ought he for any fear or cause whatsoever absent or hide himself, our late
troubles speak this too evidently.

It is an ill practice, that they who have been the greatest sticklers in state
troubles and commotions, should be the greatest gainers by the accommodation of
them.

Seditions whose originals cannot be traced, are always the most dangerous.

The due correction of a mutinous people brought again to obedience, ought to
be regulated by examples and means accommodated to the time, and disposition
and humor of the Country; the Laws must give place to policy.

Always observe, that a paltry ordinary fellow in a great sedition is commonly
the chief, and such an one is harder to be spoken or treated with, then any
Prince or General.

In a civil war betwixt subjects of the same Prince, misery follows the
vanquished, cruelty and impiety, haunts the conquerors, ruin and destruction
both the one and the other.

That people can never be at ease, whose Prince is indebted.

Let this be a lesson to the people to contain themselves within the bounds of
their duty, for by engaging in the quarrels of the great ones, they are
commonly plunged in the mire, while their leaders trample over them to security.

Nothing is impossible or unfasible, for an enslaved people to do against
Tyrants and Usurpers.

He that keeps himself strictly to the observation of the Divine Laws, cannot
err in the humane, and he that is a good Servant of God, will never be an ill
Subject to his Prince.

Such a Prince, and such a People, I pray God for ever to maintain and continue
in these Nations.

FINIS.

