AN APOLOGY FOR THE Protestants of France, In Reference to the PERSECUTIONS
They are under at this day; IN Six LETTERS: The First, Treats of the
Privileges they have by the Edict of Nantes. The Second, Gives an Account of
some part of the injuries and outrages they do them, whereby to force them to
change their Religion. The Third, Proves that their Religion inspires no other
principle into them, but an unmovable Loyalty to their Prince. The Fourth,
Iustifies their innocence against the unjust charge of Monsieur Maimbourg. The
Fifth, Defends them in relation to those troubles that fell out in Lewis XIII.
Reign, and the Affair of Rochel. The Last, Shows that the Papists, by the
Principles of their Religion, are Guilty of all the crimes, they wrongfully lay
to the Protestants, in reference to Kings.


LONDON, Printed for John Holford, at the Crown, in the Pall Mall, 1683.

TO THE READER.
SEveral accidents have till now hindered the completing the number of these
Letters; tho such as make not to our present purpose to relate. Only it is fit
I should let you know, that by the mouth of August last, mentioned in the third
Letter, is to be understood August, in the year 1681.

But if you would know why I publish these Letters: know, that the implacable
hatred the Persecutours of the French Protestants do pursue these poor people
with, who have taken Sanctuary under the protection of our good King; has made
it absolutely necessary. For when by all imaginable ways of cruelty, they have
forced them to a resolution of abandoning their Country and all they have; they
not only make it the utmost penalty on this side life, so much as to attempt a
departure, but after they are escaped, endeavor to prevent their subsisting
any where else, especially in England. Amongst some they are represented as
Enemies to our Religion Established: tho they desire to be esteemed as
Brethren, by professing the same Faith and submitting to the same discipline.
To others they are made appear as a mixed Multitude, part Protestant part
Papist: whereas the strict Examination of their testimonials by the Churches
here of their own Nation, makes the suggestion impossible. But that nothing may
be wanting to add affliction to the misery of these poor Fugitives, and render
them at the same time worse than unprofitable to their Brethren: It is
suggested to the common people, that they come to take the Bread out of their
Mouths, by over-stocking those populous Manufactures, which seem already rather
to be overcharged, and by surfeiting the Land with people. Which Objection, if
we consider strictly according to interest, comes not up to any weight or
consideration. For many of the Manufactures they bring over, are such as we had
not before, and by consequence of the greatest and most unexceptionable benefit
to us. Others, tho not wholly new, yet bring so great improvement to those we
had already of the same kind: that they do in a manner create a new
Manufacture. There are likewise that give help to a full Trade that wanted
hands before to supply it. And now if any are so unfortunate, as to bring over
such as we are more than filled with already: I would beg, that as men* we
would consider the common Laws of Humanity, and let necessity take place of
inconvenience; and as Christians, to have especial regard to those that are of
the Household of Faith. Now that we should be over-peopled, I think there is no
danger; when no considering man but will allow that our Nation wants more than
a Million of people, and that no Country is rich but in proportion to its
number. But be the politic consideration what it will; never was there greater
objects of Christian Charity and Compassion, than these poor people. 1. If we
look upon the privileges of mankind, we shall find them here infringed to the
scandal of our being. Men not only forced to renounce their thoughts, and say
the contrary to what at the same time they declare themsevels to believe; but
having by violence Holy Water cast upon them, and dragged at a Horse-tail to
Mass, they shall be pronounced Roman Catholics, and made to suffer as Relapse,
if they dare renounce what they never consented to. They are neither permitted
to live at home, nor to go abroad. The Holy and Religious Duty (as the Papists
account it) of Confession is prostituted to Oppression, and polluted with the
intermixture of secular Concerns. For the Confessors now in France conjure
their Penitents, upon pain of Damnation not to conceal any Debt they owe to a
Protestant, and when revealed, immediately they attach it in the Debtors Hands,
under the same penalty. 2. If we consider them as they are Protestants of
France, never had people greater privileges, better settled, nor upon juster
grounds; of which the first Letter will abundantly convince any reasonable
person. And yet it will appear by the second Letter, that no people were ever
reduced to a more miserable Estate, and lived. But that which ought to move an
Englishman in all diversities of his passion at once is, not only that they are
of our Communion, but that we are in a manner punished in them. For a great
inducement to this inhumane Usage, not only seems to be, but is really owned by
Papists to be from the rage they have conceived against us for preventing their
bloody and hellish Designs by the exemplary punishment of some Popish Traitors.
Nay, if they durst for shame speak out, I am sure they would tell us, That
since they could not execute their malice upon English Protestants, they are
resolved to wreak their Revenge upon the French and scourge them for our sakes.

The three next Letters make good by invincible proofs the innocence of these
poor sufferers, together with their affection and loyalty to their Soverains.
And the last shows plainly that the Papists themselves are the real Enemies to
all Crowned Heads.

You will find that I use no Authority for the justification of the French
Protestants, but what I have taken out of Popish Authors, who cannot be
suspected of partiality.

Since the finishing of my last Letter, I met with an ingenuous acknowledement
of the Gunpowder-Treason-Plot by a Jesuit. Who tho he seems to speak with some
abhorrence of the Fact, and would excuse Garnet, and others of his Society;
does however acknowledge the thing in so Plain a manner, as makes all his
excuses frivolous. You will find the story in a Book Entitled Historia
Missionis Anglicanae Soc. Jesu, Authore Henrico Moro lib. 7. n. XIX. Printed at
St. Omers Anno. 1660.

THE Present State OF THE PROTESTANTS IN France.
LETTER I.
YOu are not at all mistaken; I can now easily satisfy you in what you desire
to know concerning the Protestants of France. One that is a Friend to us both,
who is lately come thence, has fully acquainted me with the condition they are
in. I saw him the day after his arrival, and found him ordering his Books, and
loose Papers, which were just opened. After our first Salute, I asked him what
they were. They are, said he, French Books; and those Printed Sheets, are the
new Edicts, Declarations, and Acts which the King of France has lately
published against the Protestants of his Kingdom. I am very happy, said I, in
lighting on you at the opening of your Papers. I was extremely impatient of
knowing, with some certainty, what it was drove so many of them from their
Native Country; and I perceive, by the care you have taken to collect all the
pieces which concern them, that I could not have met any one who might better
satisfy my curiosity. They come hither in Troops almost every day, and the
greatest part of them with no other Goods, but their Children. The King,
according to his accustomed Goodness, has had pity on them, so far as to
provide means whereby they may be able to gain their Livelihood; and amongst
other things, he has ordered a general Collection for them throughout the
Kingdom. We were all resolved to answer the charitable Intentions of our
Gracious Prince, and were beginning to contribute freely. But to tell you the
truth, we were extremely cooled by certain Rumors. It is confessed, that their
King is very earnest to make them embrace his Religion: but they assure us,
that he uses none but very reasonable Means, Declaration of the 17th: of June,
1681.
and that they who come hither with such Outcries, are a sort of People not
gifted with much patience, who easily forsake their Native Country, being
dissatisfied, that their merit, as they conceive, is not sufficiently rewarded.
Besides, they are represented to us very much suspected in the point of their
Obedience and Loyalty. If we may believe many here, they have been very
factious and rebellious; such as in all times have struck at the higher Powers
both in Church and State; which, you must needs see, would not be much for our
purpose in these present Conjunctures. In truth, this is intolerable, (cried
our Friend) I cannot endure that the Innocence of these poor people should be
run down at this rate: I perceive Father La Chaise is not content to persecute
them in their own Country with the utmost cruelty, but trys all ways to shut up
the Bowels of their Brethren in foreign parts: he endeavors to ruin, and to
famish them every where; in England as well as France: A Hatred so cruel, and,
if I may so say, murderous, agrees not so well with the Gospel of the Meek
Jesus, whose Companion Father La Chaise styles himself. For, he came not to
destroy men, but to save them. Let this Jesuit alone, said I, and his
Emissaries, I do not doubt but he has too much to do in all the Affairs of
Protestants. But tell me ingenuously, do they give just cause to them of
France, to quit their Country as they do, and are they persons whom the State
and the Church may trust? You your self shall be Judge, said he, and that you
may be fully informed of the Cause, I will give you a particular Account of the
State of these poor People. But before I speak of the Evils they have suffered,
it is sit you should know, what it is that they have right to hope for from
their King, and from their Countrymen; you will then be more affected with the
usage they find.

You cannot but have heard of the Edict of Nantes. Here it is, said he, (taking
up one of the Books that lay upon the Table.) It is a Law which Henry the
Fourth confirmed to establish their Condition, and to secure their Lives and
Privileges, and that they might have liberty freely to profess their Religion.
It is called the Edict of Nantes, because it was concluded of at Nantes whilst
the King was there. It contains 149 Articles, 93 general, and 56 particular.
You may read it at your leisure, if you please: I will only observe some of
them to you at present. Look, I pray, (said he) on the sixth general, and the
first particular Article. Liberty of Conscience, without let, or molestation is
there most expressly promised, not only to them who made profession of the
Protestant Religion, at the establishment of the Edict, but, (which is
principally to be observed) to all those who should embrace and profess it
afterward. Art. 1. Pa^^tic.
For the Article says, that Liberty of Conscience is granted for all those who
are, or who shall be of the said Religion, whether Natives or others. The
seventh general Article grants to all Protestants the right of having Divine
Service, Preaching, and full exercise of their Religion, in all their Houses
who have Sovereign Justice: that is to say, who have the privilege of
appointing a Judge, who has the power of judging in Capital Causes, upon
occasion. There are a great many Noble Houses in France which have this
privilege. That seventh Article allows all Protestants who have such Houses, to
have Divine Service and Preaching there, not only for themselves, their own
Family and Tenants, but also for all persons who have a mind to go thither. The
following Article allows even the same Exercise of the Protestant Religion in
Noble Houses which have not the right of Sovereign Justice, but which only hold
in Fee-simple. It is true, it does not allow them to admit into their
Assemblies above thirty persons besides their own Family. The ninth Article is
of far greater importance: it allows the Protestants to have, and to continue
the exercise of their Religion in all those places where it had been publicly
used in the years 1596, and 1597. The tenth Article goes farther yet, and
orders that that Exercise be established in all places where it ought to have
been by the Edict of 1577, if it had not been; or to be re-established in all
those places if it had been taken away: and that Edict of 1577, granted by
Henry the Third, declares, that the Exercise of the Protestant Religion should
be continued in all places where it had been in the Month of September that
same year; and moreover, that there should be a place in each Bailywick, or
other Corporation of the like nature, where the Exercise of that Religion
should be established, tho it had never been there before. These are those
places which since have been called, with reference to the Exercise of
Religion, The first places of the Bailywick. It follows then from this tenth
Article of the Edict of Nantes, that besides the Cities and Towns in which the
Exercise of that Religion ought to be continued, because they had it in the
years 1596, and 1597, it ought to be over and above in all those places where
it had been in the month of September in the year 1577, and in a convenient
place of each Bailywick, etc. although it had not been there in that Month. The
eleventh Article grants also this Exercise in each Bailywick, in a second place
where it had not been either in the Month of September, 1577, or in the years
1596, or 1597. This is that which is called The second place of the Bailywick,
in distinction to that other place of the same nature, which is granted by
virtue of the Edict of 1577. When Henry the Fourth sent Commissaries into the
several Provinces to see his Edict put in execution, there was scarce found any
considerable City or Town where the Commissaries did not acknowledge that the
Exercise of the Protestant Religion had no need to be confirmed, or
re-established, because it had been used there in some one of the three years
abovementioned: in so much, that there were whole Provinces which had no need
of those two places, granted out o^ pure favor, I mean, the two places of each
Bailywick; all the Cities, and all the Towns of those Provinces claiming that
Exercise by a better Title. This is it which made the Bishop of Rodes,
(Monsieur Perifix) afterward Archbishop of Paris, Ann. 1599, p. 285, and 286,
E^it. Amsterdam, 1664.
in his History of the Life of Henry the Fourth, to say, that that Prince by
his Edict of Nantes granted to the Protestants Liberty of Preaching almost
every where. But he granted them farther, the means and full power of breeding
up, and teaching their Children. Read, as to that, the thirty seventh
particular Article. It declares, that they shall have public Schools and
Colleges in those Cities and Places where they ought to have the public
Exercise of their Religion. The Edict having secured, as you see, the Exercise
of the Protestant Religion, secures also the condition of them who should
profess it, to the end that they might, without any molestation, each one
according to his quality, follow those Trades, Employments and Offices which
are the ordinary means of men's Livelihood.

Indeed, the thing of it self speaks this. For it is plain that they do not
grant in good earnest the free Exercise of a Religion, who debar the persons
that profess it the use of means necessary for their subsistence. Nevertheless
for their greater security, Henry the Fourth has declared to all Europe by his
Edict, that he would not that there should be any difference, as to that point,
between his Protestant and his Papist Subjects. The thirty seventh general
Article, as to that is express. This it is: We declare all them who do or shall
make profession of the pretended Reformed Religion, capable of holding and
exercising all Conditions, Offices, Honors, and public Charges whatsoever,
Royalties, Seigneuries, or any Charge in the Cities of our Kingdom, Countries,
Territories, or Seigneuries under our Authority. The fifty fourth Article
declares, that they shall be admitted Officers in the Courts of Parliaments,
Great Council, Chamber of Accounts, Court of Aids, and the Offices of the
general Treasurers of France; and amongst the other Officers of the Revenues of
the Crown. The seventy fourth Article puts them in the same state with their
Fellow Subjects, as to all public Exactions, willing that they should be
charged no higher than others. Those of the said Religion pretendedly Reformed
(says the Article) may not hereafter be overcharged or oppressed with any
Imposition ordinary or extraordinary, more than the Catholics: And to the end
that Justice might be done and administered impartially, as the Edict explains
it self, the 30th. 31st to the 57th Articles set up Chambers of the Edict in
the Parliaments of Paris and Roan, where the Protestant Counselors ought to
assist as Judges: and Chambers Miparties in the Parliaments of Guienne,
Languedoc and Dauphine, consisting each of two Presidents, the one Protestant,
the other Papist, and of twelve Counselors, an equal number of each Religion,
to judge without Appeal, (exclusive to all other Courts) all Differences of any
importance which the Protestants might have with their Fellow Subjects as well
in Criminal, as in Civil Matters. In short, this great Edict forgets nothing
which might make the Protestants of France to live in peace, and honor: It has
not failed even to explain it self, as to the Vexations which might be created
them, by taking away or seducing their Children. For, read the eighteenth
general Article. It forbids all Papists of what quality or condition soever
they may be, to take them away by force, or by persuasion against the will of
their Parents: As if it had foreseen that this would be one of the ways which
their Persecutors would use, to vex and ruin them. But the 38th. Article goes
farther yet: That Wills, that even after their death, Fathers shall be Masters
of the Education of their Children, and consequently of their Religion; so long
as their Children shall continue under Guardians, which is by the Laws of
France till the 25th year of their Age: It shall be lawful for Fathers, who
profess the said Religion, to provide for them such persons for their
education, as they think fit, and to substitute one or more, by Will, Codicil,
or other Declaration made before Public Notaries, or written and signed with
their own hand.

You perceive then plainly, continued our Friend, that by this Edict King Henry
the Fourth made the condition of the Protestants equal almost in all things to
that of his other Subjects. They had reason then to hope that they should be
allowed to exercise their Religion, to breed up and instruct their Children in
it, without any disturbance; and that they should have as free admission to all
Arts, Trades, Offices and Employments as any of their Fellow Subjects.

This is very clear, said I, and I am much obliged to you for explaining to me
what this famous Edict of Nantes is, which I had heard so much discourse of.
But they who have no affection for the Protestants tell us, that it is a Law
which was extorted by violence; and consequently, is not to be kept. I will not
stand now (said our Friend) to examine whether that consequence be good; you
cannot but perceive that it is dangerous. But I dare assure you that the
Principle from whence it is drawn; namely, that the Edict was extorted by
violence is very false. I would not have you take my word for it. But I will
produce an unexceptionable Witness. It is the Archbishop of Paris; he who writ
the Life of Honry the Fourth. That one Witness is worth a thousand; for he was
a declared Enemy of the Protestants. According to him: The general Peace was
made, the Ligue extinguished; and all persons in France had laid down their
Arms, when this Edict was granted in favor of them. It is ridiculous now, to
say, that it was extorted by violence, there being then no party in all the
Kingdom in a condition to make the least attempt with impunity. Moreover, that
Prelate could not forbear owning expressly what it was moved the King to grant
them that Edict: It was the sense of the Great Obligations he had to them. See
the Book it self; read the Passage. The Great Obligations which he had to them
would not permit him to drive them into despair; and therefore to preserve them
a just balance, he granted them an Edict larger than any before. They called
it the Edict of Nantes, etc. Indeed the Obligations he had to them were not
small. They had testified an inviolable Loyalty to him in all his Troubles.
They had spent freely their Lives and Fortunes to defend his Rights, and his
Life against the Princes of Lorrain, who made so many Attempts to keep him from
the Throne of his Ancestors, and to usurp his place. Had it not been for their
Valor, and their Loyalty, the Crown had gone into the hands of Strangers; and
(since we must speak out) had it not been for them, the Blood of the Bourbons
would not this day have been possessed of the Throne.

The Edict of Nantes then, was the Effect and the Recompense of the Great
Obligations which King Henry the Fourth had to his Loyal Protestants, and not
as is slanderously reported, the fruit of any violence, gained by force, and
granted against the hair. But farther, the Law of Nature and common policy
might challenge such an Edict for them as well as Gratitude. It is true, that
Sovereign Magistrates are appointed by God to preserve the public peace, and
by consequence, to cut off, or prevent, as much as in them lies, whatever may
disturb it: It is true also that new Establishments in matters of Religion may
cause great troubles in a State, and that there are Religions which have Maxims
so pernicious, that when Magistrates are of a different opinion, or but so much
as tolerate such a one, their Lives and their Kingdoms are never in safety. But
Henry the Fourth found the Protestant Religion wholly established in the
Kingdom when he came to the Crown: Besides, he who had so long professed it,
knew perfectly well that it had none of those dreadful Maxims, which makes
Princes and States jealous; that on the contrary, in it, Loyalty and Obedience
of Subjects to Sovereigns of what Religion, and what humor soever, was to them
an Article of Faith, and an obligation of Conscience. He knew that Protestants,
by their Religion were peaceable men, who sought but to serve God according to
his Word, and were always ready to spend the last drop of their blood for the
service and the honor of their King.

But he knew also that the zeal of the Romish Clergy always animated the Popish
Common People against them, and that they would be sure to fall upon them,
unless he took them into his protection. The Law of Nature then did not permit
him to abandon to the rage of the multitude so many innocent persons; and
common policy warned him to preserve so many faithful Subjects for the State,
so capable of supporting it on occasion, as he had so freshly experienced. It
being certain, that had it not been for them, the Pope and the Ligue had ruined
the whole Kingdom; But it was not possible, either to defend them from the fury
of the People, or to preserve them for the service of the State, if he had
granted in favor of them any thing less than the Edict of Nantes: so that this
Edict in truth was to be ascribed to common Equity and Prudence no less than
Gratitude.

But, said I to my Friend, do you believe that the Grandson of Henry the Fourth
is bound to make good what his Grandfather did? I do not doubt it at all
(answered he) otherwise there would be nothing secure or certain in Civil
Society; and woe be to all Governments if there be no Foundation of public
Trust. 1. For if ever Law deserved to be regarded by the Successors of a
Prince, it is this. It was established by a Hero, who had recovered the Crown
for his posterity, by his Sword: and this Establishment was not made but after
mature and long deliberations, in the calm of a prosound Peace, obtained and
cemented by many and signal Victories. That Hero has declared expressly in the
Preface of the Edict, that he established it in the nature of an irrevocable
and perpetual Law; willing, that it should be firm and inviolable; as he also
says himself in the 90th. Article. Accordingly he made all the Formalities to
be observed in its establishment, which are necessary for the passing of a
fundamental Law in a State. For he made the observation of it under the quality
of an irrevocable Law, to be sworn to by all the Governors and
Lieutenant-Generals of his Provinces, by the Bailiffs, Mayors, and other
ordinary Judges, and principal Inhabitants of the Cities, of each Religion, by
the Majors, Sheriffs, Consuls and Jurates, by the Parliaments, Chambers of
Accounts, Court of Aids, with order to have it published and registered in all
the said Courts. This is expressly set down in the 92d. and 93d. Articles. Was
there ever any thing more authentic? 2. The same Reasons which caused the
Establishment, remain still, and plead for its continuance. 1. The Family of
Bourbon preserved in the Throne. 2. The Law of Nature and common Policy. 3. The
two Successors of Henry the Fourth looked not upon themselves as unconcerned in
this Edict. Their Word, and their Royal Authority are engaged for its
observation no less than the Word and Royal Authority of its Illustrious
Author. Lewis the Thirteenth confirmed it as soon as he came to the Crown by
his Declaration of the 22d. of May, 1610, ordering, that the Edict of Nantes
should be observed in every Point and Article. These are the very words. Read
them (said he) showing me a Book in Folio, called, P. 156, and 157, of the
Lions Edition.
The Great Conference of the Royal Ordinances and Edicts. I read there in the
first Book, Title 6, of the second Part of the Volume, not only the Article he
mentioned, but also the citation of nine several Declarations published at
several times by the same King, on the same subject. Lewis the Fourteenth, who
now Reigns, (says our Friend) has likewise assured all Europe by his
authentic Edicts and Declarations, that he would maintain the Edict of Nantes
according to the desire of his Grandfather, who had made it an irrevocable Law.
He himself acknowledges and confirms it himself anew; by his Edict of June,
1680, where he forbids Papists to change their Religion. There it is; pray take
the pains to read it. Lewis by the Grace of God, King of France and Navarre, to
all persons to whom these Presents come, Greeting. The late Henry the Fourth;
our Grandfather, of Glorious Memory, granted by his Edict given at Nantes in
the Month of April, 1598, to all his Subjects of the Religion pretended
Reformed, who then lived in his Kingdom, or who afterward should come and
settle in it, Liberty of professing their Religion, and at the same time
provided whatsoever he judged necessary for affording those of the said
Religion pretended Reformed means of living in our Kingdom, in the Exercise of
their Religion, without being molested in it by our Catholic Subjects: which
the late King, our most Honored Lord and Father, and we since have authorized
and confirmed on other Occasions, by diverse Declarations and Acts. But this
Prince is not content to tell what he has formerly done, in confirmation of
the Edict of Nantes; read some Lines a little lower, and you will see that he
repeats again his former Engagements. We declare, that confirming as much as
is, or may be needful, the Edict of Nantes, and other Declarations and Acts
given in pursuit of it, etc. That is to say: That by this new Edict he signs
once more the Edict of Nantes, and for a more authentic confirmation of that
important Law, he ratifies together with it, and seals with his Royal Seal all
the Declarations which had already confirmed it. If all this is not sufficient
to render His Word Sacred and Inviolable, there is nothing in the World can do
it: all things are lawful, and it is to no purpose to talk of any Obligation,
or of any Bond in humane Society. They cannot make void, or break the Clauses
of an Edict so well deserved by the Protestants, so just and so wise in it
self, so solemnly established, so religiously sworn to, and so often, and so
authentically confirmed by three Kings, without shaking all the Foundations of
public Security, without violating, in that Act, the Law of Nations, and
silling the World with fatal Principles, which by ruining all mutual Faith
among men, render Divisions in States incurable; and consequently immortal.

Dear Sir, said I, I am much pleased with what you have informed me. O how I
shall dash them out of countenance, who hereafter shall compare the condition
of our Papists in England with that of the Protestants in France. There is no
sort of good usage but what is due to these in their own Country; of which they
have deserved so well by preserving that Family which now reigns there. What
have they not a right to hope for under the protection of an Edict so
authentic? But our Papists in England have they ever deserved a like
protection? Has there ever been passed any Act of Parliament in favor of
them, like to this Edict? On the contrary, have not there been passed 1000
against them? And not one, but upon the provocation of some Sedition, or open
Rebellion. See Statures at large. 1 Elizab. 1. 5 Eliz. 1. 13 Eliz. 1. 23 Eliz.
1. 27 Eliz. 2. 35 Eliz. 2. 1 Jacob. 4. 3 Iac. 4, 5, etc.
You need but review the Fundamental Laws of the Land now in force against the
Pope, against the Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and in general against all the
Papists. There is decreed justly against them all the contrary that by the
Edict of Nantes is promised to the Protestants.

You are much in the right (said our Friend) when you use the word justly on
this occasion: Princes and Protestant Magistrates cannot look upon, nor by
consequence, treat Papists otherwise than as declared an^ mortal Enemies of
their Persons, and of their States. They may disguise themselves as they
please: (...) in truth, every Papist is a man who takes the Pope to be the
Sovereign Head of the Universal Church, and believes that on that very account,
there is no Prince, nor King, nor Emperor who is not subject to his Censures,
even to Excommunication. Now who knows not that it is a general Maxim of that
Religion, that they ought to treat all excommunicated persons, as common Pests?
Upon this all Subjects are dispensed with from their Oaths of Allegiance to
their Princes, Kingdoms are laid under Interdicts; and they are no way obliged
to keep faith with Heretics. This is the original and damnable Cause of the
many Conspiracies that have been made against the Sacred Lives of our Kings:
And if you will search our Histories, you will find none of the forementioned
Acts ever passed but upon some previous provocation given by the Papists
Insolence, or Rebellions: of the Massacres in France and Ireland, wherein they
of Rome have so triumphed, and of the general consternation into which so
lately our Nation was cast. They would fain persuade us, that these pernicious
Maxims are peculiar to the Jesuits and some Monks: But a little Treatise,
called, Printed for Henry Brom^, 1674.
The Disserence between the Church and Court of Rome, proves undeniably, that
it is the judgment of all true Papists. I could produce other invincible
authority, if this point were here to be proved. There cannot then be too great
caution against such persons: whatever they pretend, they do not design simply
the exercise of that Belief which their Conscience dictates to them, they grasp
at the Power, and aspire at Dominion: they design, whatever it cost them, to
have their Church reign once more here in England* There is nothing they dare
not attempt, nothing they are not ready to act, that they may compass it. They
are implacable Enemies who wait but for an opportunity to cut our Throats: and
we must needs be very senseless and stupid, if after so many proofs as they
have given us of their desperate malice, we should repeal those Laws which tie
up their hands. You are much in the right, I replied, but let us leave them for
the present, and return to our Protestants of France. You have showed me their
Rights, now let me understand their Grievances. I am willing to do it, said he;
but it is a little late: and if you please, being somewhat weary with my
Journey, we will defer it till to morrow. I will expect you here in my Chamber
at the same hour you came to day. I told him with all my heart. And as our
Conversation ended there, I think it not amiss to end my Letter also, intending
in another to let you know the present condition of those poor People. I am
your, etc,

LETTER II.
I Did not fail to wait on my Friend at the appointed hour. Sit down (said he)
as soon as he saw me in the Chamber, and let us lose no time in needless
Ceremony: I was just putting my Papers in order, by which I would desire you to
judge of the Protestants Complaints, and the Reasons that have made them leave
their Country: But since you are here, take them as they come to hand.

The first is a Verbal Process of the extraordinary Assembly of the Archbishops
and Bishops held in the Province of the Archbishop of Paris, in the Months of
March and May, this 1681. It is a Piece which justifies a Truth, that the World
will hardly believe: Namely, That whereas the Protestants by Virtue of the
Edict had the Exercise of their Religion almost every where, they have it now
scarce any where. See the proof in the tenth Page of that Verbal Process, where
one of the Agents, General of the Clergy of France, alleges as so many
public Testimonies of the Piety of their King, An almost Infinite Number of
Churches demolished, and the Exercise of the Religion pretended Reformed
suppressed. I leave you to imagine what a consternation such a terrible Blow
must have put those poor people into; not to mention their Grief to see those
Holy Places beaten down, whose very Stones they took pleasure in; instead of
having the Heavenly Mannah shower down at the Doors of their Tabernacles, at
this present they are forced to go 30 or 40 miles through the worst of ways, in
the Winter, to hear the Word of God, and to have their Children baptized. But
let us go on to a second Piece.

Here is a Declaration has lain heavy upon them, in reference to an infinite
number of living Temples, who are ^ar otherwise to be lamented for, by reason
of the rigor they are used with, than the Temples of Stone that are demolished.
It is of the thirteenth of March, 1679. Pray read it. It forbids all Popish
Clergymen, whatever desire they have, to turn Protestants; and even all those
Protestants, who have forsaken their Religion out of Lightness, or Infirmity;
to return to it again, upon better knowledge of the truth, pressed to it by
their Consciences, and desiring to give glory to God. This dreadful Edict, will
not suffer, that any of them shall satisfy their Consciences, in so important
an Affair, under any less penalty, than that of the Amend Honorable, perpetual
banishment, and consiscation of their Goods. I beseech you (said I) what does
the Declaration intend, by making Amend Honorable? You have reason to ask,
replied he, it is that you ought not to be ignorant of. Know then, that for
them to make Amend Honorable is to go into some public place, in their Shirt,
a Torch in their Hand, a Rope about their Neck, followed by the Hangman, in
this Equipage (which is that of the most infamous Criminals) to ask pardon of
God, the King, and Justice for what they have done: that is to say, on this
occasion, for having dared to rep^nt of sinning against God, for having
forsaken a Religion which they believed Heretical and Idolatrous, and
consequently, the infallible way to eternal damnation; and for being willing
thence-forward to profess the Protestant Religion, in which only they are
persuaded they can be saved. This is, dear Friend, what they in^lict upon all
Popish Ecclesiastics to whom God vouchsafes Grace to discern the true
Religion, and upon all Protestants, who having been such Wretches as to forsake
it, are a^terwards so happy as to be convinced of their Sin; and to repent.
They call the first Apostates, and the other Relaps. But Names do not change
the nature of things: the Misery is, that all this is executed with the utmost
rigor. The Prisons of Poictiers, and those of other places are at this present
filled with this sort of pretended Relapsed Persons; and it is not permitted to
any one to relieve them. What possibility is there then for such as are in like
Circumstances, and whose number every day increases, to continue in France?

But the mischief is much increased since this Declaration. What was particular
to Ecclesiastics and Relapse Protestants, is now become universal to all Roman
Catholics. I showed you the Piece yesterday. It is that very Edict of June,
1680, wherein they pretend to confirm the Edict of Nantes. A Blessed
Confirmation! The Edict of Nantes, Art. 1. pat^.
as I have showed you, allows the Liberty of Conscience to all them who were
then Protestants, and to all such as would be afterward, Inhabitants, or
others. But* what does this new Edict declare! Our Will and Pleasure is, that
our Subjects, of what quality, condition, age or sex soever, now making
profession of the Catholic Apostolic Roman Religion, may never forsake it, to
go over to the pretended Reformed Religion, for what Cause, Reason, Pretense or
Consideration soever. We will that they who shall act contrary to this our
Pleasure, shall be condemned to make Amend Honorable, to perpetual banishment
out of our Kingdom, and all their Goods to be confiscated. We forbid all
Ministers of the said pretended Reformed Religion, hereafter to receive any
Catholic to make profession of the pretended Reformed Religion, and we forbid
them and the Elders of their Consistories to su^fer in their Churches or
Assemblies any such, under penalty to the Ministers of being deprived for ever
of exercising any Function of their Ministry in our Kingdom, and of suppression
for ever of the Exercise of the said Religion in that place where any one
Catholic shall be received to make profession of the said pretended Reformed
Religion. Lord! what a horrible proceeding is this! (cried I, as soon as my
Friend had read it) do they call this confirming of Edicts in France? what a
Violence is this to the Consciences of Ministers and Elders, to command them to
shut the doors of the Church of Jesus Christ to all their Neighbors who come
thither for admission: (and to have this done) by them who are called by God to
open the Door to all the World? Is not this to force them to violate the most
Essential and Sacred Duty of Christian Charity? In truth, if there were nothing
else but this; I do not see how they can stay there much longer with a safe
Conscience. They must swallow worse Potions than these (said my Friend) you
shall see presently quite other Preparations. What (replied I) have they the
heart to use thus cruelly those poor Churches within whose Walls any Roman
Catholic changes his Religion? Don't doubt it (said he) they make no
conscience at all to exceed their Commission, whenever they are enjoined to
execute any penalty. I will give you an Example, which will amaze you There is
a great Town in Poitou called La Motthe, where the Protestants have a Church
consisting of between three and four thousand Communicants: a young Maid of
about seventeen years old, who from a Protestant had turned Papist, had stole
her self into the Congregation upon a Communion-day* Now you must observe, that
the Protestant Churches are full on those days. For they would believe
themselves very much to blame, if they lost any Opportunity of partaking at the
Lord's Supper. Nevertheless, without considering how easy it was for that
young Maid not to be discovered by the Consistory in such a Crowd, and tho
those poor people were not at all within the Letter of that rigorous Edict,
they have made them undergo all the penalty. The Exercise of their Religion is
wholly suppressed there, and their Minister not allowed to preach in France.
This is very cruel (said I to our Friend) and tho it were true that those
Ministers and those Elders were guilty upon such an account, why should the
whole flock be punished? Those poor Sheep what have they done? That is very
usual for those Gentlemen (answered he:) I have a hundred Stories to instance
in. I cannot forbear telling you one, which many of their own Devotees were
scandalized at. S. Hippolyte is a place in where all the Inhabitants are
Protestants, except the Curate, and it may be, two or three poor wretches, who
are not Natives of the place neither. A fancy took the Curate to put a Trick
upon the Protestants; for this he chose a Sunday; and the very moment that they
came out of the Church, he came and presented himself before them with his
Sacrament, as they were almost all come out. You must know that the Church is
on the farther side of a Bridge, which must be passed over, going and coming.
Several of them were upon the Bridge, others had passed it, and part were yet
on the other side; when the Curate appeared, all of them, who could possibly,
got away and hid themselves: but neither the place, nor the great haste of the
Curate would permit all of them to do so. He went up directly to one of the
Company, whom he had born an ill will to for some time: he bids him kneel: and
the other answering that his Conscience would not suffer him to do it; he gave
him a Cuff on the Ear. He that was struck grumbled; and so did two or three who
were about him. The Curate went on his way, threatening hard. Next day there
were Informations made on both sides: the Curate in his, not complaining of any
person but him he had struck, and two or three others who had grumbled at it.
The Friends of the Curate perceiving that he had done the wrong, proposed an
Accommodation. It was by misfortune consented to. Prosecution ceased on each
side, and it was believed that there was an end of that business: there was not
a word spoken of it in above a year. But the Intendant of Languedoc revived it
last Winter, when they thought of nothing less; and of a matter particular to
two or three, made it a general Concern of the whole Congregation. He cites
them before the Presidial of Nismes, to whom he joined himself. He condemns
them to demolish their Church in a Months time. Those poor people go and cast
themselves at the feet of the Court; but to no purpose. The King's Council
hears and confirms this strange Order of the Intendant, and the Church is rac'd
to the ground. The Council which gave this Sentence was the first in which the
Dauphine was present. The Report of such an Order being spread among the
Courtiers, and all being amazed that heard it, a certain person took the
liberty to tell the Dauphin, that for the first time he had been at the
Council, he had assisted to a great Injustice. What say you to that? said a
Duke and Peer, to the Dauphin, who had made no reply to the former. I say,
answered the Dauphin, that he may be much in the right. I told our Friend, I
had enough of this. You must not be weary, said he, this is but the beginning
of sorrows. Let Us go on to the rest. Here is, said he, a Little Book which
comes just now to my hand, in it are stitched up together, three Acts
concerning Schools. The first is of the ninth of November, 1670. It forbids all
Protestant Schoolmasters to teach any thing in their Schools, but to read and
write, and Arithmetic. The second, which is of the 4th. of December, 1671,
ordains, that the Protestants shall have but one only School in any place where
they have the public Exercise of their Religion; and but one Master in that
School. The third is of the ninth of July, this present 1681. Look upon them
(said he) and give me your opinion. It seems (said I) that the first contains
nothing which the Protestants may complain of, at least, if that which I read
there be true, namely, that by the Edict of Nantes it is expressly ordained,
That in the Schools of those of the pretended Reformed Religion, there shall
not any thing be taught, but to read, write, and cast account. For according to
this, the Edict of 1670 is entirely conformable to that other Edict which is
the Law. You are in the right, said I, but they who framed the Act, have
deceived you, and have made no scruple to ground it upon a matter of fact
entirely false. For the Article which speaks of Schools, does not mention the
least word of that restriction, which the Act assures us to be there expressed,
namely, of teaching only to read, write, and cast account. See the Article
length: it is the 37th particular. Those of the said Religion may not keep
public Schools, unless in Cities and places where the public Exercise of
their Religion is allowed, and the Provisions which have heretofore been
granted them for the erection or maintenance of Colleges, shall be
authenticated where occasion shall require, and have their full and entire
effect. Where is that express Order? It is expressly ordered to teach only to
read, write, and cast account; upon which the Act is grounded. Is it possible
(said I) that they should have no sense of the horrid shame which must arise
upon conviction of forgery in a matter of fact of this nature? They never stick
at so small a matter as that (said he) in the design they have of rooting out
the Protestants. Those who are in France dare not open their mouths to discover
such kind of Falsities; and Strangers, whom they carry ^air with, will not so
far concern themselves as ever to suspect there should be falsehood in a matter
of fact so easy to be made out; and which they make to be so positively
af^irm'd by so great a King. So that they do not fear at all the shame you
speak of. After all, they are but pious Frauds, at which, they of the Popes
Communion never blush. And what say you (continued be) to that other Act which
reduces all Schools to one, in each City and Town where the Protestants have
the public Exercise of their Religion, and that which requires that there
should be only one Master in that School. I replied that it was an excellent
way to restore Ignorance, the Mother of the Roman Faith and Devotion. In truth,
says he, the care of one Master cannot go far. Besides there is a Protestant
Church which alone has two thousand Children of age to be taught. Those poor
people have done all they could to obtain of the Council, that at least there
might be two Schools in each place, one for Boys, and the other for Girls. But
it was to little purpose that they pleaded good manners for it, which such a
mixture of both Sexes visibly was offensive to. They were deaf to all their
Prayers and to all their Remonstrances. But this is not all yet. In the
Execution of this rigorous Act, they have taken away from them that little
which was left them. For the Judges of the places will not suffer that any
Schoolmaster teach, unless they have first of all approved of him, and received
him in all their Forms. As therefore their approbation is a matter full of
invincible Di^^iculties; above all, when they are to give it to a man of merit,
and who may do good, it is come to pass by means of these two Acts, that all
the little Schools of the Protestants are shut up. From the little Schools they
have proceeded to Colleges. You see by the Act of the last of July, which
suppresses for ever that of Sedan. They have taken away also the College of
Chatillon sur Loin. So that, hereafter the Protestants in France are to lie
under worse than Egyptian Darkness. I leave you now to judge whether they are
to blame to seek for light in some Goshen. In truth, said I, this is very hard.
But if they who inspire into the King such strange Acts, have no respect for
Henry the Great and his Edicts, at least they ought to be more tender of the
Glory of their own Illustrious Prince, and not to expose him, as they do, to be
ranked with that Emperor against whom the Holy Fathers have cried so loudly. Is
it possible they can be ignorant that this method o^ extinguishing the
Protestant Religion is exactly the same that Julian took to extinguish the
Christian Religion? I do not think (said our Friend) that they can be ignorant
of a truth so well known; especially since one of their eminent Writers has
published the History of the Life of S. Basil the Great, and of S. Gregory
Nazianzen. There they might have read in more than one place, that it was
likewise one of the Secrets of that Emperor, Mr. God. Hermant, Doctor of the
Sorbin. Tom. 1. Book 2 p. 204. and Note^ of the same chap^. p. 625.
to ruin the Christians by keeping them from all Improvement in Learning, and
to prohibit their Colleges and Schools; and which the Fathers judged to be most
subtle policy. But their zeal transports them above the most odious
Comparisons. They stick not to give occasion for them every moment. I will show
you an Example which will astonish you, I have here light upon the Paper.

They are now come to take the measures of that barbarous and inhumane King who
used Midwives of his own Religion to destroy the Race of the people of God in
Egypt. For by that Declaration of the 28th of February, 1680, It is ordered,
that the Wives of Protestants shall not be brought to bed but by Midwives or
Chyrurgeons who are Papists. This they make to be observed with the utmost
rigor, so far that they put a poor woman in prison for being present at the
Labor of her Sister, whose delivery was so quick and fortunate, that there was
neither time nor need to call a Midwife.

That, you may in few words understand of what consequence this is to our poor
Brethren, I need but acquaint you, that the King of France in his Edict of the
Month of June, 1680, where he forbids Papists to change their Religion,
acknowledges himself, what experience does but too plainly justify, namely,
that the Roman Catholics have always had an aversion, not only against the
Protestant Religion, but against all those that profess it, and an aversion
which has been improved by the publication of Edicts, Declarations and Acts.
That is to say, that whatever pretense the Roman Catholics make to the
contrary, they have always been, and still are Enemies of the Protestants; and
that the Protestants ought to look to be treated by the Catholics as Enemies.
After this what can they judge of the Design, and Consequences of a
Declaration, which puts the Lives of their Wives and Children into those very
hands which the King, who makes the Declaration, acknowledges to be hands of
Enemies? But farther, the Declaration it self discovers, that one of its
intentions was, to make the Children of Protestants to be baptized by Midwives,
or by Popish Chyrurgions. And what mischief do they not open a way for by that?
The Protestants will hold that Baptism void, which has been administered by
such hands, they will not fail to make it be administered anew, by their
Pastors. This shall pass for a capital Crime in the Pastors and Fathers, and
they shall be punished as sacrilegious persons who trample on the Religion in
Authority, the Religion of the King: for the most odious Representations are
still made use of. Nay, said I, by this they will likewise claim a right, from
the Baptism's being administered by Papists, to make themselves Masters of the
education of their Children. You are in the right (said he) and that Article
ought not to be forgotten. It is just, will they say, that they should be
brought up in the Church which has consecrated them to God, by Baptism, at
least, that they should be bred up there, till they are of age to choose for
themselves: and when they are of age, they will say then, that it is just they
should, as well as others, be liable to the same Edict which forbids Catholics
to change their Religion. Is not this enough already to make one forsake such a
Kingdom? A Christian for less than this would surely fly to the utmost Parts
of the World. But to proceed,

Here is that terrible Decree which fills up the measure, as to what concerns
the poor Children. It comes to my hand very seasonably. It is the Declaration
of the 17th. of June last. This ordains that all the Children of Protestants
shall be admitted to abjure the Religion of their Fathers, and become Papists
as soon as they shall be seven years old: It declares, that after such an
Abjuration, it shall be at the choice of the Children, either to return home to
their Fathers, and there to be maintained, or to oblige their Fathers and
Mothers to pay for their Board, and Maintenance, where ever they please to
live. It adds extreme Penalties to be laid on them, who breed up their Children
in foreign parts, before they are sixteen years old. But I pray read over the
whole Edict. Upon that I took the De^^aration from our Friends hand, read it,
and returning it to him again, could not forbear declaring, that I did not now
wonder any more that the Protestants of France were in so great a
Consternation. They are much in the right (said I) Discretion and Conscience
oblige them to depart out of a Country, in which there is no security for the
salvation of their dear Children. They are of too great a value to be so
hazarded. What is more easy, for them who have all the power, than to induce
such young Children to change their Religion? There is no need for this, to
show them all the Kingdoms of the World and their Glory. A Baby, a Picture, a
little Cake will do the business; or if there want somewhat more, a Rod will
not fail to complete this worthy Conver^ion. In the mean while, what a
condition are their wretched Fathers in, besides the most inexpressible grief
of seeing what is most dear to them in the world seduced out of the Service and
House of God; they shall likewise have this addition of Anguish of having their
own Children for their Persecutors. For, knowing, as I do, the Spirit of that
Religion, I doubt not but they will all prove rebellious and unnatural, and
renounce all that love and natural respect which is due to them, whom they owe
their Lives to.

They Will give Law to their Parents, they will oblige them to make them great
Allowances, which they will dispose of as they list; and if their Fathers pay
them not precisely at the time appointed, I am sure, no rigors shall be
forgotten in the prosecution. No certainly, said our Friend, and I could give
you an hundred Instances, if there were need. Even before this merciless
Declaration was made, the Goods of Parents were seized upon, exposed to sale,
to pay for the maintenance of their Children, who had been inveigled from them,
and been made Papists. If they dealt with them so then before the Declaration,
what will they not do when they see themselves supported and armed with Royal
Authority? But there is no need I should insist farther on the dreadful
Consequences of this Declaration. It has been lately Printed in our Language,
and Notes made upon it, wherein nothing has been forgotten. The Book is
written impartially: tho I can scarce believe what is expressed in the Title
Page, that it was written in French; however, some Gallicisms are put in to
make you believe it: but the Protestants of that Nation are not used to such
bold Expr^ssions upon such kind of Subjects: and I doubt much whether they
could do it.

If they have reason to fear for the birth, and for the tender years of their
Children, they have no less for themselves. Here is a proof of it. It is the
Declaration of the 19th. of November, 1680: By which it is ordained, That
whenever they are sick, they shall suffer themselves to be visited by the
Papist Magistrates. Thus, having made their lives burdensome to them, they take
a thousand ways to torment them in their Beds, as soon as any Disease has
seized them. It is not henceforth permitted to them either to be sick, or die
in peace. Under color of this Declaration they are persecuted, and all means
are tried to shake their Faith, under the pretense of being asked what Religion
they will die in. First a Judge presents himself with the awe of his presence,
accompanied by one of the King's Sollicitors and two Papist Witnesses. They
begin their Work by driving all Protestants, who are with the sick man, out of
his Chamber: Father, Mother, Wife, Husband, Children, none are excepted. After
that, they do with the sick person as they list: they draw up a Verbal Process,
or such as they like. Lies with them are but pious Frauds. Whatsoever the sick
man answers, he has still abjured, if these Gentlemen please to make a
conversion of it; and there is no possibility of disproving it. The Verbal
Process is drawn up in good Form. If the sick man recovers, and refuses to go
to Mass, immediately he is subject to all the penalties of a Relapse. If he
dies and chances to be the Father of a Family, they take away all his Children,
to breed them up in the Popish Religion; and his Estate, to preserve it, as
they pretend, for the Children of a Catholic Father. Can any one who has any
care of his own salvation, or any affection for his Children, live exposed to
such dreadful Inconveniences, if God offers any means to avoid them?

I am afraid I tire you with the Recital of so many Calamities. Fear not that,
answered I, I am resolved to know all. You do not consider what you say,
replied he, I should need whole weeks to tell you all. Imagine all the
Suprises, all the indirect practices, all the base tricks of Insinuation, and
little quirks of Law are put in ure: together with all manner of violence, to
accomplish the Work. Neither do those Enemies of the Protestants always neglect
the Oracles of the Scripture. It says, I will smite the Shepherd, and the Sheep
of the Flock shall be scattered. These Gentlemen then, that they may the more
easily scatter the Sheep, smite, every where, the Shepherd, and constrain them
to fly. They imprison one, for having by the Word of God confirmed some of his
Flock, whom the Popish Doctors would pervert: another, for being converted to
the Protestant Religion in his youth, long before any Law was made against
pretended Apostates. They hire forlorn Wretches to go to the Sermons of the
Protestant Ministers, and to depose before a Magistrate, that the Ministers
said, that the Church of Rome was idolatrous, or that the Faithful are
persecuted, that they spoke ill of the Virgin Mary, or of the King. Upon this,
without being heard, (and tho it be offered to be made out by the Deposition of
an infinity almost of persons of credit, that the testimonies of these two or
three Wretches are absolutely false) Orders are issued out for the seizing the
Bodies of the Ministers. They are clapped in Jayl as soon as taken: they are
condemned to pay excessive Fines: they force them to make the Amend Honorable,
they banish them the Kingdom. The Intendant of Rochefort suppressed one there,
upon the most extravagant Deposition that was ever taken. The Deponent having,
been at the Sermon of that Minister, said, That there was nothing to be found
fault with in his words, but that he perceived his thoughts were not innocent.
If there are any amongst them so happy as to consound so the false Witnesses,
that the Judges are ashamed to use all those rigors; none of the Charges of
Imprisonment, or of the Suit are ever recovered against any one. A Minister who
may have sixty or seventy pounds a year, and seven or eight in Family to
maintain, must be condemned with all his innocence to pay all these great
costs. I could, upon this Head, tell you a hundred Stories, but that it would
be too tedious. I have met both at Paris and in other Provinces many of these
persecuted Ministers, who acquainted me with their Adventures, Germany, Holland
and Switzerland are full of them, and I am told, there are some of them here in
England. Their absence from their Flocks is but too good a proof how hot the
persecution is against them. And so let us go on.

You may remember that the Edict of Nantes judged it necessary for the
preservation of the Estates, and Credit of the protestants, and for the safety
of their Lives, to erect Tribunals where supreme Justice might be administered
by Judges of the one, and of the other Religion. But all these Tribunals are
suppressed: namely, the Chambers of the Edict of Paris, and of Rouen. It is
some years since the Chambres Miparties were suppressed by the Delaration of
July, 1679: so that here is their Fortunes, their Credit, their Lives, all at
the mercy of their sworn Enemies. For you have not forgot that the King of
France acknowledges, in one of his Declarations, that the Papists have always
hated the persons of the Protestants. Judge then if it be safe for them to stay
longer in such a Kingdom.

But there is no method proper to ruin them, which is not made use of, that if
one fails, another may be sure to take. Synods and Conferences are absolutely
necessary, for the Admission of their Ministers, for the Correction of
Scandals, for the preservation of Peace in their Congregations, for the
subsistence of their Colleges, and for the support and exercise of their
Discipline. At first they kept them with all sort of Liberty. Under Lewis the
Thirteenth, they thought fit to forbid them to hold any Synod, unless some
Protestant Commissary, who was to be named by the Court, were present. This was
observed till the year 1679, when a Declaration was published, requiring that
there should be a Papist Commissary in their Synods. That is to say, Sir, said
I, interrupting our Friend, they will pry into their hearts, and perfectly know
where their strength or their weakness lies. If there were nothing but that in
it, replied our Friend, that Declaration would not allarm them so much as it
does. For there is nothing done in their Assemblies, which they are not willing
all the world should know. They defy their most mortal Enemies to prove the
contrary. Can there be a more undeniable proof of this, than the practice of
the Protestant Commissary, who sends to the Court a Copy well attested of all
the Results of the Deliberations which are made, while the Synod or Conference
is held? What do they fear then, replied I, from the presence of a Papist
Commissary? Because they know that the end of the Court cannot be to discover
their Secrets, since they have none; therefore it is that they justly fear,
that this Papist Commissary has been set over them, to create them trouble in
the most innocent Affairs, to hinder those Deliberations which are most
necessary for the due preservation of their Flocks, to silence those Ministers
among them whom he shall perceive to be of greatest Ability, and of Credit, to
dishearten one by threatenings, to corrupt another by promises, to sow
Dissension and Division among them, and to employ all means possibly to ruin
them. These are the just fears which have hindered them till this present, from
assembling any Synods with this so destructive a condition, hoping continually
that, it may be, God would touch the heart of their King. But perceiving no
favorable change, and not being able to subsist without holding their Synods,
I learned, as I came out of France, that these poor people are resolved to run
these hazards, and that their Synods are upon assembling in several places. May
God vouchsafe to preside in the midst of them by his Grace, and remove far from
them all the Evils ^hey have cause to fear. It may be, by their good Examples,
and their Religious Behavior they may convert them, who are set over them for
a snare, as it happened to their Fathers in the last Age also. Then was
contrived the placing of Papist Commissaries, to spy out their liberty. But
these Commissaries were so taken with the Modesty, the Piety, the Charity, the
Decency of Order, and the devout Prayers of the first Reformers, that they gave
Glory to God, and embraced the Religion which they had persecuted,

The Jesuits nevertheless have thought all these Evils of which I have spoken,
too slack and gentle. That they may not be at any more trouble, they will do
the business once for all. They have contrived to starve all the Protestants:
and to effect this, they have made all the means of gaining a livelihood, to be
taken from them, by the Acts of the Council of State, of the sixth of November,
1679, and the 28th. of June, 1681. 1. They have turned out of all Jurisdictions
and Seignuries (which are almost infinite in France) all Protestants who had
been admitted Officers in those Jurisdictions. All Stewards, Bailifss,
Sollicitors, Officers of the Exchequer, Registers, Notaries, Clerks, Sergeants
and Ushers that were Protestants, of all sorts, throughout the whole Kingdom,
are cashiered by virtue of these Acts; they have reduced to Beggary thousands
of Families, which had no other subsistence, but by these Employments. 2. Look
upon those two Pieces, which they procured also, for the same intent. The Title
of the one is, The Order of the Council Royal of the Finances (or Treasury) of
the 11 th. of June, 1680. The other is, An Order of the Council of State of the
17 th. of August of the same year. By the means of these two Pieces, the
Jesuits have made the Protestants to be kept out of all the Affairs of the
Finances, Customs, which they call Traites Forains, of Aids, Gabelles, Taxes of
all sorts of Commissions, to which the Edict of Nantes ordered, that they
should be admitted indifferently with the Papists. This second has taken away
the Bread of a vast number of Families more. 3. They every day make the
Protestant Captains and Officers (who have served so worthily by Land and Sea)
to be turned out of their Commands. Those brave Men after they have spent their
Estates to advance their Masters Honor, and ventured their Lives a thousand
times for his Glory; see themselves shamefully, as so many Cowards, cashiered,
without any exception for them who having signalized and distinguished
themselves by particular Actions, had deserved extraordinary Pensions. Because
they will not be less faithful to God, than they have been to their King: they
are resolved Disgrace and Beggary shall be the Reward of their Service. By
this, they take away from all the Protestant Nobility the means of maintaining
themselves in that Rank in which God by their Birth has placed them. 4. As to
the Merchants, look what the Jesuits have thought upon to ruin them. They have
obtained an Order of Council of State, of the 19th. of November, 1680, which
grants to all Protestants who change their Religion, the term and forbearance
of three years for the payment of the principal of their Debts, with
prohibition to all their Creditors to bring any Action against them, during
that time, upon pain of Nonsuit, Noli prosequi, and all Charges, Damages,
Costs and Interests. I perceive very well, (said I to our Friend) that this
puts those who revolt in a way to secure and withdraw their Goods; and to enjoy
in peace the Fruits of their turning Bankrupts. But I do not see how this tends
to the ruin of those Merchants in general, who persevere in the Protestant
Religion. That is (said he, smiling) because you have not so subtle a wit, nor
are so quick-sighted as the Jesuits. You know very well that Merchants subsist
by their Credit: if their credit be low, they must fall; there is no more
trading for them, their business is done. Now do you not perceive, that the
credit of all Protestant Merchants is ruined by this Order, which puts them in
a way of turning Bankrupts as they please, with all indemnity; and of enriching
themselves with those Goods they have been trusted with? Who do you think after
this will be so silly as to take their word? Who can tell, with any certainty,
whether they with whom they deal, are persons who will continue in the
Protestant Religion? Is there any thing more common than such Changes in
Religion now adays? It Is enough (said I) I was mistaken, I perceive now very
well that the ruin of the Protestant Merchants is unavoidable. Go on to the
other Professions. For I see they are resolved that no Protestant shall get
Bread among them. You are in the right (said he) you have seen it in many of
them, I Will show it you now in the rest. 5. All Papists who drive any Trade, or
exercise any Art, are forbid ^o take any Protestant Apprentice. I have seen the
Order, but have it not now by me. By this you see that all young men of the
Protestant Religion (who have not means of their own) are reduced to this
extremity, either of starving in France, or turning Papists, or forsaking that
Kingdom. For the same Order forbids any Protestant who drives or professes any
Trade, to have under them any Apprenti^e* either Papist or Protestant, that so
they may not be able to do work enough to maintain their Families. 6. The Grand
Master and Grand Prevot have given notice, by Virtue of Letters under the
Signet, to all Protestants who had Privileges, whereby they had right to keep
Shops, as Chyrurgions, Apothecaries, Watchmakers, and other Tradesmen, to
forbear using their privileges any longer, and to shut up their Shops, which
has been punctually executed. 7. They have established Societies of Physicians
at Rochelle, and in other places, where, as I am assured from good hands, there
were none ever before. None but Papists will be received into those Societies.
By this, the Jesuits have found out the way, at one stroke to hinder the
Practice of all the Protestant Physicians; however able and experienced they
may be. In so much that the Lives of all sick Protestants are by this means put
into the hands of their Enemies. 8. In short, there is scarce now any place in
all France where they may get their livelihood. They are every where molested
and hindered from exercising in quiet any Trade or Art which they have learned.
To dispatch them quite; they require of them not only that they shall continue
to bear all the Burdens of the Government, although they take from them the means
of doing it: but also that they bear double to what they did; that is to say,
they use a rigor far greater, than what was practiced upon the People of God,
when they were commanded to deliver the same tale of bricks, and yet had not
straw given them as formerly. In effect, at the same time that they will not
allow them, of the Protestant Religion, to get a penny: they exact of them to
pay the King double, nay, treble, to what they paid before. Monsieur de
Marillac, Intendant of Poitou, has an Order of Council which gives him alone
the Power of the Imposition of the Tax in that great Province. He discharges
the Papists, who are at ease, and overcharges the poor Protestants with their
proportion, who before that fainted under their own proper burden; and could
bear no more. I will tell you farther on this occasion, that the Jesuits have
obtained an Order of the King, by which all Protestants who change Religion,
are exempted for two years, from all quartering of Soldiers, and all
Contributions of Moneys which are levied on that Account, which also tends to
the utter ruin of them who continue firm in the Protestant Religion. For they
throw all the burden upon them, of which the others are eased. From thence in
part it is, that all the Houses of those poor people are filled with Soldiers,
who live there as in an Enemy's Country.

I do not know if the zeal of the Jesuits will rest here: For they want yet the
satisfaction of keeping S. Bartholomew's Day, as they kept it in the former
Age. It is true, what is allowed them is not far from it. For which is the
better of the two, to stab with one blow, or to make men die by little and
little, of hunger and misery? As to the Blow (said I to our Friend) I do not
understand you. Pray, if you please, explain your self, what do you mean by
keeping S. Bartholomew's Day? Monsieur de Perisix, that Archbishop of Paris,
who has writ the Life of Henry the Fourth (answered he) shall tell you for me.
There Is the Book, the place may be easily found. Here it is ^ Six days after,
Surl' an. 1572 Edit. Amsterd. p. 30.
which wa^ S. Bartholomew 's Day, all the Huguenots who came to the (Wedding)
Feast, had their Throats cut, amongst others, the Admiral, twenty persons of
the best quality, twelve hundred Gentlemen, about four thousand Soldiers and
Citizens: afterward through all the Cities of the Kingdom, after the Example
of Paris, near a hundred thousand were massacred. An execrable Action! Such as
never was, and I hope to God never will be the like. You know then well,
continued our Friend, directing his Speech to me, you know well now what it is
to keep S. Bartholomew's Day, and I believe that what I said is no Riddle to
you. The Jesuits and their Friends set a great value on themselves in the
world, because they forbear cutting the Protestants Throats, as they did then.
But, Merciless as you are, do you ere the less take away their lives! You say
you do not kill them, but do you not make them pine to death with hunger and
vexation? He who gives slow poison is he less a poisoner, than he who gives
what is violent and quick, since both of them destroy the life at last? Pardon
this short Transport (said our Friend) in good earnest I cannot restrain my
indignation, when I see them use the utmost of cruelty, and yet would be looked
on as patterns of all moderation and meekness. Let me impart to you three
Letters which two of our Friends who are yet in France have written to me since
I came from Paris. I received the two first at Calis, before I got into the
Packet Boat; the last was delivered me last night after you went away from any
Chamber. You will there see with what Gentleness they proceed in those
Countries. He thereupon read to me his Letters, and I have since took Copies of
them, and send them here enclosed.

A Copy of the First Letter.
WE are just upon the point of seeing that Reformation which has cost so much
labor and pains, and so much blood, come to nothing in France. To know the
condition of the Protestants in the several Provinces of this Kingdom, you need
but read what the first Christians suffered under the Reigns of the Emperors
Nero, Domitian, Trajan, Maximin, Dioclesian and such like. There are four
Troops of Horse in Poitou who live at free Quarter, upon all of the Protestant
Religion without any exception. When they have pillaged the Houses of them who
will not go to Mass, they tie them to their Horse Tails, and drag them thither
by force. The Intendant whom they have sent thither, who is their most bitter
Enemy, has his Witnesses ready suborned, who accuse whom they please, of what
Crimes they please, and after that cast the poor men into dark Dungeons, beat
them with Cudgels, and then pass sentence of death to terrify them; and
afterward underhand, send others to try them by fair means, to promise them
that their mourning shall be turned into joy, if they will but go to Mass.
Those whom God gives the grace to resist, die in the Dungeon, through
unspeakable anguish. Three Gentlemen of Quality who went about to confirm some
of the poor people in their Village, that began to waver, were presently clapped
up, Flax put about their Necks, then set on fire, and so they were scorched,
till they said they would renounce their Religion. There would be no end if I
should relate all that is done. This you may be assured of, that the People of
Israel were never so oppressed by the Egyptians, as the Protestants are by
their own Countrymen.


A Copy of the Second Letter.
To make good my promise of giving you an exact Account of the continuance of
the persecution which is raised against the Protestants in France, I shall
acquaint you that they of Poitiers are threat'ned with being made a Garrison
this Winter. I say they, the Protestants: For none but they must quarter any of
them. Monsieur de Marillac gives himself up wholly to the making of Proselytes.
The Deputies of Poitiers are now here to make complaint of the violences they
still labor under. They offer, by a Petition which they have presented, at the
cost of their lives, if they are found guilty of any Falsehood, or if they do
not make out what they say. They set forth, that by the Orders of Monsieur
Marillac, the Protestant are dealt with as declared Enemies; that their Goods
and their Houses are plundered; their persons assaulted; that the Soldiers are
employed as Executioners of these Outrages. That they are quartered upon the
Protestants only, that besides the excessive expense they put them to, they
exact money of them with dreadful Oaths and Execrations. They knock them down,
they drag Women by the hair of the Head, and Ropes about their Necks, they have
put them to the torture with Screws, by clapping their Fingers into a Vice, and
so squeezing them by degrees, they have bound aged Men, eighty years old, and
beaten them, and have misused, before their Eyes, their Children, who came to
comfort them: They hinder Handicrafts men from working; they take from
Laborers what they use for their Livelihood; they set their Goods openly to
sale, and they clap their Swords and Pistols to their Breasts, who are not
frighted with their other Usages: they drag them in Sheets into their Churches,
they throw Holy Water in their Faces, and then say they are Catholics, and
shall be proceeded against as Relapsed, if they live otherwise. It is not
permitted to these miserable persons to complain; those who would have
attempted it have been seized on, and the Prisons are full of them. They are
detained there without any Process being made against them, and even without so
much as having their Names entered in the Iayl-Books. If any Gentleman speak to
Monsieur Marillac, he answers them, that they should meddle with their own
Business, that otherwise he will lay them fast. This is a Taste of what they
are doing here.


A Copy of the Third Letter.
BEing very busy, it shall suffice at this time to send you a Copy of a
Letter; which I just now received from Saints, concerning the Protestants of
this Kingdom; Sir J. P. our common Friend writ it me. He is now making his Tour
of France. I entreated treated him to inform himself as well as he could how
they treated the poor people in those places he was to pass through, that he
might give me a full Account. This is the Letter, dated the last of August, Old
Style. I am now going out of Aulnix, where I meet with nothing but Objects of
Compassion. The Intendant of Rochefort, which is Monsieur Du Muins, lays all
waste there. It is the same person concerning whom at the Marquis de Segnelay's
we were told so many pleasant Stories last Winter at S. Germain. Do not you
remember that they talked much of a certain Picard, who owed all his Fortune to
his Wife, and whom the Marquis de Segnelay treats always as the worst of men?
That Is the Man, he is born to do mischief as much as ever man was, and his
Employment has increased bis insolence beyond measure. To this he has added,
to the Protestants grief, all the barbarous zeal of Ignorance. And if the King
would let him do it, he would soon act over again the Tragedy of S.
Bartholomew. About ten days since he went to a great Town in Aunix, called
Surgeres, accompanied with his Provost, and about forty Archers. He began his
Feats with a Proclamation that all the Huguenots should change their Religion,
and upon their refusal he quartered his Troop upon those poor people: he made
them to live there at discretion, as in an Enemies Country; he made their Goods
to be thrown into the Streets, and their Beds under the Horses Feet. By his
Order the Vessels of Wine and Brandy were staved, and their Horse Heels washed
with it; their Corn was sold, or rather given away, for a fourth part of what
it was worth, and the same was done to all the Tradesmens Goods: Men, Women and
Children were put to the Torture, were dragged by force to the Popish Churches;
and so great Cruelty was used toward them that the greatest part not being
able longer to endure the extremity of the pain, renounced their Religion. By
the same means they forced them to give it under their hands, That they had
abjured without constraint, and of their own free choice. The Goods of those
who found means to escape, are sentenced to be sold, and to be pillaged. Proud
of so noble an Expedition, our good man returns to Rochefort, the place of his
ordinary abode, forbids all the Prot^s^ants, who are there pretty numerous, to
remove any of their G^ods out of the Town, under penalty of confiscation of
what should be seized, and corporal punishment over and above; and he commands
them all to change their Religion in five days. This was done by sound of
Trumpet, that no one might pretend ignorance. The Term expires to morrow. After
this he marched to Moze (it is another great Town in Aunix) where there is a
very fair Church of the Protestants, and a very able Minister, there he set out
the same Prohibitions, and the same Commands that he had at Rochefort. Upon
this a very worthy person of the place, and Elder of the Church, named Mr.
Jarry, addressed to him with a most humble Remonstrance; and this cruel and
barbarous man made him presently to be clapped up in Irons. After this he
quartered his Men upon those of the Protestant Religion, where he exercises
the same violence which he did at Surgeres. Nevertheless hitherto no one has
made Shipwreck of his Conscience in this place. They suffer all this cruel
persecution with an admirable constancy. God of his Mercy support them to the
end. All the rest of Aunix is in extreme consternation. There are likewise
Prohibitions made at Rochelle, against the shipping of any Goods. In so much
that all they who sly away run a great hazard of carrying away their lives
only for a prey. Adieu. I will end mine as Sir J. P. does his: all your Friends
--


Do you intend to conclude there, said I to our Friend? I have a mind to do so
(replied he) tho I have a thousand Insolences and Outrages more yet to acquaint
you with. But it is late; and I have produced but too much to justify the
French Protestants who forsake their Country, from any suspicion of impatience
or wantonness. You see now what are the Reasonable Means that are used to
convert them. Those goodly means which have been employed are, To despise the
most Sacred Edict that was ever made by men; to count as nothing promises
repeated a hundred times, most solemnly by authentic Declarations; to reduce
people to utmost Beggary; to make them die of Hunger, in my opinion, a more
cruel death than that by Fire or Sword, which in a moment ends life and
miseries together; to lay upon them all sorts of afflictions, to take away
their Churches, their Ministers, their Goods, their Children, their liberty of
being born, of living, or of dying in peace, to drive them from their
Employments, their Honors, their Houses, their native Country; to knock them on
the head, to drag them to the Mass with Ropes about their Necks, to imprison
them, to cast them into Dungeons, to give them the question, put them to the
Rack, make them die in the midst of torments, and that too without so much as
any Formality of Justice. This is that they call Reasonable Means, Gentle and
Innocent Means: For these are the Terms which the Archbishop of Claudiopol^s
uses, at the Head of all the Deputies of the Clergy of France, in the
Remonstrance they made to their King, the last year when they took leave of his
Majesty. I must needs read you the passage: here is the Remonstrance, and the
very words of that Archbishop: Those gentle and innocent means which you make
use of, Printed at P^ris cum Privi^^gio Chaz Lionard, Inprimt^r du ^^y. 1680.
Sir, with so much success to bring the Heretics into the bosom of the Church,
are becoming the Bounty and Goodness of your Majesty, and conformable at the
same time to the mind of the divine Pastor, who always retains Bowels of Mercy
for these strayed Sheep: he wills, that they should be brought back, and not
hunted away, because he desires their salvation, and regrets their loss. How
far is this conduct from the rigor wherewith the Catholics are treated in
those Neighboring Kingdoms which are infected with Heresy. Your Majesty makes
it appear, what difference there is between Reason and Passion, between the
Meekness of Truth, and the Rage of Imposture, between the Zeal of the House of
God, and the Fury of Babylon. In good truth, cried I to our Friend, after the
reading of this passage: this is insufferable, and I cannot forbear taking my
turn to be a little in passion. Methinks they should blush to death, who call
those Cruelties, which have been executed upon innocent Sheep, Meekness; and
that Rigor, and the fury of Babylon which we have inflicted upon Tigers, who
thirsted after our Blood, and had sworn the destruction of Church and State.
They plague and torment to death more than a million of peaceable persons, who
desire only the freedom of serving God according to his Word, and the Laws of
the Land, who cannot be accused of the least shadow of Conspiracy, and who by
preserving that Illustrious Blood which now reigns there, have done to France
Services deserved, together with the Edict of Pacification, the love, and the
hearty thanks of all true French Men. And we have put to death in a legal
manner, it may be twenty wretched persons (the most of which had forfeited
their lives to the Law, for being found here) convinced by diverse Witnesses,
who were the greatest part Papists, of having attempted against the Sacred Li^e
of our King, and the lives of millions of his faithful Subjects. Surely they
would have had us let them done their Work, let them have rooted out that
Northern Heresy, which they were, as they assure us by their own Letters,
Omahon S. Th. Mag. Disputatio Apolegitica de Iure Regni Hib^rni^ pro
Catholicis, n. 20.
in so great, and so near hopes of accomplishing. But we had not forgot the
Massacre of Ireland, wherein, by the confession of one of their own Doctors,
who knew it very well, more than a hundred and fifty thousand of our Brethren,
in the midst of a profound peace, without any provocation, by a most sudden and
barbarous Rebellion, had their Throats cut by that sort of Catholics, whose
fate they so much bewail.

Although your Transport be very just, and I am very well pleased with it, said
our Friend to me, I must needs interrupt you; to bring you back again to our
poor Protestants. What say you to their Condition? I say (answered I) that
there can be nothing more worthy compassion; and that we must entirely forget
all that we owe to the Communion of Saints, if we open not our hearts, and
receive them as our true Brethren. I will be sure to publish in all places what
you have informed me, and will stir up all persons to express in their favor
all the Duties of Hospitality and Christian Charity. To the end (said he to me)
you may do it with a better heart, at our next meeting, I will fully justify
them against all those malicious Reports which are given out against their
Loyalty and their Obedience to the Higher Powers. Let us take for that all to
morrow seven-night, As you please, said I, so we took leave one of another: and
thus you have an end of a long Letter, assuring you, that I ever shall be, Sir,
Yours.

FINIS.
The third Letter. The French Protestants are no Antimonarchists.
SIR,
SInce you know the reason why this my third Letter comes so late, I will not
take up your time in excusing my long silence. Our Friend being now recovered
from his Indisposition, which was the main stop hitherto, we agreed upon a day,
when I came to his Chamber at the hour appointed. I cannot tell, sais he,
whether, before we enter upon this matter, to justify our French Protestants
in point of Fidelity toward their Superiors, I should not impart to you
several Letters, which have since come to my hands, wherein I have an account
of several fresh Persecutions since August last. I told him, No: For besides
that what you related to me at our second meeting is more than enough to
convince the greatest Infidel, That the Mischiefs are at the height in that
Kingdom, and that there is no security of Conscience for the Protestants who
stay there; besides all this, our Streets are full of instances of the new
troubles they give them. There is no Man but knows what was the event of the
Marquess de Venour's Deputation, wherein he gave a List of the cruelties used
in Poictou against our poor Protestants: He was forced to fly from his Estate
and Country. Every body has heard how many Gentlemen of good condition, and
several Ministers, have been imprisoned for no other fault but their zeal for a
Religion they believe to be the only true and safe one, the exercise of which
is likewise tolerated by one of the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, as you
have already so well made out. In short, we are assured by a thousand credible
Witnesses, as likewise by the sight of several Proclamations, That they ruin
all the Protestants that are Taxable in France, by a Secret they have found out
to Tax the people at Will, and then make one or more responsible for all the
rest; That they are barbarously cruel upon the least complaint of any thing,
that falls from them in the height of their misfortunes; That they Demolish
their best Established Temples, upon the least pretense; and that besides all
this, they condemn them to the Galleys, if they offer to quit the Realm, to
serve God according to a good Conscience in any other Country, with a Fine of
a thousand Crowns for the first Fault, and Corporal Punishment for the rest,
upon their Friends that shall any way countenance, directly or indirectly,
their departure out of the Realm. I have read the Proclamation, and you may
read it, says our Friend, when you please, for it lies there upon my Table. The
strangest thing in it is, that they glory of their pretended Conversions in
Poitou and elsewhere, as if they had been carried on with all the gentleness
and Christian temper imaginable, when all Europe knows they have used no other
but carnal means, and since I am provoked to say it, the Devil's Weapons, the
allurement of Riches, Promises of worldly Advantages, Threats, Force, and a
thousand unheard of Cruelties, whereby they have brought the poor People to
this hard choice, either to turn Papist, or perish by Hunger and ill usage. And
many times we see their Consciences will not suffer them to continue in that
Communion they have been thus forced into; for they come over by Flocks, and
the Prisons in France are full of these pretended Relaps. But because you know
all this already, I proceed now, says he, to the Justification of our poor
persecuted Brethren.

I am very well satisfied that this groundless Accusation, as if they were
Seditious Firebrands, and Enemies to Monarchs and Monarchy, has given them no
prejudice with you. If Accusation were enough to render guilty of this Crime,
Moses and Christ, the old and new people of God had certainly lost their Cause.
The Enemy of Truth has ever made this his Charge against the Innocence of Gods
Children. Moses was accused for Seducing the people; Exodus 5.4. 1. King. 18.17.
Ier. 38.4. Neb. 6.6. Luc. 23.2. Act. 24.5. and 17.6.
Elias, for Troubling Israel; Jeremiah, That he did not pray for the Prosperity
of this people, but their mischief; the People of God, That they designed to
revolt from the King of Persia; Jesus Christ himself, That he perverted the
people, and forbad to pay Tribute to Caesar; and his Apostles, That they were
common Pests, Movers of Sedition, and that turned the World upside down. You
have read Turtullians Apologetick, and Arnobius against the Gentiles. You see
there, how the most innocent of the Primitive Christians, and the meekest of
Men, were charged with the same Crime. Our Protestants of France have no reason
to expect other measure than that of their Savior and the Saints departed,
since it is the same Religion they strive for: And by the Grace of God we shall
with as much ease acquit them of all those Imputations laid to their charge.

There is certainly no stronger Proof of what the Opinions of a Church are,
than the public Declarations her self has made of her Principles, by open
Professions or Confessions of Faith; these are authentic pieces, composed with
the approbation of the whole Body, and published on purpose to declare to the
World what in sincerity such a Church believes in matters of Religion. The
Protestant Church of France has not been wanting in this particular, but has
composed and published a Confession of Faith that all the World might be sure
what really are her thoughts and belief: And certainly, without the highest
injustice, we cannot reject what she has thus made Protestation of. Then I told
our Friend, you need not enlarge upon this point, for no Man of sense will
dispute this Principle with you. Let us come to the Question. I shall soon
dispatch it, says he; I will read to you the two last Articles of our
Protestants Confession of Faith.

We believe, That God will have the World governed by Laws and Policies, Art.
39.
to the end there may be a restraint upon the inordinate Appetites of Men; and
for this end, that he has appointed Kingdoms, Commonwealths, and all other
sorts of Government, Hereditary or otherwise, and whatever appertains to the
dispensation of Justice, and that he himself will be acknowledged the Author of
it. For this cause he has put the Sword in^o the Magistrates Hand, to punish
Faults committed, not only against the second Table, but likewise against the
first. We ought therefore, for God's sake, not only to submit to the Government
of Superiors, but also to honor them, and hold them in such regard, as
esteeming them his Lieutenants and Officers, whom he has constituted to
exercise a Lawful and Sacred Trust.

We hold it therefore our Duty to obey their Laws and Statutes, Art. 40
to pay Tributes, Imposts, and other Duties, and to bear the Yoke of Subjection
with a cheerful and good will, be they Infidels, provided the Sovereign Empire
of God be kept entire. Thus we detest those that would reject Authority, put
all things in common, and overthrow the course of Justice.

Here you see the Confession of the Protestants of France, where you find they
make it a part of their Religion and Faith to believe that it is God who
appoints Kingdoms, Hereditary, and others; That we ought to Honor Princes, and
hold them in all Reverence, as the Lieutenants and Officers of God, to obey
them, to pay them Tribute, to submit to them with a good will, though they
happen to be of another Religion than ours; and they reject with horror all
those that reject the Powers. Can any thing be said stronger, or with greater
exactness?

Moreover these Protestants of France have a Liturgy, a Form of Common Prayers,
as well as our Church of England, There it is that in the presence of God, and
speaking to God, they do confirm by a public Act of Worship all that they say
of Kings and Potentates in their Confession of Faith. After they have said to
God, We have thy Precept to pray for those whom thou have set over us,
Superiors and Governors, they add, We Beseech thee therefore, O heavenly
Father, for all Kings and Princes, thy Servants, to whom thou have committed
the dispensation of Justice, and particularly for the King, etc. If ever we
ought to believe Men's words, no doubt it is when they speak to God in the Act
and fervor of their Devotion: If a man be not wicked to the last degree, or an
Athiest, he will then at least speak the thoughts of his Heart. And upon such
an account it is that the Protestants of France own, in conformity to their
Confession of Faith, That it is God who has set Rulers over them, to Govern;
That all Princes are the Servants of God; That the Justice they dispense to
men, is that of God himself, of which God has committed to them the
Administration or Rule. And upon that score it is they pray to God for their
own King, and for all other Princes, That he would give them his holy Spirit,
and all Graces requisite to well Governing. Is this the style of a seditious
People, Enemies to Monarchs and Monarchy?

Since therefore the Confession of Faith, and form of Common Prayer, speaks the
mind of the whole Body of the French Protestants, it will be needless to quote
the Sermons and Writings of their particular Ministers; yet because I observe,
to my great grief, there are many here cry down the incomparable Calvin, as if,
in this point of obedience to Monarchs, he were not very sound, I must needs
read to you what he has said upon that subject in his excellent Institution: It
is in his fourth Book, Chap. 20. where, after he has showed, Sect. 22 and 23 of
this Chapter, the Duty of Subjects toward Princes and Magistrates, which he
makes consist in having a profound Reverence for them, to observe their
Commands with a perfect submission, to pay such Taxes and Rates as they put
upon them, to offer up Prayers and Thansgivings to God for their Prosperity;
and when he has there proved by Scripture, That we cannot resist the Magistrate
without resisting God, who is prepared to defend them, he considers, Sect. 24.
That there are many who fancy we owe not this respect and obedience, but to
good Princes, and so may despise the wicked, and shake off the yoke of Tyrants.
This Maxim he confutes, as a most pernicious error, in the following Sections,
of which I shall here give you a taste.

The Word of God obliges us to submit, not only to the authority of Princes
that use us well, but in general to the Dominion of all those, after whatever
fashion, that exercise Sovereign Power, though they perform nothing less than
the Duty of a Prince. For however the Lord assures us, that Magistrates are the
Bounty of his Grace, set up for the conservation of Men, and that therefore he
sets them bounds, within which they ought to keep, yet he declares at the same
time, that whatever they prove, they hold their Power of him; that they who
seek the public good in their Sovereign Administration, are the lively Images
of his Goodness; that they which rule with violence and oppression, were raised
by him to the Throne for a Scourge to a sinful people; but that the one and the
other are equally invested with that Sacredness of Majesty which he has stamped
upon the Forehead of all lawful Authorities. I shall insist upon this point,
which the Spirit of the Multitude does not so easily conceive, to wit, that
this admirable and Divine Authority, that the Lord by his Word confers upon the
Ministers of his Justice, remains no l^ss with a Man that is never so wicked or
unworthy of all honor, if once he be raised to the Sovereign Power; so that
his Subjects ought no less to Reverence him, in regard of Allegiance due to
Sovereigns, than if he were a good King. First, I would have it carefully
observed, the special Providence of God in bestowing Crowns, and setting up
Kings, of which we are so often told in Scripture. It is God, says Daniel, that
removes Kings, and sets up Kings. Dan. 2.21. and 4.25.
And speaking elsewhere to Nebuchadnezz^r, Thou shall be, says he to him, wet
with the Dew of Heaven, till thou know that the most High Rules in the Kingdom
of Men, and gives it to whomsoever he will. We know well enough what a kind of
King this N^buchadnezzar was, who took Jerusalem. He was an Usurper, and an
accomplished Villain. Nevertheless the Lord assures us in Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 29.19.
that he had given him Egypt as a Reward for the Service he had done him, in
the mischief he did to Tire. And Daniel says to the same King, Dan. 2.37.38.
The God of Heaven has given thee a Kingdom Power, and Strength, and Glory, and
wheresoever the Children of Men dwell, the Beasts of the Field, and the Fowls
of the Heaven, has he given into thine hand, and has made thee Ruler over them
all. He says also to Belshazzar, this King's Son, Dan. 5.18.
The most high God gave Nebuchadnezzar, thy Father, a Kingdom, and Majesty, and
Glory, and Honor, and for the Majesty that he gave him, all People, Nations,
and Languages trembled and feared before him. Whenever we find God has set up
any man to be King, let us call to mind the heavenly Oracles, which appoint us
to Honor and Fear the King, and then we shall not fail to bear Respect, even
in the persons of Tyrants, to this mighty Character wherewith God has been
pleased to honor them, Samuel, telling the People of Israel what they were to
suffer from their Kings, uses these words, This will be the manner or Right of
the King that shall Reign over you; He will take your Sons, and will appoint
them for himself, for his Chariots, and to be his Horsemen, and some shall run
before his Chariots. 1 Samuel 8.11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
And he will take your Daughters to be Confectionaries, and to be Cooks, and to
be Bakers. And he will take your Fields,, and your Vineyards, and your
Olive-yards even the best of them, and give them to his Servants. And he will
take the tenth of your Seed, and of your Vineyards, and give to his Officers,
and to his Servants. And he will take your Menservants and your Maidservants,
and your goodliest Young Men, and your Asses and put them to his Work. He will
take the tenth of your Sheep, and ye shall be his Servants. Doubtless Kings
have no Right to deal thus, those that the Law so carefully directs to
Moderation and Temperance: But Samuel calls this the Right of the King over the
People, because the People are under an indispensable Obligation to submit, and
are not allowed to resist, as if the Prophet had explained himself after this
manner, The mismanagement of Kings shall come to this height, and you shall
have no right to oppose it, your part must be to take their Commands, and to
obey them.

Calvin, after this, produces a long passage out of Jeremiah, where great
punishments are denounced against all those that would not submit to the
Government of Nebuch^dnezzar, who originally was but an Usurper as well as a
Tyrant. And he concludes, that we ought to reject these seditious thoughts,
That a King ought to be handled as he deserves, and that there is no reason we
should behave our selves as Subjects toward him, if he carries not himself
like a King toward us. After which, he most substantially answers the
Objections which unquiet Spirits are used to make against this Doctrine. And
now I leave it to reasonable Men to judge, whether it be not the greatest
Injustice to this excellent Person, to declare to the World, That he was an
Enemy to Kings.

They that followed him, have after his example, all taken the same side upon
this subject. No doubt you have read what their great Salmasius has writ in
defense of our blessed Martyr King Charles the first. Their famous Amyraldus
likewise took occasion from the Martyrdom of our good King, to Print an
excellent Discourse of the Power of Kings; where, by the strongest Arguments,
taken out of the Word of God, he proves beyond dispute, That the Majesty and
Person of Sovereign Princes ought at all times to be Sacred to all their
Subjects. We have likewise, to the same purpose, the Letter of their learned
Bochart, to Doctor Morley, then Chaplain to His Majesty, and now most
deservedly Bishop of Winchester. You may see there how this excellent person
defends the Rights of all Crowned Heads; He takes in there, in the Compass of a
few Pages, the strongest things that can be said. The force of all this, is,
that the performance of these Protestants has exactly answered their Confession
of Faith, the Prayers of their Liturgy, and what their Doctors have taught, as
often as there was occasion for it. They have been always the first in
assisting their Kings, when there was need, with their Lives and Fortunes.

Every Body knows how many mischiefs the Queen, Catharine de Medicis did them.
Yet when the Guises had seized the person of Charles the Ninth, who had nothing
but Tears to oppose their violence, Mez. Hist. de Franc. Tom. 2. p. 841.
as Mezeray well observes; and that the Queen, finding her self under the same
streights with the young King, had called for help upon the Prince of Conde and
his Friends: the Protestants came in from all parts, and ventured all they had
to set their Majesty's at Liberty. It is a remarkable Story. Mezeray does all
he can to di^guise the matter: but so known a Truth could not but extort this
confession from him. The Queen writ two Letters the same day to the Prince,
full of pity and good words, Ibid.
recommending to him the safety of the Kingdom, beseeching him to take
compassion of the innocent tears of his King, who was held captive by his own
Subjects; and that he would generously attempt his rescue, a^suring him, that
he should be maintained in whatever he should do. The same Historian confesses
in his Chronological Abridgement, That by these Letters, the Queen who was then
Regent, gave to the Prince who was then a Protestant, a just ground to take up
Arms: which he did, so soon as he received the Order. Then flew in like
lightning to the assistance of the King and Queen, the same Protestants, that
with so much rigor and violence had been persecuted by them. He sent
presently, says M^zeray, to the Reformed Churches; especially to those upon the
River Loire, to Bourges, Poitiers, and others more remote, ordering them
immediately to seize all the Passes: and that for his part, he was resolved to
expose his person, and all that was in his power, to make good the Kings
Commands, and Revenge the injury done to his Majesty. You have here, Sir, the
true Cause of these Prote^^ants first taking up Arms: and, as you see, it was
upon a glorious account. For it was, in short, to succor their King, whom
stranger-Princes (who aimed at his Crown, as it appeared at last) held Captive.
Besides, all here was lawful. They take not up Arms, but by order of the
Regent, who promises the Head of the Protestants, That he should be justified
in all he did. And she made her word good to him, however, the great credit his
enemies had, and the Queens inconstancy, had for some time run down the credit
of this glorious Action with the people. For the King gave an authentic
testimony of the Innocence and Loyalty of the Prince and his Friends upon this
occasion. It is by the sol^mn Edict of 1563. where the King says, That the
sincere and true intent of our said Cousin the Prince of Conde may not be
doubted, we have said and declared, and do say and declare, That we esteem this
our said Cousin, as our good Kinsman, faithful Subject and Servant; as likewise
We hold all those Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, and other Inhabitants of Towns,
Communalties, Boroughs, and other Places of our Kingdoms and Countries of our
Dominion, that have followed, assisted, aided, and accompanied him in this
present War, and during the said Tumults, in what part or place soever of our
Kingdom, for our Good and Loyal Subjects and Servants; believing and esteeming
what was done before this by our s^id Subjects, as well in regard of the taking
up of Arms, as the Articles of Justice agreed among them, and the Judgments and
Executions of the same, was done with a good Intent, and for our Service.

Henry the Third was their mortal Enemy: He was the chief Author of that
detestible Massacre, where by the confession of the Bishop of Rhodes himself,
Hist. de Hen. le Grand. s^r l'an. 1571.
near a hundred thousand Protestants had their throats cut. And yet all this
did not hinder them from coming in to his assistance; so soon as ever they saw
his Crown and Life in danger. They forgot that he had been their Pers^cutor,
and remembered only that he was their King. And all Europe knows, that without
their aid he had been lost. He was shut up in Tours, hard pressed by the Army
of the Ligue, which consisted, as every one knows, all of Roman Catholics.
Already three parts in four of his party, Mez. Hist. de Franc. Tom ^ page 634.
and those of the bravest, as Mezeray assures us, were slain, and the Duke of
Mayenne, General of this Army of Parricides, had made himself master of the
Suburb, when the Protestant recruits came. This brave Captain, says Mezeray,
(speaking of Chastillon) lodged his Men in the Isle, in despite of their
continual Firing upon him from every part of the Suburb, and made them work so
hard, that they had covered themselves in less than two hours. The Liguers, so
soon as they had discovered them, and knew him by his face, did well to cry, To
your Quarters White Scarfs, this is none of your quarrel: brave Chastillon, we
have no design against thee, retreat, it is against him that Murdered thy
Father, let us but alone, and we will revenge his death; adding several
reproaches against the King, more insolent, than commonly upon such occasion
Soldiers use to do. Chastillon answered, That he they spoke so ill of, was
their King; that it was for women to rail, and that he would see the next day
whether they were as good at fighting as they were at scolding. But the Duke of
Mayenne fearing to stand the shock of the Protestant Troops, considering, as
Mezeray says, That it might not be safe to encounter with old Soldiers that
had been used to blows, he quits all his advantages and marches silently away
at three a clock in the morning. Thus was Tours relieved, and Henry the Third
saved by the same Protestants, to whom he had done so much mischief. And by
this the Protestants preserved the Crown to the Family of Bourbon, from which
it had been gone past recovery, if Tours had been taken. For indeed, they that
laid the siege, and intended to dethrone their King, were heads of that
powerful Faction which, (as the Bishop of Rhodes testifies) would have broken
the succession of the Royal Line. Hist. de Hen. le Grand sur l'an. 1576.
And the General of the Army was own Brother to the Duke of Guise, who, as the
same Bishop tells us, designed the Crown for himself.

As for King Henry the Fourth, Grandfather to our King, as well as to the
present King of France, there is no man that understands the least of those
Histories, but knows it was his faithful Protestants that preserved him for the
Throne, and set the Crown upon his Head. The Bishop of Rhodes acknowledges, Id
sur la meme ane^.
That this Great Prince had been bred up from his Birth among the Huguenot
party, and that they were his best support. And indeed, they expended their
blood more than once to save his, against the rage of the Ligue, and the
ambition of the Lorain Princes, who would have usurped his right. So soon as
ever Henry the Third, his Predecessor, assassinated by the Friar Jacques
Clement, was dead: they did not do, as Papists that were then in his Army. For
whereas these for the most part fell into Cabals, and gave him a thousand
troubles by their Seditious Resolutions, which tended either to exclude him
from the Succession, or tear the Government in pieces: the Protestants kept
steady: they immediately owned him for their King. The Huguenot Nobility, with
the Forces they had brought (which were all Protestants) swore Allegiance to
him presently. They are the very words of the Bishop of Rhodes. Id sur l'an.
1589.
And when unhappily, which cannot be enough lamented, he forsook their
Religion, fearing the Papists should choose another King in his stead; their
Fidelity failed them not for all that, they maintained his Cause with the same
zeal, whilst diverse ^apists continued to keep his Garrisons from him, and
armed several Assassins to take away his Life. Peter Barriere, says Mezeray,
had designed to kill the King, Sur l'an. 1593.
because he heard some of the Clergy say, That it would be an exploit worthy
eternal praise, and that would carry a man straight to Heaven. When he was come
to Lions with this resolution, the same Popish Historian adds, He communicated
it to the Archbishops Vicar General, to a Capucin Fr^ar, and to two other
Priests, who all approved of it, and encouraged him to do it. Mezeray tells us
afterward, That Barriere having a little demurred upon the Kings having
forsaken the Protestant Religion, Christopher d' Aubry, Curat of S. Andre des
Arces, and Varade Rector of the Jesuits, heartened him by their advice to
pursue his Hellish Design of stabbing the King. You know the story of John
Chastel, one of the Jesuits Scholars, to the same purpose, how he wounded the
King in the mouth with the stab of a Knife, which he intended for his throat.
It is well known what share the Jesuits had in this attempt: This young
Desperate confessed, Mez. sur l'an. 1594.
that he heard them say, That it was lawful to kill the King. There were found
in their College several Pieces full of Invectives, and most pernicious
Propositions against the Honor and Life of Henry the Third, and Henry the
Fourth his Successor then Reigning. The famous Act of Parliament at Paris has
eternized the Memory of this Execrable Attempt. It Ordains, That all the
Priests and Scholars of the College of Clermont, and all others that styled
themselves of the Society of Jesus, should quit the Kingdom in fifteen days, as
corrupters of Youth, disturbers of the public Peace, and Enemies to the King
and Kingdom. Which was done accordingly. And it is fit I should tell you upon
this, how Cardinal d'Ossat bemoaned their loss, by reason of the apparent
advantage the poor Protestants had by it: You may see it in the eighth Letter
of his first Book; these are his words: It must needs give a Prince converted
to the Catholic Religion, whom we should have comforted and confirmed by all
means possible, great offense and prejudice against Catholics: when they that
boast themselves the Pillars of the Catholic Religion, have thus endeavored
to get him Murdered. Whereas if there had been any pretense for Assassinates,
it should have been the Heretics that should have procured it and seen it
done, because he had quitted and forsaken them, and they had reason to
apprehend him: And yet they have attempted no such thing either against Him, or
any of the five Kings his Predecessors, whatever slaughter their Majesty's made
amongst them. You have here at once an authentic Witness of the exact Loyalty
of the Protestants of France to their Sovereign, how viol^nt soever the
Sovereign might have been: and a dreadful warning for all Princes to consider
the Spirit of Popery, perpetually engaged in Murder, and ready to spill the
most Sacred Blood, if they think it runs cross to their interest, The death of
this Great Prince Henry the Fourth, is a precedent enough to make the heart of
any Prince ache, that is so unhappy as to have in his Dominion, or near his
Person, these sort of common pests. It was to much purpose to profess the
Romish Religion, while these Monsters, out of a suspicion perhaps that his
heart was not Roman enough, never rested till they had pierced it by the hand
of that abominable Villain Ravilliac, Hist. de Hen. le Grand sur l 'an. 1610.
who had been a Monk, as the Bishop of Rhodes assures us. And what he says of
the hardiness of this wicked Fellow, to suffer all without speaking a word*
plainly shows us who were those Devils and Furies that Inspired him with such
cursed Thoughts. He was taken in the very Fact, says the Bishop of Rhodes,
(after he has given an account of the Crime of Ravilliac) being Interrogated
several times by the Commissioners of Parliament, condemned, the Courts met,
and by Sentence torn between four Horses in the place of Execution, after they
had tormented him with hot burning pincers in the Breast, Arms and Thighs,
without discove^ing the least fear or grief in the midst of so great Torment:
which confirmed the mistrust they had, that certain Emiss^ries, under pretense
of Zeal, had instructed and charmed him by false assurances, that he should die
a Martyr if he killed him, whom they made believe to be a sworn enemy of the
Church. But I should not make an end this day, if I were to take notice of all
the Stories of the malice and fury of the Papists against such Princes, as have
not had the happiness to please them, and give you all the proofs of the
affection and untainted Loyalty of the Protestants for their Kings, how little
secure soever they have been to them.

However, said I to our Friend, do not conclude before you have quitted the
Subjects from that suspicion, which the proceedings of the present King of
France has ^aised every where of the innocence of this poor people. For
according to the manner he has treated them within his Kingdom, he must needs
look upon them rather as his Enemies than his Subjects: Must there not have
been some failure on their part, and that they have entered into some
conspiracy, or are revolted, to deserve such hard usage?

I must confess, says h^, it would make one suspect some such thing by that
course is taken with them: For who could ever think, that so Great and Wise a
Prince would deal with Loyal Subjects, as if he had to do with Traitors? And
yet, which is the prodigious part of the History of Lewis the Fourteenth, there
is nothing more certain, than that these very Protestants, to whom they have
done so much mischief, have always observed exactly their duty toward their
King. One may safely say, by their behavior, they have loved him as their
Eyes: Their Loyalty has been yearly tried, during the minority of this King.
All the World knows it: neither could any thing ever corrupt or shake it. By
their Care and Address, all the Towns, where they had any Interest at that
time, as Montauban, Nimes, Rochel, declared for their King, and disposed not
only the Provinces that belonged to them, but those adjoining likewise. God
knows what had become then of the Crown, had it not been for the warm Sermons
of those Ministers, whose mouths are now stopped, and the courage of those very
Protestants they now persecute with so much violence: Whilst the Popish
Prelates and great Lords drank publicly the health of Lewis the Fifteenth,
these poor persecuted People were with Sword in hand exposing themselves to the
utmost dangers to preserve the Kingdom to Lewis the Fourteenth. It is matter of
Fact, which the King knows. He has born them witness more than once, that their
Loyalty upon this account, had contributed in the highest degree to the
security of his Crown. And it is fit upon this occasion I should impart to you
a wonderful Piece: It is a Letter of this Kings, writ to his Electoral High^ess
the Marquess of Brandenburg. My Friend that gav^ me this L^tter, copyed it from
the Original, which was seen by a thousand Ho^orable Witnesses, that may be
produced in time and place. It may not be impossible, but that I may show you
the Original. This was the Letter, Brother,
I should not enter into discourse with any other Prince besides your self,
concerning what you write to me in behalf of my Subjects of the pretended
Reformed Religion. But that you may see what a particular respect I have for
you, I will freely tell you, That some ill affected people to my service, have
published Seditious Libels in foreign Countries, as if the Edicts and
Declarations which the Kings my Predecessors have made in favor of my said
Subjects of the pretended Reformed Religion, and which I my self have confirmed
to them, were not punctually observed in all my Estates, which I never
intended. For I would have them enjoy all their Privileges which were granted
them. And I take care that they be suffered to live upon equal Terms, and
without distinction, among the rest of my Subjects: I am obliged to it by the
word of a King, and from the Acknowledgment I owe upon fresh proofs they have
given me of their Loyalty in my Service, during the late troubles, when they
took up Arms, and vigorously and successfully opposed the wicked designs
against my Government, of a Rebellious party at home. I pray God, etc.

From St. Germain, October. 13. 1666.



Mons. le Marshall de Sbamberg. Mr. du Quesne.
Such happy Beginnings were followed with suitable Success. The Protestants have
been remarkable upon an hundred occasions since, both by Sea and Land: they
were always observed to be the first when they were to fight for their King and
Country. All the World knows to whom they owe their Victories in Portugal,
over the Spaniards, which was so highly advantageous for France; and the Defeat
of the Famous De Ruyter, who after so long and great a Reputation, was at last
overcome by a French Protestant. I will conclude with an observation which they
assure me this King made himself, That neither in that great number of
Conspirators, who had laid so dangerous a plot against him, some years since,
nor amongst that monstrous Crowd of Poisoners, that have alarmed all France,
and destroyed so many considerable Families, was there found one single
Protestant.

After all this, to persecute them as they do, and proclaim them to be
Firebrands and disturbers of the public peace, Enemies of Monarchs and
Monarchy; is it not to punish those that deserve Reward? Is it not by a
shameful aspersion, no less ridiculous than fowl, to contrive the oppression of
persecuted Innocence? You are in the right, said I, but yet pray do not forget
to answer some Objections which are made every day to blast or render
suspicious the Loyalty of these poor people.

First, they accuse them for concealing dangerous poison under these words, in
their Confession of Faith, So long as the Sovereign Power of God be kept
inviolable. We hold, that we ought to obey their Laws and Ordinances, pay
Tribute, Imposts, and other Duties, and bear the Yoke with a cheerful and good
Will, although they were Infidels, Provided the Sovereign Power of God be kept
inviolable. Whence they infer, that they hold it for an Article of Faith, that
Subjects may take Arms against their lawful Prince, whenever they fancy that
what he commands is not suitable to the Principles of their pretended
Reformation.

That is a Gloss, replies our Friend, that spoils the Text, and a new
aspersion, these Protestants have given no ground for: Nay they foresaw, and
have confuted it beforehand, in resolving, as they have done, That Subjects
ought to bear the Yoke of their Subjection with a cheerful and good Will,
though their Princes were Infidels. For this plainly intimates, That although
our Kings were Enemies to our Religion, we are always obliged to submit to
their Orders. And if you would know what then is the meaning of this exception,
Provided the Sovereign Power of God remain inviolable, I answer, it means no
more than what St. Peter and St. John intended when they said to the great
Council of the Jews, Whether it be right in the sight of God, to hearken unto
you more than unto God, judge ye: Acts 4.19.
Or what all the Apostles meant when they said to the said Council, We ought to
obey God rather than Man: Than what St. Ch^ysostome intended when he told his
Auditors, When we say, Acts 5.29.
Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, we only mean such Duties as are
not against Piety and Religion, Chrysostom. in Matthew. c. 17.
because whatever harms Faith and Virtue, is not C^sar's, but the Devil's
Tribute. Or to bring an Authority of greater weight to those of the Popish
persuasion, this exception imports no more than what we find in the Canon of
the Papal Decree: If the Master command those things that are not repugnant to
the Holy Scriptures, let the Servant obey his Master; If he command the
contrary, Decr. Cause. 11. q. 3. c. 93. Si Dominus.
let him rather obey the Lord of the Spirit than him of the Flesh. If what the
Emperor command you be lawful, execute his Commands; if it be not, Answer, We
ought to obey God rather than Man. In a word, the French Protestants mean no
more by this their exception, than what all Mankind ought to think in this
matter, if they have the fear of God before their eyes, viz. That as God is
King of Kings, and by consequence, to whom our Princes and we owe an
indispensible Obedience, without any reserve, we must never admit of a dispute
between the one and the other, to obey the Orders of the Prince, when they are
contrary to those of God. Provided the Sovereignty of God be kept inviolable,
that is, to the end we diminish not the Sovereign power of God, but that God be
always owned for the King of all Kings: it is absolutely necessary, that in
such a contrariety between his orders and that of the Prince, we prefer his
without any manner of hesitation. To do otherwise, would be to place the Prince
in God's stead, and so make an Idol of him. This is all the Protestants would
say.

But then I asked our Friend, what would they have the Subjects do upon such
occasions, especially if Princes proceed to violence and punishing, thereby to
make themselves be obeyed with preference to God? Methinks, says he, they
explain themselves clearly enough, when they say, We ought to bear the yoke of
subjection with a cheerful and good will, though our Princes were Infidels. For
an Infidel Prince signifies here, a Prince that in his Laws and in his practice
is opposite to the appointments of God: is an ene^y, and so, a persecutor of
the true Religion, whenever he has a fair opportunity, and is so disposed. To
say then, as do the Protestants in their Confession of Faith, that although
Princes were Infidels, we ought to bear the yoke of subjection: is it not to
declare it to be the duty of subjects to suffer quietly whatever their Prince
pleases to inflict upon them? Indeed they do not mean, that we should exec^te
the commands of Princes, when they are contrary to the commands of God: but on
the other side, they are not for casting off their Allegiance, upon pretense
that their Prince does not herein do his duty, and is unjustly s^vere to them.
Whence it is plain from the Doctrine of the French Protestants, that Christian
Subjects upon these unhappy occasions, ought to continue alike faithful to
their God and to their Prince: to their God, in being careful to observe his
Statutes in the midst of all the threats and outrages of men: to their Prince,
by suffering with all humility and Christian patience, whatever is imposed upon
them, either to torture their Conscience, or force them to renounce their holy
Religion. Their worthy Calvin makes it evident, that this was his opinion, when
from what the Scripture ordains, to honor and ^ear the King, he concludes, that
Christians are obliged to reverence, even in the person of a Tyrant, the mighty
Character with which it has pleased God to honor Crowned Heads. For a Tyrant
is an unjust and cruel Prince, who thirsts after the Blood of his people, and
is always invading their Goods, or Life, or good Name. Therefore when Calvin
teaches, that Christians ought to pay respect, even in the person of these sort
of Princes, this mighty Character with which it has pleased God to honor
Kings: it shows plainly, that in his judgment whatever wrong or oppression a
Prince commits upon his Subjects, they remain always under an indispensible
obligation of being subject to his Scepter, so far from ever having a right to
take up Arms to depose him, or to set force against force. It is the same which
M^ses Amyraldus, that famous Protestant of Saumur, proves at large in his
Discourse of the power of Kings, upon the occasion of those unhappy Troubles,
which had so fatal an end, and so reproachful to the Nation. He m^kes it appear
by undeniable proofs, that nothing can be more pernicious to mankind, more
against the Word of God, nor more opposite to the practice of Jesus Christ,
that of his Apostles, the behavior of the Primitive Christians, and the very
genius of Christianity than to assert a right for subjects to take up Arms
against their King upon any pretense or ground whatever. And it will not be
amiss, that I thereupon read to you a passage or two out of the Letter of the
learned Bochart, Minister of Caen, to Doctor Morley Bishop of Winchester, If
one had any right to arraign a King, says he, why not Saul, who had twice
revolted from God, Let. de M. Boch. 3. part.
who had slain with the edge of the sword a whole Town of the Priests of the
Lord, who had taken away David's wife by force and given her to another, and
sought his innocent life, after so many eminent Services done the State by this
young Prince: and who could pretend more to it than David, who was appointed by
God, anointed and consecrated to the Government of Israel? Yet David, who was a
Prophet, and a man after Gods own heart, was of another mind, as we are assured
by Holy Writ. Saul seeking him in the deserts, went alone into a Ca^ where
David lay hid, who finding him in such a condition, might as ^asily have killed
him as Macrinus did Carcalla,. Nay, one would think he ought not to have
omitted so fair an occasion of ridding himself of his enemy, especially when he
was in a manner constrained to it by his own Soldiers, who minded him of the
Prophetic Promise God had made him, to deliver his Enemy into his hand: But he
calmly disswades them by a sober reply, to attempt nothing against Saul: The
Lord forbid, says he, that I should do this thing to my master the Lords
anointed, to stretch forth my hand against him, seeing he is the anointed of
the Lord, that is to say, A man that God has set apart for so Sacred and Divine
a Charge, if he make ill use of it, as did Saul and such like: nevertheless, as
he is a King, he ought to be exempt from all Civil Punishment, and left to the
judgment of the last day. In another place this Learned Person lays down for a
Maxim, That against the oppression of a King there is no humane remedy. He
maintains likewise, That when Kings abuse their Power, and treat ill their
Subjects, all ought to be remitted to Gods Iudgment-seat, and in the mean time
to have recourse to our Tears and Prayers, which are, says he, the weapons of
a true Christian. Thus the Author of the Books called, [ Les derniers, efforts
de Pinnocence asslige, the last attempts of persecuted innocence] who is a
French Protestant, very well known to the World, and my particular Friend,
Deuxi^m^. Entret. p. 75.
takes it for a Religious Principle, and that which bears the Charact^r of the
ancient Christian Moral, That the King is Master of the exterior part of
Religion: that if he will suffer none but his own, if we cannot conform, we
ought to die without resistance: because the true Religion is not to employ the
Arm of Flesh to establish it in a flourishing condition: That Princes become
very guilty, when they oppose by force the settling of the true Religion, but
they are to answer to none but God for it.

This is Sir, says our Friend, the true sense of the French Protestants, in
this important Affai^* I could make it out by a thousand more witnesses of
credit, if it were needful. And I am well assured, that after so many pregnant
Testimonies, there is no reasonable person can be offended at their Confession
of Faith: Therefore let us go to your other Objections. I would with all my
heart, said I, but that it is so late. And besides, I would be glad to make my
Objections stronger, by running over a new Book, which the Enemies of the
French Protestants make a great noise with in England, and put it into the
hands of all our people of Quality, to prejudice them against these poor
Protestants. It is the History of Calvinism, by Monsieur Maimbourg, a
Secularised Jesuit. If you will take my word, let us put it off till this day
sevennight. Be it so, says our Friend, and so we parted: This shall be also the
end of my Letter: I am,

Sir, Yours, etc.

The fourth Letter. The Protestant Loyalty vindicated against Maimbourg.
SIR,
I Failed not to be at our Friends Chamber at the time appointed: Well, says
he, so soon as we were sat down, What do you say of our Secularized Jesuit and
his Book? I told him, his Book smelt strong of a Libel. And as for him, he is a
man so full of Equivocation, that he will hardly ever forget his former
profession. He would fain have us believe, that his design is to make a Satyr
against the French Protestants, whom he charges at random with many crimes: and
yet when he comes to cast up his reckoning, one would swear he set Pen to paper
for no other end but to write in their praise, and to let after-ages know, That
the Huguenots or Calvinists, as he is pleased to call them, were far honester
men and better Christians, than their enemies the Papists: For what is it he
omits for the advantage of those, he himself acknowledges to be true
Protestants? Lewis de Bourbon, Prince of Conde, had a strength of parts, a
constancy and greatness of mind, Hist. du Calv. Ed. de Holland. 1682.
worthy his high Quality of Prince of the Blood. He had the courage of a Hero,
and as much Wit as Valor. He had a largeness of Soul and of Understanding,
equal to the greatest men of former ages, Page 124. Page 415. Page 422.
and ought to be reckoned amongst the chiefest Men of the Royal house of
Bourbon, had he not spoiled so many rare Qualities, Page 124.
which made him one of the most beloved men in the World, by unfortunately
dying a Huguenot. The Lady de Roye, his Mother-in-law, and Eleonor de Roye his
Wife, were both very wise Women, courageous, and of great virtue: but both
these likewise, the most zealous and resolute Huguenots of their time. Cardinal
Odet, Page 197. and 198.
the elder of the three Brothers of Coligny, was one of the handsomest men in
France, and who got the greatest love and esteem of any man at Court for his
Wit and Learning, for his Prudence and Ability in the management of Affairs,
for his sweet and obliging Deportment, and for his magnificence and wonderful
generosity. He had certainly been one of the greatest and most accomplished
Prelates of the Kingdom: had he not disgraced his Coat and Character by
Heresy, in becoming a Calvinist. The Chancellor Michael de L'Hospital, was a
man of extraordinary merit. Page 203, 204.
It is not to be denied, but that he was one of the most considerable men of
his time, in all curious and substantial knowledge, and in all the perfections
of Moral Virtues. But after all this, we neither can nor ought to conceal what
eclipsed the beauty of so many ra^e Endowments, which was, that he openly
countenanced Calvinism. Ia^es du Bosc of Esmendreville, Page 280.
second President in the Court of Aids of the Parliament of Rouen, a Man of
high Birth, and great Worth, disgraced all his good Qualities by an obstinate
adherence to the Huguenot party. Francis de la Noue, surnamed Bras de Fer, was
one of the bravest men of his time, Page 414, 415.
as he has evinced by a thousand noble Exploits: He was not only equal to the
Stoutest, but to the wisest and most knowing Commanders of old. Page 475.
Jasper de Coligny, Admiral of France, a Man of Method, Wit and Courage, quick
and watchful, bold, a good Souldie^ and great Captain, was almost the only
person that was a good Huguenot amongst all the people of Quality on his side.
Now we must know what Monsieur Maimbourgh means by a good Huguenot: He explains
himself very clearly in that passage where he commends the Queen of Nuvar, Page
462, 463.
Mother to Henry the Fourth: These are the words, She was a Princess, that
besides the perfections of her Body, had so great a Soul, so much Courage and
Wit, that she had deserved the glorious Title of the Heroess of her time, had
not Heresy, which though at first she was hardly brought too, yet at last she
cleaved to with an unmovable Resolution, been so great a blot in her
Scotcheon. However, we must allow her to have been a good Huguenot, living up,
in all appearance, to the greatest Piety and Regularity: For as to the other
great Persons of this Sect, except the Admiral, they only carried the name of
Calvinists, not very well knowing what they were themselves; and to speak
truly, the Court was then very corrupt, where there was little difference
between Catholic and Huguenot, but that the one went not to Mass, nor the
other to a Sermon; As to any thing else, they agreed v^ry well the one with the
other, for the most part, having no Religion at all, either in Devotion or the
fear of God, which this Queen Iean d' Albret bewails in one of her Letters.
Whence it appears, That according to Monsieur Maimbourg, to be a good Huguenot,
is to lead a virtuous Life, contrary to that of a deb^uched Court, to be very
devout in the fear of God, and to grieve for the corruption of the Age. This is
the notion he gives us of the true French Protestants, whom he calls, The good
Huguenots. He is very far from giving so advantageous a Character to those
zealous Catholics, whom he makes the Bulwark of his Church against the
pretended Heresy of the Protestants.

He affects the contemptuous compellation of little King, Page 157.
when he speaks of Francis the Second, of whom he says in another place, That
he had conceived so great a prejudice against the Huguenots, that he bound
himself under a solemn Oath to drive them all out of the Kingdom. The Reign of
the little King Francis. The little King Francis being dead, etc. At the death
of the little King Francis, etc. Page 154. Page 179.319.
And what does he not say of the Queen, Katharine de Medicis, the other scourge
of the Calvinian Heresy? He has represented her as the most wicked of all
Women: As he says, She had Principles that favored little of Christianity:
Page 164. Page 248.
She was an ambitious Queen, who by a wicked Policy would govern at any rate,
even to the sacrificing Religion it self. Page 453.
She did not deal faithfully with the Huguenots, when she made the Peace with
them. Her only design was, to deceive them. It was she that put the King upon
that barbarous resolution, which was executed upon that bloody and accursed day
of St. Bartholomew.

He sets out Charles the Ninth, as a Son worthy of such a Mother. This Prince
was of an impetuous humor, Choleric, Revengeful, Page 454.
and very Cruel, which proceeded from his dark Melancholy temper, and from his
wicked Education. Page 456.
He was so good a Proficient in what his Mother taught him, who was a Woman the
best skilled of any in her time in the Art of Dissimulation, and deceiving
people, that he made it appear, he had outdone her in her own Craft. Page 458.
What was it he did not do for two years together to deceive the poor Admiral?
He expressed the greatest value and love for him imaginable: Embraced him,
kissed him, called him his Father. And yet so soon as ever they advised him to
dispatch him out of hand. He stood up in the greatest rage, Page 460.
and swore by God, (according to his wicked custom) Ay, I will have him
dispatched; nay, I will have all the Huguenots destroyed, that not a man remain
to reproach me hereafter with his death. Page 474.
They hung the Body of the Admiral by the heels upon the Gibbet of
Mount-Faucon, lighting a Fire underneath to make him a more frightful
spectacle. It was so miserable a sight, that Charles the King would needs see
his Enemy thus dead: which certainly was an act altogether unworthy, I will not
say of a King, but of a man of any Birth: to such a degree had this Spirit of
hatred, revenge and cruelty, which he had learned of his Mother, prevailed upon
him.

As for Henry the Third, another mortal Enemy to the Protestants, Monsieur
Maimbourg sets him out as the falsest and most unnatural of Mankind. The Sieur
Aubery du Maurier, says he, Page 189.
tells us in the Preface of his Memoirs, that he has heard his Father say, that
he had it from the mouth of Monsieur de Vellievre, that at the same time he
showed large Instructions to oblige him earnestly to intercede for the Life of
Mary Queen of Scots, he had private ones quite contrary from the hand of Henry
the Third, to advise Queen Elizabeth to put to death that common Enemy to their
Persons and Kingdoms. And could there be a stranger cruelty, than what he makes
this Prince guilty of, when as yet he was only Duke d'Anjou? Page 421, 422.
The Prince of Conde, after he had defended himself a long time most bravely at
the Battle of Iarnac, was forced at last to yield up himself: Two Gentlemen
received his Sword with all manner of respect. But the Baron of Montesquiou,
Captain of Monsier's Swiss Guards, being come up whilst this was doing, and
finding by them that it was the Prince of Conde, So they called The Duke of
Anjou:
Kill him, kill him, says he, and with a great Oath, discharged his Pistol at
his Head, and shot him dead at the stump of a Tree, where he leant. It was an
action doubtless no ways to be excused, especially in a French Man, who ought
to have had respect and spared the Royal Blood, had it been in the heat of the
Battle, much more in cold Blood. They say, this was done by the express command
of the Duke d'Anjou.

He says of the Duke of Montpensier, an irreconcilable enemy to the Huguenots,
Page 418.
that he would give them no Quarter; that he always talked of hanging them;
that all he took prisoners, he put to death presently without mercy; that he
said to that brave and wise la Noue, (who came to surrender himself Prisoner of
War) My Friend, you are a Huguenot, your Sentence is passed, Page 478.
Prepare for death: that the day of the Massacre, this bigoted Catholic went
through the Streets with the Marshal de Tavannes, encouraging the People, that
were but too forward of themselves, Page 171, 172.
and provoking them to fall upon every body, and spare none.

He makes the Cardinal of Lorrain, that great Champion for Popery, to be Author
of a sordid and cruel proceeding. He says of the Duke of Guise, whom the
Catholics looked upon as the invincible Defender of their Faith, that indeed
he did service to the Religion, but that he likewise made it serve his turn;
Page 132.
and to invest him with that almost Regal Power, which in the end proved so
fatal to him. Now a Subject that makes Religion a step to mount him into his
Princes Throne, and take away his Crown, can he be otherwise esteemed than as a
profane and wicked man?

Speaking of the Ligue, which as he says, had for the chief Actors Philip the
Second, Queen Katharine, and the Duke of Guise, the great supporters of the
Pope, That it had like to have destroyed Church and State at once, and that the
greatest part of those that ran headlong in with that heat and passion, Page
491. Page 490.
and chiefly the People, the Clergy, and the Friars, were but the stales of
such as made up this Cabal, where Ambition, Revenge and Interest, took more
place than Religion, which was used but for a show to cheat the World.

At last he represents the Court of Charles the Ninth, which had been that of
Francis the Second, and was afterward that of Henry the Third, as a pack of
Miscreants and Atheists. The Court, says he, was at that time very corrupt,
where there was no difference hardly between a Catholic and a Huguenot, but
that the one went not to Mass, Page 462, 463.
nor the other to Sermon: As for any thing else, they agreed well enough, for
as much as the one and the other, at least generally speaking, had no Religion
at all, profane, without the fear of God. And yet it was from this Court, as
from a deadly Spring, that flowed all the Persecutions which the Protestants
suffered under the Reigns of three of their Kings. And Monsieur Maimbourg is
very pleasant; when he makes it up of Huguenots as well as Papists. All the
World knows, that the Huguenots were banished from the Court of Charles the
Ninth, so that all he says of this Court, can light upon none but the Papists,
who alone were admitted at that time. You are in the right, says our Friend,
and it will do well, to finish the draught, Monsieur Maimbourg has given us of
this Court, that I read to you what the Bishop of Rhodes writes of it in his
History of Henry the Fourth, Hist. de Hen. le Grand. sur l'an. 1572.
There never was one more vicious and corrupt, Wickedness, Atheism, Magic, the
most enormous uncleanness, the fowlest treacheries, perfidiousness, poisoning
and murder, predominated to the highest pitch.

But I beseech you, Sir, says he, tell me what you would infer from these words
of Monsieur Maimbourg, that gives such Encomium's to the same Protestants, whom
he would seem at the same time to cry down with all his might: and makes such
heavy Reflections upon those same Roman Catholics, whom he makes the Pillars
of his Church, and the greatest enemies to the Protestant Religion.

I make no doubt, replied I, but I draw the same Consequences from hence as ^ou
do: that Monsieur Maimbo^rg plainly shows by this, that he ought no^ to be
believed, when elsewhere he charges so many faults upon the first Protestants
of France, and imputes all the great Exploits to their enemies the Papists: and
that the true Protestants, or the good Huguenots, being so pious, and having
the fear of God before their eyes, for which he comm^nds them, could not be the
causes of Disorders; though very likely their Adversaries might have been, whom
the Historian represents as the most wicked, ambitious, ungodly and cruel of
men. By this he likewise convinces us, that his Book ought not to be regarded,
and that we ought not to look upon his accusations against that which he calls
Calvinism, otherwise then as railing and aspersions invented at will to make
way for his better reception at Court, or some other by end that is not worth
enquiring after. It is that which prejudices his Book with all Ingenious
Persons, and renders it unworthy the least consideration. Yet since the enemies
of the French Protestants make such a noise with it, let me entreat you, Sir,
to clear the matters of Fact to me, which he produces with so much confidence,
to raise a jealousy in Princes upon these poor Men, as if they were the
Authors of those Troubles and Disorders in the last Age, which came within a
very little of ruining France.

Page 96.
First, he charges their Religion with being a mortal enemy to Monarchy. I
confess, you have made the contrary appear beyond dispute in our former
Conference. But he lays his Charge upon matters of Fact, whereof I have not
knowledge enough to clear the Objections. Page 501.
One shall hardly see, says he, more dreadful Conspiracies, than those which
the Huguenots have made against our Kings: For instance, that cruel business of
Amboise and that of Meaux; not to mention their terrible Rebellions which have
cost France so much Blood; and the unhappy Intelligences they have held with
the enemy, to withdraw themselves from their Allegiance, and set up openly for
a Commonwealth, as they have done more than once. I beg of you to give me all
the light you can to deliver Innocence from so black an Aspersion. With all my
heart, says our Friend; and besides, when I have taken off this reproach, I
promise to make it as clear as the Sun at Noonday, that they are Father
Maimbourgs Catholics, who are guilty of all these desperate Conspiracies
against the persons of Kings, which he so unjustly and fasly lays to the
Protestants.

His first proof of the dreadful Conspiracies of the Huguenots against that of
their Kings, is the business of Amboise and Meaux. But before I enter into
Particulars, I set against him an unexceptionable Witness, who openly declares,
That the Huguenots entered not into any Conspiracy against their Kings in either
of those places: My Witness is one of the same Religion with Monsieur
Maimbourg, and what is more, a Cardinal, and one so knowing and of so
extraordinary worth, Cardinal d'Ossat. Ex Elog. Clar. Vir. Sammart.
that Monsieur Sainte-marthe is not afraid to style him, The Flower of the
College of Cardinals, the Light of France, and the New Star of his Age:
Sacrati ordinis aureum Florem, Ocellum nostrae Galliae, sui denique seculi
novum Sidus. He had over and above this advantage of Monsieur Maimbourg, that
he lived in the time of the businesses of Amboise and of Meaux. The
insurrection of Amboise happened in the year 1560. and Cardinal 'd Ossat was
born 1536.
He was above twenty years old at the time of the first: and he was too exact
and too knowing, not to have thoroughly examined the Causes and Motives of two
Occurrences, that made such a noise all over Europe. You shall hear what he
says in his eighth Letter of the first Book, upon the occasion of an attempt
against the Life of Henry the Fourth. You had it already: but I cannot forbear
reading it again to you, for it deserves to be writ in Letters of Gold upon the
Front of all the French Kings Palaces. To a Prince turned Catholic, who should
have been encouraged and confirmed by all means possible, it was to give him
great offense and distaste at the Catholics, when they that call themselves
the support of the Catholic Religion, should go about to have him
Assassinated; that, which if there were any pretense for, the Heretics ought
to have procured, or done it themselves, because he had quitted and forsaken
them, and they had therefore reason to fear him; and yet they attempted no such
thing, either against him, or any of the five Kings his Predecessors, whatever
Butchery they had made among them. These remarkable words, And yet they
attempted no such thing, either against him, or any of the five Kings his
Predecessors, are a manifest confutation of all that Monsieur Maimbourg's Libel
sets forth against the Loyalty of the French Protestants, from the beginning of
the Reformation, which was under Francis the first, to the Reign of Henry the
fourth. The businesses of Amboise and of Meaux happened, the one under Francis
the second, the other under Charles the ninth, two of the five Kings,
Predecessors to Henry the fourth, of whom Cardinal d'Ossa^ speaks. Assuring us
therefore, as he does, That the Protestants never attempted any thing against
the life of these five Kings, he positively denies what Monsieur Maimbourg
asserts, That in (...) two affairs, the Huguenots had entered into terrible
Conspiracies against their Kings. Now in the presence of God, which of these
two ought we rather to give credit to, the Cardinal, a man of an unspotted
Reputation, and who was an Eyewitness of these two passages now in dispute, or
Monsieur Maimbourg, who writ his Libel sixscore years after the business of
Meaux, and whom the Pope himself has turned out of the Jesuits Order for an
untoward reason? For every body knows it was for being detected of falsehood in
his Writings, that the Pope put this high Affront upon him.

But to come to our present purpose, and to be short, we will stick to the
account Monsieur Maimbourg himself gives of that he calls the business of
Amboise. This is that he says, Page 127,
That at a very close meeting at la Ferte sous Iouare, they determined a high
point of Conscience, by the advice of Divines, Canonists, and Lawyers, who all
agreed, That This present St^te of Affairs was, That the Duke of Guise, and the
Cardinal of Lorrain having made themselves Masters of the Mind the Person, and
the Authority of the young King Francis the second, became insufferable Tyrants
in the Kingdom, committed a thousand insolences upon the Princes of the Blood,
and gave all imaginable suspicion that they aimed at the Crown, as pretended
Heirs to Charles the Great.
during the present State of affairs, men might take up Arms to seize in any
manner the Duke of Guise, and the Cardinal of Lorrain, his Brother, to bring
them to Trial, provided a Prince of the Blood, who is in this case a lawful
Magistrate, would head the Party: That all this having been allowed of by a
general Consent, the Prince of Conde P. 128.
resolved to head them, upon condition that they attempted nothing against the
King and the Royal Family, nor against the State* That to carry on this attempt
under the Authority of the Prince, they chose La Renaudie, a Gentleman of
Perigord: That he contrived P. 129.
a meeting of a considerable number of Gentlemen and other Deputies at Nantes:
That after he had discovered to this Meeting what had been concluded at La
Ferte, he told them that the concealed Head of this Party was the Prince of
Conde, who had made him his Lieutenant; That it was agreed that five hundred
Gentlemen, and a thousand Foot, under thirty chosen Captains, should upon the
tenth of March meet from several Quarters at Blois, at which time the Court was
to be there, and pretending to present a Petition to the King, should secure
his Apartment, that they might effect their designs upon the Guises: P. 130
That the Guises having discovered this, immediately removed the Court to
Amboise: That La Renaudie, who was resolved to do that at Amboise which he
could not now do at Blois, P. 131.
was betrayed by one he trusted: That by this means they apprehended most of
his Associates without much trouble: That they hanged a great many presently,
without the form of a Trial: That they cast some into the River: P. 132.
That they hanged up the Body of La Renaudie, who was slain, and afterward cut
it into Quarters: That the chief of his Captains were Beheaded, after they had
all confessed: That three of their Captains, who came last, and had attacked
the Castle, were cut to pieces.

This was the end of that attempt. After this general account, Monsieur
Maimbourg comes to the Prince in particular, P. 133.
and this he says, As to the Prince of Conde, when the King reproached him for
attempting against his Person, and against the State, he justified himself like
a great Man, and suitable to his high Courage; for in presence of all the great
ones at Court, that were then by, and before the King, the Queens, and Royal
Family, he gave the Lie to as many as should dare to say that he headed those
that had attempted the King's Sacred Person, or his State, profering to lay
aside the consideration of his being Prince of the Blood, and maintain that
Challenge in single Combat; but no body took him up. This he might do
questionless with all Justice, it being certain that he was resolved the first
Article of the Consult at La Ferte should be, That they should attempt nothing
against the King's Majesty, nor against the State. Mezeray adds something here
that is too remarkable to be passed by. Mez. Hlst. de France, Tom. 2. P. 771.
The Prince, after he had proffered, To justify his Innocence against his
Accusers, by Sword or Lance, said, That he assured himself he should make them
confess that they themselves were the persons who had sworn the subversion of
the State and Royal Family. He had no sooner done speaking (says this Popish
Historian) but the Duke of Guise, seeming not to take it to himself, addressed
to him, and told him, That it was not to be endured so foul a Charge should be
laid upon so great a Prince, and offered to be his Second, if there could be
any so audacious as to maintain these false Accusations.

It appears by what Monsieur Maimbourg sets down and asserts, That the design
of that business of Amboise was only to seize the Duke of Guise and the
Cardinal of Lorrain, to bring them to their Trial; That it was resolved at the
undertaking of this business, That they would attempt nothing against the King,
the Royal Family, or the State; That indeed the Prince of Conde did not attempt
any thing against the Kings Majesty or State in this business of Amboise. When
therefore Monsieur Maimbourg, so shamefully contradicting himself, dares say in
another place, That you shall hardly meet with a more desperate Conspiracy than
that of the Huguenots against their King in the business of Amboise: P. 501.
What can he pass for less, in the sense of all honest men, than an infamous
Libeller? Against the testimony of his own conscience, against what himself had
writ and avowed, does he lay a heavy accusation upon the Innocent; and all this
in hopes to afflict the afflicted, and to shut up the Bowels of their Brethren
in Foreign Parts, from taking compassion of the poor French Protestants, who
are so terribly persecuted in their own Country. He would make all the World
jealous of them, that they might no where find reception, but be reduced,
wherever they go, to dye with Hunger and Affliction. You see what a worthy
Wight this Author proves, that they make such a do about amongst Persons of
Quality, to prejudice them against their poor Brethren. For we must not think
that the argument he makes in his Recital, to persuade us, That to attack the
Guises was to fall upon the King, can excuse him from contradiction and calumny
in this particular. They are not groundless proofs that will justify an
accusation of this weight, especially when it has been acknowledged that the
persons accused designed neither against King nor State, but only against the
Guises. There never was any thing (says he) so heinous as this Plot. For to
seek to possess themselves of the King's Appartment to seize his principal
Ministers, P. 13^.
and kill them before his face, as Captain Mazeres, who with others, undertook
the bloody execution, attests: Is it not to set upon the King himself, and to
seek to make themselves Masters of his Person and Government. I shall not
trouble my self to take off what he says of the Confession of Captain Mazeres.
Mezeray observes expressly in his Chronological Abridgment, That the brave and
wise Castelno, (...)
when he was confronted, sufficiently reproved this Captain: and the famous
Monsieur de Thou has the same passage in his History. Monsieur Maimbourg
himself acknowledges, That the result of this meeting was not to kill the
Guises, but only to apprehend them, that they might be brought to Trial by the
ordinary course of Justice. These are the very words of their resolution, as
Mezeray reports them: That whilst the King, by reason of the tenderness of his
years, and the Artifices of those that had shut him up to themselves could
neither foresee nor prevent the danger his Pers^^ and Government were in: they
ought to seize upon the Duke of Guise, and the Cardinal his Brother, to bring
them to Justice before the States. As to what Monsieur Maimbourg pretends, that
to endeavor to secure the Kings Appartment by force, and in his presence to
seize his principal Ministers, is to seize the King himself, and endeavor to
become master of his Person and Government. I say, his pretense is unjust and
very rash, in regard of those extraordinary Circumstances France was then under.

1. Francis the Second who then reigned, was very young, and Monsieur
Maimbourg, who calls him so often The little King Francis, gives him no very
advantageous Character.

2. The Duke of Guise and the Cardinal of Lorrain, who were strangers, having
become masters of the Person and Government of this young Prince, played the
Tyrant so, as to make the whole Kingdom desp^rate; and then they had put all
the Princes of the Blood from having any thing to do with the Government, the
Children of the hou^e, whose chiefest Interest it was, to preserve King and
State.

3. This Illustrious Prince of Conde, whom Mezeray represents to us of so sweet
a temper and great a courage, sincere and loyal, an enemy to all tricks and
cheats, Mez. Hist. de Franc. Tom. 2. page 1016. Id. ib. page 768.
and detesting to do an ill thing, and who for this reason cannot be suspected
in this matter, had got the Informations to be drawn by men of known and
unblemished reputation concerning the behavior of the Guises; by which
Information he had made it appear, that they were guilty not only of many
Oppressions and Violences, Id. ib. page 758.
but had moreover a design to extinguish the Royal Line, that they might
possess themselves of the Crown, having already got into their hands the
Justice, the Money, the Garrisons, the Soldiers, and the hearts of the common
people.

4. Indeed, the Guises declared publicly, that Provence and Anjou belonged to
them, and it was a thing commonly known, that they set men to work who were
versed in History, Id. ib. page 756.
to find out their Genealogy in the Line of Charles the Great, on purpose to
challenge their right of Succession against the Descendants of Hugh Capet; of
which Francis the Second, then Reigning, was one; as is likewise Lewis the
Fourteenth who now Reigns. It was because the Protestants opposed this design,
and that the business of Amboise, as well as other contests which they had
afterward with the Guise Faction, down to the Reign of Henry the Fourth, were
to no other end, Id. ib. page 773.
but to preserve the Crown to the posterity of Hugh Capet; it was, I say, for
this cause, that the Protestants were called Huguenots, from the name of Hugh.
Mezeray observes very well, that this was always esteemed by them to be the
original of this Appellation: But they, says he, took this name for an honor,
giving it another sense, as if they had been the Preservers of the Line of Hugh
Capet, whom, they said, the Guises intended to destroy, that they might restore
the Crown to the Posterity of Charlemayn, of whose Issue they boast themselves
to be. A great man of the Popish Religion has made it appear, Guy Coquil^e dans
ses Memoirs pour la Reformation de l' Estat Ecclesiastique.
that this is the only probable Etimology of the Name. So that far from the
Protestants of France taking it as a reproach, they ought to be proud of it, as
a lasting Work of their inviolable Loyalty to their Kings, and their glorious
oppositions they made against the attempts of the Guises, who aimed at the
Crown.

5. Besides, that we have the Word of such a Prince as the most Renowned Prince
of Conde, who asserted it more than once in great Assemblies; the whole Conduct
of the Duke of Guise makes it evident, what detestable Design this ambitious
Family had. Mezeray Hsst. de France, p. 578, 771.
When he had got Francis the Second into his hands, He took upon him, says
Mezeray, to equal himself with the Princes of the Blood, and to give orders in
the Military Affairs, and the Cardinal his Brother to direct the Treasury: Idem
ib. p. 744, 745.
whereas the ancient Laws of the Realm (as the same Historian has very well
observed) Ordain, That the Blood Royal shall have the preference before (...),
in matters of Government. Page 746.
They had in a short time made a way for themselves to the Sovereign Power: as
Mezeray adds, (speaking of the Duke and the Cardinal) and possessed themselves
of all Charges and Places of Trust, the Garrisons and the Treasury, so ordering
it, that all this passed either through their own hands, or through those of
their Creatures. When the King of Navar came to Court, Page 749.
his Purvoyer could find no room for him in the Castle; and the Duke of Guise,
who had taken up the next Apartment to the King, told him plainly, That it
should cost the Life of him and ten thousand of his Friends, before he would
quit it: as much as to say, he would have the Preference before the first
Prince of the Blood; and in truth he did trample upon him. The event showed
plainly afterward, that the Prince of Conde and his Friends understood very
well, that the Guises aimed at the Crown. The Duke procured full power to
summon all the Princes, great Lords, Captains, and others of all Conditions,
Id. ib. page 766.
to give them his Orders what they were to do, to raise men immediately as many
as he should think fit: and generally to provide and order all things, either
in Ammunition or repairs of Fortifications, in as ample manners as the King
himself could do. So that he wanted nothing but the name of King. And Mezeray
is forced to acknowledge, that since the Mayors of the Palace, Id. ib. page 840.
there had never been such an Encroachment made by any French Man upon the
Crown. He takes notice moreover, of the bitter Resentments the French had of an
Edict so injurious to their King. When the Queen Mother entreated him to go
strait to the Court, which was then at Monceaux, and not pass through Paris: he
took no notice of her Request, but made his Entry in the Capital City of
France, by the Gate of St. Dennis, in the midst of the Peoples Acclamations,
the Provost of the Merchants going before him: All Ceremonies, says Mezeray,
which ought to be paid to the King alone. The Dukes death, and the incessant
opposition of the Protestants, hindered him from going farther. But his Son, who
succeeded him in his Ambition and in all his Designs, made it appear upon the
first occasion, how far the Treacherous Intentions of this Family went. He
shuts up his King in the Louvre, on purpose to lay him aside. You have the
Story of it in Mezeray's Chronological Abridgement, under the year 1588. He put
himself in the head of that powerful Faction, which, as the Bishop of Rhodes
assures us, Hist. de Hen. le Grand. sur l'an. 1576. Id sur l'an. 1584.
designed to take away the Succession of the Royal Family. The same Bishops
tells us, That this new Duke of Guise, had thoughts of making himself King, and
that he endeavored it several ways.

6. The Prince of Conde, who was so well assured that the Duke of Guise, Father
to this Man, had so foul a design, did questionless look upon him with another
eye then Maimbourg does, who would make us believe, Hist. du Call. page 317.
that he was in a very high degree Master of all the excellent Qualities which
can contribute to make a great Prince, without any fault that might Eclipse
the splendour of so glorious Perfections: and that he was a truly Christian
Hero. Id. page 318.
At this rate, a profound Dissimulation and horrid bloody Treason are to be
reckoned as nothing. The Prince of Conde profers to justify his Innocence
against his Accusers by Combat, Mez. Hist. de Franc. Tom. 2. page 771.
assuring himself to make them confess, that it was they themselves who had
conspired the overthrow of the Government and Blood Royal. This Defiance was
chiefly intended to the Duke of Guise. But this Duke would not take it to
himself: Mez. Abreg. Chro.
but deeply dissembling the matter, he commends the Prince his generosity, and
said, He was likewise ready to justify his Innocence, though privately he took
care to have him apprehended. In good earnest, Monsieur Maimbourg's Morals must
be strangely depraved, since he is no longer a Jesuit, not to find any fault in
a Prince guilty of so prosligate a Dissimulation and notorious Treachery. And
does he think, if Lewis the Fourteenth ever comes to open his eyes, he will
think himself obliged to those that would make such a Man pass for a truly
Christian H^ro, who has done his utmost to disappoint him of the Crown, by
taking it from his Ancestors, and endeavoring to cut off the Illustrious Race
of the Bourbon's? If an ^nglishman should Canonize Cromwell, and place him
among the Hero's, Can you imagine he should be well received at Court, or that
the King should repose any great confidence in his Loyalty? Monsieur Maimbourg
must know, that the Prince of Conde, being what he was, could not look upon
this pretended Hero otherwise than as a Monster. He was obliged, by the duty of
his Relation, his Honor, Loyalty, and all that was becoming a Great Mind, with
all his might to set himself against those wicked Designs, which he saw the
Duke of Guise and the Cardinal of Lorrain had so plainly laid. Would you have
had him stood with his hands in his pockets, when he discovered so great
danger, and suffer Strangers to ruin the State, and take the Crown away from
his Family with a high hand?

7. These Usurpers had laid their business so well, and were become so absolute
Masters of the Person, the Mind, the Authority, and the whole Power of the
young King, that it was impossible to carry any Address to the King, unless by
their means: and to do any thing against them to bring them to Justice, but, as
one may say, in the Kings presence, who was continually in their hands; and by
consequence, to redress a mischief that so absolutely required a remedy,
without resolving upon some great and extraordinary attempt. Either therefore
the Prince of Conde must have done what he did, or else have suffered the
Throne to be usurped, and the Royal Family sacrificed, contrary to that duty he
owed to France, to his King, to Himself, and to his whole Race. If Monsieur
Maimbourg will have it, that the Prince of Conde should have let the Guises go
on, his King ought to look upon him as his mortal Enemy: If he believes he did
his duty, let him retract, and be ashamed of those unadvised words, That he
would have taken the Kings Lodgings by force, as Affairs then stood, to seize
in his presence upon his chief Ministers, was to attack the King himself, and
to seek to make himself master of his Person and Government. In the condition
matters were then, it was the only humane means left to rescue the young King
from slavery, to give a stop to the Outrages of a Forain domineering Power, or
rather Tyranny, and to preserve the Crown to its right Heirs. If God was not
pleased, in his All-wise providence, to give so good success to the attempt as
was hoped: it failed not nevertheless of doing some good. It gave a check to
the wicked designs of the Guises, and made them sensible, that whilst they had
to do with men of that Courage, they should not purchase the Kingdom at so
cheap a rate as they thought for. Besides, I must not conceal it from you, that
the Protestants were not the only Men that Lifted themselves under the Prince
of Conde for this important Service to their Country, and to the Royal Family:
several Roman Catholics shared with them in the glory of this Attempt. The
famous Mezeray has published it to all the World. So that Monsieur Maimbourg is
(...) out, Mez. Hist. de Fran. Tom. 2. page 757, and p. 763.
when he would make it a quarrel upon Religion. And much (...) unjustly is he
mistaken, when he offers to say, that at the business of Amboise, The Huguenots
entered into a horrible Conspiracy against their King. I am satisfied, says I to
our Friend, and I am confident every honest man, that knows as much as you have
told me of this matter, will look upon this Jesuits Imputation with amazement
and detestation. Pray give me an account now of the business of Meaux.

The French Protestants, rep^yed he, are no less innocent of Conspiracy against
their King in the business of Meaux, than they were in that of Amboise. The
testimony of the eminent Cardinal d'Ossat, is an invincible Defense to them in
this Affair, and puts them beyond the reach of Calumny. But I suppose you would
be thoroughly informed of this matter. I will do it in as few words as possibly
I can: And I will take the account partly from Monsieur Maimbourg himselff;
partly from two other Popish Historians, who have much a greater esteem in the
World than he, it is the famous President de Thou, and Mezeray. We will take it
from the beginning.

You have not forgot what I told you at our former Meeting, when I gave you an
account of the first War the Prince of Conde was forced to make for rescuing
the King, Hist. du Calv. page 261.
at the earnest entreaty of the Queen Mother, then Regent. I shall not need to
take off a thousand odious Reflections, which Monsieur Maimbourg lays upon the
French Protestants in relation to this War. They are either the faults of some
private persons, who having acted contrary to the principles of the Reformed
Religion, were disowned by all sincere Protestants; or false Suggestions, which
the solemn Edict of Charles the Ninth, in the Year 1563. has sufficiently
confuted: the King there owning, as done for his Service, all that the Prince
of Conde and his Friends had done in this first taking up of Arms. This noted
Edict Ordains, That the Protestant Religion should be publicly exercised in
several parts of the Kingdom, Popelin. Hist. de Fran. Vol. 1. l. 9. an. 1563.
which the Edict names; it puts all the French Protestants under the protection
of their King, in what part of France soever they should make their abode; it
Wills, That every one of them, when they come home, should be maintained and
secured in their Goods, Thuan. l. 34.
Honors, Estates, Charges, Offices, etc. The Prince and the Protestants
observed the Articles of the Treaty of Peace most exactly. Mez. Hist. de Fran.
Tom. 2. page 903. Hist. de Calv. page 341.
Monsieur Maimbourg tells us himself, That all the places which the Huguenots
held, submitted to the King. Nay, we English have occasion to complain of their
too great exactness in this point: For they were the hottest in taking Havre de
Grace from us, which we had possessed our selves of, only to give them succor
against their Persecutors. All their great Soldiers came against us to the
Siege of this Town. The Prince of Conde lodged all the while in the Trenches.
Mez. Hist. de Fran. Tom. 2. page 904.
All the French, says Mezeray, went thither in great fury, especially the
Huguenots. But their Adversaries dealt not so with them: they broke the Edict
every where in a shamful and barbarous manner. In his Abridg. Chr. Iul. 1563.
This Illustrious Queen of Navar, that made France happy with Henry the Great,
was the first that experienced how little sacred that protection was held,
which had been so solemnly promised to the Protestants. Id. Hist. of France,
Tom. 2. page 924.
Some great Men, to curry-favor with Philip King of Spain, by some signal
service entered into a Conspiracy with him to seize the Queen Jane d' Albret and
her Children in the Town of Pau in Bearn, and carry them to the Inquisition in
Spain. An attempt, says Mezeray, which escaped punishment, for the Qualities
sake of those persons which were engaged in it. Afterward they put it into the
Kings head to take a Progress through France, and in this unhappy Progress it
was, that the ruin of the Protestants was agreed upon and sworn to, contrary
to so solemn an Edict. The Queen was perpetually importuned by the Pope, Maimb.
Hist. du Calv. p. 344.
by all the Catholic Princes, and especially by her two Sons-in-law, Philip
the Second King of Spain, and Charles the Third Duke of Lorrain, to persuade
the King to take up a generous resolution, to prohibit the Huguenots the
exercise of their Calvinism, etc. That is, to break his Royal word, and to
demonstrate by so pregnant a proof, that the Church of Rome does not think her
self obliged to keep Faith with Heretics: and consequently, that they whom she
holds Heretics, ought never to take her word, no not when she expresses her
self by the mouths of the greatest Princes of the World, and by the most
Authentic Records. Monsieur Maimbourg, without the least scruple or ceremony,
calls these Breaches of Public Faith, a generous resolution. And as ill luck
would have it, his Predecessors knew but too well how to persuade Catharine de
Medicis, and Charles the Ninth that so it was. The Queen and the King, Id. ib.
page 345.
says he, who were at least staggered by these Remonstrances, being under such
a disposition, it was no wonder, if the Huguenots were not very kindly used
during this Progress, though nothing was done directly against the
Pacification. They built another Citadel at Lions in opposition to the Huguenot
party, who were yet the strongest in that place, and they ordered the slighting
of those new Fortifications in the places they held during the War. They forbid
the exercise of their pretended Religion ten Leagues round such places as the
Court should pass, though it was allowed by the Edict in certain Towns within
that compass, which they interpreted to be when the King was not there, or
within ten Leagues. They made a new Edict at Rouseillon, the Count de Tournons
house, by which they were forbidden, upon pain of death, to hold any meeting
but in the presence of Officers appointed by His Majesty to attend there. And
the Magis^rates had order to force the apostate Friars and Priests, who were
turned Huguenots that they might marry, to quit their wives upon pain of the
Galleys for the men, and perpetual Imprisonment for the women. Whenever the
Catholics made any complaint against the Huguenots, or the Huguenots against
the Catholics; these had always more favor showed them than the other, who
were generally found in the fault right or wrong. The conference the Queen had,
as she passed by Avignon with the Vice-Legat, which gave him wonderful
satisfaction, pleased them not so well: so that they chose rather to be
directed by that she had at Bayonne with the Duke d' Alva. They did believe
that a League was made between the two Crowns, to drive the Calvinists out of
the Dominions of both the Kings, and the rather, because they knew that the
Queen was then contriving an interview between the Pope and the Catholic
Princes. According to Monsieur Maimbourg, it is no ways to act directly against
the Edict of Peace, to hinder the Exercise of the Protestant Religion in
several Towns where it was permitted by the Edict, to impose conditions upon
Protestant Congregations, enough to disturb that peace and repose the Edict had
promised them; to deprive many of them of that freedom of Conscience the same
Edict allowed them. Nor to offer all those other Injuries to the Huguenots,
which Monsieur Maimbourg himself tells us they did, though the Edict had given
assurance of quite the contrary. Mezeray deals more sincerely: He ingenuously
confesses, That they daily retrenched that Liberty, which had been allowed them
by the Edict, in so much that it was in a manner reduced to nothing, Mez. ubr.
Chron. Id. Hist. de Fr. Tom. 11. p. 926.
and that they undermined the Liberty of Conscience they had promised them, by
several Expositions they put upon the Edict. He gives many Instances but one
amongst the rest, which I am resolved to set down: It is this, The Count de
Candale had contrived a League with his Brother Christopher Bishop of Air, Id.
ib. p. 932.
Montluc, Gabriel de Chaumont, Laytun, Descars, Mervilles his younger Brother,
and Gaston Marquess of Trans, of the same house of Foix, who was the Author of
this Advice: The Contents of which being published, he afterward made open War
against the Huguenots. By this means he became guilty of High Treason, neither
could they excuse the action from being an attempt against the Kings Authority,
and the Faith of the Edicts. But his zeal was not displeasing to the
Catholics: besides, that regard was to be had to his Quality, and to so many
Great Men that were engaged in this Affair: Which is the reason why the King,
to stop the Huguenots mouths, owns by a Declaration all that this Count and his
Accomplices had done, as having had his Order for it. This is that which Monsieur
Maimbourg calls, To do nothing directly against the Edict of Peace. It is fit
you should know what the same Mezeray relates concerning the Conferences of the
Queen at Bayonne with the Duke d' Alva, Id Abrege Chron. sur l'an. 1565.
one of the greatest Enemies the True Religion ever had. She had discourse
every night with the Duke d'Alva: And the event has showed since, That all
these Conferences drove at a secret Alliance between the two Kings, utterly to
root out the Protestants. The Huguenots believed, the Duke d'Alva had advised
the Queen to invite them to some great Assembly, and so to rid herself of them
without mercy: that he had let fall these words, That a Ioal of Salmon was
better worth, then all the Frogs of a Marsh: that from the time of the Assembly
of Moulins, the Queen had executed this Design, had things happened as she
expected. St. Bartholomews day does not a little confirm this mistrust of the
Huguenots. But you shall hear what it was made the Prince of Conde take those
Resolutions Monsieur Maimbourg so exclaims against. Id. Abreg. Chron. sur l'an.
1565.
The intention of destroying the Huguenots, was, evident, because they daily
retrenched them of that liberty, which was given them by the Edicts, so that
they had in a manner brought it to nothing: The people fell upon them in those
places, where they were the weaker party; where they were able to maintain
their Ground, the Governor made use of the Kings Authority to oppress them;
they dismantled those Towns that had showed them any favor; they built
Citadels in the same places; no Justice was to be obtained for them, either in
Parliament or Council; they murdered them without restrai^t, neither were they
restored to their Estates or Offices. These complaints were brought two or
three times to the Prince of Conde, and to Coligny, who at two meetings, had
given this Answer both times, That thoy ought to endure all patiently, rather
than to take up arms. But when one of the chief Men at Court, had given them
certain notice that they were resolved to seize the Prince and the Admiral, to
confine the first to perpetual Imprisonment, and bring the other to the Block:
Dandelot's advice, who was bolder than the rest, put them upon a resolution,
not only of defending themselves, but likewise to attack their Enemies by open
force; and for this end, to drive the Cardinal of Lorrain from the King's
presence, and cut off the Suisses. They were six thousand Suisses they had
raised, under pretense of hindering the Duke d' Alva's passage, but indeed to
destroy the Protestants, as Monsieur Maimbourg himself sufficiently hints,
Maimb. Hist. du Calvin. p. 355.
and as I shall plainly show you from a remarkable passage of Monsieur de Thou:
Which passage shall likewise serve to confirm what Mezeray has told us, That
one of the chief men at Court gave certain notice to the Protestants, that they
were resolved to seize the Prince and the Admiral: And to convince Monsieur
Maimbourg of the greatest Impudence, and at the same time of the highest
Injustice done to a Prince, that was the Hero of his age, See but how this
Jesuit relates to us the occasion and motive of that he calls, The business of
Meaux: Page 362^
The Prince was always in hopes, that the Queen would have procured for him to
be Lieutenant General over the whole Kingdom: That she had promised to bring
him to the point he aimed at, when the Treaty of Orleans was made. Tho she was
no ways inclined to put so great a charge in his hands, but said it only to
fool him. She was resolved to set the Duke of Anjou upon him, who was the
dearest to her of all her children: And she instructed him so well, that when
the Prince of Conde came some days to the Queens Supper, Monsieur, who watched
for an opportunity to affront him, took him aside to a corner of the Reom,
where he treated him in a strange manner, so far as to tell him in a threatening
way, laying his hand upon his Sword, That if ever he thought of this place,
contrary to that respect he owed him, that he would make him repent it, and
make him as inconsiderable as he aspired to be great. After this, the Prince
touched to the quick, Page 364.
disputed no farther with himself what party to take, though he concealed his
resentment at that time, to make his Revenge the surer, of which from that
moment he laid the design. And this was the true cause of the second Troubles,
which he cloaked with the pretense of Religion; which had the least share, if
any at all, in that violent resolution which he took, and in that unhappy and
abominable attempt at Meaux. Indeed he had already had two Meetings with the
Colignies and chief of his Friends, one at Chastillon, and the other at Valery,
where nothing was as yet agreed upon. But presently after Monsieur had used him
thus, and that he found himself thus tricked by the Queen, and all his credit
at the Court lost, he went, and had a third at Chastillon: And there it was,
that without discovering any thing more, than what had been said in the two
former about the Ligue, which they said was made to oppress and ruin their
Religion; they resolved to take Arms, not only to defend themselves, but
likewise to assault, and to cut in pieces the Suisses which the King had caused
to be raised, and to make themselves Masters of the whole Kingdom, by seizing
upon the Sacred Person of the King, the Princes his Brothers, and the Queen.
Really this is intolerable. I could never have thought so private a Person, as
Monsieur Maimbourg, could have dared to blast by so impudently false a story,
the memory of so great a Prince, in the face of his Highness the Prince of
Conde now living, who no doubt shares in so foul a Disgrace cast upon one of
the most renowned of his Ancestors.

1. Mezeray gives Monsieur Maimbourg quite another reason of the second
Troubles: and to find out those that were the cause of them, there was no need
that he should go to make of one of the sincerest Princes the World ever had, a
Hypocrite and a wicked Person that made a stale of Religion, using it for a
cover to his pernicious Designs, and to a mad unbridled Ambition and Revenge.
Philip the Second, King of Spain, says Mezeray, Mez. Hist. de Fran. Tom. ^I.
page 946.
contrived a second Civil War in France: the severe effects of which, had
almost put it to its last gasp. See, from a Papist Writer, what was the true
incentive of discord in these second Troubles. Surely then Monsieur Maimbourg
has some secret malice against the house of Bourbon, to impute, as he does, the
crime of a Blood-thirsty King, to the generous Prince of Conde.

2. But with what face dare he say, that they resolved, at the third meeting of
the Protestants to take arms, though at that time they discovered no more than
what they had done at the two former, where, by the way, no such thing was
concluded? With what face dare he say this, who is told by Mezeray, That in
this last meeting, they determined to resist force by force, Abrig. Chron. sur
l'an. 1569.
forasmuch as one of the chief men at Court gave certain notice that they had
resolved to seize the Prince and the Admiral? In short, the learned President
de Thou, whom he quotes some times in his History, could have informed him of
all that was needful to hinder him for ever doing so cruel an injustice to so
excellent a Prince. For he tells us in the beginning of his 42 Book, That the
Protestants met one and another time with the Prince of Conde, the Admiral, and
d' Andelot, at Valery first, and afterward at Chastillon upon Loin; That after
having well discussed the matter Pro and Con, they at last unanimously agree to
try all means before they came to the last Remedy, that is, to take Arms: But
that after this, Provocations growing higher, especially by reason of the
Suisses, which the King would not dismiss, though he was entreated to do it,
and that the Duke d' Alva was now entered into the Low Countries. There came
Letters from one of the great Lords at Court, who was a Friend to the
Protestants, by which the Prince was advised, that it was determined in a
private Council that they intended to seize upon him and the Admiral, to cramp
the one in Prison, and cut off the others head: that at the same time they
would put two thousand Swisses into Paris, two thousand into Orleans, and as
many into Poictiers: that then they would repeal the Edict, and set out others
for the extirpation of the Protestants. For that reason it was, according to
Monsieur de Thou, that they came to a resolution: and not as Monsieur Maimbourg
reproaches them, without proof or ground, that they might seize the Sacred
Person of the King, Mez. Hist. de Fr. Tom. 2. p. 714, and 841.
his Brothers, and the Queen, (The Guises, Monsieur Maimbourg's Hero's, are
only capable of such Exploits:) but to present their most humble Petitions to
the young King in such a posture, as might secure them from the rage of their
irreconcilable Enemies; and to drive the Cardinal of Lorrain from the Court,
who had sworn the ruin of the Princes of the Blood, and sought the extirpation
of the Huguenots, for no other end, than because they opposed with all their
might this detestable Design, as Mezeray very well observes. I fancy, Id. ib.
page 754, 755.
it will not be amiss to read the passage to you. The Duke of Guise and the
Cardinal of Lorrain looked upon the Protestants as a hindrance to the
establishment of their Grandeur. They easily foresaw, if the The King was
Francis the Second.
King should happen to die of that sickness, which they apprehended very
dangerous they should have no farther pretense to keep the Authority longer in
their hands, which then they held in his name, the Who was afterward Charl^s
the Ninth.
Duke of Orleans that was to succeed him, being a Minor, and that therefore the
Princes of the Blood had all the reason in the World to take it from them. They
knew likewise very well the weakness of these Princes, and thought they had
strength enough to order them like the others, could they but hinder the
gathering together of the Factions of the Huguenots.
Religionaries, who came to join them from all parts; for which cause they made
haste to disperse them, before they should be able to form themselves into a
Body, which would certainly prove very sturdy and formidable, and might serve
as a retreat for all the rest. Some thought, and indeed their private dealings,
and those they confided in, made it appear, that they had attempted to draw
them on their side; nay they had a mind to declare themselves head of this
Party, if the Princes of the Blood should have got the better at the beginning;
but that the Religionaries did always refuse to come in to them. It was, they
say, one of the chief reasons why they set themselves upon their ruin.

Id. ib. p. 958.
This Cardinal thirsting after the Blood of the Huguenots, because they would
not betray the Interest of the Blood Royal, and who was wonderfully desirous of
troubles, as necessary for the setting a Value upon his Power, and placing his
Nephews in their Fathers Credit, became an unmovable obstacle to the Kingdoms
Peace. Besides the Prince knew that he was to fall into the hands of this
merciless Prelate, Hist. de l' Etat de Fran. etc. ^ons le Reg. de Francois H.
P. 688. to p. 699.
who had caused him to be condemned to have his head cut off under Francis the
Second, and that the whole Royal Family was in danger, especially the House of
Bou-bon, if he made not haste to prevent it, in seizing upon his person, that
he might Mez. Hist. de Fran. Tom. 11. p* 956.
rid the Court of him. Therefore he takes Horse, with about Id ib. p. ^57. l.
p. 958.
four hundred of his Friends, to make his way to fall at the Kings Feet, where
he might offer his complaints of the severe Persecutions the Protestants lay
under all over the Kingdom, and to remove from his Majesty's presence this
public Pest, who had engrossed him to himself, and imposing upon his tender
years, possessed him with Resolutions so pernicious to the Princes of his
Blood, and to his best Subjects. The Queen, upon the news of this, Id. ib. p.
957. Ib.
withdraws the King to Meaux, a town of Brie. By her Order the Marshal of
Montmorancy goes to while off the Prince, till six thousand Suisses should be
got into Meaux. The Constable argued exceeding well for staying at Meaux,
forasmuch as there was not the least danger to the Kings Person. Id. ib. p. 958.
At first, says Mezeray, the Queen liked well of this advice, but within an
hour after, her mind was altered, either through the inconstancy of her Sex, or
the Cardinal of Lorrain's dissuasions. They say that this Prelate, being very
desirous of troubles, as requisite to put a value upon his power, and to
establish his Nephews in their Fathers Credit, suggested as if Montmorency held
Intelligence with the Prince, P. 959.
That she and her Children would be delivered into their hands; representing to
her likewise, That if this should not so fall out, yet she was to consider,
That by staying at Meaux, she would be confined and helpless under the
imperious Austerity of the Constable, who set himself to keep their Majesty's
in so inconsiderable a Town for no other end than to have them at his own
disposal At the same time, to increase her suspicions, his Emissaries spread a
Rumor about the Court, That the Constable and Chancellor had sent a secret
dispatch to the Prince, and were to deliver him up one of the Gates of the
Town. The Queen, startled at the Cardinal's Suggestions, and it may be at those
false reports, called the Council a second time, in the Apartment of the Duke
of Nemours, who was strongly tied up by Interest with the House of Guise: There
it is resolved by the advice of this Duke, that it was fit to carry the King to
Paris, and to be gone presently aft^^ Midnight. It was to no purpose, that the
Chancellor laid before the Queen the Inconveniences that would happen upon
this course, and cried out, That they exposed the Sacred Person of the King to
the utmost peril; that they betrayed the public Interest for private ones;
that they cut off all means and hopes of accommodation; and that the Ambition
of some, was engaging the Kingdom to the necessity of entering into an
Implacable War. The Cardinal's evil Counsel carried it. The King went away in
the midst of seven or eight hundred Horse, flanked with the Six thousand
Suisses. Ibid. Page 960.
At peep of day they discovered the Princes Troops, who were not in all above
Four hundred Horse. The Kings Troops seeing them in their way, and that they
cut off their passage, made a Halt to receive Orders. In the mean time the
Prince, knowing that the King was there, advanced leisurely with his Horse, and
asked to speak to his Majesty: But the young King would not vouchsafe to hear
him, but kept himself all the while covered under the Guard of his Suisses. The
Prince, enraged, that they would not suffer him to lay his just Complaints
before the King, changed both his Countenance and his Purpose, says Mezeray,
and put himself in a Posture to vent his Fury upon the Suisses, who stood here
in his way, and whom he knew his enemies had appointed to destroy him and all
the Protestants: But what could Four or Five hundred men do against above seven
thousand? All ended in some slight Skirmishes of words rather then blows, as
appears from Monsieur de Thou's History, who, no doubt, had better ground for
what he said, Thuan Hist. l. 42.
then either Mezeray or Monsieur Maimbourg, who makes here a great deal of
noise about a very inconsiderable business. Whatever it was, the Constable
thought fit to have the King conveyed speedily to Paris through By-ways with a
strong party, which brought him thither the same day without any hazard; and
all the rest of the Army got thither the next day. This is the truth of the
business of Meaux, Hist. du Calv. page 363.
which Monsieur Maimbourg calls a terrible Conspiracy of the Prince of Conde
against the Sacred Person of his Sovereign Lord the King. He has the impudence
to call those Wicked Arms, which were taken up for no other end, but to
preserve to France the Noble Blood of the Bourbons, which at this day does it
so much honor, and which a Conspiracy of cruel and unreasonable Adversaries,
were at the very point of spilling to the last drop, that they might afterward
usurp to themselves the right of the Heirs of the House. Is it, that Monsieur
Maimbourg would have had all this Noble House extinct, and that the Guises, who
pretend to come from Charlemain, should have possessed the Throne at this day?
In good truth, his King is much beholding to him. Thus then it is, that he
begins to observe what he promises in his Advertisement, To serve Ep. Dedicat.
his gracious Protector with more warmth, zeal and freedom, than ever.

You must give me leave, says I, smiling, to give a check here to the carier of
your Victory: Hist du Calv. page 368. The nature of that Heresy which the
Prince professed, i^ to harden the heart and to infuse into it all the rage,
which the spirit of rebellion is capable of.
Monsieur Maimbourg is very unjust to attribute to the genius of the Reformed
Religion of France, the outrages of Subjects Rebellion against their Prince.
You have, beyond dispute, showed the contrary in our former Conference, from
their Confession of Faith, the Prayers in their Liturgy, and from what their
most Famous Doctors have taught publicly: Therefore when our Jesuit (for his
change of Habit does not hinder, but that we have still too much cause to call
him by this name) charges the Protestant Religion, to which unjustly he imputes
Heresy, with Inspiring Rebellions and Outrages: he gives us a cast of his
office, to put the sham upon us, well knowing what the J^suits Religion is
really guilty of in this point; and to augment the displeasure of his King
against the poor Huguenots, the most faithful of his Subjects. But setting
aside this Jesuitical pliableness and malice, tell me a little, Do you think
this action of the Prince of Conde very regular, to show himself before the
King, in Arms, as if he would wrest from him by force that Justice which was
denied him? I will allow, that his enemies had sworn his ruin, and that of all
the Protestants of France, I cannot question it, after all those proofs which
you have brought; I will allow besides, that the Six thousand Suisses which
environed the King, had never been raised nor kept up, but to be the
Executioners of this unjust and bloody Design: should a Subject endeavor to cut
them off, even before his Sovereigns eyes, who secured them by his Royal
Authority? Was not this to invade that Sovereign Authority, which ought never
to be touched by any Subject? In a word, this attempt of the Prince, is it not
point blanck contrary to the Maxims of the Protestant Religion of France, as
you have represented it to me, That we ought never to repel force by force,
when it is our Sovereign that does the wrong? I am very glad, says our Friend,
that you have made this Objection: it will give me occasion to say something
that will help to clear all that they reproach the Huguenots with till the
Reign of Lewis the Thirteenth.

Hist. de Calv. page 462, 463.
1. All that pretend to be Protestants, are not so. Monsieur Maimbourg himself
is of the same opinion. And it is a shameful Injustice to make the Religion
answerable for the miscarriages of those, that are a disgrace to it, and that
make it appear, by leading a life quite contrary to its maxims and
instructions, that they are not its followers but its enemies. This is the
Injustice Monseiur Maimbourg does to the Protestant Religion in every Page of
his Libel. For example, he imputes to it the beastly and barbarous behavior of
the Baron des Adrets, P^g. 273, 274, 275.
though he himself acknowle^ges, he was a man of no Religion, far from being
what he elsewhere calls a good Huguenot, a man truly devoted to the Principles
of the Protestant Religion, who breathes nothing but piety toward God, and
love and bounty toward his Neighbor. He likewise imputes to it the Exploit of
certain seditious Fellows, Page 370.
that coined Silver Money with the Princes stamp, and this Inscription in
Latin, Ludov. XIII Rex Franc. I cannot tell, whether what he says of this Coin,
be true: I have not the Book by me which he quotes. De Thou and Mezeray, who
are otherwise so exact and curious, speak not a word of it. And considering the
hatred that has always been against the Huguenots, they would in all
probability, have kept some of this Coin very carefully, to have stopped their
mouths, as often as they should reproach the Papists with the several attempts
they had made against Kings. However it be, if the Story be true, they that
caused such money to be coined, are wicked Wretches, and have most insolently
transgressed the 39th and 40th Articles of the Confession of Faith made by the
Reformed Church of France: So that the true French Protestants, are so far from
owning them for their Brethren, that they detest them as utter Enemies to their
holy Religion. In general, all they that have failed in the respect which is
due to Potentates, having thereby acted contrary to the Principles of the
Reformed Religion, cannot be reckoned among the true Protestants. It is
therefore an idle thing to reproach us with the Extravagancies and Enterprises
of such men. We have nothing to do with them. And if the Prince of Conde, was
no otherwise a Protestant, than as Monsieur Maimbourg would maliciously
insinuate, if under a false pretense of Religion, to deceive a simple people
that put great confidence in him, he concealed a Criminal Revenge and Ambition:
the honest Huguenots disown him; and it would be an unconscionable thing to
make them guilty of what this Prince had committed, when at the same time he
must have declared himself an enemy to their Religion, by having violated,
after such a manner, their Confession of Faith in so essential a Point. But God
forbid we should have so ill an Opinion of this Hero, as Monsieur Maimbourg
would persuade us to! Mez^ray himself assures us, that the Prince was sincere,
an enemy to cheats and treacheries, Hist. de France, Tom. 2. P. 768. and 1016.
and abhorred to do an ill thing. He was then, doubtless, what he desired that
men should take him for, a true Protestant, which is to say, a good Christian.

2. But the best Christians have their faults: Wherefore there is no man that
does not sometimes yield to the temptations offered him. And when w^ know the
temptations to be strong, as no doubt they are, which Aristotle calls Just
Griefs, we are apt rather to pity than blame men, for the faults they have
committed. I am well assured, Monsieur Maimbourg will not deny, but that the
Prince's integrity has been put to the severest trial. For he confesses, that
the Queen broke her word with him in a matter of the Highest Consequence: and
that the Duke d' Anjou had passed a cruel Affront upon him, which touched him
to the quick. Besides, the Prince knew upon very good grounds, that his enemies
were about to seize his Person a second time: It is true, they talked only of
shutting him up in Prison during life: But he could not forget, that they were
not men to be satisfied with so little, when once they had got him in their
hands. For when he was first in Prison, they condemned him to lose his Head by
the hand of the common Executioner: And then, it was manifest, they designed
the death of the Admiral, his great Friend, and of a Million of innocent
Persons more. Suppose it therefore to be true, that at the sight of death, and
of so many Injuries and so great a spilling of Blood, the Prince's head was a
little turned, and that being intent upon saving his own Life and Honor, and
the Lives and Honor of so many brave Men as were engaged with him, etc. he
forgot that he could not, without a want of respect to his King, attack his
Ministers, how wicked or injust soever they might be; supposing this to be
true, ought he to be used after that insolent manner, as Monsieur Maimbourg
treats him? Is he the only Hero, the only true Christian, that has discovered
his Infirmity under so heavy a Temptation? And when is it, that a Fault is most
excusable, if it be not, when a Man is hurryed away by such violent storms?

3. But I cannot endure, that so glorious an attempt should be blemished with
the least Imputation. The Prince by his Birth, and the great Concern that
engaged him in, was under a particular Obligation to watch for the preservation
of the Crown and the Blood Royal: all the World must grant it. It is most
certain, that the Princes of the House of Lorrain aimed at the Crown, under a
pretense that it belonged to them as the lawful Successors of Charlemain, and
that they only waited a fit opportunity to possess themselves of it. Experience
shows plainly that he was not deceived, when Henry the Third, to escape the
ambitious Attempts of the Duke of Guise, Nephew to the Cardinal of Lorrain, was
forced to run from his Palace and his capital City, where the Duke had made
every body against him, and where they showed the Suissers with which they
intended to make him a Monks crown, Mez. Hist. dr Franc. Tom. 111. page 508.
when they had taken away that of a King. The Prince knows moreover, that the
Cardinal of Lorrain, to compass his wicked Design, was resolved to rid himself
of all the Princes of the Blood, whatever it cost him. They had thoughts of
stealing away the Queen of Navar, and her Son, the first Prince of the Blood,
to destroy them in a most cruel and shameful manner, by putting them into the
Spanish Inquisition. They had raised Six thousand Suisses to seize his Person,
put the Admiral to death, and to root out all the Protestants, that is, the
main Supporters of the Rights of Hugh Capet's true Line, against the false
pretenses of the Mock-posterity of Charlemain. The Prince, who sees and knows
all this, is he not obliged to set himself with all his might against this
Bloody Conspiracy of Strangers, who are about to shed the Noblest Blood of
France, to supplant the Heirs of the Family, and usurp their Place? There is no
question of it. But things were come to such a pass, that the Prince could no
longer set himself effectually against the wicked purposes of the House of
Guise, by the common methods of Remonstrances and Petitions to his Majesty, and
by the course of Justice either in Council or Parliament: For the Cardinal of
Lorrain and his party, swayed all in the Parliament and Council: They had all
the power at Court: There was no coming to the King, but by them: They were so
got into this young Prince, who was, at the most, but sixteen years of age,
that he would hear nothing but what these people told him, and blindly took
their advice in every thing. It was then absolutely necessary, either that the
Prince, against his duty of Prince of the Blood and a faithful Subject, should
suffer all the Royal Blood to be spilt, with that of all true French men, and
that the Crown should be usurped by Strangers: or else that he should do
something extraordinary, and put Himself in a posture to overcome all the
difficulties, which hindered him from undeceiving the King, making him to
understand who were his real enemies, and bringing them to condign punishment:
which could never be done, without the assistance at least of several of his
Friends, and cutting off the six thousand Swisses, who were to seize his Person
and ruin all the honest party; unless, in short, he would become a prey to the
Cardinal, when he should present himself before the King to request Justice. I
must confess, the Protestant, that is, the Christian Religion, never allows a
Subject to take up Arms against his Sovereign, upon any pretense whatever. But
a Prince of the Blood does not take up Arms against his Sovereign, when he
takes them up to no other end, but to hinder Strangers from laying hands upon
the Crown, and changing the Succession. It is true indeed, that these
Strangers, taking the advantage of Charles the Ninth his tender years, were
predominant in his Court, and that it is an odd sort of a way for a Subject to
come armed before his King, and to seize upon his chief Ministers before his
face, and as it were tea^ them out of his arms. But Prudence directs us, of two
Evils always to avoid the greatest. And I do not think any one will dispute it
in earnest but that to suffer a Kingdom to be taken from its lawful Heirs, and
all the Royal Family to be oppressed by Tyrants, who have engrossed their King
for no other end, but to destroy him, is an evil infinitely greater, than to
come short, for some little time, of the Laws of good manners, till the King
and Kingdom were safe. There are none, but such as would be glad to have the
way left open, either to invade the Throne or Royal Authority, whereby to work
the overthrow of the State; I say, there are none, but the ambitious and common
Pests, that have the impudence to persuade the King, that to fail in these
rules of Good manners, when it is upon the utmost necessity, and in prospect to
save the Crown, is to give a mischievous example, and encourage Rebellion.
Extraordinary actions upon absolute necessity, as this attempt of the Prince,
never ought to be drawn into example for ordinary proceedings, which should
always be directed by the Laws and Customs of the Country. Had the business
succeeded, it had been easy for the Prince and his Friends to have excused to
the King this indecent Violence, and justified by the event of the sincerity of
their Intentions, in the same manner as by the event it proved, that when
Charles the Seventh, whilst he was Dauphin took up Arms, it was neither
against the King his Father, nor against the Kingdom: which was the Example
that was brought to resolve the scruples of some of the Prince's Friends, who
were afraid of the odious Reflections which might be made upon the attempt at
Meaux, how necessary or innocent soever it might be in it self. And Monsieur de
Thou, who gives us an account of this particular, tells us likewise, that the
design the Prince and his Friends had in arming themselves, was to drive from
the Helm the Enemies of the public Peace, to undeceive the young King, and to
settle all things quiet in his Kingdom. But I ought to read you the whole
Passage, since it is in my hand. Thuan. Hist. l. 42. ad ann. 1567. page 467.
Objiciebatur, Cardinalem semper Regi ejusdem, etc. It was objected, that the
Cardinal always beset the King, and that the Swisses were continually about
him, whom if they should attack in these Circumstances, they would not seem to
assault the Cardinal and the Swisses, but the King himself. This must, no
doubt, draw the utmost envy of all men upon them; but the King, whose favor
they should seek, would never forgive them. To this d' Andelot, who was almost
always for the warmest Counsel, answered, That the intention of the Protestants
would be judged by the event: as formerly Charles the Seventh, when he was yet
but Dauphin, made it appear to all the World by the conclusion of the War, that
he fought neither against his Father nor his King. Nor indeed could any one
imagine, that a Body made up of French, should conspire their Kings ruin. For
though we have an account of the Conspiracies of some single persons, an
universal revolt was never yet heard of: But if fortune should favor their
first attempts, there would be an end of a fatal War, which being crushed at
the beginning, the enemies of our common repose might be removed from the
Government and the King, of whom, being better informed of things, a
confirmation of the Edicts might be obtained, and a firm peace settled in the
Kingdom.

Here is enough to convince all the World of the Insolence and Malice of
Monsieur Maimbourg, in treating the renowned Grandfather of the present Prince
of Conde so rudely, in an attempt, which as it had nothing in it contrary
either to the Principles of Christian Religion or good Politics, was,
doubtless, every way glorious, and deserves the highest commendations. The
Prince appeared in this a true Hero: He comes to the succor of his King and
Country, and all the honest part of the Kingdom, and with five or six hundred
men he attempts to cut off the six thousand Swisses, who were to be the Tools
and Bulwork of a Forain Tyranny: He had not failed of success, had not the
contrivances of the Queen, who then favored the enemies of the State,
disappointed him of the Conquest. But God was not yet pleased to give repose to
France. The King retreats from Meaux to Paris, against the advice of the wisest
of his Council. And the Prince, to hinder the utter ruin of a Party, that was
the only check to the wicked designs of the House of Lorrain, found himself
obliged to raise a small Army to give Battle at St. Dennis, to besiege and to
take several Towns: But the deep respect he had for his King, made him and all
his party lay down their Arms, at a time when he was just ready to take the
Town of Chartres, and to have reduced all the enemies of the State. Hist. de
Franc. de Mez. Tom. 2. p. 985.
So soon as ever they proposed any safety for his Person, and for the security
of his faithful Protestants, who were the only true Supports of the Crown
against the ambition of the Guises; he immediately quitted all his Advantages,
and accepted of the Peace which was offered him. This was the substance of the
Articles, says Mezeray, Id. ib. page 986, 987.
That they should fully and peaceably enjoy the Edict of January, without any
Qualification or Restriction whatever. That they should be put and maintained
under the Kings protection, as to their Estates, Honor and Privileges. That
the King would esteem the Prince for his good Kinsman, and his loyal Subject
and Servant, and all those that followed him for good and loyal Subjects.

You see now what this business of Meaux was, with the Consequences of it, that
Monsieur Maimbourg has made such ado about so as to make it pass with the
affair of Amboise, for horrible Conspiracies which the Huguenots have contrived
against the Kings of France. To hinder the Princes of the House of Guise from
usurping the Crown of the French Kings, and taking it from Lewis the
Fourteenth, in the person of his Predecessors, and destroying the whole Race of
the Bourbons, must pass according to this man, for contriving horrible
Conspiracies against the Kings of France. Thus It is that he courts his Hero,
and complements the present Prince of Conde.

But what does he mean, said I to our Friend, when he says moreover, Not to
speak of their cruel Rebellions, that have cost France so much blood, and the
mischievous intelligences they have held with the enemy to rid themselves of
the Monarchy, and with open face set up a Commonwealth, as they have done more
than once?

Our Friend answered me, That since he distinguishes this from the pretended
Conspiracies of Amboise and Meaux, he must by the Rebellions and Plots he
Imputes to these Protestants, needs mean the other Troubles that happened after
these two first, to the Reign of Henry the Great, and those that were revived
in the beginning of the Reign of Lewis the 13th. Hist. du Calv. p. 399, etc.
Indeed he accuses them upon this account, that contrary to the Treaty they had
made, the Protestants refused to surrender to the King Sancerre, Montauban,
Milhaud, Cahors, Albi and Castres, but especially Rochel, the Rebellion of
which Town, says he, openly maintained by the Heads of the Huguenot party, who
were resolved to make it their chief place of strength was the true ground of
the breach, Id. ib. page 402.
because it would not admit the Garrison, which the King would have put in
there, but received several of the chief Leaders of the Huguenots, went on with
the Fortifications, Page 403.
and gave the Court reason to believe, that the Prince and the Admiral were
preparing for a War. Upon which it was resolved, to surprise them, and carry
them away. The Marshal de Tavannes, Page 404.
a great Friend to the House of Guise, and Confident of Queen Catharine,
undertook to do the thing, whilst the Prince was at his house called Noyers,
Page 405.
in Bourgoyne. But the matter being discovered just as it was to be executed,
Page 406. Page 407.
the Prince made his escape to Rochel with his Fami^y and the Admiral: His
Friends, upon this news, came in to his aid from all parts; whilst the King
repealed all the Edicts made in favor of the Protestants, and drew all his
Forces together. This is, in short, the account Monsieur Maimbourg gives, who,
according to his custom, fails not to charge the Huguenots with all the
Villainies that were committed in this third War, Mez. Hist. de Fran, Tom. 2.
page 985.
by profligate fellows on both sides.

But the Towns he complains of, knew very well at that time, what Mezeray has
since published to all Europe, That the Council, which is to say, the Cardinal
of Lorrain, and his Creatures, had no other end in making this Peace, but to
remove the imminent danger the Parisians would have been in upon the taking of
Chartres, and to disperse the great Force the Huguenots had got together, that
they might oppress them, when scattered. The same Historian tells us, Id. ib.
page 986.
That some of the Court sent them word, that if they took not good caution they
would be cheated; and the Admiral made it appear to them what the inconvencies
would be. Being a person of an excellent judgment, he plainly discovered that
treaty to be nothing else, but a trick to amuse, and so surprise them. This
ought, at least, to have persuaded these poor people to have gone warily to
work in surrendering their Garrisons, till they had seen how the Guise party,
that governed all, would observe the Articles of this Peace, Ahr. Chr. sur
l'an. 1568.
which, as Mezeray expresses it, exposed them to the mercy of their enemies,
without other security than the word of an Italian Woman. It was not long,
before the Huguenots found by experience, that the intelligence they had
received from Court was but too true, and that the Admirals opinion was ^ut too
well grounded. Immediately the Parliament of Toulouse Beheaded Rapin, a worthy
Gentleman, whom the King had sent thither to solicit the Ratification of the
Edict of Peace. Monsieur de Thou gives an account of it. Thuan: Hist. l. XLII.
sub. sin.
Whatever complaint the Prince could make of so outrageous a breach of the
Peace, the Court, where the Guises were predominant, made him not the least
satisfaction. I leave you to judge then, whether the Protestants had reason to
believe they had dealt fairly with them, when they saw they had murdered a Man,
without being questioned for it, who was sent by his Sovereign to solicit the
verification of the Edict of Peace. They found themselves constrained
therefore, for the safety of their own lives, and the lives of the Princes of
the Blood, to shut up the Gates of their strong Places against those Emissaries
that came from their deadly Enemies, who at the bottom had no other design in
destroying the Huguenots party, than thereby to make the way more easy for the
destruction of the Princes of Hugh Capet's Line, and open themselves a passage
to the Throne, or Tyranny rather. Doubtless, they ought to have stood more
carefully upon their Guard, forasmuch as they could not but know what Mezeray,
after Monsieur de Thou, assures us was acted so publicly; to wit, that the
Popish Preachers stirred up the people incessantly by their vehement
Declamations, saying, That if there was a necessity to make the Peace, Mezeray
Hist. de France, Tom. 2. page 995. Thuan. Hist. lib. 44. ad an. 1568.
it was a sin to keep it; that there could be no alliance betwixt Christ and
Belial that there is no Obligation to hold Faith with Heretics, but that all
Christians ought to fall upon them as Monsters and common Pests; that it was an
acceptable Sacrifice to God, to wash their hands in the Blood of these unclean
Beasts. And for this, they quoted in their own sense, a Decree of the Council
of Constance, imp^^^ing, That no Faith was to be kept with them; adding
Examples out of holy Scripture, of those that were slain by the Levites upon
Moses his order, of those that had worshipped the golden Calf* and of Iehu,
that slew all the Priests of B^al, when he had got them together upon promise
of safe conduct. Monsieur de Thou observes, that those Preachers were J^suits.
So that all the Protestant Princes and their loyal Subjects, may well think,
from the account these two Popist Historians give, what hazard they run, when
either they receive or su^^^r in their Dominions* these bloody Spirits, enemies
to public Faith* and by consequence to Mankind. But I must needs give you all
that Mezeray says upon this Subject, in his Chronological Abridgement, which
will wholly suppress the impudence of the Jesuit Maimbourg, Ad ann* 1568.
in charging the Protestants with the breach of this Peace: These are his
words* They ^ailed not to cheat the Hu^uenots both of their Peace and liberty
of Conscience. They were then in greater danger than during the War. In th^^e
(...) time, there were more than Two thousand killed in several parts, either
The same Mezeray in his Hist. Tom. 2. page 995, and 996, observes, That it was
shrewdly guessed, that the Murder of some Persons of Quality, as that of
Sipierre, who were set upon during the time of these rumors, was not done
without the privacy of the Highest Powers; and that d'Arsy, or the Marquess
d'Ars, who killed Sipierre, said publicly. That he did nothing but what he had
good warrant for.
by their particular Enemies, as Rene Lord of Sipiere, son to Claud of Savoy
Count of Tend, and thirty persons of his Train, which Gaspar de Villeneuve
Marquess d'Ars, murdered in Fraius, or else by popular Insurrections, as at
Amiens near a hundred, at Auxerre a hundred and fifty, several at Blois,
Bourges, Issoudun, Troyes, and twenty other places. The Prince was at Noyers in
Burgundy. There they caught a Soldier measuring the Graft and the Wall in order
to scale the place. When the project failed, the Queen sent some Troops into
Burgundy, to take him by force, whom they could not catch by craft. He sent
Teligny, and afterward Iaquelin de Rohan his Wives Mother, to Court, to
beseech the Queen Mother to observe the Peace and the Edicts But it was not a
thing longer to be hoped for, when he found, that whoever was of that Opinion,
he was called Libertine and Politician, and that the Chancellor of the
Hospital, who advised to Peace, was dismissed from Court, and sent to his House
of Vignan, as suspected for a Huguenot. The Prince's Mother-in-law was scarce
gone from Court, when he understood that the Troops had private Orders to block
up Noyers, and that if he continued there three or four days longer, he would
not be able to get away. Coligny perceiving plainly the Trains that were laid
for them, was come to Tanlay Castle, whence going to the Prince, they both wen
ftrom Noyers with a Party only of a hundred and fifty Horse, under whose Guard
were, a sad sight, their Wives and Children, most of them in their Nurses arms,
or not out of their Hanging-sleeves. The Prince having escaped all danger by
his Expedition, got to Rochel the 18th of September: Soon after the Queen of
Navar came thither likewise, with the Prince her Son; and afte^ ^er, all the
Huguenot Officers* with the greatest part of their Forces.

Now let all the World judge, whether it was the Protestants of France that
were Authors of this third War, or not rather the Guises, who thirsted after
the Blood of this Innocent People, to clear the way to that of the Royal
Family. I will prove hereafter, that Rochel in particular was not so much in
the wrong, for pleading her Privileges, to avoid the admitting those Men, who
came for no other end but to destroy her. Monsieur Maimbourg is scandalized at
it, Hist. du Calv. Page 402.
under pretense that the Cardinal of Lorrain, who did all at Court, had
invested them with Regal Authority, who came to take away their Religion,
Liberty and Lives. But a scandal very absurdly taken. There is no man but sees
it plainly: and what I shall tell you hereafter, will make it more plain. I
will not enter into the Particulars of this unhappy War, where the Prince of
Conde was killed in cold Blood, Ib. page 422.
after the Battle of Iarnac, and which concluded wit^ a Peace yet more
unfortunate. They allowed, in this Peace, several very great Advantages to the
Protestants: but it was only to have an opportunity to cut their Throats in the
most Treacherous and Inhumane manner that was ever heard of. To say the truth,
Id. ib. l. 6. page 453.
says Monsieur Maimbourg, as the Queen made this Treaty, it is very likely,
that such a Peace as this was never really meant on her side, who concealed her
Intentions, and did not grant so many things to the Huguenots, otherwise than
to make them lay down their Arms, that she might fall upon such as she had a
mind to be revenged of, the Admiral especially, upon the first favorable
occasion that should offer it self: which she thought she had met with at last,
when she had prevailed with the King to take that horrid Resolution, which was
executed upon that Bloody and Accursed Day of St. Bartholomew. Under pretense
of Marrying the Prince of Navar to the Lady Margaret, Sister to Charles the
Ninth, all the Protestants, that were of any Quality, were drawn to Paris. The
Queen of Navar was taken away in five days by a hot Fever, occasioned, as many
believed, by the art of the Perfumer Messer Rene, a Florentine, suspected for a
skillful man at poisoning, Id. ib. l. 6. page 4^^. Id. ib. page 468. Upon the
year, 1572.
as Monsieur Maimbourg himself acknowledges. At last to make the Feast more
solemn, they had the Admiral murdered by an old retainer to the House of Guise,
called Louviers Monrevel, who shot him with a Carabine: and they concluded it
with this cruel Butchery, which Monsieur de Perefixe, Archbishop of Paris, sums
up in these words, in his History of Henry the Great. All the Huguenots that
came to the Feast, had their throats cut; amongst others, the Admiral, Twenty
other Lords of note, Twelve hundred Gentlemen, Three or four thousand Soldiers
and Citizens, and then through all the Towns of the Kingdom, Histor. de France*
Tom. 2. P. 1110.
after the pattern at Paris, near a Hundred thousand men A detestable action,
such as never was before, nor never will be, by the help of God, the like. But
all the Popish World was of the Archbishop of Paris his mind, witness what
Mezeray says, The holy Father, and all his Court, expressed a mighty joy at it,
and went in a solemn Procession to the Church of St. Lewis, to give God thanks
for so happy a riddance: where the Cardinal of Lorrain, who found not himself
in such a transport of joy, had placed over the door a Latin Inscription after
the ancient manner, giving the reason of this Ceremony. They were not less
rejoiced in Spain, than at Rome, where they preached up this Action before King
Philip, under the Title of The Triumph of the Church militant. It is true, that
Monsieur Maimbourg, Papist as he is, could not bring himself to second this Joy
of his High Priest, and one of his Hero's the Cardinal of Lorrain. But on the
contrary, he has highly condemned so shameful a Fact; neither could he forbear
to Declame, in more than one place, Hist. di^ Calv. page 476. l. 6. Ib. 477.
against those barbarous people that did it. My Reader, says he, ought not to
expect from me an account of all that was done upon this unhappy day, which I
wish, with all my heart, had been buried in the sh^des of eternal Oblivion. So
soon as it rung the Warning Toxin, It is called in French, which i^ a certai^^^
flow s^^nd they give the Bell, when it is to warn of Fire, or any thing
extraordinary.
Bell at the Palace, there were more than Fifty thousand men Armed running up
and down the Streets, like so many Furies let loose, breaking open doors,
crowding into the Houses that were marked out, or that they themselves had
observed, making the Air sound with the hideous Cries that were heard from the
groans of Men and Women that were assassinated, and the Oaths and Blasphemies
of those that murdered them, Dispatch, kill, stab, knock them down, fling them
out of the windows, made Paris all that day, which was upon a Sunday, and a
Feast, a bloody Theater of Cruelty, or rather an abominable Butchery, by the
slaughter of above Six thousand persons, whose Blood ran down the kennels, Page
478.
and their Bodies, all gored with Wounds, dragged into the River. This was what
we might reasonably expect from the brutish and blind rage of a Rabble, when
they are let loose to do what they please with impunity. But that which we find
in this altogether mis-becoming the French generosity, which ought to be the
proper character of the Nobility of the Kingdom, especially those of the
Highest Rank, was, that the Marshal de Tavannes, the chief contriver of this
Massacre, and the Duke de Montpensier, too warm a Catholic, went up and down
the Streets encouraging the People, who were already but too much transported
of themselves, and setting them on upon every body sparing none. The King
himself, who saw out of his Chamber-window the mangled Bodies floating upon the
Water, was so far from being troubled at the sight, that he shot with a long
Gun, though to no p^rpose, cross the River, at those, who they had told him,
were got into the Faubourg St. Germain to save themselves from the Massacre,
and cried out as loud as he could stretch his voice, that they should pursue
and kill them. Page 479.
However, he was afterward extremely trouble at it; and to excuse himself from
the imputation of so cruel an Act, he caused Letters to be writ the same day,
to all the Governors of the Provinces, that all which was done at Paris upon
St. Bartholomew's day, was the effect of an old Quarrel that was b^tween the
Duke of Guise and the Admiral, which drew on such deadly Consequences, it being
impossible to hinder them during that rage the Parisians were then stirred up
to, by running into Arms for the Guises against the Huguenots. However, this
excuse passed but for a little while. They made the King sensible, that besides
it would not be credited, it would expose his Majesty to the contempt of his
Subjects, when they should see by this, that he had not authority enough over
the Guises to be obeyed by them, nor power and resolution to punish so great a
fault. Wherefore wholly changing his mind, he appointed the Tuesday following
to appear himself in Parliament, where he declared, the same which he likewise
caused to be writ to all the Governors, that this Massacre was committed by his
Order, though to his great grief, for prevention of a Hellish Conspiracy, which
the Admiral with the Huguenots had entered into against his Person, and against
all the Princes of the Blood, thereby to possess himself of the Sovereign Power
and of the Regality, when they should at one blow have destroyed all the Royal
Line. The premier President, Christopher du Thou, though in his heart he
abhorred so foul an action, as that of St. Bartholomew's day, Page 480.
and openly disclaimed against it all his life, does yet undertake, out of a
flattery little becoming so great a Magistrate, to commend it, as the effect of
a singular prudence, and in his Speech to extol the King, who to preserve the
Government, by suppressing those that would have overthrown it, understood so
well how to practice that excellent Rule of Lewis the Eleventh, who was used to
say, He that knows not how to dissemble, knows nothing of the art of Governing.
And the better to prove this Plot, which gained but little faith then, and that
no body believes now, they proceeded against old Briquemaud, Marshal du Camp to
the Princes Army, against Caragnes Chancellor to the party, and against the
dead Admiral. They were all three hanged, the last in Effigy, by something made
up like him, with a tooth-pick in his mouth, as he was almost always used to
have, and the two others in person, before the King and the Queen, who would
needs see the Execution out of the Townhouse window. They thought by this
likewise, to persuade the They were the new King of Navarre, and the new Prince
of Conde.
Princes, whom they had a mind to draw over from that Party, by making them
believe, That they had engaged with those, who were their greatest enemies, and
the most profligate of all men.

What do you think, says our Friend, after he had read all this long story out
of Monsieur Maimbourg; what do you think of the enemies of the French
Protestants, and their dealings? I assured him, I was extremely surprised: and
that out of respect to the quality of those that acted, I durst not tell him
all I thought. But I heartily thank Monsieur Maimbourg, for letting the World
know, that this pretended hellish Conspiracy, charged upon the Huguenots, to
take away their good Name, after they had taken away their Lives, was but a
shameful Story, raised by a devilish malice to excuse a hellish action: and for
so freely censuring the meaness of the Premier President, Christopher du Thou,
who was so base to commend that in public, which he abhorred in private, and
to countenance such a Story, against the Dictates of his own Conscience. All
the World may by this easily discern the Spirit of Popery: It is a Spirit of
Murder and Lying. It causes the shedding Rivers of Blood, and it invents Lies
to color its Murders, and to commit fresh ones, Joh 8.44.
by which Briguemaud and Cavagnes were hanged. This is to say much in a few
words, says our Friend. And if Monsieur Maimbourg had been constantly so
ingenuous, as he is upon this occasion, his Book would be no Libel, but a true
and righteous defense of the Protestants Innocence. All those dreadful things
which he there alleges against them, are the stamp of the same Spirit, which
vouches a Conspiracy, to justify the Massacre. Neither was it harder for him
to be assured of that, than to satisfy himself, that this last report was a
mere Story. This Story was, as he says himself, the first means his Church
thought fit to use for the conversion of the young King of Navarre, who was
afterward Henry the Great, and the young Prince of Conde to the Roman
Religion. They likewise believed, says he, that this, meaning the false rumor
of a hellish Conspiracy against all the Royal Line, would help toward the
Conversion of the Princes, by making them believe, they were engaged with those
that were their greatest enemies and the worst of Men. An excellent way of
converting truly! And becoming the Christian Religion.

I will now read to you, what account Monsieur Maimbourg gives of Charles the
Ninth's proceedings in the accomplishment of this excellent Work, Id. ib. p.
481.
after as Christian a manner, as it had been begun. Whilst they were Massacring
the Huguenots in the Louvre, and all over Paris, the King sent for those
Princes into his Closet, where, after he had in short given them the reason of
this bloody Proceeding, of which they themselves had seen some part, and which
was yet in execution, he tells them with a stern countenance, imperious and
threatening according to his custom, that being resolved no longer to suffer in
his Kingdom so wicked a Religion, which teaches its Followers to revolt, and
even to conspire against the Person of their Sovereign, he expected they should
presently renounce this cursed Sect, and that they should embrace the Faith
which was always professed by the most Christian Kings, from whom they had the
honor to be descended: and that if they refused to comply with him in this, he
would use them just as they had seen them used, whose Rebellion and Impiety
they had hitherto been directed by. To this the King of Navarre answered, with
all respect, that he was no ways obstinate, but was ready to submit to
instruction, and sincerely to embrace the Catholic Religion when he should be
convinced of the truth of it, which as yet he was ignorant of. P. 482.
The Prince of Conde answered, That his Majesty, whose Subject he was, might
dispose of his Life and Fortune as he pleased; but not of his Religion, for
which he was accountable to God alone, of whom he held it. This answer given to
a fierce and hasty Master, put him into so great a rage, that falling into hard
words, calling him ever and anon, Seditious Madman, Rebel, and Son of a Rebel:
he swore by God, that if he did not comply, in that little time which he should
give him, he would have his life. Nay more, not being able to endure to see,
that in spite of all their endeavors to convert him, this Prince should still
continue unmovable: he drew his Sword, and vowed he would destroy all the rest
of the Huguenots, that persisted in their Heresy, beginning presently with the
Prince of Conde. And it was with much ado, that the young Queen prevailed with
him to lay by his Sword, casting herself at his feet to entreat him, with hands
lifted up, and tears in her eyes, but to forbear a little while. He yielded,
but at the same time, making the Prince be brought before him, he cast two or
three thundering looks at him, without saying any more than these three words to
him in a threatening and frightful tone, Mass, Death, or the Bastile: and so
turning away, he dismissed him. This wrought so strongly upon the Mind of the
poor Prince, and so terrified him, P. 483.
that he solemnly abjured Calvinism in the presence of his Uncle the Cardinal
of Bourbon, as had done before him, the King of Navarre, the Lady Catharine his
Sister, and the Princess of Conde. You see what were the motives, that
converted the Princes. And this detestable Massacre was the introduction of the
fourth War upon the Protestants, as Mezeray says. Abr. Chr. sur l'an. 1573.


As to the Fact, our Jesuit, Jesuit as he is, notwithstanding condemns it.
Neither has he the Heart to charge the Huguenots with these new troubles. Id.
ib.
The King raised several Armies to extirpate those that had escaped the
Massacre. They laid the two so much talked of Sieges of Rochel and Sanvane;
which were raised at the arrival of the Polish Ambassadors, come to seek for
the Duke of Anjou, elected King of that Kingdom, whither he went. Charles the
Ninth falls very ill. The Prince of Conde flies into Germany, Hist. de Hen. le
Grand par l' Eveq. de Rhodes sur l'an. 1574.
and returns again to the Protestant Communion. The King dies after a thousand
remorses of Conscience upon the account of St. Bartholomew's Massacre. For we
are told, That oftentimes he fancied that he saw a Sea of Blood flowing before
his Eyes, and that they should hear him from time to time cry out, Ah! my poor
Subjects, what have ye done to me? They forced me to it. Then though too late,
he acknowledged, Mez. Hist. de Fran. T. 11. p. 1168.
that it was not the Protestants, as the Jesuit Maimbourg so maliciously
reports, but the Montmorency's and the Guises, who had been the real Authors of
all the Troubles. He had owned, says Mezeray, That the Houses of Montmorency
and Guise were the true causes of the Civil Wars. The King of Poland, who was
afterward called Henry the Third, returns into France, Id. ib. 1170.
and succeeds Charles the Ninth. The Protestants apply to him for Peace, and at
the same time, Mez. Abreg. Chr. s^r l an. 1575. Id. ib.
That Atheism and Blasphemy may be exemplarily punished, and that the
Ordinances against enormous and lewd Whoring, which drew down the Wrath of God
upon France, might be execu^^^ ^ut, says Mezeray, this untoward reproof, made
the Huguenots mere ha^ed at Court than did all their Insurrections and
Heresies. They had no fruit (...) their demands: they would not be hearkened to.
Id. ib.
The War was kept up every where. The Duke of Alanzon, presumptive Heir to the
Crown, Id. ib.
retired from Court, and headed the Protestants. "The King of Navarre likewise
withdrew four Months after. Their conjunction with the Prince of Conde, Id. ib.
sur l'an. 1576.
who had raised a considerable Army, obliges the Court at last to agree to
Peace, which they had so long desired. The Edict was prepared and verified the
15th of May, 1576. Id. ib.
It allowed the Protestants the free exercise of their Religion, which from
that time forwards, was to be called La Religion pret^ndue Reformed.
The Pretendded Reformed Religion. It allowed them Churchyards, and made them
capable of all Offices both in the Colleges, Hospitals, etc. forbid farther
enquiry after Priests and Friars, that were married; declared their Children
Legitimate, and capable of Succ^ssion, etc. expressed a deep resentment of the
Slaughters upon St. Bartholomew's day: exempted the Children of those, that had
been killed, from the Arriereban.
Duty of the Militia, if they were Gentlemen, and from Taxes, if Yeomen:
repealed all the Acts which had condemned the Admiral, Briquemaud, Cavagnes,
Montgommery, Montbrun, and others of the Religion: owned the Prince and D'
Amville for his good Subjects, Casimir for his Allie and Neighbor, and owned
all they had done, as done for his Service: gave to those of the Religion, for
their better security of Justice, the A Court of Justice consisting of half
Protestants, and half Papists. Ib.
Chambres my parties, in each Parliament or Court of Justice, etc.

But all this was only for a new decoy to catch the Huguenots. Mezeray
observes, that so soon as they had got the Duke of Alanzon from them, they
began afresh to contrive their ruin. And then it was, that terrible League
broke out, which under pretense of extirpating the Protestants, set the whole
Kingdom in a flame. All the Historians agree, that it was the pernicious cause
of all the Wars, that were made against the Huguenots, during the Reign of
Henry the Third, and that had like to have laid France waste. Wherefore, to
justify the innocence of the Protestants, during all these troubles, we need
only observe the measures and designs of the League, which was the cause of
them. I will keep to what Monsieur Maimbourg says. He is thus far ingenuous,
This League, Hist. du Ca. v. p. 490. P. 491.
says he, had like to have overthrown both Church and State. The most of those
that went into it, or rather run headlong and blindfold with so much heat and
passion, and especially the common people, the Clergy and the Friars, were but
stales to those that composed the Cabal, where Ambition, Malice, and
Self-Interest had more share, than Religion, which in all probability was
brought in for no other end, but to ch^at the World. These were the King of
Spain, Queen Catharine, and the Duke of Guise: who cast up their Accounts
together, though upon very different reasons, yet such as agreed all against
the State: the Duke, to make himself head of a Party, which after the
expiration of the The Line before that of Bourbon.
Valois, might advance him to yet a higher pitch; the Queen, that she might
have a pretense to bring in her Grandchild Henry, Son to Charles Duke of
Lorrain, instead of the lawful Successor to the Crown; the King of Navarre, her
Son-in-Law, whom she cared not for; and the Spaniard, to take advantage of the
division the League would cause among the French, to make them ruin one
another, and afterward become their Master. This League divided the
Catholics, who took Arms one against anther, the one to s^cure Religion, as
they said, the other to defend the Royal Authority, and the Fundamental Law of
the Land, which they designed to overthrow. It obliged the King, for prevention
of the dangerous Conspiraci^s of the Leaguers, P. 492.
to come to a difficult extreme, and to join his Forces with those of the
Huguenot Party, to reduce the Catholic Rebels to their Duty. It stirred up
terrible Commotions all over the Kingdom. This cursed League was made in
opposition to the Royal Authority, under the fair pretense of Religion. It had
a fowl beginning, though contrary to the common apprehension of those, who know
not how to fifth into the bottom of it. Its procedure was abominable, being
neither more nor less, but almost a continued attempt against the Government of
a King, who was at least as good a Catholic as they that headed the League. In
conclusion, P. 494.
that the rise and design of the League extended to the Subversion of the Royal
Family.

I shall not need to give an exact account here of all the steps the Contrivers
of this violent Conspiracy took, Hist. de Hen. le Grand sur Pan. 1576.
since the holding of the Estates at Blois in the year 1576. Where, as the
Bishop of Rhodes says, The King, Henry the Third, was forced to declare himself
Head of the League, whereby from a Sovereign he became head of a Faction, and
Enemy to a part of his Subjects, down to the year 1589. when they caused this
unfortunate Prince to be stabbed by Jacques Clement the Friar. It is enough to
understand, that by the confession of Monsieur Maimbourg himself, the Duke of
Guise and his Accomplices, did not put Henry the Third upon persecuting the
Protestants with that heat and violence, for any other end, but by the ruin^ of
the Protestants to compass The Subversion of the Royal Family. This was the
bottom of all their Designs* All their aim was to take the Crown from its
lawful Heirs. The first thing the Guises and the Queen Mother proposed to
themselves, when the Duke of Alenzon was dead, says the Bishop of Rhodes, was
each to make sure of the Crown, as if the Succession had been at an end. Ib.
sur l'an. 1584.
This Prelate says further, that the Duke of Guise his design was to secure the
Crown to himself. So soon as ever the League was co^^ to a height and
strengthened, they that had contrived it, made it (...) that it was not only to
s^cure Religion for the future, but from (...) moment to get themselves up to
the Throne; and that their (...) was not only upon the King of Navarre, who was
to succ^^d, (...) upon Henry the Third, who then Reigned. They had hired
certain Id. sur l'an. 1588.
new Divin^s, who undertook to maintain, "That a Prince who does not his duty,
ought to be deposed; That nothing but a Power well disposed, is of God; else,
when it is out of order, it is not Authority, but Invasion; and that it is as
ridiculous, to say such a one is King, who knows not how to Govern, and is void
of Understanding, as to believe that a blind Man may be a Guide, or that a
senseless Statue may give motion to living Men In short, the same Bishop asse^ts
in express Terms, That the Duke of Guise, 'perpetually urged Henry the Third,
to give him Forces to accomplish the extirpation of the Huguenots, in whose
ruin he certainly expected to involve the King of Navarre.

It appears from all this, That the Protestants could not omit defending
themselves with all their might, in the Wars which the League stirred up
against them, without betraying their King, their Country, the Lawful Heir of
the Crown, who headed them, and the whole Line of the Bourbons. I do not think
there needs any more to take off all aspersions. Neither can I imagine what the
Jes^ite Maimbourg means, who understood all this so exactly well, to say of
these worthy Defenders of the Crown, Hist. du Calv. p. 490.
They became more obstinate and more insolent under Henry the Third. What!
would he have had, all the Protestants suffered their Throats to be cut, he
that maintains the design of those, who would have cut the Protestants Throats,
to have been the Subversion of the Fundamental Law of the Land, the
extinguishing of the Royal Family, and to have taken away the Crown from his
Kings Renowned Grandfather? In good earnest his King is much beholding to him,
to call that Obstinacy and Insolence, which was the heroic attempts of those,
who so often hazarded their Lives, to preserve that Throne for for him which he
enjoys with so great Glory.

You see easily then, says our Friend; that justly they can no more charge the
French Protestants with Rebellion, than they can do with any Plot against their
King, down to the Reign of Henry the Fourth, whom they delivered from the fury
of the League, and seated in the Throne in despite of all the obstructions of
this powerful Faction. Id. ib. p. 501, 502.
Therefore Monsieur Maimbourg is but an infamous Detractor, when he charges
them with Rebellions, which cost France so much Blood, and Plots, which he
accuses them to have laid with the Enemies, to withdraw themselves from under
the Monarchy, by openly setting up for a Commonwealth. The later part of this
accusation is so absurd, that it deserves not to be considered. Whom would this
Man persuade, that they who made no other War, but under the conduct of Princes
of the Blood, who were so nearly concerned for the support of the Monarchy,
should ^v^r end^avor to set up a Commonwealth? Besides, Is there any
likelihood, that so many Protestants of the Nobility, who hold all their Honor
of the Monarchy, and had no other Luster, but as they were Rays of the Royal
Sun, should have renounced their glory and dependence upon the Court, to lie
obnoxious to the caprice of a seditious multitude under the obscurity of a
Commonwealth?

They took up Arms about the beginning of Henry the Fourths Reign, or indeed
rather, they continued in Arms: but it was only to complete his Conquests, and
to settle him in the Throne, by dispersing the remainder of the League, which
held out as long as it could, from owning him King, even when he was turned
Roman Catholic, and reconciled to the Pope. So soon as all the troubles were
appeased, and every one reduced to his duty, he settled the famous Edict of
Nantes, under the Title of Perpetual and Irrevocable, as I showed you at our
first meeting: which gave the Protestants a full Peace, during the remaining
part of this Prince's Life. His Life had been as long as glorious, in all
appearance, but for the wicked knife of the vile Ravillac, who had the
confidence to spill this illustrious Blood, in time of Peace, which was so much
reguarded in the heat of War. The disorders broke out again, after France had
lost its wise Pilot, and invincible Protector. But because this Conference has
held us so long; Let us, if you please, defer what we have more to say in
justification of the French Protestants, till another time. Only give me leave,
before we part, to read to you a passage out of Mezeray. He confutes in very
few words, all Monsieur Maimbourg's Calumnies, by which he would maliciously
charge the Protestant Religion, with all the mischiefs in France, and all the
rest of Europe, during the Reigns of Francis the Second, and Charles the Ninth,
whereas this excellent Historian, who has more sincerity than the Jesuit,
though of the same Religion, lays them all to the abominable Wickedness, the
Papists of these two Courts were alone guilty of. These are his words Charlee
the Ninth lived 25 years wanting 31 days. But he began not to Reign, till after
the Siege of Rochelle. His Mother always kept the Government in her own hand,
with three or four of her Confidents, Mez Hist. de Fr. Tom. 11. p 1171.
who turned all upside down, to keep the Authority to themselves. Thence sprung
the continual Civil Wars, pursued with so many fatal Battles, Pillages, and all
sorts of Waste. Thence came the abuse of Military Discipline, the Corruption of
Manners, the overthrowing of Laws: In short, this barbarous day of St.
Bartholomew, and a thousand other mischiefs that perplexed his Reign, had all
their rise from hence. Three great Evils prevailed likewise in those days,
which did most provoke the Divine Majesty, to wit, Blasphemy, Sorcery, and all
sorts of Villainies; which having begun ever since the Reign of Henry the
Second, drew the vengeance of Heaven upon this unhappy Kingdom, and were the
cause that God visited it with so many Judgments one after another. After we
had read this passage, we appointed a day to meet again, and so parted. I take
my leave therefore, for this time, and remain, etc.

The End of the Fourth Letter.
The fifth Letter. French Protestants innocence, under Lewis the Thirteenth.
SIR,
I Was no sooner come to our Friends Chamber, and that we were sat down, but
we fell to our business. I am very well satisfied, says I to him, in all that
you have told me hitherto in behalf of the French Protestants; and I am
convinced, That till the Reign of their King Lewis XIII. they cannot justly
charge them with any Plot or Rebellion against their Kings. If at any time they
have taken up Arms, it was always to secure the Crown to their lawful Prin^es,
against the ambitious designs of the House of Guise, and under the Authority of
the first Princes of the Blood, who had a natural Right to oppose the
Usurpation these Strangers would have made; who, making an ill use of the
Simplicity, Minority, and Weakness of the Kings Francis the Second, Charles the
Ninth, and Henry the Third, had taken the Scepter out of their hands, or at
least would have deprived their Rightful Successors of it, had not the
Protestants given Succor with their utmost Force, the great Prince of Conde
first, and afterward the King of Navarre. Therefore to say the truth, they
armed only in their Kings Quarrel, and especially to secure to France the
Illustrious House of Bourbon, which sits on that Throne at present. After all,
it is clear, That hitherto they cannot question their Loyalty, or their
Innocence, but through the heart of Henry the Great, by blasting his Memory,
and disgracing his Crown and all his Posterity. But I must confess to you, That
I am to seek, how well to defend them against the Reproaches for their several
Insurrections under the Reign of Lewis the Thirteenth. For in the Year 1615
they joined with the Prince of Conde against their King, which had like to have
set the whole Nation in a Flame. In the Year 1620 they sided with the
Queen Mother, who raised Forces against the King her Son. In the Years 1621 and
1622 they gave the occasion, by the Meeting they held at Rochel, contrary to
the King's express Command, of a most bloody War, in which many of their
Garrisons were Besieged, Taken, and Sacked. In the Year 1525 they carried away
their King's Ships from Blavet, they seized upon the Island of Oleron, they had
diverse Battles. Lastly, in the Years 1627 and 1628 they gave fresh disturbances
under the Command of the Duke of Rohan, and Rochel Revolted from its Allegiance
to that degree of obstinacy, that nothing but the utmost extremity of Famine
could make them open their Gates.

These several Insurrections, which are continually objected against them,
gives occasion to their Enemies to cry them down at Court amongst the Nobility,
and indeed all over the Nation, as a restless sort of people, active, and
dangerous, whose Religion inspires them with a Spirit of Sedition and
Backsliding, pernicious to Monarchs and Monarchies. Therefore pray Instruct me
what I may answer in their Justification and Defense.

I know not, says our Friend, whether you are in jest or earnest, but for my
part I find nothing more easy than to satisfy any reasonable Person in this
point.

1. ^tis is a hundred and sixty Years since there have been Protestants in
France. Hist. du Calv. p. 10.11.12.
For by the Confession of Monsieur Maimbourg himself, the Reformation begun to
be settled ever since the Year 1522. And all the World agrees, That from this
Year to the Death of Henry the Second, who was killed with a Lance by
Montgomery, in the Year 1559, which was about 37 Years after, the Protestants
continued all along exactly Loyal an^ in the deepest Veneration for their
Kings. Monsieur Maimbourg indeed disputes the thirty Years under the Reigns of
Francis the Second, Charles the Ninth, and Henry the Third, but I have confuted
all his Calumnies in this particular, and you have allowed the strength of my
Arguments for clearing the Protestants during these three Reigns; so that here
are 67 Years of Allegiance and Loyalty. Neither have they any thing to say
against them upon this account for the one and twenty Years that Henry the
Fourth Reigned, or for the four first Years of Lewis the Thirteenth, no more
than for the 54 Years that passed between the Year 1629, at what time all the
Wars about Religion ceased, and this present time 1682, when they are
persecuted with the utmost Rigor. So that for a hundred and sixty Years that
the Protestants have been in France, there are but fourteen in which they have
any thing to object against them, that is, from their uniting with the Prince
of Conde in the Year 1615 to the general Peace concluded in the Month of July
1629. And of these fourteen Years, we must deduct seven, which are the Years
1616, 1617, 1618, 1619, 1623, 1624, and 1626. in which there were no Civil
Wars. Thus when all is cast up, and due Deduction made, allow the worst that
can be, there are but seven Years which they can reproach them with. And
suppose it true, that the Protestants, during these seven Years, should have
forgot themselves so far as to have come short of their duty toward their
Sovereign; is it just to infer from thence, That the Principles they go by
proceed from a Spirit of Sedition and Rebellion? Is there any proportion
between seven Years misbehaviour and uneasiness, and above a hundred and fi^ty
Years Duty and Loyalty, such Duty and Loyalty, as have undergone the greatest
proofs? And since they have testified twenty times more Zeal and Constancy for
the service of their Kings, than they have showed Disobedience and Opposition
to their Orders; does not Reason and Justice plainly oblige us to conclude from
thence, That they are animated by a spirit of Loyalty and Obedience? It must be
confessed, That their Loyalty, which stood firm for more than fourscore Years,
was shaken to some degree for the space of seven Years. But he that swounds
away is not dead: The Sun goes not out when it is ^clipsed; And the Loyalty of
the Protestants is so well recovered from its fainting Fit, that it is more
than half an Age that we find it resisting all manner of Provocations and ill
usage, without yielding in the least. This long and constant perseverance of
the Protestants in their duty, is that we ought to have regard to, if we would
be just in taking the true Character of their Spirit, and not the infirmity of
a hasty and shortlived transport. This ought to be enough to satisfy all
reasonable Men: and yet it is not all that can be said in behalf of these poor
persecuted people.

2. It is a great matter, Sir, that they can with no Justice impute those
Insurrections you spoke of, to the whole Body of the French Protestants. For,
First, There was an infinite number of them not in the least concerned.
Secondly, they that were the Ringleaders, See the following Quotation.
were only Protestants in Name, but really men only of this World, Ambitious or
Covetous, who only made use of Religion for a Mask to hide their wicked
purposes, and for a pretense to ^ish in troubled Waters. But if there happened
to be any sincere Protestants who were drawn in by these Hypocrites to take up
Arms with them, as it is not to be doubted, they did it not in pursuit of the
Principles of their Religion, which is point-blanck against such proceedings,
but out of too great a fear of Death, or something worse, through a usual
Infirmity of Nature, from which the best of Christians are not wholly exempt.
The first need no defense; the second deserve it not, and the third sort plead
their fear (the rather because just, as it were easy to prove) as well as
their repentance. As the first are they that held to the true Principles of
their Religion, it is but reasonble that we should make our judgment of the
French Protestants from their behavior. The second, as they did but act a
part, and were Impostors, there is no reason their Extravagancies and
Rebellions should be charged upon the true Protestants, who disown their
Fraternity: And because the third falled out of weakness, it is the duty of a
Christian Compassion, and the sense of our own Infirmities to forget and
forgive their Failures. I propose nothing in all this, Collection of Edicts and
Declarations, Printed at Paris by Allowance, by Anth. Stephens, in the year
1659 P. 104, 105, 107, 108, 109, and 110.
but upon the most authentic Authority that could be wished for upon such an
occasion; it is a Declaration of Lewis XIII. given at Bourdeaux the 10th of
November, 1615. upon the joining of the Protestants with the Prince of Conde.
Many, says this King, speaking of the Protestants of his Kingdom, have taken up
Arms against us, to assist the Commotion begun by our Cousin the Prince of
Conde; amongst which, there are that use Religion only for a better Pretense to
conceal their Ambition and extreme thirst of bettering themselves by the
disturbance and ruin of the State; and the rest have been Cheated, and Imposed
upon by false suggestions and vain fears that the former sort have put into
their heads, as if there were no avoiding Persecution, but presently to take up
Arms with them in their own defense, making them believe, the better to work
upon their easiness, That in the private Article, upon the Match with Spain, it
was agreed and covenanted to drive them out of the Kingdom, or wholly to
destroy them; which they being too forward to believe, have run into this
Engagement, out of a conceit that they are forced to it in their own defense,
which makes their Fault pardonable, and worthy rather of Pity than Punishment.
But these tricks have not prevailed or seduced the wiser and better sort, who
profess the same Religion purely out of Conscience, as expecting to be Saved by
it, and not to promote a Faction; who, to a considerable number, as well Lords,
Gentlemen, Towns, Corporations, as other private persons of all qualities,
condemn and abhor the wickedness and rashness of their attempt, and have
publicly declared by word of mouth, and writing, That it ought to be esteemed
as neither more nor less than a downright Rebellion, etc. We have declared and
ordained, and do declare and ordain, upon Consideration, and in favor to the
Loyalty which has been observed toward us by an infinite number of our good
Subjects of the said Religion, amongst which there are of the chiefest and best
Quality, who deserve a special Proof of our Good Will, That what has been
committed by those of the same Religion, who have taken up Arms against us, or
that have in any manner aided or assisted them, have likewise the favor of our
Edicts, and that they share in this Grace as if they had always continued in
their Duty, etc.

This same King would by no means have the least Reproach lie upon those
Protestants, whose Fault he had declared Pardonable, though they had joined
with the Prince of Conde. For when they came to consider 'all things for
appeasing these first troubles, he owns them for his faithful Subjects, and
maintains all they had done, as done for his Service. It is in Article XVII. of
the Edict of Blois, See the same Co^lection.
in the Year 1616. and by your leave I will read you the Article That there may
be no question of the good intention of our dearest Cou^in the Prince of Conde,
and of those that joined with him, we declare, That we hold and esteem our said
Cousin the Prince of Conde to be our good Kinsman and faithful Subject and
Servant; as likewise the other Princes, Duk^s, Peers, O^ficers of our Crown,
Lords, Gentlemen, Towns, Communalties, and others, as well Catholics as those
of the pretended Reformed Religion, of what quality or condition soever, that
have assisted, joined, and united themselves with him, either before, or during
the Cessation of Arms, understanding also thereby the Deputies of the pr^tended
Reformed Religion, lately assembled at Nismes, and now at our City of Rochel,
to be our good and Loyal Subjects and Servants: And having seen the Declaration
addressed to us by our said Cousin the Prince of Conde, We believe and look
upon what was done by him and the aforenamed, to have been done for a good end
and purpose, and for our Service.

In all the following troubles, the same distinction is to be made. The whole
Body of Protestants was never engaged in them; the greater and more sober part
always kept to their Obedience and Duty, in despite of all the Injuries that
were done them. They were contented to encounter God and their ^ing with Tears
and Prayers, or if they were seen in Arms, it was in the Armies, and under the
Standards of their King, whilst they that were not Protestants, but in show,
made all the stirs, which they unjustly impute to the true Protestants, of
which, if any were drawn in by the insinuation of several disaffected persons,
and through impatience of the unjust Severities they were treated with, against
the Engagement of the Edicts, to defend themselves by force of Arms, their
Religion, which is from Jesus Christ, never allowed it in opposition to their
Superiors. But after all, it was but a small number of the Protestants that
gave in to those rough Provocations they then lay under: In so doing, they
departed from the Principles of the Protestant Religion: Their own Brethren, an
in^inite number of them, have condemned them for it, true Christians are
pardoned daily for faults committed upon far more flight motives: The King
himself, that then Reigned, has determined, That the cause of their taking up
Arms, which was undoubtedly a very just grievance as well as a sudden terror,
made their Crime pardonable, and rather deserving Pity than Punishment.
However, to lay the fault of particular Men, upon the whole Body, or the
Protestant Religion it self, as their Enemies do every day, is as if we should
charge the whole Church and Romish Religion with the Faults of those Papists,
who to a very great number followed either the late Prince of Conde in the
troubles of the year 1615. or the Queen Mother, Mary de Medicis in those of the
year 1620. or the present Prince of Conde in the Civil Wars during the minority
of Lewis XIV. I am confident the Papists would cry out against it, as a great
and foul Injustice done to their Church. And yet why do they continually use
the Protestants thus unreasonably? I presume this may serve for a full
Justification, in reference to the Spirit of Rebellion imputed upon the account
of what passed in the beginning of the Reign of Lewis XIII. They cannot wrong
them more, than to make their Religion answerable for the weakness of some of
them, who were disapproved by the wisest among them, who have more reason to be
considered, than a few, who acted contrary to the Principles of the Protestant
Religion, as they are contained in their Confession of Faith, established by
their most eminent Divines, as I showed you at our third Conference. So that I
suppose, Sir, it will be needl^ss to run through all the several troubles,
which followed the first, down to the year, 1629. This may answer the whole.

Yet methinks, said I, you should not have done, before you have said something
particularly of Rochel. Its Rebellion and Siege have made too great a noise in
the World, and perchance that which happened about this Town, is what has
raised the greatest cry against the French Protestants, as Commonwealthsmen and
Traitors. Therefore I shall no more question their Loyalty, and you will enable
me to defend them sufficiently under the Reign of Lewis XIII as well as under
those that went before; if you can set me right in the excuse of Rochel. It
will be no hard matter for me, says our Friend, to satisfy you in this Point.
And we English are particularly oblig^d to make out the innocence of the
Protestants in this affair. If any be to blame, we are. For it was we that
engaged them in this last War. But, God be thanked, they can charge us with
nothing, To make it the clearer to you, we must take the Business a little
higher.

Rochel did belong to the Kings of England, being a part of their Dominion by
the Marriage of Eleanor, M^z. Hist. de Fr. T. 1. p. 456. Id. ib. p. ^54. and D^
Chesne Antiq. de la Fran. p. 584.585. Mez. ib. p. 842, 843. Id. ib. p. 885, 886.
Countess of Poitou, in the year 1152. with Henry II. when he was yet but Duke
of Normandy. But the King of France, Lewis VIII. assaulted and took it by force
in the year 2224. It fell again into the hands of our Kings, who were the
rightful Lords of it, in the year 1359. by the Peace of Bretegny, as part of
the Ransom for John King of France, who was taken Prisoner at the Battle of
Poitiers, by Edward Prince of Wales. But in the year 1372. the Rochellers were
so unhappy as to withdraw their Allgiance from their natural Lord our King
Edward III. And to complete their Revolt, they put themselves under the power
of the French King. This occurrence ought to be observed, though I shall say
nothing of it, but in Mezeray's own words. This Town, says he, having shaken
off the English Yoke, desired to come under the French, upon condition of
prese^ving that liberty it had acquired by its own means. And therefore, it
delivered it self up to the King, it made so good a Bargain for it self, (which
was agreed by Letters under the Broad Seal, and the Seals of his Peers) that
the Castle should be demolished, and that there never should be any within or
near the Town, etc. The same Historian touches upon this in another place. In
consideration, says he, that Rochel came voluntarily into France, the King,
Tom. 11. p. 978, 979.
Charles V. seeing that the Townsmen having of themselves quitted the Power
they were under, to the great hazard of their Lives, could either continue
free, or give themselves up to whom they pleased, granted them all the
Privileges they could d^^^re, as, That they might Coin Florins, Money of a mixed
Metal; (...) the Castle should be demolished, and that no other should be built
in their Town. And by other Letters he promises them, that their Walls and
Forts should stand; and that he would raise none upon them. He goes on with the
other great Immunities that were granted to Rochel by this King, and by his
Successors, not sticking to declare ingenuously, that Henry II. and Francis I.
by sometimes placing their Governors and Garrisons, had infringed their
Privileges. He adds, 'That the Rochellers looked upon this as a violation, and
always waited for a more favorable occasion to restore themselves to their
original Right.

By this you see that Rochel did not deliver it self up to France, but upon
Conditions, and so were to continue their Obedience no longer than the Articles
stipulated by the Rochellers, and accepted by the King of France, were
observed. It appears that one of these Articles says expressly. That they were
never to build Castle or Fort either in or about the Town. Notwithstanding
contrary to this Agreement, they raise a Fort before Rochel, in time of the
War, which was in the Years, 1621* 1622. And though they promised by the
Articles of Peace, which were afterward agreed upon, that this Fort should be
slighted, yet it always continued: which was the cause of those troubles, that
followed in the Years, 1625, 1626. the Rochellers being no longer obliged to
keep touch with the King of France, because he had broke the Treaty, by virtue
of which alone, they became his Subjects. The Affairs of Europe disposing the
late King, our Sovereign Lord Charles I. to interpose for a Pacification: The
Rochellers, and such other Protestants of France as had engaged in their
Quarrel, agreed to refer all their Concerns to him. And he obtained it for them
a second time, that this Fort, which was so great an eyesore to Rochel, should
be demolished; for which he was Guarantee by an Authentic Declaration, that
his Ambassadors gave in Writing. I will read it to you.

We Henry Rich, Baron of Kensington, ^arl of Holland, Captain of the Guards to
the King of Great Britain, Knight of the Order of the Garter, and Counselor of
State; and Dudley Carleton Knight, Counselor of State, and Vicechamberlain of
His Majesty's Household, Ambassadors Extraordinary from His said Majesty to the
Most Christian King, To all present and to come, Greeting. It so falling out
that Montmartin and Manial, Deputies-General of the Reformed Churches of
France, and other particular Deputies of the Dukes of Rohan and Soubise, with
those of several Towns and Provinces, who were engaged with them, have made
their Peace with the Most Christian King; By our advice and interposition it is
agreed and consented to (...) the said King their Sovereign. And the Deputies
have released many things, which they esteemed very important for their
security, and all conformable to their ^dicts and Declarations, which they had
express order to insist upon at the Treaty of Peace, and which they had
resolutely persisted in, saving the obedience they owe and desire to pay their
King and Sovereign, and saving the respect and deference they would show to the
so express Summons and Demands of the most Serene King of Great Britain our
Master, in whose Name we have exhorted and advised them to condescend to the
Conditions offered and given in upon the abovenamed Peace, in kindness, and for
the good of this Kingdom, and the satisfaction and aid of Christendom in
general. For these Reasons we declare and certify, that by the words they had
before agreed upon with us, for the finishing of the said Treaty, and which
were produced in the presence, and by the command of his most Christian
Majesty, by the Lord Chancellor, in order to the acceptance of the Peace,
importing, That by long Services, and a continued Obedience, they had reason to
expect the Kings favor, which they never could procure by any Treaty, even of
matters esteemed of greatest importance, for which in due time they might
receive humble addresses with all humility and respect: there was a clearer
explication on his Majesty's part, and his Ministers reported to us by the
Commissioners for the Peace; Persons of great Quality, appointed and put in,
with directions and power from his Majesty and his Ministers, the sense and
meaning of which is, That they mean the Fort Lo^is before Rochel, and thereby,
to give assurance of the demolishing of it in convenient time, and in the mean
while for the ^aking off those other matters, which rest by the aforesaid
Treaty of Peace, to the prejudice of the Liberty of the Town of Rochel; without
which assurance of demolishing and taking off the Garrisons, the aforesaid
Deputies have protested to us, that they had never consented to the
continuation of the said Fort, being directed and resolved to hold the Right of
its demolition, as they do by the present Declaration, in confidence that the
King of Great Britain will endeavor by his Mediations, together with their
most humble entreaties for shortning the time of the said demolition: for which
we have given them all the words and promises of a King, they could wish for,
after we had laid before them, that they ought and might rest satisfied
therein. In confirmation of which, and what else we have above said, we have
Signed and Sealed this Present with our Names and Coats of Arms, and made the
same he Countersigned by one of Our Secretaries.

Given at Paris the Eleventh of February 1626. Signed thus, HOLLAND, D.
CARLETON.
With the Seals under each of their Names. And below, By Command of my Lords,
AVGIER.



Our King pressed the performance of so Solemn a Promise, for demolishing the
Fort Louis, to little purpose: when they neither took notice of his
solicitations, nor the obligation to which his Ambassadors had tied him up, to
see this Treaty of Peace executed You may perceive it by the Duke of
Buckingham's Manifesto, who at last landed upon the Isle of Re, with an Army,
to discharge the Royal Word of our Sovereign. This is the Manifesto.

;What share the Kings of Great Britain have always taken in the Concerns of the
Reformed Churches of this Kingdom, Id. 16. p. 16.
and with how much zeal and care they have labored for their good, is
notorious to all Men, the experiences of which have been as frequent, as the
occasions. The present King, my most honored Lord and Master, comes nothing
short of his Predecessors in this Point: had not the good and laudable purposes
for their good, been perverted to their ruin, by those, that were most
concerned in their true accomplishment. What advantages has he let slip? What
course has he not taken, by his Alliance with France, to enable himself to
procure more e^fectually and powerfully the restitution of the Churches to
their ancient Liberty and Splendour? And what could be expected less, from so
strict an Alliance, and so many repeated promises from the Mouth of a great
Prince, but Effects truly Noble, and suitable to his high Quality? But so far
has his Majesty been, after so many Promises, and such strict ties of Amity,
from being able to obtain freedom and security for the Churches, and restore
France to Peace, by reconciling those, that breath nothing but entire obedience
to their King, under the liberty of the Edicts: that on the contrary, they have
made use of the Interest he had in those of the Religion to deceive them;
thereby not only to disingage him from them, but likewise to render him, if not
hated, at least suspected, in diverting the means he had appointed for their
good, to a quite contrary end. Witness the English Ships, intended not for the
extirpation of those of the Religion: but on the contrary, an absolute Promise
made not to employ them against that Party: which were nevertheless brought
before Rochel, and employed in the last Sea Fight against them. What then could
be hoped for from so powerful a Prince, as the King my Master, so grossly
disappointed, but a resentment equal in proportion to the injuries received?
But he forbore beyond all Patience. Whilst he had hopes by other means to
advantage the Churches: he sought not to do it by force of Arms, till he had
been made the Instrument and Mediator of the last Peace, upon very hard terms;
and such as never had been accepted of without His Majesty's Intercession, who
interposed his Credit and Mediation toward the Churches to accept of it, even
with threats, that he might save the honor of the Most Christian King, upon
assurance on his side, not only of making good, but likewise of bettering the
terms, for which he became Surety on behalf of the Churches. But what was the
event of all this, but an abuse of his Goodness? And which His Majesty looked
upon as the chief remedy of all their Miseries, has it not almost given the
last blow to the ruin of the Churches? It missed very narrowly, by keeping up
the Fort before Ro^^el, the slighting of which was promised, by the outrages of
the Soldiers and Garrisons, and of the said Fort and Islands, as well upon the
Inhabitants of the said Town, as upon Strangers, who instead of being wholly
withdrawn, were daily increased, and other Forts built, and by the stay of the
Commissioners in the said Town beyond the time agreed, to make Cabals there,
and by means of the divisions they stirred up among the Inhabitants, to set
open the Gates to the neighboring Troops, and by other contraventions and
breaches of the Peace it missed, I say, very narrowly, that the said Town, and
with it all the Churches had given up the Ghost. And for all this His Majesty
yet contained himself, and used no other Weapons against so many Affronts and
Breaches of Faith, but complaints and Intercessions: till he had certain
advice, confirmed by Letters that were intercepted, of the great preparations
the Most Christian King had made to set down before Rochel. And now what could
His Majesty have done less, than vindicate his Honor by immediately arming
Himself against those that had made him Party to their false dealing, and given
proof of His Integrity, and the zeal he has always had for reestab^ishing the
Churches, a Work which will be ever valued by him above all other things? And
this was the only end of arming himself, and not any private Interest; if any
one shall yet question, let him but consider the circumstance of the time, and
the po^ture of his Affairs. For who can believe, that the King my Ma^ter has
any design upon ^rance, or making any Conquests there, at so improper a time,
when he has already upon him an Enemy, one of the most Powerful Princes in the
World? And that, if he had any such thoughts, of so many Men as he has raised,
which are the same charge to him, as if he had them here, and which he is
always ready to send over, if the Churches want them, he should only send a
handful, in comparison of so many as would be needful for so great an
undertaking, besides the great Succors he sends at the same time into Germany?
Who would not conclude rather, as in truth it is, that the Forces here, are but
Auxiliaries, and that they are for no other purpose, but to assist the
Churches, which for so many reasons, and upon such important accounts he finds
himself obliged before God and Man to aid and protect? that if they will say,
the King my Master was provoked to arm himself upon other considerations, as
the imbargo and seizure of all the Shipping, Goods and Effects of his Subjects
at Bourdeaux, and other places of this Kingdom, to the open breach and
overthrow of the Treaties between the two Crowns, which are direct in this
point, and to the irreparable prejudice, even the entire ruin of Trade, in the
disappointment of which, the poor people of this Kingdom, not being able to put
off their Commodities, groan not only under the Burden of so many Taxes and
Impositions, but even of the Necessaries of Life it self; that the apprehension
the King my Master has of the growth of the Most Christian Kings Power by Sea,
has put him upon taking Arms, to hinder the progress; and in conclusion, that
he was forced to put himself in a Warlike posture, through despair of an
accommodation: The answer to all this must be, that whoever will take notice of
the Stops, Seizures, and Prizes that were on the one side and the other, shall
find that the King my Master and his Subjects have hitherto got most by this
Breach, and that it has been an advantage to them in some measure. In the
second place, he is so far from being jealous of the growth of this pretended
power at Se^, and seeking to obstruct it: that there needs no more, whenever
the King my Master shall see his time, but to give out Letters of Mart to his
Subjects, to disappoint all these vain and weak attempts, without making use of
his Royal Power. And lastly that we were necessitated to this arming of our
selves out of a despair of an accommodation: the contrary is most apparent to
any one, that will consider the applications that have been made at several
times, as well by their own, as by the Ministers of stranger Princes to the
King my Master, at their instance, to treat about an accommodation. All which
justifies the King my Master, who has not been forced to arm upon any private
account, but only in aid of the Churches, for whose safety and freedom he had
undertaken. And there are, that would possess the world, that his Majesty has a
private design, and that he makes use of a pretense of the Religion to form a
Party, by the help and addition of which, with his own forces, he thinks to
carry on his design to his own purpose. But our Religion teaches us otherwise,
and the goodness of the King my Master, in which he comes short of no man
living, will never suffer him to do it. His purpose is to settle the Churches,
his interest is their good, his end to give them satisfaction. This being done
the beating of Drums and displaying of Colors shall cease, and all this noise
of War shall be buried in Oblivion, as what was never done but upon their
account, nor set forward but for their sakes: Given on Board the Admiral this
Wednesday the one and twentieth of July 1927.

Signed, Buckingham.

This Declaration shows that our Kings are resolved to love and che^ish the
Protestants of France; and that our Great Monarch in holding his Arms open to
them at this day does but follow the steps of his Princely Father. He
demonstrates thereby to all his people, that he inherites his goodness, as well
as his Crown; and that, as this holy Martyr, he knows assuredly, that these
poor persecuted, would breath nothing but loyalty in the enjoyment of the
Edicts. The same Declaration shows undeniably the innocence and justice of our
arming upon the occasions, whereof we are treating, as not having been made but
upon the extremest necessity, when there was no other way left to hold France
to that promise, of which our King was the Garante, and to prevent the lo^s of
Rochel, which was undone only for committing its concerns to his Majesty.
Honor, sincerity, public faith, the Law of Nations, the urging Duty of
conscience, all obliged us to run in to the succor of a Town, that had cast it
self upon our Monarch, and that had full right to shake off the yoke of France,
since it had been no otherwise given up to the French, but upon a condition
that was broken, which was, that they should build no Fort upon its Territory,
whereby to give cause of suspicion. Nevertheless, as the Declaration ob^erves,
they had not only built one, against the Article of the Treaty, which made the
Treaty void, and put Rochel, into its full liberty, which it had acquired at
other times: but they had built several, which blocked up the Town on every
side, and destroyed its trade,

Our arming therefore upon this occasion, was just. It was justified by the
public faith, and the Law of necessity, and had no other end but to protect
the weak, who were oppressed contrary to the ^ngagement of the Treaty, which
was the supporting of a good cause. For Rochel, which they wasted after so many
manners, was then in right to defend it self, being no longer subject to the
Prince, who attaqued it. Conditio non impleta liberat fidem, say the Civilians,
A condition not fullfilled takes off all Engagement. Rochel had said to the
King of France, you shall be my King, if you build no Fort upon my Territory,
but not otherwise; and the King of France consented, or rather swore, to a
solemn Treaty, that he would not be Master of Rochel, but upon this condition.
So that from the moment, in which he had broken the condition agreed upon and
accepted of, he put Rochel into its orignal right. The Rochellers are no longer
his subjects; and therefore, if they shut the gates of their Town against him,
if they defend themselves as well as they can against his invasion, if they
call in their friends for succor; they do it in their own right, and it is to
do them open wrong, it is traducing them, to charge them with Rebellion upon
this account. Are men Rebels, when they defend themselves against the
invasions of a Prince, that is not their King? This is so evident, said I here
to our friend, that you need say no more. I must confess, the French
Protestants are set right in my opinion. They are not guilty of the Wars, which
infested France from the Reign of Francis the Second, to that of Henry the
Fourth. They lived in perfect good understanding with their Countrymen during
the Reign of this great Prince. The Wars under Lewis the Thirteenth cannot
justly be imputed to them: because the greater and sounder part of them, were
not engaged; because the real promoters of difference, were Protestan^s only in
name; because if any true Protestants did go in, it was upon motives and
mistakes, which in the opinion, even of their King, made their fault
pardonable; and because the standing out of Rochel, must by no means pass for a
Rebellion. So that indisputably, it is the effect of a dark and devilish malice
in Monsieur Maimbourg and his Brethren, to cry them down, at such a rate, as
incendiaries and seditious, by which they would render them suspected to the
Magistrates and people, where they go to be out of the reach of that cruel
persecution that was^s them. I cannot recover my self out of the astonishment,
that so wise a Prince, as theirs is, should desire to lose such subjects, by
driving them into despair. All Europe, says our friend, is of the same mind.
They say plainly, that the King of France cuts off the hand, which saved his
Crown, and of which he or his son may stand in need some time or other, to
defend themselves against the Ligues of the Roman Clergy. It is more then fifty
years, that they whom they persecute, have given the highest testimony of their
loyalty and zeal for the service of their Kings. But what is yet more
surprising, they make use of their loyalty for an occasion of persecuting them
more severely. For I know it from the first hand, in the Memorial, which was
Presented to their King by a certain Abbot some years since; to invite him to
root them out, and to open to him the way, they lay down plainly their loyalty,
which says this Memorial, they make an Article of faith and a point of
conscience, to satisfy him that there was no danger from them, whatever injury
or rigor they used toward them. I have seen this Memorial, of which there was
means found to get a copy: the Abbot, who was the bearer, having forgot the
Rule and charge, that he was under, to be secret. But I can assure you, the
French Court were not a little pleased with this motion, since it does only
follow the Memorial step by step, in all the tricks and outrages that have been
practiced upon the Protestants against the security of the Edicts. To be short,
that which will complete your amazement, is that this Great Lewis the
Fourteenth whom the whole World has in admiration, was disposed quite another
way, as appears not only by his Letter to the Elector of Brandenburg, which I
have already communicated to you, and is but a private transaction; but by a
solemn Declaration, which I must needs read to you before we part.

The King's Declaration, by which he confirms the Edicts of Pacification.
LEwis by the Grace of God King of France and Navar, Recuil des Edicts etc.
imprime avec Privilege a Paris par Antoine Etienne l'an. 165.^ p. 272. etc.
to all that shall see these present Letters, Greeting. The late King our most
honored Lord and Father, whom God rest, being convinced that one of the most
necessary things to preserve the Peace of the Kingdom, was to maintain his
subjects of the pretended Reformed Religion in the full and entire enjoyment of
the Edic^^ made in their favor, and to have the free exercise of their
Religion; took special care by all prudent means to hinder that they should not
be molested in the fruition of the Liberties, Prerogatives, and Privileges
granted to them by the said Edicts: having to this end, immediately upon his
coming to the Crown, by Letters Patents of the 22. of May 1610. and after he
came of Age by his Declaration of the 20. of November 1615. declared it to be
his will, that the Edicts should be observed, thereby to encourage his subjects
so much the more to keep within their Duty. And after the pattern of so great a
Prince, and in imitation of his bounty, we intend to do the like, having upon
the same grounds and considerations by our Declaration of the Eight of July
1643. willed and ordained, that our said subjects of the pretended Reformed
Religion, enjoy all the Concessions, Privileges, and Advantages, especially
the free and full exercise of their said Religion, in pursuance of the Edicts,
Declarations, and Ordinances made in their favor upon this account. And for as
much as our said subjects of the Pretended Reformed Religion have given us
certain proofs of their affection and loyalty, particularly in the present
Affairs, of which we are abundantly satisfied: Be it known, that We for these
reasons, and at the most humble request which has been made us from our said
Subjects professing the said pretended Reformed Religion, and after having it
debated in our presence at Council: We by the advice of the same, and upon our
certain knowledge and Royal Authority, have said, declared and ordained, say,
declare, and ordain, will, and it is our pleasure, That our said Subjects of
the pretended Reformed Religion be maintained and protected, as indeed we do
maintain and protect them, in the full and entire enjoym^nt of the Edict of
Nantes, other Edicts, Declarations, Acts, Ordinances, Articles, and Briefs set
out in their favor, Registered in Parliament and Edict Chambers, especially in
the free and public exercise of the said Religion, in all places where these
Orders have allowed it, all Letters and Acts, as well of our Council, as of
Soverain Courts or other Iudicatories to the contrary notwithstanding. Willing
that the transgressors of our said Edicts be punished and chastised, as
disturbers of our public peace. So we give in command to our well beloved and
faithful the persons holding our Courts of Parliament, Edict Chambers*
Bailiffs, Seneschalls, their Deputies, and other our Officers whom it shall
concern in their respective places, that they cause these Presents to be
Registered, read and Published where it shall be requisite, and keep, observe
and retain according to their form and Tenure. And forasmuch as there may be
need of these Presents in diverse places, We will that the same credit shall be
given to Copies duly collated by one of our well beloved and faithful
Counselors and Secretaries; as to the present Original: For such is our
pleasure. In witness whereof we have caused our Seal to be set to these
Presents.

Given at St Germains en Lay 20. of May in the year of Grace 1652. and of our
Reign the Tenth. Signed, LOUIS, and a little below, by the King, PHELIPEAUX.
And Sealed with the Broad Seal.
Can we doubt, but, they who persuade this great Prince to violate a word so
solemnly given, are his mortal Enemies, Enemies to his glory as much or more
then the Protestants? Were I not obliged to go abroad, I would instantly
discharge my self of the last part of my promise to you: which is to show you,
that the Papists are the really guilty persons of the sins of Rebellion and
conspiracy, which the Jesuits Maimbourg, and such as he, falsely impute to the
French Protestant. But this shall be for our next meeting. Upon which, having
first appointed an other time, we parted.

I am etc.

The Sixth Letter. Papists themselves Antymonarchists.
SIR.
I was sure to come at the hour appointed. Our friend had two little Books in
his hands, just as I came into the room. He compared them one with an other,
and I observed him to smile, whilst he was doing of it. Pray, said I, give me
leave to awake you out of your pleasant Dream, and ask you, what you are so
intent upon, that, for what I can perceive, pleases you very well. If you
please to sit down, replied he, I will tell you in short. So I took my seat,
and he went on. One of the two Books, that you saw me have, is The History of
Calvinisme, and the other The Policy of the Clergy of France. Whilst I was
expecting you, I read what Monsiuer Mainbourg says in the First, to take off
the prejudice Protestant Kings and Princes might have taken against the
Principles and usual practice of Papists. And I must confess to you, I could
not forbear smiling, when I saw the ridiculous evasions this man made use of,
especially after I had compared them with the objections of the Author of The
Policy of the Clergy of France, which he pretends to confute. I must needs read
all this to you. You shall find proofs enough there to justify you in what I
promised, That they are the Papists who are really to be feared in the point of
Rebellion and conspiracies, into which the principles of their Religion have so
often lead them; and not the Protestants of France, whose Religion is so
directly opposite to these sort of practices, and who, by the help of God, have
never been guilty of them, properly so speaking, as I have before demonstrated
to you.

It is certain, says Monsieur Maimbourg, that in the glorious condition the
King is at this day, Hist: of Calv: lib: 6. p 151* 152.
having vanquished all those, that conspired against this Soverain Power, to
which they all bow: he might with ease, and justly deal with the Huguenots, as
the Protestant Princes do with the Catholics. Nay, his glory seems to oblige
him to it. For is it not a wonderful thing, to see some Princes, who come
infinitely short of him in every thing, denying the Catholics the free
Exercise of their Religion within their Territories: and yet to have it
expected, th^^ he should endure those that profess theirs freely to Exercise in
his Kingdom? Might he not very reasonably Say to the Huguenots: Either let
these Princes allow the free Exercise of my Religion under them, or else do not
look that I should allow you the freedom of ^xercising yours and theirs in
France. If you would have us observe the Edicts, that were made in your favor;
see then that they make the like in favor of the Catholics. And it signifies
nothing, what one of their last witnesses has (...) of late, to give the best
answer he could to this powerful argument, which overthrows them. He thought to
take it off, by saying, that there is a great difference betwixt the one and
the other in this respect, in as much as the Catholics believing that the Pope
may depose a Prince, who is esteemed at Rome a Heretic or Excommunicated
Person, there is reason to be at defiance with them, and to apprehend their
conspiring against such a Prince; which cannot be said of the Protestants, who
are far from any such belief, so that there is no ground to suspect them, or
imagine they should attempt any ill against the Catholic Princes their
Sovereigns. To show, plainly how little force there is in such an Answer, which
is indeed but a poor shifting, we need only mark these two things, which have
been laid down in this History of Calvinisme, and which cannot be denied. The
first is, that more dismal conspiracies are hardly to be met with, then those
the Hugunots have made against our Kings, such as the accursed attempts of
Amboise, and of Meaux; not to take notice of their terrible Rebellions, which
have cost France so much blood, and of the unhappy Plots they have entered into
with their ^nemies, to withdraw their subjection from the Monarchy by openly
setting up a Commonwealth; as they have done more then once. The second is,
that it is by no means our belief, that a Pope can depose Princes, though they
be Heretics, nor absolve their subjects from the Oath of Allegiance, and give
up their right to him that can first take it. Far from this, our most Christian
Kings, who are known to have been the most zealous Defenders of the Catholic
faith, and the greatst Protectors of the holy See, to which they have always
unmoveably held, notwithstanding all the differences they had with some Popes
about temporal Affairs, and the right of their Crown, which they must never
give up: our Kings, I say, have ever protested against this pretension,
grounded upon a principle, which our Doctors have always condemned, as directly
contrar^ to the divine Law. There may be seen to this purpose the remonstrances
and the protestations, that I have mention^d, which Charle^ the Ninth directed
to Pope Pius the Fourth, upon the occasion of Queen Iean of Navar, as obstinate
a Huguenot as she was. Therefore the King might justly use the Huguenots, as
the Protestant Princes in their States do the Catholics.

I should not have done to day, if I should take notice of all that Monsieur
Maimbourg says upon this subject. He makes it consistent with the Duty and
Honor of the King of France, to overthrow an Edict, which was the reward of
the Loialty and of the eminent services of the Protestants, an Edict confirmed
in all the Parliaments of the Kingdom under the title of a perpetual and
irrevacable Law, Ratified by a thousand Royal promises, and by a thousand
authentike Declarations, which Lewis the Fourteenth had himself solemnly sworn
to observe upon so many occasions. It seems, says the Jesuit, that he is bound
to do it for his glory, which is to say, according to this man of conscince,
that one does his Duty, when he breaks his word, and his Oath; and that he acts
for his Glory, when he dishonours himself and his Ancestors, by perjuries and
overthrowing the most Religiously established Laws. But above all, it is a
pleasant fancy, that the argument, he furnishes his King with to stop the mouth
of the Huguenots, who do not prevail with the Princes of their Religion, to
permit the free exercise of the Roman Religion in their Dominions. Might he not
very justly say to the Huguenots, says he, speaking to the King of France,
either see that these Princes allow the free exercise of my Religion with them,
or do not think to have the free exercise of yours and theirs in France. If it
be expected that we should consider the Edicts which have been here made in
your behalf, let them show then the like favor to the Catholics. Monsieur
Maimbourg calls this a powerful argument, which overthrows the Huguenots. But
as to that I remit him to the Author of the Critique General of his History. He
will there find his dream entertained, Crit. Genesis de hist. de Calv. a Ville
Franc. 1682. let. 22. p. 322.
as it deserves. It is sufficient for my purpose, to let you see that what the
Author of the Policy of the Clergy urges, to prove that the Papists, upon
account of the principles of their Religion, are always to be feared in
Protestant States, is no Poor groundl^ss evasion, as Monsieur Maimbourg would
have us believe. And that you may be the better judge of it, give me leave to
read all that this exellent Author has writ upon the Subject. La Pol^^^ du
Cler^^ de Fran. 3. M E Edit. a la Hage p. 102.
I am confident, after you have heard it read, you will not less wonder, then I
do, at the confidence of the Jesuit, who never appears more positive, then
where he has least reason. So then our friend read to me this following
discourse.

Hugonot Princes cannot allow the same toleration to Catholics in their
States, that Catholic Princes can allow to Hugonots; because Protestant
Princes cannot be assured of the fidelity of their Catholic Subjects, by
reason they have taken Oaths of fidelity to another Prince, whom they look upon
as greater than all Kings. It is the Pope; and this Prince is a sworn ^nemy of
the Protestants. He obliges the People to believe that a Sovereign turned
Heretic has forfeited all the Rights of Sovereignty; that they owe him no
Obedience; that they may with impunity revolt from him, that they may fall upon
him as an Enemy of the Christian Name, even to assassinate him. [See the
Jesuits Morals, cap. 3. Book the third.] And thereupon he cited to me, Mariana,
Carolus, Scribanus, Ribadinera, Tolet, Gretser, Hereau, Amicus, Les^ius,
Valentia Dicatillus, and several others, that are cited by the Iansenists, in
the Book of the J^suits Morals, and by the Ministers. All these Authors, said
he to me, teach conformably to the Divinity of Rome, that a Heretic Prince,
and Excommunicated by the Pope, is but a private person, against whom Arms may
be taken; that he may be likewise Assassinated, or poisoned. He added to this,
the examples of the many Parricides that have been committed, or attempted in
pursuance of these Maxims. How many times, said he, would they have
Assassinated Queen Elizabeth? Prince William of Orange was twice Assassinated,
and lost his Life the Second time. Henry the Third, was not he killed by a
Iacobin, as Excommunicated by the Pope, and stripped of the Royal Dignity? John
Chastel, did not he attempt the same thing upon Henry the Fourth? And did not
Ravilliac out of a false Zeal Assassinate him? After which he gave me an
account of the Gunpowder Plot in England; by which, in the year 1606. the
Catholics had undertaken to blow up the King and all the Grandees of the
Kingdom, by a Mine they had made under the Parliament House. He told me of the
Jesuits Garnet and Oldcorn, Chief of that Conspiracy, who were put into the
number of the Martyrs, whether they would or no; for the Jesuit Garnet going to
Execution, some one of his Companions telling him so^tly in his Ear, that he
was going to be a Martyr, he answered, Nun^u^m audivi parricidam esse Martyrem,
I never heard that a Parricide was a Martyr. He related to me a hundred
scandalous Stories of that nature. Amongst others, he told me one that
extremely surprised me; he read it to me with all its circumstances, in a
little Book that had been published by an English Minister, who calls himself
the King of Englands Chaplain. Thus it is in short: A Divine, who had been the
Chaplain of King Charles who was beheaded, turned Catholic some time before his
Masters Death, and the English Jesuits put such confidence in him, that they
imparted to him a very dreadful thing; It was a Consultation allowed of by the
Pope, about the means of re-establishing the Catholic Religion in England. The
English Catholics, seeing that the King was a Prisoner in the hands of the
Independants, formed the Resolution of laying hold on that occasion to d^stroy
the Protestant, and re-establish the Catholic Religion. They concluded that
the only means of reestablishing the Catholic Religion, and of laying aside
all the Laws that had been made against it in England, was to dispatch the
King, and destroy Monarchy. That they might be authorized and maintained in
this great Undertaking, they deputed eighteen Father-Jesuits to Rome, to demand
the Popes advice. The matter was agitated in secret Assemblies, and it was
concluded, that it was permitted and just to put the King to Death. Those
Deputies, in their passage through Paris, consulted the Sorbonne, who, without
waiting for the Opinion of Rome, had judged that that enterprise was just and
lawful; and upon the return of the Jesuits, who had taken the Journey to Rome,
they communicated to the Sorbonnits the Popes Answer, of which several Copies
were taken. The Deputies, who had been at Rome, being returned to London,
confirmed the Catholics in their Design. To compass this point, they thrust
themselves in amongst the Independants, by dissembling their Religion. They
persuaded those people that the King must be put to Death; and it cost that
poor Prince his Life some Months after. But the Death of King Charles not
having had all the Consequences that was hoped; and all Europe having cried out
with horror against the Parricide committed upon the Person of that poor
Prince; they would have called in again all the Copies that had been made of
the Consultation of the Pope, and of that of Sorbonne; but this English
Chaplain who had turned Catholic would not restore his; and he has
communicated it, since the return of the Family of the Stuarts to the Crown of
England, to several persons who are still alive, and were Eye witnesses of what
I have now told you.

Par. I never heard this before. But the English Calvinists not Producing any
authentic pieces to prove this accusation, it may be looked upon as a Calumny.


Prove. My Hug^not Gentleman would not answer for it, for he is very just;
However he added, that what rendered it very probable, is that this Conduct is a
sequel of the Divinity of the zealous Catholics of Spaim, Italy, and even of
France: Mor^over there are several Circumstanc^s which render the thing
apparent. For example, he that lately published this story, had already once
published it in the year 1662, to answer a little Book that insulted over the
English Calvinists, in that they had put their King to death. The Divine, who
knew the story that I have related, published it to prove that the Catholics
were guilty of the Crime which the Calvinists were accused of. When this story
came to light, there was a great alarm in the House of the Queen Mother of the
King of England, that House being full of Jesuits; and even that great Lord,
who had lead the Jesuits to Rome, and had made himself chief of that
Conspiracy, was one of the principal Officers of the House. They immediately
demanded Justice of the King, by the means of the Queen Mother, for the injury
that he who had published this scandalous story had done them. The Doctor
offered to prove his Accusation, and to produce his Witnesses, who were still
living. The great Lord and Officer of the Queens House, and the Jesuits, seeing
the resolution of this Man, durst not push him on; they only obtained from the
King, by the means of the Queen Mother, that he should be silenced. You must
avow that there are but few that are innocent, who would have been so easy in
so terrible an Accusation. Besides, it is certain that this Consultation of
Rome has been seen by several persons. If it is false, it must have been forged
by this Chaplain who was turned Catholic, and who showed it since; tho it must
be confessed that this is not very likely. However, as all this is reduceed to
a single Witness, my Gentleman acknowledged that the proof was not wholly in
form; but he stood much upon the late Conspiracy of England, which was
discovered two years ago, by which half the Kingdom was to have had their
Throats cut to become Masters of the rest.


Prove. Be it as it will, my Hugonot Gentleman concluded from all this, that a
Protestant Prince can never be assured of the Fidelity of his Catholic
Subjects. On the contrary, said he, the Protestants are subject to their Prince
out of Conscience, and out of a Principle of their Religion: They acknowledge
no other Superior than their King, and do not believe that for the cause of
Heresy it is permitted, either to kill a lawful Prince, or to refuse him
obedience.

They oppose against us, said he to me, the English and Holland Catholics: But
what has been promised to those people that has not been performed? The United
Provinces of the Low Countries are entered into the Union with this Condition,
of not suffering any other Religion in their States, than the Protestant.
Though England was reformed under Edward the 6 th, afterward under Elizabeth,
by several Acts of Parliament, which are the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom,
it was ordered that no other Religion should be suffered than that the
Anglicane Church made choice of, and that they would not suffer the Assemblies
of those, whom they at present call Nonconformists. It was even forbidden to
the Priests and Monks to set Foot in England, and to make any abode there.
However they have not kept up to this rigor, and every one knows that there is
at present above ten thousand Priests and Monks disguised in England, and that
there has ever been so. Wherefore more has been given to the Catholics, than
was promised them. But in France, where we live under favorable Edicts, they
have promised us what they have not performed: It is only against us that they
make profession of not performing what they have promised. The Edicts of
Pacification are in all the Forms that perpetual Laws ought to be; they are
verified by the Parliaments, they are confirmed by a hundred Declarations,
which followed by Consequence, and by a thousand Royal Words: In fine, they
have been laid as irrevocable Laws, and as foundations of the Peace of the
State. We rely upon the good Faith of so many promises; and on a sudden we see
snatched from us, what we looked upon as our greatest security, and which we had
possessed for above a hundred years Thus there is neither Title, nor
Prescription, nor Edicts, nor Acts, nor Declarations which can put us in
Safety. This is what he told me, and I avow to you, that this part put me in
pain, for I am a Slave to my Word, and an Idolater of good Faith: I look upon
it as the only Rampart of Civil Society; and I conceive that States and Public
persons are no l^ss obliged to keep what they promise, than particular men.


Far. That is true. But do not you know that the safety of the people, and the
public good, is the Sovereign Law; Very often we must suffer, and even do some
Evil, for the good of the State. Peaces and Treaties are daily broken, which
have been solemnly sworn, because that the public interest requires it should
be so.


Prove. My Hugonot made himself that difficulty, and told me thereupon, When War
is declared against Neighbors, to the prejudice of Treties of Peace and
Alliances, this is done in the Forms. They publish Manifesto's; they expose, or
at least, they suppose Grievances and Infractions in the Articles of the
Treaty, that have been made by those against whom War is declared. When a
Sovereign revokes the Graces that he had done his Subjects, it is ever under
pretense that they have rendered themselves unworthy of them. But are we
accused, or can we be accused of having tampered in any Conspiracy, of having
had Intelligence with the Enemies of the State, of having wanted Love, Fidelity
and Obedience toward our Sovereigns? If it be so, let us be brought to Trial,
let the Criminals be informed against, and let the Innocent be distinguished
from those that are Guilty. We speak boldly th^rein, because we are certain
they can reproach us with nothing; and we know that his Majesty himself has
very often given Testimony of our Fidelity. He knows that we did not enter into
any of the Parties that have been made against his Service, since he has been
upon the Throne. During the troubles of his minority, it may be said, that none
but those Cities we were Masters of, remained Loyal. When the Gates of Orleans
were shut upon the King, he went to Gien; and that City was going to be guilty
of the same Crime, without the vigor of a Hugonot, who made way with his Sword
in his hand to the Bridge, and let it down himself: This action was known, and
recompensed; for the King immediately made him Noble who had done it. We had
not any part in the disturbances of Bordeaux, in those of Britany and Auvergue,
nor in the Conspiracy of the Chevalier do Roban: Not one Hugonot was engaged in
these Criminal Cases. The King has been pleased to acknowledge it; and we look
upon the Testimony of so great a King as a great Recompense. But our Enemies,
who continually solicit him to our ruin, ought to be mindful, that it would be
more civil in them, to leave the King the liberty of following his
inclinations: These would without doubt move him to preserve the effects of his
kindness for people who have preserved for him an inviolable Fidelity. This is
what he told me upon that point; and I confess I was in great perplexity how to
answer him; for I durst not make use of that Maxim that I have seen often
maintained by some people, That one is not obliged to keep Faith with
Heretics. I have ever admired that saying of Charles the Fifth: He caused
Martin Luther to come to Worms, and gave him safe Conduct, and his Imperial
word, that no hurt should be done him. But not having been able to obtain from
him what he desired, he sent him back; ^ome one would have persuaded Charles,
That he ought to cause Luther to be seized without having regard to the safe
Conduct, because that this man was of the Character of those with whom one is
not obliged to keep ones word. Though ^incerity, were banished from all the
Earth; answered he, it ought to be found in an Emperor. A saying very worthy
of so great a Man! But tell me, Sir, is it not an Opinion very contrary to that
of Charles the 5 th, which is the cause that so little Conscience is made of
keeping touch with those people in what has been promised them?


Par. This Doctrine, that one is not obliged to keep Faith with Heretics, is
taught by some Casuists, and they pretend that it is founded upon the Authority
of the Council of Constance, because that that Council caused John Hus to be
burnt; contrary to the Faith of the safe Conduct that the Emperor Sigismond had
granted him, and Jerome of Prague, notwithstanding the safe Conduct that the
same Council had given him.


Prove. This Morality ever appeared to me terrible; and I have been oft^n
scandalized at the Conduct of that great Council of Constance.


Par. The most part of the Catholics reject that Morality, and maintain we are
obliged to keep Faith with all the World, without excepting Infidels and
Heretics; otherwise there would never be any Treaty between the Turks and the
Christians, that were real. It is pretended that the Council of Constance has
not established this Maxim, That we are not obliged to make good to Heretics
what we have promised them. John Hus had no safe Conduct from the Council, he
had only the Emperors; and thereupon the Council in the Nineteenth Session
declared, That any safe Conduct, granted by the Emperor, by Kings, and the
other Secular Princes to Heretics, could not do prejudice to the Catholic
Faith, and to the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and could not hinder from
proceeding in the Tribunal of the Church, to the punishment of Heretics, who
had provided themselves with such a safe Conduct, Thus the Council did not
violate its promise, for it never gave any; neither did it oblige the Emperor
to violate his Faith: But the Ecclesiastical Tribunal, that had not given any
word, made John Hus his Process.


Prove. That distinction seems pleasant to me: I have heard say, that the Church
does not put its hand into blood: When John Hus was convicted of Heresy by the
Council, he was delivered without doubt to the secular Arm to be burnt. Those
Secular Judges, were not they Imperial Judges? Thus the Emperor violated his
safe Conduct, in permitting his Judges to put a Man to Death, to whom he had
promised all security. But what do they say of Jerome of Prague, to whom the
Council it self had given a safe Conduct, and yet was burnt?


Par. They say that the Council, in the safe Conduct that was given to Jerome
of Prague, had inserted this Clause, Salva Iustitia; that thus they had only
promised to warrant Jerome of Prague, from violence, and not from the arrests
of Justice: But I avow to you that all this is not capable of justifying the
Conduct of that Council. Neither does it pass in France for a Rule that they
will follow. If they do not keep with the Hugonots all that has been promised
them, it is not that they ground themselves upon the Morality and the Conduct
of the Council of Constance. They do not pretend to depart from sincerity; they
make profession of keeping the Edict of Nantes: Do you not see this at the Head
of all the Declarations which are made against them? And now lately, in that by
which the Catholics are forbidden to embrace the P. R. Religion, upon pain of
Confiscation of goods, loss of Honor, and Banishment; though never any
Declaration was made that was more contrary to the Edicts of Nantes. We have
one called Bernard, and another Lawyer of the City of Poictiers, called
Tilleau, who have made large Commentaries upon the Edict of Nantes, to make it
appear, that without formally revoking that Edict, the Hugonots may be deprived
of all that Edict grants them, in giving to every one of the Articles
Interpretations and Glosses that would never have been imagined: And these are
the measures they follow,


Prove. This is good to amuse. But after all, this does not satisfy the
Conscience, and one is no less convinced of having violated his word: For those
who obtain Declarations against the Hugonots, according to the Glosses of
Bernard and Tilleau, are well persuaded that they are Glosses of Orleans, which
overturn the Text. But do you know what I told my Hugonot, to stop his Mouth,
upon these Infractions in the Edicts?


Par. Perhaps you told him, that one is not o^liged to keep a word that has
been extorted by violence; that the Hugonots have obtained those ^dicts by main
force: That ours were constrained to yield to the misfortune of the times; but
that at present the King is in Right of Nulling those promises. Our Advocates
plead daily thus at the Bars, and there are likewise grave Authors who write it.


Prove. You have guessed right: but thereupon my Hugonot grew strangely
passionate. Ah! this is, said he, a cruelty we cannot suffer. This is our
strength, and they are so bold as to attacque us in this part, as if it was our
weak side. It is true, that we were armed some years before that the Edict of
Nantes was made. But in favor of whom did we bear those Arms? It was to
establish the Illustrious branch of Bourbon upon the Throne, that belonged to
it. We shall ever be proud of having shed the purest of our Blood, to restore
to France it is lawful Kings of which they designed to deprive it. After this
growing more cool, he made me an abridgement of the History of the League. He
shew^d me that the House of Lorrain, in that time, aimed not so much at Heresy
as at the Crown. He minded me that from the time of Charl^s the 9 ^h, the
Princes of that House caused a Book to be Printed, for the proving their
Genealogy, and to make appear that they were descended in a direct Line from
the Second Race of ou^ Kings, for the making way to the Crown. He acquainted me
that there was at the same time a Concordat passed between the Duke of Guise,
the Duke of Montmorency, and the Marshal de St. Andrew, which was called the
Triumvi^ate. One of the Articles of that Concordat bore, in express terms, that
the Duke of Guise should have in charge to deface entirely the name of the
Family and Race of the Bourbons. Henry the Third, said he to me, could he be
suspected of Heresy, or an ^ider of Heretics? Never was any man more linked
to the Catholic Church than he. Yet the House of Guise had sworn his ruin:
They would have shaved him, which they highly threatened him with, and they one
day writ upon the Chapel of the Battes, to the Augustins of Paris, these four
French Verses.

The Bones of those who here lie dead,
Like Cross of Burgundy to thee are shown,
And make appear thy days are fled:
And that thou surely lose thy Crown.
They are of the same sense with those two Latin Verses which were found set
upon the Palace Dyal.

Qui dedit ante duas, unam abstulit, altera nutat;
Tertia tonsoris nunc facienda manu.
He that gave two, has taken one, the other
Shakes; but the Barber still shall give another.
The Faction of the House of Guise caused this to be done: And this poor
Prince, after a thousand delays and troubles, resolved at length to make that
execution so famous in our History; it is that of the Duke and Cardinal of
Guise, who were executed at the States of Blois. That Prince must needs have
seen his ruin approaching, and inevitable to come to that, since that he well
foresaw that this blow would raise him so many storms, and give him so much
trouble. Who knows not that the Faction of Rome, and of Spain, had a Design of
raising the House of Lorrain to the Throne of France, for the excluding the
House of Bourbon? In the year 1587. the Pope sent to the Duke of Guise a Sword
engraven with flames, telling him by the Duke of Parma, that amongst all the
Princes of Europe, it only belonged to Henry of Lorrain to bear the arms of the
Church, and to be the Chief thereof. Almost all the Kingdom was engaged in that
Spirit of revolt: The King found no other support, than the King of Navar and
of his Hugonotes. It was Chastillon, the Son of the Admiral de Coligny, who
saved the King from the hands of the Duke of Mayenne at Tours. This Chief of
the League cried to him, retire ye white Scarfs; retire you Chastillon, it is
not you we aim at, it is the Murderer of your Father. And in truth, Henry the
Third, then Duke of Anjou, was President in the Council when the Resolution was
taken of making the Massacre of St. Bartholomew, in which the Admiral Coligny
perished. But his Son, forgetting that injury, to save his King, answered those
Rebels; You are Traitors to your Country; and when the Service of the Prince
and State is concerned, I know how to lay aside all revenge and particular
interest; he added, that after the Assassinate committed by the League, in the
person of Henry the Third, Henry the Fourth was ready to see himself abandoned
by his most faithful Servants, because of the Protestant Religion, which he
made profession of, which appears by a Declaration that this Prince made in the
form of an Harangue to the Lords of his Army, on the 8 th day of August, 1589,
in which he says, that he had been informed that his Catholic Nobility set a
report on foot they could not serve him, unless he made profession of the Roman
Religion, and that they were going to quit his Army. Nothing but the firmness
and fidelity of the Hugonots upheld this wavering Party. He must be, said my
Gentleman, the falsest of men, who dissembles the Ardour and Zeal with which
those of our Religion maintained that just Cause of the House of Bourbon,
against the attempts of the League: And to prove, said he, that their interest
was not the only cause of their fidelity, we must see what they did when Henry
the Fourth turned Roman Catholic. It cannot be said but that they then strove
to have a King of their Religion: However, there was not one who bated any
thing of his Zeal and Fidelity, the King was peaceable possessour of the Crown,
the League was beaten down, he was Master in Paris, he was reconciled to the
Court of Rome when the Edict of Nantes was granted and published: Our Hugonots
were no longer armed, nor in a condition of obtaining any thing by force of
arms. Since that the Change of Religion had reduced all the Roman Catholics to
him, he would have been in a State of resisting their violence. It was the sole
acknowledgment of the King, and of good Frenchmen, that obliged all France to
give Peace to a Party that had shed their Blood with so much Zeal and
Profession for the preserving the Crown, and the restoring it to its legitimate
Heirs. I acknowledge that we did our Duty; but are not those to be thanked who
do what they ought? How is it possible that these things are at present worn
out of the memory of men? I am certain, that if the King was made to read the
History of his Grandfather, he would preserve some inclin^tion for the
Children of those who sacrificed themselves for the glory of his House.

No man can be ignorant of the necessary dependence that must be between the
Roman Catholic Clergy and the Court of Rome. This Court is the Head, the
Clergy is the Body, the Ecclesiastics and Monks are the Members, and all these
Members move by the Orders of the Head. Again, I have no Design to chocque the
Gentlemen of the Clergy, whose persons I respect: I do not doubt but that they
have good French Hearts; But in fine, they have their Maxims of Conscience;
they are of a Religion, and they must follow its Principles. Now the Principles
of their Religion binds them to the Holy see, and its preservation preferably
to all things; moreover, Interest deceives the Hearts and Minds of men. Their
Interest obliges them to take the Popes part, who is their Preserver and
Protector* and what they do out of interest, they persuade themselves that
they do it out of Conscience. First, it may be said of the Monks, that all the
Houses they have in France, are so many Citadels that the Court of Rome has in
the Kingdom. Those great Societies have withdrawn themselves from the
jurisdiction of the Bishops, they depend immediately on the Holy See; they have
all their Generals of Orders at Rome; and those Generals who are Italians and
Spaniards, are the Soul of the Society; they are obliged to follow their
Opinions and their Orders; the Italian Divinity is the Divinity of the
Cloisters. Thus the King may reckon, that all the Monks look upon him as the
Pope's Subject, as being liable to be Excommunicated, his Kingdom put under an
Ecclesiastical Censure, his Subjects dispensed and released from the Oath of
Allegiance, and his States given by the Pope to another Prince. And every time
that this happens, they will believe themselves obliged, out of Conscience, to
obey the Pope. If in those Orders of Monks there happen to be some particular
men, who follow other Principles, it is certain that they are in no Number, so
that the Body of the Monks is absolutely in the Interests of the Court of Rome,
and by consequence in that of Spain. Thus you see already a considerable Party
of whose Fidelity the Kings of France cannot be assured. And what is this
Party? One may say that it is all France: for the begging Monks and the Jesuits
are Masters of all the Consciences; they are Confessors, they are Directors,
they persuade what they will to those that are devoted to them. The House of
Bourbon ought not to doubt of this truth, if it never so little calls to mind
the endeavors that were used by the Monks for the forcing from it the Crown,
when the Ra^e of the Valois came to fail. It is against this so considerable
Party that the State ought to take its Precautions, in preserving that other
Party which can never be of intelligence with this; it is that of the Reformed.
History tells us how impossible it is to be long without having Disputes with
the Court of Rome. It is always attempting, and we are obliged to defend our
selves against its enterprises. It is capable of setting great Engines a going,
of making Engagements and Alliances: It had twenty times like to have ruined
Germany, it has dethroned great Emperors, it has likewise caused great
troubles in France, and one cannot be too secure against its ambition,


Par. I fancy that your Hugonot's Advocate would not spare the rest of the
Clergy, and that he endeavored to prove that w^ can be no more assured of
their Fidelity than of that of the Religious.


Prove. What you have already heard may make you easily imagine that, for the
giving the more force to what he had to say against our Divines, he prevented
what might have been objected If you understood these matters, Sir, said he to
me, you could tell me that our Clergy of France teach a Divinity wholly
different from that of Rome; that all make profession of maintaining the
Liberties of the Gallicane Church; the principal Articles of which are, 1. That
the King of France cannot be Excommunicated by the Pope. 2. That an
^cclesiastical Censure cannot be laid upon their Kingdom. 3. That it cannot be
given to others. 4. That the Pope has nothing to do with the Temporality of
Kings. 5 That he is not Infallible. 6. That he is inferior to the Council.
These, you would tell me, are the Maxims of the Sorbonne, that have often
censured the contrary Propositions. This Divinity is maintained by the
Authority of the Parliaments, who have often declared the Bulls of the Pope
abusive, null, scandalous and impious, and have appealed from the Execution of
these Bulls, when they found them contrary to the Liberties of the Gallicane
Church. The Estates assembled at Tours, during the League, caused the Bul's of
Excommunication to be burnt by the hands of the Executioner, that had been
published against Henry the Third and Henry the Fourth. This looks great and
magnificent, if you please, but these fair appearances have no foundation; I do
not speak of the Divinity of the Parliaments, which is that of the Politicians;
I speak of the Divinity of the Clergy.


Once more, added he, I do not at all doubt of the Fidelity of the Divines of
France to their King; but they shall never persuade me, that this Fidelity and
Zeal for their Prince is without exception; and I make no other exception
against it than what they themselves make: Will you hear them speak? Read the
Harangue that Cardinal du Perron made to the third Estate, in the name of all
the Clergy of France* in the Assembly, 1616. and remembe^ that it is not the
Cardinal du Perron who speaks, it is the Clergy of France assembled in a Body
who speak by the mouth of that Cardinal. All France struck with a sense of the
two horrible Parricides that had been committed in the persons of the two late
Kings, both of them assassinated out of a false Zeal for Religion, would draw
up a form of an Oath, and establish a Fundamental Law of the State, which all
the Subjects were to swear to; and this Law imported, that every one should
swear to acknowledge and believe, that our Kings as to their Temporalities do
not depend on any but God; that it is not lawful for any cause whatsoever to
assassinate Kings; that even for causes of Heresy and of Schism Kings cannot
be Deposed, nor their Subjects Absolved from their Oath of Allegiance, nor upon
any other pretense whatsoever. This Law, methinks, is the security of Kings,
this is a Doctrine which all the Hugonots are ready to sign with their Blood.
What did the Clergy of France do thereupon? It formally opposed that Law;
(Works of Cardinal du Perron, p. 600 and following) they were willing to
acknowledge the Independancy of Kings, in regard of the Temporalty; they
consented that Anathema should be pronounced against the assassinates of Kings.
But they would never pass the last Article; that for what cause soever it was,
a King cannot be Deposed by the Pope, stripped of his States, and his Subjects
absolved from the Oath of Allegiance. He who spoke for them, alleged all the
examples of Emperors and of Kings, who had been Deposed and Excommunicated by
Popes, upon account of refusing Obedience to the Holy See, and approved them;
he alleged the Example of St. Urban the Second, who Excommunicated Philip the
First, and laid an Ecclesiastical Censure upon his Kingdom* because he had put
away his Wife Bertha, Daughter of a Count of Holland, to Marry Bertrade Wife of
Foulques Count d' Anjou, then still alive. He made use of the testimony of Paul
Emile, who said, that Pope Zacharias discharged the French from the Oath of
^ide^i^y that they had made to Chilperick. These two Princes were no^
Heretics; yet the Clergy of France approved their having been stripped of their
States by the Popes; which makes appear, that the Clergy in the bottom judges
that the Pope has Right to lay an Ecclesiastical Censure upon the Kingdom of
France, and to depose its Kings for any ^^^er cause as well as that of Heresy.
Is it not to abuse the World, to confess on one side that the Temporalty of
Kings does not depend on the Pope, and establ^sh on the other, that the Pope
may in certain cases Interdict these Kings, Excommunicate them and Absolve
their Subjects from the Oath of Allegiance? In fine, this is the result of that
Famous Opinion of the Clergy of France. So that if Christians are obliged to
defend their Religion and their lives against Heretic or Apostate Princes,
when once absolved from their Allegiance, the Politic Christian Laws do not
permit them any thing more than wha^ is permitted by Military Laws, and by the
Right of Nations, to wit, open War, and not Assassination and Cl^ndestine
Conspiracies: that is to say, that when a Pope has declared a Prince deprived
of his S^ates, his Subjects may set up the Standard of Rebellion, declare War
against him, refuse him Obedience, and kill him if they can meet with him,
provided it be with arms in their hand, and by the ordinary course of War. I
cannot comprehend how one ^an be secured of the Fidelity of those who hold such
like Maxims. For in fine, Kings are not infallible, and if they happen to do
any thing that the Court of Rome judges worthy of Excommunication and
Int^rdiction, they are Kings without Kingdoms and Subjects, acco^ding to our
Clergy of France, as well as according to the Divines of Italy. But perhaps the
Sorbonne, which is the Depository of the Fren^h Divinity, does not receive
these Maxims so fatal to the safety of Ki^gs: Let us see what it has done. In
the Month of December, 1587, because Henry the Third, for the security of his
Person and of his State, made a Treaty with the Rutres, or the German
Protestants, the Sorbo^ne, without staying for the Decisions of Rome, made a
private determination which said, That the Government might be taken from
Princes, who were not found such as they ought to be, as the admini^tration
from a suspected Tutor: This was known by the King, he sent for the Sorbonne
some days after, and complained of it. After the death of the Princes of Guise,
which happened at Blois, the Sorbonne did much worse: they declared and caused
to be published in all parts of Paris, That all the People of that Kingdom were
Absolved from the Oaths of Fidelity that they had sworn to Henry of Valois,
here^ofore their King: they ra^ed his name out of the public Prayers, and made
known to the People that they might with safe Conscience unit^, a^m and
contribute to make War against him, as a Tyrant. If I would add to that the
Story that I know this Gentleman told you concerning the Death of the late King
of England we should find that the Sorbonne has ^ver been of the same Opinion.
This is the truth of it, every time that our Kings affairs shall carry them to
extremity against the Court of Rome, the Clergy of France will suppress their
discontents while matters go well for the Court of France; but if things turn
other ways, the Maxims of our Divines against the King will be sure to break
out. Every sincere person will allow, ^ha^ it has never been otherwise than so,
and that it will be always thus; which may be observed in the very least
disputes.

I was willing to read all these passages to you out of The Policy of the
Clergy of France, because the Author of that excellent piece, proves there
exceed^ng well, all that I pr^m^sed to show you, for the close of our
Conferences, which is, that the Papists are truly Guilty of the Conspiracies
and Rebellions, which Monsieur Maimbourg would falsely fasten upon the Hugonots.
Of this the Murder of Henry the Third, that of Henry the Fourth, the violence
of the League, the several attempts against Queen Elizabeth, King James, and
our holy Martyr Charles the First, not to mention the late Plot, that has made
such a noise in the World, are undeniable proofs. But you have seen likewise,
which ought to awaken the Protestant Princes to a purpose, that all these black
attempts, have not been the fruit of impatience and human frailty, under the
temptation of some severe persecution; but the natural Consequence and effect
of the Principles of the Roman Religion, as we are assured by those very men,
who pass for the Oracles of this Religion. For you have seen just now out of
Authentic pieces, that the Pope, the Cardinals, and all the Divines of Italy,
who are the Pillars of the Roman Catholic Religion, all the Regulars of
France, who draw after them more then three fourths of the French Papists, and
the Sorbonne it self, when the rod is not over it, own publicly, that the Pope
may Excommunicate Kings, when he judges them Heretics or countenancers of
Heriticks, to interdict their Kingdoms, absolve their subjects from their
Allegiance, and expose them to the fury of all the World. You have also seen,
that the whole Clergy of France was of this opinion, by the mouth of Cardinal
Perron, so that this pernicious Doctrine is the vowed Faith of the whole Popish
Gallican Church, as well as of the Court of Rome, the great depository of the
Roman Religion and all its mysteries. From whence evidently follows, what the
Author of The Policy of the Clergy of France, infers, That there is no safety
for the Crown, nor for the life of Kings, whether they be Protestants
themselves, or only protect such as are, whilst they are beset with Papists: so
that there is not the same reason to tolerate Popery in Protestant Kingdoms, as
there is to to^erate Protestants in Popish Kingdoms. Monsieur Maimbourg would
make us believe, that all this is but a poor shift. Hist. de Calv. p. 501.
And to convince us of it, he says, that we need but to consider these two
things: First that there are not to be found more detestable Conspiracies, then
those the Hugonots have made against their Kings etc. Secondly, that it is by
no means the belief of the Roman Catholics, princes, ^. 50^.
that a Pope may depose Princes, though they were Hereti^ks, acquit their
subjects from their Allegiance, and bestow their Dominions upon those that can
first take them. But I have evidently showed you the falsness of the first
assertion: and for the second it is expressly disproved by those undeniable
proofs, the Author of The Policy of the Clergy, has produced, to show that the
Roman Catholics hold that belief, which Monsieur Maimbourg af^irms they do
not. You say, Monsieur Maimbourg, that it is by no means your belief, that a
Pope can depose Princes etc. At this rate, the Pope, who is the head of your
Church, this head, for whose infallibility you have so much disputed, knows not
the belief of your Church: for he believes, that by the principles of the
Church of Rome, he has the power, which you seem to deny him: The Cardinals,
the Bishops, and all the Divines of Italy, all your Regulars, all your Clergy
of France, speaking by the mouth of your Cardinal du Perron, your Sorbonne it
self, so renowned for its great number of able men, did not know, in so
important a case, what was the belief of your Church. For they have all held,
that it believes the Pope can depose Princes etc. At least he should have given
some answers to the Authentic Acts and notorious matters of fact, which the
Author of The Policy of the Clergy, had quoted to this purpose. To say nothing
of all this, and to think it enough, to say at random, It is by no means our
belief, that a Pope may depose Princes, even though they were Heretics etc.
this is to pass the sentence of an unjust judge, who rather then fairly to
confess his error, makes no conscience of denying that in words, in which his
heart gives him the lie. And I beseech you, consider what he adds, to make us
believe, that the Roman Catholics have not that belief, which the Popes
themselves attribute to them. So far from that, says he, that our most
Christian Kings, who are known alwais to have been the most zealous asserters
of the Catholic Faith, and Witness the Medal, where one of them caused to be
Engraven. Perdam Babyloni^ nomen. I will root out the name of Babylon. p. 33^.
the chiefest Protectors of the Holy See, to which they have inviolably held in
all times, notwithstanding all the disputes, they have had with some Popes
about temporal concerns and the rights of their Crown, which they are bound
never to relinquish: our Kings, I say, have ever protested against this claim,
which is grounded upon a Doctrine, that all our Doctors have ever condemned, as
point blanck against the Divine Law. To this purpose may be seen the
Remonstrances and Protestations, which I have said that Charles the Ninth
addressed to Pope Pius the Fourth upon the account of Queen Jane of Navarre, as
obstinate a Heretic as she was. What can be said to such childish stuff? Is it
not an excellent way of arguing, The Kings of France do not believe the Pope
has that power over them, as he challenges to him self: therefore it is by no
means the belief of the Roman Catholics, that the Pope has such a power* so
that Princes who are Protestants, or protect such as are, can be in no danger
either of life or Crown from their Popish subjects? The Remonstrances and the
Protestations, which Monsieur Maimbourg makes such a noise with, did they
prevail, that more than half the Papists of France should no^ rise against
their King Henry the Third so soon as ever the Pope had thundered out his
^xcommunication against him? This crowd of people of Churchmen and of Friars,
who by Monsieur Maimbourg's own confession, P. 490.491.
entered into a League with so much heat against this poo^ Prince; did they not
make it appear plainly, that the good Catholic subjects take much notice of
the particular belief and the weighty Protestations of the French Kings, when
the Pope has pronounced Anathema? The almost perpetual Conspiracies of our
Papists against the sacred Majesty of our Kings, and against their faithful
Subjects, are likewise a strong evidence of Monsieur Maimbourg's sound
reasoning. Do not the Catholics of England plainly show, that they take these
particular decisions of the French Kings for the rule of their Faith and of
their practice? But this assertion, All our Doctors have ever condemned the
Doctrine, upon which is grounded the claim of Popes against Kings, as directly
opposite to the Divine Law, is such a piece of confidence, as, it may be, never
was the like. I must confess, I could not have believed, that what is said of
the Jesuitical impudence, could have gone thus far. Sant. Tract. de Haeres. et
de Potest. Summi. Pont. c. 30. and 31. Bell. Tract. de potest. summi Pont. in
Temp. a^vers. Barel Rome 1^10. p. 35
What then! Is it that Anthony Santarel, the Jesuit, who has written, That a
Pope has power to depose Kings, discharge their Subjects from the obedience
they owe them, and deprive them of their Kingdoms for Heresy, nay if they
govern negligently, or are not useful to their Kingdom, that Cardinal
Bellermin, who was likewise a Jesuit, and has maintained, That the Pope may
absolve Subjects from their Oath of Allegiance, and deprive Kings of their
Dominion; that a thousand other Priests of the same Society, quoted in the
second part of the moral Divinity of the Jesuits, ought not to be reckoned
among the Doctors of the Church of Rome: that Monsieur Maimbourg pronounces so
positively, All our Doctors have ever condemned this Doctrine, as directly
opposite to the Divine Law? But perchance, Monsieur Maimbourg, since he left
the Society, has almost as good an opinion of the Jesuits, as their good friend
sof the Port Royal: No doubt he has taken up the same prejudice, which these
Gentlemen have done, that those Jesuits are no other in the Harvest of the
Church, than the tares that annoy the good Corn, and that they ought not to be
reckoned among the Christian Doctors. However he ought to have the best
intelligence, and know them better than any man. At least he should not have
forgotten, that he was informed how the whole Sorbonne, in a body, declared it
self in this point of the same judgment with the Jesuits, upon the particular
case of Henry the Third. He should as little forget, that Cardinal du Perron,
in one of the greatest assemblies of the World, maintained with open face, not
in behalf of the Jesuits, but of the whole Clergy of France, and as the mouth
of all the Prelates of the Kingdom, that the Pope has all that power over
Kings, which the Je^u^ts attribute to him.

Therefore, not to s^ay longer upon these ^^^llings of Monsieur Maimbourg, you
may easily see, says our friend, that as much as it is false, that the
Protestants, who abhor all those principles, above mentioned, are to be
suspected by any King of any Religion whatever, in whose Dominion they abide:
so far certain and undeniabl^ is it, that Roman Catholic Subjects, of what
Country soever, from the cursed tenants o^ their Religion, ought to be dreaded
by their Kings, whether Protestants, or favorers of such.

I told our friend, interrupting of him, that I was already fully satisfied of
the second Article: neither can I imagine how it is possible, that any man in
this Kingdom should doubt of it, after the no less clear then convincing
proofs, that our worthy Bishop of Lincoln has brought, in his learned
Observations upon the Bull of Pius the Fifth for the pretended Excommunication
of our renowned Queen Elizabeth. As to the Loyalty and honest intentions of the
Protestants of France I am likewise fully satisfied by all that you h^ve said*
And I make no question; but they that have been so good Subjects in a Kingdom,
where their Loyalty has undergon such rough Trials, will be all zeal and flame
in the service and for the Honor of our good King, who takes them into his
Protection with so much charity and compassion. But pray tell me, before we
part, what do you think of a little story, which Monsieur Maimbourg has printed
at the end of his Libell, under the Title of The Declaration of the Duchess of
York? I could tell you a great many things upon this subject, said our friend.
For I have the whole History of it. I have it here in English. But to speak
particularly to it, would force me to discover too many mysteries. It would
carry us a great way, and is much more proper for another time. I will only
tell you, that this Declaration was drawn up for quite another person, then the
late Duchess of York; and it were easy to prove, that the greater part of
what is there said, does not at all suit with this Lady. It was from much a
different principle, to what is reported in this piece, that she made so
sudden a change of her Religion. And they who were by, when she lay a dying,
have testified of quite other thoughts, then those they have made her declare
when they make her say, she found the Romish Religion so plainly taught in the
holy Scripture. Her great unquietness of Spirit which she discovered, when she
lay a dying, is as little suitable to these words in the Declaration, I have
been particularly and strongly convinced of the real presenc^ of Jesus. Christ
in the Holy Sacrament of the Altar, of the Churches infallibilit^ etc. But all
these things will be set out in their proper colors. However they are not to
our present purpose. I hope I have set you right, a^ to the justification of
the French Protestants quitting their Country, and of their unshaken Loyalty
to their Sovereign.

I do acknowledge, says I, and am extremely obliged, for the light you have
given me in this matter. I will be sure to improve it upon occasion; neither
shall it be my fault, if these poor persecuted People do not find a better
Country with us, than that they are come from. After which I took my leave of
our friend, and remain

Sir Yours etc.

End of the Sixth and last Letter.

