A short HISTORY OF Valentinus Gentilis THE Tritheist.

Tried, Condemned, and put to Death by the Protestant Reformed City and Church
of Bern in Switzerland, for Asserting the Three Divine Persons of the Trinity,
to be [Three Distinct, Eternal Spirits, etc.]

Wrote in Latin, by Benedictus Aretius, a Divine of that Church; and now
Translated into English for the use of Dr. Sherlock.

Humbly Tendered to the Consideration of the Archbishops and Bishops of this
Church and Kingdom.

London, Printed, and Sold by E. Whitlock, near Stationers' Hall, 1696.

TO THE Most Reverend the Archbishops, and the Right Reverend the Bishops of
the Church of England.
My Lords,

I Here present your Lordships with a short Account of the Proceedings of an
Eminent Protestant Reformed Church and State, against a Noted Tritheist, for
asserting Three Eternal Spirits in the Blessed Trinity; induced thereto by the
late fatal Growth of Tritheism in our Church; first vented and asserted in the
same and yet higher Terms by Dr. Sherlock, in his pretended Vindication of the
Doctrine of the Ever Blessed Trinity, in the Year 1690. And since that by one
J. B. Minister of Folkstone in Kent, and styling himself, A Presbyter of the
Church of England (to the extreme Disgrace of it), in a Book written in Defense
of the said Dr. Sherlock, and his Tritheistick Notions upon the same Article,
in the Year 1695. and since that also openly preached in the very Face of the
whole University of Oxon, by one Mr. Joseph Bingham, then a Fellow of
University-Colledge there, on the 28th of October, in 1695. And lastly,
maintained, and with great and even foaming Vehemence, preached up in one of
the most Eminent Cathedrals in England, by one of the Prebendaries of the same,
first on the 30th, Nov. 95. and since that on the 12th of January 9. Whose
Name, together with the Heterodoxyes then and there delivered by him, are ready
to be produced, as there shall be occasion. So that your Lordships can need
nothing further, either to alarm or convince you, That the Enemy has been
sowing his Tares amongst us, while you see them so plentifully coming up even
under your Eyes.

As for Dr. Sherlock, he has over and over declared, and lately again renewed
See Dr. Sherlock's Examination of the Oxford Censure, p. 46.
the same Declaration, viz. That the Three Divine Persons are Three distinct
Infinite Eternal Minds or Spirits; and that it is Heresy and Nonsense to judge
otherwise; (For He, it seems, may take upon him to declare Heresy without a
Reprimand.) And as for Presbyter I. B. of Folkstone, he asserts the very same
in Print. And not only so, but likewise, to the flagrant Scandal of our Church,
* professedly owns I am not afraid (says he) to commend Genebrard and Petavius
before Calvin and his Followers, who denied the Nicene Faith of [God of God].
See page 6. of his Preface against Tritheism Charged, etc.
and prefers Genebrard 's Tritheistick Doctrine of the Blessed Trinity, as
better and more Orthodox than that of Calvin and his Followers, whom he charges
with denying the Nicene Faith, as to that part of it [God of God]; which yet
Bellarmine himself (as much as he hated Calvin) vindicates him from, in his 2d
Book de Christo, and 19. Chap. To Note, That this book of Genebrard has not the
Numeral Mark upon every Page, but only upon every Leaf of it.
whom we may further add Beza, Brentius and Zanchius, with several other
Eminent Divines of the Reformation, All of them, with the utmost Calumny
reviled and condemned by this Genebrard; while on the other side he positively
Unus ille Spiritus Essentialiter est Tres Spiritus personaliter Geneb. contra
Schegkium de Trinitate, fol. 53. p. 2. And again, Tres sunt aeterni Spiritus
quorum unusquisque per se Deus est, fol. 54. p. 1.
vouches the horrid Opinions of Gentilis for sound and Catholic: And besides
all this, at one stroke charges all the Reformed Churches, both of France and
Germany, sometimes with Sabellianism, and sometimes with Arianism, as the
Reader will perceive by the Quotations here tendered him on the Tres Personas
(says Geneva to Schegkins) Uni essentiae affigis ut Synagogis Gallicis and
Germanicis placeas, quos jam Omnes Sabellians Scelere Contaminatas atque
Conspurcatas docui. Geneb. fol. 131. And again, Illud est quod Ecclesiam a Te
vestrisque Synagogis separat, quas omnes Arrtano vel Sabelliano Scelere
irretitas meridie ipso clarius demonstravi, and clarissie demonstrabo in Opere
quod contra istum Apostatam Zanchium parturio. fol. 144. p. 2.
side. This Genebrard, I say, is the Person followed and defended by Dr.
Sherlock's Defender, J. B. and that as to his Doctrine of the Trinity; as may
be more particularly and fully declared in another place. But in the mean time,
how these Encomium's, bestowed by a Presbyter of the Church of England, upon
such a Furious Tritheistick Papist (in so foul a manner, traducing the Doctrine
of most of the Protestant Divines and Churchis, about the blessed Trinity,)
will sound in the ears of the Reformed Churches abroad (whom we have been so
long professing to Court) is
left to the Bishops of this Reformed Church to judge: For some indeed have
shown themselves very zealous to quit a great part of our Ecclesiastical
Constitution, in order to our Union with those Churches beyond Sea; (Tho I
confess I could never yet hear, That those Churches alleged the Rites and
Ceremonies of our Church as any Bar to their Communion with it.) But howsoever
they do, or may stand affected to us, I dare undertake, that our quitting all
the Ceremonies hitherto enjoined and received amongst us (as Ancient, Decent,
and Inoffensive, as they certainly are) will not be half so powerful to draw
them to us, as the Asserting Three Distinct Infinite, Eternal Minds or Spirits
in the Blessed Trinity (or countenancing those who assert them) will be
effectual to make them abhor, loath, and fly from our Communion. And when they
are once gotten to such a distance from us, I fear we shall hardly get them
back again, but by quitting our Church Livings and Preferments to them, and
then we shall be thoroughly Reformed indeed.

That Tritheism therefore is in a thriving condition amongst us, cannot be
denied, nor so much as questioned. And the Causes of it are manifestly these
two: First, The great and advantageous Station held by that Person in the
Church, who first broached it here: And Secondly, The connivence which has ever
since attended him in the Assertion of it. The first of which has created him
several Dependencies amongst some poor empty Retainers, acted. by Hope and
Hunger (as Hunger and Emptiness generally go together;) who to serve their
Interest by his Favor, easily turn Proselytes to his Opinions; it being not
Imaginable that they should open their Mouths so wide for him, but to have them
filled by him. But such mischiefs must always be expected from Heterodoxy in
High Place; which is never so formidable for what it holds, as for what it has
to give. For this still made the Pope an Over-match for a Council, and may at
any time give an overgrown Heretic the vantage ground of Truth. Tho miserable,
no doubt, must the state of that Church needs be, where men shall wear her
Favors, so much to the prejudice of her Faith.

As for the other Reason of the Fatal spreading of this Poison, viz. The
Connivence and Encouragement attending the Person who first vented it; I shall
not stick to affirm, That he who asserts any thing contrary to the Received
Doctrine of the Church, (how much soever he may be favored or abetted,
dignified or distinguished) is a scandal to the Gown he wears, and an
Insufferable Reproach to the Church he wears it in. I very well know, That the
judicial Proceedings of the Church and Senate of Bern against that wretehed
Thitheist Gentilis, are no rule for us to proceed by, who have Laws of our own,
which allow of no such severity (as I am far from desiring that they should.)
Nevertheless, tho they are not a rule for us to proceed by, they may very well
be a Rule for us to judge by, so far at least, as to Conclude, That what upon
the Maturest deliberation, was accounted Capital in one Reformed Church (and
that a very great one too) cannot without scandal continue Uncensured and
Unrebuked in Another; which yet this Detestable Tritheism has done for several
years; and not only so, but the Publisher and Assertor of it, has been hitherto
so far from any thing like Censure, or Rebuke, that he has been Advanced,
Countenanced and Abetted to the utmost: And some talk of no less matters than
his being mounted shortly to the Episcopal Chair and Dignity; tho some again
think that it would be a very odd sight, in a Christian Church, to see a
Tritheist in a Bishopric, and holding his Tritheism with it in Commendam; for
let this happen when it will, I dare undertake that the Promotion of the man
will be the Degradation of the Office.

However, this is certain, That the wounds which this man has given this poor
Church, are deep and dangerous, and have been kept Bleeding so long, that now
they begin to Fester and threaten some further mischief; and it is too late to
dally any longer with the Cure. For, my Lords, your Lordships cannot but know
that Tritheism is worse, and more Reproachful to Christianity, not only than
Sabellianism, but even than Socinianism it self, as being contrary to all
Natural, as well as Revealed Religion, by destroying the grand, leading and
fundamental Article of Both, viz. The Unity of the Godhead; which Socinianism
(how much soever it impugns and denies the Revealed Article of three distinct
Persons in the Godhead) does not encroach upon. And yet in a further degree is
it worse than Arianism; for tho Arianism denies the Essential Deity of the Son,
making him only a Glorious Deified Creature, or the Firstborn of the Creation,
yet it still preserves the Unity of the Divine Essence entire and unmultiplied;
which the Assertion of Three distinct Infinite, Eternal Minds or Spirits
unavoidably multiplies, and by consequence destroys. Whereas the Unity of the
Godhead is the very Foundation and Corner Stone of all True Religion, and as
Essential an Article of the Christian Faith, as that of a Trinity of Persons it
self; Both of them together making up that great Depositum, which God has
committed to us to keep inviolably, and to defend resolutely (and in a word) to
save, as well as to be saved by.

And therefore. my Lords I shall recommend this important matter to your
Lordships, much in those words of Mordecai to Esther. Who knows but that you
are come to such high Place, Power and Dignity in our Church for such a Time as
This? And that God is now Trying whether you will make good the Zeal you have
so often professed for our Religion heretofore, by doing something signal,
great, and worthy of those Professions now. In a word, I look upon your
Lordships as Persons of that Sincerity and Clearness of Principle, that if you
believed this Doctrine of Three Distinct, Infinite, Eternal Minds, Spirits and
Substances in the ever Blessed Trinity, to be True, you would boldly and openly
Profess it, which since you do not, why should not so Scandalous a Corruption
of our Faith, receive a Check by some mark of your Lordships Disapprobation?
Hitherto I am sure there has been a Profound Silence in this matter; and I
heartily wish, the Enemies of our Religion may not pass that nicking Reflection
upon it, Tacent, Satis Laudant. For in good earnest it is very hard that Heresy
should overrun a Church, only because we must not call it Heresy.

But this is not the worst of our Case neither. For a certain Socinian Writer
(by a Spirit of Prophecy coming upon him from some above) When the Nominal
Trinitarians have called till they are hoarse, weary and ashamed, to
Universities and Bishops to espouse their Cause, and Censure the real
Trinitarians, etc. All their Appeals notwithstanding, it will not be long e're
they are told by their-Superiors in the Church, That it is expedient for them
to be quiet, lest themselves be Censured as Sabellians Answer to Dr. Bull, p.
68. col. 1.
positively tells the Nominal Trinitarians (as he calls those who assert a
Trinity of Divine Persons, in opposition to that of Three distinct, Infinite
Minds, Spirits, or Substances) that it will not be long before they be told by
their Superiors in the Church, That it will concern them to be Quiet (that is,
I suppose, to Write against Dr. Sherlock and his Tribe no more) lest they
themselves be censured as Sabellians. Now this, upon my word, is very home, and
sounds dreadfully indeed; and having been written about the middle of August
last, lets us into a farther Understanding of the late Letter sent to the
Vice Chancellor of Oxon, and shows, That there were Reprimands preparing for us
long before that scandalous Sermon was Preached there, and consequently before
the Oxford Censure could be thought of. And now if this be really so, is not
our Church, think we, in a blessed Condition? viz. That first, the Assertors of
its received Doctrine are to be censured; next, That They are to be Censured by
their Superiors in and of the same Church. And thirdly, That they are to be
Censured as Sabellian Heretics. And lastly, That the Socinians must be made
privy to this Design, while our Clergy knows nothing of it. What a dismal
Aspect, I say, must all this needs have upon our Church and Clergy? But as for
the Charge of Sabellianism, which we are here threatened with, I hope it will be
proved against us, before we are Censured for it; and then we desire no greater
security against such a Censure. For does not Sabellius hold only one single
Subsistence in the Godhead, and no more? And can those then be Sabellians who
hold three distinct Subsistences in the Same? And does not Sabellius allow only
a Trinity of Names, as of Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and that Founded in a
Trinity of Offices, as that the Father is the Creator of all things; the Son
the Redeemer of Mankind; and the Holy Ghost, the Sanctifier of the Church? The
Assumption of which Names and Offices having been a free effect of God's will,
might by Consequence (had God so pleased) never have been at all; since nothing
in the Divine Nature could make it necessary. But what is this to us, who
maintain three such Subsistences in the Divine Nature, as are Eternal,
Necessary and Inseparable (even by the Divine Power it self) both from the said
Nature, and from one another. I protest I cannot tell whether there be more
Malice or Ignorance in such a Charge (as often as some have the face to make
it.) But such is the Nature of Malice, that while it opens men's Mouths, it
commonly shuts their Eyes. In the mean time I would have this pert, meddling
Socinian know, That the Assertors of a Trinity of Persons against Three
Distinct, Infinite Minds or Spirits are neither grown so hoarse with Appealing
to Universities and Bishops, nor yet so weary and ashamed of so doing, but that
in case such a censure should pass upon them from those Superiors he speaks of,
they would have the Courage to appeal still; not indeed to them, but from them,
and that to the whole Nation, and to all the Protestant Churches and
Universities in Christendom. But, if what this Socinian has so boldly and
positively said and Printed of them, be false (as for their own sakes I trust
it is) I hope these Superiors will consider what may be the consequence of
sitting down tamely under such a Slander. However, let matters go as they will,
The Assertion of Three Divine Persons, in contradiction to Three Distinct,
Infinite, Eternal Minds, Spirits or Substances in the ever blessed Trinity, is
certainly the Cause of God, and he will not desert it, though others should.

The University of Oxford has appeared very considerably in this matter
already, and would have appeared yet further, and done much more had she not
been hindered from doing what she was ready and desirous to do; there being
nothing which that Great and Learned Body so ardently wished, and pressed for,
as a Liberty
to have declared it self Authoritatively against those scandalous Propositions
in full Convocation. But if, in the mean time, there is any Failure or Defect
(as some contend there is) in the late Censure so worthily passed upon the
forementioned Propositions, by that Venerable meeting of the Vice Chancellor,
the Bp. of the Diocese, and other Heads of Colleges and Halls there, it is to
be hoped, that your Lordships, to whom the Care of our Religion more
immediately and peculiarly belongs, will vouchsafe to supply the said Defect by
the greater Authority of your Episcopal Censure: For if so gross a Piece of
Paganism as that which holds [Three Distinct Infinite Eternal Minds or Spirits
in the Godhead], having been first vented by one in so considerable a Place and
Dignity in our Church, and to this very Day persisted in, and moreover defended
(to his poor Utmost) by one calling himself a Presbyter of the Church of
England; and after that preached publicly before one of our Universities; and
lastly, maintained from the Pulpit in one of our greatest Cathedrals Twice,
shall continue Uncensured and Uncontrouled by the Governors of our Church; a^
(...) upon these Terms, will be apt to look (...) Ecclesiastical Authority as
serving (...) else but to upbraid the Non-Ex^ (...) it is further referred to
your Lordships, seriously to consider, how Foreign Churches (which will
certainly hear of it,) will Resent it; And how Reproachfully it will Reflect
upon our Own; which I account a Church as well Reformed as the best of them;
and that without the help of a Further Reformation.

May God direct and assist your Lordships Counsels and Proceedings in so near
and Arduous a Concern of our Opposed Religion. For the Eyes of the World are
upon you, and their Ears open to hear what you will do. And as all who wish
your Lordships and the Church well, hope that you will acquit your selves in so
weighty an Affair, sutably to your High Character and Post in the Church, so
their next satisfaction will be, That your Lordships have had this matter
humbly, fairly and Dutifully laid before you, whether your Lordships shall
think fit to do anything in it or no.

So begging your Lordshipp's Paternal Blessing, I am,

My Lords, Your Lordshipp's most Humble, and Obedient Servant,

N. N.

ADVERTISEMENT, Concerning the Publication of the following History.
I Have here presented the Reader with this History, just as I find it
published by Aretius, though I am not ignorant, that several Parts and Passages
of it will seem foreign to the purpose, I produee it for. However, I thought it
more Advisable to lay it before the Reader entire and unaltered; as the
likeliest way to render it the less liable to Exception, which any
Abbreviatures, or Decurtations might probably subject it to; especially with
some sort of Readers, who will be but too ready to take occasion to Cavil where
the least pretense or shadow for it can be laid hold of.

I am not here concerned to make an exact Parallel between the Heresy of
Valentinus Gentilis, and the Opinion of Dr. Sherlock, as to all the
Particularities and Circumstantials of each; it being enough for my purpose,
that they agree, and are the same, as to the main of both; (viz.) The Assertion
of Three Eternal Spirits in the Blessed Trinity: But my chief Design is to show
the Noble Concern of a Protestant City and Senate in Vindicating so High an
Article as that of the Trinity against this Heretical Tritheistical Innovation
upon it.

And accordingly I have given the Reader not the entire History only, but also
the Epistle prefixed to it, and Dedicatory of it to the Lords of the Senate,
that so it may appear to all, That it was not written and Published at the sole
Will and Pleasure of a private Man, but by the Order and Authority of the
Governors of the Place, thereby Owning and Avowing their Proceedings against
this Heretic, to the whole World: And I cannot but, in Honor to them, wish
that all Christian Governors and Governments would show the same Magnanimous
Zeal and Courage in the Defense of their Faith; though I confess, I wish not,
that they should do the same way.

A Brief ACCOUNT OF Valentinus Gentilis: CONTAINING Some Passages of his Life
and Just Execution.

Together with An Orthodox Defense of the Article of the Holy Trinity against
his Blasphemies.

TO THE Most Honorable and Noble Lords, Nicholas a Diessbach, Nicholas a
Graffenried Treasurer: And Petermannus ab Erlach, Most Worthy Senators of the
Republic of BERN, and his Most Honored Lords and Patrons, Health through
Jesus Christ.
TO Discourse modestly of God, and Matters relating to him, is no small part of
Religion. For since the Nature of God is incomprehensible, his Power infinite,
and his Name inexpressible, no thought can comprehend his infinite Power, no
Eye approach so glorious a Light, no Tongue can declare it: And for this reason
the more sound Philosophers have been very sparing in their Discourses upon
this Subject. Plato is commended for his Modesty in this case; who, though he is
not afraid to style God, The Creator of the World, a Lover of Mankind, and the
provident Curator of all things, (Forasmuch as he is a most Wise Being, and
does not slight and despise the Work of his own Wisdom;) yet notwithstanding
all this confesses, That the Eyes of Men are too weak, to see through Matters
of Divinity.

Aristotle was satisfied with placing some one first Mover in the Heavens. But
he dares not say one word about the Nature of God. Others thought fit wholly to
omit this Question. The Judgment of Simonides on the Case is commonly known;
who being ask't by Hiero about the Nature of God, prolonged the time a good
while, by requesting more Days for Deliberation, and at last returned this
Answer, The more I think on it, the less I understand of it. After such a manner
did the Excellency of this Divine Nature exercise and tire the liveliest Wits
without the Church, that they were at last forced to acknowledge the
inscrutability of the Majesty thereof: And on the other side they perceived
such a blindness and decay of strength in Human Nature, as rendered it utterly
incapable of raising it self to such a degree of purity without a peculiar
dispensation from above.

And though within the Church this Doctrine of God has always remained more
uncorrupted and perspicuous; yet nevertheless the most Religious have thought
it a great piece of Wisdom, to confess their own weakness in this Affair; and
have therefore been contented with those Discoveries, God has been pleased to
make of himself, and have desisted from any farther search into this Sublime
Mystery. Hence in the Invocation of him this Phrase is made use of; God of
Abraham, God of Isaac, God of Jacob, God of our Fathers, etc. And when Jacob
made too curious an Enquiry after the Angel's Name, he was repelled by the Rays
of the Divine Majesty, and reprimanded by a Voice; Wherefore is it, that thou
ask after my Name? Moses also upon his asking after the Name of God, who
sent him to the Children of Israel, received only this answer, I am that I am;
and say, I am has sent me unto you. We ought therefore in this business also
to take notice of the Apostle's Advice, Not to think, above what we ought to
think, but to think soberly. For it is most certain, when we cast our thoughts
on things relating to God, our Understanding sees as little, if not less, than
the Owl at Noonday. But since there is a necessity still of Man's being
instructed concerning God, and this instruction is to be received from the
Church alone, it is the best way to keep strictly to one form of speaking, drawn
from the Prophetical and Evangelical Writings; because the Church has taken
these from God's own Mouth; whence the Apostle calls the Scripture (...), or
inspired. And this the Church kept pure and undefiled, till a parcel of
Ambitious Men rose up, who laying no restraint on their wild Fancies, made a
very ill use of the simplicity of the Scripture, and began to affix New
Interpretations to Texts. To keep these Fellows within their Bounds, and to
show that their Opinions were contrary to Scripture, 'twas necessary, that
better Men should limit the sense of things in other words. Wherefore
since. Words were to be interpreted by Words, and Phrases by other forms of
Speech, they referred themselves and their Writings to the Scriptures.
Forasmuch as no one can speak better of God, than God does of himself. And
therefore, when we are to speak of him, it is our Duty to consult him first
speaking of himself. Moreover as it is impious to deny the use of
Scripture-Forms of speaking; so it is downright Malice to condemn those that are
commonly received, so long as reason proves not, that they maintain any thing
against Scripture. In Ecclesiastical Histories and Acts of Synods there are
abundance of Examples (were they pertinent to be mentioned here) of this
Nature. Our Age has seen one in Valentinus Gentilis; who, that he might destroy
the Unity of the Divine Essence, in his explication of the Three Persons,
quarreled first with the received Terms, such
as are the (...) and (...) of the Persons. See Dr. Sherl. taking the same
Course since; as appears from these Words. The Truth is, That which has
confounded this Mystery (viz. of the Trinity) has been the vain endeavor to
reduce it, to Terms of Art, such as Nature, Essence, Substance, Subsistence,
Hypostasis, and the like. Vind. Trin. p. 138. l. the last, and page 139. l. the
first.
For as long as they were made use of, he saw 'twas impossible to maintain
three Spirits distinct in Essence and Degree.

This small Treatise shows the unanimous determination of the Church concerning
this Doctrine, together with the rise of that Corruption.

My Lords, I present this History to your Lordships, because you presided at
the Trial; and it was to your grief that you heard this Corruption of the true
Doctrine was brought into the Church: And since the account might prove useful
to the World, 'twas not fit it should be made public so much upon my private
Will, as your Lordship's public Commands.

The Lord Jesus Christ govern you by his good Spirit, that you may lead long
and happy Lives in these Honorable Stations, to the defense of the Orthodox
Doctrine, and the interest of your Country. Amen.

M. D. LXVII. Call. Junii.

My Lords, Your Lordships most humble Servant,

B. Aretius.

THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS.
CHAP 1. HOW and where Valentinus Gentilis fell into those New Opinions, and
what great mischief he did by spreading of them. Chap. 2. Upon what account he
was brought to Bern. Chap. 3. Concerning his Writings, and the Heads of his
Accusation. Chap. 4. Whether he ought to have been heard as Plaintiff. Chap. 5.
Containing some Propositions taken out of his Books of the Trinity, which we
judge to be false. Chap. 6. An account of his Errors, about the Article of the
Blessed Trinity. Chap. 7. Of these Words, Trinitas, (...), and what they do
properly signify. Chap. 8. What was the Opinion of Arius, and wherein Gentilis
and he do agree. Chap. 9. Concerning the Generation of the Son of God, and how
we ought to understand the Words (...), and (...). Chap. 10. Whether or no it
be proper to the Father to be called the One only God. Chap. 11. The Judgment
and Consent of Scripture, with respect to this Article. Chap. 12. Gentilis's
Censure of the Fathers and their Writings. Chap. 13. The Judgment of Justin,
Martyr, and Philosopher. Chap. 14. The Judgment of St. Ignatius. Chap. 15. The
Judgment of Tertullian. Chap. 16. Concerning the Fathers, especially St.
Austin. Chap. 17. Concerning the Communication of Attributes, or Properties.
Chap. 18. Containing some of Gentilis's Notorious Blasphemies. Chap. 19. Of the
vile Scandals he has falsely thrown upon the Doctrine of our Church. Chap. 20.
Of the Cheats and Impostures whereby he indeavor'd to impose upon good
(well-meaning) People.
A Brief ACCOUNT OF Valentinus Gentilis, etc.
CHAP. I.
How, and where he fell into those New Opinions, and what great mischief he did
by spreading of them.

VAlentinus Gentilis, a Campanian, having lest his Native Country Cosentia,
Traveled through Naples, Sicily, and Italy, and at last arrived at Geneva.
There were at that time in the Italian Church [of that City] several Persons
out of all parts of Italy, who came thither upon very different accounts; but
were mostly such, as being Banished out of their own Country for the sake of
Religion, had made this their place of Refuge. Amongst them were several (...),
So that Dr. Sherl. may find sevaral (...), much Antienter than himself.
Inventers of New Doctrines. Such was G. Blandrata a Physician, who had newly
began to attack the Doctrine of the Trinity; but as yet all he did was in
private only, and by way of Letters to some familiar Acquaintance. The Dispute
was concerning the commonly received Terms, (...), and (...), Trinitas, (...),
etc. At the
same time M. Gribaldus an eminent Lawyer, and Paulus Alciatus a Milanese were
engaged in carrying on the same design. Gentilis was no sooner come to Town,
and heard of the Controversy, but he wholly applied himself to the Study of
it. And in a short time he and his Friends became so great Proficients in it,
as boldly to assert, That the Reformed Churches were still agreed with the
Papists in that abominable and grievous Error, of subscribing to the Article of
the Trinity: For by that Doctrine of theirs, they as well as the Papists, did
not defend a Trinity, but rather a Quaternity. That a true Trinity ought to
consist So says Philoponus, Joachim, and Dr. Sherlock, with the rest of the
Tritheistick Tribe.
of Three Eternal distinct Spirits, differing from each other essentially
rather than personally. This was what these Innovators did then unanimously
profess; but falling afterward into different Factions, they ran into several
contradictory and extravagant Opinions: And being called to account for their
Doctrines at Geneva, they all made a shift some way or other to get off; by
what particular means, I shall not now concern my self; my chief design being
to give a brief account of Gentilis only.

Who though he had undertaken to defend the same Opinions with Blandrata,
Gribaldus, and Alciatus, yet shortly after made his Recantation, and by an
exemplary Penance, publicly abjured his Novel Doctrines. This happened in the
Year 1558; to testify the truth of which there is extant a Narrative of the
whole Proceedings.

But having thus solemnly renounced his own Opinions more for fear of Death,
than out of any real sense of their Impiety, and still retaining a strong
desire, of defending them, it was not long, e're despising the Calvin says that
he had most perfidiously for sworn himself Thrice. But Tritheists must be
allowed to have more skill in dealing with an Oath, than other Men. See
Calvin's Narrative of Gentilis, in his Opuscula, p. 764.
sacred Obligations of his Oath, and committing the most horrid Perjury, he
fled from Geneva.

Near which place was the Town of Fargiae, where M. Gribaldus lived, with whom
he associated himself: And in the same place was Alciatus, and with him a
certain Schoolmaster, and Tutor to Gribaldus's Children; amongst whom (after
the coming of Gentilis) there were frequent Conferences and Disputes about the
same Controversies; by all which Gentilis was mightily confirmed in his
Notions: And so leaving them, he went to Lions, where he was furnished with
plenty of Books by one Baptista Lucensis, and there made Collections out of the
Fathers in order to confirm and establish his new Opinions. And seeing both the
Latin and Greek Fathers were universally quoted by the Orthodox, he made it his
business to consult the most ancient of them.

But the Collections he made, were only some miserable, imperfect, broken
Quotations out of Ignatius's Epistles, Justin Martyr, and Tertullian; nay, so
impudent was St. Hilary.
he, as to ransack the Alcoran for Authorities, and quote even Mahomet himself.
And then he very roundly condemned and exploded all the rest of the Fathers,
such as St. Austin, St. Jerome, St. Basil, Chrysostom, Damascene, and whoever
else had plainly expressed their Thoughts concerning the Trinity in a different
way from him. Nay, he wholly rejected some Books in Justin Martyr and
Tertullian, and questioned the Authority of others. And because so grand an
Affair could not be successfully managed without Writing, he set himself upon
that also; and in a short time wrote a Book, entitled his Antidotes, wherein
he endeavored to vindicate himself against his Adversaries of Geneva, and to
answer the Objections, which the Ministers of the Italian Congregation there,
had produced against his Opinions. The Book, which he made was not published,
but was found lying by him in MSS. Being now furnished with new Arguments and
Reasons, he went to Grenoble, where his dear Friend Gribaldus was then public
Professor. And besides all this he was now fallen into a Distemper, which
forced the needy Gentleman to seek out for a place, where he might be kindly
received, and find a comfortable retirement and subsistence during his Sickness.

Whilst he was under Cure, his Principles began to be known abroad, upon which
account he was commanded by the Magistrates to exhibit a Confession of his
Faith, which he so cunningly contrived, by abusing the Reformed Churches, and
in particular Mr. Calvin, that it was admitted for Orthodox by the Particularly
by Genebrardus.
Papists. But he said nothing at all to the purpose as to the main point and
business of the Controversy. From thence he went to Chambrey a Neighboring
Town, but being disturbed in this place also, he returned to Fargiae. By this
time his Doctrines began to make a noise in the World. For Geneva, being not
far off, was able to give an ample Testimony of the Sea the account given of
him by Calvin in his Opuscula.
whole Proceedings. And he himself was well enough known by his rambling about
at Lions, Chambrey, Grenoble, and in Dauphiny.

The Town of Fargiae is in the Presecture of Gaium, and belongs to the
Illustrious Lords of Bern. The Governor of which place being advertised of the
arrival of this Pestilent Fellow, ordered his Officers to apprehend him, and
bring him to Gaium; where he was put into Custody, but after some time, was
released out of Prison, though still bound to his good Behavior. But
notwithstanding all this, he still continued industriously to propagate his
Errors, denying that his Opinions did in any wise interfere with the public
Peace.

And here he played a fresh Prank. For when the Governor had demanded of him a
Confession, with design to send it to Bern, there to be examined by the Clergy;
what did Gentilis do, but sent it to the Press, pretending the Governor's
Command for so doing: To this Confession he added some Propositions with many
seurrilous Reflections upon St. Athanasius. Nor was this enough, but he must
likewise abuse the Name and Authority of the Governor, by Dedicating his Book
to him, which so highly incensed the Governor, that could he have laid hold of
the Offender, he would immediately have thrown him into Gaol again.

Hence he went back to Lions, where the Provost of the City put him into Prison
for the very same Doctrine, and kept him there almost two Months, but at last
he gained his Liberty by much such another Trick as before. For he so softened
his Book of Antidotes and Confession, that they rather seemed Libels against
Mr. Calvin, than Treatises against the Trinity; and so he got free.

The next Summer he went into Poland, being invited thither by Blandrata and
Alciatus, who looked upon him as a fit Instrument to raise Innovations in the
Churches of Poland. Here he stayed for above two Years, to the great Mischief
both of Church and State. And had not Divine Providence confounded the Designs
of these Men, by setting them at variance amongst themselves, it is probable the
Wounds they had given Religion might have proved more dangerous to the Church.
For Blandrata and Gentilis turned Arians, and Alciatus a Mohammedan; and others
(as their wild Fancies led them) embraced more monstrous and extravagant
Opinions. And thus having disturbed the Peace of the Church, they now began to
quarrel amongst themselves: And that this is true, the present unhappy state of
Poland does sufficiently testify. The Followers of Blandrata were arrived to
such a pitch as to avow and openly defend the Doctrine of Arius. They condemned
the Council of Nice, and the Creed made by it; ridiculed and exploded the Terms
(...), As Dr. Sherlock, and his Tritheistical Followers now do in England.
(...). Some denied the Incarnation of the Son of God, and others impugn'd the
Immortality of the Soul; a third sort asserted, that our Savior had his
Beginning and Existence from the Virgin Mary, a fourth allowed of Polygamy; and
a fifth sort became Patrons of the Extravagancies of Mahomet. These are the sad
Effects of those Spirits of Error, which Satan (by the just Judgment of God)
sends to delude the old, decaying World. How great the Distractions and
Confusions were that followed the Publication of these erroneous Doctrines, we
may easily gather from the King's Proclamation, strictly commanding all such
Strangers as were Setters up of New Doctrines, immediately to depart the
Kingdom; by which Edict, Gentilis, amongst the rest, was driven out of Poland.
Being expelled Poland, his next Journey was into Moravia, where he joined with
the Anabaptists. From thence he went to Vienna; every where, as he traveled,
dispersing his new invented Notions.

But still continuing unsettled, indeed being able to stay no where, he began
to think of returning into Savoy, believing, as he said, the Churches there to
be the most moderate, and less infected of any whatever; and, besides this, he
was in hopes to find Gribaldus, and the rest of his Accomplices alive, from
whom he might receive assistance; Mr. Calvin (whom he always found a most
zealous Adversary to all his Novelties) being now dead. All these
Considerations put together, made him look upon Savoy, at this time, as the
most secure place of Retirement, after so many dangerous Adventures. But as the
wise Providence of God had ordained he should by his own Folly blindly run on
upon ruin, he came to Gaium, where the very same Governor, he had formerly
affronted, was then by an extraordinary Commission, continued Governor of that
Province. To him Gentilis made his Application, and begged of him the Favor of
a Public Disputation: The Governor's Answer was, He should be sure to have
Justice done him: And thereupon committed him to Prison. Thus was this subtle,
cunning Heretic, who had been so insufferably troublesome to so many Churches,
brought into such straits, that He was never afterward able to extricate
himself.

This I thought necessary to be at large premised, that the Reader might the
better be informed, how he came to fall into these strange Absurdities; and in
what Places he dispersed them; what a Disturber he had been of the Peace of the
Church; how often he had brought himself by these Practices into very dangerous
Circumstances; and yet still by some crafty Evasion or other, made a shift to
escape, till at last Divine Justice brought him to condign Punishment.

CHAP. II.
Upon what Account he was brought to Bern.

THE Senate of Bern were soon acquainted with his Confinement at Gaium, which
happened on the 2d. of June, 1566. And understanding, (1.) That he maintained
and taught the same Errors he once had abjured; and, (2.) That thereby he had
involved himself in a grievous Perjury; (3.) That he had condemned our Church
as still subject to Papal Slavery; when at the same time he himself, though in a
Popish Country, could publish such a Confession, as easily procured him
Liberty. (4.) That he had actually endeavored to undermine the Doctrine of the
Trinity. (5.) That Poland had been mightily disturbed by him and his
Accomplices. (6.) That the Ringleaders of the Faction (who formerly did all
profess the same Opinion) were now altogether by the Ears; one an Arian, and
another a Mohammedan, etc. (7.) That their Doctrines were publicly condemned
throughout Germany, their Errors animadverted upon from the Pulpit, and their
Opinions, both by Writing Andtherefore not preached from thence before their
Universities; nor written against by One only amongst them, and no more.
and Disputations, in all the Schools were every where rejected and exploded.
The Senate upon these Accounts ordered him to be brought to Bern. Besides all
this, he was to give the Governor of Gaium Satisfaction for the Book, which he
published and dedicated to him. Nay more, Gentilis himself, perceiving the
Governor did so highly resent the Affront, which he had offered him by the
said Dedication, made his Appeal to the Senate at Bern, whither he was brought
the 19th. of July.

CHAP. III.
Concerning his Writings and the Heads of his Accusation.

AT Bern he continued under Confinement for some time, without having any thing
else done to him. At last, by command of the Senate, the Papers, which were
found about him, were examined.

The first was a Book wrote with his own hand, and dedicated to Sigismund King
of Poland, consisting of 29 Sheets and 175 Leaves. In this Book was contained
the whole System of his Doctrine, and Principles; tho he affirmed he had one
much more complete, transcribed by Blandrata. In the Epistle Dedicatory, which
is very long, he courts the Favor, and begs the Protection of his Majesty,
both for Himself and his Cause. Then repeats the Confessions he made at Geneva,
before his Recantation; the last of which Confessions having been confuted by
them of Geneva, he subjoins to it, by way of Defense, his Book of Antidotes,
which he formerly composed at Lions. Then he falls upon refuting the 13th.
Chapter of the first Book of Calvin's Institutions; and, in the same place,
utterly condemns the Doctrine of the Trinity, as it had hitherto been delivered
and taught in all Churches whatever. Next to that he produces several
Propositions out of St. Austin; especially out of his fifteen Books of the
Trinity, which together with their incomparable Author, he rejects and exposes
with all Much like Dr. Sherlock's Modest Examination, etc.
imaginable Scurrility. After that he produces several nice Passages out of the
Scripture, the Fathers, and the Alcoran, in defense of his Doctrine. And last
of all annexes his Annotations upon Athanasius to the end of the Book.

Secondly, There were found some Verses wrote with his own hand, being nothing
else but a bitter Scurrilous Libel against the Blessed Trinity, and its
Worshippers.

Thirdly, A Book in Italian, with another in Latin of the same strain,
concerning the Incarnation of Christ.

Fourthly, A printed Book under a false Name, dedicated to the Governor of
Gaium, with a preliminary Discourse to the Clergy; which though it carries
Antwerp in the Title Page, yet was indeed Printed at Lions.

Out of all these Papers were collected several Articles, with the Heads of an
Indictment to be preferred against him, which are all reducible to these four
particulars.

First, That he dissented from Us, and So does Dr. Sherlock.
all the Orthodox in the Doctrine of the Trinity.

Secondly, That he had thrown many Scandalous and unheard of Imputations upon
our Church, and charged her with Heresy.

Thirdly, That his Writings contain many impious Blasphemies, frequently used
by him in his Disputes concerning the Trinity; and that in his Behavior he
could not abstain from the like impudent Scurrility.

Fourthly, All the Cheats and Impostures were notoriously evident, which he
commonly used in disguising his Opinions, in working out his own Deliverance,
and seducing others, to the danger of their Lives: But of this in its proper
place.

When these things were urged against him, namely, That

First, He had entertained intolerable erroneous Notions about the Trinity. That

Secondly, He had falsely charged us with several Errors, which none of us did
ever defend, nay, more would never permit any Body else that did harbor or
maintain such Notions. That

Thirdly, His Writings were filled with many horrid Blasphemies, reflecting not
so much on the Persons of his Adversaries, as on the Sacred Subject in dispute,
And

Lastly, That by his shuffling and impertinent Digressions, he so mightily
perplexed and obscured the Cause, as gave too just reason to suspect he did
industriously seek for Evasions. We therefore desired him fairly and honestly
to give in his Answer to each particular that should be asked him.

Here Gentilis made a long Speech about the Infirmity of his Body, the
craziness of his Head, and the weakness of his Memory (which was now so
mightily decayed, that he could scarce remember the Actions of one whole Day,
and therefore being in such a condition, might not perhaps be able to give a
reasonable Answer to all their Interrogatories) with many more of the like idle
Excuses, to avoid being brought to the Bar as a Malefactor, and gain the
privilege of being heard as Plaintiff, which unless they granted him, he
protested he could not have Justice done him in so weighty a Cause.

CHAP. IV.
Whether he ought to have been heard as Plaintiff.

THIS Exception of his must first be answered: But let any Honest Man judge,
what grounds he could have for such a Declinatory Plea, besides the crafty
design of prescribing such a Form of Trial, so advantageous to himself, that he
was sure to have none, or at most but very few Prosecutors, and withal to gain
the Privilege of arraigning whom he pleased.

To make this case more plain and intelligible, I shall here take the trouble
of repeating those Arguments, he proposed in his own defense upon this occasion.

First, He pleaded that his coming to Town was Voluntary, and on purpose to
treat with the Honorable Senate concerning the same Business he was now
indicted for.

Secondly, He urged his being an Assertor of the Sovereignty of God the Father,
and a zealous Defender of the Truth of the Gospel against false and Heterodox
Expositors.

Thirdly, He pretended that he was not yet convicted of any such erroneous
Doctrines, [as were laid to his charge:]

And Lastly, Thought it was very hard he should be bound to give in his Answer
before he knew who were to be his Accusers.

In answer to which he was desired first to consider his present Circumstances;
That he was under Confinement, and Prisoner to a Christian Magistrate; which
was no proper Qualification for a Plaintiff, but rather the Sign of an Offender.

In the next place he was told, it was but just and equitable for him in the
quality of a Prisoner, to hear first the Charge that lay against him, or the
causes of his Confinement, and then fairly to give in his Answers, and clear
himself, if he desired to be released; but that nothing could be more repugnant
to the Practice of all Courts, than for a Person in Chains to turn Prosecutor.

First, As for his pretense of coming thither voluntarily, that was thought to
be an excuse not at all material, since Malefactors do by the just Judgment of
God frequently of their own accord thrust themselves into places most dangerous
and fatal to them. And though it be true, that he came voluntarily to Gaium,
yet being there apprehended, and for certain Reasons committed to Prison, he
still continued a Prisoner, and under that Quality it was, that he was conveyed
to Bern.

Secondly, Equally impertinent were his vain Pretensions of vindicating the
Sovereignty of God the Father, and of asserting the Truth of the Gospel against
false Expositors; since we were not yet satisfied of the legality of his Call.
Nor could we give any credit to those extraordinary Horrors and unusual
Convulsions he pretended to have twice felt, when at Prayers in Geneva; as if
he had been instigated by the secret Impulses of the Holy Ghost to pronounce
the Ministers of that Church, Defenders of Quaternity.

Thirdly, As to his Errors and false Doctrines, we were of Opinion that he
needed no farther Conviction, than his own abjuration of them at Geneva, where
he underwent public Penance, when Sentence was given against him in the
following words, (viz.)

It Is the Judgment of the Court, that you Valentinus Gentilis, undergo the
following Punishment.

First, That you shall be stripped close to your Shirt, then barefoot and
bareheaded shall carry in your hand a lighted Torch, and beg God's Pardon and
ours on your Knees, by confessing your self maliciously and wickedly to have
spread abroad a false and Heretical Doctrine; but that you do now from your
heart detest and abhor those abominable, Lying, Blasphemous Books, you composed
in its defense; in Testimony whereof you shall cast them with your own Hands
into the Flames, there to be burnt to Ashes; and for more ample satisfaction we
do enjoin you to be led through all the Streets of this City, at the sound of
the Trumpet, and habited as before; and do strictly command you not to depart
this City without permission, etc.

Therefore seeing he had so publicly condemned the same Doctrines which he now
endeavored to revive, and after so singular a manner done Penance for them;
which yet he now endeavored to revive, it would be absurd to admit of their
defense by such a faithless shuffling Advocate. Besides, he could not be
ignorant what a grievous Perjury he had committed by going out of Geneva
without permission, contrary to the Oath he had once took; this last Charge was
so notorious, that he could give no other Answer, but that he was sorry for it.

Fourthly, To the last Exception, of his not knowing who were to be his
Accusers, our Answer was, We would 1. Produce the same Persons who had formerly
impleaded him, when he made his Recantation at Geneva. And 2. Those who had
banished him with the rest of his Heretical Accomplices out of Poland; and if
these were not enough, we had in store the Churches of Germany, by whom his
Opinions were condemned, as savouring of Arianism. And

Lastly, We had the And those I suppose passed in their respective Convocations.
Decreta of several Universities, whereby his Doctrine was exploded, and
himself by Name condemned for an Heretic; particularly Alexander Alepius, of
the University of Lipswick, was present, ready to testify against him; so that
it seems one of the strangest things in the World for him to pretend ignorance
of his Accusers, when he had in all places found, so many and so considerable
Adversaries.

Now all this being so notorious, that the most frontless Impudence could not
deny one Syllable of it, I think nothing can be more plain, than that he ought
not to be admitted as Plaintiff, and that upon these Accounts.

First, As having once already renounced the Doctrine he now went about to
defend.

Secondly, Because he was guilty of Perjury in the same case.

Thirdly, As being indicted by so many known Accusers.

Fourthly, Because he had endeavored to undermine one of the prime Articles of
our Faith, an Article so essential to the very
being of Christianity, that in the worst and darkest times of Popery, it still
continued pure and uncorrupted.

And Lastly, Because the leading Assertors of this new Doctrine had not yet
agreed upon their Principles: For according to his own Confession, Blandrata
turned Arian, Alciat a Mohammedan, and himself and Gribaldus were still of
different Opinions. For when our Confession was tendered him, to which
Gribaldus had formerly subscribed, he disapproved and condemned it, withal
affirming Gribalaus to have committed a grievous. Sin by subscribing it.

Upon these Accounts he was debarred from being a Plaintiff (whether justly or
not, let the World judge) and commanded to give in a particular Answer to the
Articles preferred against him.

CHAP. V.
Containing some Propositions taken out of his Books of the Trinity, which we
judge to be false.

AND now we desire the whole Church of God, and the Piety of all succeeding
Ages to judge of the following Positions, wherein he does either by an impudent
prevarication scandalize and bespatter us, or, which is far worse, impiously
blaspheme God.

And first, He calls the Trinity a mere human Invention, not so much as known
to any Catholic Creed, and directly contrary to the Word of God.

Secondly he affirms, That the Father alone is that One only God, set forth to
us in the Holy Scriptures.

Thirdly, That the Son is not of himself, but of the Father, to whom He is
Subordinate as to his Maker, [or Essentiator.]

Fourthly, The Father, Son and Holy Ghost are not only three distinct Persons,
but have also Three distinct Essences or Substances.


Fifthly, The Son was begotten by the Father, according to his Substance, and
differs from the Father as a Subordinate Spirit.

Sixthly, There are in the Trinity Three
Eternal Spirits, each of which is by himself The fourth and sixth are Dr.
Sherlock's Doctrine expressly.
God.

Seventhly, That these three Spirits differ from each other in Order, Degree,
and Propriety of Essence.

CHAP. VI.
An Account of his Errors about the Article of the Blessed Trinity.

THE adorable Mystery of the Trinity is the constant Subject that runs through all
his Writings: A Subject which he handles after such a rate, as that he seems
neither to have thought nor wrote of any thing else, for the space at least of
8 Years last past.

In all which his principal design is to advance such a distinction in the
Divine Essence, as might make the three Persons three distinct Spirits of
different order and degree. As when we say, The Father of our Lord Jesus Christ
is a Person in the Individual Trinity, Gentilis will have this to be false, and
that we ought to say, The Father of our Lord Jesus Christ is that one God [is
God alone.] Again, when we say Father, Son and Holy Ghost are one God Eternal,
he here accuses us of Heresy, telling us, The Father alone is God of himself,
[(...),] not begotten, [(...),] Maker of all things [Essentiator.] But that the
Son was made [Essentiatus,] or received his Being from another; is indeed God,
but not (...); and so likewise the Holy Ghost; and by consequence that they are
not One but Three Eternals.

Again, when we affirm that one God is to be Worshipped in Trinity, and Trinity
in Unity; this Pious plain Proposition he calls mere Perhaps he meant
Gypsie-Cant and mere Gibberish.
Cant, and perfect Sophistry; and plainly affirms, page 20. of his Antidotes,
That there are three Spirits really Subsisting. There are, says he, Antid. fol.
27, and 28. therefore Three, because So that we see, Three Eternal Spirits are
but an old Story, and Vented long before the Year 1690.
three Eternal Spirits. And explains himself, page 70. They are (says he) Three
Eternal Spirits distinguished by a gradual and due Subordination: And though he
grants the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost to be three Persons of the same Nature,
yet he adds, They are distinct in Order, Degree, and Propriety; to explain
which, he affirms, That it is proper to the Father, to be styled the One only
God, by which explication the Son and Holy Ghost are manifestly excluded from
the Unity of the Godhead. But he fancies there is a kind of (...),
Self-existence, which belongs to the Father only, that cannot be attributed to
the Son. Hence it is, he styles the Father (...), i. e. God of himself, as he
is more eminently, truly, and properly God; but the Son is not (...), but (...)
and (...), [a secondary and different sort of God;] whence he infers, That the
Son is not of himself, but of God the Father, who alone is (...), God of
himself, p. 54. and p. 161. That God the Father is in the Scriptures called the
only God, Invisible, most High, and the God of Christ or of the Word Incarnate.
Again, p. 82. the Son is Subordinate [Essentiatori] to him that gave him Being;
and so he makes the Father Essentiator, and the Son Essentiatus; and (by
consequence) the Father to be properly God, and the Son only a Subordinate
inferior God.

Whereas we on the contrary do admit of no degrees in the Godhead, and do
positively assert, That the Essence of God is but one single Essence, not
Subordinate (or capable of Superiority and Inferiority.) However to bring
himself clearly off here, he says, that when he affirms, The Father is the One
only God, this ought to be referred wholly to his Self-existence, not to his
Numerical Substance. But who cannot easily discern, that this pitiful shift is
too weak to support his tottering Cause? For still this Absurdity will remain;
to wit, That the Son is not Self-existent; and which is yet a plainer
contradiction, 'twill follow that the Son with the Father is one God, and yet
that the Father alone is this one God; likewise that the Essence, or (...) of
the Godhead, is common to all three Persons, and yet Self-existence, or (...),
is peculiar to the Father. Farther, when we say, and yet they are not three
Gods, but one God, he cries out upon this as an abominable Error, forasmuch as
these Words, one God, are to be understood of [and applied to] the Father only
exclusive of the Son. Antidote 5. he pretends, that we ought not to say these
three are one God [Unus Deus] but only Unum. For that all three have indeed but
one Godhead, but yet are not all three one God. And shortly after he adds, The
Father alone is the One God, and shows, page 50. that, the word One belongs not
to the Unity (...) of Substance or Essence, but to the Self-Existence, to the
(...) of the Father. And then concludes, page 59. that Christ is not (...), or
God of himself; and scornfully upbraids us with wresting the Term, Unus, proper
only to the Father, to signify the Unity of Essence belonging to the three
Persons, contending that we ought to say, The Father, Son and Holy Ghost are
Unum, but they are by no means Unus, or one God. Therefore when we say, [And
yet not Three Eternals, but one Eternal;] Gentilis will have this to be a grand
mistake; for that they are Three Eternal Spirits, which cannot be One or Unus.
Thus I have briefly, and with what plainness I could, collected his Tenets out
of his own Writings, which likewise he has frequently owned and endeavored to
defend in common Discourse and Conversation.

In short, the Sum of what he asserted, is briefly this; That the Father is one
God, the Son another God, and the Holy Ghost a third God; That they are all
One, (Unum) yet not unus Deus [one God] but three Subordinate Spirits; that the
Father only is properly to be called, The One God, who alone is of himself, and
strictly (...).

Here it is to be observed, That when we say One God, that Expression may be
understood two ways.

First, One (...), in Essence:

Secondly, One (...), in Name only.

The first Acceptance he utterly rejects, or else he could never defend Dr.
Sherlock defends the very same.
Three distinct intelligent Substances.

The latter he allows of, and recommends by a very pompous Exposition, as that
these Three Spirits are He might have added in Mutual Consciousness too.
One in Consent, in Will, in Nature, in Power, in Dominion, in Operations, etc.
and to this sense he wrests whatever is said in Scripture concerning the Unity
of the Godhead. But the Universal Consent of the Catholic Church teaches us
quite otherwise; namely, That God is One in Essence, which one Essence subsists
in three Persons. In this sense has the Church hitherto expounded the Apostles
Creed. I Believe in God. But what God do you believe in? Why, in the Father Son
and Holy Ghost. Thus the Nicene Creed added the Term (...), [of the same
Substance] to express the Identity of Substance in opposition to the
Blasphemies of Arius. And the Creed of Athanasius in express terms tells us, We
must confess the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost not to be Three Gods, but One God,
neither confounding the Persons, nor dividing the Substance. And in this
Trinity (says he) none is before or after other, none greater or less than
another, but the whole Three Persons are coeternal and coequal; so that in all
things a Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity, is to be worshipped. By
denying of this, Gentilis has been the occasion of introducing several
dangerous and insufferable Errors into the Church.

CHAP. VII.
Of those Words, Trinitas, (...), and what they do properly signify.

NOW because he quarrels with the word Trinity as used by us, and every where
confounds (...) and (...) (using promiscuously the Words (...), substantia,
essentia, persona, and hypostasis,) we will therefore briefly explain their
proper significations. For there is not an Arranter Piece of Sophistry, than to
use Words in a different sense from that, wherein they have usually been
received and taken? It Is true indeed, we ought not to be over Nice in our
Expressions; and wrangle about Words, when we are agreed as to the thing; but
what madness is it to Coin new Terms, and cry down the old without any reason
or necessity? It is Let Dr. Sherl and his Party give a satisfactory Answer to
this, if they can.
in my Opinion equally advisable to retain the Language, as well as to imitate
the Manners of our wise Forefathers.

But to come to the business: The Word Trinity in this Question does not
signify an Abstracted Number, as when we say in Latin ternio, quaternio, [in
English three or four Units] but it denotes an (...), something really
existing; thence it is that the Trinity was called (...). Conformably to which
the Greek Fathers, Gregory Nazianzen, St. Basil, Damascen, and also the Latins,
do generally speak of the Trinity. And therefore Gentilis is much in the wrong,
when he concludes, because the Father is God, the Son God, and the Holy Ghost
God, and the Trinity likewise God, therefore there are four Persons of the
Godhead; and whoever asserts this, must likewise assert a Quaternity, not a
Trinity. We do absolutely deny the consequence. For no body says that the
Trinity as distinct from, and without the Persons of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, is God Or that the Godhead Subsists by it self, out of the Persons, but
actually and wholly in the Persons, and not otherwise.
For the very being of the Trinity [and of the Godhead too] is in these three
Persons, and without them there can be neither Godhead, nor Essence of the
Godhead. But the true consequence had been this, the Father is God, the Son
God, and the Holy Ghost God, and these three are One, therefore there is in the
Godhead a Trinity of Persons; nor by asserting of this do we in any wise set up
a new God or Idol. But to proceed, the Word [Trinity] was not without very good
reason brought into the Church. For the Bishops assembled with Athanasius at
Alexandria [as we are told by Sozomen, l. 6. c. 20. Hist. trip.] to defend and
establish the Decree of the Nicene Council concerning the consubstantiality of
the Father, Son, and H. Ghost, in opposition to the turbulent Arians, sixth upon
the Word (...), or Trinity, thereby intending to signify the three Persons of
the same Substance, not dividing the Substance, nor confounding the Persons.
And ever since the Word has been made use of by all Orthodox Councils, as well
as by the Greek and Latin Fathers. Nay, the Scripture it self speaks to the
very same purpose, John 1. cap. 5. There are Three that bear Record in Heaven,
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and these Three are One. And so likewise in
the Baptism of Christ, Mark 1. Mat. 3. and in the Institution of Baptism, Mat.
28. there is plain mention made of three Persons. It Is therefore an impudent
and a frontless rash Censure, to call the Trinity a mere Human Invention,
utterly unknown to the Orthodox Creeds. The Nicene, Alexandrian, and Ephesine
Creeds, are all confessedly Orthodox, and yet all make use of the Word Trinity.
But here he replies, they never acknowledged the Trinity to be a God. I must
profess, I cannot tell what he would be at with his Deus Trinitas: If by it he
understands a fourth Person, it is one of his own making; and we may justly
explode both him and his fancy; and he well deserves the Name of Impious
Libertine, that in a matter of so great importance dares fly to these wicked
Cavils; but if by Deus Trinitas he understands Deus Trinus, or a Trinity in the
Godhead Or a Trinity which is God.
it is plain he has asserted a notorious falsehood, since we have already proved
both Councils and Fathers to have used the Word Trinity in this Sense, and that
a Trinity in the Godhead was no Novelty to them.

Thus our Crafty Adversary would sain father upon us the Notion of a Deus
Trinitas, distinct from, or without the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. But it is
all perfect Calumny; and God forbid the Church of Christ should be ever guilty
of such a Blasphemous Position. I think it needless to dwell any longer upon
the Explication of the Word Trinitas, since we have evidently demonstrated
[whatever Valentinus vainly pretends to the contrary] that by a Trinity we
understand (...), something real, or really subsisting; and that the Catholic
Creeds have not been unaccustomed to the Word. After the same lewd manner he
plays upon the Words (...) and (...), often Styling them an Impertinant Iargon.
But he ought to have considered, that it is not the least Excellence in the Art
of Teaching, to be able to give things their proper Appellations; and that
nothing can be a more evident sign of a malicious, narrow Spirit, than to wrap
up our Knowledge in a Cloud of ambiguous dark expressions, especially in
treating of a Subject so highly Mysterious, that no Human Understanding is able
sufficiently to explain it. For whatever we can say of God is too mean, and
falls much below the dignity of his immense and glorious Majesty. So that the
Ancients did wisely observe, that we could much easier tell, what God was not,
than what He was. And that saying of Justin Martyr well deserves our notice,
(...), etc. i. e. It Is extremely difficult to conceive aright of God, but to
express or declare him fully is impossible; and therefore 'twas piously said by
Evagrius, Socr. lib. 6. Hist. Trip. c. 21. That the ineffable Mystery of the
Trinity, was rather in silence to be adored, than dogmatically to be What? not
explained by Self-Consciousness and Mutual Consciousness? which, we are told,
makes a Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity, a plain, easy, and
Intelligible Notion, and Solves all difficulties about it. Sh. Vin Trin.
explained. Thus we call God a Substance, though in Propriety of Speech he cannot
be so Styled: for a Substance is capable of being Defined, but God is (...),
boundless, and not to be circumscribed within any limits of Words. Therefore I
think we ought to handle such a Subject, with the greatest humility and
reverence, and to be extremely cautious, how we make use of any expressions,
but such as are received, common, and most applicable to it.

Because God is in the Scripture Styled (...), as in the Hebrew Jehovah from
Eijeh, so in the like signification from (...) he is called (...); as from Deus
they called the Divine Essence Deitas; so likewise did they express the Deity
by (...). The Greeks do otherwise use the Word (...) to signify Riches, Goods,
or Possessions, as in that, (...); i. e. of your Goods or Money: and by
Philosophers it is used to signify that which is contradistinguished to an
Accident, viz. a Substance.

But amongst Divines, and particularly in this Controversy, (...) is put to
signify the Divine Essence. It was indeed long controverted, whether this Word
ought to have been rendered into Latin by Essentia or Substantia; but the
generality have thought Essentia to be the most proper Translation, and
therefore do by (...) express the common Nature of the Godhead in the Trinity.

It Is likewise the common Opinion of St. Austin, lib. 7. de Trin. that it is
more properly rendered by Essentia. But, says he, whether you take it for
Essence, which is the proper, or for Substance, which is the corrupted
Translation of the Word, it still denotes something Absolute not Relative. So
again, lib. 5. de Trin. c. 8. I call that Essence which the Greeks term (...);
and presently after, (...), i. e. One Essence, but three Subsistences. And in
the same Book, cap. 2. Est tamen sine dubitatione substantia, vel fi melius
haec appelletur essentia, quam Graeci (...) vocant. St. Ierom in some places
retains the Word Usia, as in his Book against Lucifer. In others he Translates
it by Substantia, as in his Epistle to Damasus. Sufficient (says he) nobis
dicere unam substantiem, tres persons subsistenies perfectas, aequales,
cooeternas. In the same place he renders it Essentia, as Deus essentiae nomen
vere tenet; and again, Nomen essentiae sibi vendicat proprie Deus.

As to the Word Hypostasis in Profane Authors, it signified the same that (...)
does; witness St. Ierom in his Epistle to Damasus. And Socrat. in 6. lib. c.
21. Hist. Tripartit. tells us out of Irenoeus Grammaticus, that the more Modern
Philosophers took (...) and (...) to express the same thing, and this
signification it retained amongst the Divines too for some time. Socrates makes
use of it, Fol. 179. (...). That he was not of a different Hypostasis or
Substance, but the same with the Father. But at that time a Person was called
(...) as in the same Author, lib. 1. c. 23. Another while (...) and (...) were
taken for Synonymous terms, as in that passage of Socrates, (...), i. e.
Confessing the Son to be an Hypostasis and subsisting in God, and that there is
one God in three Persons or Subsistences.

At last they did upon very good grounds limit the signification of (...) to
Person only, and (...) and (...) became equivalent terms, as in Latin persona
and subsistentia; so that a Substance with [personal] Properties was called
(...). In the time of St. Ierom the Controversy about this Word was still on
foot, which makes him call it a Novel expression; and therefore seeing some
called substance Hypostasis; and others were used to say three Hypostases, i.
e. Three Persons, He asks Damasus his Advice what to do in the business. Si
jube as (says he) non timebo tres (...) dicere.

And it is plain from the Hist. Tripar. that the Fathers were very cautious in
the using of these expressions, and seldom did it, unless in a case of great
necessity.

Upon this account it was that the Bishops assembled with Athanasius did
industriously let fall the Dispute about (...) and (...), resolving to make use
of those Words only against Sabellius; and were therefore concerned lest that
for want of Words (...) or Substance, and (...) or Subsistence, might be
mistaken one for the other. Ruffinus says the same, lib. 10. c. 29.

At present some Translate (...) by Substance, and (...) by Subsistence; others
more significantly term (...) Person; (...) Essence, for as (...) is in Greek
derived (...), so in Latin essentia comes ab esse. However I think, it is no
great matter which way it be taken, so that the sense be the same. So then the
common Nature or Essence of the Godhead is (...); according to which God is
One, but the Persons are termed (...) or (...). In this sense they are said to
be three Hypostases, that is, Subsistences, or they are three (...) or Persons;
or as the Greeks, (...), three Persons in one Substance. Justin Martyr and
others call them tres (...) and tria (...).

But Gentilis in his Explication of the Trinity does not only confound the
Words (...) and (...), but goes yet farther, and places the distinction of the
Three Persons (...), or their Substance.

When we told him, that this was plainly against the sense of the Scripture,
and consent of Antiquity; his Answer was, that the Word (...) was not to be
found expressly in Scripture; which was as much as Arius himself could have
said: for St. Ierom against Lucifer tells us, that this was the very Argument
Valens and his Followers used to turn the Word Since condemned and equally
exploded by Dr. Sherl.
(...) out of the Church, and at the same time to condemn the Confession of the
Nicene Council.

But we have already shown how this Word was taken up in opposition to
Sabellius; And though our Author would fain be thought an indifferent Person
between Arius and Sabellius, yet he seems most to espouse the Cause of Arius.

CHAP. VIII.
What was the Opinion of Arius, and wherein Gentilis and he do agree.

BUT since it is yet disputed by many, what was the Heresy of Arius; it will
therefore be worth our while briefly to enquire into his Opinions. Especially
since matters are now come to such a pass, that Men dare openly avouch, That he
was not Condemned for allowing the Father only to be God, but rather for
asserting the Son of God to be a mere Creature. Here are then two Propositions,
(Viz.)

First, That the Son of God was a Creature. Arius asserted this, but Gentilis
does not.

Secondly, That the Father alone is the One Most High God, who dwells in Light
inaccessible. This Gentilis does affirm, but Arius seems not to have Asserted
it. Gentilis takes a great deal of pains in stating the difference between
these two Positions, to avoid (if possible) falling in with Arius. However if
his Assertion be true, and it belongs only to the Father to be styled the One
only God, I cannot for my part see any reason why he and Arius should keep at
such a distance. For according to Gentilis he would have said nothing but
truth, seeing he was never called in question by the Fathers, for calling
Christ the Son of God; since that Assertion of his was true and undoubtedly
Orthodox.

But if the difference be only in Words, and the sense of both Propositions be
the same, there needs no proof, that they agree in their Notions. To make this
appear, let us enquire in what manner Arius his Opinion has been delivered down
to us. We find in Theodor. l. 1. cap. 4. Alexander Bishop of Alexandria making
complaint, that Arius and Achilles denied the Divinity of Christ. His Words are
these, (...), i. e. Denying the Divinity of our Savior, and making him of the
same Nature with all other Men; and presently after, They attribute to him
(says he) a Temporal Beginning. For thus speaks Arius himself. (...), i. e.
There was a time when the Son of God was not, etc. His Opinion is related after
the same manner, Hist. Trip. lib. 1. cap. 13. Deus, say they, non semper Pater
fuit, non semper fuit Dei verbum, sed fuit, quando Deus non Pater fuit, Dei
autem verbum ex non existentibus factum fuit, etc. i. e. God was not always a
Father, nor did the Word always exist, but there was a time, when God was not a
Father, and the Word was made out of nothing. To the same purpose Nicephorus,
lib. 8. cap. 8. Deus non semper Pater erat, sed erat cum Deus Pater non erat.
Non semper igitur Dei verbum erat, sed ex non existentibus factum est. Qui enim
erat Deus, illum, qui non erat, ex non existente fecit, etc. You may see more
to this purpose in the same Book, lib. 8. c. 18. From all which it does appear,
that Arius did in the first place divide the Essence of God, making one Essence
of the Father, and another of the Son, and after that assigning only a temporal
Original to the Son; and therefore he so earnestly condemned the (...), that he
might carry his Point for the Separation of Essence. And denied the co-eternity
of the Son, that he might thereby establish the Notion of his temporal
Original. From hence followed more monstrous Absurdities, viz. That the Son of
God was a mere Creature; and that he was made out of nothing. For they were
very well satisfied, that the Essence of God being the most simple, and withal
the most perfect of any, could admit of no gradual division, and therefore they
assigned the Son a separate Essence.

And now it is easy to discover, wherein he and Gentilis agree. Arius said,
That there was One Essence or Substance of the Father, and another of the Son:
Gentilis distinguishes the Father from the Son not only in Person or
Hypostasis, but in Essence or Substance also. Nor does it at all alter the
case, in that he says, The Word was begotten of the Substance of the Father;
and is consubstantial with him: In which, it is confessed, he differs from
Arius, but nevertheless introduces a separation of Substance. Arius then says,
The Son was made out of nothing: This Man tells us he was not made out of
nothing, but out of the Substance of the Father. But in this they both agree,
That [quoad essentiam] as to his Substance the Son is Numerically distinct from
the Father. We are told by Niceph. lib. 18. c. 47, 48. that Philoponus a famous
Philosopher drove on the same Argument. For by dividing the Indivisible Nature
of God, into more Persons, he ascribed it to them severally, as to Individuals,
and distributed it to those three Subsistences of a Supersubstantial Nature. He
was likewise a great Champion of the Monophysites, who, by reason there was but
one Hypostasis or Person in Christ, asserted that he had but one (...), or
Nature also, which was made of both the Divine and Humane, as on the contrary
Nestorius from the two Natures of Christ concluded, that he likewise must
necessarily have two Hypostases or Persons.

Again, Arius asserted, That the Father only was Eternal, but that the Word had
a beginning; which likewise was the Opinion of the Philosophers Philoponus and
Themistius; see Niceph. lib. 18. c. 50.

Gentilis tells us, The Son of God was begotten by a precedent act of
Generation; which if true, then must his being begotten have succeeded in order
of time. To prove this he does with his usual confidence quote that passage of
Tertullin. Non ideo Pater and judex semper, quia Deus semper. Nam nec Pater
potuit esse ante filium, nec judex ante delictum. Fuit autem tempus cum ei
delictum, and filius non fuit, i. e. God is not therefore always a Father and a
Judge, because he always was God. For he could not be a Father before he had a
Son, neither could he be a Judge, before there was a Criminal. But there was a
time, when neither Criminal nor Son did exist. In this Opinion he agrees with
Tertullian, and by consequence is a Partizan of Arius. For it signifies not a
farthing, from whom this Sentence is quoted, whether from Tertullian or any
body else, since it is plain it gives us the true Sentiments of Arius.

From what has been said, it appears, That Arius and he are of the same Opinion
in these two particulars, (Viz.)

1. In dividing the Substance or Essence of the Godhead. And. 2. In making the
Act of Generation in order of time antecedent to the Existence of the Son,
which exactly agrees with the (...) of Arius.
CHAP. IX.
Concerning the Generation of the Son of God, and how we ought to understand
the Words (...) and (...).

IN the next place Gentilis appeals to those Texts of Scripture, wherein the
Generation of the Son of God is revealed to us, as John 1. We saw his Glory,
the Glory as of the only Begotten of God; and Psalm. 2. Thou art my Son, this
day have I begotten thee; which place is cited by St. Paul, Act. 13. and the
Apostle 1 Heb. 5. Then Gentilis farther concludes, That Begotten is therefore
distinguished from Unbegotten, because the one has always a beginning, the
other has none. Again, that the Father is therefore called ingenitus
[Unbegotten] because he derives his Original from none; but all things had
their Beings from him. But the Son is therefore said to be Begotten, because he
had his beginning from the Father; upon which account the Father is styled the
Essentiator Being, and the Son the Essentiated Spirit.

This is his way of Arguing; and, I think, any one, that has but half an Eye,
may plainly see how Arius his Argument lies couched under it. For whosoever
has read Nicephorus, Theodoret, and the other Ecclesiastical Writers, cannot
be ignorant, that this was the very Argument Arius and his Followers made use
of. In Answer to which, we freely allow and acknowledge the Generation of the
Son of God, and readily grant that the Father is unbegotten, the Son begotten;
but moreover we assert that this Generation was without beginning of Time, and
is of such a Nature, as transcends the Capacities and Apprehensions of all
Mortal Men. For the Word was in the Beginning, and all things were made by him;
which Word is afterward called the Only begotten Son of God. Of the same Word
the Prophet speaks, when he says, The dew of thy birth is of the womb of the
Moruing; which passage the Jews themselves confess to have been spoken with
respect to the Eternal Generation of the Messiah. Therefore Gentilis his
Argument is by no means conclusive; This way of Generation being wholly
inexplicable, and without any beginning of Time; by consequence there is no
prius nor posterius, no succession in it, but the whole coeternal together.

How audacious then is the Mind of Man, that dares pry into and endeavor to
explain these hidden things of God? If neither Ear has heard, nor Eye seen,
neither has it entered into the Heart of Man to conceive those things, which
God has prepared for them that love him, How much more ought that Mystery of
the Eternal Son of God, and that of his Eternal Generation, rather to be adored
than fathomed? But let us see, how the Ancients expressed their thoughts about
this matter. Theodoret, in Book 4. cap. 1. tells us, (...), i. e. That God did
not beget his Son in time, nor after a certain season or period: and in the
same place he calls it (...), an Immutable Filiation. Again he confesses, the
Son of God was begotten, but it was, (...), in an unspeakable, inexpressible,
inconceiveable, undeterminable manner, by which words it plainly appears, that
the Ancients looked upon this as a very great unfathomable Mystery. They did
likewise call it (...), thereby to show that his Generation was without
beginning, as may be seen in Damascene and in Theodoret, in the place above
cited. And Socrates in his 1. l. c. 8. has a passage importing the very same
thing. (...), says he, (...), i. e. By a mode of Generation inexpressible and
unconceiveable by any created Nature. From all which I think we may well
conclude, the Manner of the Generation of the Son of God to be truly ineffable,
incomprehensible, and undeterminable. Whereby it follows, that the Word was
begotten out of all time, and before all time; That the Son was always with the
Father; That God always was a Father; and that there never was any time,
wherein the Son was not. As for any other ways of explaining this Generation,
the Catholic Church, and all Christian Writers, Justin Martyr, Irenoeus, and
others, have constantly rejected and exploded them. A few of which I shall just
glance upon.

Some would have the Son to descend from the Father (...), by division; Theod:
l. 1. c. 6.
This seems to have been the Opinion of Philosophers, who parted the Divine
Essence into several Persons; just as if out of the same Mass of Gold you would
cleave two or three Bars, or as you would divide any one totum into two or
three parts. Sic (...) dicitur (...).

Others were for having it to be (...), i. e. by Germination, as we see Scions
bud out from Trees.

Others thought it might be (...), by efflux or emanation, as Children are
naturally begotten of their Parents.

Others called it (...) (i. e.) by eructation, as may be seen from Arius his
Epistle in Theod. l. 1. c. 6. And lastly there were others, who believed it to
be (...), or by alteration of Substance. See Socr. Book 1. c. 6.

All these ways were rejected by Antiquity, and the Arians too, though for a
different reason; namely, that they might hereby explode the (...), or
Consubstantiality. Of which see Nicephor. l. 8. c. 18. Their Argument ran thus;
The Son of God is not born of the Father, neither (...), nor (...), nor (...),
nor (...), nor yet (...), Ergo he is not (...), or of the same Substance with
the Father, because what is such, must be so some of these ways.

To which we Answer, That there is another way or method, which they have past
over, and which alone the Catholic Church has approved of; that is, (...), or
by Immanence, or else (...), by Communication of his whole Nature to the Son,
who is therefore (...), Consubstantial with the Father. And to manifest the
coeternity, the Fathers still called it (...) and (...), unspeakable, and
incomprehensible.

Which Phrases are certainly most Ancient, since we find them in Justin Martyr
[an Author immediately after the first Century], who frequently condemns and
refutes those other expressions, (...), The parting, as it were, of the Divine
Essence of the Father] or, as their Followers were pleased to term it, (...).
He condemns those likewise who affirm the Son to have been born either (...),
or (...): the former I take to be the same with (...) or Germination, the
latter to signify (...) or efflux; though (...) and (...) do import the same.
Thus much I thought necessary to repeat concerning the manner of the Generation
of God the Son; that it might the better appear, what terms and expressions
were used by the Ancients, and withal how boldly and rashly this unsearchable
Mystery is treated of by the Men of the present Age.

Now, as it does not follow, that because he that begets, is one, and he that
is begotten, is another, therefore the Substance or Essence of the Father is
one, and the Substance or Essence of the Son is another; so neither does it
follow, that because he that begets is one, and he that is begotten, is
another; therefore the Word, which was begotten, must have been in time after
him, that did beget him; This being nothing else but quibbling about the
ambiguity of a Word, as the Arians of old were used to do. For upon the whole
we do not deny, but (...) is proper to the Father, Augustine lib. 15. de Trin.
cap. 17. Vide Erasmi Observat.
(...) proper to the Son, provided the Words be taken in their due sense.

And therefore, to avoid all mistakes about them, let it be observed, that
First, (...) does signify one that has no manner of original at all; (...)
denotes him that is begotten of a Father. In this sense the Father alone [in
himself] is said to be unbegotten (...), because there is not any thing from
whence he derives his Original; and in the same manner the Son may be said to
be (...), in as much as he was begotten by the Father after an ineffable
manner; and in this sense these terms may very well be applied without any
absurdity; we may safely call as well Father as the Holy Ghost (...), since
neither of them had a Father; and the Son only (...), as being begotten of the
Father. Secondly, (...), or rather (...), may signify the same with (...), i.
e. not Created. In this sense the Philosophers call the Elements (...), because
they are the first Principles; and in the same manner the Creator is
distinguished from his Creatures; he is (...), and they are styled (...): and
in this sense it is plain, that Christ cannot be called (...), he being not
made, i. e. (...), as is the whole indivisible Divine Nature Which may be
Communicated indeed, but yet not Made, nor Created, according to this latter
sense of the Word.
.

Lastly, If (...) be opposed to (...) in respect of Time, i. e. as that which
never had a beginning, but was from all Eternity, is opposed to that which came
after, and had its beginning in time; in this sense it is plain all the three
Persons in the Godhead must be ingenite; since none of them had their beginning
in time, but were before all time.

And therefore these Propositions, The Son is Begotten, and only the Father is
Unbegotten, are not simpliciter Viz. in all the Senses of the Word.
, or absolutely to be granted, since in one respect the Son also is Unbegotten,
i. e. without Beginning.

CHAP. X.
Whether or no it be proper to the Father to be called the One Only God?

LET us in the next place take into our consideration, that Supremacy or
Sovereignty of the Father, whereof Gentilis so mightily boasts himself to have
been an Assertor; and sticks not to say, that there have been none yet (that he
knows of) who have been put to Death for asserting the Glory and Sovereignty of
the Father. That the Prophets, Apostles, and H. Martyrs,
underwent Persecutions, Death, and all manner of extremities, for the Glory of
the Son, but that he can find no Martyrs for the Supremacy of the Father.

Our next Enquiry then must be, what this Sovereign Prerogative is, which
belongs to the Father, and cannot by any means appertain to the Son. His Answer
is this, That the Father is the One Only God, which the Scripture has revealed
to us. I appeal to all good Christians whether this be not the highest
Indignity and Blasphemy against the Glory of our Blessed Savior, so to
appropriate the Title of God to the Father only, as at the same time
Sacrilegiously to rob and despoil Christ of his Divinity. He tells us, that
whenever the Scripture speaks of the One God, it is to be understood of the
Father only; and therefore (says he) Christ cannot be truly or properly God;
for whatever agrees properly to any thing Uni and Soli, cannot be accommodated
[or Communicated] to any thing else; which if true, then, according to
Gentilis, Christ will not only differ (...) [in Essence or Substance] from the
Father, but likewise cannot at all be styled God. And therefore tho he had the
confidence openly to avow the first Position, namely, That the Father and the
Son were two Species essentially distinct; and was grown so hardy in his
impudence, as without shame or blushing, stiffly to maintain such a distinction;
yet perceiving the latter (viz. That Christ ought not to be called God) did
contain such open Blasphemy, as must necessarily give the greatest Offense and
Scandal to all good Christians, he was willing to allow that Christ might be
called God [tho not strictly, yet] by Communication of the Divinity; which
admirable Salvo of his is still clogged with an Error as absurd* namely, That
Christ is of a later Existence than the Father. The Father (says he) was from
all Eternity and without Beginning, the Son was Born in time, and had a
Beginning. The Father is God per se, or of himself, the Son only by
Communication [from the Father] just as a King may admit his Eldest Son into a
part of the Government. The Father is the One Only God, but the Son neither the
One, nor the Only, but a different God. Here it ought to be observed, that the
Scripture does sometimes speak of God distinctly, i. e. with respect to a
certain Person of the Trinity; as when St. John says, The Word was with God,
where it is plain he means the Father. So again, when Christ upon the Cross
cries out, My God, My God, why have thou for saken me? He directed that
Invocation to the Father, Mat. 27. But St. John expressly says of the Son, And
the Word was God. After the same manner St. Thomas speaking of the Son, calls
him, My God, and my Lord. Ioh. 20. and in Acts 5. St. Peter says to Ananias,
Thou have not lied unto Men, but unto God, i. e. to the Holy Ghost.

At other times the Scriptures speak of God absolutely, and secundum essentiam,
whereby we are to understand the whole Godhead, from which none of the Persons
is excluded, [or as it comprehends all three Persons] as Ioh. 4. God is a
Spirit. We are God's Laborers, We are God's Husbandry, We are God's Building.
1. Cor. 3. The wisdom of the World is foolishness with God. With what God? With
the Father only exclusive of the Son? No, No. The Word [God] is here, as in
many other places, taken essentially, as it belongs to all three Persons.

But all this signifies nothing with Gentilis, who will have the Scripture
every where to speak of God distinctly, and therefore must of necessity exclude
Christ from the Unity of the Divine Essence, and Propriety of the Godhead; and
lastly, make him of later Existence than the Father. But this is not all; his
Presumption and Arrogance carries him farther, to make two distinct sorts of
Martyrdom. He thinks it a common ordinary piece of Service to dye for the Glory
of the Son; and has therefore found out a new and more exalted one; namely, to
suffer for the Glory and Sovereignty of the Father. It Is certainly a grievous
Error, to think of Worshipping or Honoring the Father, and to neglect the
Son; yet a greater to exclude the Son from this Honor: but the most grievous
of all, to pretend to Honor the Father by degrading and dishonouring the Son.
For God is to be Worshipped in the manner, as he has manifested himself; but he
has plainly told us, Ioh. 5. That he who honors not the Son, honors not
the Father: And Ioh. 12. The Father bears witness from heaven, that He is
glorified in the Son. Wherefore let us keep to this certain perpetual form of
honoring the Father, I mean, by honoring of him in the Son, through whom
alone he is well pleased with us; for, without the Son, no honor can be
acceptable unto God the Father. Such subtle delusions does the Devil make use
of, to overthrow the Glory of Christ, under the specious pretext of vindicating
the Sovereignty of the Father; a Service, which God never required, either from
the Prophets, Apostles, or any other Holy Men of Old. But it is plain, this
method of honoring the Father tends to the disgrace and dishonor of Christ;
and, that with a very little more trouble, Gentilis may reconcile himself with
both Jews and Turks.

CHAP. XI.
Containing the Judgment and Consent of Scripture with respect to this Article.

THese false Doctrines of Gentilis have ever been condemned by the universal
consent both of Scripture and the true Church; which consent is plainly and in
short, as follows, viz. The Essence of God is but One, in which one Essence the
Scripture sets forth to us three Hypostases or Subsistences, to wit, of the
Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; so that we acknowledge neither three
Gods, nor any division Nor Multiplication.
of the Essence [of God.] The Son and the Holy Ghost are so Consubstantial with
the Father, that they with him are One, true, eternal, infinite God. Nor is the
appellation or title of the One most high God proper only to the Father
exclusive of the Son and Holy Ghost. This, I say, is the Judgment and Consent
of the Scripture and the true Church. For God is to be Worshipped in the same
manner, that he has revealed himself, and so the Church has always Worshipped
him; but he has declared himself to be One, i. e. a Being in Substance or
(...) One, subsisting by himself, Eternal, Wise, Good, etc. but has manifested
himself in three Persons or Hypostases.

That his Essence is but One, will appear from many plain Testimonies, as 1
Deuteronomy. 6. Hear, O Israel, the Lord thy God is one God. 1 Cor. 8. We know that
there is but one God. Ephesians. 4. There is one God. Deuteronomy. 4. The Lord [Jehovah] he
is God, and there is none else besides him. Therefore he has declared himself
to be but One. But that He has likewise revealed himself as subsisting in
three Persons, is plain from Mark 1. and Mat. 3. where, in the Baptism of
Christ, the Father, Son and Holy Ghost are expressly mentioned: And so likewise
in the Institution of Baptism, Mat. 28. Mark 16. Nor can we be put off by that
evasion of Gentilis, whereby he refers all this only to the Agreement and
Consent of the Persons. We do not deny that there is such a Consent of Will;
And of Mutual Consciousness too.
but we say, that besides this, there is an Unity of Essence. Wherefore this
Doctrine does remain more firm and unshaken, than a Rock of Marble; namely,
That God has declared himself to be One in Essence, subsisting in three
Persons; so that a Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity, is to be Worshipped.
And this is the only true way of Worshipping God.

And in this sense the Church has still Interpreted the Scripture and the
Apostles Creed. I Believe in God, who is One; that is to say, (...) in Essence;
where presently after is added, by way of Explication, an enumeration of all
the Persons, that it might appear, who that One God Almighty was; namely, the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

Consequently Gentilis his Exposition must be false, who makes this
distinction; I believe in God the Father, and restrains the Word God to the
Father only. I say this is a Sophistical Exposition arising from a mistaken
distinction.

Neither have the Nicene, nor Athanasian Creeds, or any of the Orthodox, ever
understood it in this sense. Wherefore the Son and H. Ghost are the true and
one God with God the Father, and are so set forth to us in Scripture, as often
as mention is made of the One true God, Jehovah, or Lord of Israel.

Mark 10. Christ says to the Rich Young Man, None is Good save God only; where
if we admit Gentilis his Opinion to be true, the Argument must run thus; None
is good, but one that is God; but the Father only is the only God, therefore
the Father only is Good. For Christ speaks exclusively, Why call thou me
good? (...). One God, is the proper appellation only of the Father; Therefore
the Father only is Good.

Nor will he be ever able to extricate himself out of this Labyrinth, unless he
does affirm, that Christ may be said to be good also by Communication, but the
Father only to be properly and originally Good; which is intolerable Blasphemy,
for it distinguishes Christ from his Goodness, as well as from his Divinity.

But the true way of Arguing would have been thus: He that is properly and of
himself, good, must necessarily be the one true, and only God; (which we gather
from Christ's own Words, None is good but the One God.) But the Son and H.
Ghost are properly and per se Good, therefore they with the Father are that one
Only true God; from whom all things in the World, which we call Good, do derive
their goodness, and hold it at his Pleasure. All the Cavils about the Father
alone's being the one Only God do wholly vanish, and are dispelled by this one
Argument. Besides this, there are several other Testimonies to be found in the
Scripture; as in Isaiah 44. The One God is said to be the first and the last;
which Noble Character Gentilis understands to have been given only to the
Father, but he is confuted by St. John, who Revel. 1. 22, 23. gives the very
same Titles to Christ; from whence we may conclude, That Christ is also
comprehended under this Character of the One God. Nor shall we ever be
convinced of the contrary, from his saying, That Christ was called the first
and the last only in respect of the Creatures. Again, the Word in the New
Testament is called not a fictitious, but a true God, Joh. 1. But there is but
One true God, the Author both of the Old and New Covenant, therefore the Word
is comprehended under the Character of the One God, who is the Author of the
Covenant. Again, this One and Only God is called the True and Only Savior, Is.
43. 11. But if we believe Gentilis, the Word in the New Testament is not the
One and Only God, by consequence, neither will the Word be our Savior, which
is not only false, but blasphemous also. For Ioh. 1. Andrew says, We have found
the Messiah [speaking of Christ or the Word.] Therefore the Minor, which was of
Gentilis's making, is false.

Again, There is no other God [Elohim] besides the Lord [Iehovah] but the Word
(according to Gentilis) is not that One Only Isaiah 44.
Lord [Iehovah] therefore he is not the true Elohim or God: which conclusion is
abominably absurd, and by consequence so is that Proposition also of Gentilis,
from whence it follows.

Lastly, The Word is in the New Testament called a Creator, Colos. 1. Ioh. 1.
but that is a Propriety of the only One God, therefore the Name of the one Only
God belongs to the Son also.

From these and the like places of Holy Scripture, it is easy to demonstrate
how absurd and how impious a Doctrine it is to assert, That, the Father only
[exclusive of the Son] is called the One Only God: seeing, on the contrary, it
has been the constant Faith of the Church, That the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, are that One, True, and Only God revealed to us in the Scriptures; I
say, One God (...), or in Essence subsisting in three Persons. Nor need we
trouble our selves with that Sovereignty of Divine Essence or (...), since in
the Trinity there is a perfect equality, none is greater or less than [none is
before or after] another. Unus and idem Deus Pater and (...) ejus semper
assistens humane generi; as says Irenoeus, lib. 4. c. 47.

But that Sovereignty, which we oppose and deny, introduces an inequality of
prius and posterius, of majus and minus, or of Order and Majesty in the Divine
Essence, and therefore is justly exploded. In the mean time we are not
ignorant, how Christ in respect of his Human Nature, and his Office of
Mediator, is inferior to the Father, and is also so styled in Holy Scripture.
But this is nothing to the purpose, since the inequality, we expose, is not in
the Persons, but the Essence of the Deity.

CHAP. XII.
Containing Gentilis his Censure of the Fathers and their Writings.

WE have now shown our Doctrine of the Trinity to be agreeable to the sense of
Scripture, and the Orthodox Creeds. We have made it plain, how Gentilis by new
and forced Expositions does wrest the meaning of Scripture to establish his
Notions, and with like improbity does Expound the Creeds also. For not daring
to deny the Authority of the Apostles Creed, he has by a wrong punctation
falsely Interpreted it, he safely despises and rejects the other Creeds, and
treats the Fathers with the same respect. He upbraids Athanasius with
corrupting the Nicene Creed, and blushes not to call Athanasius his own Creed
mere impertinent Jargon, page 30. St. Augustine he calls a Dogmatical Pedant,
and others of them he bespatters with a great many more such Complements. But
however, lest he should seem to have no part of Antiquity on his side, he flies
to all the Ancients, and Just, no doubt, as his Successor Dr. Sherlock intends
to do in the Account he has promised us, out of the Fathers, of his
Tritheistick Hypothesis of 3 distinct Infinite Minds in the Blessed Trinity.
right or wrong hales them in to vouch for him. But his principal Friends are
Justin Martyr, Ignatius, Tertullian, Irenoeus and Hilary. Yet he has not so
great a veneration for them neither, but he can upon occasion despise, reject
and discard them also; so that upon the whole, he seems to claim nothing as his
peculiar Talent, so much as that excellent qualification which the Greeks call
(...), a Subtle Craftiness to distinguish his Cause, by wresting the Law.

Wherefore we will now demonstrate and maintain our Doctrine out of those very
Fathers he admits for Authentic; whereby it may easily be observed, how
craftily he does abuse both their Authority and judgments [in order to the
Establishing his own Opinion.]

CHAP. XIII.
Containing the Judgment of Justin, Martyr and Philosopher.

Justin Martyr, an Excellent Writer, and who lived near the Times of the
Apostles, is very Orthodox, as to the Article of the Trinity, unless it be when
his Words are maliciously wrested to the new way of Expounding Scripture. For
the better understanding therefore of this Father, we must observe that his
Writings were composed upon different occasions. In his Disputing with Trypho
the Jew, he was to prove against the Jews, that besides God the Father, (whom
the Jews acknowledge to have been the Creator of all things) there is another
Person, namely, the Son of God, who is also the true God. Nor in this does he
at all divide the Substance, or Essence, but distinguishes betwixt the Persons
or Subsistences [(...)]. These passages are abused by Gentilis, to establish
his Notion of a distinct Essence. But that this was never the Mind of Justin,
will appear from his other Writings against the Gentiles, where he resolutely
maintains, that there are not many, but One God. Which any, that have carefully
read this Author, must necessarily know to be true.

It appears then, that Justin took upon him to prove these two Propositions:

First, Against the Gentiles, that there was but One God, and not many, as the
Heathens did vainly imagine: And,

Secondly, That this God, who was but One in Essence, did yet Subsist in three
Persons.

That the True, Eternal God is but One, he proves from their own Poets and
Philosophers, [the Gentiles being ignorant of the Scriptures] and particularly
cites that Verse out of Orpheus: (...).
And farther, to show that the Son was comprehended within the Unity of the
Godhead, he brings another Verse out of the (...) of the same Poet, viz. (...).
And elegantly interprets the (...) there mentioned to be the (...), Word [or
Son] of God. From whence he concludes that those Ancient Poets did design to
Instruct us in the knowledge of the One God. Now if it be proved out of
Orpheus, that he owned but one Only God, notwithstanding that he speaks of the
(...) and (...) as two distinct Persons, it will then follow that this (...)
and (...) are the One and Only God. And however Gentilis may wrest the Author's
words, contrary to his meaning, it is plain, that this Epithet, namely, the One
Only God, belongs to the Son. For, as I now said, he [Iustin] does according to
Orpheus, infer the (...) and (...) from this Propriety.

Besides, the same Justin Martyr does expressly affirm of the Son, (...).
Nothing can be more plainly said of the Divinity of the Son of God. For [says
he] he was not barely called Angel and Lord. But he himself only is said to be
the Angel and to be God. What is become then of that Propriety of the Father,
whereby he is called the One Only God, seeing you are here told that the (...)
or Son is (...), i. e. the Only God?

Again, when God says, (...), I am that I am; Justin gives us the reason of
this expression, namely, That he did not say this with respect to the Son, as
if he would so distinguish him from himself, but in contradiction to those who
are not Gods; from whence it follows, that the Son is not excluded from the
Self-existent Deity: But this was said, that Men might know that they did
formerly serve not those which were, but those which were not Gods.

As to the Word (...) or (...), Justin tells us the Word (...) is to be
understood of the true God. (...), says he, (...). For, says he, the Pronoun,
(...), denotes or expresses the true and very God. Therefore this makes nothing
for the separation of the Father and the Son. For he presently after calls the
Son (...), the Inseparable Word of God. How then dare we be so bold as to make
him distinct in Essence from the Father? Nay, make them two distinct Numerical
Essences, and so too as that the one should be propagated by the other? It is
certainly a very impudent piece of presumption, amidst such an Universal
Consent; for us nicely to pry into these Divine Mysteries, which so vastly
transcend our weak Capacities: Wherefore Justin very admirably closes this
Subject with that Wise Saying of Mercurius, (...), etc.

Let us next consider his Dialogue against Tryphon the Jew, that so we may see
how pertinently Gentilis does from thence prove his (...) or second Essence; of
which, it is certain, Justin never so much as dreamed. We must know then, that
Trypho acknowledged One God, the Creator of Heaven and Earth, but did not allow
the Son and Holy Ghost to be God. Wherefore it lay upon Justin to prove, that
the (...) was true God, who assumed unto himself Human Nature, made after the
Image of God. Upon this Account it is, that he often says, That the Word was
true God, which assumed unto himself Human Nature; and therefore that the Name
of God did belong to another [viz. to the Son] besides the Father; that so both
might be One God, seeing Trypho himself affirmed, that there could not be more
Gods. Wherefore Justin does directly oppose the Opinion of Gentilis, but not so
as to make two Numerical Divine Essences, and to change the (...) into an
(...). His Words are these, (...); i. e. There is another besides the Creator
of the Universe, who both is, and is called God and Lord. Again, (...) (...),
i. e. This God, who is said and recorded to have appeared to Abraham, Jacob,
and Moses, is another from him, who made all things, in Number, I mean, but not
in Mind.

Thus he makes two Numerically different Hypostases in one Essence. But
Gentilis, either through Ignorance of the Greek Tongue, or out of his own
malicious Design, has mistaken this place, by thinking that Justin did here
call the Divine (...) another God. Justin himself explains his meaning in
several other places; where speaking of the Son, he says, (...), i. e. He is
called God, and both is, and will be God. Nay, farther he plainly calls him
(...), God of himself. For Expounding that place in Exodus 3. concerning the
Angel of the Lord that appeared in the Burning Bush, he says, That this Angel
was the Divine (...), and presently after has these Words, (...), i. e. The
Scripture calls him This very Being, thereby denoting that he is Lord and God.
From which expressions it evidently follows, that the Son is (...). For in the
first place it calls him the Angel of the Lord and Minister of God, but
immediately after styles the very same (...), and (...), The Lord himself, and
God himself. Therefore the Angel which appeared unto Moses, is in Iustin's
Opinion (...), God of himself.

Let us next see, what way Justin supposes the Son to have been Begotten. God,
says he, did from all Eternity beget of himself a certain rational energy or
operation [(...)] which is called the Glory of the Lord, the Son, the Wisdom,
the Angel, God, Lord, and (...) or the Word. But then this (...), says he, is
not such an one as we see propagated by us. For we (...), by uttering of a word
do make it; which yet is not of our own Substance, but (...) [of another
Nature]; but the (...) begotten of God is (...) [of the same Substance]. And to
the same purpose he says afterward, that the (...) begotten of the Father
(...), i. e. by his Energy and Will is true God; but he is not the true God, if
he is begotten (...), i. e. by dividing or parting of his Substance or Essence,
since things that are so divided remain not the same they were before division.
From whence it is as clear as the Sun, that Iustin's Opinion was that the (...)
was (...), i. e. of the very same Substance with the Father that begat him.
Again, we may gather that the Son always was with the Father from these words,
(...) (...), i. e. The Begotten was always with the Father before [the Creation
of] all things, and with him did the Father converse [from all Eternity].
Therefore there was always a Father, and always a Son, and they always were,
are, and will be One God. Or else 'twould be improper to say, the Word was
inseparable from the Father (...), as the Light is inseparable from the Sun in
the Firmament. Therefore when Justin says the (...) is (...) or (...), and
(...), i. e. The Word, or that which was Begotten, is Numerically distinct from
him that did beget him, he must be understood with respect to the number of
Persons, not of Essences, for they are indeed two Persons. And if we do not
understand Justin with respect to the Persons, we shall make him contradict
himself, who so often urges the [Essential] Unity of the Father and the Son.
Nay, he would say the same with Arius, who made use of this Argument to prove
the (...) between the Father and the Son, because he that did beget was One,
and he that was begotten was another. Therefore he that was begotten differs
from him that did beget, and that in Number too; but yet in number Personal not
Substantial; that is to say, they differ in Subsistence, not in Substance or
Essence.

The same Father in his Apology to the Roman Senate, has these words, (...). We
Worship (says he) God, [viz. the Father] the (...) or Word begotten by the
Eternal and Ineffable God, and love him, who was made Man for our sakes, that
being made partaker of our Possions and Infirmities he might also heal them. In
which words he distinguishes between the Persons of the Father and the Son, and
shows that the Office of Mediator, the Mystery of the Incarnation, and the
Redemption of Mankind, which is the true (...), belong properly to the Son.
Then he shows, what form of Invocation the Christians did use, which was
unknown to the Romans; namely, That they called upon or Prayed to the Father in
the Name of the Son, by whose Merits they received Redemption. All these
passages Gentilis wrests to another sense, and utterly rejects all the rest of
his Writings; but especially his (...), i. e. His Exposition of the Faith,
where there is express mention made of a Trinity. For citing the place of St.
Paul, Ephesians. 2. In whom you also are builded together for an habitation of God
through the Spirit, Justin adds, (...); That God, Christ, and the Holy Ghost,
one Godhead, did by their energy or operations dwell in us. And presently after
(...), i. e. There is one Name delivered down unto us, which jointly agrees to
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. And again, he expressly mentions and proves
(...), That is, the Sameness or Identity of Essence. Again, In the Trinity,
says he, we understand an Unity, and in the Unity we acknowledge a Trinity. And
again, We have delivered to you the Doctrine of one Godhead in three perfect
Subsistences, etc.

Now these and the like passages being so very plain, that it was impossible to
elude their force, Gentilis has chosen rather to deny this whole Treatise, viz.
the (...), than change his Judgment. And therefore 'twill be needless to
produce any more Quotations, since, I think, it fully appears, from what we
have said, what was the Judgment of Justin Martyr the Philosopher in this
particular.

CHAP. XIV.
Containing the Judgment of St. Ignatius.

ST. Ignatius was Contemporary with Polycarp, and Disciple to St. John, asis
evident from Eusebius in his Chronicon. St. Ierom says that he wrote several
Epistles, and reckons some of them. Yet it is certain, that several Spurious
Pieces have been attributed to him. However, I shall not now Dispute their
Authority; but supposing, with Gentilis, that they are all Genuine, let us see
how far they do countenance his Opinion.

Gentilis endeavors to prove from these Epistles, that the Son is in Essence
distinct from the Father; or, to use his own expression, that they are two The
true Tritheistical Dialect.
Eternal Spirits distinct in Numerical Essence. We, on the contrary affirm,
That St. Ignatius never so much as Dreamed of any such thing, but taught that
the (...), or Word, was one and the same God with the Father, yet so, that they
are in themselves personally distinct.

In his Epistle to the Magnesians he says, that the (...) was not a Pronounced,
but a Substantial Word. And for what he says a little after, that he is an
(...), a begotten Substance, tho it must be confessed that this is an harsh
expression, yet on the contrary it plainly appears, that he there meant nothing
else by (...), but that which does really subsist, i. e. an (...); a Subsistent
Being; to which he opposes a vocal sound, which presently vanishes.

In the same Epistle he says of the Son, that he declared the One and Only true
God to be his Father; and speaking of the Doctrine of our Lord, that he
revealed to the World the true God his Father. But what is all this to a
distinction of Essence?

In his Epistle to the Tarsenses he says* that the (...) was not he who is God
and Father over all, but his Son; which amounts to no more than this, That the
Son was not the Father; which was the Heresy of the Patripassians, who did
thus confound the Persons.

In his Epistle to the Philippians, he cites this place out of the 1 Cor: 8.
There is but one God [Father] of all things; and presently after, There is but
one God and Father; not two or three, one who is [and there is no other besides
him] the only true God. But afterward he adds, by way of Explication,
therefore there are not three Fathers, nor three Sons, nor three Holy Ghosts,
but one Father, and one Son, and one Holy Ghost; and proves this Trinity from
the Institution of Baptism, in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; not
into any one that had three Names, nor yet into three that were made Men, but
into three of the same Majesty; for there is one only who was made Man, neither
the Father, nor the Holy Ghost, but only the Son; who was not so by estimation,
or in appearance only, but in truth and reality; for the Word was made Flesh
and dwelt therein: So that here St. Ignatius does plainly oppose the
Patripassians, and such like Heretics, but does not in the least favor [or
patronize] Gentilis his Notion. In the very same Epistle disputing against the
Patripassians, he writes thus: And again, How does it appear unto you, that
Christ was not Born of the Virgin Mary, but that it was he [the Father] who is
God above all, and Almighty? Who then was it that sent him? Tell me who was he
that ruled over him? Whom did he obey, or whose Law did he fulfill? You, who
would have him yield to no one's Command or Power, do separate Christ from him
that begat him; you make the Unbegotten to have been Begotten, and him that was
without Beginning to have been nailed to the Cross. Which is all said by him in
direct opposition to the Patripassians or Sabellians.

In the same Epistle, he brings in Christ disputing against the Devil: I know,
says he, and have known One only God, whom I do not refuse to Obey, but thou
have proved an Apostate and Rebel to him; for I am not (...), i. e. contrary to
God, but I acknowledge his Sovereignty, and do not refuse to Worship him, whom
I know to have been the Author and Lord of my Nativity, and only Preserver; for
I live in and through the Father, etc. But these are the Words of Christ
Incarnate, who owns himself in respect of his Humanity, to be inferior to the
Father. For if these Words were to be understood with respect to the Divine
Nature, how could Christ be said to live propter Patrem, or rather [Per.]
seeing he [as God] is Self-existent, or has life in himself, and power to lay
it down.

In his Epistle to the Philadelphians, he Exhorts them to Union, and draws his
Arguments from the Unity of the Flesh and Blood of Christ, from the Mystical
Union of the Bread and Wine; and likewise from the Unity of the Father and the
Son. His words are these: Because there is one Father Unbegotten, and one only
Begotten Son, God the Word and Man, and one Holy Ghost, the Spirit of Truth;
also one Gospel, one Faith, one Baptism, and one Church. By which words he only
urges them to Unity and Concord in the Church. Hence he makes this conclusion,
Therefore it behoov'd them as a chosen People, a Royal Priesthood, and an Holy
Nation, to be perfected in Love and Concord. To the same purpose is what he
says in this Epistle against Ebion, who made Christ a mere Man, and therefore
he shows, That Christ was God begotten of the Father; which contains no
absurdity in it, unless violently wrested [by a faithless Exposition.]

In his Epistle to Polycarp: Here, says he, is the Race, here the Crown, wait
for Christ the Son of God, who is (...), without Time, and yet Born in Time.
Thus Damascene, and others, call the (...). Ignatius adds, That as God he was
Impassible, [not capable of Suffering] but that as Man he was Passible, and did
suffer for our sakes. And what can Gentilis say against this? Will he say, that
Christ, as God, did suffer? And that the (...), as such, had properly Flesh and
Blood? St. Ignatius is of another mind, and does plainly and Orthodoxely
distinguish the two Natures under [or in] the one Person of Christ. The one of
which, namely, the Divine, is properly and per se Impassible; but the other,
viz. the Human, is properly Passible. Gentilis confounds these Proprieties of
the two Natures, and affirms that the (...) had himself all these Affections.
Christ, indeed, has properly Flesh and Bones, and Blood, being truly and
properly Incarnate. But the (...), or Divine Nature in Christ, has no such
properly in it self.

In his Epistle to the Antiochians he says, That we ought not to deny Christ
under pretense of asserting One God, and brings several Testimonies out of
Scripture, as Deuteronomy. 6. Isai. 44. Genesis 1. and 17. which do all speak of One God,
and at the same time express different Persons; as when Moses says, The Lord
rained [fire and brimstone] from the Lord; and yet in other places says, There
is but One God, which Unity does not exclude the Son and Holy Ghost; whom he,
on the contrary, includes with the Father in the Unity of the Godhead. So that
a Trinity of Persons does not at all interfere with the Unity of Essence.

And at the end of that Epistle, he truly distinguishes the Properties of the
Persons. May he protect and defend you (says he) who is the Only unbegotten
God, [speaking of the Father] through him who was begotten before all Ages, i.
e. Through the Son, whose property it is to be begotten. But here Gentilis
objects the last clause of this Epistle, viz. Valete Deo and Christo, as if
these were different, and the Father alone was called God, but Christ Dominus
or Lord, so as to be excluded from the communion or fellowship of the only God.

In his Epistle to the Ephesians, he commends them for being one Body, and adds
this Argument for their Union: for, says he, there is one Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism, one God and Father of us all. But it is not Ignatius's Opinion, that
the Father was the Only one God; no more does it appear from the following
sentence of his, Medicus noster est Solus verus Deus, Deus ingenitus. For if
these Epithets were to be understood of the Father only, the Son would not then
be our Physician: But St. Ignatius distinguishes the Persons here only by their
Proprieties; for a little after he calls Christ our Physician, impassible in a
passible Body.

CHAP. XV.
Concerning the Judgment of Tertullian.

TErtullian, without doubt, is to be read with a great deal of caution, as
Gentilis himself confesses; and therefore it is the easier for him either to
pass by and reject his Authority, as he pleases, or else to extol and commend
it, as occasion serves.

But Tertullian, as in many other places, so particularly in his Book against
Praxeas is very Orthodox, where he expressly says [of the Persons in the
Trinity] that numerum sine divisione patiuntur; They allow of number without
division: And afterward, Ubique teneo unam substantiam in tribus
cohoerentibus; I do always acknowledge one Substance in the Three thus united.
Gentilis says, that in these and the like places Tertullian spoke waveringly,
and will have them refer to Montanus his Paraclete; which, notwithstanding all
this, are very Orthodox. But on the contrary, we say that Tertullian against
Hermogenes did not only speak doubtfully, but did actually make use of the
Phrases and Expressions of Arius; when he says, There was a time when the Son
of God was not; which saying must of necessity be extremely well liked by
Gentilis, as that which does make the Son posterior to the Father in the order
of the Godhead. But it is plainly an Arian expression, the same with the (...),
which we have already mentioned out of Nicephorus, lib. 8. cap. 8.

But Tertullian does often recollect himself, and not only makes use of proper
expressions, but seems likewise to be Orthodox enough in his Notions, as in the
same Treatise against Hermogenes he says, Divinitas gradum non habet utpote
unica; The Divinity or Godhead can admit of no degrees, as being but one.

These and the like passages do sufficiently demonstrate, that Tertullian
acknowledged no separation, no division in the Godhead; but yet, in respect of
the different Persons, he did allow of a Numerical distinction.

And thus much we thought fit to take out of Justin Martyr, Ignatius and
Tertullian; these being the Fathers to whom Gentilis lays so great a claim, as
if they were wholly Patrons of his Opinion. I shall not concern my self much
with any of the others, since the Opinions of Hilary and Irenaeus are too well
known, to give any one just occasion to suspect, that they were favorers of
this Pestilential Error; and those passages Gentilis quotes out of them are
answered by the Authors themselves. Nor shall I at present bring any Quotations
out of the many other both Greek and Latin Writers, since Gentilis rejects all
their Authorities.

CHAP. XVI.
Concerning the other Fathers, especially St. Austin.

GEntilis then, without any distinction, rejects all other both Greek and Latin
Writers, and who cannot but wonder at the daring confidence of such a Fellow?
Here we have a censorious And at this day we have such another amongst us.
Upstart, who like another Aristarchus, boldly arraigns and condemns all
Antiquity, unless they will acknowledge Three Eternal distinct Spirits in the
Divine Economy; and all the
three hundred and eighteen Fathers assembled in the Nicene Council, must be
herded amongst the Heretics, because they confessed but One God Eternal. He
prefers Arius before them all, would he but have admitted the term (...), as
newly explained by himself. But I will not oppose him with fallible Human
Authority, seeing we may easily consute this Blasphemous Error out of the
Scripture it self. And Arius, whose wicked Spirit seems now to revive in, or to
rest upon this Monster of Iniquity, was condemned of Old, and confuted not by
Human Authority, but from the Holy Scriptures and Consent of the Church. My
design being Historically to make it appear, that this wicked Man has set up a
new Interpretation of Holy Scripture, and to gain his Point the easier, has,
without any modesty or civility, taken liberty to rail at and calumniate, not
only the Fathers, but likewise all the Orthodox Councils.

However, he ought either to have submitted to such approved Authors, and to
the Consent of the Church, or else to have confuted them out of the Word of
God. This he does not, but cites some few places of Scripture, upon which he
puts a new Interpretation; and when we deny this to be the true meaning of
them, and assert, That the Church of God did never understand those places in
such a manner, and for proof of it appeal to all the Authentic Writers both
amongst the Greeks and Latins, he cries out, That we are a parcel of Dogmatical
Pedants and Heretics, and presently flies over to Arius, and the Bishops,
which followed him, as if there were a better Interpretation of Scripture
amongst them, than there is in Athanasius, and those who approved of his
Confession of Faith. He treats St. Austin in a very scurrilous manner, no ways
deserved by so excellent a Writer. He charges him, as well as us, with holding
a Quaternity, a Notion he never was so Fantastic as to dream of. He styles
that Reverend Father an Enthusiastic Writer, a Magician, and a Sophister, such
calumnies as he never received at the hands of his most Mortal Enemies. The
Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity, he calls an Imaginary Being, an Ens
rationis, and St. Austin's Goddess, which is downright abominable Blasphemy.
And notwithstanding all this, our crafty Scribler, to reconcile himself to St.
Austin, and wipe off the Odium such rude expressions must necessarily bring
upon him, at last gravely pronounces this Oracular saying, That he believes,
were St. Austin now alive, and could enjoy but this clear light of the Gospel,
he would, with his own hands, throw his Books of the Trinity into the Flames. A
thing very likely indeed! that St. Austin should take Example from this vile
Man, and Perjure himself as he has done. But of this enough.

CHAP. XVII.
Concerning the Communication of Attributes, or Proprieties.

THE Scripture speaking of the Son of God, does attribute that to one of his
Natures, which does properly belong to the other, as Ioh. 3. No one has
ascended up into heaven, but the Son of man, who is in heaven. Christ, indeed,
as he was the Son of Man, could not then be in Heaven when he spoke these
words, nor did he take his Flesh from Heaven. But all this is proper to the
Divine Nature only, and may be truly affirmed of whole Christ, by reason of the
Personal Union of the Word with Man.

By a like form of Speech we say, that God suffered and died for us, which are
very improper expressions, [if strictly taken] since God cannot properly be
said to suffer or to dye; and therefore we use to add, by way of Explication,
that it was in Carne assumpta, in the Flesh that he assumed.

This way of speaking the Ancients called Communicatio Idiomatum, or the
Communication of Properties; others called it (...), Damascene styles it (...);
as if we should say, by way of Exchange, or Mutual distribution, whereby we
attribute that to the Human Nature, which is proper to the Divine* as to be in
Heaven before the Incarnation; or when, contrariwise, that is attributed to the
Divine Nature, which is proper only to the Human, as to Dye and to Suffer; or
else we affirm that of the whole Person, which is truly and properly said,
because Christ in his Human Nature did dye, tho not in his Divine.

Nor is this way of speaking in any wise improper or absurd: For don't we, in
respect of us Mortals, upon the very same account say, That such a Man is dead,
tho this cannot be properly said of the whole Man; for Man is Mortal only in
respect of his Body, his Soul is Immortal, and survives after Death. Yet
because the Union of Soul and Body is that which makes the Man one, hence it is
that we affirm that of the whole Man, which only agrees to one part of him. So
we say of Christ, that he Suffered and is Dead; which properly do not at all
belong to the Divinity, but agree to Christ as he is Man, who is withal the
same God, and one and the same Christ.

Here Gentilis cries out, That we divide Christ, and make a separation in him,
and yet allows that there are some properties, which agree to the Word only,
before he took our Nature upon him. Such is that, John 3. No one has ascended
up into heaven, but he that came down from heaven, the Son of man which is in
heaven, etc. And John 8. Before Abraham was, I am. And Heb. 1. By whom also he
made the Worlds. Now if, as Gentilis grants, these expressions can only agree
to the Word before he was made Flesh, I think it is plain, that they are
improperly attributed to the Human Nature; and by consequence, we rightly
explain them by a Communication of Properties [or Idioms].

And that we do not divide Christ, nor make or maintain here any Separation, is
clear from the Doctrine of our Church, wherein we do plainly acknowledge two
Natures in Christ, and yet without any confusion of the Natures, the Personal
Union making one and the same Christ, the Son of God and the Blessed Virgin. We
likewise distinguish the Natures by their Properties, but do not divide or
separate them, and by this means preserve whole and entire all the Offices of
the Person of Christ.

We say it is proper to the Human Nature to Weep, to be Hungry, to Sleep, to
Suffer to Dye, to be circumscribed in a Place, etc. On the other hand it is
proper to the Divine Nature, to be impassible, to make the Worlds, to be with
the Father from all Eternity, before Abraham was, etc. We say that the Offices
of Christ are to redeem Mankind, to intercede for them, to govern his Church,
and whatever else may be said to belong to Christ, either as Prophet, Priest,
or King.

Now Gentilis being able to deny nothing of all this, it is clear, that he
quarrels with the plainest expressions merely out of heat and desire of
Contention; and does therefore unjustly Style this Orthodox Doctrine, such
impertinent Trifles as deserve to be hissed out of the Church; which he has
not only done in his Epistle Dedicatory to the King of Poland, but has also,
without any just or sufficient reason, maliciously calumniated the same in the
12th Book of his Antidotes. But there is yet at the bottom of all this,
something still more monstrously Heretical; for he often affirms, that the
(...) had truly and properly Flesh and Blood, that the (...) was truly and
properly
Nailed to the Cross; and that the same (...) did properly Suffer. Now had this
been said of Christ, it had been without Controversy true; but since (...)
does signify only the Divine Nature in Christ, which is united to the Human
Nature in the Person of Christ, he must necessarily think, that either a Spirit
has Flesh and Bones, which our Savior himself has positively denied, or else
that the (...) was incorporated, or rather turned into flesh; or as the
Monophysites did affirm, both the Natures were made into one; unless he will
confess with us, that it is an improper way of speaking to say that the (...)
did Suffer or Dye; whereby that is attributed to the Divine Nature, which is
proper only to the Human, by reason of the Hypostatick union of both Natures in
Christ, which is what we call Communicatio Idiomatum.

CHAP. XVIII.
Containing some of Gentilis's Notorious Blasphemies.

ANother remarkable Instance of this Man's Impiety, may be taken from that
scurrilous, impudent, blasphemous Language he has so freely bestowed upon this
most Sacred Mystery; a Mystery, that we ought rather in humility to adore, than
nicely to pry into. It must be consess'd, that even good Men do sometimes
disagree in their Explication of Things, and are not always of the same mind in
their Interpretations of Scripture; but yet they do it without railing, without
opprobrious Language, and much more do they abstain from the blacker Crimes of
Irreligion and Blasphemy. It Is no good sign of a Religious disposition, to
scandalize and bespatter the Subject in dispute; and yet however, Gentilis has
been so liberal of his Railery, that had he raked even Hell it self, he could
not have met with more dirty noisome Expressions, nor more offensive to any
Judicious Person.

He sticks not to call the Trinity an Idol; Page 62.
the Tower of Babel; a New Idol, which we P. 30.
have erected above the Father; a Tripersonate P. 6.
Mock-God; a Diabolical, Fictitious P. 7.
Person; a Fictitious Propriety and Sophistical Person in a New God. And page
8. An Imaginary Fantastic Person. Page 28. he calls the Trinity, Trium
horrenda confusio and Execrabilis Mixtura. And page 33. says, That we have
invented this New God, the Trinity, out of our own Heads. Page 39. he styles it
a Fourth Idol, which deserves to be thrust down into Hell. And page 44. calls
the first Person in the undivided Godhead a Magical Phantom, an empty Spectrum,
that has begotten another Imaginary Person, or mere Relation.

Antid. 3. He calls the Deus Trinitas, Nomen Monstrosum. And page 56. he will
have it be nothing but Magical Persons and Proprieties. Again, a Magical
Propriety in a New Idol. Page 34. The three Persons he calls Three Magical
Impostures; and the One God he styles a Fourth unknown Idol.

In his Printed Book, Fol. 6. he calls the Trinity a mere human Invention,
diametrically opposite to the Truth of the Gospel; The belief of a Trinity is
perfect Sophistry. And again, the Trinity is Deus Trinomius, a God only under
three Names; which last he seems to have borrowed from Sabellius.

Again, Fol. 8. The Trinity is called a New God, indefinite, Tripersonate, a
God, which none of the Prophets or Patriarchs ever knew of; which Christ never
revealed, nor the Apostles ever preached.

He styles our Blessed Savior Christus tergeminus, p. 14. of his Printed Book;
and in his Epistle to the Sons of the Church tells them, Christ was transformed
into One, which was not the Son of God. Page 15. he calls him the Son of the
Father; that is, says he, of a mere empty Relation Did the Father beget a Mode
and call it his Son? says Dr. Sh. Vin. Trin. p. 84.
: Then calls him a Tripartite Metamorphos'd Christ. God the Father he calls a
fruitless, idle, unknown God. But perhaps it will be said, that these
Railleries were designed only against us, not against the Mystery it self. It
is true, indeed, that Gentilis does generally endeavor to throw his Scandals
upon us, and bespatter our Doctrine with these abusive terms; yet it cannot be
denied, but that he is so profane, as in a vast many places plainly to condemn
the Word Trinity, although he makes use of it himself, as is clearly proved by
his Epistle to the King of Poland; where, in the sixth Page, he complains, that
there were several Monstrous and Dr Sherlock perfectly agrees with him in this
Assertion.
Profane terms brought into the Church, such as (...), Person, Essence, Unity,
Trinity, whereby all the Holy Mysteries of Religion were overturned, and the
knowledge of the Eternal God, with his Son, and Holy Ghost, was quite lost. In
this charge he was led on by Gregorius Paulus, who calls these two Phrases,
viz. The One Essence of God, and One God in three Persons the Inventions and
cunning Contrivance of the Devil. But however, since the Phrases these Men
endeavor to explode, have been the constant Language of the Church, I think it
needs no other demonstration, to prove that Gentilis is not only Profane in his
Expressions, but makes use also of Diabolical Stratagems [to overthrow the
Established Doctrine] of the Church.

But the last and most plausible Argument, which they use, is this: Gentilis
complains to King Sigismund, that Luther, Zuinglius and Bucer, were wholly
taken up in demolishing the Outworks of Antichrist; and that, amongst so many
thousand Reformers, only Philip had attempted any thing in this Glorious
Undertaking; and that too so indirectly, that he seemed rather to threaten its
ruin, than to have given it any deadly wound. To the same purpose Gregorius
Paulus says, That God began by Luther to demolish the church of Antichrist at
the Roof, not at the Foundation, left the noisome stench of the Ruins should
have stifled them. And all this is, because they left the Doctrine of the
Trinity unattacked; therefore they are said by them to have begun at the
Outworks, and the Roof, not at the principal Fort and Foundation of Antichrist.
Thus these Witty Gentlemen are pleased to sport amongst themselves. Yet, after
all, it is certain, that their quarrelling with these Words is only to find
some means to escape; and therefore it is, that they fall so foul upon the
Blessed Labors of those Good Men. Then they interpret every thing as they
please, and take the liberty of condemning whatever makes against them; and
hence it is, that they endeavor to refine and new model the Language and
Expressions of the Church, which being a task far above their weak abilities,
[rather than seem to be Nonplust] they despitefully scatter such horrid
Expressions and bitter Calumnies, as no good Christian can hear without horror
and astonishment. His Book to the King of Poland is fraught with such
Elegancies and Ornaments as these, and his common Discourse was wont to be set
off with the like Embellishments; so that he seems to please himself, and hopes
to raise his Reputation by this means.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the vile Scandals he has falsely thrown upon the Doctrine of our Church.

GEntilis is very dextrous in Forging of false Accusations, for he unjustly
Charges our Church with several Crimes he will never be able to prove against
her; as

First, That we do Impudently deny Christ to have been the Son of God.

Secondly, That we have unadvisedly brought a new God into the Christian
Religion.

Thirdly, That we affirm that God did not beget his Son of his own Substance.

If Cardinal Cusanus said any such thing, let him look to it, the Reformed, or
Evangelick Churches, are not bound to Answer for his Errors.

Fourthly, That we made a Triple God contrary to the Authority of the
Scriptures.

Abundance more of such sort of Stuff is contained in his Antidotes; all which
I here industriously avoid. For what good Man can hear with patience such a
Rascally Fellow thus sawcily abusing and undermining the Christian Religion?

Hence it is, that he gives us the Titles of Opposers of God; Iudaizing
Heretics; and as bad as Turks; and passes the same Complements upon the
Churches of Savoy also, which yet he acknowledges to be the most Uncorrupted,
and best Reformed, of any he knew.

He compares us with the Turks and Jews for denying (as he says) with Mahomet,
that God did beget his Son. But who can say that he ever heard amongst us, That
we devised another God Superior to the Father of Christ? Who amongst us ever
taught or affirmed any such thing? Hence he took that specious pretense of a
Quaternity, a thing that was never seen or heard of, much less Worshipped in
our Church. He accounts our Faith to be mere Sophistry, and our selves Novices
and Sophisters; yet gives no reason for it. Thus this Crafty Fellow comically
sports with us; but the true reason is, because we deny his Three Eternal
Spirits, and do say, with Athanasius, There is One Eternal, One Almighty; but
that the Three Persons are three (...) or (...), i. e. Only three Subsistences.
And when we say, Deus est Trinus, or there is a Trinity in the Godhead, he
starts up as. if he were Mad, and cries out, That we make the Trinity a Fourth
God; as if we asserted any Deus Trinitas besides, or without the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost. But this is certainly too gross and palpable a Calumny, for we
own the Trinity only to relate to these Three Persons; and besides, or without
them, there is neither God, nor Trinity. Of the same strain is his Calumny of
our defending an unknown God, Superior to the Father of Christ; and making
three Christ's out of one.

We acknowledge and defend the God, that was known and revealed to our Fathers,
but do set up no unknown God. We know there is but one Christ, in whom two
Natures do conspire to make one Person; and therefore we judge it to be Impious
and Heretical, to say there are three Christ's [or that Christ is Tergeminus.]

But that Scandal is of a blacker Dye, of our dividing Christ, and transforming
him into another, which is not the Son of the Living God. Let this Blasphemer
show us any other Christ besides that Son of God, and let him make it out,
where, and how, we do divide Christ. Of the same Nature are those Impostures he
charges us with, of Conjuring up a new Christ the Son of a new Relation, and
then deceitfully believing him to be the Son of God.

We believe in the Son of God as revealed in the Scriptures, but acknowledge
none of Gentilis's Impostures. We constantly assert, without any deceit, [or
fraud] three Persons in the Godhead; nor do we divide the Substance, but do
distinguish between the Persons. He hits us in the teeth with Dr. Sherlock 's
constant Charge upon such as deny Three distinct Infinite Minds or Spirits in
the Trinity.
Sabellianism, whilst we do more justly charge him with the Blasphemy of Arius.
The Doctrine of our Church does plainly prove, that there is nothing in it
agreeing with Sabellius; whereas he blushes not openly to defend Arius, and to
prefer him before all the Fathers of the Nicene Council. And however cautious
he may seem to be, in his keeping the middle way between Arius and Sabellius,
yet I am persuaded his Opinions are as bad as either of theirs.

CHAP. XX.
Of the Cheats and Impostures, whereby he endeavored to impose upon good
(well-meaning) People.

INOW come to the last Chapter (or last Head of his Accusation) wherein I shall
make it appear, by what sly Artifices Gentilis endeavored to impose upon [or
cheat] every one he had to do with. For, indeed, he has shown himself to be
exactly such an one as the Poet has Comically described Mercury, (...); one
that had got an excellent knack of changing his Name.

First then, he prefixed to the Confession he Published, a forged Preface,
under the Name of Theophilus the Printer to the Sons of the Church. This he
composed himself, and wrote it with his own hand, wherein he extravagantly
commends to the Reader the vast treasure contained in that little Book; a Book,
says he, so Excellent, that it were to be wished all Churches might have the
happiness to enjoy the use of it And, the better to set off his unmerchantable
Ware, he makes as if the Printer were vastly desirous of having the rest of
Gentilis his Writings made public; and despises the bulky Volumes, and vast,
tedious, Paradoxical Books of other Authors, if compared with Gentilis his
Works.

But this (methinks) is a Trick no Ingenuous or Honest Man would have been
guilty of in a matter of such moment. Christ, the Prophets, and Apostles, never
made use of these little Artifices to recommend their Writings to Posterity. It
was wisely said of King Solomon, Let another praise thee, and not thine own
mouth. And we have a Proverbamong our selves, which says, That they must needs
have bad Neighbors, who are forced to commend themselves. But the truth is, he
was afraid, that had he not under a feigned Name commended it himself, the Book
would certainly have met with no body else that would have been so kind, as to
give it a good Character.

Secondly, He was asraid to discover the place where it was printed. For tho
the Book had been published at Lions, yet he craftily pretends it was done at
Antwerp. But these were but civil Lies he made use of the better to disperse
his pernicious Principles.

Thirdly, He begins his Confession with the same probity; It was by your
Command, Honored Sir, etc. For the better understanding of which Cheat, I
desire all good Men to take notice, that the truth of the whole business is
this:

Gentilis being under custody, was commanded in that quality to exhibit a
Confession of his Faith to the Governor of Gaium, which he designed should be
examined by the Clergy of that Province: But in the mean time, Gentilis, whose
Character was not yet fully known, nor his Confession examined, was, by the
intercession of some Friends, dismissed out of Prison upon his good Behavior,
the Governor all the while, not in the least suspecting he had kept a Copy of
his Confession to himself.

But as soon as he was dismissed, he immediately dispersed his Confession, as
if he had been commanded by the Governor so to do. The Governor did, indeed,
command him, as being a suspected Heretic, to exhibit a Confession, but never
gave him Orders to publish such a Blasphemous Libel under the protection of his
Name. All that Gentilis could ever say in defense of this notorious Forgery,
was only this; That as the Governor never did command him, so neither did he
ever forbid him to publish it. But what reason, I pray you, had he to prohibit
him, when as he never suspected, that he would have had the Impudence to
publish it.

But Fourthly, We have already told you, and that from his own Mouth, how he
published such Confessions of the Trinity, both at Grenoble and Lions, as were
admitted for Orthodox by the Viz. Such as Genebrard a Sorbon Doctor, who, to
his Eternal Infamy, both defended Gentilis, and asserted Three distinct Eternal
Spirits in the Trinity. See his Answer to Skegkius de Trinitate, fol. 53. p. 2.
Papists themselves. And yet he has the Impudence to accuse us for joining with
them in the defense of a Quaternity, and for submitting to the grievous Errors
of the Greek and Latin Fathers in this Doctrine. Certainly there cannot be a
more malicious and deceitful representation of this Doctrine, than this wicked
Man has given out. So that I may more truly call his false Accusations
Impostures, Sophistry, Magic, and much worse Names.

Fifthly, At his return out of Poland, he presented to the Governor of Gaium a
Draught or Form, for having a Public Disputation, which I shall here present
the Reader with, as it is transcribed verbatim from his own Original; that so
all honest Men may see, what sort of Spirit it was that governed him through
the whole Transaction. The Instrument, which he caused to be Published under
the Governor's Name, ran in the following form.

To all and singular the Pastors, Teachers, Deacons and Elders, of the Reformed
and Evangelick Churches, dispersed through Savoy and France, to whom these
Letters shall come, or to whom they shall be read, Health and Peace in the Lord.

FOrasmuch as We have read and considered the above-written Propositions, that
are opposite to each other; and having heard the Just and Reasonable Petition
of Valentinus Gentilis an Italian, humbly requesting, That this weighty
Controversy might be decided barely from the Word of God; The Illustrious
Governor of Gaium has, upon these considerations, thought fit to transmit
Copies of the Doctrine asserted by both Parties, into several places of France,
and Savoy, more particularly to Lions and Geneva, to the intent, that if there
be any of Mr. Calvin 's Disciples, who will take upon him to defend the
assertions of his Master, he may come to Gaium within the space of one Week,
there to dispute with Gentilis, upon this condition, That whosoever shall not
be able to demonstrate the Propositions, he undertook to maintain, to be true,
out of the plain Word of God, shall be looked upon as a notorious Impostor, and
Assertor of a false Religion, and shall So that Gentilis suffered just
according to his own. Conditions.
suffer Death for the same. But if there be none that shall appear within the
time here prescribed, the Illustrious Governor, with the whole Senate of Gaium,
are resolved, as is most fitting, publicly to declare, That the abovenam a
Gentilis is truly Orthodox in his Opinions concerning the most High God, and
his Son Jesus Christ, etc.

I desire all good Men to observe, what an advantageous way of Disputing (for
himself I mean) our Adversary has here prescribed. For Gentilis's Propositions
are first presumed to be pious and sound; then there is only eight days time
allowed for the Disputants to come together; whereas 'twas almost impossible
for the Challenge to be sent to them in so short a time. But that is
particularly to be taken notice of, that no body was to Dispute but under
Penalty of losing his Life, if conquered. Is not this, I pray you, an evident
sign of a Seducing and Diabolical Spirit? And when he was charged with this
base contrivance, his Answer was, That he did it only that he might have the
fewer Opposers. But this bloody Spirit sufficiently betrays it self, that would
involve Religion in Murder and false Opinions; but that (thanks be to the good
Providence of God) the ruin he designed against others, fell upon his own Pate.

And last of all, when he was to have taken his Trial, and to have desended his
Doctrine, he did, by a remarkable piece of Knavery, endeavor to obtain the
Privilege of a Plaintiff, and to be heard as such, thereby to avoid being Tried
as a Criminal; and when that could not be granted him, he proposed his Doctrine
so ambiguously, and raised scruples about matters, altogether impertinent to
the Controversy, as Whether there was one most high God; and whether Christ
was the Son of God, and the like; which no body did ever deny. But he was still
opposed in this, That Christ was to be excluded from the Unity of the Eternal
God; and that Three Eternal Spirits, distinguished
by Numerical Essence, ought to be allowed.

And now let all good Men judge, what we ought to think of this Blasphemy; and
how justly he was punished with Death, who durst challenge others to Dispute
with him for their Lives.

But it is now high time to rid my hands of this business. In short then, after
that we had used all manner of means with him, even from the 5th of August to
the 9th of September, (but all to no purpose, he still persevering obstinate in
his Opinions) he was at last condemned to Dye by the Honorable Senate. And
because it may be acceptable to the Reader, I shall here rehearse the Sentence
of Condemnation, which was pronounced against him in the following Words.

Whereas Valentinus Gentilis, a Native of Cosentia, in the Kingdom of Naples,
after The Sentence of Condemnation passed upon Gentilis.
eight years preparation to attack the Doctrine of the Trinity, did begin
openly to teach, That there were in the Trinity three distinct Spirits,
differing from each other in * Viz. Three distinct Eternal Spirits; For so it
is in the 6th Proposition, set down in the 5th Chapter and in the 6th also,
where he says the Father, Son, and H. Gh. Tres sunt aeterni Spiritus qui unus
esse non possunt.
Numerical Essence: Amongst which (three Spirits) he acknowledges the Father
only to be that infinite God, which we ought to Worship, which is plain
Blasphemy against the Son; and, besides this Opinion, has broached several
other dangerous Errors, for which he was Apprehended by the Magistrates of
Geneva, and being fully Convicted of them, there made his Recantation, and did
publicly confess, detest, and Valentinus Gentilis a great Abjurer.
abjure, these his wicked Opinions; and moreover, bound himself by Oath not to
depart out of that City without leave of the Senate, yet notwithstanding all
this, violated the Sacred obligations of his Oath, by stealing away from
thence, and by relapsing into the Erroneous Opinions he had once Abjured, and
re-assuming their Defense with greater heat and earnestness, both by Disputing
and Writing Books in opposition to the plain and express Testimonies of
Scripture; and has been guilty of the vilest Scurrility, and most horrid
Blasphemies, against the Son of God, and the Glorious Mystery of the Trinity.
And lastly, since his being made Prisoner to this Honorable Senate, has,
notwithstanding that full and sufficient Instruction which has been given him,
still continued obstinate in his perverse and Heretical Opinions: This
Honorable Senate, to prevent disturbances, and to root out such pestilent
Errors, have adjudg'd him This Genebrard very learnedly calls Crematus est,
fol. 54. And Ultricibus flammis Traditus, fol. 52.
to be Beheaded.

As he was led out to Execution, the obstinate Wretch did not cease to Glory in
his unruly and pertinacious Stubbornness, and expecting praise from it (as the
Devil's Martyrs use to do) never lest off crying out, That he died a Martyr for
the Glory of the most high God; but that we * were all Sabellians, and held one
God under three Dr. Sherlock's Language all along.
Names; but that he did acknowledge no God (...). And tho we frequently
answered him, That the things he laid to our Charge were all Our Answer to him
is and ought to be the same; though (God be thanked) the Tongue of a Tritheist,
be it never so false, is no slander.
false and slanderous; that all the noise he made about this most high God was
only mere Sophistry, and that his asserting more Gods than One was downright
Impiety, yet we could work nothing upon him. For he still continued to repeat
his old Blasphemies, until he saw there was no help for him, but that he must
be forced to lay down his Neck to the Block; then he began to faulter, and
said, He should be very willing to agree with us, if so be we would but own
Christ to be the Son of God; when we told him, This was what we never denied
(for what otherwise would have become of our Faith?) Then again did he discover
his falsehood and treachery, as having still been used to appropriate the
appellation of God to the Person of the Father only; and in this horrid
Blasphemy he still persever'd, the whole Assembly (that stood by) praying to
God that he would change his mind, and we continually exhorting him to
repentance, he had How much better does it fare with Tritheism in England?
Which, though it lost its Head at Bern, lifts up its Head (as high as Paul's) here.
his life taken from him by the just Judgment of God; and so his Life and his
Blasphemies ended together.

And thus I have given thee (Good Reader) a brief and faithful Account of this
shattered History. And must now beg thee to join with us in our Prayers to God,
that he would, in his Mercy, turn away such scandalous Offenses from his
Church; that he would give his People vigilant and able Ministers, who may
sincerely love sound Doctrine, successfully rebuke Gainsayers, and know how to
divide the Word of Truth rightly, to the Glory of his Name, and the good of his
Church, through Jesus Christ his Only and Coeternal Son.

Amen.
THE Reader, by comparing the preceding History with what here follows, will
perceive that the principal Proposition of Valentinus Gentilis, is in Sense
perfectly the same with those Condemned by the late Oxon Censure; as also
asserted by Dr. Sherlock.

At a Meeting of the Vice Chancellor and the Heads of Colleges and Halls of the
University of Oxford, on the 25th Day of November, in the Year of Our Lord 1695.

WHEREAS in a Sermon lately preached before the University of Oxford, in the
Church of St. Peter in the East, on the Feast of S. Simon and Jude last past,
these Words, amongst others, were delivered and asserted, viz. [There are Three
Infinite distinct Minds and Substances in the Trinity.] Item [That the Three
Persons in the Trinity are Three distinct Infinite Minds or Spirits, and Three
Individual Substances.] Which gave just cause of Offense and Scandal to many
Persons:

The Vice Chancellor and Heads of Colleges and Halls, at their general Meeting
this Day assembled, do judge and declare the said Words to be False, Impious,
and Heretical; Contrary to the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, and
particularly to the received Doctrine of the Church of England:

And do therefore strictly forbid all manner of Persons, under their Care and
Charge, to Preach or Publish any such Doctrine for the future.

By Order of Mr. Vice Chancellor.

Ben. Cooper Notarie public and Register of the University of Oxon.

This Sentence, it is confessed, may, and, not improbably, will be confirmed,
and sarther enforced, by the more Authentic Sentence of the whole University
in Convocation: In the mean time, it has certainly had this good effect, That
it has Unkennelled the Wolf, who quickly show himself after it. So that being
hereby bereaved of all his Shifts, Meanings, and Subterfuges, and Sheeps
Clothing besides, the University has him now in full Chase, and, it is hoped,
will not give the Chase over, till it has run him down.

Some of the grosser Errata of the Press are thus to be Corrected.
s for f frequently.

Page 1. l. 5. for produee r. produce. p. 8. l. 19. for I am r. I AM. p. 18. in
the Margent, for (...) r. (...)- men, l. 26. for Pennancae r. penance, p. 44.
l. 6. for (...) r. (...). p. 48. l. 1. for (...) A r. (...) A. p. 54. l. 22.
for personies subsistenies r. persons subsistentes, p. 70. l. 29. for (...) r.
(...), p. 85. l. 13, r. (...) with one Accent, p. 90. l. 10. for (...) r.
(...), p. 91. l. 22. for (...) r. (...), p. 94. l. 5. for (...) r. (...), l.
11. for the (...) r. and then the (...), p. 97. l. 8. for (...) r. (...).


