An ACCOUNT of the PROCEEDINGS AT THE King's Bench Bar AT WESTMINSTER HALL,
Against the SEVEN BISHOPS.
ON Friday being the first day of the Term, the Judges attended the Lord
Chancellor to Westminster Hall, after the usual manner; where an Itch after
things Novel, had occasioned a Confluence of Multitudes of Persons of all
Qualities, who were impatient to hear the Success and Event of the Bishops
Affair.

About Nine the Court being sat, the Attorney and Solicitor Generals, prayed
a Rule of Court might be made, for the bringing the Lords the Bishops up to
that Bar, in order to plead to an Information they had prepared against them,
for Contriving, Making and Publishing a Seditious Libel against His Majesty and
His Government; the which was immediately granted, and about a quarter after
Eleven, the Lieutenant of the Tower (attended by six or seven Warders) brought
his Prisoners into the Court, where they had Chairs placed there to sit down,
their Counsel (which were Sir Francis Pemberton, Sir Robert Sawyers, Mr.
Polixfin, and Mr. Finch) began to make some Objections against the Legality of
their Commitment, and consequently against the return of their Habeas Corpus,
and being brought into that court, the Warrant having some defect, as they
imagined, in Form, for it run signed by such and such (to the number of about
Fourteen) Lords of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council, and not by Us
Lords in Council. So that they Insinuated they did not know where that Warrant
might be made, for that these Lords had not Power to Commit, nor were a Court,
but as they were met in Council; but this Objection, after a long Debate
managed for the King, by the Attorney and Solicitor Generals, only was at
length Overruled by the Judges, though Mr. Justice Powell seemed not fully to
assent to the Opinion of his Brethren, but rather dislike the Form of the
Warrant.

The Substance of this next Argument, was chiefly about the Dignity of their
Peerage, As whether it was usual for a Peer to be held to Bail, or Committed
upon a Misdemeanor: But this, after much Alteration by the Council on both
sides, was also Overruled by the Judges.

Then the Archbishop put in a Plea, which being read, contained Matter nothing
different from what had been before discussed, and so was rejected as frivolous.

Then their Council urged, they might have time allowed them to Plead to the
Information; but Sir Samuel Astre declaring it had been the Custom of that
Court, for these twelve Years to his knowledge, (and was long before, as he had
been informed by his Predecessors) to Plead immediate to the Information.) Upon
which their Lordships Pleaded Not Guilty, and the Court gave them till that day
Fortnight to prepare for their Trial. Every Man standing upon his single
Recognizance, in such a Sum as each voluntarily named; The Archbishop 200 l.
and the other Bishops in 100 l. each, and so were discharged from their
Warders, and one attended the Archbishop to Canterbury-house. They had all the
Civilities and Respect from the Court that was possible to be shown to Persons
of their Quality; and if Bail had been required by the Court, about Twenty of
the Principle Nobility attendeed to have served their Lordships. The Court rise
at a quarter after Three, this Affair having held them in Debate three hours
and a half.

The People seemed extremely satisfied at the fair play their Lordships and
Council had had through the whole Debate; and accompanied them in great Throngs
to the Parliament-Stairs, where his Grace took Barge. And in some Parts of the
City, the People, through mistake, thinking the Bishops had been cleared, made
Boon-fires, and gave other Signals of their Joy.

With Allowance.

June 16. 1688.
London, Printed by George Croom, at the Blue-Ball in Thames Street, near
Baynard's- Castle, 1688.


