The Lord Marquis of Argyle's SPEECH TO A Grand Committee OF Both Houses of
Parliament, The 25th of this instant JUNE, 1646. Together with some Papers of
the Commissioners for the Kingdom of Scotland, Wherein they do give their
consent to the sending of the Propositions of Peace to His Majesty, And desire
their Armies to be supplied, and the Accounts between the Kingdoms to be
perfected, To the end all ARMIES may be disbanded, etc. ALSO His Majesty's
Letter to the Marquis of Ormond, discharging all further Treaty with the Irish
Rebels. And a Letter from General Major Monro concerning the state of Affairs
in IRELAND.

Published by AUTHORITY.

LONDON: Printed for Laurence Chapman. June 27. 1646.

The Lord Marquis of Argyle his Speech to a Grand Committee of both Houses,
June 25. 1646.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
THough I have had the Honor to be named by the Kingdom of Scotland in all the
Commissions which had relation to this Kingdom since the beginning of this War;
yet I had never the happiness to be with Your Lordships till now, wherein I
reverence Gods Providence; that he has brought me hither at such an
opportunity, when I may boldly say, it is in the power of the two Kingdoms,
yea, I may say in Your Lordships power, to make us both happy, if You make good
use of this occasion, by settling Religion, the Peace and Union of these
Kingdoms. The work of Reformation in these Kingdoms is so great a work, as no
Age nor History can parallel since Christ's days; for no one Nation had ever
such a Reformation set forth unto them, much less three Kingdoms: So that this
Generation may truly think themselves happy if they can be Instrumental in it.
And as the work is very great, so it cannot be expected but it must have great
and powerful Enemies, not only flesh and blood which hate to be Reformed but
Principalities and Powers, the Rulers of the darkness of this world, and
Spiritual wickednesses in high places. As the dangers are great, we must look
the better to our duties; and the best way to perform these, is to keep us by
the Rules which are to be found in our National Covenant, principally the Word
of God; and in its own place, the Example of the best Reformed Churches. And in
our way we must beware of some rocks, which are temptations both upon the right
and left hand, so that we must hold the middle path. Upon the one part we would
take heed not to setle lawless Liberty in Religion, whereby in stead of
Uniformity, we should set up a thousand Heresies and Schisms, which is directly
contrary and destructive to our Covenant. Upon the other part we are to look
that we persecute not Piety and Peaceable men, who cannot through scruple of
Conscience come up in all things to the common Rule: But that they may have
such a forbearance as may be according to the Word of God, may consist with the
Covenant, and not be destructive to the Rule it self, nor to the Peace of the
Church and Kingdom; wherein I will insist no further, either to wrong Your
Lordships patience or judgments, who, I doubt not, will be very careful to do
every thing according to our Covenant.

As to the other point, concerning the Peace and Union of the Kingdoms, I know
it is that which all profess they desire; I hope it is that all do aim at:
Sure I am, it is that which all men ought to study and endeavor. And I think it
not amiss to remember Your Lordships of some former experiences as an Argument
to move us to be wise for the future. If the Kingdom of England in the 1640.
year of God then sitting in Parliament, had concurred as they were desired
against the Kingdom of Scotland, No question we had been brought to many
difficulties, which blessed be God, was by the Wisdom of the Honorable Houses
prevented. So likewise when this Kingdom was in difficulties, if the Kingdom of
Scotland had not willingly, yea cheerfully sacrificed their Peace to concur
with this Kingdom, Your Lordships all know what might have been the danger.
Therefore let us hold fast that Union which is so happily established betwixt
us; And let nothing make us again two, who are so many ways one; All of one
Language in one Island, all under one King, one in Religion, yea one in
Covenant, so that in effect we differ in nothing, but in the name (and so do
Brethren) which I wish were also removed, that we might be altogether one, if
the two Kingdoms shall think fit: For I dare say, not the greatest Kingdom in
the Earth can prejudice both, so much as one of them may do the other.

I will forbear at this time to speak of the many Jealousies I hear are
suggested, for as I do not love them, so I delight not to mention them: Only
one I cannot forbear to speak of, as if the Kingdom of Scotland were too much
affected with the Kings Interest. I will not deny but the Kingdom of Scotland,
by reason of the Reign of many Kings His Progenitors over them, has a natural
affection to His Majesty, whereby they wish he may be rather Reformed then
Ruined: Yet experience may tell, that personal regard to Him has never made
them forget that common Rule, The Safety of the People is the Supreme Law: So
likewise their love to Monarchy makes them very desirous that it may be rather
regulated, then destroyed, which I hope I need not to mention further to Your
Lordships, who I trust, are of the same mind.

I know likewise there are many Jealousies and unjust Aspersions cast upon the
Scottish Armies in England and Ireland: I can (if it were needful) presently
produce heads of a Declaration intended by the Army in England for vindicating
themselves from such Injuries, and showing the clearness of their Resolutions
and Integrity, both in the Cause, and toward this Kingdom, wherein their
undertakings and coming in at such a season of the year, their hard sufferings
and constant endeavors since, may be sufficient testimonies. Therefore I am the
more bold to desire Your Lordships, That so long as they stay in England (which
I wish may be for a short time) they may be supplied with some moneys, and
their quarters enlarged, least their lying in too narrowquarters, make the
burden in supportable to that exhausted corner of the Country where they now
remain, and so beget outcries against them, when they are not-enabled to
discharge their quarters, as other Armies within the Kingdom.

As for the Army in Ireland, I have been an eye witness to their sufferings,
and so may speak of it likewise upon certain knowledge, that never men have
suffered greater hardships, who might have been provided; for they have lived
many times upon a few Beans measured out to them by number, and never had any
other drink but water; And when they were in some better condition, they had
but an Irish Peck of rough Oats for a whole week; And now at their best
condition when they are quartered upon the country (which is able to entertain
them only for a very short time) they have only an Irish Peck of Oat-meal, or a
shilling in the ten days both for meat and drink. Therefore, according to the
many desires given in to the Honorable Houses for that end, I humbly entreat
that Your Lordships will take care to provide for them, so long as it is
thought fit they remain in that Kingdom.

For a renewed testimony of our earnest desires to comply with the Honorable
Houses for settling the Peace of these Kingdoms, so much longed for, We do
return unto Your Lordships the Propositions of Peace (which we received on
Tuesday last) with our consent thereunto, wishing they may be hasted to His
Majesty, who has so often called for them. And I likewise offer to Your
Lordships the copy of His Majesty's Letter to my L: Ormond, discharging him
from any further meddling in any Treaty with the Rebels in Ireland, I hope in
order to His Majesty's further condescending to the settling of that Proposition
concerning Ireland, and the rest of the Propositions now to be sent unto Him.
Another Paper there is which concerns the supplying of the Scottish Armies in
England and Ireland, and the perfecting of the Accounts between the Kingdoms,
together with a Letter from Gen: Major Monro, to the Committee of Estates of
the Kingdom of Scotland, concerning the: state of affairs in Ireland. All
which, when Your Lordships have considered, I trust ye will take such course
therein, as may satisfy our just desires, may put an end to our present
troubles, and settle these Kingdoms in a happy Peace.

The Paper wherein the Commissioners for the Kingdom of Scotland consent to the
Propositions of PEACE.
IT is above a twelve month sithence we did earnestly press the sending of
Propositions to the King for a safe and well grounded Peace. In answer
whereunto, the Honorable Houses were pleased to acquaint us, That they had
resolved Propositions should be sent to His Majesty, but did intend to make
some alterations, in the former Propositions, and after eight or nine Months
deliberation we received from the Honorable Houses some of those Propositions:
And though we did find therein very material Additions, Alterations and
Omissions, which for their great importance, and the interest of the Kingdom of
Scotland therein, might very well have required the delay of an Answer until
the Estates of that Kingdom had been consulted; yet so unwilling were we to
retard the means of Peace, that in a Fortnights time we returned an Answer upon
the whole Propositions; And the Houses of Parliament not resting satisfied
therewith, in less then ten days we prepared a further Answer, wherein we did
very much comply with the Desires of the Honorable Houses, especially in the
matter of the settling of the Militia of England and Ireland, and in other
things did show our readiness to hear or propose such Expedients as might
determine our Differences: So that in a whole years time the Propositions have
not remained in our hands the space of four weeks (which we only mention to
clear our proceedings from mistakes and aspersions) And the Househaving now
after two months further deliberation delivered unto us upon the 23. of this
instant June, all the Propositions they intend to send to the King at this
time; We do without any delay return such an Answer and Resolution thereupon,
as will be to the present and future Generations one undeniable Testimony
(besides many others) of the Integrity and Faithfulness of the Kingdom of
Scotland in their Solemn League and Covenant, of their love to Peace, and
earnest desire to satisfy their Brethren of England, in those things which
concern the good and Government of this Kingdom: Being further Resolved,
touching the Kingdom of Scotland, That as nothing of single or sole concernment
to that Nation did engage them in this War, so nothing of that nature shall
continue the same. Although these Propositions now to be sent, do much differ
from the Propositions formerly agreed upon by the Parliaments of both Kingdoms,
and the most material Additions, Omissions and Alterations, are in such
particulars as concern the joint Interest and mutual Confidence and Conjunction
of both Kingdoms, which were, as we conceive, much better provided for, and
strengthened by the former Propositions then by these; although the particular
Propositions presented by us concerning the Kingdom of Scotland, are not yet
agreed unto by the houses of Parliament, as was offered in their Paper of the
10. of April; although diverse Propositions of joint concernment be now
superseded, and the sending of them delayed to a more convenient time, as is
expressed in the Votes of both Houses the 26. of March; and although (which is
to us more then all the rest) those Ordinances of Parliament, unto which the
fifth and sixth Propositions do relate (and were therefore communicated unto us
upon our desire to see what the Houses had already agreed upon concerning
Religion) do not contain the establishment of such a Reformation of Religion,
and Uniformity as was expected and was the chief end of our Engagement in this
War. And as all these Ordinances put together come short of what we wished, so
there are some particulars which we conceive to be inconsistent with the Word
of God, and the Example of the best Reformed Churches, and therefore cannot in
our consciences consent unto them; which particulars were expressed to both
Houses in the Remonstrance of the Commissioners of the Church of Scotland, of
the date March 26. 1646. Yet nevertheless, we do so earnestly desire, and so
highly value the easing of the heavy pressures under which both Kingdoms
groan, and the bringing of this bloody lasting War to a speedy and happy end;
considering withal, that not only the Book of Common Prayer, and the
Prelatical Government are abolished, and a common Directory of Worship
established in both Kingdoms, but that likewise the Ordinances aforementioned
do contain diverse parts of a positive Reformation and Uniformity in
ChurchGovernment, unto which we formerly gave our consent in our Answer upon
the whole Propositions of Peace of the 20. of April, and for so happy
beginnings, and so good a foundation laid for the future, we heartily thank
God, and do acknowledge the Zeal, Piety, and Wisdom of the Honorable Houses
therein, remembering also, that these Ordinances do not contain the whole Model
of Church Government, and that the Houses have been pleased to express, [ That
it cannot be expected, that a perfect Rule in every particular should be settled
all at once, but that there will be need of Supplements and Additions, and
happily of Alterations in some things, as experience shall bring to light the
necessity thereof.

Upon these considerations, as we do cheerfully consent to many material
parts of these propositions, so we resolve to make no let, but to give way to
the sending of such other particulars therein contained, with which we are
unsatisfied in the matter, for the reasons formerly represented to both Houses,
of which some still stand in force; though others of them be taken away by the
new expedients. It being always understood, that our not dissenting from, nor
opposing of the sending of the propositions, as they now stand, shall be no
prejudice nor impediment to all, or any one of the Articles of the solemn
League and Covenant, especially to the first Articles, concerning the
preservation of the reformed Religion in the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline, and Government, against our common Enemies; the
Reformation of Religion, in the Kingdom of England and Ireland, in doctrine,
worship, discipline and government, according to the word of God, and example
of the best reformed Churches, and the bringing of the Churches of God in the
three Kingdoms to the nearest conjunction and uniformity in Religion,
confession of Faith Form of Church, government, directory for worship, and
Catechizing, which things both Kingdoms are by Covenant obliged sincerely and
really to endeavor, and that not for a time, but constantly; so that neither of
the Kingdoms can be loosed or acquitted from the most strict and solemn
obligation of their continued and constant endeavoring these good ends, so
far as any of them is not yet obtained: It being also understood, that our
concurrence to the sending of the propositions, shall be without prejudice to
any agreement or Treaty between the Kingdoms, and shall not infringe any
engagement made to the Kingdom of Scotland, nor be any hind^rance to our
insisting upon the other propositions already made known to the Houses: and it
being understood that it is not our Judgment, that every particular and
circumstance of these propositions is of so great importance to these
Kingdoms, as Peace and War should depend thereupon. Upon these grounds
(which we make known only for clearing our consciences and for discharging
our selves in the trust, put upon us, without the least thought, of retarding
the so much longed for Peace) we condescend and agree that the propositions as
they are now resolved upon be in the name of both Kingdoms presented to the
King, whose heart we beseech the Lord wholly to incline to the Counsels of
Truth and Peace.

25. June, 1646. By the command of the Commissioners, for the Kingdom of
Scotland. John Cheisley

Another Paper, wherein the Commissioners for the Kingdom of Scotland desire
their Armies in England and Ireland to be supplied, the Accounts to be
perfected, and all Armies disbanded, etc.
HAving so often represented by Papers, and now by word to the Honorable
Houses, the extreme necessities of our Armies in England and Ireland, We shall
not trouble them with unnecessary repetition, but only mention those desires
which require their very speedy consideration.

1 We desire, that for easing the Country of their great pressures, and
preventing many dangerous inconveniences, the quarters of the Scottish Army in
the North of this Kingdom may be enlarged, and a considrable supply of money
dispatched unto them.

2 That money, Provisions, and ammunition may be sent to the Scottish army in
Ireland, and the same care taken in providing for them as for other forces
employed in that kingdom.

3 That the 5000 Arms long since promised, and in an Ordinance of both Houses
of the 26 of August 1645, referred to the care of the Committee sitting at
Habberdashers-hall, may be speedily provided; and that the honorable Houses
will be pleased to grant power to that Committee, to contract and make payment
as well as to treat for furnishing of these Arms, by reason of which defect in
the Ordinance, the sending of these Arms has been hitherto retarded.

4 That to prevent the further invasion of the Kingdom of Scotland by the
Irish Rebels, ships may be presently sent to attend the coasts betwixt Scotland
and Ireland, and the Commanders of these ships authorized with such
instructions as are agreeable to the Treaties between the Kingdoms.

5 That the Honorable Houses will be pleased to send Commissioners to join
with the Committee of Estates, residing with the Scottish Army, who may be
witnesses as of their other proceedings, so of their earnest desires and real
endeavors with the King, for giving speedy and full satisfaction to both
Kingdoms. And it is also our earnest request, that these Commissioners may have
power to Treat and agree with the Committee of Estates, concerning the stating
of the accounts, and settling any differences that may arise thereupon. And
further to Treat and agree upon Overtures, estimated Mediums, or expedients for
the speedy settling therereof (which we are confident may be done in a very few
days) and either finally to conclude them, or represent them to both Houses;
whereby withal possible expedition upon the settling of the Propositions and
accounts, such course may be taken as all Arms may be disbanded, the Kingdoms
eased of their heavy pressures and insupportable burdens, that so all things
being settled in a brotherly way, we and our posterity may after so unhappy and
troublesome a War, enjoy a quiet and blessed Peace.

25. June, 1646. By Command of the Commissioners, for the Kingdom of Scotland.
John Cheisly.

His Majesty's Letter to the Marquess of Ormond.
CHARLES R.

RIght trusty, etc. Having long with much grief looked upon the sad condition
our Kingdom of Ireland has been in these diverse years through the wicked and
desperate Rebellion there, and the bloody effects have ensued thereupon; for
the settling whereof we would have wholly applied our selves, if the difference
betwixt Us and Our Subjects here had not diver^^d and withdrawn Us; and not
having been able by force (for that respect) to reduce them, we were
necessitated for the present safety of Our Protestant Subjects there, to give
you power and authority to treat with them, upon such pious, honorable, and
safe grounds as the good of that Our Kingdom did then require. But for many
reasons too long for a Letter, We think fit to require you to proceed no
further in Treaty with the Rebels, nor to engage us upon any conditions with
them after sight hereof. And having formerly found such real proofs of your
ready obedience to our commands, We doubt not of your care in this, wherein Our
service and the good of Our Protestant Subjects in Ireland, is so much
concerned:

From Newcastle the 11 of June 1646.
Right Honorable,
IT being my duty to represent unto your honors the condition of affairs here
touching our Army, and these of the British Army, who were engaged with us in
the service being extraordinarily scarce of provisions, and hearing from all
parts that the Irish had no considerable Army on foot, for preservation of our
quarters it was resolved by joint advice to make to the Feilds with a Months
provision, for to purchase victuals or Cattle from the enemy; So that we
entered our march the second of June being effective under Arms 3400 fooot, and
eleven Troops of horse with six feilding pieces, And Colonel Monro was to
join with us at Glashloch with three Troops of horse, and 240 Musqueriers,
Auchinbreck being left at home for defense of the quarters; the Marquis
Regiment being landed from Scotland two days before, could not be gotten in
readiness to join with us. It was also condiscended on by the English
Commissioners and me, that the Laggan forces should march unto Connaght
immedately to keep the enemy busied there, who were ordained to keep
correspondency with us on all occasions; having parted with our Commissioners
the second night of our march near Drummore. The fourth in the morning, I
commanded forth a party of horse being 72, commanded horsemen led by the
Lieutenant of my Troop Daniel Monro, who had direction to cross the
blackwater at Benburg to scour the fields, and to certify Colonel Monro of
my Rendezvous place at Glasloch June the 5. whereby the way at Armagh the party
unexpectedly foregathered with the enemies fore Troop, and took a prisoner of
theirs, who gave intelligence that the enemies Army were marching that morning
from Glasloch to quarter at Benburg andCharlemount, which intercepted my party
from going to Colonel Monro, the prisoner being sent to meet me, after
examination certified us the enemies Army were effective above 5000 foot, and
twelve Troops of horse provided with a fortnights Victuals. Being thus
informed I presently broke up our night leagure and marched six miles surther
to Hamiltons hand four miles from Armagh, and sent for our party to retire
upon the Army, being impossible for them to get through to Colonel Monro.
Friday the fifth by four of the clock in the morning I marched to Armagh in
view of the Enemy, thinking the nearer our Army was to theirs, to hinder them
from sending any strength to fall upon Colonel Monro, his way lying directly
toward the enemies quarters. And having viewed the enemies Army in a posture
to defend the passage at Benburg, which being hard for us to force the passage,
by reason of the straitness of the pass, the enemy being master of the Bridge
and of the Ford, very advantageous for him; presently I conveened the Officers
of the Army to consult what was best for us to undertake, whereby joint advice
it was resolved to march with the Army in the enemies view to Kinnard to cross
the Water there, And so to draw the enemy from his advantage, and from Colonel
Monro his party being but weak, which being effectuated we were betwixt the
enemy and his Victuals, having gained the pass at Kinnard without dispute and
had he enemy betwixt us and our party, and our baggage secured in our Rear;
All our Army foot and horse did earnestly cover fighting, which was impossible
for me to gainestand without being reproached of Cowardice; And therefore
having provided our selves for Battle, And that orderly, with resolution, we
advanced toward the enemy about six a Clock at night, and beat in their
commanded men and fore Troops to their Army, where they stood ready in Battle
to receive us. Lieutenant Colonel Cuningham, with 500 commanded men cleared
the passage for our horsemen to advance who were commanded then in absence of
Colonel Moure by the Lord Viscount of Ardes; The Army followed up after the
feilding Pieces, and drew up in Battle forth against the enemy, who had
possessed themselves with the advantageous ground, where their foot were
covered with scrogs and Bushes; the service begun hot on both sides continued
from six a clock at night till after Sun set. The enemy could not get charged
on our left or right Wing having the blackwater on the right hand and a marrish
bog on the left wing, and we being drawn up in the plain, having our pieces
before us and our horsemen behind our reserve, and it being impossible for the
enemy to charge us but in our van, our horsemen could receive them marching up,
and charging through the intervals, betwixt the brigades of foot, About sun set
I perceived the enemy making ready for a general assault, first with his foot
and his horse coming up behind his foot to second them, I had given order to a
squadron of our horse to break through them before they should advance to our
foot, that squadron of horse consisting for the most part of Irish riders,
although under the English command, did not charge but retreated disorderly
through our foot, making the enemies horse for to follow them at least one
squadron, notwithstanding thereof our foot stood to it, and received the
enemies batalions body to body with push of pike, till at last our second
squadron of horse charged: the enemies horse and fell pell mell amongst our
foot, who being carried in disorder, had no way of retreat but to wade the
Blackwater where it was scarce foordable, and by that means and the darkness
of the night many of our foot escaped with the loss of some few Officers, six
field pieces, and some colors, so that by all appearance the Irish under the
Lesnegarvey horsemen had a purpose to betray the Army by their running away;
leaving the foot to be cut down, who were also deserted by the rest of the
horse after retiring from their last charge, the enemy falling on our baggage,
the baggage horses being all gone, the enemy loved the spoil better then to
prosecute the victory. So that we lost off the foot at the nearest conjecture
five or six hundred, and twenty Officers were taken prisoners the Lord of Ardes
being one, we lost also many arms by reason the soldiers had above 50 miles
to retire. And notwithstanding of all our losses, the enemy as yet (praised be
God) has not attempted to prosecute his victory within our quarters, and Col.
Monro with his party miraculously retreated home from the enemy who viewed
them, without the loss of a man. And now we are making up out forces again,
having not lost of our horsemen above thirty, and one Cornet who was killed; we
are both scarce of arms and victuals, and for ought I can understand, the Lord
of Hosts had a controversy with us to rub shame on our faces, as on other
armies, till once we shall be humbled; for a greater confidence did I never see
in any Army then was amongst us, and we behooved to taste of bitterness as
well as others of both nations; but praised be God being now humbled before
God, we increase in courage and resolution so according to your interest in us
and in the poor inhabitants in this Province, use some speedy means to supply
us. Thus recommending your Lordships and all your weighty affairs to the
protection of the Allmighty, I humbly take my leave.

Cariek-fergus the 11th of June. ROBERT MONRO.


About the same time a party of our countrymen in Connaght incountered with a
commanded party of Prestons Army, where the enemy lost five hundred men,
besides twenty Officers that were taken prisoners, whereof General Major Taaff
was the special, with whom and such others as I have prisoners of theirs, we
intend to relieve the Lord Ardes and other of our friends.

FINIS.

