AN APOSTROPHE From the LOYAL PARTY To The King's Most Sacred Majesty: Humbly
showing how the next House of Commons by Law may be purged of its disaffected
Members.
Great King,
WHom God has chosen to be his Anointed, and for whose Preservation Wonders and
Miracles were done to that degree, as to joy the Faithful, and confound the
Incredulous; It was for this that God touched the heart of a Woman, and made
her become another Judeth to pass through the Assyrians Camp, at the same time
that Bethulia was besieged, to the end she might deliver the Kingdom and People
from the fury of the Enemy; Judeth delivered Bethulia and her distressed People
by carrying away the dead Head of the Assyrians General; And this delivers the
People of three Kingdoms from the Slavery and Tyranny of Usurpers, by bravely
carrying away the living Head of these Three Kingdoms. It was for This that se
courageously looked Death in the Face, and exposed her Life and Fortune to the
worst of Fates. It was for This that Gold was to Peasants of no other value
than Dirt, when it was only to be purchased by delivering up the Innocent into
the hands of the Guilty. But that which makes it the more remarkable and worthy
of admiration, is, That God should make use of such Instruments to effect Your
Preservation, as have now lately been Accused, Condemned and Sacrificed, for
attempting to destroy You, whom (with the hazard of their Lives) they had
formerly preserved. Nay, for this it was, that even the Romish Priests
themselves were instrumental.

Sir, God took You out of the hands of your Enemies, at a time when all the
world despaired of seeing You seated on any other Throne than that on which
Your Royal Father acted the last Scene of a Horrid and Bloody Tragedy. Who can
repeat the buying and selling of a King, the best that ever People had, and
this by his own Vassals? his being accused by them? his being betrayed by them?
his being judged by them? his being condemned by them? and his being murdered
by them in the Face of Heaven and the whole World? Who (I say) can repeat these
things without Horror and Execration?

God miraculously delivered You out of the hands of a barbarous people, who
sought you for no other end than to destroy You; but he mercifully withheld
the blow which all the world believed was inevitably falling on You; for there
was no one could avert it but God alone; And he did it, that we might one day
see you seated on the Throne of Glory. It Is true, he withheld You from Us for
some time; but it was that You might return the more glorious and welcome, and
to make Us sensible of the ill was done in banishing Him from us whom God had
appointed to Rule and Govern us.

I believe there are few alive now who lived then, who have forgotten the
Calamity this Kingdom groaned under at that time, and the sad Catastrophe
attended Your absence.

It was a sad thing to see your 3 Kingdoms governed by the Murderers of your
Royal Father; to see Mechanics seated in the Throne of Princes, and the
giddy-headed Mobile to Lord it over the Nobility; Cobblers and Bricklayers turn
Preachers, whilst the Bishops have their Rockets pulled over their ears, and
the best of the Clergy turned out of their Benefices; at the same time their
Wives and Children going a begging; to hear nothing but Sedition and Treason
daily preached out of the Pulpits; to see the Royal Party dance attendance
every day to a damned Committee, made up of a Company of formal prick-ear'd
Raskals, who had no other Religion than ^y sinister ways to monopolize ^he
Riches of the Nation, whilst honest men turned Bankrupts; to see those men who
had served the King your Father with their Blood and Fortunes, by these
Governors Banished, Imprisoned and Tortured, and for no other Crime than
because they had the honesty to be Loyal; to see the best of these men forced
to buy their own Estates three or four times over of these Villains, who had
seized them as their own, whilst others of the meaner sort had not Bread to put
in their Heads.

But God was pleased at his proper time to commiserate our Sufferings, by
out-doing his former Prodigies which were acted in your Preservation, in
restoring You to a People who lived with no other hope than despair of ever
seeing You seated upon the Imperial Throne of Great Britain. Sir, it is
undoubted Your Restoration was decreed by Heaven, and to confirm which, God
(as it were with his own hand) led You into Your Kingdoms, that there You might
be made Sacred, and have your Temples incircled with a Crown; and then it was
he consigned a Scepter into Your Sacred hand, with which at the same time he
commanded You to Rule, and Govern your People in the strict observance of
Justice and Equity; and after that perfect Model which he himself has left
you, in his Sacred and Divine Laws, and not according to those exorbitant Laws
the ignorant Rabble, and their Abettors would prescribe you.

What joy was it at that time to all true English hearts to see You Return in
Triumph from your long Exile? to see You not only received into your Kingdoms,
but into the hearts of Your People; who looked upon You as no other than the
Angel of Peace sent by the living God to comfort an afflicted People and to
redeem them from Slavery? It was then that we were all big with hopes no longer
to see our Laws (which are the best in the world) trampled under foot by
Tyrannical Usurpers: It was then that we gave our selves the assurance that we
should see Justice, and Mercy equally poysed in one Balance, and neither to
outweigh each other, It was then that we expected to see Impiety banished out
of your Kingdoms, as an Imposture, and Virtue raised to that Throne it
deserves, that is, to be seated on the right hand of Kings: And then it was
that we believed that Loyalty should nobly be rewarded for their Fidelity and
past Sufferings; and the Disloyal Traitor punished, and for ever banished from
the Influence of your Bounty; the performance of which had established to Your
People a Kingdom of Peace, and we should have seen a Golden Age to flourish.

But, Sir, there are some men who are bold, and take leave to say, You have not
poised the Balance equal, and your Clemency and Mercy have infinitely
out-weighed the Scale of Justice; That you have mis-placed your Bounty; And
(they now begin to fear) You have done that you said you never would;
Sacrificed your Friends to please your Enemies; And this they say has
alienated your Friends, and made their Loyal hearts grow cold, and freeze; And
bold Mouths spit their Allegiance out. This has so far prevailed upon your
Enemies, as to persuade them that their former ill-doings were well done, which
makes them bold to act them over again. Sir, such are their proceedings, that
You appear no longer now as a King to govern the People, but as a Pupil to be
governed by them. This makes us fear you have delivered your Royal Scepter into
their hands; And if so, you have made your Self and Friends one Sacrifice to
the Fury and Malice of your Enemies; So that we have nothing now in prospect,
but the Old Tragedy acted over again; where we behold a Stage filled with
Rapine, Sword, Fire, Blond and Massacres; with the Desolation and Overthrow of
three Kingdoms.

Dread Sovereign, You are the Object on which all our eyes are fixed; You are
the Center in which the hopes and desires of all Loyal hearts are lodged. Now
is the time to make your self a King, and us a happy people or never. If You
put on an unshaken Resolution. You will encourage and strengthen Your Friends
to stand by you to the last; which we are resolved to do, if you force us not
from you; And this will not a little tame the Insolency of those bad men who
brand all those who stand up for your Rights and Prerogatives with that
scandalous Name Papist. All those honest Gentlemen who had a desire to serve
their Country, by being Parliament Men, because they opposed the Rump Faction,
they and all their Friends were Papists, rank barefaced Papists. If these men
can make us Papists at this rate, we shall have Popery among us before we know
where we are; and really I think we have no great reason to be so much afraid
on it; for it is come to that, that you shall not hea^ of an honest Cavalier, nay
scarce an honest man but presently he is a Papist.

Sir, you have been silent too long, therefore since You have given us your
Royal word, That our Laws shall be Your Rule and Measure, by which You are
resolved to Govern, let us hear you roar like the King of Lion^, when next you
meet your Parliament; cry ha! to them, and ha! again, till (like your
Predecessor H. VIII.) you make them tremble. Sir, remember you are as well King
of France as England; therefore let not the French King be a greater Monarch
than your self: At least for a time show yourself as absolute over your people
as he is, and since that Law is Your Measure, like him tell them sic volo, sic
jubeo, and take off the head of that man who shall dare to open his Lips to
contradict it; And be assured that this way of Governing shall gain you more
Friends in one day, than all your compliance to the unreasonable demands of
your Parliament shall gain you in an age.

Be pleased to take from the Commons that old Theme Religion, or else you must
never expect any business to be done by them, either for the good of your self,
or your Kingdom. If we must have a Change or Reformation in our spiritual
Government, let it be done by spiritual men, the Bishops, and such who
understand what Religion is: But for such men whose conversation is chiefly
among Dogs and Horses, Women and Wine, to be perpetually making new
Reformations in Religion, is the most preposterous thing in the world.

What a monstrous thing it is to see the Tail pretend to more Wisdom and
Understanding in Government than the Head! We have too sadly experienced what
it is to live under this damned Rump Government; therefore, for Heavens sake,
Sir, let us have no more on it.

Sir, as God was pleased to perform wonders at your Preservation and
Restoration, so has he done no less all the time of your Government: For
(setting aside the precipice into which your Father fell, and in it was
irrecoverably lost, which still lies open ^^fore the Gates of your Palace, so
that it is not possible for You to enter in, or out, but you must necessarily
remember your Fathers sad Fate. The Peal that these men daily ring in your
ears, which was your Fathers Knell:) setting aside, I say, these things: Heaven
and Earth have conspired daily to alarm you, and bid you arm your self against
the Treacheries and damned Conspiracies, which are hourly acting against your
Life and Government.

Sir, the first thing you are to do is to know your Enemies, and then to arm
your self against them: You cannot have forgotten those men by whom your Royal
Father fell, and pursued you to Banishment; These are the men, Sir, who strike
so boldly at your Crown, therefore beware your Head: You cannot therefore
persuade your self that the Murderers of the Father can ever love the Son. But
least your Majesty should mistake these men, and think them to be your Friends,
our famous Salamancha Doctor has unmasked them unto you; For he says, (and
what he says with us is Gospel) That they are Papists in Masquerade, disguised
in the Habit and Manners of the Godly Brethren. So that it is to be hoped your
Majesty will trust none of them, nor any thing that looks like this kind of
Cattle. We humbly therefore beg that the next Parliament you will take aview of
your House of Commons, that You may know the Members of which it is composed;
and if there be any of these disguised Papists there, that they may be turned
out; that is not a place for them; for the Law says, No Papist shall Sit in the
House. If therefore there be any there who had their hands imbrewed in your
Fathers blood, they are disguised Papists, they must out also. If there be any
there who have unsheathed their Swords against their lawful Sovereign, and
appeared in open Rebellion against him, they are the same, they must out too;
for they are all Papists in Masquerade. Or if there be any of the Sons of these
men, they are the same Flesh and Blood, and they will prove themselves no Bastards
i will warrant you; they have sucked in their Fathers Disloyalty and bloody Nature
with their Mill which it is to be feared they will never digest so long as they
have an hour to live; therefore These must out too. And when the House is thus
purged of these kind of Cattle, we may hope to see good times again, and not
till then; For believe it, Sir, they are are so glutted with the Spoils and
Sweet of their last Rebellion, that they will now be Caesar's or nothing; which
Heaven and your endeavors must prevent.

I could wish with all my soul that what the Prophet Is^iah spoke of the
Counselors of King Pharaoh may not truly be verified in the people of this
Nation. God has sent among them a spirit of giddiness, and made them reel up
and down in all their actions like drunken men.

Sir, great and terrible are the menaces which God thunders out by the mouth of
holy Job, against those who wander from the true way of Justice. God (says he)
suffers these wise Counselors to fall into the hazards of senselss men. God
makes the Judges stupid, takes away the Sword and Belt from Kings to ingirt
their Reins with a Cord; God makes the Priests to appear Infamous, supplanteth
the Principal of the people, changes the Lips of Truth-speakers, takes away
the Doctrine of Old men, and powers out Contempt upon Princes, Job 12.

But that these things may not fall upon this Kingdom, and that they may be
timely prevented, be pleased, Great Sir, to hear the Coursel that a great
Statesman gave to the Governors of the Empire; and it is this:

Use the matters so that Judges of Provinces may be very careful in the
observance of Laws, that Tribunals spare not to thunder out Sentences against
ill Manners, but especially against False Witnesses and Perjurers; That Thieves
may fear the Gates of your Palace; That the Adulterer may tremble before a
chaste Officer; That the Forgerer may feel horror at the voice of a Herald;
And that all Crimes may be banished from our Teritory; That no man oppress the
poor; That the Persecutors be apprehended and pursued as disturbers of the
^ublick repose: You shall make a general peace when you have beaten down the
Authors of mischiefs which are committed: Let Captains contain their Soldiers
in all manner of Discipline in such sort that the Labourer, the Merchant, the
Sailer, and Artificer, may understand Arms are not made but for their defense.
I will not likewise that my nearest Allies be pardoned in any case of Justice,
since I have taken the Commonwealth into my charge, I have dispoyled my proper
Interests, I wish well to mine, but in the generality.

Sir, when we shall behold these things practiced within your Dominions, we
shall conclude that all these prodigies which have been done in your
Preservation and Restoration were performed by Heaven for no other end than
that you should be that darling Prince to make your Kingdoms flourish, and Us a
happy people; which we all promise our selves, and that we shall see you the
greatest of Monarchs. It was to Princes that the Angel in the Apocalypse speaks
these words: He who shall overcome and keep my works unto the end, I will give
him power over Nations, and he shall rule them with a Rod of Iron; and as the
Vessel of the Potter they shall be broken.

VIVAT REX.
London: Printed Anno Domini, MDCLXXXI.


