OF THE Laws of Chance, OR, A METHOD OF Calculation of the Hazards OF GAME,
Plainly demonstrated, And applied to GAMES at present most in Use, Which may be
easily extended to the most intricate Cases of Chance imaginable.

LONDON: Printed by Benj. Motte, and sold by Randall Tailor near
Stationers' Hall, 1692.

PREFACE.
IT is thought as necessary to write a Preface before a Book, as it is judged
civil, when you invite a Friend to Dinner, to proffer him a Glass of Hock
beforehand for a Whet: And this being maimed enough for want of a Dedication,
I am resolved it shall not want an Epistle to the Reader too. I shall not take
upon me to determine, whether it is lawful to play at Dice or not, leaving that
to be disputed betwixt the Fanatic Parsons and the Sharpers; I am sure it is
lawful to deal with playing at Dice as with other Epidemic Distempers; and I am
confident that the writing a Book about it, will contribute as little toward
its Encouragement, as Fluxing and Precipitates do to Whoring.

It will be to little purpose to tell my Reader, of how great Antiquity the
playing at Dice is, I will only let him know, that by the Aleae Ludus, the
Ancients comprehended all Games, which were subjected to the determination of
mere Chance; this sort of Gaming was strictly forbid by the Emperor Justinian,
Cod. Lib. 3. Tit. 43. under very severe Penalties; and Photius Nomocan, Tit. 9.
Cap. 27. acquaints us, that the Use of this was altogether denied the Clergy
of that time. Seneca says very well, Aleator quanto in art est melior, tanto
est nequior; That by how much the one is more skilful in Games, by so much he
is the more culpable; or we may say of this, as an ingenious Man says of
Dancing, That to be extraordinary good at it, is to be excellent in a Fault;
therefore I hope no body will imagine I had so mean a Design in this, as to
teach the Art of Playing at Dice.

A great part of this Discourse is a Translation from Mons. Hugen's Treatise,
De ratiociniis in ludo Aleae, one, who in his Improvements of Philosophy, has
but one Superior, and I think few or no Equals. The whole I undertook for my
own Divertisement, next to the Satisfaction of some Friends, who would now and
then be wrangling about the Proportions of Hazards in some Cases that are here
decided. All it required was a few spare Hours, and but little Work for the
Brain; my Design in publishing it, was to make it of more general Use, and
perhaps persuade a raw Squire, by it, to keep his Money in his Pocket; and if,
upon this account, I should ineur the Clamours of the Sharpers, I do not much
regard it, since they are a sort of People the World is not bound to provide
for.

You will find here a very plain and easy Method of the Calculation of the
Hazards of Game, which a man may understand, without knowing the Quadratures of
Curves, the Doctrine of Series's, or the Laws of Centripetation of Bodies, or
the Periods of the Satellites of Jupiter; yea, without so much as the Elements
of Euclid. There is nothing required for the comprehending the whole, but
common Sense and practical Arithmetic; saving a few Touches of Algebra, as in
the first Three Propositions, where the Reader, without suspicion of Popery,
may make use of a strong implicit Faith; tho I must confess, it does not much
recommend it self to me in these purposes; for I had rather he would enquire,
and I believe he will find the speculation not unpleasant.

Every man's Success in any Affair is proportional to his Conduct and Fortune.
Fortune (in the sense of most People) signifies an Event which depends on
Chance, agreeing with my Wish; and Misfortune signifies such an Event contrary
to my Wish: an Event depending on Chance, signifies such an one, whose
immediate Causes I don't know, and consequently can neither foretell nor produce
it (for it is no Heresy to believe, that Providence suffers ordinary matters
to run in the Channel of second Causes). Now I suppose, that all a wise Man can
do in such a Case is, to lay his Business on such Events, as have the most or
most powerful second Causes, and this is true both in the great Events of the
World, and in ordinary Games. It is impossible for a Dye, with such a
determined force and direction, not to fall on such a determined side, only I
don't know the force and direction which makes it fall on such a determined
side, and therefore I call that Chance, which is nothing but want of Art; that
only which is left to me, is to wager where there are the greatest number of
Chances, and consequently the greatest probability to gain; and the whole Art
of Gaming, where there is any thing of Hazard, will be reduced to this at last,
viz. in dubious Cases, to calculate on which side there are most Chances; and
tho this cannot be done in the midst of Game precisely to an Unite, yet a Man
who knows the Principles, may make such a conjecture, as will be a sufficient
direction to him; and tho it is possible, if there are any Chances against him
at all, that he may lose, yet when he chooses the safest side, he may partwith
his Money with more content (if there can be any at all) in such a Case.

I will not debate, whether one may engage another in a disadvantageous Wager.
Games may be supposed to be a trial of Wit as well as Fortune, and every Man,
when he enters the Lists with another, unless out of Complaisance, takes it for
granted, his Fortune and Judgment, are, at least, equal to those of his
Play-Fellow; but this I am sure of, that false Dice, Tricks of Legerde-main,
etc. are inexcusable, for the question in Gaming is not, Who is the best Iugler?

The Reader may here observe the Force of Numbers, which can be succesfully
applied, even to those things, which one would imagine are subject to no Rules.
There are very few things which we know, which are not capable of being reduced
to a Mathematical Reasoning, and when they cannot, its a sign our Knowledge of
them is very small and confused; and where a mathematical reasoning can be had,
it is as great folly to make use of any other, as to grope for a thing in the
dark when you have a Candle standing by you. I believe the Calculation of the
Quantity of Probability might be improved to a very useful and pleasant
Speculation, and applied to a great many Events which are accidental, besides
those of Games; only these Cases would be infinitely more confused, as
depending on Chances which the most part of Men are ignorant of; and as I have
hinted already, all the Politics in the World are nothing else but a kind of
Analysis of the Quantity of Probability in casual Events, and a good Politician
signifies no more, but one who is dexterous at such Calculations; only the
Principles which are made use of in the Solution of such Problems, cannot be
studied in a Closet, but acquired by the Observation of Mankind.

There is likewise a Calculation of the Quantity of Probability founded on
Experience, to be made use of in Wagers about any thing; for Example, it is
odds, if a Woman is with Child, but it shall be a Boy; and if you would know
the just odds, you must consider the Proportion in the Bills that the Males
bear to the Females: The Yearly Bills of Mortality are observed to bear such
Proportion to the live People as 1 to 30, or 26; therefore it is an even Wager,
that one out of thirteen, dies within a Year (which may be a good reason, tho
not the true one of that foolish piece of Superstition), because, at this rate,
if 1 out of 26 dies, you are no loser. It is but 1 to 18 if you meet a Parson
in the Street, that he proves to be a Non-Juror, because there is but 1 of 36
that are such. It is hardly 1 to 10, that a Woman of Twenty Years old has her
Maidenhead, and almost the same Wager, that a Town-Spark of that Age has not
been clapped. I think a Man might venture some odds, that 100 of the Gens d'arms
beats an equal Number of Dutch Troopers; and that an English Regiment stands
its ground as long as another, making Experience our Guide in all these Cases
and others of the like nature.

But there are no casual Events, which are so easily subjected to Numbers, as
those of Games; and I believe, there the Speculation might be improved so far,
as to bring in the Doctrine of the Series's and Logarithms. Since Gaming is
become a Trade, I think it fit the Adventurers should be upon the Square; and
therefore in the Contrivance of Games there ought to be a strict Calculation
made use of, that they may not put one Party in more probability to gain than
another; and likewise, if a Man has a considerable Venture, he ought to be
allowed to withdraw his Money when he pleases, paying according to the
Circumstances he is then in: and it were easy in most Games to make Tables, by
the Inspection of which, a Man might know what he was either to pay or receive,
in any Circumstances you can imagine, it being convenient to save a part of ones
Money, rather than venture the loss of it all.

I shall add no more, but that a Mathematician will easily perceive, it is not
put in such a Dress as to be taken notice of by him, there being abundance of
Words spent to make the more ordinary sort of People understand it.

FOR the sake of those who are not versed in Mathematics, I have added the
following Explanation of Signs.

= Equal. + More, or to be added. - Less, or to be subtracted. x Multiplied.
Example.

3 x 4 + 3 - 1 = 14 = 5/9 a, is to be read thus,

3 multiplied in 4 more by 3 less by 1 is equal to 14, which is equal to five
ninth parts of a.

An Exact METHOD For SOLVING the Hazards of Game.
ALthough the Events of Games, which Fortune solely governs, are uncertain, yet
it may be certainly determined, how much one is more ready to lose than gain.
For Example: If one should wager, at the first Throw with one Dye, to throw
Six, it is an accident if he gains or not, but by how much it is more probable he
will lose than gain, is really determined by the Nature of the thing, and
capable of a strict Calculation. So likewise, if I should play with another on
this condition, that the Victory should be to the Three first Games, and I had
gained one already; it is still uncertain who shall first gain the third; yet
by a demonstrative reasoning I can estimate both the Value of his expectation
and mine, and consequently (if we agree to leave the Game unperfect) determine
how great a share of the Stakes belong to me, and how much to my Play-fellow;
or if any were desirous to take my place, at what rate I ought to sell it.
Hence may arise innumerable Queries among two, three, or more Gamesters; and
since the Calculation of these things is a little out of the common road, and
can be oft-times applied to good purpose; I shall briefly here show how it is
to be done, and afterward explain those things which belong properly to the
Dice.

In both cases I shall make use of this Principle, Ones Hazard or Expectation
to gain any thing, is worth so much, as, if he had it, he could purchase the
like Hazard or Expectation again in a just and equal Game.

For Example, If one, without my knowledge, should hide in one Hand 7 Shillings,
and in his other 3 Shillings, and put it to my choice which Hand I would take,
I say this is as much worth to me, as if he should give me 5 Shillings;
because, if I have 5 Shillings, I can purchase as good a Chance again, and that
in a fair and just Game.

PROPOSITION I.
If I expect a or b, either of which, with equal probability, may fall to me,
then my Expectation is worth ^, that is, the half Sum of a and b.

THat I may not only demonstrate, but likewise investigate this Rule, suppose
the Value of my Expectation be x; by the former Principle having x, I can
purchase as good an Expectation again in a fair and just Game. Suppose then I
play with another on these terms; That every one stakes x, and the Gainer give
to the Loser a, this Game is just, and it appears, that at this rate, I have an
equal hazard either to get a if I lose the Game, or 2 x-a if I gain; for in
this case I get 2 x, which are the Stakes, out of which I must pay the other a;
but if 2 x-a were worth b, then I have an equal hazard to get a or b; therefore
making 2 x-a=b, ^, which is the Value of my Expectation. The Demonstration is
easy, for having ^, I can play with another who will stake ^ against it, on
this condition, that the Gainer should give to the Loser a; by this means I
have an equal Expectation to get a if I lose, or b if I win; for in the last
case I get a+b the Stakes, out of which I must pay a to my Play-fellow.

In Numbers: If I had an equal hazard to get 3 or 7, then by this Proposition,
my Expectation is worth 5, and it is certain, having 5, I may have the same
Chance; for if I play with another so that every one stakes 5, and the Gainer
pay to the Loser 3, this is a fair way of Gaming; and it is evident, I have an
equal hazard to get 3 if I lose, or 7 if I gain.

PROP. II.
If I expect a, b, or c, either of which, with equal facility, may happen, then
the Value of my Expectation is ^, or the third part of the Sum of a b and c.

FOR the Investigation of which, suppose x be the value of my Expectation; then
x must be such, as I can purchase with it the same Expectation in a just Game:
Suppose the Conditions of the Game be, that playing with two others, each of us
stakes x, and I bargain with one of the Gamesters, if I win, to give him b, and
he shall do the same to me; but with the other, that if I gain, I shall give
him c, and vice versa; this is fair play: And here I have an equal hazard to
get b, if the first win, c if the second, or 3 x-b-c if I gain my self; for
then I get 3 x, viz. the Stakes, of which I give the one b and the other c; but
if 3 x-b-c be equal to a, I have an equal Expectation of a, b, or c; therefore
making 3 x-b-c=a, ^, which is the Value of my Expectation. After the same
method you will find, if I had an equal hazard to get a b c or d, the Value of
my Expectation ^ that is the fourth part of the Sum of a b c and d, etc.

PROP. III.
If the Number of Chances, by which a falls to me, be p, and the Number of
Chances, by which b falls, be q, and supposing all the Chances do happen with
equal Facility, then the Value of my Expectation is ^, i. e. the Product of a
multiplied in the Number of its Chances added to the Product of b, multiplied
into the Number of its Chances, and the Sum divided by the Number of Chances
both of a and b.

SUppose, as before, x be the Value of my Expectation; then if I have x, I must
be able to purchase with it that same Expectation again in a fair Game: For
this I shall take as many Play-fellows as, with me, make up the Number of p+q,
of which let every one stake x, so the whole Stake will be px+qx, and every one
plays with equal hopes of winning; with as many of my Fellow-Gamesters as the
Number 9 stands for, I make this bargain one by one, that whoever of them gains
shall give me b, and if I win, I shall do so to them; with every one of the
rest of the Gamesters, whose Number is p-1, I make this bargain, that whoever
of them gains, shall give me a, and I shall give every one of them as much, if
I gain: It Is evident this is fair play; for no Man here is injured; and in this
case I have q Expectations to gain b, and p-1 Expectations to gain a, and 1
Expectation (viz. when I win my my self) to get px+qx-bqap+a; for then I am to
deliver b to every one of the q Players, and a to every one of the p-1
Gamesters, which makes ab+pa-a; if therefore qx+bx-ba-ap+a were equal to a, I
would have p Expectations of a (since just now I had p-1 Expectations of it)
and q Expectations of b, and so would have just come to my first Expectation;
therefore putting px+qx-bq-ap+a=a, then is ^

In Numbers: If I had 3 Chances to gain for 13, and 2 for 8, by this Rule, my
Hazard is worth 11; for 13 multiplied by 3 gives 39, and 8 by 2 16, these two
added, make 55, divided by 5 is 11, and I can easily show, if I have 11, I can
come to the like Expectation again; for playing with four others, and every one
of us staking 11, with two of them I make this Bargain, that whoever gains
shall give me 8, and I shall too do so to them; with the other two I make this
Bargain, that whoever gains shall give me 13, and I them as much if I gain: It
appears, by this means I have two Expectations to get 8, viz. if any of the
first two gain, and 3 Expectations to get 13, viz. if either I or any of the
other two gain; for in this case I gain the Stakes, which are 55, out of which
I am obliged to give the first two 8, and the other two 13, and so there
remains 13 for my self.

PROP. IV.
That I may come to the Question proposed, viz. The making a just Distribution
amongst Gamesters, when their Hazards are unequal; we must begin with the most
easy Cases.

SUppose then I play with another, on condition that he who wins the three
first Games shall have the Stakes, and that I have already gained two, I would
know, if we agree to break off the Game, and part the Stakes justly, how much
falls to my share?

The first thing we must consider in such Questions is, the Number of Games
that are wanting to both: For Example, If it had been agreed betwixt us, that
he should have the Stakes who gained the first 20 Games, and if I had gained
already 19, and my Fellow-Gamester but 18, my Hazard is as much better than his
in that Case, as in this proposed, viz? When of 3 Games I have 2, and he but 1,
because in both cases there is 2 wanting to him, and 1 to me.

In the next place, to find the portion of the Stakes due to each of us, we
must consider what would happen if the Game went on; it is certain, if I gain
the first Game, I get the Stake, which I call a; but if he gained, both our
Lots would be equal, and so there would fall to each of us a; but since I have
an equal Hazard to gain or lose the first Game, I have an equal Expectation to
gain a, or a, which, by the first Proposition, is as much worth as the half Sum
of both, i. e. a, so there is left to my Fellow-Gamester a; from whence it
follows, that he who would buy my Game, ought to pay me for it a; and
therefore, he who undertakes to gain one Game before another gains two, may
wager 3 to 1.

PROP. V.
Suppose I want but one Game, and my Fellow-gamester three, it is required to
make a just Distribution of the Stake:

LET us here likewise consider in what state we should be, if I or he gained
the first Game; if I gain, I have the Stake a, if he, then he wants yet 2
Games, and I but 1, and therefore we should be in the same condition which is
supposed in the former Proposition; and so there would fall to my share, as was
demonstrated there, a; therefore with equal facility there may happen to me a,
or a, which, by the First Proposition, is worth a, and to my Fellow-Gamester
there is left 1/8 a, and therefore my Hazard to his is as 7 to 1.

As the Calculation of the former Proposition was requisite for this, so this
will serve for the following. If I should suppose my self to want but one Game,
and my Fellow four (by the same Method) you will find 15/16 of the Stake
belongs to me, and 1/16 to him.

PROP. VI.
Suppose I want two Games, and my Fellow-Gamester three.

THen by the next Game it will happen, that I want but one, and he three, which
(by the preceding Proposition) is worth a; or that we should both want two,
whence there will be a due to each of us; now I being in an equal probability
to gain or lose the next Game, I have an equal Hazard to gain a or a, which, by
the First Proposition is worth 11/16 a, and so there are eleven parts of the
Stakes due to me, and five to my Fellow.

PROP. VII.
Let us suppose I want two Games, and my Fellow four.

IF I gain the next Game, then I shall want but one, and my Fellow four; but if
I lose it, then I shall want two, and he three: So I have an equal Hazard for
gaining 15/16 a, or 11/16 a, which, by the First, is worth 13/16 a: So it
appears, that he who is to gain two Games for the others four, is in a better
condition than he who is to gain one for the others two; for my share in the
first Case is a or 12/16 a, which is less than 13/16, my share in the last.

PROP. VIII.
Let us suppose three Gamesters, whereof the first and second want 1 Game, but
the third 2.

TO find the share of the first, we must consider what would happen if either
he, or any of the other two gained the first Game; if he gains, then he has the
Stake a; if the second gain, he has nothing; but if the third gain, then each
of them would want a Game, and so a would be due to every one of them. Thus the
first Gamester has one Expectation to gain a, one to gain nothing, and one for
a (since all are in an equal probability to gain the first Game) which by the
second Proposition is worth 4/9 a: Now since the second Gamesters Condition is
as good, his Share is likewise 4/9 a, and so there remains to the third 1/9 a,
whose Share might have been as easily found by its self.

PROP. IX.
In any Number of Gamesters you please, amongst whom there are some who want
more, some fewer Games: To find what is any ones Share in the Stake, we must
consider, what would be due to him, whose Share we investigate, if either he,
or any of his Fellow-Gamesters should gain the next following Game; add all
their Shares together, and divide the Sum by the Number of the Gamesters, the
Quotient is his Share you were seeking.

SUppose three Gamesters, A B and C, A wants 1 Game, B 2, and C likewise 2, I
would find what is the Share of the Stake due to B, which I shall call q.

First we must consider what would fall to B's share, if either he, A, or C,
wins the next Game; if A wins, the Game is ended, so he gets nothing; if B
himself gain, then he wants 1 Game, A 1, and C 2; therefore, by the former
Proposition, there is due to him in that Case 4/^q, then if C gains the next
Play, then A and C would want but 1, and B 2; and therefore, by the Eigth
Proposition, his Share would be worth 1/9q; add together what is due to B in
all these three Cases, viz. o4/9q, 1/9q, the Sum is 5/9q, which being divided
by 3, the Number of Gamesters gives 5/27q, which is the Share of B sought for:
The Demonstration of this is clear from the Second Proposition, because B has
an equal Hazard to gain o 4/9 q or 1/9q, that is, ^, i. e. 5/27q; now it is
evident the Divisor 3 is the Number of the Gamesters.

To find what is due to one in any Case, viz. if either he, or any of his
Fellow-Gamsters win the following Game; we must consider first the more simple
Cases, and by their help the following; for as this Case could not be solved
before the Case of the Eighth Proposition was calculated, in which, the Games
wanting were 1, 1, 2; so the Case, where the Games wanting are 1, 2, 3, cannot
be calculated, without the Calculation of the Case, where the Games wanting are
1, 2, 2, (which we have just now performed) and likewise of the Case, where the
Games wanting are 1, 1, 3, which can be done by the Eighth: And by this means
you may reckon all the Cases comprehended in the following Tables, and an
infinite number of others. ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

As for the Dice; these Questions may be proposed, at how many Throws one may
wager to throw 6, or any Number below that, with one Dye; How many Throws are
required for 12 upon two Dice; or 18 on 3; and several other Questions to this
purpose.

For the resolving of which, it must be considered, that in one Dye there are
six different Throws, all equally probable to come up; for I suppose the Dye
has the exact figure of a Cube: On Two Dice there are 36 different Throws; for
in respect to every Throw of One Dye, any One Throw of the 6 of the other Dye
may come up; and 6 times 6 make 36: In Three Dice there are 216 different
Throws; for in relation to any of the 36 Throws of Two Dice, any one of the six
of the Third may come up; and 6 times 36 make 216: So in Four Dice there are 6
times 216 Throws, that is, 1296: And so forward you may reckon the Throws of
any Number of Dice, taking always, for the addition of a new Dye, 6 times the
Number of the preceding.

Besides, it must be observed, that in Two Dice there is only one way 2 or 12
can come up; two ways that 3 or 11 can come up; for if I shall call the Dice A
and B to make 3, there may be 1 in A and 2 in B, or 2 in A and 1 in B; so to
make 11, there may be 5 in A or 6 in B, or 6 in A and 5 in B; for 4 there are
three Chances, 3 in A and 1 in B, 3 in B and 1 in A, or 2 as well in A as B;
for 10 there are likewise three Chances; for 5 or 9 there are four Chances; for
6 or 8 five Chances; for 7 there are six Chances.

In 3 Dice there are found for 3 or 18 1 4 or 17 3 5 or 16 6 6 or 15 10 7 or 14
15 8 or 13 21 9 or 12 25 10 or 11 27


PROP. X.
To find at how many times one may undertake to throw 6 with One Dye.

IF any should undertake to throw 6 the first time, it is evident there is one
Chance gives him the Stake, and five which give him nothing; for there are 5
Throws against him, and only 1 for him: Let the Stake be called a, then he has
one Expectation to gain a, and five to gain nothing, which, by the Second
Proposition, is worth 1/6 a, and there remains for the other a; so he who
undertakes, with one Dye, to throw 6 the first time, ought to wager only 1 to 5.

2. Suppose one undertake, at two Throws of 1 Dye, to throw 6, his Hazard is
calculated thus; if he throw 6 at the first he has a the Stake, if he do not,
there remains to him one Throw, which, by the former Case, is worth 1/6 a; but
there is but one Chance which gives him 6 at the first Throw, and five Chances
against him; so there is one Chance which gives him a, and five which give him
1/^ a, which, by the Second Proposition, is worth 11/36 a, so there remains to
his Fellow-Gamester 2^/3^ a; so the Value of my Expectation to his, is as 11 to
25, i. e. less than 1 to 2.

By the same method of calculation, you will find, that his Hazard who
undertakes to throw 6 at three times with one Dye, is 91/216 a; so that he can
only lay 91 against 125, which is something less than 3 to 4.

He who undertakes to do it at four times, his Hazard is 671/1296 a, so he may
wager 671 against 625, that is, something more than 1 to 1.

He who undertakes to do it at five times, his Hazard is 4651/7776 a, so he can
wager 4651 against 3125, that is something less than 3 to 2.

His Hazard who undertakes to do it 6 times, is 3^031/45656 a, and he can wager
31031 against 15625, that is something less than 2 to 1.

Thus any Numb. of Throws may be easily found, but the following Proposition
will show you a more compendious way of Calculation.

PROP. XI.
To find at how many times one may undertake to throw 12 with Two Dice.

IF one should undertake it at One Throw, it is clear he has but one Chance to
get the Stake a, and 35 to get nothing; so, by the Second Proposition, he has
much 1/36 a.

He who undertakes to do it at Twice, if he throw 12 the first time gains a, if
otherwise, then there remains to him One Throw, which, by the former Case, is
worth 1/36 a; but there is but One Chance which gives 12 at the first Throw,
and 35 Chances against him; so he has 1 Chance for a, and 35 for 1/36 a, which,
by the Second Proposition, is worth 71/1296 a, and there remains to his
Fellow-Gamester 1^2^/1296 a.

From these it is easy to find the Value of his Hazard, who undertakes it at
four times; passing by his Case who undertakes it at three times.

If he who undertakes to do it at four times throws 12 the first or second
Cast, then he has a, if not, there remains two other Throws, which, by the
former Case, are worth 71/1296 a; but for the same reason, in his two first
Throws, he has 71 Chances which give him a, against 1225 Chances, in which it
may happen otherwise; therefore at first he has 71 Chances which give him a,
and 1225 which give him 71/1296 a, which, by the Second Proposition, is worth
19006^5/167961^ a, which shows that their Hazards to one another are as 178991
to 1500625.

From which Cases it is easy to find the Value of his Expectation, who
undertakes to do it at 8 times, and from that, his Case who undertakes to do it
at 16 times; and from his Case who undertakes to do it at 8 times; and his
likewise who undertakes to do it at 16 times; it is easy to determine his
Expectation who undertakes it at 24 times: In which Operation, because that
which is principally sought, is the Number of Throws, which makes the Hazard
equal on both sides, viz. to him who undertakes, and he who offers, you may,
without any sensible Error, from the Numbers (which else would grow very great)
cut off some of the last Figures. And so I find, that he who undertakes to
throw 12 with Two Dice, at 24 times, has some Loss, and he who undertakes it at
25 times, has some Advantage.

PROP. XII.
To find with how many Dice, one can undertake to throw two Sixes at the first
Cast.

THis is as much, as if one would know, at how many Throws of one Dye, he may
undertake to throw twice Six; now if any should undertake it at two Throws, by
what we have shown before, his Hazard would be 1/36 a, he who would undertake
to do it at 3; times, if his first Throw were not 6, then there would remain
two Throws, each of which must be 6, which (as we have said) is worth 1/36 a;
but if the first Throw be 6, he wants only one 6 in the two following Throws,
which by the Tenth Proposition, is worth 11/36 a; but since he has but one
Chance to get 6 the first Throw, and five to miss it; he has therefore, at
first, one Chance for 11/36 a, and five Chances for 1/36 a, which, by the
Second Proposition, is worth 16/216 a, or 2/27 a, after this manner still
assuming 1 Chance more, you will find that you may undertake to throw two Sixes
at 10 Throws of one Dye, or 1 Throw of ten Dice, and that with some Advantage.

PROP. XIII.
If I am to play with another One Throw, on this condition, that if 7 comes up
I gain, if 10 he gains; if it happens that we must divide the Stake, and not
play, to find how much belongs to me, and how much to him.

BEcause of the 36 different Throws of the Two Dice, there are six which give 7
and 3, which give 10 and 27, which equals the Game, in which Case there is due
to each of us a: But if none of the 27 should happen, I have 6, by which I may
gain a, and 3, by which I may get nothing, which, by the Second Proposition, is
worth a; so I have 27 Chances for a, and 9 for a, which, by the second
Proposition, is worth 13/24 a, and there remains to my Fellow-Gamester 11/24 a.

PROP. XIV.
If I were playing with another by turns, with two Dice, on this condition,
that if I throw 7 I gain, and if he throw 6 he gains, allowing him the first
Throw: To find the proportion of my Hazard to his.

SUppose I call the Value of my Hazard x, and the Stakes a, then his Hazard
will be a-x; then whenever it is his turn to throw, my Hazard is x, but when
it is mine, the Value of my Hazard is greater. Suppose I then call it y; now
because of the 36 Throws of Two Dice, there are five which give my
Fellow-Gamester 6, thirty one which bring it again to my turn to throw, I have
five Chances for nothing, and thirty one for y, which, by the Third
Proposition, is worth 31/36 y; but I supposed at first my Hazard to be x;
therefore 31/36 y=x, and consequently y=36/3^x. I supposed likewise, when it
was my turn to throw, the Value of my Hazard was y, but then I have six Chances
which give me 7, and consequently the Stake, and thirty which give my Fellow
the Dice, that is, make my Hazard worth x; so I have six Chances for a, and
thirty for x, which, by Prop. 3. is worth ^ but this by supposition is equal to
y, which is equal (by what has been proved already) to 36/3^ x; therefore ^,
and consequently x=31/6^a, the Value of my Hazard, and that of my
Fellow-Gamester is 30/61 a; so that mine is to his as 31 to 30.

Here follow some Questions which serve to exercise the former Rules.

1. A and B play together with two Dice, A wins if he throws 6, and B if he
throws 7; A at first gets one Throw, then B two, then A two, and so on by
turns, till one of them wins. I require the proportion of A's Hazard to B's?
Answer, It is as 10355 to 12276.

2. Three Gamesters, A, B, and C, take 12 Counters, of which there are four
white and eight black; the Law of the Game is this, that he shall win, who,
hood-winked, shall first choose a white Counter, and that A shall have the first
choice, B the second, and C the third, and so, by turns, till one of them win.
Quaer. What is the proportion of their Hazards?

3. A wagers with B, that of 40 Cards, that is, 10 of every Suit, he will pick
out four; so that there shall be one of every suit; A's Hazard to B's, in this
Case, is as 1000 to 8139.

4. Supposing, as before, 4 white Counters and 8 black, A wagers with B, that
out of them, he shall pick 7 Counters, of which there are 3 white. I require
the proportion of A's Hazard to B's?

5. A and B taking 12 Counters, play with three Dice after this manner; that if
12 comes up, A shall give one Counter to B, but if 14 comes up, B shall give
one to A, and that he shall gain who first has all the Counters. A's Hazard to
B's is 244140625 to 282429 536481.

The Calculus of the preceding Problems is left out by Mons. Hugens, on
purpose that the ingenious Reader may have the satisfaction of applying the
former Method himself; it is in most of them more laborious than difficult; for
Example, I have pitched upon the Second and Third, because the rest can be
solved after the same Method.

Problem 1.
The first Problem is solved by the Method of Prop. 14. only with this
difference, that after you have found the share due to B, if A were to get no
first Throw, you must subtract from it 5/36 of the Stake which is due to A for
his Hazard of throwing Six at the first Throw.

Probl. 2
As for the second Problem, it is solved thus, Suppose A's Hazard, when it is
his own turn to choose, be x, when it is B's, be y, and when it is C's, be z; it
is evident, when out of 12 Counters, of which there are 4 white and 8 black, he
endeavors to choose a white one, he has four Chances to get it, and eight to
miss it, that is, he has four Chances to get the Stake a, and eight to make his
Hazard worth y; so ^, and consequently ^. When it is B's turn to choose, then he
has four Chances for nothing, and eight for z, (that is to bring it to C's
turn) consequently ^; this equation reduced gives ^; when it comes to C's turn
to choose then A has four Chances for nothing, and eight for x, consequently
z=8/12x, therefore ^; this equation reduced gives x=9/19a, and consequently
there remains to the B and C 10/19 a, which must be shared after the same
manner, that is, so that B have the first Choice, C the next, and so on, till
one of them gain; the reason is, because it had been just in A to have demanded
9/19 of the Stake for not playing, and then the seniority fell to B; now 10/19
a parted betwixt B and C, by the former method, gives 6/19 to B, and 4/19 to C;
so A, B, and C's Hazards, from the beginning, were as 9, 6, 4.

I have supposed here the sense of the Problem to be, that when any one chus'd
a Counter, he did not diminish their Number; but if he missed of a white one,
put it in again, and left an equal Hazard to him who had the following Choice;
for if it be otherwise supposed, A's share will be 55/123, which is less than
9/19.

Prob. 2. It is evident, that wagering to pick out 4 Cards out of 40, so that
there be one of every Suit, is no more, than wagering, out of 39 Cards to take
3 which shall be of three proposed Suits; for it is all one which Card you draw
first, all the Hazard being, whether out of the 39 remaining you take 3, of
which none shall be of the Suit you first drew. Suppose then you had gone right
for three times, and were to draw your last Card, it is clear, that there are
^7 Cards, (viz. of the Suits you have drawn before) of which, if you draw any
you lose, and 10 of which, if you draw any, you have the Stake a; so you have
10 Chances for a, and 27 for nothing, which, by Prop. 3. is worth 10/37 a.
Suppose again you had gone right only for two Draughts, then you have 18 Cards
(of the Suits you have drawn before) which make you lose, and 20, which put you
in the Case supposed formerly, viz. where you have but one Card to draw, which,
as we have already calculated, is worth 10/37 a; so you have 18 Chances for
nothing, and 20 for 10/37 a, which, by Prop. 3. is worth 100/703 a. Suppose
again you have 3 Cards to draw, then you have 9 (of the Suit you drew first)
which make you lose, and 30 which put you in the Case supposed last; so you
have 9 Chances for nothing, and 30 for 100/703 a, which, by Prop. 3. is worth
3000/27417 a, or 1000/9139 a, and you leave to your Fellow-Gamester 8139/9139
a; so your Hazard is to his as 1000 to 8139.

It is easy to apply this Method to the Games that are in use amongst us: For
Example, If A and B, playing at Backgammon, B had already gained one end of
three, and A none, and if A had the Dice in his Hand for the last Throw of the
second end, all his Men but two upon the Ace Point being already cast of:
Quaer. What is the proportion of As Hazard to Bs?

Solution: There being of the 36 Throws of two Dice, six which give Doublets;
if A throw any of the Six, he has the Stake a; if he throw any of the other
Thirty, then he wants but one Game, and his Fellow-Gamester three, which, by
Prop. V. is worth a; so A has six Chances for a, and thirty for a, which, by
Prop. 3. is worth 129/144 a, and there remains to his Play-Fellow 15/144 a; so
A's Hazard to B's, is as 129 to 15, that is, less than 9 to 1.

Supposing the same Case, and if their Bargain had been, that he who gained
three ends before the other gained one, should have double of what each staked,
that is, the Stake and a half more, then there had been due to A 282/285 of the
Stake, that is, B ought only to take 1/^^, and leave the rest to A.

Thus likewise, if you apply the former Rule to the Royal Oak-Lottery, you will
find, that he who wagers that any Figure shall come up at the first throw,
ought to wagers 1 against 31; that he who wagers it shall come up at one of two
throws, ought to wager 63 against 961; that he who wagers that a Figure shall
come up at once in three times, ought to lay 124955 against 923621, etc. it
being only somewhat tedious to calculate the rest. Where you will find, that
the equality will not fall as some imagine on 16 Throws, no more than the
equality of wagering at how many Throws of one Dye 6 shall come up, falls on
three; the contrary of which you have seen already demonstrated; you will find
by calculation, that he has the Disadvantage, who wagers, that 1 of the 32
different Throws of the Royal Oak-Lottery, shall come at once of 20 times, and
that he has some Advantage, who wagers on 22 times; so the nearest to Equality
is on 21 times: But it must be remembered, that I have supposed in the former
Calculation, the Ball in the Royal Oak-Lottery to be regular, tho it can never
be exactly so; for he who has the smallest Skill in Geometry, knows, that there
can be no regular Body of 32 sides, and yet this can be of no advantage to him
who keeps it.

To find the Value of the Throws of Dice as to the Quantity.
NOthing is more easy, than by the former Method to determine the Value of any
Number of Throws of any Number of Dice; for in one Throw of a Dye, I have an
equal chance for 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, consequently my Hazard is worth their Sum 21
divided by their Number 6, that is, 3. Now if one Throw of a Dye be worth 3,
then two Throws of a Dye, or one Throw of two Dice is worth 7, two Throws of
two Dice, or one Throw of four Dice is worth 14, etc. The general Rule being to
multiply the Number of Dice, the Number of Throws, and 3 continually.

This is not to be understood as if it were an equal Wager to throw 7, or above
it, with two Dice at one Throw; for he who undertakes to do so, has the
advantage by 21 against 15. The meaning is only, if I were to have a Guinea, a
Shilling, or any thing else, for every Point that I threw with two Dice at one
Throw, my Hazard is worth 7 of these, because he who gave me 7 for it, would
have an equal probability of gaining or losing by it, the Chances of the Throws
above 7 being as many, as of these below it: So it is more than an equal Wager
to throw 14 at least at two Throws of two Dice, because it is more probable
that 14 will come, than any one Number besides, and as probable that it will be
above it as below it; but if one were to buy this Hazard at the rate
abovementioned, he ought just to give 14 for it. The equal Wager in one Throw
of two Dice, is to throw 7 at least one time, and 8 at least another time, and
so per vices: The reason is, because in the first Case I have 21 Chances
against 15, and in the second 15 Chances against 21.

Of RAFFLING.
IN Raiffing the different throws and their Chances are these; Where it is to
be observed, that of the 216 different Throws of three Dice, there are only 96
that give Doublets, or two, at least, of a kind; so it is 4 to 5 that with
three Dice Throws. Chan. 3 18 1 4 17 3 5 16 6 6 15 4 7 14 9 8 13 9 9 12 7 10 11
9 you shall throw Doublets, and it is 1 to 35 that you throw a Raffle, or all
three of a kind. It is evident likewise, that it is an even Wager to throw 11
or above it, because there are as many Chances for 11, and the Throws above it,
as for the Throws below it; but tho it be an even Wager to throw 11 at one
Throw, it is a disadvantage to wager to throw 22 at two Throws, and far more to
wager to throw 33 at three Throws; and yet it is more than an equal Wager that
you shall throw 21 at two Throws in Raffling, because it is as probable that
you will, as that you will not throw 11, at least, the first time, and more
than probable that you will throw 10, at least, the second time.

For an instance of the plainness of the preceding Method, I will show, how by
simple Subtraction, the most part of the former Problems may be solved.

Suppose A and B, playing together, each of 'em stakes 32 Shillings, and that A
wants one Game of the Number agreed on, and B wants two; to find the share of
the Stakes due to each of 'em. It Is plain, if A wins the next Game he has the
whole 64 Shillings; if B wins it, then their Shares are equal; therefore says A
to B, If you will break off the Game, give me 32, which I am sure of, whether I
win or lose the next Game, and since you will not venture for the other 32, let
us part them equally, that is, give me 16, which, with the former 32, make 48,
leaving 16 to you.

Suppose A wanted one Game, and B three; if A wins the next Game, he has the 64
Shillings; if B wins it, then they are in the condition formerly supposed, in
which Case there is 48 due to A; therefore says A to B, give me the 48 which I
am sure of, whether I win or lose the next Game, and since you will not hazard
for the other 16, let us part them equally, that is, give me 8, which, with the
former 48, make 56, leaving 8 to you, and so all the other Cases may be solved
after the same manner.

Suppose A wagers with B, that with one Dye he shall throw 6 at one of three
Throws, and that each of them stakes 108 Guineas: To find what is the
proportion of their Hazards; Now there being in one Throw of a Dye but one
Chance for 6, and five Chances against it, one Throw for 6 is worth 1/6 of the
Stake; therefore says B to A, of the 216 Guineas take a sixth part for your
first Throw, that is, 36; for your next Throw take a sixth part of the
remaining 180, that is, 30; and for your third Throw, take a sixth part of the
remaining 150, that is, 25, which in all make 91, leaving to me 125; so his
Hazard who undertakes to throw 6 at one of three Throws, is 91 to 125.

Suppose A had undertaken to throw 6 with one Dye at one Throw of four, and
that the whole Stake is 1296; says A to B, Every Throw for 6 of one Dye, is
worth the sixth part of what I throw for; therefore for my first Throw give me
216, which is the sixth part of 1296, and there remains 1080, I must have the
sixth part of that, viz. 180, for my second Throw; and the sixth part of the
remaining 900, which is 150, for my third Throw; and the sixth part of the last
remainder 750, which is 125 for my fourth Throw; all this added together makes
671, and there remains to you 625; so it is evident, that A's Hazard, in this
Case, is to B's 671 to 625.

Suppose A is to win the Stakes (which we shall suppose to be 36) if he throws
7 at once of twice with two Dice, and B is to have them if he does not; says B
to A, the Chances which give 7 are 6 of the 36, which is as' much as 1 of 6;
therefore for your first Throw you shall have a sixth part of the 36, which is
6; and for your next Throw a sixth part of the remainder 30, which is 5; this
in all makes 11; so you leave 25 to me; so A's Hazard is to B's as 11 to 25.

It were easy, at this rate to calculate the most intricate Hazards, were it
not that Fractions will occur, which, if they be more than, may be supposed
equal to an Unit, without causing any remarkable Error in great Numbers.

It will not be amiss, before I conclude, to give you a Rule for finding in any
Number of Games the Value of the first, because Hugens's Method, in that Case,
is something tedious.

Suppose A and B had agreed, that he should have the Stakes who did win the
first 9 Games, and A had already won one of the 9; I would know what share of
B's Money is due to A for the Advantage of this Game. To find this, take the
first eight even Numbers 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, and multiply them
continually; that is, the first by the second, the product by the third, etc.
take the first eight odd Numbers, 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, and do just so by
them, the product of the even Number is the Denominator, and the product of the
odd Number the Numerator of a Fraction, which expresses the quantity of B's
Money due to A upon the winning of the first Game of 9; that is, if each staked
a number of Guineas, or Shillings, etc. expressed by the product of the even
Numbers, there would belong to A, of B's Money, the Number expressed by the
product of the odd Numbers: For Example, Suppose A had gained one Game of 4,
then by this Rule, I take the three first even Numbers, 2, 4, 6, and multiply
them continually, which make 48, and the first three odd Numbers, 1, 3, 5, and
multiply them continually, which make 15; so there belongs to A 15/48 of B's
Money, that is, if each staked 48, there would belong to A, besides his own 15
of A's. Now by Hugens's Method, if A wants but three Games while B wants four,
there is due to A 21/32 of the Stake; by this Rule there is due to A 15/48 of
B's Money, which is 15/69 of the Stake, which, with his own 48/96 of the Stake,
makes 63/96 or 21/32 of the Stake, and so in every Case you will find Hugens's
Method and this will give you the same Number; a Demonstration of it you may
see in a Letter of Monsieur Pascals to Monsieur Fermat; tho it be otherwise
expressed there than here, yet the consequence is easily supplied. To prevent
the labor of Calculation, I have subjoined the following Table, which is
calculated for two Gamesters, as Mons. Hugens is for three.

If each of us stake 256 Guineas in

There belongs to me of 256 of my Play-fellow

The Use of the Table is plain; for let our Stakes be what they will, I can
find the Portion due to me upon the winning the first, or the first two Games,
etc. of 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. For Example, If each of us had staked 4 Guineas, and the
Number of Games to be played were 3, of which I had gained 1, say, As 256 is to
96, so is 4 to a fourth.

256: 96:: 4: 1

To find what is the Value of his Hazard, who undertakes, at the first Throw,
to cast Doublets, in any given Number of Dice.

In two Dice it is plain to avoid Doublets, every one of the six different
Throws of the first, can only be combined with five of the second, because one
of the six is of the same kind, and consequently makes Doublets; for the samo
reason, the thirty Throws of two Dice, which are not Doublets, can only be
combined with four Throws of a third Dice, and three Throws of a fourth Dice;
so generally it is this Series,

6 x 5 x 4 x 3 x 2 x 1 x 0, etc.

6 x 6 x 6 x 6 x 6 x 6 x 6, etc.

The second Series is the Sum of the Chances, and the first the Number of
Chances against him who undertakes to throw Doublets, each Series to be
continued so many terms, as are the Number of Dice. For Example, If one should
undertake to throw Doublets at the first Throw of four Dice, his Adversary's
Hazard is ^ or 5/18 leaving to him 13/18, so he has 13 to 5. In seven Dice, you
see the Chances against him are o, because then there must necessarily be
Doublets.

Of WHIST.
IF there be four playing at Whist, it is 15 to 1 that any two of them shall
not have the four Honors, which I demonstrate thus:

Suppose the four Gamesters be A, B, C, D: If A and B had, while the Cards are
a dealing, already got three Honors, and wanted only one, since it is as
probable that C and D will have the next Honor, as A and B; if A and B had
laid a Wager to have it, there is due to them but of the Stake: If A and B
wanted two of the four, and had wager'd to have both those two, then they have
an equal Hazard to get nothing; if they miss the first of those two, or to put
themselves in the former Case if they get it; so they have an equal Hazard to
get nothing or, which, by Prop. 1. is worth of the Stake; so if they want three
Honors, you will find due to them 1/8 of the Stake; and if they wanted four,
1/16 of the Stake, leaving to C and D 15/16; so C and D can wager 15 to 1, that
A and B shall not have all the four Honors.

It is 11 to 5 that A and B shall not have three of the four Honors, which 1
prove thus:

It is an even Wager, if there were but three Honors, that A and B shall have
two of these three, since it is as probable that they will have two of the
three, as that C and D shall have them; consequently, if A and B had laid a
Wager to have two of three, there is due to them of the Stake. Now suppose A
and B had wager'd to have three of four, they have an equal Hazard to get the
first of the four, or miss it; if they get it, then they want two of the three,
and consequently there is due to them of the Stake; if they miss it, then they
want three of the three, and consequently there is due to them 1/8 of the
Stake; therefore, by Prop. 1. their Hazard is worth 5/16, leaving to C and D
11/16.

A and B playing at Whist against C and D; A and B have eight of ten, and C and
D nine, and therefore cannot reckon Honors; to find the proportion of their
Hazards.

There is 5/16 due to C and D upon their hazard of having three of four
Honors; but since A and B want but one Game, and C and D two, there is due to
C and D but, or 4/16 more upon that account, by Prop. 4. this in all makes
9/16, leaving to A and B 7/16; so the hazard of A and B to that of C and D, is
as 9 to 7.

In the former Calculations I have abstracted from the small difference of
having the Deal and being Seniors.

All the former Cases can be calculated by the Theorems laid down by Monsieur
Hugens; but Cases more composed require other Principles, for the easy and
ready Computation of which, I shall add one Theorem more, demonstrated after
Mons. Hugens's Method.

Theor.
If I have p Chances for a, q Chances for b, and r Chances for c, then my
hazard is worth ^, that is, a multiplied into the number of its Chances added
to b, multiplied into the number of its Chances, added to c multiplied into the
number of its Chances, and the Sum divided by the Sum of Chances of a, b, c.

To investigate as well as demonstrate this Theorem, suppose the value of my
hazard be x, then x must be such, as having it, I am able to purchase as good a
hazard again in a just and equal Game. Suppose the Law of it be this, That
playing with so many Gamesters as, with my self, make up the number p+q+r, with
as many of them as the nnmber p represents; I make this bargain, that whoever
of them wins shall give me a, and that I shall do so to each of them if I win;
with the Gamesters represented by the number of q, I bargain to get b, if any
of them win, ann to give b to each of them, if I win my self; and with the rest
of the Gamesters, whose number is r-1, I bargain to give, or to get c after the
same manner: Now all being in an equal probability to gain, I have p Chances to
get a, q Chances to get b, and r-1 Chances to get c, and one Chance, viz. when
I win my self, to get px+qx+rx-ap-bq-rc+c, which, if it be supposed equal to c,
then I have p Chances for a, q Chances for b, and r Chances for c (for I had
just now r-1 Chances for it) therefore, if px+qx+rx-ap-bq-rc+c=c, then is ^.

By the same way of reasoning you will find, if I have p Chances for a, q
Chances for b, r Chances for c, and s Chances for d, that my hazard is ^, etc.

In Numbers.
If I had two Chances for 3 Shillings, four Chances for 5 Shillings, and one
Chance for 9 Shillings, then, by this Rule, my hazard is worth 5 Shillings; for
^; and it is easy to prove, that with 5 Shillings I can purchase the like
hazard again; for suppose I play with six others, each of us staking 5
Shillings; with two of them I bargain, that if either of them win, he must give
me 3 Shillings, and that I shall do so to them; and with the other four I
bargain just so, to give or to get 5 Shillings: This is a just Game, and all
being in an equal probability to win; by this means I have two Chances to get 3
Shillings, four Chances to get 5 Shillings, and one Chance to get 9 Shillings,
viz. when I win my self; for then out of the Stake, which makes 35 Shillings, I
must give the first two 6 Shillings, and the other four 20 Shillings, so there
remains just 9 to my self.

It it easy, by the help of this Theorem, to calculate in the Game of Dice,
commonly called Hazard, what Mains are best to set on, and who has the
Advantage, the Caster or Setter. The Scheme of the Game, as I take it, is thus,
Throws next following for Mains. The Caster. The Setter. V. V. II. III. XI.
XII. VI. VI. XII. XI. II. III. VII. VII. XI. XII. II. III. VIII. VIII. XII. XI.
II. III. IX. IX. II. III. XI. XII.

By an easy Calculation you will find, if the Caster has VI. and the Setter
VII, there is due to the Caster of the Stake; if he has V. against VII. 2/5 of
the Stake, VI. against VII. 5/11 of the Stake, IV. against VI. 3/8 of the
Stake, V. against VI. 4/9 of the Stake, VI. against V. 3/7 of the Stake,


I need not tell the Reader, that IV. is the same with X, V. with IX, and VI.
with VIII.

Suppose then VII. be the Main: To find the proportion of the hazard of the
Caster to that of the Setter.

By the Law of the Game, the Caster, before he throws next, has four Chances
for nothing, viz. these II, III, XII; eight Chances for the whole Stake, viz.
those of VII, XI; six Chances for, viz. those IV, X; eight Chances for 2/5,
viz. those of V, IX; and ten Chances for 5/11, viz. these of VI, X; so his
hazard, by the preceding Theorem, is ^

Now to save the trouble of a tedious reduction, Suppose the Stake which they
play for be 36, that is, the Setter had laid down 18; in that case, every one
of these Fractions are so many parts of an Unite, which, being gathered into
one Sum, give 1741/59 to the Caster, leaving 1814/55 to the Setter; so the
hazard of the Caster is to that of the Setter 244, 251.

Suppose VI. or VIII. be the Main, then the Share of the Caster is

II.

III. VI. IV. V.

XI. XII. X. IX. VIII. VII.

5x0+6x1+6x3/8+8x4/9+5x+6x6/11= =17229/396, leaving to the Setter 18167/396, so
the hazard of the Caster is to that of the Setter as 6961 to 7295.

Suppose V. or IX. be the Main, then the Share of the Caster is

II.

III.

XI. IV. VI.

XII. V. X. IX. VIII. VII.

6x0+4x1+6x^+4x+10x^+6x^= =17 229/315, leaving to the Setter is 1886/315, so
the hazard of the Caster is to that of the Setter as 1396 to 1493.

It is plain, that in every Case the Caster has the Disadvantage, and that V.
or IX. are better Mains to set on than VII, because, in this last Cast the
Setter has but 18 and 14/55 or 84/330; whereas, when V. or IX. is the Main, he
has 1886/315; likewise VI. or VIII. are better Mains than V. or IX. because
167/396 is a greater Froction than 86/315.

All those Problems suppose Chances, which are in an equal probability to
happen, if it should be supposed otherwise, there will arise variety of Cases
of a quite different nature, which, perhaps, 'twere not unpleasant to consider,
I shall add one Problem of that kind, leaving the Solution to those who think
it merits their pains.

In Parallelipipedo cujus latera sunt ad invicem in ratione a, b, c: Invenire
quota vice quivis suscipere potest, ut datum quodvis planum, v. g. ab jaciat.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PReface, page 3. line 1. read in. p. 6. l. 5. r. incur. p. 10. l. 8. for is
left to me, r. properly deserves the name of Conduct. Book, p. 2. l. 7. for 9
r. q. p. 16. l. 5. add and he one. p. 71. l. 5. r. wins.

Advertisement.
THe whole Duty of Man according to the Law of Nature. By that famous Civilian
SAMUEL PUFFENDORF, Professor of The Law of Nature and Nations, in the
University of Heidelberg, and in the Caroline University, afterward
Counselor and Historiographer to the K. of Sweden, and to his Electoral
Highness of Brandenburg. Now made English. Printed for C. Harper, at the
Flowerde-Luce over against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet.


