THE HISTORY OF APPIAN OF ALEXANDRIA, IN Two Parts. THE First Consisting of the
Punick, Syrian, Parthian, Mithridatick, Illyrian, Spanish, and Hannibalick,
Wars.
THE SECOND Containing Five BOOKS OF THE Civil Wars OF ROME. Made English by I.
D.

LONDON, Printed for John Amery at the Peacock against S. Dunstan's Church in
Fleet Street. 1679.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE EARL OF OSSORY, etc.
May it please your Lordship,
COuld I as truly boast I had performed your Commands in making Appian English,
as I can that I attempted it by your Command, I should with much more
confidence (than now I dare) present it to your Lordship: for the least
flattering imagination that I were able to make this excellent Historian speak
as well, and prove as pleasing to your Lordship in ours, as he does in any
other foreign Language, would be apt to create in me a confidence, pardonable
only in those who are successful in their obedience, and whose Performances are
equal to their Wishes.

But since the knowledge of my own weakness forbids me to entertain any such
thoughts, I come with all humility to lay at your Lordships feet not the
effects of my well doing, but of my good will; and though I am sufficiently
sensible of my want of power to give height to my desires; yet I rest satisfied
in this, that Experience has taught me, your Lordship can never want goodness
to accept of my intentions. And whilst you have so much of that Heaven about
you, I can fear little damage from any Earthly Defects of mine.

And whilst your Lordship is pleased to own Appian, and undertake his
protection in this Humble Dress of mine, what doubt can I harbor of his
finding a happy Reception in the World? You, who have been so great an Example
of the main subject he treats of, Military Prowess; You, who have so seasonably
pressed your self forward, both in Naval and Land^ Service for the Glory of
your King and Country, that no Example of Roman Bravery could ever reach to;
You, whom if Appian himself were still alive, he would be proud of the
opportunity of exceeding all he has done (in one of his greatest Excellencies)
by giving a Character of so illustrious a Worthy.

For I dare leave it to any impartial Reader of this Age to judge, whether any
of his Descriptions of those Hero's, whose Actions he writes, comes not short
in many points of what justly might be said of your Lordship, or if any there
be (sure I am) none but the two great Scipios can pretend to claim any
Parallel. You like them have uninteressed fought for your Country; and in this
have exceeded them, that when your Glory was already at that height made you
the envy of ill men, you still thrust your self into those hazards makes you
the Admiration of all that have either Goodness or Honor, which together with
your other excellent Qualities deservedly entitles you to that Attribute once
given to the Emperor Titus, of being, The Delight of all Humane Kind.

But why should I strive to tell the World what they already know, and what
none will dispute with me* It Is an Honor too great for me, that your Lordship
has by laying this Command upon me, given me an occasion to publish the hearty
desire I have to acknowledge all your Lordships Favors, and to assume a
liberty (few men living but would be proud to share in) of declaring my self,

My Lord, Your Lordships Most Humble, most Faithful, And most Obedient Servant
I. D.

TO THE READER.
THough this History be so excellent in it self, both as to its Method and
Original Style, that it needs no Preface to recommend it, yet such is the
invincible power of Custom, that a loose Sheet must be cast away to usher it
among the people; and I cannot be so stubborn to disoblige them in so trivial a
matter: and though I know it is no purpose to say any thing of my self, since
all I can say will not stop the least censure; yet for others satisfaction I
will speak something of my Author, and this Book, as it is his.

He was, though Native of Alexandria, a Roman Citizen, and for his exquisite
parts and Learning so much respected in his time, that he was successively
Advocate to two Emperors of Rome; an Employment which gave him the opportunity
of having at his command the prime Records of the Empire, which it is possible
first put him upon composing this History: for by several hints in these Books
of his we find the use he made thereof, and especially of the private Memoirs
of Augustus Caesar, written with his own hand, which he tells us he had seen,
and whereby possibly he ^as enabled so exactly to discourse of those intricate
causes of disgust between young Caesar and Anthony, which he does in his Civil
Wars, and which possibly he had been much more large upon in his History of
Egypt, had not that among others unfortunately been lost.

For he began his History from the Infancy of the Roman-State (his first Book
treating of their Affairs under their Kings) and so continued it, not by
hudling all their Actions together according to an exact series of time, but by
composing a particular Book of every great and renowned War in any Province or
Country, without intermingling it with the Affairs of any other Country farther
than the necessity of the Story required, till at length he concluded with the
Battle of Actium, and Conquest of Egypt, which was the last Province reduced
under the Roman Power, and with which the whole Empire became entirely settled
in peace under the Government of Caesar Augustus.

And certainly all the mighty Actions of so great and glorious a people as
those of Rome, compiled by so excellent an Author, must needs have been a Wo^k
worthy of the World: but whether it were the pleasure of Fate to make us
sensible that all things sublunary are subject to decay, or (as the French
Translator will have it) a just punishment from Heaven for the Roman Pride,
Ava^ice, and Cruelty, that no e^tire ^istory of all their prodigious
Undertakings should be transmitted to Posterity, this fell under fate of most
Roman Histories, and of thirty two Books written by Appian, nineteen have been
eaten up by devouring time, and thirteen only preserved to our days, viz. the
Punick, Syrian, Parthian, Mithridatick, Illyrian, Gallick (and that too but a
fragment) Spanish and Hanniballick War, with five Books of the Civil Wars, all
which are here made English. True it is, that in the Latin Copy with the
Annot. Var. there are several fragmenrs of other Wars managed by the Roman
People, but so utterly imperfect, that the translating of them would have given
little or no satisfaction to the Reader.

I have but one thing more to add, that is, notwithstanding our misfortunes in
being deprived of so great a part of this noble History, we may take occasion
to admire the excellent method and contrivance of Appian, his composure being
such, that though so many of his Books are lost, yet the want of them renders
not those left imperfect (as Livy, or other Historians are by so much as is
left of them) but by taking the whole Affairs of every Country from the first
dealings the Romans had with them, till such time as they were reduced to a
Roman Province, he makes every Book independent, and become a perfect History,
and withal the Reader not being amused, nor his memory confounded by running
from one Action to another, nor the Affairs of one People or Nation to another,
according to the series of time is not exposed to the hazard of forge^^ing what
he had before read of a Concern, that breaks of in the middle, to give way to
others, as we see in many other Histories, but may go on with all Delight
imaginable every thing here treated of, being perfect and entire in it self.

THE PREFACE OF THE AUTHOR.
DEsigning to write a History of the Roman Wars, I judged it convenient to
begin it with the Bounds of their Empire. In the first place, the greatest part
of those Nations inhabiting the Coasts of the British Ocean pay them obedience;
from thence entering into the Mediterranean Sea by the Straits of Gibraltar,
which way soever you cast your eyes, all that you behold of Isles or Ports or
Lands, is subject to their Dominion. The first people found on the right hand
Coast of that Sea are the Mauritanians or Moors, and after them several other
Africans, as far as Carthage, and up in the main Land are the Nomades, whom the
Latins call Numidians, as they call the Country Numidia. Continuing onwards on
the Sea Coast by the Lybians, as far as the Or Quicksands.
Syrtes on the Coast of Cyrene, and Cyrene it self. Next them succeed the
Marmarides, the Hammoniens* and all the people neighboring upon the This is
possibly that which H^rodod^tus calls Palus Tritandes.
Palus Marien. Next them is found that great City which took its name from its
Founder, Alexander, situate upon the Confines of Egypt, and then all Egypt
stretching it self up toward the Springs of the Nile, as far as the Oriental
Aethiopians, and returning to the Sea at Pelusium, from whence going along the
Coast you find Syria, Palestine, and above them a part of Arabia on the Banks
of the Red Sea. Next to Palestine lies Phoenicia, above which is the Country of
Or the Lower Syria.
Coelo Syria, which extends it self as far as Euphrates. A little higher are
the Palmyrians, environed with sandy Deserts, which likewise extend themselves
as far as Euphrates: Those which give Bounds to the Syrians are the Cilicians
and Cappadocians their Neighbors, with that Armenia called the lesser* then
follow all those other Nations which submit to the Roman Empire on the Now
called the Black Sea.
Euxine Sea, of which number the Syrians and Cilicians lie upon the
Mediterranean. As for the Armenians and Cappadocians, they are on one side
bounded by the Pontick Nations, and on the other side join those people living
in the Continent, environed by Armenia Major, where the Romans levy no Tribute,
but only have a right of naming their Kings. Now between the Cappadocians and
the Cilicians there is a great Peninsula which advances into the Sea, whose
right hand Coasts are bounded by the Euxine, Propontick* H^lle spout and Aegean
Seas, and the left by the Seas of Pamphylia and Egypt, for all these Seas
compose this Peninsula, whose Inhabitants toward the Egyptian Sea are the
Pamphilians and the Lycians, and after them the Carians, as far as Ionia* and
those toward the Euxine Sea, the Propontick and H^llespont are the Galatians,
Bythinians, Mysians and Phrygians: and those who inhabit the middle parts are
the Lydians and Pisidians: so many different Nations within this Peninsula
submitted to the Roman Rule. Moreover, beyond the Strait on the ^^ropean side
^hey possessed other Provinces on the Euxine Sea, as Mysia and Thrace, so (...)
at least as they lay upon that Sea.

Opposite to Ionia begins the Gulf of the Aegean Sea, next to it is the Sea of
Ionia, and then that of Sicily, which is followed by the Tyrrhene Sea which
reaches to the Pillars of Hercules. On the Coasts of all these Seas which
extend themselves from Ionia to the Ocean, there lie many Provinces of the
Roman Empire, as all Greece, Thessaly, Macedonia, the remainder of Thrace,
Pannonia and Illyria, and after them Italy, which is washed at the bottom of it
by the Ioni^n Sea, passes along the Tyrrhene, extending it self as far as Gaul,
a part of which lies upon the M^dit^^ranean; others are bounded by the Northern
Ocean, and some have the R^ine for their Frontier. Next follows all Spain and
Celtiberia, which extend themselves along the Coasts of the Northern and
Western Ocean to the Pillars of Hercules.

I shall speak of these people more exactly, as the method I have propos^^ to
follow, shall direct me. But now having described the Bounds of this (...)
toward the Sea, entering into the Continent we shall find that part of
Mau^^ania, which lies upon the Occidental Ethiopians, and after it many
Countr^^ of Africa (almost uninhabited by reason of the excessive heats and
(...) of ^ild Beasts) stretching as far as the Oriental Aethiopia, which are
the Frontiers of the Roman Empire in Africa. As for their Dominions in Asia
they are bounded by the Euphrates, Mount Caucasus, and Colchos, extending it
self to the Euxine Sea, and the remainder of that Sea Coast, In Europe its
^ounds are the two great Rivers of the Rhine, and the Danube, of which the
Rhi^e ^^ses it self in the Northern Ocean, and the Danube, in the Euxine Sea,
not but that the Roman Dominion extends it self our some Germans beyond the
Rhine, and over the Getes whom they call Daci, beyond the Danube.

These are the Limits toward the Continent, as we after a very curious search
have learned. Besides which all the Islands in the Mediterranean, as the
Cycla^^s, Sporades, Echinades, Tyrrhenides, Baleares, and an infinite number of
others of different names in the Seas of Africa, Ionia, Egypt (...), Sicily,
and o^r Sea, as likewise those which for their excellence the Greeks call
great, as Cyprus, Crete, Rhodes, Lesbos, Euboea, Sicily, Sardinia, Corsica: In
short, all their Isles as well great as small, depend upon the Romans. Who
moreover having landed their Forces in Britany, which is an Island so great,
that it seems another Continent, they have conquered the better half, slighting
the remainder as not worth their pains: nor indeed does that part they possess
yield them any great advantage.

Though they have now subdued so many People and Nations, yet were they above
five hundred years before they could make themselves Masters of all Italy. Two
hundred and fifty years they lived under their Kings, till having expelled them
with a solemn Oath, never to admit them again, their Commonwealth was governed
by the worthiest Citizens, and by Magistrates which they yearly changed,
insomuch, that within two hundred years after the first five hundred it was by
continual Victories, and the assistance of Strangers, who from all parts sought
their alliance, increased to such a height, that in those times the Romans
became Conquerors of a great number of Provinces.

After which Caesar having made himself the most powerful of the Age he lived
in, was so near usurping the Sovereignty, that he left the Romans only the
shadow and name of a Commonwealth, whilst he in effect was become absolute
Master of it; insomuch, that from his time even to this all that great Empire
has paid obedience to one single person, whom, to avoid the violation of their
Oath (occording to my opinion) they styled nothing but Commander in chief, or
General of the Army.
Emperor; and indeed the name it self seems much more genuine, as being
likewise common to those who commanded an Army for a time: and yet they are
indeed Kings in effect. It Is now two hundred years since the first of those
Emperors unto our time, during which, a long and constant peace having secured
their Dominion, the City is become both beautiful and rich. For the first
mightily added to the Provinces, and restrained within bounds of duty those
which had a mind to revolt. And in short, very prudently chose rather to
content themselves with those rich Countries on the Sea Coast, and with the
well ordering of them, than to stretch their Empire ad infinitum, over poor and
barbarous Nations from whom they could reap no advantage: I my self have seen
at Rome Ambassadors who have come expressly to submit themselves and their
Country to the Roman Empire, whom the Emperor would not accept of, because
they could bring nothing to his Coffers; for they give Kings to a multitude of
Nations, whose Dominions they themselves despise, and are at the expense to
defend sundry Provinces, esteeming it a great dishonor to desert those whom
they have once taken into their protection.

They have always been careful to maintain on their Frontiers mighty Armies, as
Guards to this vast Empire, which both by Sea and Land they have with such
labor and diligence maintained, as if it had been but some little Province:
nor was ever any Dominion of so great extent, and so long duration together.
For if we consider Greece since the Reign of Darius, which was the time of its
beginning of Glory, until Philip the Son of Amyntas adding to him the
Athenians, Lacedaemonians and Thebans, there would yet be no comparison: for the
Greeks rather made War about the pre-eminence of their Cities, than to enlarge
their Territory; and the noblest of their Actions was but the Defense of their
Liberty against foreign Princes: for when any of them designed to pass into
Sicily, in order to any Conquest, they still came off with dishonor; or if at
any time in a hostile manner they entered Asia, they were forced to a retreat
without doing any memorable Action. In short, the Grecian Prowess, as ambitious
as it was, never conquered any thing out of Greece which it any long time
enjoyed, being contented with preserving the Liberty of that Country, and the
reputation of an invincible valor; but after the time of Philip the Son of
Amyntas, and his Son Alexander, their Glory seems to me very much diminished:
nor had the Empire, fo^nded by them in Asia any thing to equal that established
by the Romans in Europe, considering the weakness and effeminacy of the
Asiaticks, as may be seen in the progress of this History. For the Romans
fought but few Battles to subdue all those Provinces they possessed, though
they were defended by Macedonians: but Africa and Europe were gained with
mighty labor. Besides, those three great Empires of the Assyrians, Medes and
Persians did not (put them altogether) continue nine hundred years, as the
Roman Power has done, which subsists to this instant, and yet the extent of
those three Empires was less by one half than that of the Romans, if we compare
the Bounds of one with the other; for the Roman Empire reached from the Western
Ocean, as far as Mount Caucasus, the Euphrates; and to the Aethiopians that are
above Egypt to Arabia: and in short, even to the Oriental Sea, so that the
Ocean were its bounds both Eastward and Westward, whilst all the Mediterranean
and those Isles it embraces, and even England, not known in the Authors days,
but by the name of Britain; the name of England being brought in by the Angles,
a People in Germany, called in by the Britains to assist them in their War with
the Picts, a People that then possessed that part of the Island called then
Caledonia, now Scotland.
(Britain) in the Northern Ocean submitted to its Dominion. Whereas the Medes
and Persians in those times when they were most powerful at Sea, never had more
than the Gulf of Pamphilia, with the Island of Cyprus, and some small matter
on the Coasts of the Ionian Sea, besides the Persian Gulf which is of no great
extent. As to the Affairs of the Macedonians before the Reign of Philip the Son
of Amyntas, they were but in a bad condition, having no sure Foundation. True
it is, that Philip was very happy in all he undertook, but he never waged War
out of Greece, or the Neighboring Provinces. At last under Alexander that
Kingdom was raised to a prodigious and an incomparable height of Greatness, as
well for its extent, and the number of its people, as for the expeditious
felicity of itsVictories; yet was it only like a flash of Lightning, if we
consider its short continuance, Not but that after it was divided into several
Lieutenancies, or Vicegerencies.
Satrapies, every Province did for a long time afterward maintain and preserve
its primitive splendour. For the Kings of Egypt only kept in pay two hundred
thousand Footmen, forty thousand Horsemen, three hundred Elephants trained to
the War, two thousand Chariots armed with Scythes, with Arms in store for three
hundred thousand Men; and besides all these Landforces, had in constant
readiness two thousand S^allops, or small Vessels, fifteen hundred Galleys,
with all their Furniture, eight hundred tall Ships rigged, and splendidly
fitted with all Naval Provisions, and richly gilded both in Poop and Prow, on
which they were wont to go to War, that they might appear with the greater
pomp. As for Money, they had continually in the Treasury seven hundred and
forty thousand Egyptian Talents of Silver, as appears by the Registers wherein
these things are recorded, which are producible to this day, and particularly
those left by Alexander's immediate Successor to the Kingdom of Egypt, who of
all the Kings was the most exact in his Accounts of his Revenues, most splendid
in his Expenses, and most magnificent in his Buildings, Most certain it is,
there were some other Satrapies not much inferior to this, but they all fell
to ruin by the Civil Dissentions of the succeeding Princes, than which no more
dangerous Plague can infect a great Estate. But the Roman Empire, because
admirable both in its greatness and prosperity, by reason of that long
continuance, the product of its Senates prudent deliberations, though the
raising of this Estate required an extraordinary, vigor, and Spirits capable
of undergoing incredible labor and overcoming ten thousand difficulties; for
success never made them proud nor presumptuous, till they saw themselves firmly
setteled: and on the other side, adversity never dismayed them; for not the
loss of twenty, nay forty, no, nor fifty thousand Men in one single Battle, not
the hazard of an absolute ruin by Plague, Famine, or Sedition, ever made them
abate of their Courage; but at last having baffled all imaginable dangers for
seven hundred years together, and triumphed over all those difficulties daily
opposed them, they raised their Empire to that height of Glory and Greatness;
and at present reap the Fruits of both their good Fortune and Prudence.

Many Authors as well Greek as Latin have wrote of all these things, and
indeed the Subject is greater than that of the Macedonian Affairs, though they
^ere in their season possibly more considerable. But for my part, after having
well considered the Roman Virtue, that I might make the more contemplative
comparison of it with that of other Nations, I have given freedom to my
thoughts to wander from one place to another, from Carthage to Spain, from
thence to Sicily or Macedonia, and fancied either an Embassy, or a Commission
to succor the oppressed, and thence like a perfect Vagabond (that had nothing
else to do) returning either to Carthage or Sicily, I have collected all things
necessary to compose this History: I informed my self how often the Romans sent
Ambassadors or Armies into Sicily, and of every minute Action they performed
there, till they reduced it under that obedience it now acknowledges. I
enquired into all Treaties of Peace, or Overtures between one or the other that
had been transacted between the Carthaginians and Roman People, what Wrongs one
had done to the other, and what Losses and Overthrows each had received till
such time as Carthage was demolished, and Africa was made a Roman Province; and
at last how Carthage being rebuilt, Africa came into the state we now find it:
I have followed the same course through all the other Provinces, led by a
curiosity to understand all that the Romans had done of great and glorious, to
know the sloth or industry of every Nation, the Virtue and Fortune of this
victorious People. And in short, all things worthy recording: and imagining it
would be no unpleasant thing to the world to know the Roman History, in this
manner I laid my design to write the particular Actions of every Province by
themselves, omitting what in those times was done elsewhere, and referring it
to its proper place and order. I looked upon it likewise as unnecessary to set
down throughout the whole the time when every thing passed, (...) sufficient to
observe it in Affairs of most Importance.

Let me add, that heretofore the Romans had but one name, like other men, in
process of time they added another; and it is not long since that some of them
took a third, the better to make themselves be known, either by some bodily
mark, or some advantageous endowment of mind; so some Greeks likewise to their
names added Sirnames. Wherefore I shall sometime make use of all their Names,
especially when I am treating of Illustrious Personages, to the intent they may
be the better known; but Ishall call many, as well of the one as the other, by
those names most agreeable to the matter in hand.

For the Order and Method of this History, it is taken from the time in which
these Wars were begun and ended (notwithstanding there were diverse others
interfer'd, which are omitted to avoid confusion.) Wherefore the several Books
shall take their Titles from the matter, as the Punik, Syrian, Parthian,
Mithridatick, Iberian, and Hannibal's War, etc.

As to the Domestic Seditions, and Civil Wars, we shall treat of them
according to the time in which the Authors of them lived, as that of Marius and
Sylla; of Pompey and Caesar; of Anthony and the other Caesar, surnamed
Augustus, against the Murderers of the first Caesar. And lastly, the War which
the Conquerours made one against another, which is the last Civil War, and
during which, Egypt fell into the Power of the Romans. Thus the Affairs with
strange Nations, shall be divided by each Book, and the Civil Wars by the
Chiefs of the Parties.

But who am I that write all these things? Many persons know already, and I my
self have declared it, but to declare it yet more publicly. I was born in
Alexandria, of an honest Family in my Country: afterward I lived at Rome where
I pleaded Causes before the Tribunal of the Caesar's, till such time as they
honored me with the Quality of one of their Proc^^atores. He that would know
more, may learn it from the Books I have wrote on this Subject.

APPIAN OF ALEXANDRIA, HIS HISTORY OF THE Roman Wars IN LYBIA, OR, THE PUNICK
WAR.
PART I.
The Argument of this Book.
I. THe Foundation of the City of Carthage. II. A brief Recital of the Roman
Wars against the Carthaginians. III. The first Punick War where Attilius was
defeated by Xantippus. IV. War of the Carthaginians against all the People of
Lybia. V. The cause of the second Punick War. VI. Scipio obtains Commission for
this War, makes preparation and advances into Sicily. VII. The Carthaginians
prepare for defense. VIII. The occasion of Masanissa's discontent against
Syphax, and the Carthagini^n^. IX. S^^pio lands in Afri^a. X. ^a^anissa lays an
ambush for Ha^^o, XI. Scipio besieg^s, and ta^es Locha. XII. Five thousand
Africans defeated by Scipio. XIII. Scipio besieges Utica, where Syphax to gain
time proposes Conditions of ^eace. XIV. Asdrubal and Syphax design to surprise
Scipio. XV. Scipio calls a Council, where he resolves to pre^ent (...) E^emies.
XVI. Scipio ass^^lts A^dr^bal's Camp by Night, takes it, p^llage^ it, and ki^s
30000 Men. XVII. Asdrubal upon (...) defeat is condemned to death by the
Carthaginians; but yet rallies his forces. XVIII. A Sea Fight between the
Romans and Carthaginians. XIX. Battle between Syphax and Masanissa, where
Syphax is defeated, and taken Prisoner. XX. Sophonisba, Syphax's Wife, sends
her excuses to Masanissa, who receives her, and then poisons her, to avoid the
delivering her up to Scipio. XXI. Han^o suborns People to set fire an Scipio's
Camp, they are discovered, and put to death. XXII. Scipio wasting the Country,
the Carthaginians consult about the re-calling of Hannibal, yet send their.
Ambassadors to Rome, to treat of Peace, which is concluded between the two
Estates. XXIII. Hannibal returned to Africa, prepares for War, and the
Carthaginians break the Peace by pillaging the Roman Ships. XXIV. Hannibal
undertakes the Charge of the Army is hardly put to it by Scipio, whereupon he
su^^ for Peace, which is gran^ed him; but the People will not consent. XXV.
Hannibal confers with Scipio, who forces him at length to give Battle. XXVI.
The two Generals draw up their Armies in Battalia, and make their Orations to
their Soldiers. XXVII. The Battle between Hannibal and Scipio, where Hannibal
is defeated. XXVIII. Scipio approache^ Carthage, the Citizens sue for Peace,
which is granted on Condition the Senate ratify it. XXIX. The Poeple oppose
the Peace; yet send d^^^ties to Rome, ^here at an Assembly of the Senate, the
Peace is ratified. Scipio's Triu^^h. XXXI. Difference betwixt Masanissa and the
Carthaginians, in which the Romans concern themselves. XXXII. The great Battle
between Masanissa, and the Carthaginians, with the siege of their Camp by that
King, who makes them pass under the Yoke. XXXIII. The Romans laying hold on the
occasion, it is decreed in the Senate to make War upon Carthage, and that that
City be rased. XXXIV. The Consuls advance into Sicily, whither the
Carthaginians bring them three hundred of their children for Hostages. XXXV.
From Sicily they pass to Utica, where the Carthaginians yield up their Arms.
XXXVI. The Consuls declare to the Deputies, the Senates resolution, touching
the demolishing of Carthage. XXXVII. Hanno's Oration to the Consuls to move
them to compassion. XXXVIII. Censorinus Answer. XXXIX. The Carthaginians
hearing the News, in desperation prepare for War. XL. Description of the City
of Carthage. XLI. The beginning of the siege. XLII. Anoble Act of Scipio's, yet
but Tribune. XLIII. Death of Masanissa, whose Goods are divided among his
Children by Scipio, the Executor of his Will. XLIV. Scipio draws Phameas to the
Roman Party, they go both to Rome, and are magnificently received. XLV.
Calphurnius Piso, and L. Mancinus, come to command the Army, who spend the
Summer without doing any thing. XLVI. The Carthaginians take heart and contemn
the Romans. XLVII. Scipio chosen Consul, he comes to Utica, where he finds
Mancinus, and the Army in great danger, from which he dis-engages them. XLVIII.
He reestablishes Discipline in the Army. XLIX. He takes the place of Megara L.
He seizes on the Neck of the Peninsula, where he fortifies himself, and by that
means brings a Famine into the City. LI. He blocks up the Port of Carthage with
a dam, and the Carthaginians open another passage on the other side, at which
they issue out with a great number of ships. LII. A Sea Fight with almost equal
loss. LIII. Scipio siezes on the great Platform, or Bulwark before the Walls.
LIVE. He takes and pillages the Camp before Nephere, and makes himself Master of
all the Plain-country of Lybia. LV. He takes the City, and those in the Citadel
submit, save only the Runaways with Asdrubals Wife. LVI. He sends the News to
Rome, and after having given all necessary Orders in Africa, returns to Rome,
which be enters in triumph.

THe Phenicians built Carthage in Africa, fifty years before Troy. It was
Founded by Xorus, and Carchedon, or as the Romans, and indeed the Carthaginians
themselves, will have it, by a Tyrian Lady called Dido, who (her Husband being
privily murdered by Pygmaleon Tyrant of Tire, which was revealed to her in a
Dream) conveyed aboard all the Treasure she could, and shipping her self with
some Tyrians that fled from the Tyranny, came to Lybia, to that place where now
Carthage stands; and upon the people of that Countries refusal to receive them
they demanded for their Habitation only so much Land as they could compass with
an Oxe-hide. This proposition seemed ridiculous to the Africans, and they
thought it a shame to refuse Strangers a thing of so small consequence; besides
they could not imagine how any Habitation could be built in so small a patch of
ground, and therefore that they might have the pleasure to discover the
Phenicians subtilty, they granted their request. Whereupon the Tyrians taking
an Oxe-hide, cut it round about, and made so fine a Thong, that they therewith
encompassed the place where they afterward built the Citadel of Carthage,
which from thence was called Byrsa in Greek signifies a Hide.
Byrsa. Soon after by little and little extending their limits, and becoming
stronger then their Neighbors, as they were much more cunning, they caused
Ships to be built to traffic on the Sea after the manner of the Phenicians, by
which means they built a City adjoining to their Citadel. Their power thus
increasing, they became Masters of Lybia, and the circumadjacent Sea; and at
last making War upon Sicily, Sardinia, and all the Islands of that Sea, and
even in Spain in self, they sent thither Colonies, till at length from so small
a beginning, they formed an Estate comparable in Power to that of the Greeks,
and in Riches to that of the Persians.

But about seven hundred years after the Foundation of Carthage, the Sicily
from the Carthaginians, and after that Sardinia, and at length in the second
Punick War, Spain it self. After which these Nations being in continual War,
the Carthaginians under the command of Hannibal wasted Italy for sixteen years
together, till such time as the Romans commanded by Cornelius Scipio the Elder,
deprived them of their power, taking from them their Ships, and Elephants, and
forcing them to pay Tribute; whereupon a second Peace was concluded between
these two People. This lasted fifty years, after which began the third and last
Punick War, in which the young Scipio being General of the Romans, Carthage was
utterly ruined, and strict prohibition made of Rebuilding it. However, the
Romans founded another Town in a place near adjacent, which they made choice of
for the greater convenience of keeping the Africans in subjection. Now because
in our History of Sicily, we have already set down all the memorable acts of
the Carthaginians there, and in that of Spain, what passed in that Country, as
likewise in that of Hannibal, all the actions of that Captain in Italy, we have
resolved in this Book to write only what was done in Lybia, after the beginning
of that War which succeeded that of Sicily.

When therefore the War of Sicily was ended, the Romans armed Lybia; where
after having reduced some Cities under their obedien^e, they le^t Attilius
Regulus to command the Army. This General gained the Romans two hundred Cities
more, which surrendered to him, being weary of the Government of Carthage; and
pressing forward his Conquests, he spoiled their Territories, even to their
very Gates. After all these losses, which the Carthaginians believed happen^ed
to them only for want of good Generals, they demanded one from the
Lacedaemonians, who sent to them Xantippus. Attilius was now encamped near the
Fens of Lybia, from whence upon Intelligence of this Captain's arrival, he
advanced toward the Enemy; but having taken his march along the Edge of the
Marshes, and in the greatest heats of Summer, his Soldiers were grievously
incommoded by the weight of their Arms, by thirst, heat, labor, and the darts
thrown on them, from the Mountains; yet though they marched in this condition
all the day, coming toward the Evening to a River, which now only separated
the two Armies; he forthwith made his Men pass over, believing it would strike
a terror into Xantippus his Army. The Lacedemonian on the other side, judging
it would be no hard matter to overcome people harassed in that manner, besides
that he had the night to favor him, presently drew up his Army in order and
advanced to charge Attilius. In which he was not deceived, for of thirty
thousand Men that composed the Roman Army, a few only saved themselves in the
City of Aspides, all the rest were slain or taken Prisoners, and the General
himself fell into the Enemies hand. Yet this advantage obstructed not the
Carthaginians, tired with the War, from sending Ambassadors to Rome to demand
Peace, and Attilius himself went upon Parol, to return himself a Prisoner if he
obtained it not. And yet this Captain when he came to confer with the prime Men
of Rome, was so far from inclining them to Peace, that he persuaded them to
continue the War; and without doing ought else returned to Carthage, resolved
to suffer the utmost of their torments, and indeed the Carthaginians shut him
up in a Cask driven full of sharp Nails, where he ended his Life most
miserably. However, this good success was the cause of Xantippus his death, for
the Carthaginians fearing lest all the honor of the Victory would be
attributed to the Lacedaemonians, feigned a gratification of their General,
making him magnificent Presents, and sending him back in Galleys of their own,
but with orders to the Commanders of them, that as soon as they came into the
open Sea, they should throw Xantippus and the Lacedaemonians overboard; so
unhappy a recompense did this valiant Man receive for so brave an Action. And
this is all that was done considerable in the first Punick Wars till such time
as the Carthaginians quitted to the Romans all their Rights in Sicily; Now we
have in our Sicilian History set down in what manner this Treaty was made,
therefore shall say no more here. It will be sufficient to understand that by
this means Peace was concluded between the People of Rome and Carthage.

Afterward the Africans who were subject to the Carthaginians and Sicily, and
the Celtes who served under their pay in that War, complaining that the
promises made them had not been performed, declared War against them, which
obliged those of Carthage to demand aid from the Romans as their friends, from
whom notwithstanding they could obtain no more, save a permission to levy
Soldiers in Italy at their own Charge: for and indeed by the Articles of the
Treaty they could not require so much as that favor; how be it the Romans sent
deputyes into Africa to determine the difference, and make Peace between these
people. But the Africans would by no means hearken to it, offering rather to
submit themselves to their government if they desired it, which however they
would not accept: this was the reason that made the Carthaginians fit out so
powerful a Fleet to revenge themselves on these Revolters, that the Sea being
no longer left open to the Lybians; by which they might fetch in Provisions,
and the land being left untilled by reason of the Wars, they were reduced to
such great scarcity, as enforced them to return under the Carthaginians
obedience.

This mighty Fleet not only pillaged the Lybians but even all they met Rome,
and indeed it was a long time ere these crimes were discovered, and when they
were, the Carthaginians seemed very averse to the giving satisfaction, till
such time that War being by the Romans declared against them they quitted
Sardinia in reparation of this injury. And this Article was added to the first
treaty of Peace. Sometime after the Carthaginians sent an Army into Spain to
reduce it under their obedience, and because they assailed those People
separately, they had already well advanced their Conquests: When the Saguntines
had recourse to the Romans for aid: Hereupon the Carthaginians made a second
Treaty, by which they were bound not to Act any Hostilities beyond the River
Iberus, but this Treaty was soon broken, for Hannibal past that River, and
leaving the Forces in Spain under the Command of other Captains came thundering
into Italy with a Mighty Army. The Romans had at this time in Spain, Publius
Scipio and his brother Cneus Cornelius, who after having gained sundry
Victories, were slain by the Enemy. Those who succeeded them had no better
success, until Scipio the Son of that Publius who was killed in Spain being
commanded thither with an Army, all the world looked upon him as a man sent by
the Order of Heaven, and guided by a Divine Spirit, so great and glorious were
his Actions. At last having gained much Honor and Renown, he delivered up the
Army into their hands whom the Senate had appointed to succeed him.

Being returned to Rome he demanded Commission to pass into Africa with an
Army, promising himself both to oblige Hannibal to quit Italy, and to force
reason from the Carthaginians in their own Country. Many who had the highest
charges in the Commonwealth disliked the project, alleging there was little
appearance of doing any good by sending an Army into Africa, and quitting
Italy, already by the Wars reduced almost to extremity, whilst Hannibal raged
with Fire and Sword, and Hanno was coming to fall on them with great multitudes
of Ligurians and Celtes, But the opposite party argued that it might well be
believed that the Carthaginians who attempted not the Conquest of Italy, but
because they feared nothing at Home, would soon recall Hannibal when they saw
War at their own Doors, this opinion prevailed, but upon condition that Scipio
should make no levies in Italy so long as Hannibal was in Arms, but if any
Volunteers presented themselves he might make use of them as likewise of the
Army of Sicily; they likewise permitted him to take for his passage ten of
their Galleys ready fitted, with all those that he could find in Sicily, yet
without furnishing him with any Money, but what himself could raise among his
private friends, so mean opinion had they of this enterprise which afterward
proved of such mighty importance. But Scipio who seemed carried to Carthage by
some Divine Power, transported himself into Sicily with only about seven
thousand Horse and Foot, out of all which he chose three hundred of the most
strong and comely youth for a guard to his Person; he would not arrive them in
Italy, but as soon as he arrived in Sicily he commanded a like number of the
richest of the Island to appear at a certain place with the fairest Arms and
best Horses they could procure; And as soon as they were come gave them leave
to put other Persons in their places, which being accepted by the Sicilians he
presented to them his three hundred young men commanding them, to give them
their Arms and their Horses, which they willingly consented to, thus, instead
of three hundred Sicilians, Scipio mounted and armed his three hundred
Italians, who could not but give him thanks for such a favor and indeed did
afterward serve him Excellently well in many occasions.

Asdrubal the son of Gisco to assemble Elephants and sent to Mago who was then
raising Forces in Liguria, six thousand Foot, eight hundred Horse and seven
Elephants with Orders forthwith to enter Tuscany.
Hetruria with all the force he could make, hoping to oblige Scipio to quit his
design on Lybia. Mago was not over-quick, in the Execution of these Orders,
whether it were that he could not join with Hannibal, who was far distant, or
that he foresaw a troublesome event of the Enterprise. Asdrubal upon his return
from the Chase of the Elephants, levies upon the Lands of the Carthaginians and
Lybians, six thousand Foot and eight hundred Horse, he buys likewise five
thousand slaves for the Galleys, and the Numidians furnished him with two
thousand Horse, besides some Foreign Mercenary Troops, so that having assembled
an Army composed of sundry Nations, he brought them about two hundred Furlongs
from the City and there exercised and trained them.

N^midia diverse Kings whose Estates were separate, among whom Syphax held the
first degree. Massanissa Son to the King of the Massesulians a Warlike People,
was likewise very considerable, and was withal so comely of person and active
of mind that Asdrubal the son of Gisco one of the principal men of Carthage
desired him for his son in law though he were a Numidian. As soon as the
Marriage was agreed upon, that young Prince went to make War in Spain; but
Syphax who was in love with the Lady, mad that she was engaged to another, with
an Army invades the Carthaginians Lands, and promises Scipio (who came out of
Spain to confer with him) that if he would assault Carthage he would join Arms
with him; which was the reason that the Carthaginians, who knew well of what
importance Syphax would be to them in this War, gave him Masanissa's Mistress
in Marriage without either his or Asdrubals own knowledge; for they were both
together in Spain. That young Prince receiving advice of the affront done him,
so much resented it, that to revenge himself he entered into a secret alliance
with Scipio, which yet could not be kept so private but it came to Asdrubals
knowledge, who though he were much troubled at the injury done to this Lover
and his Mistress, yet he believed he was bound to prefer the public good to
his private resentment, and therefore to make away Masanissa. To which end,
when this Prince was upon return from Spain to take possession of his Fathers
Kingdom, lately dead, he gave him some Horse to accompany him, with Orders to
destroy him, in what manner soever it were; but the King suspecting their
design, withdrew himself privily out of their hands, and went to seize upon his
Fathers Kingdom, which after he had got possession of, he drew together a
flying wing of people accustomed to fight by night as well as by day and to
charge and retreat in a marvelous manner: for so they make war in Numidia,
where the men easily endure hunger, live on herbs instead of bread, and drink
only water, and where the Horses never eat Oats but feed only on Straw and
Grass, and drink but seldom. Masanissa's Army was composed of twenty thousand
men of this temper, with whom he made strange incursions, spoiling the
Neighboring Provinces out of design to keep his men in Exercise. These
preparations made both the Carthaginians and Syphax, who had been accomplices in
the affront put upon the young Prince, believe they were made only to serve
against them, wherefore they resolved to prevent him, making account that after
they had defeated him, they would go meet the Romans. They had a far greater
Army then he, and carried along with them great quantities of Baggage and
Wagons, laden not only with things necessary but voluptuous, on the contrary
Masanissa was in all labor an Example to his Soldiers; Among all his Cavalry
there was no loads either of Provison or Baggage, so that having nothing to
hinder them, sometimes they made a retreat, sometimes they charged the Enemy,
and then again retired into places strong by Situation. If sometimes he
perceived himself pressed too hard upon, he gave order to his people to save
themselves as they best could, and in the mean time kept himself concealed only
with a few, till such time as all returning by day or by night, they were again
assembled at the place by him appointed for their Rendezvous. Nay sometimes it
happened, that he hid himself only with two horsemen in a Cave, about which the
enemy lay encamped, and that without being discovered. And it was indeed his
principal care that the enemy should not know the place of his retreat, that
they might never be able to assail him, but always be forced to stand upon
their own defense, As for provision he gave himself not much trouble, still
furnishing himself by nightly surprises and whether it were Village, Town or
City, he plundered all, dividing the Prey among his Companions. For which
reason many Numidians stocked to him, not for pay, for he had none established,
but for booty which was more worth then pay.

Whilst, Masanissa thus made war against the Carthaginians, Scipio Sicily, so
that having sacrificed to Jupiter and Neptune, he set sail for Africa with two
and fifty long Ships, four hundred Ships of burden, and a great number of
Barks and Shallops: his forces were composed of Sixteen thousand foot and Six
hundred horse, and with them he brought great store of Arms and Engines of War.
Syphax and the Carthaginians having advice of his coming resolved to make a
dissembled peace with Masanissa, and to patch up things with him until such
time as they had defeated Scipio. But well he knew their design, and that he
might pay them in their own Coin, (having first sent advice to Scipio) he comes
to find out Asdrubal with his whole body of horse as if he had been indeed
reconciled. It was near unto Utica that Asdrubal, Syphax and Masanissa were
encamped separately, and Scipio having been driven by the winds on that Coast,
was likewise encamped near unto Asdrubal, who had twenty thousand foot, seven
thousand horse, and twenty seven Elephants. Whether Syphax were afraid, or that
he had a mind to betray all parties, he feigned that his Neighbors had invaded
his Kingdom, and under pretense to go and defend it, left the others.

Scipio in the mean while having reduced some Cities under his obedience, sent
daily out some of his people to skirmish, that he might draw Asdrubal to a
battle, which yet he despaired to do, when Masanissa by night comes secretly to
his Camp, where after some Civilities passed on either side, he advises him to
place the next morning five thousand men in Ambush, about thirty furlongs from
Utica, near the tower of Agathocles, formerly Tyrant of Syracusa; And about
break of day he persuades Asdrubal, to send Hanno who commanded the horse, to
take a view of the Roman forces and throw himself into Utica, lest the enemy
lying so near, those inhabitants should revolt, offering himself to follow and
second him, if Asdrubal thought it convenient. Hanno hereupon took the field
with a thousand chosen Carthaginian horse, and some Lybians, Masanissa with his
Numidians followed: But when they were on the right hand of the Tower, Hanno
with a few of his people having already taken the way toward Utica, a part of
those who lay in Ambush appeared, which gave opportunity to Masanissa to advise
him, whom Hanno had left to command the Carthaginian horse to charge, as if the
Enemy had been but an inconsiderable number, and he himself followed under
pretense of seconding him. The Africans hereupon advancing, the rest of the
Ambush appeared, and now were these unfortunate people enclosed on all sides,
and as well by the Romans as by Masanissa himself cut all in pieces, save only
four hundred which were taken Prisoners. After this defeat he posts after
Hanno, and coming up him as if he had been his friend, arrests him and carries
him prisoner into Scipio's Camp, and afterward exchanged him for his Mother
who was in Asdrubal's hands.

Scipio and Masanissa were joined together, they pillaged the whole Country,
and delivered from bondage those Romans which they found in Fetters, destined
to toil and slavery, and who had been sent thither by Hannibal from Spain,
Sicily and even from Italy it self. Afterward they laid Siege before a great
City called Locha, where they found great difficulties; yet at length it happened
that as they were bringing the Ladders to the Walls, resolved to take it by
Storm, the inhabitants by a Herald demanded that they might have permission to
march out of the Town, with their Arms and Baggage; whereupon Scipio caused the
Retreat to be founded. But the Soldiers angered at the miseries they had
undergone in the siege, would not obey, but scaled the walls, killing all they
met with and sparing neither sex nor age; The General sent away without ransom
all that were saved, and as a punishment of their disobedience, he took away
all the plunder from the Soldiers, and caused those Officers, were the cause
of it, to cast Lots for their lives, in the sight of the whole Army, of whom
three only he condemned to death, to whom fortune was not favorable.

Being returned again to wast the Country, Asdrubal laid a plot Mago who
Commanded his horse, to charge him in the Front, whilst he another way fell in
upon the Rear. The Romans finding themselves thus engaged in the midst of their
Enemies, divided their Army, likewise into two parts, and Scipio and Masanissa
commanding each their body, cut in pieces five thousand Africans, took eighteen
hundred Prisoners and pursued the rest so close, that many of them tumbled
headlong down the steep Rocks.

Some days after Scipio besieged Utica by Sea and by Land, and The Greek calls
them, scyths, and indeed they did call these sort of hooks scyths which they
made use of in the same manner as they did the Rams, only the Rams beat the
Walls inwards, and the Scyths pulled them outward, and for the word rampire
the Greek says, the hides and other coverings, there is a like description in
the seventh Bo^k of Caesar's Commentaries in the Siege of Bourges.
hooks strove to pull down the rampire. The inhabitants on the other side
undermined the besiegers works by passages under ground, tumbling them down as
fast as they raised them; they twined aside the hooks with Ropes, so that they
could take no effect; they opposed to the Rams great Timbers or Booms which
received the blow without endamaging the walls, and when the wind blew toward
the Engines they darted out firebrarnds to burn them. Insomuch that Scipio out
of hopes to take the City by this way of fighting, resolved to carry it by
assault, when Syphax having intelligence of his design advances his Army, and
encamps near Asdrubal. He declares himself a friend to both parties; But it was
only to gain so much time, till those other Ships then building for the
Carthaginians were in a readiness, and the Soldiers raised in Gaul and Liguria
arrived. He would likewise have become a Mediator between the two Estates and
proposed a Treaty, the Conditions of which were, that the Carthaginian Army
should return out of Italy, and the Romans depart out of Lybia and for the rest
that Sicily, Sardinia and the other Isles that had belonged to the
Carthaginians, together with Spain, should remain entire to the people of Rome
making his protestation that if either of the parties refused to consent to
these propositions he would join with the other; In the mean time he used his
utmost endeavors to gain Masanissa, promising to secure to him the Kingdom of
the Massesuliens, and to give him in Marriage which of his three daughters he
desired. His agent that came to Masanissa with these offers brought store of
money along with him, to the end that if he could obtain nothing from him he
might c^rrupt some of his Domestics to Murder him, and accordingly not being
able to gain him, before his return, he gave Money to one of that Princes
followers, who promised him to execute the treason; but when he had received
the sum discovered it to his Master who punished the suborner. Whereupon
Syphax ^eeing all his Artifices fail declared himself openly for the
Carthaginians, and having by means of a Traitor taken a City in the plain
Country called T^olon, where the Romans had great stores of Ammunition and
Provision, he put to the Sword all the Garrison who refused to yield to him.

Syphax returned to the siege of Utica. Asdrubal encamped near to Scipio, and
the Carthaginian fleet came to Anchor directly against the other, to the end
they might fall on all at a time, and so that the Romans being much fewer in
number and separate the one from the other, might not be able to sustain the
power of their enemies. Masanissa having advice of this design from some
Numidians, went and communicated it to Scipio, who without any delay (judging
that if his Army were thus divided they would not be strong enough to stand the
shock) the same night assembled the Council, and when he saw they lost time
without resolving any thing, he thus spoke to his Captains.

As soon as they had all given their approbation of this advice. It is time,
said he, to put in Execution our d^sign as soon as we have made an end of this
conference. Whilst it is night and dark, the fight will seem more dreadful to
our enemies, and we shall find them less prepared; besides the obscurity will
hinder them from being able to succor one another, and in this manner we shall
prevent this design they have of assailing us to morrow. Now as they are three
Armies, that at Sea is distant, and it is not possible to assault ships by
night; Asdrubal and Syphax are not encamped far from each other, Asdrubal is
the Principal Chief, and Syphax barbarous, effeminate and fearful as he is,
will never undertake any thing in the dark; Wherefore let us make an attempt
upon Asdrubal with all our Forces, and place Masanissa in Ambush against
Syphax, if by chance and contrary to our b^lief he should come to assist the
other. Let us march with our foot directly to Asdrubal's Camp and storm it
courageously on all sides, till we have forced his trenches. As for the Horse
since they are not fit for this night service, We will place them on the
Avenues of the enemies Camp, that if by misfortune we be repulsed they may
supp^rt and favor our Retreat, and if we gain the advantage they may p^rsue
and destroy the flyers. Having finished this discourse he gave order to his
Captains forthwith to draw their Soldiers to Arms, whilst he sacrificed to
Courage and Fear, that none might in the night be terrified, but on the
Contrary the whole Army bear themselves courageously in the Enterprise.

Asdrubal's Camp without making the least noise till such time as the Horse had
seized the Aven^es, and the foot were upon the Ditch. Then was there raised
among them a terrible noise of confused voices mixed with Trumpets, the more to
affright the enemy, and therewith falling on, they beat back the guards, filled
up the trench, pulled down the Palisadoes, and some of the boldest pressing
forwards began to set fire on the Tents. The Africans full of con^usion take
their Arms between sleep and waking, and endeavor to draw into a battle, but
the tumult was so great they could not hear the voices of them that Commanded,
and their General himself knew not the cause of the Alarm. The Romans thronged
in among these people whom they found in disorder and ill Armed, setting all
before them on fire, and putting all they met with to the Sword; Their shouts,
the sight of them, and their fierceness, stroke terror into these miserable
people, and the night and the incertainty of the danger increased it, so that
believing all their Camp was absolutely taken, fearing to be involved in the
general ruin they thronged in crowds toward the plain, where they thought
they might be in more security, and every one taking his own way they fell into
the hands of the horsemen, who made a most dreadful slaughter, Syphax heard
this great noise in the night and saw the flames, but stirred not out of his
Camp, only sent some Troops of Horse to assist Asdrubal who falling into
Masanissa's Ambush were all cut of; When at break of day Syphax understood that
Asdrubal was fled, that all his Army were either slain, taken, or ran away,
that his Camp with all his munition of war was in the Romans possession, he
deserted all, retiring farther up into the Contitinent, out of fear lest Scipio
returning from the Chase of Asdrubal should turn his Arms against him, leaving
his Camp and all it is furniture as a prey to Masanissa. Thus at one stroke in
less then a night the Romans took two Camps and routed two Armies beyond
comparison greater than theirs. The vanquishers lost about one hundred
Soldiers, and the vanquished about thirty thousand, besides two thousand four
hundred that were taken Prisoners, and six hundred Horse that came to submit
themselves to Scipio upon his return from the Victory, as for the Elephants
they were all either wounded or killed, Scipio having gained in this battle
great quantity of Arms, Gold, Silver, Ivory and Horses, as well Numidian as
others, and beholding the Carthaginian forces ruined by this great victory,
distributed part of the booty among his Soldiers, sent whatever was most
precious to Rome, and began to Exercise his Army in Labor and Travel, expecting
Hannibal, who was ere long to return from Italy, as was likewise Hanno from
Liguria.

Asdrubal General of the Carthaginians having been wounded Anda, where he
rallyed some Mercenaries, and some fled Numidians, and gave liberty to all
slaves that would bears Arms, and at length understanding that his Citizens had
condemned him to death for his ill Conduct in this War, and that they had made
Hanno the Son of Bomilcar his Successor, he took a resolution to keep himself
with this Army, which consisted of three thousand Horse and eight thousand
Foot, besides a great Number of Criminals that resorted to him, with which he
marched through all places where he had any hopes to get provisions, inuring
them to hardship, having prepared himself to perish if he could not overcome,
which was a long time unknown as well to the Romans as Carthaginians.

Mean while Scipio marched at the head of his Army to the very Carthage, where
he presented battle to the Citizens, but they would not accept it. But Amilcar
their Admiral went with one hundred Ships to the Port where Scipio's Fleet lay,
believing that before Scipio could return he should easily defeat twenty Roman
Galleys with his hundred Ships. But Scipio having intelligence of his Design
sent his Orders before to block up the Ports mouth with Ships of burden, which
they ranged before it at Anchor, in such manner that there were passages left
for the Roman Galleys to Sally out when they saw an advantage, and yet these
great Ships were fastened together by the Yard-arms, and served as a wall
against the enemies. The work was not quite finished at his arrival, but he
soon brought it to perfection. The Carthaginian Ships then coming to assault
the Romans were beaten off by flights of Arrows and Stones, as well from those
in the ships as on shore, and from the walls of the Port, insomuch that most of
them being battered and the Soldiers quite tired they retired in the Evening
without doing any thing. As they made their retreat the Roman Galleys sallied
by the passages which we spoke of before; and when they found they could
execute nothing, they retreated into the Port by the same passages. At length
they brought to Scipio one of the enemies ships, but not a man in her. After
these encounters, it being now winter, each party retired to their Garrisons.

Utica and Carthage being in great necessity plundered those which brought them,
till a recruit of shipping being come to Scipio he opposed the enemy in such
manner that they not daring longer to cruise as they were wont, those Cities
were miserably afflicted with famine. During this same winter Syphax not being
far distant, Masanissa desired of Scipio a third part of the Roman Army, which
being arrived under the Command of Lelius and joined with that Kings Forces,
they together pursued Syphax, who still retreated before them, till such time
as coming to the Banks of a certain River he was forced to fight. The Numidians
according to their Custom cast at first charge showers of Darts at each other,
whilst the Romans covering themselves with their shields still advanced
forward. Syphax seeing Masanissa in the heat of the Battle, transported with
rage makes directly toward him, and Masanissa joyfully runs to meet him: After
they had generously fought as well on one side as the other, at length Syphax
party was routed, and as he was passing the river to save himself his horse
wounded by some accidental stroke, reared and came backward with his Master
into the water. Whereupon Masanissa pressing in, took him and one of his sons
prisoners, both which he sent to Scipio. There were in this fight about two
thousand men slain, on Syphax his party; the Romans lost seventy five, and
Masanissa three hundred, there were likewise four thousand of Syphax men taken
prisoners, of which two thousand five hundred were Massesuliens that had
deserted Masanissa to take part with Syphax, these Masanissa demanded of
Lelius, and having obtained his request caused them to be all cut in pieces.

Syphax, to re-establish Masanissa in his Kingdom by receiving those who
submitted, and forcing those to obey who refused. The inhabitants of Cirtha
sent deputies unto them with Orders to offer them the Royal Palace, and in
particular there came others to Masanissa from Sophonisba wife of the Prisoner
King, to excuse her of that Marriage to which she had been forced. He easily
accepted of her Excuses, but when he returned back to Scipio, left her still at
Cirtha, foreseeing what would happen. When Syphax was brought to Scipio, he was
ask't by him what evil Genius had perverted his spirit, to the violation of his
faith, and despising of those Gods that were witnesses, by deceving the Romans
in taking up arms against them, and following the part of the Carthaginians
their common enemy, after having entreated him as a friend to come into Africa.
To which he answered, It was Sophonisba the daughter of Asdrubal, with whom,
says he, to my ruin I fell in love, she is passionately affected to her
Country, and there is no man can withstand what she desires, though I was your
friend, her Charms made me the friend of her Country, and from that happiness
in which I lived, has precipitated me into this misery, since therefore I am
now at your dispose, and being lost to Sophonisba, ought to fix my self to your
interests; I give you advice to be careful left that woman draw Masanissa from
you, for there is no hopes she should ever favor the Romans such a lover she is
of her Country. These things he said either because they were indeed true, or
out of jealousy to prejudice Masanissa. After this Scipio having an esteem of
Syphax prudence, and because he knew the Country, called him to the Council of
War and asked his advice, as Cyrus had formerly done with Croesus King of
Lydia. Lelius being come and assuring him of what had been before told him
concerning Sophonisba, Scipio required Masanissa to deliver her into his hands,
which he seeming averse to do, declaring what had passed between him and that
woman, Scipio urged it with more rigor, telling him he should not think to
withhold by force any part of that spoil which belonged to the people of Rome,
that he ought first to present her, and afterward request her back if he
thought convenient. Whereupon he departed with some Romans to deliver
Sophonisba into their hands, but first he posted to her himself alone, and
giving her a cup of poison, told her there was but this choice, either to drink
that, or be carried Captive to Rome, and without saying word more remounted his
horse and returned: She having showed the Cup to her Nurse and entreated her
not to mourn her death, since thus she died gloriously, presently drunk up the
poison. The Romans being come Masanissa exposed the body to their view, and
after having given it a funeral worthy a Queen, he returned to wait on Scipio,
who highly praised him, and to comfort him for the loss of an evil woman,
crowned him for the Victory gained over Syphax, and made him most Magnificent
presents. As for Syphax he being carried to Rome, some were of opinion they
ought to pardon a man, had served them so well in Spain, others judged that he
ought to be punished the rather, for having revolted from his friends, but
whilst these things were in debate he died of a distemper occasioned by grief.

When Asdrubal had well excercised his Army, he sent a Messenger Hanno General
of the Carthaginians Army to entreat him to accept him as a Companion in that
charge, and withal to tell him that there were some Spaniards in Scipio's Army,
who might be corrupted by money and promises to set on fire the Roman Camp, and
there he would not fail to be ready at the time appointed, if the General
thought it convenient: Hanno having received this advice, though he designed to
deceive Asdrubal, yet resolved to make use of it, and to that end sent one of
his people into Scipio's Camp with good quantity of Silver; This man shelters
himself there as a Runaway and not being suspected by any one, corrupted many,
and after they had set a day for putting their design in execution, he returns
to Hanno, who presently sends him to Asdrubal, but as Scipio sacrificed the
Aruspices having advertised him to beware of fire, he gave order to one of his
Domestics to take care to see the fires put out in all places, where such an
accident might be feared. He continued for some days the same sacrifices, and
still the entrails threatened him with the same misfortune, which troubled him
much and made him resolve to discamp, but the plot was in this manner
discovered. A Certain Roman Knight had a Spanish slave who suspecting his
companions had some mischievous design, feigned himself of the party, and by
that means having gained knowledge of the whole enterprise, discovered it to
his Master, his Master brought him to Scipio, who causing the guilty wretches
to be siezed on, put them all to death, and made their bodies be thrown out of
the Camp. Hanno who was not far off having news of it, came not to the place
appointed. Asdrubal who knew nothing of it, came, but seeing there so many dead
bodies, suspecting what had happened, retired. Hanno took hence an occasion to
criminate him, and to beget an ill opinion of him in the minds of the
Soldiery, giving out that he was come expressly to surrender himself to Scipio,
but that he refusing to accept him he was retreated, and by this Calumny much
increased the hatred the Carthaginians bore him.

Amilcar made an assault upon the Roman Fleet, took a Galley and six ships of
burden; but Hanno having made an attempt upon those that besieged Utica was
repulsed and forced to a swift retreat. Scipio however tired with the length of
that siege raised it without more ado, and caused his Engines to be carried
before Hypone, where finding no better success he burnt them as useless, and
took the field drawing thereby some Countries to his party, and pillaging
others. Insomuch that the Carthaginians astonished at so many losses and
disasters, chose Hannibal General, and sent away ships for him, that he might
make all the have he could for Africa, and in the mean time they sent deputies
to Scipio to treat of peace, hoping either to obtain it, or at least gain time
enough for Hannibals return. Scipio grants them truce, and having caused
sufficient victuals to be provided for his Army, gives them leave to send
Ambassadors to Rome to treat the peace with the Senate and people of Rome. When
they came thither they were received as enemies, for they lodged them without
the City, and when they had audience, no other proposition was made to them but
to crave pardon. One part of the Senators declaimed against the perfidiousness
of the Carthaginians, the breach of so many treaties, the mischiefs Hannibal
had done to the people of Rome and their allies as well in Italy as Spain. But
others remonstrated that the Romans had more need of peace then the
Carthaginians, seeing Italy was almost ruined by so many Wars, besides there
was much reason to fear so many Fleets and Armies being ready to pour upon
Scypio at one instant, Hannibal going out of Italy; Mago out of Liguria, and
Hanno being already at Carthage. Upon all which the Senate not coming to any
agreement: sent the two opinions to Scipio to examine, with full Authority to
act whatever he thought most advantageous for the good of the Commonwealth: he
concluded a peace of which the Articles were, That the Carthaginians should
recall Mago out of Liguria, that for the future they should entertain no foreign
Soldiers under their pay, That they should have no more then thirty long
ships, That they should not extend their Dominions farther then the place
called the Punick ditch. That they should deliver up all Captives and Runaways,
and that within a limited time they should bring sixteen hundred Talents into
the public Treasure. To Masanissa likewise they granted by this Treaty, that
he should enjoy not only the Country of the Massesuliens, but likewise all he
had Conquered of Syphax his Dominions. These Articles being agreed upon,
Deputies from Carthage went to Rome, to swear before the Consuls to keep them
inviolable, and Commissioners went from Rome to Carthage to receive the Oath of
the Carthaginian Magistrates. This peace thus sworn, the people of Rome gave
Masanissa as an acknowledgment of his fidelity, and the services he had done
them, a Crown of Gold, a Cup of Gold, a Chariot of Ivory, a Cloak of Purple, a
Robe after the Roman Fashion, a Horse trapped with Gold, and a complete Suit of
Armor.

In the mean time Hanniba^ sets sail for Carthage, much against Carthage, whom
he knew distrustful of their Magistrates, and headlong in their Counsels, and
believing the peace not yet concluded, or that if it were it would not last
long, he lands at Adrumetum. As soon as he was on shore he sends all about to
seek for Corn, gives Order to buy horses, Allies himself with the Prince of the
Areacides who are a Nation of Numidia. He causes to be shot to death with
Arrows, four thousand Horsemen that had formerly served Syphax, afterward
Masanissa, and now at last came to offer themselves to him, because he had a
suspicion of them, but their Horses he divided among his own people. Another
Prince named Mesetulus came likewise to join with him with Vermina one of the
Sons of Syphax, who yet held a great part of his fathers Kingdom; Moreover he
siezed on some of the Cities belonging to Masanissa partly by surrender, and
partly by force, and Nar^e he took by surprise in this manner: being in want of
provisions he sent to them as to his friends till having found an opportunity
he caused a great many of his people to enter Armed only with Daggers under
their Coats, with Orders not to offer any affront to the Merchants till they
heard the noise of the Trumpet, but then to kill all they met, and make
themselves Masters of the Gates, thus was this City taken; On the other side,
though the peace was so lately made, Scipio yet upon the place, and the
Carthaginians Deputies not gone from Rome, yet some ships laden with provision
for the Romans (having by storm been driven into the Port of Carthage) the
Common People pillaged them and put the Mariners in Irons, notwithstanding all
the threats of the Senate against this seditious rabble, and all the
prohibition made against violating a Peace they had so lately sworn. They cried
out to excuse themselves, that the treaty was not just, and that they were more
apprehensive of famine then of any danger could arrive by the breach of the
peace. Though Scipio were much offended at this action; yet he would not revive
the war, having once made peace: only he sent to demand satisfaction by the way
of Justice as of friends that had forgot their duty, but the people would needs
have arrested those who came on the behalf of the Romans, till such time as
their deputies were returned from Rome. But Hanno the Great and Asdrubal
Surnamed the Great rescued them out of the hands of the people, and sent them
back on two Galleys which they fitted out, of which some gave notice to
Asdrubal Admiral of the Fleet, who then rode at Anchor near the Promontory of
Apollo, persuading him to watch the passage of those Galleys, and set upon
them, which he so violently performed that two of the Roman deputies were slain
with arrows, and the others almost overpressed with showers of Darts, with much
difficulty saved themselves in the Port where their ships lay, and had they not
nimbly leapt from one of the Galleys which was already grapled with by the
enemy, they had without doubt been taken prisoners. When news of this came to
Rome the Deputies of Carthage, who were still in that City to complete the
treaty, were Commanded by the Senate to depart immediately out of Italy as
enemies of the Republic, whereupon they took ship to return to Carthage, but
were driven by storm to the place where Scipio lay encamped. his Admiral took
them, and sent to him to know what should be done with them, Nothing, said he,
of what the Carthaginians have done, and so without any more ado they were sent
home. The Ancients of Carthage (that is to say a body of the most prudent and
honest men) hearing of this Excellent goodness of Scipio's and comparing the
injury they had done to the Romans with the favor they had received, began to
declaim against the rashness of their fellow Citizens, and to Counsel them they
would yet observe the treaty, which might still be done if they asked Scipio
pardon for their fault, and submitted to pay a fine, but the people already
animated against the Senate by reason of the miseries of the war which they
imputed to the ill Conduct of that Noble body, and set on likewise by some
seditious spirits suffered themselves to be transported with vain hopes, and
caused Hannibal to advance with his Army.

Asdrubal with those forces he had to their assistance. Whereupon Asdrubal was
by the Senate absolved of those crimes he stood charged with, having first
consigned over his Army to Hannibal. Yet he durst not publicly show himself in
the City for fear of the people, but kept concealed in the house of one of his
friends. Mean while Scipio caused his Fleet to lie before Carthage that he
might hinder all provision coming by Sea, and the inland could furnish no
great quantity, by reason that during the war they could not till the ground.
About the same time happened a fight near Zama between Hannibal and Scipio's
horse, in which the Romans had the advantage. After which happened several
skirmishes for some days together, but of little consequence, till such time as
Scipio understanding that Hannibal wanted provisions, and that he expected a
supply, caused a Tribune called Thermus to march in the Night to intercept
them, who having taken an advantageous post, upon an eminence near unto a
strait, they must of necessity pass, slew four thousand Africans, took as many
Prisoners and brought the Conway to Scipio. In so much that Hannibal beholding
himself reduced to an extreme necessity, and considering what he should do in
such a conjuncture, resolved to send messengers to Masanissa to represent to
him that he had been bred in Carthage, and had there passed a considerable part
of his life, entreating him to labor a peace between Scipio and him by
beseeching him to believe that if any thing of ill had happened, the fault was
to be imputed to the people, or to some particular men more foolish then the
people, Masanissa remembering that he had indeed been bred and brought up in
that City whose Majesty he still reverenced, and where he likewise had a great
many particular friends, besought Scipio with so good a grace that he consented
the Treaty should be renewed, on condition that the people of Carthage would
restore to the Romans the ship, men, and provisions, they had taken, or pay for
what could not be restored at the price, whereas Scipio should value them, and
for a fine deposite one thousand talents. These Conditions being agreed on, a
Truce was granted till such time as the Articles should be carried to Carthage.
Thus Hannibal saved himself beyond his own hopes. When the Senate of Carthage
saw this agreement they approved it, and entreated the people to give their
consent by representing to them the long train of miseries would else ensue,
and the deep necessities they were in of men, money, and provisions. But the
Populacy (as it is the Custom of the Vulgar) believed that the Chiefs in making
this peace labored only their private interest, that being fortified with the
friendship of the Romans they might become more powerful in the Country. That
Hannibal had now done the same thing Asdrubal did before, who having first by
night betrayed his Army would afterward have surrendered himself to Scipio,
having for that end approached his Camp, and lay now concealed in the City.
These discourses raised a Tumult among the people with terrible cries and
Exclamations, and many of them leaving the assembly ran presently to find out
Asdrubal, who a little before was retired into the Sepulcher of his Father,
having first poisoned himself. But they drew him thence dead as he was, cut off
his head, and setting it on a Pike carried it through the City. Thus was
Asdrubal first banished without having deserved it, afterward Hanno accused
him falsely, and at last his own Citizens forced him to become his own
Murderer, and when he was dead exposed his body to a thousand indignities.

After having treated Asdrubal in this manner they forthwith Hannibal to break
the truce and make war with Scipio, ordering him to give him battle as soon as
he could, because of the scarcity they were in. As soon as the truce was broke,
Scipio presently took a great City called Partha, and that done went and
encamped near Hannibal, who immediately discamped: He had three several times
sent spies into the Roman Camp, who being discovered and taken, Scipio would
not put them to death, according to the Law's of war, but made them be carried
through the whole Camp, that they might view his Stores, his Engines of War,
and his Army imbattelled, and so without doing them any injury sent them back
to Hannibal to give him an account of what they had seen. The Carthaginians
surprised at this manner of proceeding, demanded a conference, which being
granted, he told Scipio; That the people of Carthage could not perform that
treaty because of the too great sum of money demanded of them, but if he would
please to remit any thing of that demand, and that the people of Rome would
content themselves with Sicily, Spain, and the Islands they now held, the peace
would become both firm and lasting. To which Scipio answered, That Hannibal
would be fully recompensed for having by flight quitted Italy, if those
propositions were agreed to, adding not a word more, but the forbidding him to
send any further Messages. So after some threats on one part and the other,
each retired to his Camp. There was not far distant a City called Cilla, near
which was a rising ground, very proper to encamp in, Hannibal having designed
to lodge himself there, sends his vanguard before to possess it, whilst he
followed with the rest of the Army. But finding Scipio had first siesed it, he
was forced to pass away all that night in the midst of a dry plain, sorely
pestered to sink wells, where after all the Army had wrought hard, and thrown
up mountains of sand, their mighty pains was recompensed with the finding but
of one well, and that of troubled water, of which the Soldiers drank greedily,
without eating, or any other convenience. There were likewise many of them
stood in Arms all night. Scipio, who knew all this well enough, was not wanting
to assail them next morning harrassed as they were with marching, thirst and
want of sleep. It grieved Hannibal to the heart to see himself forced to fight
thus unseasonably, yet he saw plainly that if he staid there, he should be
intollerably straightened for want of water, and if he drew off, his retreat would
increase the enemies courage, who would certainly fall on in his rear, for
these reasons therefore he resolved to fight, and presently drew into Battalia
fifty thousand men and fourscore Elephants.

Baleares. In his main body he placed the Carthaginians and Africans, and in
his rear those Italians that had followed his fortune, in whom he had great
confidence because they dreaded to be overcome. His Cavalry made his two Wings.
As for Scipio he had three and twenty thousand foot, and fifteen hundred horse
as well Italians as Romans; be^ides Masanissa had a stout body of Numidian
horse; and another Prince of that Country, called Dachamas, had six hundred
auxiliary horse. He divided his Army into three battalia's, Vanguard, Main-body
and Rear-guard, as Hannibal had done his, save only he kept his battalia's at a
more open Order, that the horse upon occasion might have passage between. In
the front of every battalia he placed men with stakes the most part Armed with
Iron at the ends, and about two Or a Yard.
Cubits long, that they might better repulse the Elephants by striking them at
hand with these sort of Truncheons, giving Order to the foot to avoid the shock
of those great beasts by opening to the right and left, when they made at them,
and to pursue them incessantly when they were past with darts and arrows, or
hamstring them with their Swords, if they could get so near them. Having thus
ordered his foot, he disposed the Numidian Cavalry on his two wings, because
the Numidian horses are accustomed to the smell and sight of Elephants;
wherefore fearful lest the Italian horses should be frightened, he placed them
in the Rear-guard that they might charge between the bodies, and support the
infantry whilst they fought against the Elephants, and to every horseman he
gave a light Armed Soldier, and great quantity of darts, wherewith to chase
away those Monsters if they came upon them. His Cavalry being thus disposed, ^e
gave the Command of the right wing to Lelius, of the left to Octavius, and
himself took Charge of the main battle. Hannibal did the same, and as if these
two great Captains had acted by the same Spirit, they each kept near their
persons a strong body of horse, ready to move on all sides to the relief of
those, stood in need. Hannibal's party consisted of four thousand horse.
Scipio's only of two thousand, besides those three hundred Italians to whom he
had given Arms in Sicily. Both Armies thus drawn up for battle, each General
went through the Ranks to encourage his people. Scipio publicly invoked the
Gods who having been witnesses of their Treaties, had been affronted by the
Carthaginians as often as they had violated them, exhorting his Soldiers not
so much to consider the Number of their enemies as their own proper Virtue,
which had already made them Victorious over the same enemies in the same
province, remonstrating to them that though their having always overcome,
should not clear all their doubts of the success of this battle; Yet the
Africans having been always beaten would make them despair. Thus did Scipio
hearten up his men encouraging them not to think of the smalness of their
Number. Hannibal on the other side desired his to remember those brave acts
they had done, and the noble victories they had gained not only against the
Numidians, but throughout all Italy, setting forth at the same time the
inconsiderable number of their enemies, and exhorting them so to act that the
greater number might not be beaten by the less, nor the natural inhabitants of
the Country shamefully forced to yield to strangers. In short both Generals set
forth with the most pressing arguments they could invent, the consequences of
that battle. Hannibal told his men that they now disputed whether Carthage and
with it all Africa should command, or be for ever hereafter inslaved. And
Scipio let the Roman Soldiers know that if they suffered themselves to be
vanquished they had no place of retreat, but if they gained the victory the
advantages reaped by it would be increase of the Roman Empire, the end of their
labors, the so much desired leave of returning into their Country, and with all
immortal glory.

These Orations ended, the Carthaginian Trumpets sounded a charge, and Scipio
caused the Rear guard of Italian horse, and the Soldiers lightly armed to
advance to the relief of his foot. And because the horse were fearful of those
beasts, he commanded his horsemen to alight, and with their darts charge the
Elephants, who had caused a great disorder, and to oblige them by his own
Example, himself alighted first and wounded an Elephant that came toward him,
which so heartned the Romans, that discharging their darts on all sides they so
wounded those creatures that they forced them to retreat like the others. These
beasts thus driven out of the battle they had nothing now to encounter but men
and horses. The right wing Commanded by Lelius had put to flight the Numidians
that opposed them, after that Masanissa had wounded their Prince Macinta, but
Hannibal coming speedily to their assistance renewed the fight. In the left
wing where Octavius had to do with Gauls and Ligurians, they fought with equal
fortune. Scipio sent thither the Tribune Therinus with some chosen troops; but
Hannibal having reinforced his left wing speeds away to the relief of the Gauls
and Ligurians, taking with him all his Carthaginians and Africans, which Scipio
perceiving was forced to do the like, and made his main battle advance. And now
these two mighty Captains fighting in person, the Soldiers encouraged by the
sight of them did acts incredible. All feared to yield, all fought with a
wonderful alacrity, exhorting, exciting and encouraging one another. At length
victory having long hung in equal Balance, the Generals moved with compassion
to see their Soldiers out of breath, fiercely charged each other, the sooner
to put an end to the battle; at the same instant both discharged their darts,
Scipio's stuck in Hannibal's buckler, and Hannibal's hurt Scipio's horse, who
feeling himself wounded overthrew his Master to the ground. But Scipio nimbly
remounting on another, discharges a second dart at Hannibal, which took no
better effect then the former, save only it wounded a horseman that sat near
his Captain. Mean while Masanissa having notice comes in, and the Roman
Soldiers seeing their General perform not only the part of a Captain but of a
Private Soldier, fighting for them, gave so home a Charge that they put the
enemy to flight. As they followed the pursuit, Hannibal gained the front of his
own men, endeavoring all he could to stop them and lead them back to fight,
but in vain. At last since from them he could obtain nothing, he has recourse
to those Italians he had brought with him, who yet kept firm in their Post, and
makes them advance toward the enemy, hoping whilst the Romans were eager in
pursuit of the flyers he might the easier put them in disorder, but they
perceiving his design stopped as if a retreat had been sounded and drew up into
order. The horse had now left them and their darts were spent, so they were
forced to close with the enemy and come to Swords point. And now was a terrible
slaughter nothing to be heard but the groans of dying men and the shouts of
those that slew them, till such time as the enemy were totally routed, the
victory no longer doubted of, and Hannibal, had betaken himself to flight. As
he fled he perceived some Numidian horse still in a body, to them he goes and
begs them not to forsake him, and as soon as they had given him their word
turns upon his pursuers with great hopes of defeating them. They were by chance
Massesuliens, so that Masanissa and Hannibal came to fight hand to hand. In
this Combat Hannibal received a blow on his buckler, and at the same instant
slew his enemies horse. Masanissa getting up and seeking for Hannibal. on foot
slew with a dart a horseman that encountered him, and received in his buckler,
which was of Elephants skin, several darts, one of which he snatches out and
throws at Hannibal, but by misfortune another horseman received the stroke and
lost his life, and as he strove to pull out another he was wounded in the arm,
and forced for a while to retire out of the fight. Scipio hearing of this
rancounter was in fear for Masanissa, but as he was going to relieve him, he
found that having bound up his wound he was returning to the fight mounted on a
fresh horse, so the battle being renewed, they fought courageously on either
side, when Hannibal perceiving on a little hill, a squadron of Spaniards and
Gauls, spurred toward them to bring them into his assistance, which gave
occasion to the others unacquainted with the reason of his departure, and
believing he fled, to become quite heartless, and betake themselves to a
disorderly flight, not after Hannibal, but every one where fortune led him. The
Romans seeing the Enemy thus dispersed thought themselves assured of the
victory, and began without any order to follow the chase; for they knew not
Hannibal's design, who presently returning to the Charge at the head of those
Spaniards and Gauls, Scipio was forced to recall his men again from the pursuit,
and speedily put them in order to receive the Enemy, whom they had no great
difficulty to overcome, being a far greater number then those descended from
the hill. Hannibal seeing this last push had no better success then the former,
and that all was absolutely lost, fled likewise, pursued by many, and among
others by Masanissa, who notwithstanding the pain and inconveniency of his
wound followed him close at the heels, out of the passionate desire he had to
take him prisoner and present him to Scipio, but by the favor of the night
which came on he escaped his hands, and at last accompained only with twenty
horse, which were all could follow him, gained as far as a City called Tunis,
where he met several horsemen as well Brutians as Spaniards who had there saved
themselves after the defeat, but knowing the Spaniards to be rash and
Barbarous, and the Brutians to be Italians of the same Country with Scipio, he
was fearful left to obtain pardon for the fault, they had committed in bearing
arms against their Country, they should deliver him up to his enemy, and so
departed secretly by night, accompanied only with one horseman in whom he had
confidence, so that having rode in two days and two nights almost three
thousand furlongs he arrived at Adrumetum which is a Sea-town where finding
some troops he had left as guards to his stores of Corn, and drawing together
forces from the circumadjacent places, and rallying all those had escaped from
the battle, he began again to make preparation of Arms and Engines of War. But
Scipio having gained this noble victory, burnt with his own hands, according to
the Custom of the Roman Generals, those spoils of the enemy that were of small
moment, sending the choicest and most precious to Rome, ten talents of Gold,
two thousand five hundred talents of Silver, many movables of Ivory, whole
Ships loading of Prisoners, the most part Gentlemen, with Lelius to carry the
new's. The remainder he sold, distributing the money among the Soldiers, giving
Military rewards to such as had served him well, particularly a Crown to
Masanissa; and now being become absolute Master of the field he made himself
Master of the Cities. Such was the success of this battle fought in Africa
between Hannibal and Scipio, who never before had dealings with each other. The
Romans lost two thousand five hundred men, Masanissa somewhat more, there died
of the enemies five and twenty thousand, besides eight thousand eight hundred
taken prisoners, three hundred Spaniards that yielded to Scipio, and eight
hundred Numidians to Masanissa.

Now before the News of this Victory was brought either to Rome or Carthage,
the Carthaginians had writ to Mago, who was then raising forces in Gaul with
Orders to make an irruption into Italy if it were possible, or else to come
over into Africa with such power as he might have raised, but these Letters
being intercepted and brought to Rome, were the occasion of the Senates sending
recruits of foot and horse, with Ships and Money to Scipio, who after this
defeat made Octavius March with his Army toward Carthage, whither he designed
to follow with his Fleet. But when the Carthaginians understood that Hannibal
was defeated, they sent their Deputies to meet Scipio, the chief of which were
Hanno the great, and Asdrubal furnamed the Goat, they went in a passage Boat,
on the Prow of which they planted a Caduceus, and at their arrival stretched
forth their hands joined toward the Conqueror, like people imploring mercy.
Scipio ordered them to meet him at the Camp, where being seated in the Tribunal
he caused them to be brought to his presence, whither being come they cast
themselves on their knees weeping, till being raised up by the Ushers, and
having permission to speak, Asdrubal began in this manner.

Most certain it is Sirs, that neither Hanno whom you see here, nor my self,
nor any person of wisdom in all Cart^age, are guilty of those crimes wherewith
you charge us, for when our unhappy Citizens oppressed by famine injured those
sent from you, we opposed our selves, and sent them back to you. Nor ought the
people of Carthage, in general to be accused, who sent their deputies, and of
whom the most part signed the Articles with joy, but as the Populacy suffer
themselves to be easily seduced to their own ruin, whatever is pleasing to the
multitude is usually preferred before that which is most profitable. We our
selves have had experience of it, for what ever propositions we have made, some
private calumniators, who never had the boldness to discover their thoughts in
our presence, have hindered us from being believed. Wherefore Sirs, Judge not of
our affairs, by what is practiced in Rome, for your discipline in your Counsels
is extremely different from ours, and if by chance our crime seem to some
greater then the calamity that constrained it, let him consider that hunger is
a pinching necessity, and that that was the principal cause of our misfortunes:
for had we not been pressed by it, it is not to be believed that the same
people who had but newly demanded peace, offered so much money, parted with the
greatest patt of their Dominion, sworn to observe the Articles of Peace, and
sent to that purpose deputies to your Senate, should be violently hurried on to
offend you, without expecting the return of those they had sent. But we must
attribute this accident to the anger of some God, and to the tempest which cast
your provisions into our Port; in a time when almost all Carthage was ready to
perish with hunger, hunger that pernicious counselor against another goods,
especially in the breasts of people wanting all things, 'twould be certainly a
piece of injustice to punish with severity what this miserable multitude have
done. Yet if you will impute this fault rather to our malice then our misery,
we confess it, we crave pardon for it. Were we innocent, we would endeavor to
justify our selves, but being criminals we supplicate for grace, hoping that
you who are in the top of prosperity will the easier grant it, if you consider
that humane affairs are subject to strange reverses, and that those who were
yesterday in a condition to do injuries, are to day under a necessity of
imploring mercy. You may behold, Sirs, a fresh example in the unhappy City of
Carthage, she that for seven hundred years togehas been the greatest and most
powerful City of all Africa, powerful in Ships, in Silver, in Elephants, in
Foot, in Horse, She whose Dominion extended over the Lybians, and over many
Cities and Isles by Sea and Land, in short She that has so long been the Rival
of your Empire, Now no more places her hope in her Ports, nor in her Ships, nor
in her Horse, nor in her Elephants, nor in her Provinces, which she has quitted
to you, but she expects her safety from your mercy, You that she has heretofore
so ill treated. You will do an Action worthy of your selves, if considering the
deplorable Estate to which we are reduced, you will receive a moderation in the
midst of your prosperity, and having regard as well to your own accustomed
generosity, as to the ancient felicity of Carthage, you will in our misery make
such a use of the favors of fortune, as may not displease the immortal Gods,
but that by your clemency you will acquire a glorious name, that can never die
whilst there is memory among men. Nor need you hereafter more fear the
perfidiousness of Carthage, the chastisement they receive for their past faults
will be an eternal warning to them: and as the good Counsel they had given
them, but despised, had kept them in bounds of duty, so now they have been
faulty, repentance joined with the punishment inflicted on them, will prevent
their falling again, and whilst you inveigh against the cruelty and injustice
of the Carthaginians, you should be careful lest you fall into the same crimes,
for as poverty often occasions men to sin, those who are in prosperity have
opportunity to exercise their humanity and goodness, thus it is of concern both
to the honor, and the advantage of your Commonwealth, rather to preserve so
great a City, than to destroy it; but you may act as you please: for our parts
we have but two things to oppose in our defense, the Ancient Dignity of the
Carthaginian Empire, and that Noble Moderation you have used to the rest of the
World, which joined with your Valor, has raised you to so high a Sovereignty:
And for what concerns the conditions of the Treaty, we only desire Peace; for
Terms we have none to propose, leaving them wholly to your Discretion.

Asdrubal finished his Oration with tears: upon which Scipio causing the
Deputies to retire, held a Council about this important Affair with the
principal Officers of the Army; and after a long deliberation, caused the
Carthaginians to return, to whom he spoke in this manner:

You are not worthy of pardon, after having so often violated your Faith, and
having, as a complement of all, so evilly treated our Deputies: A truth so
manifest, that by your own confession, there is no punishment whatsoever, which
you deserve not, for the expiation of your crimes: but it is needless to
reproach you with faults your selves confess. And now you have recourse to
prayers: you, that had you gained the Victory, would have rooted out even the
Roman Name. We have not treated you at the like rate, but sent back your Agents
from our City, at the same time you had injured ours, and violated the Treaty:
and those very Agents being by the Sea cast into our Camp, and War already
declared, I sent back to you without offering them the least wrong. Therefore
in the condition your affairs are reduced to, you cannot believe we will order
you any thing advantageous. I will therefore tell you my thoughts, if the
Senate approve them, if they think it convenient, we will yet grant you peace,
on condition you surrender into the hands of the people of Rome all your Ships
of War, save only ten, and all your Elephants: That you restore all you have
taken from us, or the value of what cannot be found; in the estimation of
which, if any difference arise, I will be Judge: That you likewise deliver up
all the Captives and Fugitives, and all those Italian Soldiers, who followed
Hannibal into Africa, which must be performed within a month after the day of
publication of the Peace: That within two months you cause Mago to return out
of ^iguria: That you withdraw all Garrisons out of such Cities as are beyond
the Punick Ditch, and send them back their Hostages: That besides all this you
pay us yearly for fifty years, two hundred and fifty Euboick Talents: That for
the future you entertain no Soldiers into your pay, either out of Gaul or
Liguria: That you make not any war upon Masanissa, or any of our Allies, nor
permit any Carthaginian to bear Arms against them; then shall your City and
Territory remain free to you within the Punick Ditch, limited by the same
bounds you possessed when I entered Africa, provided you put a just value on the
friendship of the people of Rome; and if occasion requires, assist them with
your Forces by Sea and Land. If the Senate of Rome approve these propositions,
the Roman Army shall depart out of Lybia, within fifty days after the
ratification; to perfect which, if you will send Deputies to Rome, I will in
the mean time grant you Truce, and you shall deliver me in Hostage one hundred
and fifty of such of your Children as I shall choose, and pay me a thousand
Talents for the Armies entertainment; besides such Provisions as you shall
furnish. As for the Hostages I will return them so soon as the Peace is
ratified.

The Deputies carried back this answer to Carthage, where after many
deliberations, the principal Men of the City advised the accepting of these
Conditions, left whilst they made a difficulty of quitting part of what they
possessed, they should run in danger of loosing all. But the multitude, who
ordinarily consider more what is taken from them, than what is left them,
opposing it, thinking it mighty strange that the Elders of Carthage should in a
public famine, choose rather to send Provisions to the Roman Soldiers, than to
their own Citizens; and in effect, they went to seek out every particular
Senator, threatening them all to plunder and fire their Houses. At last it was
agreed on to send for Hannibal into the Council, who having gathered together
six thousand Foot, and five hundred Horse, was retired into the City of
Marthame. He comes, and though the most moderate men were fearful lest that
warlike Men should absolutely pervert the people; yet by a grave Discourse he
made, he persuaded to Peace; but the Populacy incensed, and insolent railed no
less at him than they had done at others, and continued their threatenings, till
such time as all the Nobility despairing of the affairs of the City, left it;
one part returning to Masanissa, and the other to the Roman Army. Now the
remainder of the people having intelligence that Hannibal had stored up great
quantities of Corn in a certain place --

-- That is unjust, and looks like a malicious emulation, and it seems in
effect, There wants here a leaf in the Original, so that this which follows
seems part of an Oration made by a Roman Senator in open Senate, while Peace
was debated.
Scipio himself doubted of it; when opening his thoughts to us, he adds, That
he would grant peace to the Carthaginians, even though we should refuse it: And
indeed, there is reason to believe, that being upon the place he should see
clearer, and have a more exact knowledge of affairs than we possibly can. In
short, if we slight his advice, we affront that great Captain, who out of his
passionate love to his Country, always counseled the carrying of the War into
Africa; and when he could not obtain an Army from us, raised one at his own
expense, and has succeeded more happily than we could hope: So that it
strangely amazes me, to see you now so obstinate, and with such violence to
press forward this War to extremity, which in the beginning you undertook with
so much coldness and negligence. If any of the opposers of Peace grant all
this, and shall only found their advice upon a fear, left the Carthaginians
should now again, as they have done formerly, violate the Treaty in question. I
answer, that there is more reason to believe, that having had experience of the
miseries their infidelity has involved them in, and being persuaded, as they
are, that all these misfortunes have fallen upon them, only for having violated
the Religion of their Oaths, they will for the future keep sacred that Faith
they shall swear to. And to me it appears an evident contradiction to say, that
the Carthaginians are contemptible, because they have no more power, and at the
same time to fear that they are in a capacity of revolting. Besides, it is much
easier for us to hinder the growth of power, than totally to ruin them; for if
we press them to extremities, we shall have to deal with people, whom despair
will make capable of any thing: but if you grant them Peace, the fear of
falling into the like danger, will preserve them within the bounds of Duty: but
besides all this, they will have persecutors enough, though we concern not our
selves; for not any of their Neighbors, but remembering the Pride and Tyranny
of their Empire, will maintain against them an irreconcilable War: after all
this, we have Masanissa (who has been our most faithful friend in all
adventures) still upon the place, who will continually cast an eye on their
actions, and be always ready to oppose whatever they dare attempt. But if any
one not considering all these reasons, has regard only to the glorious success
of Scipio's Arms, and promises himself the like in the continuance of this War:
let him remember the inconstancy of Fortune, and that no man living can assure
himself to have it at all times favorable. But granting we take the City of
Carthage, what shall we do with it? shall we utterly ruin and raze it, because
they took some of our Corn and Shipping, which they are ready to pay for with
interest? Certainly we shall not, lest we incurr the indignation of Gods and
Men. Shall we give it to Masanissa? No, for though he be our friend, we must
not raise him above measure: Much better may we make use of those contracts he
shall have with the Carthaginians, to the advantage of the Commonwealth.
Perhaps we might draw some Treasure thence, but the Armies that must be
maintained will waste it: for who can doubt but there must be great Forces kept
up for the guard of a Country encompassed with so many barbarous Nations. We
may likewise send thither a Colony of Italians; but upon terms to hold eternal
War with the people of Numidia, or if those we send shall in process of time
make themselves Masters of all these Nations, it may happen that having
conquered so great a Country, without comparison more excellent than ours,
their power may render them not only suspected, but even terrible to our
selves. And this in my opinion, was Scipio's judgment, when he advised us to
grant the Carthaginians the effect of their demands. Let us not therefore,
Gentlemen, refuse them, as well because we now behold them our humble
supplyants, as because our General desires it.

To this Cornelius Lentulus, kinsman to Cneus, now Consul, who hoped to suceed
Scipio in this War, answered in this manner:

Gentlemen, it is ordinary in War to consider only advantage; wherefore since
we all agree, that this City may yet be able to do mischief, we ought to take
heed of that Infidelity is accompanied with Power: And we cannot assure our
selves against its Perfidy. I am of opinion we ought, before all other things,
to deprive it utterly of the means to do hurt: We can never have a more
favorable opportunity, and since they are weak and poor, we should commit a
great error to stay till they have recovered Force and Riches; not that I
would argue we ought not likewise have regard to that which is just. But who
can accuse the Roman people of injustice, or think they use with too much
severity the Victory they have gained over the Carthaginians, a people who in
prosperity are unjust and violent to all the World, who in adversity submit and
humble themselves; and as soon as they have obtained Peace and Pardon, violate
that Peace they have sworn to? They have no respect for Oaths, they believe not
that there are Gods; yet he that spoke before me says, we ought to spare them
to avoid the indignation of Men and Gods: For my part I believe those very Gods
have reduced Carthage to this very state, to punish the impieties of people,
who besides the violation of so many Treaties of Peace made in Sicily, Spain,
Italy and Africa, have by a thousand wrongs provoked the whole World. I will
give some foreign Examples before I speak of those concern us. Saguntum, one
of the fairest Cities of all Spain, was entered into Alliance with us, nay
moreover, was a friend to the people of Rome, and yet without any occasion of
complaint given they took it, sacked it, and put all to the Sword, without
sparing Sex or Age. The City of Nucera, which depended upon us, surrendered to
them upon composition, after they had sworn that the Inhabitants should be
permitted to pass freely, with two Suits of Apparel each, yet, to the prejudice
of their Oath, they shut up the Senators of that unhappy City in Stoves, where
they smothered them to death, and slew all the people with Darts, as they
passed out. After having engaged their Faith to the Senators of Acerra, they
threw them into Wells, and buried them alive under the Earth they cast down
upon them. They deceived M. Cornelius our Consul, whom by force of Oaths they
prevailed with to go see their General, who feigned himself sick; and from
Sicily, where they were, carried him prisoner into Africa, with two and twenty
of our Ships. They likewise cruelly put to death our General Regulus, who that
he might not violate his Oath, returned to Carthage. In short, Hannibal has
committed so many cruelties, during the War, by Surprise and by Treachery, both
against us and against his own Allies, plundring their Cities, and putting to
death those engaged in his Service, that it is not possible to express it; let
me only say in a few words, that he has sacked four hundred of our Cities; that
he has made Bridges over Rivers of the Bodies of Roman Prisoners, and filled
Ditches with them as with Fagots, whereon to pass his men over: Sometimes he
has trampled them under the feet of his Elephants; otherwhiles exposed them as
a spectacle, making them like Gladiators fight Brother against Brother, and Son
against Father. They sent us but very lately, Deputies of theirs to conclude a
Peace, which they swore to; and yet before they were gone from our City, robbed
our Ships, and put our Mariners in Irons. These are the works of their cruelty;
now what commiseration or kindness is there due to those, who have never used
moderation or clemency to any person, and who would (as Scipio told them) have
abolished the very Roman Name, had they overcome us. Perhaps this time they
will keep their Faith, but what Faith, what Treaties, what Oaths have they not
violated? What Peace or what Favor have they not repaid with Injury? Some may
say we are not to imitate them. Pray, wherein do we imitate them? We break not
the Peace, since it is not yet agreed on: but you say, we ought not to imitate
their cruelty. Would you then have these famous Inhumans for your Friends and
Allies? It would be somewhat to the purpose, if, as they are vanquished, they
would submit to discretion, as many others have done before them; then we would
consult of it. And whatever we should leave them, the obligation would be on
their part, nor could the favors they received, pass for an accommodation. And
surely there is great difference 'twixt these two: For as long as we make
Treaties with them, they will violate them as before, making it an occasion of
Rupture, that the Conditions seem to them unjust. For pretenses will not be
wanting, when they have a mind to break: But when they are submitted to
discretion, that we have disarmed them, and reduced their bodies under our
obedience, they will learn that they have nothing properly their own, and
humbling themselves, will be content with those things we shall leave them, as
if they had never appertained to them. If Scipio be of another judgment, you
may examine these two different opinions, and choose the best; but if he be
resolved to make Peace with the Carthaginians without you, there is no
necessity of writing to him. For my part knowing well you are the Judges of our
Council, I have given mine as I believed it most advantageous for the
Commonwealth.

After Lentulus had argued in this manner, the Senate put it to Voices, where
Scipio carried it by several Votes. Thus was a third Peace concluded between
Rome and Carthage, of which Scipio was the principal cause, whether for the
reasons aforementioned, or because he thought it sufficient that the people of
Rome had weakened Carthage to such a degree. For there have been who affirmed,
that to preserve the ancient discipline among the Romans, he would have that
City left yet in some condition, least having nothing to fear, too great
prosperity should make them insolent. If this were Scipio's thought he did not
declare it, but Cato sometime after said the same thing in open Senate in a
grave discourse he made to the Fathers then incensed against the Rhodians.

Peace being concluded, Scipio caused all the African Army to repass into
Italy, and entered the City in Triumph, but with greater Pomp then ever any
Captain had done. The manner of which I shall describe, being the same used now
adays. All the whole people were crowned, the Trumpets marched before with the
Chariots laden with the Spoils of the enemy, after which were born the figures
of the Cities taken, and Pictures wherein were delineated, all the glorious
acts done in that War, then followed all the Silver as well coined as in
Ingots, and other precious things, and then followed those Crowns had been
given to the General by the Cities, by the Allies, or by his own Army; After
all this followed white Oxen, then Elephants, and after them the Captive
Carthaginian and Numidian Captains. Before the General marched the Ushers in
Purple Robes with a Chore of Music, and Satyrs girt after the Tuscan manner,
having on their heads crowns of Gold, who advanced in order singing and
dancing. These Satyrs they called Ludions, by reason as I imagine that the
Tuscans wore formerly the Lydian habit; In the midst of all these people was a
certain man clad in a long purple Robe, adorned with Bracelets and Chains of
Gold, who with ridiculous postures derided the enemies. After followed in train
certain men with perfumes, and next appeared the General mounted on a Chariot
richly carved, he had on his head a Crown of Gold set about with Precious
Stones, his vesture was a purple robe, and in one hand he bore an Ivory
Scepter, and in the other a branch of Laurel, which at Rome is the mark of
victory. There were in the same Chariot with him diverse Children and Maidens,
and on Horses that drew it were mounted young men of his relations. All about
it marched the guards, the Secretaries and Esquires, who were followed by the
Soldiery, marching in order with abundance of Laurels, and those who had done
any eminent Service, wearing the military Recompenses they had received. They
have all free liberty in these occasions either to praise their Captains; pass
their jests upon them, or if they please to condemn their actions, for a
Triumph is a thing of absolute freedom, and men are privileged to say any
thing. In this manner Scipio ascended the Capitol, and the Pomp over,
magnificently treated his Friends in the Temple according to custom.

Such was the end of the second Punick War, which began in Spain, and was
finished in Africa by a Treaty concluded about that time, when the Greeks
account the hundred forty fourth Olympiad.

Sometime after Masanissa (sworn Enemy to the Carthaginians) having Rome to
supplicate the Senate to put a stop to the Enterprises of that Prince:
Commissioners were sent to determine the difference, but with Orders to advance
that Kings interests as high as they could possibly. Thus Masanissa was
maintained in the possession of what he had taken, and made likewise a peace
with the Carthaginians which lasted about fifty years. During which, Carthage
enjoying a solid peace, and being much improved in men and riches by reason of
the fruitfulness of the soil, and commodiousness of the Harbors: The minds of
men, as is usual, were transported with prosperity, and the City was divided
into three Factions the Roman, the Popular, and the Royal. Each of which had
for head the most considerable men of the Nobility both for dignity and virtue.
Hanno* the Great stood for the interest of the Romans: Hannibal Opsar sided
with Masanissa: And Amilcar called the Samnite, and with him Carthalon were
heads of the Popular Faction. These last seeing the Romans engaged in a War in
Celtiberia, and Masanissa hard put to it to defend himself against other
Spaniards, obliged Carthalon, who then in quality of Lieutenant General was
going his Circuit, to fall at unawares upon Masanissa's Camp, then pitched in
that Country, about which they had been at difference; which he did, and having
taken and slain some of the Kings Troops raised the Country of Lybia against
the Numidians. There followed some other skirmishes between the two parties,
till such time as the Romans once more sent Commissioners to make Peace, with
Orders like the former to do secretly all they could in favor of the King. Who
made use of this cunning to confirm Masanissa in the possession of what he had
before siesed upon. They gave no sentence, nor took so much as any cognizance
of the difference, for fear lest Masanissa should seem to have lost his cause,
they only placed themselves between the two Camps, parted them, and gave order
to both sides to lay down Arms. Some time after Masanissa renewed the War upon
a pretense he had to a Country called Lysoa, where there were large Champians,
and fifty good Towns. The Carthaginians had again recourse to the Senate, and
people of Rome; they promised to send Deputies upon the place to determine this
affair, but the Deputation was delayed till such time as probable conjectures
might be made that Masanissa had the advantage. Then Commissioners were
dispatched, and among others Cato, who being arrived upon the places contended
for, required the parties to give them full power to judge the difference as
Arbitrators. To which Masanissa who found himself the stronger, and confided in
the Romans, easily agreed, but the Carthaginians made a difficulty of it, and
not without reason, for they remembered well that in former sentences they had
not done them justice, and alleged that the accommodations made by the
authority of Scipio needed no correctors, provided they were observed by one
Party and the other. Whereupon the Commissioners who would not be Judges but by
consent of parties, returned without doing any thing. But observing in their
journey how excellently the Land was cultivated, and that the Country abounded
in all things, they were astonished, especially to see Carthage it self so soon
recovered of those losses so lately sustained by Scipio's Victory; Insomuch
that being returned to the City they declared it a fault in the people of Rome,
not to have a more watchful eye upon Carthage, they had so anciently been
jealous of, and which upon a sudden was so easily restored to such power. Cato
himself said the Liberty of the people of Rome could never be secured whilst
Carthage subsisted. Which being proposed in the Senate, it was resolved to make
War upon the Carthaginians, but that the design should be kept secret till
opportunity presented. It Is said that Cato hereafter ceased not in open Senate
to declare the Necessity of demolishing Carthage, but Scipio Nasica quite
contrary argued that it was to be left in a condition, that the ancient
Discipline, which began to decay, might be maintained in vigor by the fear they
would still stand in of that City.

Mean while in Carthage the Popular Faction suppressed the Royal, condemning
Masanissa to oblige him to a War; He was before sufficiently inclined to it;
wherefore he sent Gulussa and Micipsa two of his sons to Carthage, to solicit
the return of those who had for his sake been banished. But when they presented
themselves at the Gates. Carthalon forbid their entrance, for fear lest the
tears of the Exiles kindred should work upon the people, and besides Amil^ar
the Samnite laid an ambush for Gulussa upon his return which ^lew some of his
attendants and put him to flight. This gave occasion to Masanissa to besiege
the City of Horoscopa, with the taking of which he had a mighty desire to begin
the rupture. To it is relief went the Carthaginians with twenty five thousand
Foot, and four thousand Horse of the City, under the command of Asdrubal then
General of their forces, to whom joined Assasis and Suba, two of Masanissa's
Major Generals who deserting the two young Princes, went over to the
Carthaginian party with six thousand horse. Asdrubal with this additional force
goes and encamps near the King, and had often and successful skirmishes. But
Masanissa acting with the cunning of a Great Captain retired by little and
little, as if he had given ground, till such time as he had drawn him into a
great barren plain encompassed on all sides with Mountains, and deficient in
all necessaries to subsist on; Here facing the enemy he encamped in the midst
of the Plain, while Asdrubal siesed on the Eminencies, whereby he thought he
had the greater advantage. On the morrow the battle was designed, when young
Scipio who afterward took Carthage, and who at present was only Lieutenant to
Lucullus, who made War in Celtiberia, came to seek out Masanissa to demand some
Elephants. The King who was desirous that day to take some repose that he might
go the fresher to the battle sent some horse to meet him, and gave orders to
some of his sons to receive him. Day being come he drew up his Army in battle
being now fourscore and eight years old, yet a strong and vigorous Soldier,
who according to the custom of the Country mounted on horse back, without
saddle or other covering equally acting in the duty of General and Soldier, for
the Numidians are lustiest of all the people of Africa, and live longer then
any others, which is perhaps occasioned because the Winter is not so sharp in
this Country, nor the heats so violent as in India and Ethiopia, and for the
same reasons are their Cattle stronger and greater. The men lie all abroad and
harden themselves by continual labor, they drink little Wine, feed very
sparingly and with much sobriety. Masanissa having drawn up his Army in Order,
Asdrubal did the like, for to him there were joined many people of the Country.
Scipio being on the top of a Hill, as on a Theater, saw all this Battle, and
was after heard to say, that though he had been in an infinite number of
fights, there was never any in which he took so much delight, for he had never
seen any other, wherein either his person was in security, or that there were a
hundred and ten thousand Combatants: Or to express it more gloriously, he said
that before him were never found but two Spectators in a like occasion, which
were in the time of the Trojan Wars, Jupiter on the top of Mount Ida, and
Neptune on Samothracia. They fought from Morning till Night with great
slaughter of men on both sides; however the advantage seemed Masanissa's: Whom
Scipio came to meet, as he returned to his Camp, congratulating the happy
success of his Arms; and for his part, he received Scipio as the Son of his
Friend, with all possible demonstrations of kindness. The Carthaginians having
notice of his coming, requested him to make peace between Masanissa and them,
which he having yielded to, brought them to a Conference; the Articles of the
Treaty were, that the Carthaginians should release to the King all the Country
that lies about the Empories, and should promise him two hundred Talents ready
money, and eight hundred more payable at a certain term: But when Masanissa,
besides all this, demanded the Fugitives, they would not hear him speak of it;
so they parted without doing any thing, and Scipio returned into Spain with the
Elephants. Masanissa seeing his Enemies Camp seated on an Eminence, or round
Hill, besieged them in such a manner, that no Provisions could be brought to
them, nor was the bringing all, there was none to be had, and he himself
procured them with much difficulty, and what he had was fetched from afar off,
and in very small quantities. Asdrubal at first thought that with the Forces he
had, he could disingage himself when he pleased, and open himself a passage
through the midst of his Enemies. But because his Stores were better furnished
than theirs, he hoped Masanissa might be reduced to a necessity of demanding
Peace; and besides, he was the less concerned, because he had heard that
Deputies were coming from Rome to end their differences. This was true, but
these Deputies had Orders to determine the Affairs, if Masanissa was
overcharged, but to highten his courage, if they found^ him the stronger, which
Orders they punctually executed. Mean while the Famine entered Asdrubal's Camp
in such manner, that the Soldiers weakened with Hunger, were not able to
repulse the Enemy; first they killed the Beasts of carriage, after that their
Horses for service; and at last were reduced to such extreme necessity, that
they boiled the very Reins of the Bridles for a sustenance. There supprised
them likewise an infinite number of Diseases, increased by their bad Food, by
the idleness of the Soldiers, and the season of the year, for there was a great
number of men enclosed within a small compass of ground, during the greatest
heats of Summer, which were excessive in Africa: And because through the want
of Wood, even to dress their Food, they had been forced to burn their very
Bucklers: Now not having the means to carry their dead Bodies out of the Camp,
because of the strict Guard Masanissa kept, and destitute of Fuel to burn them,
the Plague daily increased with the stink of the dead Carcases, in the midst of
which they were forced to abide. Hunger had already consumed the greatest part,
when the rest hopeless of safety were forced to deliver up the Fugitives to
Masanissa, to oblige themselves to pay him yearly five thousand Talents of
Silver for fifty years, and to cause those they had banished to return,
notwithstanding their Oath to the contrary. It was likewise agreed, that the
Soldiers which remained should march out only with one Coat, and pass under the
Yoke: Which being executed, Gulussa remembering how a little before he had been
affronted, sent the Numidian Horse after the Carthaginians, who not able to
make resistance, disarmed, as they were, and not having strength enough to fly;
of fifty eight thousand men very few recovered Carthage, of which number was
Asdrubal, with some of the Nobility. This is what passed in the War, between
Masanissa and the Carthagians, which was soon after followed by the third and
last Punick War.

The people of Carthage weakened by the losses they had sustained in this War,
Masanissa, who was nigh with a great Army; and besides doubted not but the
Romans, who had testified their disaffection to them upon all occasions, would
lay hold of this, under pretense that the Carthaginians had made War upon
Masanissa, the Friend and Ally of the Roman people. And indeed their conjecture
was not false; for as soon as it was known at Rome what had passed, the Senate
commanded all the people of Italy to levy great numbers of Soldiers; not
declaring for what service they designed them; but only giving Orders they
should be in a readiness upon the first Command. Wherefore the Carthaginians to
repair their fault, did by public Edict declare Asdrubal their General against
Masanissa, criminal, together with Carthalon his Lieutenant, and all those of
their Faction, laying to their charge the cause of this War. They likewise sent
them Deputies to Rome to complain of Masanissa, but more of their own Citizens
already condemned, for that they had rashly, and with too much passion taken
Arms against that King, and by that means put the City into hazard of falling
afresh into evil terms with the people of Rome. Upon which a certain Senator
asked them, why they had not, in the beginning of the War, condemned all those
were the cause of it, without attending the ill success of the enterprise;
adding that the Carthaginians had a long time designed a War against the people
of Rome, and went only seeking an opportunity, wherefore the Senate could not
receive this excuse. The Deputies surprised with this answer, demanded in
return what then they should do to expiate their crime, since they had adjudged
them guilty: to which was replied in a word, Content the people of Rome. It was
brought into debate in the Senate of Carthage, what this Contentment could be,
they desired of them, some thinking that the Romans would have some sums added
to those ordained by Scipio, others that they must absolutely quit to Masanissa
the possession of those Lands in difference. In this uncertainty they sent once
more to beseech the Senate to prescribe them more expressly the means of
contenting them; to which answer was given, the Carthaginians knew them well
enough; and with this they were sent back: which begat a strange trouble, and
general terror throughout all Carthage. And to add to it, at the same time,
the City of Utica, then the most considerable of all Africa, next to Carthage,
having large and commodious Havens to receive a foreign Fleet, and not above
sixty furlongs distant from that City, and so by consequence very proper to
make the seat of the War against the Carthaginians; there having ever been a
secret animosity between the two Cities: Utica taking this opportunity of the
deplorable Estate, to which Carthage was now reduced, sends Deputies to Rome to
yield up themselves and their City to the Roman people. The Senate, who had
long before had an inclination to this War, and were now prepared for it,
having at their devotion so strong and so commodious a City, discovered their
intentions, and assembling in the Capitol, where it is usual to debate Affairs
of consequence, decreed a War with Carthage; and at the same time gave it in
Order to the Consuls, with private Orders, never to give it over till Carthage
were destroyed.

M. Manlius had the command of the Army by Land, and L. Marcinus Censorinus of
the Fleet by Sea. After offering up the usual Sacrifices, they past into
Sicily, that from thence they might set forward to Utica, carried by fifty
Galleys of five ranks to a bank.
Quinqueremes, and a hundred Foists followed by many others, as well flat
bottomed Vessels, as great Barques and Ships of Burden: Their Army consisted
of fourscore thousand Foot, and about four thousand chosen Horse. For both the
Citizens and Allies manifested an equal alacrity to go upon this glorious
expedition, the success of which was no way doubtful; nay, some were found that
would engage in it, whether the Consuls would or no. Thus was War made and
declared against Carthage at the same time, and he that carried them the Decree
of the Senate, declared likewise that there was an Army at Sea ready to invade
them. This news cast the whole City, not only into fear, but despair. They had
lately lost all their Youth, they had neither Fleet, nor Allies, nor Soldiers
in readiness, no provision in the City to sustain a Siege; in short, no manner
of preparations, as ordinarily happen to people surprised, with an unexpected
War, and which has not been declared. Besides, it was not possible for them to
oppose the Romans and Masanissa together; wherefore they sent other Deputies to
Rome, with full authority to accommodate the Affair at any rate whatsoever. The
Senate made them answer, That, provided the Army were yet in Sicily, if within
a month the Carthaginians would deliver up in Hostage three hundred Children of
their best Families, and perform what they should ordain, the City of Carthage
should remain free in the enjoyment of their Rights, and of the Territory they
possessed in Africa. This Decree of the Senate they publicly gave to the
Deputies to carry to the Consuls, whom privately they advertised not to recede
from those orders they had received in the City. The Carthaginians were
doubtful, that though they did deliver up their Hostages, they should not
obtain assured Peace. However, in the extremity wherein they beheld themselves,
they placed all their hopes in obedience; and that they might work upon the
Consuls, by a ready execution of their commands, they carried their Children
into Sicily, before the time had been prescribed them. It Is true, that their
Parents and Friends parted not from them without abundance of tears; especially
the Mothers, who ecchoing fearful shrieks and cries, could hardly be pulled from
the embraces of their Children, and when they were, hung upon the Ships,
clasped hold upon the Anchors, and cut the Tackle to hinder the Seamen from
putting forth; many tore their hair, and beat their breasts, as if they had
been at a Funeral, for they perceived that in appearance indeed they gave
Hostages, but in reality and effect, they yielded up their City, since their
Children were taken away, and no assured promise made them. And indeed many of
these Women shedding tears made this dire prediction, that the giving Hostages
was but in vain. Thus were these Youth taken away from Carthage, to be
delivered up in Sicily, where they were received by the Consuls, who sent them
to Rome, and told the Carthaginians, they should know at Utica, what more was
to be done, to deliver themselves from this War.

When the Romans were passed over, the Army encamped in the same place, Scipio
had before encamped in, and the Fleet rode in the Ports depending on Utica. The
Carthaginian Deputies came to attend the Consuls, who seated in the Tribunal,
encompassed by all the Officers of the Army, had caused to be drawn off on both
sides the way that the Carthaginians were to pass, all their Forces
magnificently armed, with Colors flying, that the Carthaginians might judge of
their vast numbers by what they saw. Then a Trumpet having commanded silence,
by the Consuls order a Herald went to give notice to the Deputies, that they
were ready to give them audience. They were led through the midst of all the
Army, and when they drew near, stopped at the Rails, placed like a Bar before the
Tribunal, from whence the Consuls commanded them to make their Proposals. They
began then in a deplorable manner to recount the ancient Treaties had been
between the two people, the antiquity of Carthage, the multitudes of people in
it, the power they had had, and the former great extent of their Dominions;
adding that they spoke not this out of vanity (for it was no time to be vain,
when they were miserable) but to the end, that the Example of a change so great
and so sudden, might oblige the Romans to treat them with humanity and
moderation, of which they could not give any more illustrious evidence, than by
having commiseration of the afflicted, besides those who exercise their power
well in other men's misfortunes, may hope the like from their Conquerours, if
they should fall into the same disgrace. It would be piety in you (said the
Chief of the Deputies) to consider the miserable condition of our affairs, and
unless we have indeed met with Enemies pitiless and inexorable, you should in
all reason rest satisfied with our calamities; we have lost all the Dominion we
had both by Sea and Land, we have delivered up our Ships to you, and have not
sought to build others; we have forborne hunting of Elephants; we have both
formerly, and at present, delivered you good Hostages. We have paid you the
Tribute we ought you at the time limited, we that use to receive from others.
Certainly, Sirs, your Predecessors, after having vanquished us, contented
themselves with thus much, they received us into their alliance and friendship,
on these conditions, which we have solemnly sworn to maintain on one part and
the other. They faithfully kept the Peace they granted, after long Wars; and
you, against whom we never took up Arms, what is it you complain of? what part
of the Treaty has not been observed, that you so suddenly decreed this War, and
bring it to our doors before you declare it? Have we not paid you your Tribute?
have we any Ships? have we any Elephants? Do we not seem worthy of your
compassion, after the so late loss of fifty thousand men by famine? You will
say we made War upon Masanissa: It Is true, but 'twas not till he had usurped
our Lands, which we for a long time suffered with patience, till he setting no
bounds to his avarice, committed a thousand cruelties in the Country about the
Empories, where he was brought up and educated; and not content with that, he
has attempted to snatch from us what we had remaining, and at last has gone so
far, as to trouble the peace we had with you: But because we feared to
displease you, that we might remove all pretense of making this War, we have by
public Edict declared even our own Defenders Criminal; we have sent Deputies
to Rome to make our excuses, and now again afresh sent other Deputies with full
Authority to renew the Peace, on what conditions soever you should think fit:
What need was there then of this Fleet, or this Army against people, who though
innocent, submit themselves to whatsoever you shall ordain? You may easily
judge we make not these offers to deceive you, and that you cannot impose upon
us any penalty, we will not undergo, whilst we have surrendered up as Hostages
to you, the most considerable of our Children, as you desired, without staying
out the months time you gave us for the sending them: Besides, the Decree of
the Senate declares, that provided we delivered those Hostages, Carthage should
remain free in the enjoyment of what we possess.

After the Deputy had thus spoken, Censorinus broke silence, and answered him
in these terms. It Is needless to repeat to you the occasion of this War, your
Deputies have already heard it from the Senate themselves. But as to what you
falsely object to us 'twill be easy to reply; for it is decreed by the
Ordinance you speak of, and we told it you before in Sicily, when we received
your Hostages, that at Utica should be proposed to you the farther intentions
of the Senate. We cannot but praise you that you have sent your Hostages so
readily and such chosen ones. But if you so passionately desire Peace, what
need have you of Arms. Wherefore bring all you have as well belonging to the
public, as private persons, all your Darts, Crossbows and other Arms, and
deliver them into our hands. The Deputies answered that they were willing to
obey in this too, but then they could not tell how to hinder Asdrubal's entry
into the City, whom they had condemned to death, and who was now at the head of
twenty thousand men which he had new raised. However when the Consuls had
replied that the Senate and people of Rome would take that into their care,
they promised to surrender their Arms, and Scipio Nasica, and Cn. Cornelius
Hispalus were sent to receive them. They had Arms for two hundred thousand men,
an infinite Number of piles and darts, two thousand as well crossbows as other
engines, for the lancing of javelins and casting of great stones. And it was a
wonderful thing to see the carriages laden with them conducted by the enemies
themselves, who were followed by the Deputies, Senators, Officers, Priests and
Nobility, hoping to move the Consuls either out of respect to their dignity or
out of compassion to their misfortune.

When they were come before the Tribunal, each man habited according to their
degree, they all stood attentive, and Censorinus who was more eloquent then his
colleague once more breaking silence spoke to them in this manner. Certainly we
have good reason to applaud that ready obedience you have manifested in
delivering your Hostages, and surrendering up your Arms; but it is fruitless to
make long discourses where necessity presses. Hearken with patience to the
remaining Orders of the Senate; withdraw your selves from the City of Carthage
and transfer your habitation into whatever place you please of your Dominion,
provided it be fourscore furlongs from the Sea, for we are resolved to raze it.
The Consuls words were interrupted by the outcrys of the Carthaginians, who
began to lift up their hands to heaven, calling the gods to witness of the
treaties violated, railing, reviling and reproaching the Romans. Some desired
death, others became furious, some provoked the Romans against the Deputies,
others cast themselves on the ground, beating the pavement with their hands and
face, and others in a rage tore not only their clothes but their very flesh,
but after this first agitation was past over, you might behold them overwhelmed
with sorrow, standing still without speaking a word, as if they had been dead.
The Romans were astonished at the spectacle, and the Consuls could not take it
ill that this consternation, caused by an unexpected command, had raised such
storms in the breasts of the Carthaginians, till their heat of anger was over,
for they considered that mighty calamities do on the sudden create a boldness
in the heart of men, who cannot upon surprise digest the troublesome necessity
of obeying, and becoming hereafter servants: but when after a long silence they
grew more lively sensible of their misery, they forbore any farther revilings,
and only set themselves to lament their unfortunate condition, calling by name,
their Children, their Wives and their Country, as if they had heard their
lamentations. The Priests likewise invoked the Gods as if they had been
present, reproaching them with being the cause of their death. In short the
mourning was so great, and the groans so confused, of those who deplored the
public and private misfortune, and so worthy of compassion, that they drew
tears from the eyes of their enemies. The Consuls themselves moved with pity,
out of a consideration of the instability of humane things, expected with sad
countenances the end of their deplorings, when after abundance of tears and
groans, the Calm in some sort returning into their souls, they fell again into
a profound silence, and considering that their City was disarmed and
defenseless, that they had not one Ship, one Warlike Engine, one Dart, or one
Sword left, that they had not within their walls men of war sufficient, having
lately lost fifty thousand men, and that it was not possible for them to raise
Soldiers elsewhere, having neither friends nor allies, besides that the
shortness of the time would not permit it. That their Children, their Friends,
and their Country were in the enemies power, their City besieged by Sea and
Land, and that from the other side Masanissa their ancient enemy was ready to
fall upon them, they put a stop to the Tumult, and extravagance, as of all
things most useless in this occasion, and had a fresh recourse to prayers. Then
Hanno surnamed Gilla the most considerable of all the Carthaginians there
present, having first obatined permission to speak, began in this manner.

Sirs, If I may be admitted to add any thing to the Remonstrances Africa, both
by Sea and Land, and for a long time disputed Extent of Empire with you, at
last yielded all to Scipio, when we delivered up all our Ships and our
Elephants, we have likewise paid you the tributes imposed on us at the terms
prescribed. We beg you therefore, by those gods, witnesses to the treaty, to
pardon us, and not to violate the Oath of Scipio, who swore that from thence
forward the people of Carthage should be friend and allie to the people of
Rome. We have not swerved from any thing of that accommodation. We have neither
ships, nor Elephants, you can demand no tribute of us, ^ay we have served you
against three Kings, and be not offended if we put you in mind of it, when you
demanded our Arms, since ordinarily miseries make men speak more then they
ought; but now though the Religion of the Treaty should be sufficient argument
to persuade you, we have only recourse to our Prayers, and indeed we have
nothing else left, having already yielded up to you all that was in our power.
This is all I can say to you touching the first* Treaty of Peace which was
ratified by the Oath of Scipio your Consul, but for what concerns our present
Estate, you Sirs, are your selves witnesses of what we have done. You demanded
Hostages, we have given you all the choicest of our youth. You desired our
Arms, we have surrendered them all, which the inhabitants of a City taken never
willingly did. We assured our selves upon the honesty of the Romans and upon
their word, for the Senate gave us their letters, which we delivered unto you,
and when you demanded Hostages from us, you promised that Carthage should
(giving them) be at liberty to live according to its Laws. And if having done
what the letters of the Senate have ordered us, nay more than what they
commanded, it would certainly appear very evil if after having promised liberty
to our City, upon delivery of Hostages, you should ordain it is destruction,
after having received them, for if you demolish it, how can you leave it free
as you promised. This is all we have to say touching the Treaties, as well old
as new, and if this move you not, we will only have recourse to prayers and
tears, the sole refuge of the miserable, and for which we have ample occasion
in the innumerable calamities that overwhelm us. We beseech you therefore for
an ancient City, built by the command of the Gods. For the support of that
immense glory it had acquired. For the preservation of that name it has born
throughout the whole world, for its Temples, for its Gods, which are not
capable of any crime. Chastise not them by a privation of those solemn
sacrifices and continual adorations paid them by this City. Rob not the dead,
who never offended you, of their Sepulchers, and those funeral Honors daily
celebrated on their tombs. And if you have any pity for us, since you say it is
out of compassion you permit us to choose another habitation, spare our Altars,
spare our household gods, spare our high places, spare the goddess guardian of
Carthage. In short spare so many things that are both pleasant and precious in
the eyes of the whole earth; for what can you fear from us? You have our ships,
you have our arms, and all those great beasts which attracted on us the envy of
such a world of people. You may say perhaps that it is comfort enough for us,
that you suffer us to build another City. But it is impossible for men
accustomed to get their livelihood from the Sea, of whom we have an infinite
number, to live or subsist in the Inland, yet however you will have this to be
a favor, but pray be pleased that instead of it we offer you another condition
which will fully satisfy us and (in our opinion) bring you more glory. Let the
City that has not sinned stand, and put to death all the Carthaginians rather
then command them to change habitation. Thus all the world will believe you
animated against men, and not against Temples, Gods, Sepulchers and innocent
walls. You have been accustomed to prefer glory and pity before all things,
and to make your moderation shine in the midst of your prosperity, which
hitherto you have practiced toward all you have subdued, suffer your selves
then to be moved by the prayers of Jupiter, and those gods which yet preside
ore Carthage, and for their sake cease to hate us and our children, out of a
remembrance of our past offenses. Take heed lest we prove the first for whom
you loose that high esteem in which you live, and ^ully not your reputation by
the cruelty of this action, so horrible to speak of, much more to act, and of
which never yet was heard an Example. The Greeks made many Wars upon the
Barbarians, and you your selves have bore Arms against many other Nations; yet
neither of you ever razed a City that yielded without fight, that had delivered
up all they held most dear, their Children and their Arms, and are moreover
ready to submit to whatever other punishment should be imposed, We therefore
implore you by those gods, witnesses to our treaties, by the fortune of
mankind, by those inward stings, they who are in prosperity ought to feel and
fear, not to brand your success with so shameful a tyranny, nor extend our
miseries to the utmost extremities. Or if for your parts you are resolved, yet
give us leave to send once more to Rome, to present our request to the Senate.
It Is but a short time we ask you, yet during which our torment and trouble will
increase through the incertainty of the event. You are in ample power to do
with us what you please either at present or afterward but pray remember to
act nothing contrary to Piety and Mercy.

To all this Censorinus replied; There needs no farther repetition of the
Sicily, which since you have lost. 'Twas this Sea which made you invade Spain,
out of which you were soon after chased. 'Twas this Sea gave you the
opportunity of robbing our Merchants, contrary to your faith given in our
Leagues, and then to throw them overboard, the better to conceal your crimes,
till being surprised in it, you quitted Sardinia for reparation of that injury.
Thus you lost Sardinia by means of that Sea which by its nature inclines all
the world to covetousness, by reason of the yast profit it brings in, in a
little time. By it formerly the Athenians, skilful in Maritime Affairs, grew
suddenly and mightily great; and by it were not long after as suddenly ruined;
for the Sea is a kind of Merchandise by which riches flow in full springs, and
suddenly ebbs as fast. You know well that those people I am speaking of, having
extended their Dominion over all the Ionian Sea, and even unto Sicily, set no
bounds to their avarice till they had lost all, till they were forced to
surrender their Havens and their Ships into their Enemies hands, to receive a
Garrison into their City, and demolish with their own hands their lofty Walls,
so that they became almost a Plain, which for a long time proved the means of
their preservation. And surely, Gentlemen of Carthage, there is more stability
in a Country Life, and more assurance in Labor and Tillage; and though the
profits are not so great as those reaped by the Sea, yet are they much more
certain: and to tell you my thoughts, I am clearly of opinion, that a Maritime
City is rather a Ship, than firm Land, so much is it tossed with variety of
affairs, and subject to infinite Revolutions, whilst the Inland yields Fruits,
may be gathered without danger; for this reason was it, that anciently Kings
chose their Seats within Land, and that was it raised the Medes, Persians,
Assyrians and many others to such a height of power; but to what purpose give I
you the examples of Kings, let us speak of what concerns you. Cast your eyes
throughout all Lybia, and choose your selves a place where you may have
Neighbors that you like, but whence you may no more see this object that at
present tempts you. Thus you will raze out of your minds the memory of past
miseries; and indeed how can you look upon the Sea, where now you have no
Shipping without being tormented with the remembrance of those mighty Fleets
which daily returned to your Ports laden with booty or with the thoughts of
the former Magnificence of your Ports, your Arsenals and your Havens. And when
within your City you behold the Lodgings of the Soldiers unfurnished, your
Stables without Horses, and your Stalls without Elephants: what can all this
move you to, but grief, and desire to recover, if it were possible, the same
power. It Is ordinary among men, that the memory of past felicity creates a hope
of its return; and on the contrary, there is no better remedy against calamity
than oblivion, which can never be attained to, but by distancing our selves
from objects may keep it fresh in our minds. An evident proof of this you may
have in your selves, who after having sundry times obtained pardon for your
faults, could never keep to constant Peace, nor continue long without violation
of your Treaties. Wherefore if you have still thoughts of Dominion, and that
preserving your animosities against us, you wait only a favorable opportunity
to shake off the yoke, you do well in endeavoring still to maintain your City,
your Ports, your Honors, and those lofty Walls which seem only built for War:
and we on our side should commit a great crime to pardon people that will not
pardon us, even then when fortune has submitted them to our power. But if in
truth, and not in word only you yield the Dominion to us, and that contenting
your selves with what you possess in Lybia, you will make a sincere peace with
us, deal faithfully, and prove it by the effects, retire your selves into
Africa, and willingly yield up to us that Empire of the Sea, which by right of
War belongs to us. In vain, to move us to compassion, do you deplore your
Temples, your Gods, your public Places, and your Sepulchers; for we will not
touch your Sepulchers, and you shall have liberty when you please to come and
sacrifice, but all the rest must be demolished; for you sacrifice not to
Havens, nor pay Funeral Honors to Walls; for your Hearths, your Altars, and
public Places, you may build them elsewhere, and soon establish your selves a
Residence in the same manner as when you left Tire you came into Africa, and
gained this Seat which now you call the Seat of your Ancestors. To tell you all
in a word, you may easily conceive what we now do is not out of malice, but for
our own security, and to maintain public concord: if you remember that Alba
which was no Enemy City, inhabited not by Foes, but Friends that loved us, was
transferred into our City for the public good, which succeeded to both peoples
satisfaction. But we have, say you, multitudes of miserable people who gain
their living by the Sea; this has likewise been thought on, so far, that it
will be easy for you still to trade by Sea, and to import and export your
Commodities without very great trouble; for we have not ordained your retreat
from the Sea above fourscore Furlongs; and we our selves are distant at least a
hundred. We permit you to choose such a place as shall best like you, and live
with all freedom in your new Habitations: and this is what we meant when we
told you that the City of Carthage should remain free, if they obeyed us in
this occasion; for speaking of the City, we believed not to be understood to
have spoken of its Foundations, or its Walls, but its Citizens. Here Censorinus
stopped, but seeing the Carthaginians were likewise silent, he added, that What
he had said, was only to persuade and comfort them: And now, said he, the
Orders of the Senate must be put in execution, and that out of hand, wherefore
withdraw your selves; for as yet we consider you as Deputies. Upon hearing
these words, the Ushers made them go forth; but they foreseeing the disorder
this news would bring to Carthage, desired once more audience, and being again
admitted, spoke again in this manner. We see well, that we must obey, since you
will not permit us to send to Rome; nor have we any hopes of ever returning
again to you; for our Citizens, before we shall have done speaking, will tear
us in pieces; wherefore we beg you not for our concern (we have already set up
our Rest) but for the interest of Carthage, to oblige them by terror to support
the Calamity they groan under, that to that end you would cause your Fleet to
approach the City, whilst we are on the way thither, to the intent, that they
at once understanding your design, and seeing the danger whereupon they are
threatened, falling upon them, may suffer, if possible, the execution of your
Command. Judge you to what the injustice of our fortune has reduced us, when we
are constrained to demand your Forces against our selves.

Having uttered these words, they departed, and Censorinus went to plant
himself within view of Carthage with twenty Galleys, whilst one part of the
Deputies took a quite different way from the City, and the rest went
thitherward quite overwhelmed with sorrow and grief.

The Carthaginians stood upon their Walls to discover their return at a Rome,
they burst forth into hideous groans and outcries; and the people forcing their
Guards, entered confusedly into the Palace where now there was nothing but rage
and fury. All the Rabble, like so many Bacchantes, possessed with different
sorts of madness, fell some upon the Senators who had advised the giving of
Hostages, tearing them in pieces, as if they had been the first cause of their
surprise; others treated in the same manner those who had counseled the
delivery of their Arms: some threw Stones at the Deputies, as the bringers of
ill news; others ran like Furies up and down the Streets, and finding some
Italians, who by chance had staid in the City, not dreaming of this unexpected
misfortune, treated them with a thousand sorts of Indignities, telling them
they would have revenge for the Hostages sent to Rome, and for the Arms taken
from them. All the City was filled with tears and rage, with fear and
threatenings; some running through the Streets called out to their Friends,
others ran to the Temples, blaspheming the Gods that had not power to defend
their own Altars, some running to the Arsenals, wept for grief, to see them
empty, others running to the Havens with tears, bemoaned their Ships delivered
to faithless men, others again called their Elephants by name, as if they had
still been with them, accusing and blaming both themselves and their
Predecessors, and arguing that they ought never to have yielded up neither
Elephants, nor Ships, nor Arms, nor consented to pay Tribute; for that it had
been much more honorable to have died for their Country with their Arms in
their hands. But nothing more enflamed the anger of the people, than the
Mothers of the Hostages, whom they might behold like Furies in a Tragedy, fly
upon all they met with, reproaching them that they had robbed them of their
Children, and demanding satisfaction. In conclusion, some more reserved than
the rest, after having barricadoed up the Gates, gathered Stones, and carried
them upon the Walls, to serve against the Enemy, instead of other Arms.

Asdrubal, whom they had condemned to death, and who had already twenty
thousand Men in Arms, and to him they presently dispatched a Deputy to entreat
him, that now in his Countries extremity he would not remember the offense he
had received, which was only occasioned by the fear they had of the Romans. Him
they appointed to keep the Field; and for the City they chose another Asdrubal,
Grandchild to Masanissa, by one of his Daughters. This done, they dispatched
once more to the Consuls, to demand only thirty days time, during which, their
Deputies should go to Rome, which being refused, they took a resolution to
suffer all extremities, rather than abandon their City. And now might be seen
an universal change in men's minds; the Temples likewise, and the Palace, and
other spacious places were changed into public Shops, wherein men and women
labored night and day without respit, unless so much time as necessity and
nature required for food and sleep; so that every day they made one hundred
Bucklers, three hundred Swords, a thousand Arrows for the Cross-bow; five
hundred Darts and Javelins, and as many Cross-bows as they could; and when they
wanted strings to bend them with, the Women cut off their Hair to make Cords
of. Whilst the Carthaginians prepared for War with so much care and diligence,
the Consuls were not so pressing, whether it troubled them to resolve upon
doing a thing so extraordinary, or that they thought they could, when ever they
pleased, with ease take by force a disarmed City. Besides they imagined that
necessity would soon take them off their courage, it being ordinary, that those
who in the extremity of Affairs are at first furiously opposite, after having
more closely considered the matter, grow fearful of displeasing those who have
the power of destroying them, which happened in effect in Carthage, where a
certain man perceiving his Fellow-Citizens already growing sensible of fear,
came into the Assembly under another pretense, and told them, that of many
evils the least was to be chosen, when they had not wherewithal to defend
themselves. Mean while Masanissa was not well satisfied, that he having brought
down the Power and Glory of the Carthaginians, the Romans should come and
snatch the Victory out of his hands, and had crossed the Sea without first
communicating their design to him, which they had used to do in former Wars.
However, when the Consuls, to sound his intentions, demanded his assistance, he
replied, he would not be wanting, as soon as he knew they stood in need of it,
and indeed sometime after he sent one to the Confuls, to know if they had any
thing for him to do, but they not enduring his Pride, and mistrusting him as a
person grown angry, made answer, that when they stood in need of him, they
would send him word, and yet were they at present in some straits for
Provisions, which were only brought them from Adrumetum, Leptis, Saxa, Utica
and Chella; for Asdrubal held all the rest of Lybia, from whence he sent what
he could to Carthage.

Some days being passed, the two Consuls drew their Army near the City,
resolved to besiege it. It was situate in the great Golf of Africa, encompassed
by the Sea, in form of a Peninsula, the Neck of which dividing it from the
Continent, was about five and twenty Furlongs broad. Toward the West there
stretched out a long Point of Land, about half a Furlong wide, which advancing
into the Sea, divided it from the Marish, and was enclosed on all sides with
Rocks, and with a single Wall. Toward the South and the Continent, where stood
the Cittadal called Byrsa, it was enclosed with a triple Wall of thirty Cubits
high, not accounting the height of the Parapets and Towers, which flanked it
round in equal distances, of about two Or about 80 fathoms, a^cording to the
Greek Acre:
Acres one from another. Their Foundations were about thirty Foot deep, and
they were four Stories high, the Walls reaching only to the second, but they
were vaulted, and that so vastly, that underground there were Stalls for three
hundred Elephants, with all things necessary for their sustenance, and above
Stables for four thousand Horse, and Lofts for their Provender: besides there
were Lodgings for twenty thousand Footmen, and four thousand Horsemen; in
short, all their ordinary preparations for War were lodged in their Walls only.
There was but one place of the City, where the Walls were low and weak. This
was a neglected Angle, which began at the Point of Land, we spoke of before,
and reached to the Ports, for they had two Ports disposed in such manner, that
a Ship might easily go from one to the other; and yet there was but one
entrance through a passage of about sixty six Foot wide, secured with Chains;
the first was for Merchants, where were many, and diverse sorts of Quarters for
the Mariners; the other, which was the inner Port, was for the Men of War, in
the midst of which stood an Island encompassed about, as well as the Port, with
vast Keys, in which there were Places or Docks to put under covert two hundred
and twenty Ships, and above Storehouses, where they wrought and made all
things necessary for the Shipping; the Fronts of each place were upheld by two
Pillars of Marble of Ionick workmanship, so that the whole round, as well of
the Port as the Island, represented on both sides two magnificent Galleys.
Within this Island stood the Admirals Palace, from whence the Trumpet gave the
Signal of his Orders; from whence he published his Ordinances, and from whence
he overlooked all things. The Island stood directly opposite to the mouth of
the Port, extending it self a good way forward, so that from thence the Admiral
could discern what passed at Sea a great distance off, but those at Sea could
not perceive what passed within; nay, when the Merchants were entered into their
Port, they could not see the Men of War, for their Port was separate from the
inward Port by a double Wall, and for them there was an entrance from their
Port by a Gate into the City, without passing into the other. Such was at this
time the face of Carthage.

The Consuls having each taken their quarter, began their assaults, Manlius to
the Landside, with design to fill up the Ditch, and possess himself of the
Rampire within it, that so he might afterward attempt the high Walls; and
Censorinus from the Sea causing Ladders to be planted both on the Shore, and in
his Ships against that ill fortified Angle, which had been always neglected;
they both despised their Enemy, believing him disarmed: but when they found new
made Arms, and Men fully resolved to defend themselves, they were surprised as
at a Prodigy and retreated, acknowledging that from the very first they
committed an error, in believing they should carry the City without fighting.
They made a second assault, which succeeding no better than the first,
increased the courage of the Carthaginians; and now the Consuls fearing
Asdrubal, who lay encamped on the edge of the Marish, lodged their Forces
apart; Censorinus, with his Naval Army in the Marish, against the Walls of the
City, and Manlius on the neck of the Peninsula, toward the Continent. Being
thus posted, Censorinus passed the Marish, to go in search of Materials for the
building of Engines, where he lost five hundred Workmen; and great quantity of
Arms having been encountered by Amilcar, surnamed Phameas, Colonel of the
Carthaginian Horse: yet forbore he not the bringing of Materials, with which
having caused to be made Ladders, and other Engines, he with them returned to
the a^^ault, but in vain. Manlius after some slight attempts, and beating down
part of the first Wall, desparing of success, gave over the Enterprise: but
Censorinus having filled up a part of the Marish near to the point of the Land
to gain more room, raised two Rams of an extraordinary size, of which one was
driven forward by six thousand It is to be imagined, he means, but a part
labored at a time, and when weary, were relieved by others.
Foot, encouraged by the Orders and Presence of their Captains; and the other
by the Gally-slaves, whose labor was over-seen by those who had the command of
the Galleys. This begat subject of Emulation, so that the Commanders, as well
as the others striving, who should outdo each other, a great part of the Wall
was soon overthrown, and the City might plainly be seen into. The Carthaginians
on their side did not sleep, but applied themselves to repair by night, what
breaches the Rams had made by day; but because the night was not sufficient for
so great a labor, fearful lest the Romans should easily beat down again what
they had repaired, whilst it was yet moist and unsettled; they resolved upon a
Sally, and some with Swords, and others with Torches in their Hands, so
vigorously assaulted the Engines, that though they burnt them not quite, yet
they rendered them useless, and retreated into the City in order. Day appearing,
the Romans entertained a conceit of entering Carthage, by the breach which the
Inhabitants could not quite repair, and they saw within a spacious place very
proper to fight in. The Carthaginians expected them, having placed in the Front
all their Armed men, others with Stones and Clubs in the Rear, and all about in
the neighboring Houses, those who were any way capable of defending them. The
Romans enraged that disarmed men thus despised them, entered in throngs into
Carthage: but Scipio, to whom the taking of this City gave afterward the
surname of Africanus, being yet but Colonel of 1000 men.
Tribune, took special care not to enter, contenting himself with drawing up
his Regiment by Companies in Battle, near the Walls of the City; from whence,
as much as in him lay, he hindered others from passing in, and sustained those
whom the Carthaginians beat back, by favoring their retreat; and this was it,
gave him his first reputation, and made him gain the Character, in all Letters
that were wrote to Rome, of being wiser than the Consuls: At length Censorinus
his Army becoming sorely afflicted with sickness, by reason of being posted
among dead and stinking waters, and that the height of the Buildings hindered
them from breathing the Sea Air, he resolved to put to Sea; but the
Carthaginians having observed, that the wind blew directly to the Roman Fleet,
filled with Tow and dried Vine-twigs, a quantity of small Barques within their
Port, that the Enemy might know nothing of it; and having plaistred them over
with Pitch and Brimstone, brought them out in sight of the Romans, and there
hoisting sail, set fire to them; so that the wind, and the violence of the
flames drove them into the midst of the Fleet, which were almost all burned.

After this, Censorinus being gone to Rome to be present at the Assembly,
Manlius his Camp. To this end they sallyed by night, some armed, and others who
had no Arms carrying Bridges; and stormed the Ditch in that place next the
Town, and were already pulling out the Palisades, when the Alarm being run
through the whole Camp, by reason of the obscurity of the night, Scipio with
his Horse marched out of the farther Gate, and going the round of the Camp
without the Line, terrified the Carthaginians, and made them retreat again into
their City; all the World gave Scipio the glory of having saved the Army in
this nocturnal terror by his Conduct; and Manlius determined to keep better
Guards, and to fortify himself, to which effect he caused a Wall to be built
in the place, where there was but a Palisade, and built a Fort on the Sea, to
receive those Ships that brought him Provisions. That done, he took the Field
with ten thousand Foot, and two thousand Horse, besides Hewers of Wood and
Forragers, to gather in Harvest throughout all the level Country. Those who
were employed in this Service, were commanded by Tribunes, who relieved one
another according to their turns, which gave occasion to Phameas, who commanded
the African Horse to signalize himself; this young man diligent and handy, and
who had with him small but swift Horses, which lived on Herbs when they had
nothing else; and could endure hunger and thirst, if there were occasion,
concealed himself among the Woods, or in the Valleys; and when he perceived the
Enemy stood not upon their Guard, sallyed from his Covert, and came thundering
upon them like an Eagle; and after having charged the Romans, retreated into a
place of security. But when Scipio commanded, he never appeared; for Scipio
continually kept his Foot in order, and his Horse in a fighting posture; and
when any Corn was to be cut, he never suffered the Reapers to go to work, till
he had first gone the round of the Field they were to cut down, both with Horse
and Foot in their Arms, himself guarding the out-skirts with some Squadrons;
and if any of the laborers stragled from the others, or went out of the
Circle, he punished them severely, wherefore Phameas never durst attempt him;
and Scipio still continuing his vigilance, his glory increased from day to day;
insomuch, that the other Tribunes, who envyed him, raised a report that there
was an old Alliance between Scipio, and the Family of Phameas. It happened also
that some Africans retiring themselves to some Towers or Castles, of which
there are great number in that Country: the other Tribunes, after having
granted them Pass-ports, forbore not to lay Ambushes for them in the way* and
rob them* But Scipio on the contrary, conveyed them to the very House;
insomuch, that hereupon none afterward would enter into a Treaty, but in his
presence; so much the good opinion of his Virtue and Honesty was increased, not
only in the thoughts of the Romans, but of the Enemies themselves. Manlius
being returned to the Camp, after having gathered in Harvest, the Carthaginians
by night assaulted the Fort on the Sea with great violence, and besides to
strike terror into the Romans, the whole Multitude coming out of the City made
a horrible noise. The Consul ignorant of the cause of this Tumult, kept within
his Trenches: but Scipio having caused two Squadrons of Horse to mount, each
with his Torch in his hand posted in, forbidding his people to engage, because
of the night, and only giving them order to run to and fro, so that they might
make the Enemy believe they were a greater force than they were, and likewise
strike an apprehension into them, that they were advancing to charge them, this
succeeded; for the Carthaginians afraid of being charged on both sides,
retreated into their City; and this was a farther addition to the brave
exploits already performed by Scipio, it being now in every Mouth, he alone was
worthy to have Paulus for his Father, and to be enrolled in the Family of the
Scipio's, into which he had been adopted. Some time after Manlius going to
Nucera with design to assault Asdrubal, the enterprise displeased Scipio, the
more because he saw that in his March he was to pass through narrow ways among
the Rocks, the tops of which were possessed by the Enemy. However he would go,
but being come within three furlongs of that General, on the Banks of a River,
which he must pass to fall on: Scipio did what he could to oblige the Consul to
a retreat, telling him another time, and other means, were requisite to reach
Asdrubal. Those who envyed him were not wanting to oppose his proposition, and
to say, that it favored more of cowardice than prudence to turn tail, after
having seen the Enemy, and that it was to give them an opportunity to come and
charge them in the Rear. He then proposed another advice; to wit, that at least
they should throw up Trenches on that side the River, that if they were
repulsed, they might have a retreat; but they laughed at this, and one of them
said, he would lay down his Sword, if he must obey the orders of Scipio, and
not those of Manlius. Hereupon the Consul, who was not very expert in War, past
the River; and was no sooner on the other side, but he engaged Asdrubal, where
there happened a great slaughter on both sides; but because Asdrubal, had his
Camp near, he retreated thither, from whence as from a place of security, he
observed in what manner he might defeat the Romans, who already repenting
themselves of their enterprise, regained the River in good order, yet could
they not very commodiously repass it, because there were but few Fords, and
those very dangerous, so that they were forced to file off. Now Asdrubal taking
his time, charged them with great fury, slaying an infinite of those who sought
rather to fly than defend themselves, of which number were three of the
Tribunes, the principal of those, who had advised the General to give battle.
Scipio presently rallyed all the Cavalry he could with three hundred Horse
which he had, and dividing them into two Squadrons, caused them to march
against the Enemy each of his side, with order not to charge at the same time,
but make their discharge of their Darts, and then immediately retreat; then
charging again, retreat in like manner. He was of opinion, that thus, having
always one half of them fronting the Enemy, and stopping them with force of
Darts, he should constrain him to close his Battalia's, which indeed happened;
for after often renewing this kind of fight, and that the Africans saw they
continually charged them with Darts which extremely vexed them, they turned all
their Power against Scipio, giving by this means leisure to the rest of the
Army to repass the River; and Scipio seeing the Romans on the other side,
passed himself through all the showers of Darts, thrown at him by the Africans.
Now at the beginning of this fight, four Roman Cohorts, which the unexpected
assault of the Enemy had hindered from gaining the River, were retired to an
Eminence, where Asdrubal besieged them. The Romans perceived nothing of it,
till such time as they were about to encamp* and now they did know it, knew not
what to resolve on; some were of advice to continue their march, and not to
expose a great Army for a small Number. Whereupon Scipio remonstrated to them,
that when the debate was about a matter of importance, mature deliberation,
it is true, was requisite; but that now seeing so many brave men in an extreme
danger, nothing was to be left unattempted to relieve them. In short, having
taken with him Provision for two days, he set forward, leaving the Army in a
great fear, lest he should not return himself. As soon as he came to the place,
where the Enemy besieged the Romans, he immediately seized of an Eminence nigh
to that, to which the Cohorts were retired to, and which was only divided from
it by a very narrow Valley. His coming hindered not the Africans from continuing
the siege, for they could not think that his men tired with travel could give
any assistance to the besieged; but he seeing that the two Hills joining
themselves together at the foot, made but a very small Valley, advances that
way, and posts himself above the Enemy; who startled at his courage and
readiness, betook themselves to a disorderly flight. He would not pursue them,
because they were the greater number, but contented himself with the saving of
these four Cohorts, which were given over for absolutely lost, The Soldiers
seeing him return contrary to their hopes, and that not only he himself was
safe, but that he had likewise saved others; gave assurance of their inward
rejoicing, by their outward acclamations and shouts of joy, conceiving an
opinion of him, that he acted nothing but by the assistance of the same
Divinity, which was believed to foretell things to his Ancestor Scipio. Manlius
returned to his Camp near the City, after having suffered sufficiently, for not
giving credit to Scipio, who would have disarmed him from the Expedition; and
whereas many thought it strange, that they had left their Dead unburyed,
especially three Tribunes; Scipio gave liberty to a Prisoner, and sent him to
Asdrubal, to entreat him to give Funerals to the Tribunes. He caused them to be
sought for among the Dead; and knowing them by the Rings of Gold they wore (for
by them are the Chiefs among the Romans distinguished from the private
Soldiers, who wear only Iron ones) he gave them honorable Funerals, whether
moved to it out of humanity, or that in justice he ought it to the rule of War;
or else already reverencing the Glory of Scipio, he was willing by this Office,
to oblige that great man: To proceed, as the Romans who had had this bickering
with Asdrubal, were on their return to Carthage, still frighted with their
defeat, Phameas cruelly perplexed them, and on the other side the Carthaginians
came forth to meet them, so that they could not recover the Camp without the
loss of some servants which those from the City cut off.

Mean while the Senate sent Commissioners to the Army to enquire into Manlius,
and the Chief Officers, and likewise even those Tribunes, who had escaped from
the Rout, gave an account very advantageous in favor of Scipio. For at last so
many glorious successes had stopped the mouth of Envy; All the Army did the like,
but above all his brave Actions spoke enough for themselves* Wherefore the
Commissioners upon their return to Rome, published with one voice the admirable
qualities of Scipio, and the great love the Soldiers bore him, which extremely
pleased the Senate. But now the Army being weakened by a great many disgraces,
Ambassadors were sent to Masanissa, to demand forces against the Carthaginians,
who found him no longer among the living. That King finding himself oppressed
with age and sickness, and having many illegitimate Children on whom he had
bestowed great gifts, and three legitimate Sons, all of different minds and
manners, he sent to entreat Scipio as his friend, by succession from his
Ancestors, to come and see him, and to consult with him about dividing his
Kingdom among his Children; he immediately posted away, but ere he could
arrive, Masanissa had given up the ghost, having laid his Commands on his
children to obey Scipio, in what manner soever he should divide the succession
amongst them. Those were the last words of this great man happy in all things,
for by divine favor he reconquered his own Kingdom, which Syphax and the
Carthaginians had seized on, and enlarged it in such manner, that from
Mauritania which lies upon the Ocean he extended the bounds of his Dominion
into the Continent, as far as Cyrene, giving Laws to an infinite number of
people, and teaching them a sweeter manner of living (for before the Numidians
lived only on herbs, and despised tillage.) He left great store of Silver in
his Coffers, and many warlike Troops, whom himself had exercised in revenging
himself of his enemies. He took Syphax with his own hand, and brought the
Carthaginians so low that the Romans had not afterward so much difficulty to
destroy them. He was tall of Stature, and very strong, so that though far
advanced in years he would be present at all occasions so long as he lived, and
ever mounted on horseback without a saddle, but the greatest sign of his
vigorous constitution was that though he had many Children died before him, yet
he never had less then then ten living at a time after once he had arrived that
number, and being now fourscore and ten years old, he left his youngest only
four years old. That great age had he advanced to, and bore it out well, but at
length of force he must die. Scipio did with honor cause the liberality of
their father to be given to the bastard Children; divided the money among the
legitimate Children, together with the Revenues, and willed that they should
all bear the title of King: As for the charges of State he distributed them, to
every one according to their capacity and inclination. He gave as by privilege
of birthright to Micipsa the Eldest who loved Peace the City of Cirtha the
ancient residence of the Kings, to Gulussa the second, who was a Soldier, the
Command of the Armies, and to Mastaball the third who was a Scholar, the charge
of Justice. Having made this division of the Goods and Kingdom of Masanissa.
Scipio forthwith brought Gulussa along with him to assistance of the Romans,
who having presently discovered the place where Phameas concealed himself, and
from whence he issued out to surprise them, soon rid them of that inconvenience.

Scipio and Phameas met in a place where there was only a watercourse between,
that was impassible. Scipio who was doubtful of some ambuscades, advanced only
with three of his people, to make discovery, and Phameas came forward on the
other side accompanied only with one, which made Scipio, judging he had a
desire to speak with him, advance likewise only with one to attend him, when
they were nigh enough to hear each other, he spoke thus to the African, Why do
not you labor for your particular safety, since you can do nothing for your
Country? to which the other answered, and what safety can I expect, in the
Estate to which Carthage is reduced, after having done you so much mischief.
Assuredly replied Scipio, if you believe I have any power, and that I am a man
of Faith and Honor, I dare promise you in the name of the Romans not only grace
and pardon but acknowledgements. The African thanked him that had more
confidence in him than in all others, and told him, I will think of it, and if
I believe it may be done I will give you notice, and with that they parted. Now
Manlius to wipe away the stain of his first expedition to Nucera, returned
thither, and having taken provisions for fifteen days, encamped, and fortified
himself, as Scipio had counseled him to do the first time, but he was a long
time without doing any thing, which blasted his fame the more, besides the
hazard he ran the Army into of being beaten by Asdrubal upon their return to
Carthage. Whilst he lay thus in an incertainty what to do, one of Gulussa's
people brought a packet to Scipio, who keeping it sealed till he came to the
full Council of War, there broke it open and found writ in it, to this effect,
Such a day I will come to such a place, meet me there with what force you
please, and give Order to those who are upon the Guard, to receive me if I come
by night. To this purpose were the contents of the Letters which had no name
subscribed, but Scipio perceived well that it was an invention of Phameas.
Though Manlius was fearful lest Scipio might be deceived by that politic man,
yet seeing he had a good opinion of him, he permitted him to go to the place
assigned, with Orders to receive an Oath of Fidelity from Phameas, without
assuring him any set reward, but only promising that the Senate would
recompense him, according to his deservings. But there was no need of these
promises, for as soon as Phameas was come to the place appointed, he said that
he put his own safety into the hands of Scipio, and for recompense he referred
himself to the judgment of the Senate and people of Rome, and the morrow after
having given his parol, he drew up all his Troops in battalia, and being
advanced to the head of them with the Officers, as if he were about to consult
of something of importance, he spoke to them in this manner.

If there remained any hopes to relieve our Country, I should be ready to die
with you: but seeing it in the Condition in which you all know it, I am
resolved to take Order for my own affairs: I have assurance given me for my
self and those that will follow me: Now you are to think what you have to do.

Having thus spoken, the Captains and those who were under their command, to
the Number of two thousand two hundred Horse, declared for the Romans, the rest
stood firm by virtue of the authority and persuasion of Hanno surnamed the
White. As Scipio returned to the Camp, accompanied with Phameas, all the Army
came forth to meet him, receiving him with a general acclamation as in a
Triumph. But Manlius above all expressed extraordinary joy, and no longer
fearing his retreat might be shameful, because he believed Asdrubal, startled
at the Revolt of Phameas, durst not follow him, he discamped for want of
Provisions, not the fifteenth day after his departure, but the seventeenth. And
because he had yet three days march through troublesome ways, Scipio took
Phameas and Gulussa with their Horse, and made an inroad into the Country which
the inhabitants of the place call the Great Abyss from whence they returned at
night to their quarters, with a great booty, and good store of Provisions.
Manlius having advice that Calphurnius Piso came to succeed him, sent Scipio
before to Rome, together with Phameas, whom all the Army conducted to the very
Ships, beseeching the Gods to grant them the favor, that they might see Scipio
return into Africa in the quality of Consul, as if it had been decreed by the
destinies, that Scipio only could take Carthage, and in truth many of the Army
wrote as much to Rome. The Senate gave public praises to Scipio, honored
Phameas with the Purple-robe, and chain of Gold, presented him with a Horse
barded with Gold, and a Suit of Arms of the same gave him, besides six thousand
Sesterces; and one hundred and fifty Each Mark containing eight Ounces.
Marks of wrought Silver, together with a Tent furnished with all necessary
movables, and gave him hopes of much more if he applied himself heartily to
the service of the Republic: he promised it, and afterward returned into
Africa, to join with the Roman Camp.

Calphurnius Piso Consul, and his Colleague L. Mancinus Admiral embarked for
Africa, whither being come, they made no attempt at all neither against
Carthage nor against Asdrubal, but contented themselves to make War upon the
little Cities round about, they besieged Aspida by Sea and Land, but were
forced to raise their Siege. It Is true Piso took another Town which he sacked,
though the inhabitants complained they had surrendered upon composition: From
thence he passed to Hippone which is a great City, considerable for it is Walls,
it is Castle, it is Gates, and it is Haven, and which had been thus fortified by
Agathocles Tyrant of Sicily. It being Situate near to Utica and Carthage, the
inhabitants plundered the Convoys of Victuals that were carrying to the Romans,
with which they were in some measure accommodated; wherefore Calphurnius
designed not only to chastise them, but likewise to make them restore the
Prizes they had taken. He therefore laid siege to it, which continued all the
Summer, but in vain, for the inhabitants made two ^allies, wherein being
assisted by those of Carthage, they burnt all the besiegers Engines. Thus
Summer being spent without doing any thing, the Consul went to take up his
Winter quarters at Utica.

Asdrubal's Army entire, proud of the success of Hippone, where they had beaten
Piso, and strengthened besides with eight hundred Numidian Horse, which had
revolted from Gulussa to them under the conduct of Bythias, enlarged their
hopes, besides they perceived that though Micypsa and Mavastabal, the other
sons of Masanissa, promised Arms and Money to the Romans, yet they only
temporized in expectation to see what course these affairs would take. They
began therefore to spread themselves throughout all Africa, and without fear to
fortify places in the Country, declaiming every where against the cowardice of
the Romans, and to persuade the people, they loudly proclaimed the two
expeditions of Nucera, which had redounded to their shame, the last occasion of
Hippone, where they had been so ill handled, and at last having besieged
Carthage it self though disarmed, though unprovided of all things, yet they had
been forced to raise the siege. They sent likewise to Micypsa, to Mavastabal,
and to the free Moors, to advise them to take care left if the Romans took
Carthage, they should afterward invade and subdue them. They deputed some
likewise into Macedonia, where one who called himself the Son of Perseus made
War against the Romans, to exhort him to continue it, with promises that
Carthage would not let him want either Money or Shipping. In short, now they saw
themselves armed, they entertained no other but exalted thoughts, and their
courage and their resolution daily increased, as they beheld themselves in a
better condition of defense. Asdrubal their General abroad was no less
resolute, after having twice successfully dealt with Manlius, which had raised
his thoughts to that degree that he grew ambitious of having likewise the
command of the Forces within the City, which to compass he caused Asdrubal the
Nephew of Gulussa, who at that time commanded, to be falsely accused in full
Senate, of holding intelligence with his Uncle. At which he being so surprised
that he could answer nothing for himself, was knocked on the head with stools.

But when the cowardice of Piso, and the preparations made by the Rome, the
people were extremely moved, out of an apprehension they had, left this War,
undertaken against a neighboring Nation, and from all time enemy to the Roman
name; should grow upon them. For they having been first deficient in their
word, as to what they ordained the Carthaginians, there was no more hopes left
of an accommodation. The memory of those Noble Actions done by Scipio, in
Africa, whilst he was yet but Tribune, was yet very fresh, and the comparison
of present affairs, with what he had done, raised so much the more the glory of
his reputation, and as in all meetings every one told what was writ from the
Army, all the world wished his return in quality of Consul; the day of the
Assembly for the Election of Magistrates drew nigh, but his not being of the
age admitted by Law to possess that dignity forbid his pretending to it, for he
demanded only the charge of Edile, when the people offered him the Consulate.
The Consuls stood against it, and opposed the Law contrary to this Election,
but the multitude persisted the more, alleging that by the Laws of Tullus and
Romulus, the people were Judges of the Assembly, and so it belonged to them to
approve or cancel all Laws that concerned the Assembly. At last one of the
Tribunes threatened the Consuls to take away their power of presiding if they
agreed not to the will of the people, whereupon they permitted the Tribunes to
abrogate that Law for a year, provided it were then re-established. The
Lacedaemonians it seems did the same, when being forced to make the Laws yield
to necessity, to secure from infamy those taken Prisoners at Piles, they cried
out, Let us this day give the Laws leave to sleep. Thus Scipio demanding the
Edility, obtained the Consulate, and when Drusus that was likewise named
Consul, required that the Government of the Provinces should be drawn by Lot,
one of the Tribunes assembled the people and speaking of the War with Carthage,
demanded to which of the Consuls they would give their Commission. So the
people gave to Scipio the Government of that Province, permitting him to raise
recruits to complete the old Troops and to form new ones, to receive from the
Allies all those volunteers would follow him, and to write in the name of the
people of Rome, to what Kings and Cities he thought convenient, and indeed some
Kings, and some Estates did assist him with forces.

Things thus disposed, he passed into Sicily, and from thence forthwith to
Utica, mean while Piso besieged some Inland Towns, and Mancinus lay constantly
before Carthage, where having observed a certain place in the wall neglected,
because it was almost inaccessible by reason of the rocks that surrounded it,
he thought he might secretly gain it, and having made provision of ladders
prepared for the storm; some Soldiers mounted bravely, but the Carthaginians
despising their slender Number opened a gate by the side of the rocks, and made
a Sally upon the Romans, who so briskly repulsed them, that many Soldiers
entered Pelmel with them into the City, and shouted amain, as if they had
already been Masters of it. Mancinus ravished with joy (rash and heady as he
was) with all those that remained in the Ships came forth half Armed, and ran
to the walls to second their companions, but night coming on forced the Admiral
to lodge in a certain Post near the the Walls where he kept without doing any
thing, and because he had neither Arms nor Victuals, he sent messengers to Piso
to give him notice to come to his relief, and to the Magistrates of Utica, that
they should forthwith dispatch away Provisions; for he ran the hazard of being
assaulted as soon as it was day, by the Carthaginians, and thrown headlong from
the top of the Rocks. Scipio, who landed the same Evening at Utica, having seen
Mancinus his Letter, presently caused the Trumpets to sound, to give warning to
those were already landed to get forthwith aboard, giving orders to all the
Youth of Utica to be in a readiness to follow him, and to the old men to bring
Provisions on board the Galleys, and releasing some Carthaginian Prisoners, he
sent them unto the City to let them understand that Scipio was arrived with a
mighty Fleet. He dispatched likewise several Messengers one after another to
Piso, to command him to come to him with all speed. About the last Watch he
went to Sea, giving order to the Soldiers, that as soon as they approached the
Town, they should all stand upright on the Hatches, that the Enemy might
believe them the greater number. Toward the Break of Day, Mancinus being
charged on all sides by the Carthaginians, had formed a round Battalia,
encompassed by all the armed men he had, in the midst of which were enclosed
above three thousand without Armor, but at last the Showers of Darts, and
multitudes of Wounds had reduced them to the point of seeking their safety down
the Precipices, when they saw Scipio's Ships appear full of Soldiers, which
surprised not the Carthaginians, who had already received advice of it by their
Prisoners, but saved the lives of the Romans, who were almost hopeless; for at
the approach of this Fleet, the Carthaginians gave ground, and the Romans
withdrawn from the danger wherein they were, got aboard their Ships.

Scipio sent back Mancinus to Rome (for Serranus his Successor was already come
to command the Fleet) and went himself and encamped near Carthage. The
Carthaginians on their part went and encamped directly opposite unto him,
whither came to them Asdrubal that commanded the Field-Army, and Bythias
Colonel of the Horse, with six thousand old Foot, and a thousand chosen Horse.
But Scipio finding the Military Discipline much corrupted; that under Piso the
Soldiers had been accustomed to Idleness, Rapine and Avarice; that in the Camp
there was an infinite number of those Sutlers and Pedlars, whom only the hopes
of prey made follow the Army, who debauched the best Soldiers to straggle with
them, only to pillage and plunder, though by the Rules of War, he that went so
far from the Camp, that he could not hear the Sound of the Trumpet, was to be
proceeded against as a Runaway, and that all the mischief these people did was
imputed to the Army, and all the plunder taken begot only matter of quarrel and
dissension; for it often happened, that for a trifle Comrades fell together by
the ears, and killed one another. Scipio, I say, having observed this, and
knowing well he should never compass his ends on the Enemy, unless he first
made himself Master of his own Troops, assembled his Army, and taking his Seat
on the Tribunal, spoke in this manner:

The Oration of Scipio.
YOu are Witnesses, Fellow Soldiers, that whilst I bore Arms here under
Manlius, I gave you an example of that Obedience which I desire you should pay
me now, that I have a right to command: I could as well at this instant have
punished your disobedience, but I thought it convenient first to advise you of
your duty. You know what actions you do, I am ashamed to tell you of them in
full a^^embly. You live rather like Robbers than Soldiers, and are more used to
Traffic, than to Assaults: you leave the Camp to scour the Country; and in the
midst of War you are greedy after Delights, without laboring at all for
Victory. This is the reason, why in that little time. I have been absent, the
Carthaginian Affairs are so well recovered: so that being now come to command
you, I find that the reforming your evil orders will be the greatest part of
trouble. If I certainly knew it were your own fault, I would not fail to punish
you, but because I attribute it to another, I forget what is past. For my part I
came not hither to plunder, but to conquer. I ask no Money from the Enemy
before the Victory, and will patiently wait till they be fully defeated. It Is
therefore my pleasure, that all those people in the Camp, who hear not Arms,
depart, from this very day, except only some few whom I shall give leave to
stay; and I forbid any, whoever he be, to return, unless it be to bring
Provisions, and such Provisions too as are proper for Soldiers. I will give the
Victuallers a limited time to expose their Commodities in, on which my
Treasurer.
Quaestor and I will take care to set a reasonable price. So much for what
concerns those who are not inlisted. For you my Fellow Soldiers, whatever we
attempt, I have but one order to give you, that is, that you take example by
me, whether it be for manners or diligence* and if you do it indeed, be
assured, that your Endeavors will never want Success, nor your Actions
Recompense: we must act now that the occasion requires it; let us adjourn
profit and pleasure to their Season. This is what I demand from you, what I
desire, Discipline: and then be assured, that as obedience shall be amply
rewarded, so disobedience shall be severely punished.

After having spoken thus, he forthwith caused all useless persons to be
Megara, and having sent those about, who were to make the Attaque on the one
side, he took his march toward the other, causing to be brought along Axes,
Croes and Ladders, he had already advanced a pretty way in the dark, without
making any noise, when those that were upon the Wall perceived him, which they
signified by their Cries, to which he answered first, and after him all the
Assailants in like manner. There was likewise a great Cry raised on the other
side, which gave the first terror to the Carthaginians, astonished to be two
several ways assaulted by so many Enemies, and by night. Scipio however,
notwithstanding all the endeavors he used, could not gain the Wall; but having
observed, that on the outside, and near the Walls there was a void Tower of the
same height, which belonged to a private person, he caused some resolute young
men to mount up into it, who having with force of Darts made those who defended
the Wall, dislodge, laid Planks and Joysts over, and so passed to the Parapet,
and thence leaped down into the place, and having broken open the Gate, gave
entrance to Scipio with four thousand Men, forcing the Inhabitants to retreat
into the Fortress, as if all the rest of the City had been taken. In this Alarm
and confused Tumult they took some Prisoners; and those who were encamped
without, forsaking their Camp, fled hastily to shelter themselves with the rest
in the Citadel: but Scipio perceiving this place of Megara was full of Gardens
planted with Fruit Trees, and consisted of many little Enclosures of Mud-walls,
Quick-set Hedges, Bushes, and some little Streams, fearing left the Soldiers
among so many Turnings and Windings which they were unacquainted with, might
pursue the Enemypunc; and so give them the opportunity of laying an ambush for
them, caused the Retreat to be sounded. Day appearing, Asdrubal enraged at
Scipio's boldness, caused all the Roman Prisoners he had to be brought upon the
Wall, and before their Countrymen, with Pinchers or Hooks of Iron caused their
Eyes or Tongues to be pulled out^ or their Nerves or Privy Members torn off,
some had the Soles of their Feet cut off, and others their Fingers; some he
caused to be flead alive; and then tumbled down those high Rocks. This he did
to the end* that taking away from the Carthaginians all hopes of Peace with the
Romans, and sharpening their courages to the utmost, they should expect no
safety but from their Arms: yet his design succeeded quite otherwise; for the
Carthaginians, who found themselves made Accomplices of such horrible Crimes,
became rather more timorous than hardy* and began to hate Asdrubal, who had cut
off from them all hopes of pardon, especially the Senators, who loudly
declared, that such cruelty and insolence were unseasonable in the public
Calamities, by which discourse they incensed him to that degree, that he took
some of them, and slew them with his own hands. Thus he made himself terrible,
living henceforth more like a Tyrant than a Governor, and making his security
consist in his being feared, believing that sufficient to warrant him against
all attempts might be made against his person.

Scipio ^et on fire that Camp the Carthaginians had de^erted the night before,
when they ran to save themselves in the Citadel, and being become absolute
Master of the Peninsula, he caused a Trench to be dug from one Sea to the
other, not above a Darts cast from the Enemies, who used their utmost
endeavors to hinder the work, which made it extreme painful to the Soldiers:
however, what by working, and what by fighting, they perfected it at length,
though it were five and twenty Furlongs long. This being finished; he caused
such another to be made toward the Inland, not far distant from the other, and
after that two Traverses; so that it was a kind of a square Fortification,
which he caused to be palisadoed with sharp Stakes, behind which he likewise
caused a Ditch to be made; but that he might fortify himself the better
toward Carthage, he enclosed it with a Wall five and twenty Furlongs long,
twelve Foot high, and six Foot broad, in which he placed Redoubts and Towers at
equal distances. In the midst of the Fort he caused to be erected a very high
Tower, on which he placed a square Platform, from whence he might discover all
that was done in the City. These works having been finished in four and twenty
days, and as many nights (by the continual labor of all the Soldiers, who by
turns stood to their Arms, or wrought with their working Tools) Scipio lodged
his Army. Yet he had not built this Fortification only for that use, but
likewise to serve as a Circumvallation to hinder the bringing Provisions to the
Besieged, which before came to them by land; for besides this Neck of the
Peninsula which he now possessed, all the rest was encompassed by the Sea. This
therefore was the first and principal cause of the Besieged's misery, which
soon brought a Famine into the City; for an infinte number of people being fled
out of the Country into Carthage, durst not go out again for fear of the
Besiegers; the Merchants came no more because of the War; there was no Corn
brought by Sea from Lybia, but rarely, and then when it was calm; so that the
greatest part of their Provisions came ordinarily by land, and that passage
being stopped, the City presently became afflicted with Famine. Bythias, who
commanded the Carthaginian Horse, was now abroad, whither he had been sent to
make Provisions of Corn, but he durst not come near Scipio's Entrenchments;
much less attempt to force them: so that now no Corn could come into Carth^ge,
but by Ships which were laden afar^ off, and which hardly got in, because of
the Roman Fleet which lay at Anchor not far from the Port. However, they being
forced^ to keep at a good distance, because of the danger of the Shore, which
lay open to all Storms; and likewise could not come nearer into the Port
without being subject to inconveniences from the Carthaginians Engines upon
the Walls, or of being by the violence of the Wave^ dashed^ against the Rocks,
which lie there very thick: some Ships of Burden sent from Bythias* and some
Merchant^ Ships that despised the danger, out of hopes of the gain, took their
time when it blew a fresh gale into the Port, and with all Sails spread, made
such way, that the Roman Galleys could not reach them; but these opportunities
offered but seldom; and besides, that little Provision that came by Sea was at
Asdrubal's dispose, who distributed it only to those thirty thousand Men he had
chosen for the War, and gave no part thereof to the rest of the people, though
perishing for hunger.

Scipio having observed this, dontrived how to block up the Entrance of Scipio
could have brought it to perfection; but the whole Army labored in it with an
emulation of each other, without resting day or night; insomuch, that at last
the Besieged affrighted, resolved to make another entrance on the farther side
of the Port, where the Peninsula extends it self more into the Sea* where a Dam
could not be made, both by reason of the depth of the Water, and violence of
the Winds. All the people therefore set themselves to digging, so much as the
very Women and Children, and beginning from within, and continuing their work
without telling their design; and at the same time mustering up all the old
Materials they had, they fell to make Galleys of diverse sorts, following their
business with much courage and diligence, but so secretly, that the Prisoners
themselves could give no other account to Scipio, save that they continually
heard a great noise in the Port, but knew not what it meant. Having at last
completed every thing, they suddenly opened the Mouth of the Port, and about
break of day came forth with fifty Galleys, and great quantity of Barques,
Brigantines, and other smaller Vessels, in so good order, that they were very
capable to strike. This new Mouth so unexpectedly opened, and the unthought of
coming out of such a Fleet, so startled the Romans, that had the Carthaginians
immediately fell upon their Fleet, unfurnished both of Mariners and Slaves, all
hands being employed in the Works to advance the Siege, they might easily have
made themselves Masters of it. But because it was decreed by the Destinies,
that Carthage should be razed, they contented themselves with this vain Show,
and proud Bravado, retreating into their Port without doing any thing else.

Sidon, allies of the people of Rome, had sent to Scipio, went and dropped their
Anchors out at Sea, at a good distance from the Carthaginian, and giving scope
of Cable enough advanced by force of Oars, and after having given their charge,
warped back again by their Cables, which they had brought in at their poop, and
then again returned to the Charge, and in like manner retreated. All the Fleet
followed the Example of those of Sidon, whereby the Carthaginians were much
damaged till such time as the fight having continued a good part of the night,
the remainder of their Ships ^heltred themselves in the Haven.

Scipio attempted the Key, because he thought the gaining of it would make the
mouth of the Port useless, he therefore caused Rams, and other batteries to be
planted against the Rampart, with which he beat down a part of it. But the
Carthaginians though oppressed with hunger, and many other inconveniences,
forbore not by night to assault the Roman Engines, not by Land, for there was
no passage, nor upon Ships, for the Sea was too shallow, but naked and without
light (for fear they should be discovered far of) they entered the Sea, where
none kept guard, and passing, some wading with the water up to their breasts,
and others swimning till they came very near the batteries, where when they
could no longer couceal themselves, because they had lighted their fires, naked
as they were, they received an infinite of wounds; yet not without revenge, for
their fury carried them to strange resolutions, and all gored as they were with
Arrows and Darts in their Breasts, and in their Faces, yet they abated nothing
of their violence, but like fierce beasts pressed forward to meet the strokes,
till having set fire to the Engines, they so dismayed those that defended them,
that they took their flight toward the Camp, where never before was seen such
an alarm, as this, caused by naked enraged people. Scipio astonished at the
disorder came forth of the Camp, with some Horsemen, whom he commanded to kill
those that would not stand, and with his own hands he killed some, and by that
means obliged the rest, who else had been all lost, to keep their post, where
they stood all the night in Arms. As soon as it was day, the Carthaginians
delivered from the trouble of the Engines, labored to repair that part of the
Rampire that was broken down, adding towers at certain intervals. On the other
side the Romans made other Engines, and planted them on platforms, which raised
them as high as the towers of the enemies, and from thence cast burning
torches, brimstone and pots full of flaming pitch, with which they burnt some
of them, which put the Carthaginians to flight, and opened the Romans a way to
the Key to pursue them, but because the ground on which they ran was slippery
by reason of the blood shed there, they could not overtake them. Scipio being
become Master of the Key, lodged on it, fortified it, and caused a wall of
brick to be built to the Cityward, very near the City walls, and of equal
height. When it was finished he caused four thousand Men to get upon it with
Orders to ply the enemy continually with Darts and Arrows, which extremely
afflicted them, for the two walls being of an equal height, there was scarce a
Dart thrown in vain, thus ended the Summer.

In the beginning of the Winter, Scipio determined to clear the Country Nephera
along the Marish, after having given Order to C. Lelius to march by Land to the
intent that he might force Diogenes one of Asdrubals party from an advantageous
post. As soon as he arrived, he encamped within two hundred and fifty paces of
Diogenes, and having left Gulussa in the Camp, to prosecute the War with him,
returned to Carthage. He continued often to go and return from one place to the
other, to see how things passed, till such time as two towers of the Fort in
which Diogenes was posted being thrown down, Scipi^ sends behind the Fort a
thousand chosen Soldiers, while himself assaulted the forepart with three
thousand others, choice men likewise, who marched upon the ruins, not in
confusion but in a body, the Soldiers having orders to fight so close locked
together that they could not be repulsed, those in the first rank being
sustained by the others that followed. At the noise made by the Assailants the
Africans ran to defend themselves, but whilst they were all employed there, the
thousand Soldiers behind, according to the Order given them, forced the Camp,
and having pulled out or cut the Palisadoes, violently rushed in with a
wonderful boldness whilst none were aware of it, or so much as doubted of such
an Assault. The enemies perceiving them, betook themselves to flight, for they
believed them a far greater Number then what they saw, and Gulussa who pursued
them with his Numidians, and Elephants, made a strange and bloody slaughter,
for there perished threescore and ten thousand men, accounting the Country
people, ten thousand were taken Prisoners, and not above four thousand in all
saved themselves. Afterward Scipio took the City of Nephera with great labor,
the siege lasting two and twenty days in a cold season and incommodious place.
This victory contributed much to the taking of Carthage, for the Army at
Nephera furnished the besieged with provisions, and that Fort hardened the
Africans in their obstinacy, but after it was taken, all the other garrisons in
the Country voluntarily surrendered to Scipio's Captains. Thus all the Country
about Carthage being under the Roman obedience, and it being impossible to have
any thing by Sea by reason of the War and Winter, Victuals grew very scarce in
the City.

Scipio assaulted the Citadel called Byrsa, and and the gate called Coton at
the same time, which caused Asdrubal to set on fire that part of the gate which
was square, but whilst he expected Scipio should make a new attempt on that
side, and stood firm with the inhabitants; Lelius mounted privately by the
other side of the gate which was of a round figure, and making himself Master
of it, the shouts of those that were already got up, so dismayed the enemies,
that the other Soldiers now contemning the besieged, and having filled all the
places difficult to pass with Beams, Engines and Planks* they leapt in on all
sides, in spite of all the resistance of the guards oppressed with hunger, and
lost to all courage: Scipio thus possessed of the wall that encompassed the gate
called Coton, got thence into the great place of the City which was nigh unto
it, where night coming on, and not suffering him to go farther; he kept there
in Arms with those Soldiers he had with him, and as soon as day broke, caused
four thousand fresh men to come thither, who being got into Apollo's Temple,
plundered his Statue, which was all of Gold, and all the inside of the Temple,
which was covered with Plates of Gold, of a thousand Talents weight. They cut
in pieces the Plates with their Swords, do what their Captains could to hinder
them, till such time as having got what they could, they pursued their
enterprise. Mean while Scipio's chief design was against the place called
Byrsa, for that was the strongest of all the City, and a world of people were
retreated thither. The way from the great place thither, was up hill, through
three Streets, on each side of which there was a continuance of very high
houses, whose upper stories jetting somewhat over into the Street, whole
showers of Darts flew from thence upon the Romans, who were constrained before
they passed farther, to force the first houses, and there post themselves, that
from thence they might drive out those that fought in the neighboring houses,
and after they had driven them out, they laid Beams and Planks from one side of
the Street to the other, on which, as on Bridges they passed cross the Streets,
thus they maintained War in the Chambers, whilst as fast as they met, they
fought more cruelly below in the Streets. All places were filled with cries and
groans, people dying a thousand different sorts of Deaths, some at
Swords-point, some thrown headlong down from the tops of the houses, upon the
pavement, others falling upon Javelins, Pikes and Swords, presented against
them, however none durst yet set fire, because of those who maintained the
fight in the losts; but when Scipio had gained the foot of the Fortress, all
the three Streets were immediately on a flame, and the Soldiers had charge to
hinder the ruins of the houses caused by the fire, from falling into the
Street, that the whole Army might have the more convenient passage: And now
were new spectacles of calamity to be seen, the fire devouring, and overturning
the houses, and the Roman Soldiers all about, so far from hindering it, that
they endeavored to involve the rest in the same ruin. The miserable
Carthaginians in despair falling confusedly with the Stones and Bricks on the
Pavement, dead bodies, nay people yet living, and especially old Men, Women and
Children, who had hid themselves in the most secret places of the houses, some
laden with wounds others half burnt, and all crying out in a deplorable manner,
others tumbling headlong from the upper stories of the houses, among the Mass
of Stones and Wood, were in their falls torn in pieces. Nor was this the end of
their miseries, for the Pioneers who to make way for the Soldiers removed the
Rubbish out of the middle of the Streets, tossed with their Hooks and Forks,
the bodies, as well of the dead as living into the vaults, turning them with
their Iron Instruments, as if they had been pieces of Wood or Stones, so that
there might be seen holes full of heaps of men, of which some having been
headlong thrown in, yet breathed a long time, and lay with their legs above
ground, and others interred up to the neck, were exposed to the cruelty of the
Masons and Pioneers, who took pleasure to see their heads, and brains crushed
under the horses feet, for these sort of people placed not those wretches, so
by chance, but of set purpose. As for the Men of War their being engaged in the
fight, with the hopes of approaching victory, the eagerness of the Soldiers,
heightened by the sounds of the Trumpets, the noise made by the Majors and
Captains in giving their Orders, made them even like furies and hindered them
from amusing themselves at these Spectacles. In this bloody toil they continued
six days and six nights without respit, save only that the Soldiers were from
time to time relieved by other fresh ones, lest the continual watchings, labor,
slaughter and horror should make their hearts fail them. Scipio only bore out
all this time without sleeping, he was continually in action, continually
running from one place to another, and taking no food, but what offered it self
by chance as he was passing, till such time as quite tired out he sat down in
an eminent place, that he might see what passed. Mean while strange havoc was
made on all sides, and this calamity seemed likely to continue much longer,
when on the seventh day they had recourse to his clemency and came to him
bringing in their hand the Vervein of Aesculapius, whose Temple is the most
considerable in all the Fortress, desiring no other composition, but that he
would please to give their lives, to all that would come forth, which he
granted to them, except only to the Runaways. There came forth fifty thousand
as well Men as Women, whom he caused to pass out of the little Gate toward the
Fields, with a good guard. The Runaways who were about nine hundred, seeing
there was no mercy for them withdrew into the Temple with Asdrubal his Wife and
Children, where though they were but a small Number they might defend
themselves, because of the height of the place situated upon Rocks, and to
which in times of peace they ascended by sixty steps, but at length oppressed
with famine, watchings and fear, and seeing their destruction so nigh,
Impatience siesed them, and quitting the lower part of the Temple they fled to
the highest story. Asdrubal mean while privately withdrew himself, and went to
Scipio with a branch of Olive in his hand: Scipio having commanded him to come
up, and prostrate himself at his feet, showed him to the Runaways, who seeing
him, demanded silence, which being granted after having vomited forth an
infinite number of revilings and reproaches against Asdrubal, they set fire to
the Temple, and buried themselves in the flame. It is said that whilst the fire
was kindling, Asdrubals Wife decking her self in the best manner she could, and
placing her self in the sight of Scipio, spoke to him with a loud voice in this
manner.

The Oration of Asdrubals Wife.
I Wish nothing to thee, O Roman, but all prosperity, for thou do act only
according to the rights of War. But I beseech the Gods of Carthage* and thou
thy self to punish, as he deserves, that Asdrubal, who has betrayed his
Country, his Gods, his Wife and his Children, and then addressing her Speech to
Asdrubal. Perfidious Wretch (said she) thou most wicked of all mankind! This
fire is about to devour me and my Children: but thou, Great Captain of
Carthage, for what Triumph art not thou reserved, or what Punishment will not
he make thee suffer, at whose feet I now see thee.

After these reproaches she cut her Childrens throats and cast them into the
fire, and then threw her self headlong in; such, as is reported, was the end of
this Woman, but this death had certainly better become her Husband.

Scipio, seeing that City which had flourished for seven hundred years since it
was first built, comparable to any Empire whatsoever for Extent of Dominion by
Sea and Land, for its Arms, for its Fleets, for its Elephants, for its Riches,
and preferable even to all Nations on the Earth for Generosity and Resolution,
since after their Arms and Ships were taken away, they had supported themselves
against Famine and War for three years together. Seeing it, I say, now
absolutely ruined, it is said that he shed tears and publicly deplored the hard
fortune of his enemies. He considered that Cities, People and Empires are
subject to Revolutions, as well as the conditions of private Men, that the same
disgrace had happened to Troy that powerful City, and afterward to the
Assyrians, Medes and Persians, whose Dominion extended so far, and lately to
the Macedonians, whose Empire was so great and flourishing, which was the
reason that unawares, and as it were without thinking of it, that Distich of
Homers escaped him. Priam's and Troy's time come, they Fates obey,
And must to Fire and Sword be made a prey.


And Polybius who had been his Tutor, demanding of him in familiar discourse,
what he meant by those words, he ingeniously answered, That the consideration
of the Vicissitude of Humane Affairs, had put him in mind of his Country, whose
Fate he likewise feared; as the same Polybius reports in his Histories.

Carthage thus taken, Scipio gave the Plunder to the Soldiers for some days,
except only the Gold and Silver, and Offerings, which were found in the
Temples. After which he distributed several Military recompenses to all his
Soldiers, except only to those who had pillaged Apollo's Temple. And having
caused a very light Ship to be laden with the spoil of the Enemy, he sent it
to Rome to carry news of the Victory, and caused it be signified throughout all
Sicily, that those who would come, and claim the offerings made to their
Temples, which had been carried away by the Carthaginians when they had made
War in that Island, should have them restored. Thus giving testimonies of his
goodness in all that he could, he gained the good will of all people. And at
last having sold what remained of the spoil, he caused all the Bucklers, Engines
and useless Ships, to be piled together, and being girt after the manner of the
Romans, set fire to them as a sacrifice to Mars and Minerva.

The Ship that went from Carthage, happened to arrive at Rome in an Evening,
where as soon as the news was known of the taking of that City, all the people
flocked to the public places, and the Night was spent in rejoycings and
embracing each other, as if this Victory (the greatest that ever the Romans had
gained) had confirmed the Public Repose, which they before thought unsecure.
They knew well, that they and their Predecessors had done great things against
the Macedonians, the Spaniards, and lately against the Great Antiochus, as
likewise in Italy; but they confessed they never had a War so much to be feared
as this, by reason of the generosity, prudence and hardiness of their Enemies;
nor so perilous, by reason of their infidelity: They likewise remembered the
miseries they had suffered by the Carthaginians in Sicily, in Spain, and
likewise in Italy, for sixteen whole years together, during which Hannibal had
sacked four hundred Cities, and destroyed in diverse encounters three hundred
thousand men, and being several times come to the very Gates of their City, had
reduced them to the last extremities. These things considered, made them with
difficulty believe, what was tole of the victory, and they often demanded of
one another if it were certain that Carthage was destroyed. Thus they past the
night in recounting one to another, how after having disarmed the
Carthaginians, they had presently made themselves new Arms, beyond the judgment
of all the World. How having taken away their Ships, they had built others of
old stuff; and how having stopped the entrance of their Port, they had in a few
days dug a new one, on the other side. They spoke likewise of the unmeasurable
height of their Walls* the vast stones they were built with, the fire which
they had several times put to the Engines. In short they represented to the
eyes of the Auditors the whole figure of this War; insomuch that giving life to
their discourse by their gesture they seemed to see Scipio on the Ladders, on
the Ships, in the Gates, and in the Streets, running from one side to the other.

The people having thus spent the night, on the morrow solemn sacrifices were
made to the Gods, and Public Prayers, wherein every Tribe assisted separately:
after which Plays and Spectacles were exhibited to public view, and then the
Senate sent ten Commissioners, of the Number of the Fathers, to settle jointly
with Scipio, such Orders as were most necessary for that Province and for the
Romans best advantage. As soon as they were arrived they Ordered Scipio to
demolish what remained of Carthage; henceforth forbidding any to inhabit there,
with horrible imprecations against those, who in prejudice of this Interdict,
should attempt to Rebuild any thing, especially the Fort called Byrsa, and the
place called Megara, to the rest they defended no man's entrance. They decreed
likewise, that all the Cities which in that War had held on the Enemies party
should be razed, and gave their Territories Conquered by the Roman Arms, to the
Roman Allies, particularly gratifying those of Utica, with all the Country
extending from Carthage to Hippone, they made all the rest of the Province
Tributary, from which neither Men nor Women were exempt, resolving that every
year there should a Praetor sent form the City, and having given these Orders
they returned to Rome. Scipio having Executed them, and beholding himself at
the height of his wishes, made sacrifices, and set forth Plays in Honor of the
Gods, and after settling all things in a good condition returned to Rome,
whither he entered in Triumph. Never was any thing beheld more glorious, for
there was nothing to be seen but Statues and Rarities, and curious pieces of an
inestimable price, which the Carthaginians had for so long a time been bringing
into Africa, from all parts of the World, where they had gained an infinite of
Victories. This happened near the same time that Mummius Triumphed the third time
over the Macedonians, and the first time over the Greeks, after having overcome
Andriscus, who gave himself out to be Philip, about the hundred and sixteenth
Olympiad. Some time after there arising several seditions in the City because
of the poverty of the people, under the Tribuneship of Gracchus, it was advised
to send six thousand people to inhabit in Africa; but when setting forth the
foundations of this Colony, in the place where formerly stood Carthage, it was
found the Wolves had removed the marks, the Senate forbad their further
proceeding. Long time after, when Caesar who was created Dictator, after his
Victory over Pompey, pursued him into Egypt, and from thence came into Africa
to prosecute the War, against the friends of his dead Enemy, it is said that he
saw in a dream a great Army, which shedding of tears called to him, and that
moved with this dream, he set down in his Table Book, the design he had to
Rebuild Carthage and Corinth; but being soon after killed by his Enemies in the
Senate, Caesar Augustus his Son finding by chance that Memorial, caused
Carthage to be Rebuilt, which we may now behold near the place where the
Ancient Carthage stood, for he took care not to fall under the Execrations
fulminated when it was demolished. I find it on Record that they sent near
three thousand inhabitants from Rome, and that the neighboring Cities
completed the peopling of it. Thus was Africa reduced into the form of a
Province, and Carthage ruined by the Romans was Rebuilt by themselves, and
Repeopled one hundred and one years after it was demolished.

The End of the Roman Wars in Lybia.
APPIAN OF ALEXANDRIA, HIS HISTORY OF THE Roman Wars IN SYRIA.
Book II.
The Argument of this Book.
I. ANtiochus undertakes to make War against the Romans, without any just
cause. II. His preparations; Hannibal comes to him, advises him to carry the
War into Italy, and sends Ariston the Tyrian to Carthage, to stir up the
people. III. A Conference between Scipio the African and Hannibal. IV.
Antiochus, on the promises of the Etolians, begins the War. V. Hannibal's
Speech to divert the King from prosecuting the War, till his Forces were come
out of Asia. VI. The Romans prepare for War, mean while Antiochus besieges
Larissa, but raises his Siege, and goes to winter at Chalcedon, where he
Marries, though above fifty years old. VII. Manius, General of the Romans;
pursues Antiochus, who stays for him at the straits of Thermopylae, where they
engage, and Antiochus is defeated. VIII. Public Prayers for Manius Victory,
which is followed by the surrendry of many places; Antiochus causes his Forces
to come from Asia. IX. L. Scipio Consul prepares to come and command the Army
after Manius; mean while Livius, Admiral of the Romans, and Polexenidas,
Commander of Antiochus's Fleet, engage, where Livius gets the better. X. L.
Scipio, and his Brother the African pass into Etolia, and thence into Thrace;
whilst Livius, Successor of Attilius, takes many Towns; and Polexenidas
deceives Pausimachus, General of the Rhodian Fleet. XI. Seleucus, the Son of
Antiochus, invades Eumenes his Kingdom, and besieges Pergamus, whence he raises
his Siege, mean while the Roman Fleet defeats that of Antiochus. XII. He quits
all he held in Europe, which the Scipio's possess themselves of; then follow
that King, and overtake him at Sardis, where conditions of Peace are proposed,
which he will not accept. XIII. He is forced to come to a Battle, wherein he is
utterly defeated. XIV. The Scipio's grant him Peace, on conditions which the
Senate confirm; for which the African is accused of corruption, and defends
himself in an extraordinary manner. XV. Manius, Successor of Scipio, gives
Order to the rest of the Affairs of Asia, and brings back the Army into Italy,
where he dismisses them, and the Senate rewards the Rhodians and Eumenes. XVI.
An account of the Successors of Antiochus their actions; and how the Romans
reduced Syria, to the form of a Province. XVII. The State of the Affairs of
Syria from Alexander the Great, till Seleucus Nicanor came to be King. XVIII.
His Life and Actions. XIX. The History of the Marriage of Antiochus with
Stratonice, and the death of Seleucus. XX. Continuation of the Descendants of
Seleucus to Antiochus the Great, and a short recapitulation of his Successors.

ANtiochus, King of Syria, Babylon, and of many other Countries, was the Son of
Seleucus, Grandchild of Antiochus, and the sixteenth Successor from that
Seleucus, who after the Death of Alexander, reigned in that part of Asia,
confining on the Euphrates. This Prince made the first proof of his Arms
against the Medes, the Parthians and other people revolted from his
Predecessors, where he signalized himself by so many Heroic Actions, that he
gained the surname of Great. Afterward the success of his first Enterprises,
and that glorious Title raising his courage, he despoiled Ptolemy Philopator,
King of Egypt, yet but an Infant, of the lower Syria, and part of Cilicia; and
after that, setting no bound to his designs, he transported the War toward the
Hellespont into Etolia and Ionia, where he claimed a right, by virtue of his
being King of Asia, because formerly those Countries had been under the
Dominion of the Kings of Asia. From thence passing into Europe, he became
Master of Thrace, constraining those who offered to resist to pay him
obedience. He likewise fortified the Chersonesus, and rebuilt Lysimachia, which
Lysimachus, King of Thrace, after Alexander had built as a Citadel to keep the
people in subjection; and which after his death, the Thracians had demolished.
Antiochus undertook to repeople it, making those Inhabitants, which went out of
it return, redeeming those that were in slavery, and drawing thither many new
ones, giving them Sheep and Oxen, and Iron to Till the Ground. He was very
desirous with all possible expedition to put this City in a condition, and to
make it the seat of that War he had resolved on, because he believed that in
all Thrace there was no place more proper to be made a Magazine of Corn, and
other Provisions. A great number of people had already surrendered unto him, and
received the Garrisons for fear of his Arms, when those of Smyrna, Lampsacus,
and many others, who would not submit to his Yoke, sent their Deputies to
Flaminius the Roman General, who a little before had in a great Battle defeated
Philip of Macedon in Thessaly; for in those times and before, the Affairs of
Greece and Macedon were exremely embroiled, as we have related in the Greek
Histories. There were many deputations on one part and the other, between
Antiochus and Flaminius, but without any effect; for the Romans and Antiochus
had for a long time been distrustful of one another. The Romans were of
opinion, that this King grown now so powerful, would not, after so many happy
successes, consent to Peace and Repose; and that Prince saw that the Romans
only could oppose his designs, there being small likelihood they would ever
suffer him to establish a Dominion in Europe: Yet hitherto there was no
occasion given of a breach, when the Ambassadors of Ptolemy Philopater came to
Rome to complain that Antiochus had dispoiled him of Syria and Cilicia. The
Senate and people of Rome were very glad that this occasion presented, and
presently sent their Ambassadors to Antiochus, under pretense of reconciling
the two Kings: but indeed to observe the designs of Antiochus, and oppose them
as much as they could possible. Cneus, chief of this Embassy, required of the
King, That he would not hinder Ptolemy, who was a friend of the people of Rome,
from enjoying what had been left by his Fathers: and that he should leave in
liberty those Cities, which formerly belonged to Philip of Macedon, saying it
was not reasonable, that he should take to himself what the people of Rome had
conquered. To this he added, That they were astonished he should come from
Medea to the Sea-costs of Asia, with so great a Fleet, and so powerful an Army,
and already begin to trouble Europe by building of Cities, and making himself
Master of Thrace, and that there was great appearance all these were but
preparations to another War. The King made answer, That his Predecessors had
formerly possessed Thrace, but being busied elsewhere, it had been usurped from
them, and that now, that he had leisure, he would recover the Possession, and
had rebuilt Lysimachia for the Residence of his Son Seleucus. For the rest, he
would leave the Cities of Asia in liberty, provided they would own the
Obligation from him, and not from the people of Rome. But for what respects
Ptolemy, (said he) I am his Kinsman, and shall suddenly be his Father-in-law,
and then shall take care to act in such a manner, as he shall give you thanks
for the good office you have done him: but let me in my turn be astonished too,
not being able to comprehend by what right the people of Rome meddle with the
Affairs of Asia, since I meddle not with those of Italy. Thus they parted,
without doing any thing save threatening one another. Some time after a report
was spread, that Ptolemy Philopater was dead, which made Antiochus to take his
way toward Egypt, with design to seize that Kingdom, which the death of that
King might make an easy Conquest. Being at Ephesus, Hannibal driven from
Carthage by the calumnies of his Enemies, who had accused him to the Romans, as
factious and likely to trouble the Peace now between them, came to salute him,
and offer him his service; and as he had the Reputation of a great Captain, the
King received him with much^ kindness, and kept him near his person. Being gone
as far as Lycia, he understood that Ptolemy was yet living, whereupon he
quitted the design of Egypt, out of hopes that he might easily seize Cyprus,
and to that intent, he embarked for that Island; but was surprised with so
furious a Tempest near the River Sara, that he lost a great number of his
Ships, and many of his Friends, Mariners and Soldiers; and the rest of his
Fleet being carried by the Storm to Seleucia in Syria, he there caused his
Ships to be repaired, which were much out of order, and celebrated the Nuptials
of his Children, Antiochus and Laodice, whom he had before made enter into
contract of Marriage.

Cleopatra, surnamed Syra to Ptolemy in Egypt, and gave her in Dower the lower
Or Coelosyria.
Syria, which he had formerly usurped from him, hoping thus to appease that
young man, that he might attempt nothing on that side during the War. He sent
likewise Antiochida to Ariarathes, King of Cappadocia, and the last to Eumenes,
King of Pergamus: But that King knowing the design he had of making War upon
the Romans, and that it was only for that end that he sought his Alliance,
excused himself; and when his Brother Attalus and Phileter wondered that he
despised the Alliance of so great a King his Neigbour, who offered it of
himself; he laid before them the importance of this War, in which possibly in
the beginning they might fight with equal Forces, but that in the end the
Romans would prove victorious, by reason of that courage and generosity, which
rendered them undefatigable. In which case, said he, I shall remain free and
secure in my Kingdom; but if Antiochus overcome, it is possible so powerful a
Neighbo^r may deprive me of my Estates; or if he let me keep them, 'twill be
only on conditions of submission to his Empire. These were the Reasons why he
would not accept the Match.

Now Antiochus being returned to the Hellespont, and passed over into
Chersonesus, took many places in Thrace, either by force or surrender, set at
liberty all the Greeks that were under the Dominion of the Thracians, and was
extremely liberal to those of Constantinople.
Bizantium, because their City being seated at the mouth of the Sea, was very
commodious for War; he likewise by his bounty, and the terror of his Arms, drew
the Galatians to his party, judging those great Bodies were very proper to
oppose the Romans in a Battle. After this he came to Ephesus, whence he Deputed
Lysias, Eginetes and Menippus to Rome, in effect to pry into the intentions of
the Senate, but in appearance to tell the Fathers: That always hitherto he had
been affectionate to the Roman Name, and likewise that he had been desired to
have been received into their Alliance, if they had thought him worthy.
However, he could not but wonder that they should order him to quit the Cities
of Ionia, to release to some of them the Tribute they ought him, not to meddle
with the Affairs of Asia, and to abandon the Possession of Thrace, which he
held of his Ancestors; for that such kind of commands were usually given to the
Conquered, and not to Friends. The Senate knowing well that these Ambassadors
were only come to sound them, answered in few words, If Antiochus leave the
Asiatique Greeks at liberty, and touches nothing in Europe, he may be, if he
pleases, friend of the people of Rome. This was all they said, without giving
any farther reason to the Ambassadors. Antiochus thereupon designing as soon as
he could to seize upon Greece, that from thence he might begin the War against
the Romans, thought good to communicate his intentions to Hannibal, who told
him, That Greece having for a long time been afflicted with War, he thought
there would be no great difficulty in seizing upon it. But that it was hard for
a Prince to make War in his own Country, because of the scarcity of Provisions
that might happen, but much more easy to maintain it in his Enemies Country:
That Antiochus would never attain his desires upon the Romans in Greece,
considering the conveniences they had of supplying themselves with Provisions,
and the faculty of raising Men: He therefore counseled him to si^se on some
part of Italy, and make that the seat of the War, whereby the Roman Affairs
would, as well at home as abroad be weakened. I know, said he, Italy perfectly
well; and if you will give me but ten tho^sand men, dare promise my self to
land and post my self in some place convenient for your designs, from thence I
will write to my Friends in Carthage, to engage them to stir up the people to
revolt, who already of themselves weary of the present Government, preserve no
great fidelity for the Romans, and who out of hopes of a better Fortune, will
attempt any thing as soon as they hear of my return to Italy. The King with
pleasure listened to this advice; and considering (as true it was) that the
Engagement of the Carthaginians in this War, was of no small importance, gave
him charge to write forthwith to his Friends. However he writ not, for he could
not do it with safety, the Romans having their Spies every where, and the War
not being yet declared: Besides there were many envious persons in Carthage,
and that Republic was troubled with those Divisions, which not long after were
the cause of its ruin. Howbeit, he sent to his Friends a certain Tyrian
Merchant, called Ariston, who came to Carthage, under pretense of Trade, and by
him he desired them, that as soon as they heard he was entered Italy, they
should move the people to revenge the outrages they had received; he acquitted
himself very well of his Commission: for Hannibal's Enemies knowing of the
coming of this Ariston, began to make a great noise, as if he had the
management of some contrivance to the prejudice of the Public, so that search
was made for the Tyrian, and he, that he might not only engage the Friends of
Hannibal, fixed up by Night in the Place a certain Writing, by which that
Captain exhorted all the Senate to join with Antiochus for the defense of the
Country, and that done, gets him to Sea. Morning being come, and the Writing
read, the Friends of Hannibal found themselves by this invention discharged of
any suspicion could be had of them, because it was believed the whole Senate
had part in this advertisement. However the people knew not what to resolve on,
they affected not the Roman Rule, but they had neither the power, nor the
boldness to attempt any thing.

Mean while the Romans to cry quits with Antiochus, sent him likewise Scipio
the African. They came to Ephesus, where understanding that he was gone into
Pisidia, they staid for him, and during his absence, had several conferences
with Hannibal. They expostulated with him, that whilst Carthage was in Peace,
and Antiochus upon the point of being declared Enemy of the people of Rome, he
had left his Country, though since the League, neither he nor any other
Carthaginian had any cause of complaint. This was a policy in the Ambassadors,
who believed by these familiarities with Hannibal, they might bring him under
suspicion with the King, of which, as great a Politician as he was, he was not
at all aware: But the King being advertised of it, grew jealous of him, and
confided not in him, as he had done before: but besides his jealousy,
Antiochus grew envious of this great Commander, fearing left, if his Affairs
had success, all the Glory would be attributed to Hannibal. One day (as it is
said) these two excellent men, holding a conference before a numerous Auditory,
fell upon a discourse of great Captains; and Scipio having asked Hannibal, who
of them all he esteemed to be the greatest? He replied, Alexander of Macedon:
To which Scipio agreed, because he yielded to Alexander: And thereupon asking
again, to whom he gave the second place, he named Pyrrhus King of Epire,
because in his Judgment, Boldness and Courage were the principal Virtues of a
General of an Army, and of all Kings he had ever heard speak of, he had known
none more hardy. Scipio approved not this so well, yet he asked him again, To
whom he gave the third place? To my self, said he, for scarce crept out of my
Infancy, I made my self Master of Spain; I am the first, after Hercules, that
has passed the Alps with an Army; and being entered into Italy, have struck a
terror through all places: I have taken and sacked four hundred Cities, and
all this without any assistance, either of Men or Money from the Carthaginians.
Here Scipio interrupting these Bravadoes, told him smiling; And in what degree
would you have placed youy self, if I had not overcome you? I would have then
ranked my self, said he, before Alexander. Thus without diminishing any thing
of his own Glory, he obliged Scipio with an ingenious praise, telling him he
had vanquished a Captain greater than Alexander. Their conference ended:
Hannibal prayed Scipio to go and lie at his Apartment; which Scipio answered,
he would freely have done, had he not been with Antiochus, whom the Romans had
a present distrust of. Thus did these great Captains, by a Generosity worthy of
themselves, measure their enmities only by the Wars in which they were engaged.
Flaminius did not so, for finding, after the defeat of Antiochus, Hannibal, who
fled to have saved himself in Bithynia, in the Court of King Prusias, where
that Roman was in Embassy upon other Affairs, though he had never received any
particluar offense, nor had any order from the Senate, there being now no
reason to fear him, Carthage being subdued; yet he constrained him to end his
days by Poison. It Is said this death had been foretold him by the Oracle in
these terms.

In the Libyssan land shall Hannibal dye. But he himself was deceived, for he
hoped to dye in Libya, never thinking that in Bithynia, there was a River
called Libyssa, which gave name to the adjacent Country. I have related these
Examples, as well of the Generosity of Scipio and Hannibal, as of the contrary
baseness of Flaminius, because I thought them not unworthy to find a place in
this History.

Antiochus upon his return from Pisidia, after having given Audience to the
Deputies of the Rhodians, promised to leave in liberty both them, the
Byzantines, and all the other Greeks, bordering upon Asia, in case he came to
an agreement with the Romans; but would not grant the same conditions to the
Etolians and Ionians, because they had already been accustomed to the Dominion
of the Kings of Asia, as barbarous, as they were. As for the Roman Ambassadors,
they returned without doing any thing; nor indeed came they for any other
intent, but to gain knowledge of the Estate of Antiochus his Affairs. After
their departure, came the Deputies of Etolia, of whom Thoas was the Chief, who
offered the King all the Forces they had, advising him to pass forthwith into
Greece, as to an easy Conquest: Telling him, There was no necessity he should
stay for those Forces that were to come out of the midst of Asia, for the
Etolian Powers were more than sufficient, and besides the Lacedaemonians* and
Philip of Macedon, sworn Enemy of the Romans, would join with him as soon as he
should be entered into Greece, but that he could not use too much diligence,
Antiochus presently took fire, nor could the news brought him of his Sons being
dead in Syria hinder his embarquing, but with ten thousand men only, he went
and landed in the Island of Euboea, which he so terrified, that they yielded to
pay him Obedience. Micithion, one of his Captains, began likewise prosperously
enough; for having found some Romans in the Island of Delos, which is
consecrated to Apollo, he cut part of them in pieces, and took the rest
Prisoners. Amynander, King of the Athamanians, joined himself likewise to
Antiochus, and that for the reason we are about to relate. A certain
Macedonian, called Alexander, bred at Megalopolis, to whom the Inhabitants had
granted the freedom of becoming a Burgess of their City, had persuaded them by
extravagant lies, that he was of the Race of Alexander, the Son of Philip; and
to gain the more credit to his knavery, he called his Children, the one Philip,
and the other Alexander, and the last, which was a Daughter, Apamia, whom he
gave in Marriage to Amynander, Philip, Brother to the Maid, and who had
conducted her to her Husband, seeing his weakness and ignorance in Affairs, had
staid with this his Brother-in-law to Govern his Estates, in favor of the
Alliance. Antiochus took hold of this occasion, putting this Philip in hopes
that he would re-establish him in the Kingdom of Macedon, which belonged to him
by Succession from his Ancestors; and by this means he drew the Athamanians to
his party, as he did likewise the Thebans by going to Thebes, where he made an
Oration to the people.

Thus having rashly enough undertook a War of such great importance, Anynander,
the Thebans and the Etolians, he held a Council concerning Thessaly, whether he
should presently siese it, or stay till Winter were past. Hannibal being at
this Assembly, where he had kept silence till the King desired his advice, then
gave it in these terms.

The Oration of Hannibal
I Am of the opinion it is indifferent, whether you siese upon Thessaly before
Winter or after: but know, that people broken by a long train of misfortunes,
though they may at present testify an inclination to you, will not stick to
range themselves on the Roman party, if there happen to you the least disgrace:
Besides we are come hither without any Forces of our own, persuaded by the
Etolians, that the Lacedaemonians and Philip will join with us; and yet I fear
the Lacedaemonians are no less our Enemies than the Achaians: For Philip, though
he should declare for you, I cannot perceive in the condition, wherein things
stand, that it would be of much importance which party he takes, but I am firm
in this judgment, that you forthwith cause your Troops to come out of Asia,
without placing your hopes, either upon the Etolians or Amynander, and that as
soon as they are come, you enter Italy, that the Romans thereby sufficiently
pestered to find remedies for Domestic mischiefs, may attempt nothing against
your Dominions, nor, fearing to leave home defenseless, permit their Forces to
range abroad. To this purpose you must divide your Fleet into two parts, one of
which may waste the Coasts of Italy, whilst the other is kept in readiness,
expecting some favorable conjuncture. In the mean time you are to post your
self with your Land Army on the Frontiers of Greece, near unto Italy, both to
hold them always in terror, and to make an irruption as soon as you can
possibly. Then it will be to some purpose to use all sorts of means to engage
Philip to your interests, for which part soever he takes, he will be of no
small consequence. And if you cannot gain him, you must send your Son Seleucus
to enter his Country with an Army on the Thracian side, that seeing himself
embroiled in a Domestic War, the Enemy may draw no assistance from him.

This was Hannibal's opinion, which certainly was not ill, nor indeed was there
any better proposed in the Assembly. But the envy born to this great Man,
joined with a fear, the King and Counselors had, le^^ he should appear more
understanding in the mystery of War than they, or that if things succeeded, all
the Glory would be attributed to him, hindered its being followed, save only
that Polexenidas was dispatched into Asia, to cause the Army advance.

Greece, and of the defeat of the Romans in Delos, declared Antiochus Enemy to
the Roman people: And thus after the distrust so long time had on one part and
the other, they came to an open War. But because the King was Possessor of vast
Territories in the Continent, and of almost all the Seacoasts, that he was
entered into Europe, where he had begot a fear of him, as well because of his
mighty preparations, as of the Glory of those brave Actions had gained him the
title of Great, the Romans believed that this War would be of a long
continuance; and besides, they were distrustful of Philip of Macedon, whom they
had lately vanquished, and doubtful lest the Carthaginians should violate the
League, because of Hannibal, who was with Antiochus, they had moreover in
suspicion some Provinces newly conquered, and fearful lest they should make
some insurrection, when they saw Antiochus in Arms, wherefore they sent Forces
to bridle them with Garrisons, and with Propretors, who had each of them
carried before them six Axes, and to whom they gave one half of the Authority
attributed to the Consuls, as they bore half their Ensigns: And because in this
great danger, they were likewise doubtful lest Italy should not prove
altogether faithful, or stand steadfast with them against Antiochus, they sent a
powerful Army unto Tarentum, to hinder the Enemies entrance, whilst their Fleet
coasted round the Country, so much did Antiochus at first terrify them. After
they thought they had sufficiently secured Affairs within; they set themselves
to levy Soldiers, of whom they raised twenty thousand in the City, and twice as
many in the Cities of their Allies, with design in the Spring to pass into
Ionia. Thus they spent the Winter in making their preparations. In the mean
time Antiochus took his march toward Thessaly, and being come to the place
called Cynocephalos or Dogshead, he Magnificently buried the bodies of those
that had been slain, which had hitherto lain without Sepulcher, gaining by this
means the good will of the Macedonians, and loading Philip with the hatred of
his people, incensed that he had not taken the care to bury the bodies of those
had been slain in his service. Philip was yet uncertain what party he should
take, but hearing this news, he streightway preferred the Romans, and sending
for Bebius, that commanded the Army, that lay hard by, took between his hands
the Oath of Alliance against Antiochus. Bebius praised him, and henceforward
trusted in him, so far that sending Appius Claudius with two thousand Men into
Thessaly, he made not any difficulty of causing him to march through the midst
of Macedonia. Claudius being come to Tempe, nigh Antiochus his Camp that
besieged Larissa, kindled great fires that he might make the Enemy believe he
was come with a powerful Army. The King did believe it, and persuading himself
it was Bebius and Philip him; Fear made him raise the Siege of Larnissa, and
making the season his pretense which began to grow cold, he went to take up his
Winter Quarters at Chalcis. Here he fell in love with a beautiful Virgin,
though he were above fifty years old, and Married her with Great Pomp and
Magnificence, without considering he had upon his hands a War, wherein all his
Glory lay at stake. He spent the whole Winter in pleasure and divertisement,
and suffered his Army to do the like, but having in the first of the Spring
made an inroad into Acarnania, he too well perceived that Soldiers accustomed
to Idleness were difficultly retrived, and began to repent of his Marriage, and
the delights to which he had abandoned himself. Not but that he did somewhat in
this Country; Some places submitted to him, and others he took by force, but
having intelligence that the Romans passed the Ionian Sea, he returned to
Chalcis.

Their Army was composed of two thousand Horse, and twenty thousand Manius
Acilius Glabrio, who being passed from Or Brindisium.
Brundusium into Apolonia took his march toward Thessaly, raising in his way,
the sieges from before such Cities as the Enemy had invested, and driving out
the Garrisons from those who had received them, he reduced likewise, that
Philip of Megalopolis, who had the forementioned pretensions on the Kingdom of
Macedon, and took Prisoners about three thousand of Antiochus Soldiers. Mean
while Philip of Macedon made an Irruption into Athamania, and drove thence
Amynander, who fled, and sheltred himself in Ambracia. Antiochus having
intelligence hereof, and seeing so sudden a change of affairs, began to be
afraid of the diligence of his enemies, and perceived at last that Hannibals
advice was the best, Wherefore he dispatched many Messengers one after another
to Polexenidas, to cause him to advance, and in the mean while with all
expedition possible he drew together all the force he could make, which
amounted to ten thousand Foot and fifteen hundred Horse, with some Auxiliary
Troops of his Allies, and with these went to siese upon the pass of
Thermopylae, that he might stop the Enemies passage whilst he expected his Army
out of Asia. Now the strait of Thermopylae is a long and narrow passage,
bounded on one side with a troublesome and inaccessible Sea, and on the other
with a deep and broad Marish. It has on both sides two mighty steep Rocks, of
which one is called Tichiontes, and the other Callidromos, where are found hot
Springs whence the place had the Name of Thermopylae. Here Antiochus caused to
be raised, two walls, and erected Engines upon them, committing the guard of the
tops of the mountains to the Etolians, lest the Enemy should surprise him by
the same windings Xerxes had found out to assault the Lacedaemonians and
Leonidas, because they had left them unguarded. Having therefore placed a
thousand Men, on each top, he went and encamped with the rest of the Army near
Heraclea. Manius having intelligence of the Enemies Posture, caused publication
of the battle to be made for the morrow, and at the same time sent away two of
his Tribunes M. Cato and L. Valerius to whom he gave as many chosen Men as they
desired, with Orders in the night to make a turn about the mountains and if it
were possible to drive the Aetolians from their Posts. Valerius having
assaulted those which had the Guard of Tichiontes, was repulsed, for they
defended themselves courageously. But Cato having posted himself near the
Callidromos, about the last watch advanced, and surprised the Enemies, yet
asleep; however he had a sharp scuffle, by reason of the incommodiousness of
the place, where the Soldiers were forced to Scramble up the Rocks, and
Precipices to come at the Etolians. Mean while Manius marched directly toward
Antiochus, having drawn off his Army into several bodies for he could not fight
otherwise in these straits where the King expected him, having placed his
Targets, and light Armed Foot in the Front of his Phalanx, which he had
embatteled before his Camp, on the right hand stood the Slingers and Archers,
who guarded the Foot of the Mountain, On the left the Elephants, and on the
Seaside, those Companies appointed for the Guard of his Person. When they were
engaged, Manius found himself rudely entreated on all sides, by the light Armed
Soldiers: But bravely sustaining the Shock, and sometimes giving ground,
sometimes returning fiercely to the charge, he harassed them in such manner,
that he put them to the Rout. The Phalanx opened to give them passage, and
closing again presented the Romans with an infinite of sharp long Pikes; (By
this Invention it was that Alexander of Macedon and Philip did principally make
themselves terrible, for no Man was so hardy as to press upon this thick and
affrightful forest of Pikes.) Hereupon on a sudden, might be perceived the
Etolians with great cries flying from the Callidromos, and sheltring themselves
in Antiochus Camp; which at the instant struck fear into both parties, who knew
not what it meant; but when they knew Cato who with loud shouts pursued the
Flyers, and saw him already nigh the Camp, the Kings Soldiers, who had heard
the Roman Courage and Valor largely spoken of, and were sensible of their own
defects and faintness, occasioned by their having spent the Winter in Pleasures
and Idleness, began to be afraid, and their fear blinded them, so that they
could not observe the numbers commanded by Cato, but imagining them far greater
then they were, and apprehensive lest they should Plunder their Camp, they ran
thither in disorder, followed so close by the Romans, that they entered Pelmel
with them, and forced them to a second flight. Manius pursued them as far as
Scarphi^, and made a horrible slaughter, took a great number of Prisoners, and
at his return from the chase of the Enemy gave their camp in spoil to his
Soldiers. Mean while the Etolians had siesed the Roman camp, which they found
abandoned, but as soon as they saw Manius return they quitted it. It is said
that of the Roman Army there were about two hundred Men slain, either in the
fight or the pursuit, Antiochus lost ten thousand reck^^^^^ the Prisoners, and
he as soon as he saw his Army give way, saved himself with five hundred Horse,
and at one carriere reached Elatia. From thence he got to Chalcis, where his
Fleet lay, on which he Embarked with his new Spouse Eubia (for so she was
called) and fled to Ephesus. Yet he took not with him all his Ships, for some
that were laden with Provision fell into the hands of the Roman Admiral who
sunk them.

News of this Victory being brought to Rome, public Prayers were Philips
fidelity they sent back to him his Son Demetrius, who was yet a Hostage in the
City. Whilst at Rome they were giving Demostrations of their joy for this happy
success, the Phocians, Chalcidians and many other people, who had been of the
Kings party, came to ask pardon of Manius, who forgave them. After which he
went with Philip to spoil Etolia, took all their Cities together with
Damocrites General of that Nation (the same Damocritus who had threatened
Flaminius, he would encamp on the banks of Tiber.) After this he took his March
toward Callipolis, over Mount Corax, which is of a great height, and very
difficult to pass by reason of the Rocks especially for an Army, laden with
baggage, and the spoils of the Enemy as this was, for in passing this cragged
way many Soldiers with their Arms and Equipage, were lost among the Precipices,
besides they stood in fear of the Etolians, who might have troubled them, but
they appeared not, being busied in sending (...) to Rome to desire peace.
Antiochus in the mean while drew toward the Sea side with all Expedition
possible, all the forces that had been levied in the Lands under his obedience.
He caused likewise a Fleet to be fitted out, the command of which he gave to
Polexenidas, who had been banished from Rhodes, and not long after passed into
Chersonesus, which he fortified a second time, he placed Garrisons in Sestos
and Abidos, by which the Romans might pass into Asia. And having designed
Lysimachia for his Principal Magazine, he caused to be brought thither great
store of Ammunition and Provision, believing the Romans would soon draw toward
him with great forces both by Sea and Land.

The Senate and People of Rome sent as Successor to Manius, L. S^ipio Publius
his brother, who having overcome the Carthaginians, had brought away the
surname of African as a spoil. Whilst these two brothers were laboring in their
preparations, Livius who before had Commission to hinder the Enemy, from making
any descent in Italy, having been sent Successor to Attilius, who commanded the
Romans Naval Forces, Embarked on those Ships he had for the Defense of the
Coasts, together with some sent by the Carthaginians, and other Allies, and
came to the Port of Pyrae^m, where Attilius having delivered up to him, the
command of the Fleet, he took the Sea with fourscore and one Ships, all Armed
for War followed by Eumenes, with fifty more, the better half of which were
likewise Armed. They first made a descent in Phocida, which yet held for the
King, but now for fear receiving them, they the day following went forth to
fight. For Polexenidas who commanded Antiochus his Fleet was coming to meet
them with two hundred Ships much lighter then theirs, which was a great
advantage, for the Romans were not yet perfectly skilled in Sea Affairs. This
Captain seeing that two Carthaginian Ships, advanced in the head of the Fleet,
sent out three of his against them, which took them both, but empty, for the
Africans had cast themselves into the Sea. Livius angry at this affront, makes
a head, and goes to charge the Admiral, they stay for him, and grapple with
him, so that the Ships being now fast to one another, they fought as if on firm
Land; but the Romans being most daring leaped into the Enemies Ships, and
making themselves Masters of them, brought them into the body of their Fleet,
together with the two Carthaginian Ships had been taken at first. After this
Prologue to a Battle, when the two Fleets came to join, the Romans far
surpassed their enemies in bravery and strength, but because their Ships were
heavier, they could not reach those of Antiochus, when they made their retreat;
however they forced them to fly and save themselves in Ephesus, and they
themselves went to Chios, where joined with them seven and twenty Auxiliary
Ships of Rhodes; The King having heard what passed in this Sea Fight, sent
Hannibal into Syria, to cause other Ships to come from Phaenicia and Cilicia,
but at his return the Rhodians gave him chase, and forced him to retreat into
Pamphilia, and having taken some of his Ships, kept the rest for a while
blocked up in the Port.

Publius Scipio, being come into Etolia with the Consul Manius, who had
delivered up to him the Army, he would not carry the War from City to City,
judging it scarce worth the time, and therefore permitted the Etolians to send
again their Deputies to Rome, whilst he chose rather to go directly to
Antiochus, before his brothers Consulate was expired. To which end he caused
his Army to march by Macedon and Thrace, to gain the Hellespont, but this way
had been very difficult and troublesome, had not Philip of Macedon, taken order
that the Markets should all the way be supplied and built Bridges, and brought
in Provisions as he did. This piece of Service was the occasion that the
Scipio's, released him of the rest of the Money, that he ought, and indeed they
had Orders to that purpose from the Senate in case he served the Commonwealth
faithfully in that War. They wrote likewise to Prusias King of Bythinia,
Letters by which they gave him to understand, that the people of Rome had
enlarged the Dominions of a great many Kings, their Friends and Allies, and
that though they had overcome Philip King of Macedon, yet they had left to him
his Kingdom, sent back his Son that was in Hostage, and released him the Money
he was still obliged to pay them; with which things Prusias was so much wrought
upon, that he presently entered into Alliance with the Romans against Antiochus.
Now the Admiral Livius understanding that the Scipio's were upon their way,
left Pausimachus the Rhodian in Etolia, with the Rhodian Ships, and a part of
the Roman, and himself with the rest sailed toward the Hellespont, to receive
them. In his way Sestos and Rhetia, and two Ports of the Acheans, and some
other little Towns yielded to him, and because Abydos would not do the same, he
laid Siege to it. After Livius departure, Pausimachus lying at Anchor near
Samos, exercised his people, in trying many inventions of his own, and framing
new kinds of Engines, and among the rest making Iron Pots, filled with
combustible stuff, and fastened to the end of long booms, thrust from the Ships,
so that if in time of Service the Enemies Ships came near them, they might burn
them, by letting fall into them, those flaming Pots. Whilst he busied himself
in these sorts of Employments, Polexenidas who was likewise of Rhodes, but had
been banished thence, was contriving how he might entrap him. He promised him
to deliver up to him the Kings Fleet, on condition he would prevail that he
might be recalled from Banishment: Pausimachus was jealous of the cheat, and
for a good while stood upon his Guard; but after he had received on the part of
Polexenidas, Letters written with his own hand, and had advice that he was gone
from Ephesus, having sent most of his Mariners to seek for Provisions, he
thought there was no probability, that a man like him would run the hazard of
giving testimony under his own hand against himself, and began too lightly to
give faith to him, and grew negligent of his Guards; he likewise sent his
Seamen to Victual after the others Examples. Polexenidas seeing his plot took,
suddenly caused his men to return, and privately sent Nicander, a famous
Pyrate, with some armed Soldiers into Samos, to charge the Enemy behind on the
Land side; and he imbarquing about midnight, came before day break, and fell
upon the Rhodian, and his Companians, who were yet asleep. Pausimachus frighted
at this unexpected assault, commanded his Soldiers to dismount from the Ships,
and defend themselves on the Beak: but when Nicander came to charge him behind
(persuaded by an error ordinary in the night) he believed the greatest Force
had possessed themselves of the Shore, and regaining his Vessels in great
disorder, he was the first that made head against the Enemies, and the first
that valiantly fighting was slain; almost all the rest were slain or cut in
pieces: Only seven Ships which carried the Firepots, and which the Enemies
durst not approach were saved; the other twenty were towed, by so many Boats to
Ephesus. The noise of the Victory made Phocea, Samos and Cuma declare for
Antiochus, and obliged Livius, who feared lest the Ships he had left in
Aeolida, might be involved in the same misfortunes, speedily to return. Eumenes
came thither also; and the Rhodians having sent twenty other Ships, in a short
time all men regained courage. To revenge this affront, they presented
themselves before Ephesus in order of Battle; but no person coming out to them,
they left one half of their Fleet at anchor, in sight of the City; and with the
other part, went and made a descent into the Enemies Country, spoiling the Sea
Coasts: but Nicander coming suddenly upon them, made them quit their prize, and
flee to their Ships, so that the time of Livius command being expired, they
came and disembarqued at Samos.

At the same time Seleucus, Son of Antiochus, forraged the Lands of Eumenes,
and held Pergamus so closely besieged, that no person could get out, so that
Eumenes was constrained to make all haste possible to Elea, which is the border
of his Kingdom, together with L. Emilius Regulus, the Successor of Livius.
There came likewise from Achaia a thousand Auxiliary Foot, and a hundred chosen
Horse, under the Command of Diophanes, who being entered into Pergamus, and
perceiving from the Walls the people of Seleucus feasting and making merry, and
careless of their Guards, would have persuaded the Inhabitants to make a Salley
upon the Enemies; but they not having courage enough to adventure it, he drew
out what Horse and Foot they had, and placed them in battalia before the Walls,
with directions not to move till they had Orders. The Enemy scoffed at the
smalness of their number, and their fearfulness: but when he saw them busy at
Dinner, he fell on, and giving the Alarm to their Corpse de Guard, forced them
to turn their backs, and flee in disorder; some were killed taking up their
Arms, others bridling their Horses, others in running after their Horses that
were got loose, and others, as they strove in vain, to mount them. Thus
Diophanes gained a noble Victory in the sight of the Inhabitants, who
encouraged him from the Walls, but yet durst not come forth to second him; and
after having slain as many as he could overtake in so sudden an eruption, he
returned into the City with Men and Horses taken from the Enemy. On the morrow
he posted himself in the same station, without being followed by those of
Pergamus any more than the day before. Seleucus faced him with some Bodies of
Horse, offering him Battle; but he moved not thereat, kept firm his ground near
the Walls, waiting an opportunity; and when he perceived about noon Seleucus
Horsemen were returning to the Camp quite tired, he furiously charged them in
the Rear, and after having put them to the rout, and slain some of them, he
retreated into the City, he made many such like attempts, for they could
neither go out to Forage, nor to cut Wood, but he was still at the backs of
them; till at last he harrassed them in such manner, that Seleucus was forced
to withdraw his Camp out of the Territories of Pergamus, and at last was quite
driven out of Eumenes's Kingdom. Sometimes after happened a Sea fight between
Polexenidas and the Romans near Myonesa. Polexenidas having fourscore and ten
Ships of War, and Regulus the Roman Admiral fourscore and three, of which five
and twenty were Rhodians commanded by Eudorus. He was appointed to fight on the
left hand; but perceiving that Polexenidas was stronger on the right, and ready
to encompass the Romans, he made head with all his Ships, which were very
nimble, and forthwith opposed him, with those which carried Firebals, so that
he durst advance no further for fear of burning; but as he tacked, he exposed
the broadsides of his Ships to the Rhodians, who charging upon them, sunk some
of them, till such time as one of the Rhodian Ships having run his Beakhead
with such violence against a Sidonian, that the Anchor fell into the Rhodian,
they were grappled fast together, and now they began a Fight as on firm Land,
and a great number of Vessels thronging in both of one side and the other to
the assistance of these grappled Ships, the Fight was very bloody; but one half
of the Kings Ships being divided from the rest of their Companions, were
oppressed by the Romans before the others perceived it, and as soon as they saw
it, they betook themselves to flight. The King lost nine and twenty Ships, of
which thirteen were taken with all their crew. The Romans lost only two besides
one of Rhodes, which Polexenidas carried with him to Ephesus. Thus ended the
Sea Fight which was fought near Myonesa.

Chersonesus, and fortified Lysimachia, judging well, as true it was, that the
Romans would find it difficult to pass into Thrace, without having a firm
alliance with Philip. But being of an inconstant Spirit, and variable on
matters of no moment, as soon as he heard of this loss, near Myonesa, he began
to fear, and believed he had some God to his Enemy, since all things succeeded
so ill, that the Romans were become Masters of the Sea, where he thought he had
the greatest advantage; that Hannibal was blocked up in Pamphilia; and that
Philip, who he thought should have remembered the injuries he had received, did
himself conduct the Enemy through ways inaccessible. Frighted with all these
disorders; and God blinding his judgment, as it happens in weighty calamities,
he most imprudently abandons the Chersonesus, without staying so much as for a
sight of the Romans, or without either transporting or burning all those
Provisions and Munitions he had heaped together, whether of Corn, Arms, Engines
or Money, but leaving them entire to the service of his Enemies. Nay, so
senceless he was, that when those of Lysimachia went to him weeping with their
Wives and Children, he took no notice of it. He had now no other thoughts but
how to hinder the Romans from entering into Abidos, on which he hence forward
placed all his hopes; and yet, as if the Gods had more and more blinded him, he
never took care to guard that passage, nor so much as placed a Garrison in it,
but made a swift retreat into the Inland, designing there to expect the Enemy.
The Scipio's having intelligence of his departure, made haste to possess
themselves of Lysimachia; and having siesed on all the Treasure and Provisions
the King had left in Chersonesus, they forthwith passed the Hellespont, which
they found defenseless, and overtook Antiochus at Sardis, before he any thing
doubted it. This diligence of theirs so much astonished him, that beginning to
torment himself, and making Fortune a party in the faults he had committed, he
presently dispatched away H^raclides the Bizantine to the Scipio's to treat of
Peace, offering them Smyrna, Alexandria upon the Granick, Lampsacus, which had
been the cause of their difference, with half the charge of the War. He had
likewise Orders to grant them all the Cities of Ionia, and Aeolia, which had
held of their party, and in short, whatever they demanded. These Conditions he
was to propose publicly; but in private he had Commission to offer to Publius
Scipio a great sum of Money, with promise to restore him his Son without
Ransom, for the King had taken him prisoner in Greece, as he passed from
Chalcis to Demetriade. This is that Scipio, who afterward took and demolished
Carthage, and was the second that bore the surname of African. He was the Son
of that Paulus, who took Perseus of Macedon, Grandchild to Scipio by the
Mother side, she being his Daughter, and afterward became his Son by Adoption.
The Scipio's made answer to Heraclides in full assembly, That if Antiochus
desired Peace, he must not only quit all Ionique and Eolique Cities, but
likewise all Asia on that side Mount Taurus; and besides that, pay all the
Expense of this War, which had been begun through his fault; And in particular
Publius told the Byzantine, That if the King had offered these Conditions,
whilst he held Lysimachia and the Chersonesus; nay, it is possible before he had
passed the Hellespont, the Romans might have accepted them; but seeing he had
suffered them to pass, and that now they beheld themselves Masters, not only of
the Bridle, but of the Horseman, they knew not what else to say to him.
However, he was highly obliged to him for his kindness, and should be more when
he sent him his Son, but as Affairs at present stood, he advised him, as his
friend, to receive these Conditions ever something worse befell him. After this
he was carried sick to Aelea, leaving Cn. Domitius, Lieutenant to his Brother.
As for Antiochus, he was of the same opinion Philip of Macedon had formerly in
the like case been, that though he were absolutely defeated, they could not
demand more, and therefore applied himself to rally his Forces in the Country
of Thyatira, very near the Enemy. However, he sent Scipio his Son to Aelea, in
acknowledgement of which Scipio sent him word, by those which brought him his
Son, that he advised him not to give Battle till he was returned to the Army.

The King persuaded by the Authority of that great Man, went and encamped
Sipyle, where he fortified his Camp with a strong Wall, and was besides
defended by the River Phrygia, which parted the two Armies. This Post he made
choice of, that he might not be obliged to fight against his will. But
Domitius, covetous of Glory, had a great desire to fight, whilst he had the
Command. He therefore courageously passed the River, and came and encamped
within About two milesand a half.
twenty furlongs of the Enemy, doing all he could for four days together to
draw him to a Battle, he every day drew out his Army before his Trenches, and
the other did the like; but neither the one nor the other would begin the
engagement. The fifth day Domitius drew forth his Army, and took the Field,
hoping Antiochus would come to meet him; but seeing he moved not, he came and
encamped close by him, and having let pass one day more, he caused it to be
published throughout his Army, so loud that the Enemy might hear it, that on
the morrow he would fight, whether Antiochus would or no: This King committed
another mighty fault upon this occasion, for he might have stood upon the Ditch
of his Camp, or have kept himself within his Trenches, till Publius had been
recovered: but he thought it a shame for him to refuse Battle, when he was the
strongest; he therefore prepared himself, and about the last Watch, both Armies
took the Field, and drew up in Array. They were Marshalled in this Order:
Domitius placed his right wing, composed of about ten thousand Roman Foot on
the Bank of the River; on the side of them were ten thousand other Italian
Foot, both parties divided into Hastati, Principe; and Triarii according to the
Roman order.
Vanguard, Battle and Rear. Next the Italians stood Eumenes his Army, and three
thousand Acheans armed with Bucklers. The right Wing composed of the Latin,
Roman and Eumenes his Cavalry, which amounted to about three thousand Horse;
between whose Ranks there were placed some light armed Foot and Archers, and
besides there were four Squadrons, which Domitius kept near his person, and all
these made not above thirty thousand Men; the right Wing was commanded by
Domitius, the Battle by the Consul, and the left Wing by Eumenes. They had
likewise some Elephants, which were come to them from Lybia; but they believed
they should not be able to make use of them, because they were too few; and
besides being small, as all the Lybian Elephants are, they would be apt to be
frightened, when they saw greater, wherefore they placed them behind in the
Rearguard: Such was the order of the Roman Army.

Antiochus had an Army of seventy thousand Men, whose main strength consisted
in the Macedonian Phalanx, composed of sixteen thousand Footmen, which
according to the institution of the Ancient Kings, Philip and Alexander, were
divided into ten Battalia's, each of fifty Ranks, and in each Rank two and
thirty Men: Their Front represented the Walls of a City, because between every
Body stood an Elephant like a lofty Tower; it was covered on the Flanks with
two bodies of Horse, the one of Galatians armed at all points, and the other of
these chosen Macedonians, whom they call Agenia: In the right Wing were the
light armed Soldiers, the Or Horsemen with silver Shields.
Argyraspides, and two hundred Archers on Horseback. In the left Wing were the
Gallograecian Foot, the Tectosages, the Trocmes, the Tolostiboges, some
Cappidocians, whom Ariarathes had send to the King, and a great multitude of
Mercenaries, which were sustained by other Cavalry, armed Back and Breast, and
by the Band called Soccale lightly armed. Thus had Antiochus ordered his
Forces, placing his principal confidence, according to all appearance, in his
Cavalry, which in part covered the Front of his Battle: but he had committed an
irreparable fault by having too closely locked up his Phalanx, on which he
should have placed his chief reliance, being all old Soldiers. He had besides
all these another Body composed of Slingers, Archers, and Men with Darts and
Targets of diverse Nations, Phrygians, Lydians, Pamphylians, Cretans,
Triballians, Cilicians, armed after the manner of Crete, together with Archers
on Horseback, Dacians, Mysians, Elymans and Arabes, who mounted on Dromedaries
extremely swift, vexed the Enemy from above with the shot of their Arrows, and
when they were to fight nigh at hand, made use of long and narrow Swords. There
were some Chariots armed with Scythes, which were placed in the head of this
multitude with Orders to retire, after having made the first charge. Antiochus
Army appeared upon a view of it, to be, as it were, two, the one to assail the
Enemy, and the other to stand their ground, as if they had been an Ambuscade,
and certainly both the one and the other were capable of striking terror, both
for their number and their order. The King was upon the right hand, he gave the
left to his Son, and Mendis, Zeuxis and Philip; Master of the Elephants, had
the charge of the middle Battle. The day was very misty, so that the obscurity
hindered the Enemies from discovering their Forces; and besides the moistness
slackned the Bow-strings, and made limber and slippery the Thongs, with which
they lanced their Darts; which Eumenes having observed, found nothing else to
be concerned at, his only care was now for the Chariots, which he extremely
feared. He therefore command the Slingers, Darters, and other light armed
Soldiers to charge them, and on every side to throw their Darts and Javelins
only at the Horse; for they being once beaten down, the Chariot was useless, or
would serve rather to break the Ranks of their own party, than hurt the Enemy.
And indeed it happened so, for the Chariot-horses being wounded, turned toward
their own Cavalry, so that the Dromedaries that followed the Chariots were the
first broken, then the armed Horsemen who could not shun the Encounters of the
Scythes, by reason of the weight of their Armor: And thus was the whole Army
put into a greater disorder, then there was any reason for, or the occasion
merited; for it having begun in the middle of the Field of Battle, spread it
self to both ends, and the extent thereof being large amidst the confu^ion of
different Voices, and a general fear, those which were near the danger, sooner
felt the blow than foresaw it; and all the rest were terrified with the
expectation of some great mishap. Eumenes seeing his first onset had succeeded
so well, and that the place where the Chariots and Dromedaries had stood was
void, he pressed forward his Horse, and those of Italy against the Galatians,
Cappadocians, and other Mercenaries, crying aloud to his people, that they
should go fall upon those unskilful people, whom their Protectors had forsaken.
They obeyed and charged with so much violence, that they put to flight both
them and the Men of Arms that were behind them, whom the defeat of the Chariots
had already put in disorder, and because the weight of their Arms hindered their
saving themselves, they were almost all cut in pieces. Whilst Eumenes thus bore
down the Horse in this Wing, Antiochus having broke and put to rout the
Legions, gave them chase. Mean while the Macedonian Phalanx, which stood locked
up together upon four Fronts in the midst of the Cavalry, finding themselves
opened on all sides, by the flight of the Wings, opened to receive in the midst
of them, some Companies of light armed Men, who fought at the head of them, and
presently closed again. And now Domitius easily encompassed the Macedonians,
thus clustred together, with his Horse and light armed Foot, and shrewdly
annoyed them, for they could neither come to the charge, nor enlarge
themselves, and their experience stood them in no stead at this close order,
but rather exposed them to the Darts of their Enemies: All they could do was to
present their Pike heads to the Romans, provoking them to come to the push,
otherwise threatening they would come to them; but being on foot, and heavily
armed, they durst not go to assault Horsemen, for fear of breaking the Order of
their Phalanx, which they could very hardly recover. The Romans pressed not too
close upon these old Soldiers, thus locked together, and exasperated by
despair; but wheeling about them, they charged them at distance with Arrows and
Darts, of which not any fell without execution, because they being so hudled
together, could not shun them: seeing themselves harassed in this manner, and
not knowing what course to take, they gave ground, but still retreating, and
not breaking their Order, insomuch that the Romans durst not yet draw near, but
were satisfied to charge them at distance, till such time as the Elephants,
which they had placed between the Battalia's, began to break their Ranks, and
refusing any more to obey their Rulers, caused the whole multitude to betake
themselves to flight in disorder. Domitius having routed the Phalanx, attempted
to force Antiochus his Camp, whilst he continued driving the Legions that were
opposed to him unto their very Camp, they not being supported by any Horse, nor
any Darters, nor Slings; for Domitius had placed none in this Wing, believing
it sufficiently defended by the River. But the King being repulsed by the
Tribune, that had the charge of the Guard of the Camp, who sallied out with
some fresh Forces, and caused those that fled to return to the charge, turned
head, puffed up with an opinion of the Victory, because he knew not what had
passed elsewhere. Attalus, Brother to Eumenes, advanced to encounter him with a
Body of Horse, of which the King made so light off, that he charged through and
through, without receiving any great damage. But when he came to have knowledge
of the defeat, by the slaughter of his people, with whom all the Field of
Battle was covered, seeing the vast heaps of Bodies, Men, Horses and Elephants,
confusedly mixed together, and that even his Camp was in the Enemies power; he
likewise betook himself to flight, and all upon the spur made for Sardis,
whither he reached about midnight. From Sardis he presently took the way
toward Celenes, which men call Apamia, whither he had understood his Son was
escaped. On the morrow he departed from Celenes toward Syria, leaving his
Captains to rally the ruins of his Army; and in the mean time sent Ambassadors
into the Field of Battle, to demand peace of the Consul, who was then burying
the Bodies of his dead, spoiling those of the Enemy, and gathering together the
Prisoners. Among the Dead, there were found about four and twenty Roman
Knights, and about three hundred Footmen, who had been slain by Antiochus, and
of Eumenes Soldiers only fifteen Horsemen: As for the Enemy, they lost fifty
thousand men, comprizing the Prisoners, for the number of the dead was so
great, it could scarcely be counted. All the Elephants fell upon the place,
save only fifteen, which were taken alive. After this Victory so great, that
many could scarce believe it; for they could not imagine that a handful of men
fighting in an Enemies Country could possibly defeat such a prodigious Army of
the Kings, and especial of the Macedonian Phalanx, composed all of old
Soldiers, now stronger in men than ever, and believed invincible; after this
Victory, I say, Antiochus his Friends blamed his rashness for having undertaken
this War against the Romans, and said that from the beginning he had made it
appear, that he was no great Captain, having so inconsiderately abandoned
Lysimachia, and the Chersonesus; and besides that, withdrawn the Garrisons from
the Hellespont, by means of which he might have hindered the Scipio's from
passing into Asia: And at last they condemned his imprudence for imprisoning,
as it were, the choice Forces of his Army, thereby rendering them useless, and
placing his hopes in a heap, and multitude of new leavied Soldiers, rather then
in men accustomed by long exercise to the toils of War, and whose bodies and
courages were both invincible. Whilst all the world talked in this manner of
Antiochus, the Romans grown more resolute then before, now began to think
nothing impossible, founding their thoughts, as well upon their native valor,
as upon the assistance of the Gods, and not being able sufficiently to admire
their own good fortune, when they considered how being so infinitely unequal in
number, and in a strange Country, they had in one only battle, and in one day
subdued so many Nations, made prize of so great Riches, overcome so many
Mercenary Troops, quelled the glory of the Macedonians, and in short ruined
Antiochus, King of so many Kingdoms, and reduced him that had gained the
Surname of Great, to a byword, and a Proverb of Antiochus the Great has been.

Whilst the Romans entertained themselves, with these pleasant thoughts,
brother to the Consul, finding himself in a condition to undertake a journey,
came to the Camp, where the Kings Deputies had Audience. They now only desired
to know what Antiochus must do, that he might be received into the friendship
of the Senate and People of Rome, to which Publius answered. That this War was
not begun, but through the fault and covetousness of Antiochus, who possessing
a great Empire, of which the Romans were not at all jealous, not therewith
content, had despoiled Ptolemy his kinsman, and friend to the people of Rome,
of the lower Syria, had invaded Europe without any right, subdued Thrace,
fortified the Chersonesus, and built Lysimachia. In conclusion having brought
an Army into Greece, had endeavored to reduce under servitude the Greeks whom
the Roman People had lately set at liberty and continued his enterprises, till
such time as he was defeated at Thermopylae, That though he had been forced to
save himself by flight, he had abated nothing of his Ambition: but had renewed
the War by Sea, where he had been beaten in several Engagements, and had never
made any Overture of Peace till the Roman Army was come over into Asia. That
even then he had proudly refused their conditions, and setting on Foot a
mightier Army to make yet greater attempts was fallen into an Extremity of
Disgrace. But (said he) though with reason we may impose on him a greater
penalty, after so much obstinacy, we will not use our good fortune insolently,
nor insult on others calamities. We offer you therefore the same conditions we
did before, adding only some small matter advantageous to both, and of
importance to the common security. Renounce Europe, Quit to us all Asia as far
as Mount Taurus, Deliver into our hands all your Elephants, and as many Ships
as we shall order you to furnish. You shall henceforth keep no Elephants, and
only such a Number of Ships as we shall prescribe. You shall give up twenty
Hostages, such as the Consul shall choose, and toward the Expense of the War
you shall pay fifty Talents ready Money, and two thousand five hundred after the
Senate shall have ratified the Peace, with a thousand Talents to be for twelve
years to come, yearly sent to Rome. You shall likewise deliver to us all
Prisoners and Runaways, and pay unto Eumenes the Remainder of what was due to
his Father. If Antiochus presently perform these Articles, we will grant him
Peace, and promise him the Friendship of the Roman People; Provided the Senate
approve it. The Deputies having accepted these conditions, part of the money was
soon brought, and the Hostages delivered, among which was the Kings youngest
Son called Antiochus, which done the Scipio's and Antiochus sent their Deputies
to Rome. The Senate ratified the Treaty, and the Articles were signed according
to Scipio 's intentions, however somethings were added not before expressed.
That the bounds of Antiochus his Dominion should be the two Promontories,
called Calecadnon and Sarpedonion, beyond which he was not to bear Arms. That
he should have only twelve Ships of War to keep his Subjects in awe, but that
if he happened to have any War, he might then have more, that he should not
leavy any Mercenary Soldiers in the Lands under the Roman obedience, nor
receive any Runaways, and that from three years to three years he should
exchange the Hostages save only Antiochus his Son. This League was Engraven on
a Table of Copper, and set up in the Capitol as other Articles of Peace with
any Nation were used to be: an extract of which was sent to Manius Volson, who
being at Apamia a City of Phrygia took before Antiochus Deputies the Oath of
Alliance, as Antiochus on his part swore to observe it in the presence of the
Tribune Thermus, sent to him for that purpose. Thus ended the War between
Antiochus the Great, and the People of Rome.

Some were of opinion it proceeded no farther, because of the favor showed by
the King to Scipio's Son, and indeed at his return to Rome, they endeavored to
trouble him about it, and the two Tribunes of the People accused him of having
been corrupted by presents to betray the Commonwealth. But he made slight of
his accusers, and his Trial happening to be assigned on the same day, that he
had gained his Victory over the Carthaginians, he sent before hand to the
Capitol, all things necessary for a Pompous Sacrifice, and presented himself
before the Judgment Seat, magnificently habited, and not in Mourning like
others accused of any crime, to move their Judges to compassion. This brave Man
secured by the Testimony of his own Conscience, amazed all the world by this
manner of Conduct, for when he began his Discourse, he made no mention of any
crime, he spoke only of the Carriage of his Life past, the mighty things he had
done for the Commonwealth, and the many Victories he had gained, and he uttered
it with so good a grace as delighted the whole Auditory, but when he came to
speak of Carthage, which he had subdued, he amplified the matter with so much
heat, that he not only moved, but warmed the People, by telling them, This is
the day, Gentlemen, whereon I defeated the Carthaginians whom once you so much
feared: Wherefore I am going from this place to sacrifice at the Capitol,
whoever loves his Country, let him follow, and go with me to return thanks to
the Gods. Having said these words he mounted to the Capitol, without concerning
himself at the Judgment. All the People followed him, and the Judges themselves
applauded him, beseeching the Gods that his Sacrifice might prove acceptable.
This proceedure left his accusers in a deep perplexity; for they durst no more
call to judgment or accuse of ambition or corruption a Man whose whole
behavior was exempt from suspicion and above calumny. Thus nobly did he scorn
an accusation, had no agreement with his past life; In which in my opinion he
acted more prudently then Aristides accused of Theft, or Socrates when
imprisoned for the matters objected against them, who suffered under the infamy
without making defense for themselves. It is true, Plato attributes a certain
Plea to Socrates, which he had framed according to his own fancy. In my
Judgment likewise he repelled Calumny with more generosity then Epaminondas the
Sovereign Magistrate of the Boeotians with Pelopidas and another, his
Colleagues. The Thebans having sentthese Captains with their Forces to assist
the Arcadians and Messenians against those of Lacedemon, and the War not being
yet finished as they would have had it, they recalled them because of some
Calumnies: but they kept for six Months more the Command of the Army, refusing
to surrender it into their hands were sent to succeed them, till such time as
they had driven out the Lacedemonian Garrisons, from the Cities they held, and
placed Arcadians in them. Epaminondas had been the sole cause of this, having
promised his Colleagues, that they should fall into no danger. But as soon as
they were returned to the City, their accusers undertook them each apart to
have them condemned to death; for by their Laws it was a Capital Crime to hold
by force the Command of the Army, when another was sent to be General. The
other two were discharged not so much out of any compassion the Judges had for
them, as because they laid the whole fault upon Epaminondas who had advised
them so to do, and did consent to what they had said. He therefore being last
of all called in Judgment, I confess (said he) that I have kept the Command of
the Army beyond the time prescribed by the Law's, and have constrained my
Colleagues, whom you have absolved to do the same, I therefore beg no favor
from you: I only desire that for my past services it may be writ upon my Tomb.
Here lies he who having gained the Victory at Leuctra, led to the very Walls of
Sparta his fellow Citizens, in whom before the only sight of the Lacedemonian
Hats struck a terror: His Country condemned him to death, because he had less
consideration for the Laws then for the Public good. After having said these
words, he descended from the Tribunal offering his body to any that would lead
him to Execution, but the Judges touched with this reproach, and admiring this
manner of defense, changed their design of condemning him as Criminal into
Respect, and without putting it to Vote withdrew from the Assembly. Let every
Man judge of these Examples as he pleases.

To proceed; Manius Successor to Scipio, visiting those Lands quitted Antioc^us
to the Romans to settle them in good Order. The Tolisbologes a people of
Galatia, who had assisted the King in this War, refused to submit. They
gathered together upon Olympus a Mountain of Mysia, whither he followed them
with great labor, and having overtaken them, put them to the Rout, killed an
infinite number, and drove others down the precipices insomuch that the
slaughter was so great it was impossible to reckon the dead, because of their
Numbers: he took forty thousand Prisoners, whose Arms he caused to be burnt,
and because he could not carry along with them so great a Number of Captives,
he sold them to the Neighboring Nations. The Tectosages, and the Trocmes to
revenge their Nation, laid an Ambush for him, and charged him so furiously that
with great difficulty he saved himself, but soon after finding them lying as it
were heaped upon one another, by reason of their great Numbers, he caused them
to be encompassed by his light Armed Soldiers, who at a distance discharging at
them a shower of Arrows, not one fell without Execution, which made so horrible
a Butchery, that after the death of eight thousand Men they drove the rest
fighting past the River Halys; and because Ariarathes King of Cappadocia, who
had taken part with Antiochus, sent to Manius two hundred Talents, demanding
Pardon, for he was fearful of the War, the Roman entered not into his
Territories, but turned head toward the Hellespout with vast Riches,
innumerable sums of Money, an infinite of Spoils and Plunder, and an Army laden
with great quantity of Baggage. But now he committed a great fault, that he
would not, being it was Summer time, take his passage by Sea, not considering
the vast weight of their Equipage; For it was not now his business to harden
the Soldiers by labor, since he was not going to War, but returning home laden
with spoils. And yet he chose rather to lead his Army by the way of Thrace
which is long, crooked and craggy, and that in the violent heat of Summer, and
without giving any advice thereof to Philip, that he might have come out to
meet and be his Conductor, nor did he divide his Forces into many Bodies, for
the more commodiousness of the March, and better supply of things necessary,
nor distributed the baggage by the companies that it might have been the better
guarded, but he made all his Army file off, in the midst of which came the
Carriages, which neither the Vanguard nor Rear could relieve, because the way
was long and narrow, by which means the Thracians falling in on all sides, and
charging them unexpectedly he lost a great part of his Prey, Money and Soldiers,
and hardly saved the rest in Macedon, which made appear of what importance
Philips care in conducting them, was to the Scipio's, and how great Antiochus
his fault was in abandoning the Chersonesus. Manius having caused the remainder
of his people to march through Macedon into Thessaly, and from thence into
Epire, imbarqued them, and landing at Brundusium dismissed there his Forces,
and returned to Rome. Those of Rhodes and Eumenes King of Pergamus were well
satisfied with having taken part with the people of Rome against Antiochus, and
the Rhodians having sent their Ambassadors to Rome, and Eumenes being come in
person thither, the Senate gave to the inhabitants of that Island Lycia and
Caria, which they had taken from them some time before, for having favored the
party of Perseus King of Macedon Enemy to the Roman people. As for Eumenes they
gave him all that they had taken from Antiochus save only the Greek Cities of
Asia, to so many of which as had been tributary to Attalus Father of Eumenes
they ordered to pay tribute to Eumenes, and for those which had before paid
tribute to Antiochus they were declared free, and permitted to live according
to their Laws.

Antiochus the Great being dead, his Son Seleucus succeeded, who redeemed his
brother Antiochus from being Hostage at Rome by sending in his place Demetrius
his Son. Antiochus was already come as far as Athens, when Seleucus was
traitorously murdered by one of the Officers of his household called Heliodorus,
who had designed to siese on the Kingdom, but Eumenes and Attalus drove him out
and re-established Antiochus that they might gain his friendship: For there had
already past some things between the Romans and them which obliged them to
stand on their guard. Thus Antiochus the Son of Antiochus the Great entered into
Possession of the Realm of Syria. The Syrians called him Epiphanes, that is to
say Illustrious, because when strangers would have usurped his Kingdom he had
defended it, and restored the Family of his Ancestors. Having therefore entered
into Friendship and Alliance with Eumenes, he remained peaceable possessor of
the Kingdom of Syria, and of the Neighboring Nations, giving the Government of
Babylon to Timarchus, and the Superintendancy of his Revenues to Heraclides two
brothers, whom he had abused. He undertook likewise a War against Artaxias King
of Armenia, and having taken him Prisoner, died, leaving for his Successor his
Son Antiochus but nine years old, to whom the Syrians gave the name of Eupator,
because of the Virtue of his Father, and appointed Lysias for his Tutor or
Governor. The Senate received with great satisfaction, the news, that
Antiochus, who had resigned some years gloriously, was so soon dead; and when
Demetrius, the Son of Seleucus, Brother to Antiochus Epiphanes, Grandchild to
Antiochus the Great, and Cousin to the Infant, represented at Rome, (where he
yet remained as Hostage, being about twenty three years of age) that he was
next Heir to the Crown, they refused to let him go, because they believed it
more advantageous to the people of Rome to have Syria governed by a Child than
a Man. And having understood likewise, that there were some Elephants in that
Kingdom, and some Ships above the number agreed on with Antiochus; they sent
Commissioners to cause the Elephants to be killed, and the Ships to be burnt;
the sight of this Execution begot compassion in all the World, who thought it
cruelty to kill Beasts so tame and so rare, and to burn such Ships, and so much
spleen did it raise up in one Leptines, that meeting C^. Octavius in a place of
Exercises, as he was causing himself to be anointed, he killed that
Commissioner, whom Lysias caused to be interred. Demetrius having advice
hereof, went to the Senate, and demanded that at least they would discharge him
from the conditions of a Hostage, since he had been exchanged for Antiochus,
who was dead; but not being able to obtain any thing, he secretly escaped by a
small Vessel into Syria, where he was received with a general approbation of
all the World. He presently put Lysias to death, and soon after the Infant,
forced Heraclidos to flee, and executed Timarchus as a Rebel, having accused
him for ill management in the Government of Babylon. Wherefore he was called
Demetrius Or Savior.
Soter, a name given him by the Babylonians. After this, seeing himself settled
in the Kingdom, he sent to Rome a Crown of Gold worth ten thousand Crowns, as
an acknowledgement of his having been civily treated in quality of a Hostage;
and moreover, delivered to them Leptines, who had slain Octavius. The Senate
accepted the Crown, but as if the crime had concerned all the Syrians, they
would not content themselves with the punishment of Leptines. After this,
Demetrius drove Ariarathes out of the Kingdom of Cappadocia, and received a
thousand Talents for settling in it Holophernes, said to be his Brother, though
it were the Romans intention, that both Brothers should be Kings alike: but
sometime after they were both expelled, and Ariobarzanes, likewise by the
Forces of Mithridates, King of Pontus, upon which cause with some others began
the War with Mithridates. Never was there a greater, nor in which there were so
many strange revolutions, or so many Nations concerned; besides that it lasted
forty years, during which time, the Palace of the Kings of Syria oft-times
changed its Master, though they were still of the same Race. There happened
likewise during that time, many broils and mutations in diverse Kingdoms. The
Parthians, who for a long time had been revolted from the Family of the
Seleucides* added to their Estates Mesapotamia, which they cut off from the
Kingdom of Syria* Tigranes, Son of This Tigranes had a Son also called Tigranes.
Tigranes, having subdued the neighboring Nations, which had every one their
King, and causing himself to be called King of Kings, made War upon the
Seleucides, who would not submit. And Antiochus, surnamed the Pious, being not
able to resist him, he became Master of all the Provinces of Syria on this side
Euphrates, as far as Egypt, and of Cilicia besides, which was likewise under
the Dominion of the Seleucides. Magabates commanded in the name of the King his
Master in all their Estates newly conquered, with a powerful Army for fourteen
years together; but after that Mithridates overcome by Lucullus, sought refuge
in the Court of Tigranes. Magabates went with his Army to the assistance of his
King, and in the mean time Antiochus, Son of the Pious, retook Possession of
his Kingdom, with applause of all Syria. Lucullus, who waged the first War with
Tigranes, and drove him out of his new Conquests, disturbed not the King of
Syria, in the Possession of the Kingdom of his Fathers; but Pompey, Successor
to Lucullus, after having defeated Mithridates, suffered Tigranes to remain King
of Armenia; but for Antiochus, though he had never disobliged the Romans, yet
he despoiled him of his Kingdom, and indeed it was easy for a great Army to
oppose a King unarmed: not but that he had another pretense, for 'twas
alleged, that it was not just that Syria, whose Kings of the Seleucian Race
were expelled by the Arms of Tigranes, should rather return to them again, than
to the Romans, who were Conquerers of the same Tigranes himself. Thus were
Cilicia, Syria as well the higher as lower, Phaenicia and Palestine added to
the Roman Empire without fighting, and with them all the Countries between
Euphrates and Egypt. There remained only the Jews to be subdued by force, and
Pompey performed it, sent their King Aristobulus Prisoner to Rome, and rased
the Walls of Jerusalem, a very great and a holy City in that Country. Ptolemy
the first King of Egypt had before done the same: Vespasian likewise took and
pillaged it; and the last time it was taken, was by Adrian in our days,
wherefore the Jews pay more Tribute by the Pole, than for the Goods which they
posses, and for the Syrians and Cilicians they pay the hundredth part Pompey
having conquered all the Nations that had been formerly under the Seleucides,
gave to some particular Kings, as also to the Gallogreeks of Asia; and for the
others, he confirmed in their Tetrarchies the Ancient Kings that had faithfully
served the Romans in the War against Mithridates. Some years after all these
Estates were reunited to the Roman Empire, every one in his time, but the
principal part under the Empire of Augustus Caesar. Now Pompey being departed
from Syria, left his Government to his Quaestor Scaurus, to whom the Senate
sent Marcus Philippius for Successor, and after him Marcellinus Lentulus, both
these Praetors, who during the two years that each had the government of this
Province, were obliged several times to come to blows with the neighboring
Arabs, who made incursions into the Province, wherefore afterward there were
Proconsuls sent into Syria, who had the same power with the Consuls in matters
of War. Gabinius was the first that came with an Army, when Mithridates King of
Parthia, driven from his Kingdom by Orodes his Brother, was re-established by
the assistance of the Arabs. At the same time Ptolemy, the Eleventh King of
Egypt, being expelled likewise by his Subjects, by force of Money prevailed
with Gabinius to resettl^ him in Alexandria, and suspend the War with Parthia.
He did it, and by force constrained the Alexandrians to return to the obedience
of their King. But Gabinius was by the Senate condemned to banishment; for
having without express Orders passed into Egypt, and having undertaken a War
which was thought to be unfortunate, being forbid by the Sybills Verses. To
Gabinius succeeded (as I think) Crassus, who going to make War with the
Parthians was defeated by the loss of his whole Army. After him L. Bibulus had
this Government, during whose time the Parthians made an irruption into this
Province, and in the time of Saxa, who was his Successor, extended their Arms
as far as Ionia, the Romans being then diverted by the Civil Wars. But we shall
more amply treat of all these Matters in the Book of the Wars against the
Parthians, this being only designed for the Wars in Syria. What therefore I
have said, is only to make known in what manner Syria came under the Roman
Dominion, and how it was reduced under the form of a Province. Nor will it be
much from the purpose to insert something of what passed from the time of the
Macedonians, till it was brought under the Roman Rule.

Alexander having overcome the Persians, was King of Syria* and not Syria, but
also of all the Countries, whither he carried his Arms. After the death of
Alexander, who left two Sons, the one yet a little Infant, and the other in the
belly of his Mother. The Macedonians pressed forward, by the love they bore to
the Blood of Philip, chose for their King Aridaeus the Brother of Alexander,
who yet was not esteemed over wise, changing the name of Aridaeus into that of
Philip; but that only for the that Alexanders Children were in their minority,
for they gave Guards to the Mother, whilst she was great with Child. Mean while
the Captains of the Macedonians, and principally Perdiccas, under the authority
of this Philip, divided the conquered Nations into Satrapies or Governments,
and the Brother and Children of Alexander, being sometime after dead, the
Satrapes or Governors, became Kings. Laomedon was the first that was placed in
the Government of Syria, by the favor of Perdiccas, and of Antipater, who
after Perdiccas had the Government of the Kingdom. As soon as he had taken
possession, Ptolemy, who was Governor of Egypt came into Syria with a Fleet,
and offered this Governor a great sum of Money to put it into his hands, that
it might serve as a Rampire to Egypt, and that from thence he might invade
Cyprus. But not able to obtain any thing that way, he took Laomedon himself
Prisoner, who afterward corrupting his Guards, fled to Alcetas in Caria. Thus
Ptolemy siesed upon Syria, where having staid for some time, he left Garrisons,
and returned into Egypt: As for Antigonus, he was Governor of Phrygia, Lycia
and Pamphilia; and besides, when Antipater went into Europe, he left him
superintendent General of all Asia: So that Eumenes, Governor of Cappadocia,
being declared Enemy of the Macedonians, he went and besieged him, and
understanding that he had made a private escape from the place, pursued him,
and slew him in the way to Media, whither he had designed to flee for refuge:
from whence returning to Babylon, he was magnificently received by Seleucus,
then Governor there. But Seleucus having condemned to death one of his
Captains, without acquainting him with it, he demanded of him an account of the
Public Moneys, which so much perplexed Seleucus, that not able to resist
Antigonus, he retired to Ptolemy into Egypt. Antigonus hereupon deposed Blitor,
Lieutenant Governor of Mesopotamia, from his charge, because he had assisted
Seleucus in his retreat. Soon after he reduced under his obedience the Province
of Babylon, Mesapotamia, and all the Nations from Media to the Hellespont;
insomuch, that the other Governors not enduring he should siese on so many
Countries to their prejudice, entered into a League against him. Seleucus was
the principal Author of it; and Ptolemy; Lysimachus, Governor of Thrace, and
Cassander, who commanded in Macedon after the death of his Father, signed to
it. They forthwith sent Deputies to Antigonus to demand the restoration of
those Lands he had siesed on, and to produce the public Moneys to be divided
amongst them: He made a mock of the Deputation, whereupon the Confederates
declared War against him. This nothing daunted him; but on the contrary, he
beat out those Garrisons Ptolemy had placed in Syria, and made himself Master
of Phaenicia, and lower Syria, till then under the obedience of Egypt. Thence
he went to the Cicilian Ports, leaving Demetrius his Son, only two and twenty
years of age, in Gaza, with an Army to oppose the designs of Ptolemy: but
Ptolemy defeated him in a great Battle, and forced him to flee to his Father.
Seleucus was presently sent by the Confederates to Babylon, to reposses himself
of his Government: Ptolemy having to this effect given him a thousand Foot, and
three hundred Horse; this was a Body utterly incapable of forcing so great a
City, but the inclinations the Babylonians had for him, made him be received,
and his Forces soon increased prodigiously. Antigonus incensed against Ptolemy,
overcame him in a Sea Fight, which was fought near the Island of Cyprus, where
his Son Demetrius commanding, the Army were so puffed up with this Victory, that
they proclaimed both Father and Son Kings. It is true, there was no person left
of the Blood Royal, Aridaeus, the Son of Philip being dead, as were likewise
Olympia's, and the Children of Alexander. Ptolemy's Army hereupon gave him
likewise the Title of King, lest his loss should make him seem to yield to the
Victor. Thus different success occasioned the like event. The others presently
followed the Example, and of Governors made themselves Kings. Thus Seleucus
became King of Babylon and Media, killing afterward with his own hand in
combat, Nicator, whom Antigonus had placed in the Government of that Province;
he had afterward many Wars, as well against the Macedonians as the Barbarians,
and among the others two against the Macedonians. The last of which was against
Lysimachus, King of Thrace; and the first against Antiochus, then fourscore
years old, when the Battle was fought near Ipsa, a City of Phrygia, where that
brave old Man discharging the part of a General and Soldier together, lost his
life.

Seleucus had for his share all those Lands that lie between Euphrates and the
Sea, and from the Sea as far as Phrygia in the main Land, which vastly
augmented his Dominion. And he moreover losing no opportunity of making himself
greater, being equally powerful in Eloquence and Arms, conquered Mesopotamia,
Armenia, and Cappadocia, surnamed Seleucidia; and besides those became Master
of the Persians, Parthians, Bactrians, Arabs, Tapyrians, Sogdiens, Arachoses,
Hyrcanians, and other Nations, fronting upon the River Indus, which had been
subdued by Alexander. So that, except that King, no Prince ever possessed so
great a Country in Asia; for all the Lands, from the confines of Phrygia to the
River Indus, were under his obedience. He went likewise to make War with
Androcotes, King of the Indians, that inhabit beyond the River, and returned
not till an Alliance was contracted between them, which was followed by Peace.
True it is, that whilst Antigonus lived, he possessed but some part of this,
for the greatest share came to him after his death. They say that being in
Alexander's Army, in his expedition into Asia, and yet but a private Soldier,
he consulted the Oracle of Didymea, concerning his return, to which he was
answered, Take leave of Europe and possess Asia. That in Macedon, there of a
sudden appeared on his Fathers Hearth a great flame, which no body was seen to
kindle, and that his Mother was advertised in a Dream, to give the first Ring
she should find to Seleucus to wear; for that he should Reign in that place,
where by chance he let it fall, and that she found one of Iron, with an Anchor
engraven thereon, which was lost about Euphrates. It Is said likewise, that as
he walked about Babylon, he stumbled upon a stone, which having caused to be
taken up, there was found an Anchor underneath, which troubled much the
Southsayers, who would have had this Prodigy to be a presage of delay: But
Ptolemy, the Son of Lagus, who accompanied him, said it was rather a sign of
stedfastness, wherefore when Seleucus attained to the Royalty, he bore an
Anchor engraven in his Ring. Some likewise have assured us that whilst
Alexander was yet living, and in his presence there happened another presage of
the future greatness of Seleucus; for after he was returned from the Indies,
being embarked upon the Euphrates to go visit the Marshes of Babylon, with
intent to make Channels to water the Champion of Syria; his Diadem was by the
wind carried of his Head, and set upon a heap of Reeds, near the the Sepulcher
of an Ancient King, by a fatal presage of the death of that Prince, which
happened soon after. Whereupon a Mariner casting himself into the Water, and
having taken up the Diadem, put it on his Head, and brought it dry to
Alexander, who for a reward gave him a Talent of Silver. The Divines told him
he should put this man to death, some say he did it, others deny it; and others
again say, it was not at all a Mariner, but Seleucus himself, who cast himself
into the Water, and put the Diadem on his Head for fear of wetting it, and that
the presage was fulfilled in the persons of them both: Alexander dying at
Babylon, and Seleucus succeeding in the greatest part of his Empire. These are
the signs I have met with, presaging his greatness. To proceed, after the death
of Alexander, he was Captain of the Guards of the Kings Household, a command,
which whilst the King lived, had been possessed by Ephestion, and after him by
Perdiccas; from thence rising by degrees, he came to the Government of Babylon,
and at last mounted the Throne; and because he had gained many Victories, he
was called The Victorious.
Nicator, for I think that more probable than to imagine that because he slew
Nicator, he bore away that name as a precious spoil. He was tall of Stature,
and so strong, that when Alexander once sacrified, a Bull in fury breaking from
its Cords, and escaping, he alone stopped it, laying fast hold on his Horns,
which is the reason why they place Horns with his Statues. He beautified the
Country under his Dominion with many fair Cities, which he built from one end
to the other, of which sixteen he caused to be called by the name of his Father
Antiochia's, six after his Mothers name Laodicea's, nine after his own name
Seleucia's, four after his Wives names, three after the first Apamia's, and one
after the last Stratonicea, the fairest remaining to this day are five, two
Seleucia's, one on the Sea side, the other on the Tigris. Laodicea in
Phaenicia, Antiochia in Mount Libanus, and Apamia in Syria: He likewise gave
names to others, either Grecian or Macedonian names, as Beraea, Edessa,
Maronea, Perinta, Callipolis, Achaia, Polla, Orope, Amphipolis, Arethusa,
Astachia, Tegaea, Chalcis, Larissa, Heraea, Apolonia, and in Parthia it self,
Sotera, Calliope, Charis, Hecatonpolis, Achaia, in India, Alexandropolis; and
in Scythia, Alexandrescatta: His Victories gave a name to Nicepborea in
Mesopotamia, and to Nicopolis in Armenia, which confines on Cappadocia. It Is
said likewise, that when he was about to build Seleucia on the Sea side: It was
marked out by the Thunder, wherefore the Thunder is there adored as a God, and
to this day they sing Hymns to it, and use many particular Ceremonies. And when
he designed to lay the Foundations of that, which is upon the River Tygris; the
Magi or Southsayers, who had Orders to set out the day and hour, when the Work
was to begin, to the end it might be built under a fortunate Constellation,
pitched upon an unhappy hour, because they were not well pleased, that a great
City should be built there to awe themselves. And that as the King in his Tent
waited for the fatal hour, and all the Army stood ready to lay their hands to
the Work, as soon as the Signal should be given them. The hour of good Augury
being come, the Soldiers on a sudden, thinking they heard the Command given,
fell to the Work with so much alacrity, that no forbidding whatsoever could
stay them: at which Seleucus was much cast down; but the Magicians seeing him
disquieted about the fate of the City, demanding only safety for their persons,
and having obtained it, spoke to him in this manner.

The Oration of the Magicians.
SIr, neither Men nor Cities can change their Fate be it good or bad, for every
City has its Destiny, as well as every Man; now it has pleased the Gods that
this here shall endure many ages, being begun at this present hour. True it is,
that because we feared that when once built it would become a Fortress against
our selves, we have endeaoured to divert the Destinies, but they will still be
Mistresses, both of the cunning of Magicians, and inanimadvertency of a King.
Wherefore Fate it self commanded your Army to do what was most advantageous.
It Is a truth we assure you of, and that you may believe we deceive you not
again; You were here in person, you commanded they should stay for the signal,
and your Army, which in other occasions, where they were to throw themselves
into dangers, and to endure toil and labor, has always been perfectly obedient
to you, could not now stand still, though you commanded it; but all on a sudden
with its Officers ran to the work, as if it had been commanded; and so indeed
it was, and therefore could not be staid at your commands; but who in humane
affairs can have more power than a King, but a God? God, which this day grants
you the full of your desires. God, who a more faithful Counselor than we, is
the Author of the Foundation of this City. God, enemy of our Nation and Allies,
since now we have no more strength left, having neighbors more powerful than
we so near us. In short, rest assured, this City is founded under a fortunate
Constellation, and shall flourish a long time. And now we hope as our fault
proceeded only from the fear we had of the decay of our felicity, you will not
repent your self of the pardon you have granted us. The King mightily pleased
with the Magi's discourse, forgave them: And this is what I have found
concerning Seleucia.

Seleucus willing, that whilst he was yet living, his Son might be King, gave
to him the greatest part of his Territory in the main Land: but though this
were an action worthy the magnanimity of a mighty Prince; in my judgment, what
he did in favor of this Son's love, and of that modesty he strugled with in
his sickness, declared more courage and prudence. For this young Prince was
passionately in love with Stratonice his Fathers Wife, by whom Seleucus had
already had a Child; yet knowing his passion to be criminal, he never
discovered it, nor gave the least symptom of it to any person: but smothering
his grief, languished in his bed, and desired death. Erasistratus himself, that
famous Physician, to whom the King gave such large allowance, could not at all
conjecture whence his distemper sprung, till such time as observing that he had
no corrupt humors in his body, he concluded the seat of his malady must be in
the mind, the contagion of which had past into the Body. He knew his Grief,
Anger, and other disturbances of Man's Spirit, could not well be concealed, but
that a Modest Person might well conceal his Love; and founding himself upon
this, he privately discoursed it with Antiochus, and conjured him to tell him
the cause of his Distemper: But not being able to draw any thing from him, he
kept near his Bed, had diligently observed those Changes happened to him, when
any Woman entered his Chamber, and having taken notice that when others came
about him; his Body continued without any alteration; but at all times, when
the Queen came to visit him, his spirit seemed strangely moved, and shame and
remorse of Conscience seemed written in his Face, though he said never a word;
but that as soon as she was gone, his Body resumed a more lively color, and
with a fresh heat returned to its former Estate. Upon which he told Seleucus,
that his Sons distemper was incurable; whereat the King surprised, let his
Grief break out with a Shriek; and the Physician added, It Is for Love, Sir,
that he dies, and the Love of a Woman he can never enjoy. Seleucus was
astonished, that there should be a Woman in the World, that would not let her
self be persuaded by a King of Asia, when he proposed to her the Marriage of
his Son, and thereto added Prayers, Gifts and Money; nay, a great Kingdom, to
which the Prince was Heir, and which he would be ready to part with presently
in recompense of his cure, if any one demanded it, and thereupon pressing the
Physician to tell him, who this Woman was: He replied, It Is my wife, Sir. To
which the King returned: And how good man, you that are our Friend, and tied to
our House, by so many reciprocal Testimonies of kindness, and besides all that,
a wise and honest man; will not you save the life of this young Prince, the Son
of a King, your Friend, fallen unhappily in Love, and who out of Modesty has
concealed his Grief, even unto Death? Can you make so little account, not only
of Antiochus, but of Seleucus himself? He feigning to be moved with these
Arguments, turned them thus upon the Father. And if he were (said he) in love
with the Queen, would you quit her to him? Hereupon Seleucus began to swear by
all the Gods, Protectors of his Crown, that he would give her him freeely, and
with all his heart, that he might leave to Posterity a Noble Example of
Paternal Goodness toward a Modest Son, who in his Affliction had not made the
least Complaint, and was absolutely unworthy of this Misfortune. In conclusion,
after much Discourse of this Nature he declared, he was extremely troubled,
that he himself could not be the Physician of his Unfortunate Son, without
being beholding to Erasistratus: Who seeing now the King was in earnest,
discovered to him the whole matter, and how he came to know it, notwithstanding
all his Sons resistance. Seleucus seemed overjoyed at what he heard, and now
there remained only the difficulty of persuading his Son and the Queen; which
he did, and after having gained their Consent to his Proposition, he assembled
his Army, who perhaps had already some inkling of the Matter, and beginning to
make an enumeration of the great Actions he had done, by which he had extended
the Bound of his Empire farther, than any of the Successors of Alexander, he
then remonstrated to them, how being grown old, it was hard for him to govern
so vast a Kingdom. Wherefore (said he) I will divide this mighty Mass, and that
I may provide for your security for the future, I am resolved to discharge my
self at present of one half of this burden on him that I esteem most dear. I
believe that you will obey me in all things, it being but just you should do
so. You, I say, that since the death of Alexander, fighting under my Auspices,
are mounted to so high a degree of Power. Now that which I esteem most dear,
and most worthy of this Empire is this young Prince, the Elect of my Children,
and this Princess, who being in a flourishing age, will soon give you Children
to be the stay and support of this great Empire. I marry them therefore
together in your presence, and I give them all those Kingdoms I possess in the
main Land. As for the thing it self, do not you consider in it, so much the
Custom of the Persians, and other Nations, as the general Law, common to all
men, which requires that Subjects should believe whatever their King Decrees is
just. As soon as he had uttered these words, the Army began to make their
Acclamations, proclaiming him the greatest King since Alexander, and the best
of all Fathers. Thus Seleucus married his Wife with his Son, and sent them to
take possession of their Kingdom. And surely this Action gained him more
Reputation than all the Victories he had won; for he conquered himself. He had
seventy two Governments, under his Dominton, so vast it was, of which he gave
the greatest part to his Son, receiving to himself only the Country, lying
between Euphrates and the Sea. After this, having War with Lysimachus (which
was the last he had) he gave him Battle on the confines of Phrygia, near the
Hellespont, where Lysimachus was slain. And as he had passed the Strait to
siese upon Lysimachia, he was himself slain by Ptolemy, surnamed Serranus, who
was one of his Train. He was the Son of Ptolemy Soter, and of Euridice, the
Daughter, of Antipater, and fear having driven him from Egypt, because his
Father had resolved to give the Kindom to his younger Brother; Seleucus took
pity on him, received him, as the Son of his Friend, entertained him at his
Table, and carried him still along with him, in recompense of which he became
his Murderer. Such was Seleucus his end, who dyed in the seventy third year of
his Age, and fortieth of his Reign; for my part, I believe we may likewise
refer to his death the answer of the Oracle: Take leave of Europe, and possess
Asia; for Lysimachia is in Europe; and this was the first time he had repassed
into Europe: After having followed Alexander to the Conquest of Asia: It Is
said, demanding a Magician where he should dye, he received this Answer. Keep
far from Argos to prolong the date
Of Life, for else thou hastnest on thy Fate.
After which he made an exact search of all places, called Argos, and took
special care not to go near the Argos of Peloponnesus, of Amphilochia, of
Orestiade, from whence some Macedonians are called Argeades, or so much as to a
City of that name, which Diomedes, during his banishment, had caused to be
built beyond the Ionian Sea; but that as he was going from the Hellespont to
Lysimachia, he saw an Alter built upon an Eminence, and having demanded the
name of the place, they told him it was called Argos, and that whilst he was
informing himself of the cause of that name, whether the Argonauts passing that
way had not given it, whether the Inhabitants of the Country had not called it
so, because of the Argians, that went to the Wars of Troy; or at last, whether
it might bear that name in memory of the Country of the Atrides. Ptolemy thrust
him with his Sword through the Body. Phileterus, Gonour of Pergamus, redeemed
his Body from Serranus, with a great sum of Money; and when he had burnt it,
sent the Ashes to Antiochus, who caused a magnificent Monument to be raised for
him in Seleucia on the Sea, and built a Temple in Honor of him, which was
called Nicatorion. As for Lysimachus, it is said that he was one of Alexanders
Guard of the Body; and that one day having a long time followed the King on
foot, who was on Horseback, he grew so weary, that to ease himself, he laid
hand on the Horse tail, and by chance was pricked in a Vein of his Forehead, by
the point of Alexanders Javelin, which hung behind the Crupper, from whence
there issued so much Blood, that that Prince having nothing else, bound it up
with his Diadem, which being afterward restored to that Prince all bloody,
Aristander, the South-sayer foretold, that the wounded person should be a King,
but should always Reign in Wars and Troubles. And indeed he ruled forty years,
comprising the time, when he assumed but the quality of Governor, and at last
was slain at the age of seventy years, with his Arms in his Hand, his
Vanquisher Seleucus not long out living him. Lysimachus being slain, a Dog he
had loved, staid a long time by the Body, and defended it from the Birds and
Beasts, till such time as Thorax of Pharsalia finding it, gave it Burial.
Though some there be that say, that he was buried by a Son of his, called
Alexander, whom fear had made seek a refuge with Seleucus, when Lysimachus put
to death Agathocles his other Son; and that his Body having a long time been
sought after, was at length found by means of a Dog, quite putrefied, and was
buried by the Inhabitants of Lysimachia in a Temple, which was afterward
called Lysimachion. Thus dyed also at the same time two Kings of equal stature,
and of an extraordinary strength of Body, one at the age of seventy years, and
the other three more, fighting in person to their very death.

After Seleucus his death, his Sons succeeded in his Kingdom of Syria, the
first of which was Antiochus, surnamed Soter, who fell in love with his
Mother-in-Law, and afterward repulsed the Gauls, who had made an irruption out
of Europe into Asia. The second was another Antiochus, born of the same Woman,
he whom the Milesians called God, because he had delivered them from Timarchus
their Tyrant, but this God dyed of Poison, given him by his Wife. He had
married two, whom he equally loved, Laodice and Berenice, Daughters of
Ptolemeus Philadelphus, one of which two, to wit, Laodice gave him his death,
as she did soon after to her Sister Berenice, and her Child. Ptolemy, the Son
of Philadelphus revenged this crime by the death of Laodice, and marched into
Syria, as far as Babylon, which gave occasion to the Parthians, seeing the
House of the Seleucides in trouble, to shake off the Yoke of their Dominion. To
this Man, surnamed God, succeeded in the Kingdom of Syria, Seleucus his Son by
Laodice, who was called Callinicus, and after Callinicus his two Sons, Seleucus
and Antiochus, one after the other: the Eldest of which having neither health
nor strength enough to keep his Army in awe, was poisoned by his Domestics,
having reigned only two years; and for Antiochus, who was surnamed the Great,
it was he who had War with the Romans, the History of which we have now wrote.
We have likewise spoke of his two Sons, who reigned both one after the other,
Seleucus twelve years, without doing any thing considerable, (nor indeed had
the power, by reason of his Fathers former losses) and Antiochus only two
years, during which he took prisoner Artaxias, King of Armenia, and undertook
an expedition into Egypt against Ptolemy the Sixth, one of those two Sons, whom
their Father lately dead, had left for his Successors. As he lay encamped near
Alexandria, Popilius the Roman Deputy came into his Camp with Letters, whereby
he was commanded to depart the Kingdom of the Ptolemies. After he had read
them, and said he would consider of them, Popilius made a Circle upon the
Ground about him with a Rod he had in his hand, bidding him, consider before he
went out thence, which so terrified him, that he presently departed the Realm;
and because in his way, he plundered the Temple of Venus in Elymais, he dyed of
a rottenness of the Lungs: He left a Son nine years old, called Antiochus
Eupator, of whom we have spoken, as also of Demetrius his Successor, who being
Hostage in Rome, escaped into Syria, where having taken possession of the
Kingdom, the Syrians gave him the name of Soter, which the Sons of Nicator had
before born. There was one Alexander raised Arms against him falsely, saying he
was of the Race of the Seleucides; and being supported by Ptolemy, King of
Egypt, out of the hate he bore to Demetrius, he drove him out of his Kingdom;
he dying in Exile, his Son, called likewise Demetrius, reconquered it, and
because he had Vanquished this Seleucus, who was not of the Family of the
Seleucides, he was called by the Syrians Nicator, like the first Seleucus, from
whom the Kings of Syria were descended. And endeavoring to follow his Example,
he undertook an expedition against the Parthians, where being taken Prisomer,
he lived a long time in the Court of Phraates, and married Rhodogune, that
Kings Sister. Mean while a Domestic of the former King's, called Diodotus,
seeing the Throne of Syria without a King, siesed on it to advance therein a
Child, named Alexander, the Son of that bastard Alexander, and a Daughter of
Ptolemyes; and soon after having made away his Pupil, had the boldness to make
himself King, changing the name of Diodotus into that of Tryphon. Antiochus,
Brother of the Prisoner Demetrius, hearing at Rhodes of his Brothers Captivity,
and all the disorders succeeding it, returned into his Country, where with much
labor he reduced this Tryphon; and having put him to death, advanced with his
Army against Phraates, to oblige him to release his Brother, whom he presently
sent to him out of a fear, the Parthian, at that time, had of War, yet this
stopped him not from pursuing his design, and engaging in Battle with the
Parthian, wherein being overcome, he slew himself. Demetrius returned to his
Kingdom was murdered by his Wife Cleopatra, enraged at the second Marriage with
Rhodogune, the news of which had before been the cause, that during the
Captivity of her Husband, she had married with her Brother Antiochus, she had
two Sons by Demetrius, Seleucus and Antiochus, surnamed Grypus; and by
Antiochus, another Antiochus called the Cyzycenian, of whom Grypus she caused
to be brought up at Athens, and the Cyzycenian at Cyzica. As for Seleucus, who
had caused himself to be crowned immediately after the death of his Father, she
killed him her self with an Arrow, whether it were she were fearful, he should
revenge his Fathers death, or that she had conceived a hate against the whole
Family. Seleucus being dead, the Kingdom descended to Grypus, who forced his
Mother to drink a Poison she had prepared for him. Thus she at last was
punished, and for him he degenerated nothing from Cleopatra, for he having
advice of it, declared War against his Brother, drove him out of his Kingdom,
and made himself King of Syria, he enjoyed it no long time, being himself
expelled by the Arms of Seleucus, Son to Antiochus Grypus, who respected not in
him the Quality of Uncle; but he became so violent, and lived with so much
Tyranny, that being at Mopsa, a City of Cilicia, he was burnt alive in the
place of public Exercise. His Successor was Antiochus, the Son of the
Cyzycenian, whom the Syrians believed had escaped his Uncles traps, only for
his Piety, wherefore they surnamed him the Pious; and yet he was only saved by
a Curtezan fell in love with him, because of his Beauty, which makes me think
the Syrians gave him that name, only out of a jeer; for this Pious man married
Selene, who had before been married to his Father the Cyzyoenian, and to his
Uncle Grypus. Therefore Divine Justice suffered him in punishment of his Crime
to be driven out of his Kingdom by Tigranes; and the Son he had by Selene, who
being bred in Asia was called Asiatick, to be deprived of his Kingdom by
Pompey, as we have before related, having reigned only one year, during which
that General was elsewhere employed. He was the seventeenth King after
Seleucus, without reckoning Alexander the Bastard, or his Son, who were not of
the Race, nor their Domestic Diodotus. To conclude, the Race of the Seleucides
Reigned two hundred and seventy years, and if we account from the time of
Alexander the Great, till this Kingdom was reduced into the form of a Province,
we must likewise add those fourteen years which Tigranes Reigned. Thus much I
thought good to say, by the way, concerning the Macedonians, that were Kings of
Syria, though the Subject be somewhat separate from our History.

The End of the Syrian War.
APPIAN OF ALEXANDRIA, HIS HISTORY OF THE Roman Wars IN PARTHIA.
PART I.
BOOK III.
The Argument of this Book.
I. THE Introduction to the History. II. Crassus chosen Consul leaves Rome to
go against the Parthians. III. Crassus first Expedition wherein he does nothing
memorable. IV. Crassus preparations for his second Expedition and the presages
of his misfortune. V. His march, and the treachery of Agbarus. VI. Upon
Intelligence that the enemy is not far off, he draws up his Army in Battle.
VII. Description of the Battle. VIII. Success of the Battle, and the death of
Crassus Son. IX. The end of the Battle wherein the Romans are worsted. X.
Crassus decamps by by night. XI. The Parthians pursue their Victory, and
Crassus is slain* XII. The Parthians rejoice at Crassus death. XIII. The
beginning of Anthony's War against the Parthians, in which Ventidius makes
great progress. XIV. Anthony's Preparations. XV. Some fights between Anthony
and the Parthians. XVI. Anthony's retreat. XVII. The rashness of Flavius Gallus
who had nigh lost the Army. XVIII. Famine in the Army. XIX. Continuation of
Anthony's retreat, and the end of the War.

AFter Pompey (and those who as we have already said, succeeded Syria) Gabinius
was sent to Command in that Province, whither (as he was disposing himself to
make War against the Arabs) Mithridates King of Parthia driven out of his
Kingdom by his brother Orodes) came to him to request him to suspend his
Expedition against the Arabs, and march against the Parthians. But Ptolemy the
Eleventh, King of Egypt had more prevalency over the Spirit of the Procon^ul,
and by the power of Money wrought so far with him, that in stead of going
against the Parthians he led his Army to Alexandria. After having reestablished
that King, he was condemned to Banishment, for having without the Senates Order
undertook a War in Egypt, forbid by the Oracles, and particularly by the Sibyls
verses. Crassus succeeded him, who going to make War upon the Parthians
perished with his whole Army. After his death, when L. Bibulus was governor of
Syria, the same Parthians made an irruption into the Province, and afterward
under the Government of Saxa, who succeeded him overrun all as far as Ionia,
the Romans being imbroiled in Civil Wars: yet did they nothing memorable,
besides spoiling the Country, rather like thieves then Men of War, and all that
was but the consequence of Crassus overthrow, which had given them a boldness
that Anthony was at last to give check to, but to write the History of this
Expedition we must begin our discourse farther of.

The day of Assembly for Election of Consuls being come. C. Caesar, the Great,
and Marcus Crassus being found Competitors, the two last (notwithstanding all
the endeavors of Cicero, Cato and those of the Contrary Faction) obtained the
Consulate by force, and prolonged to Caesar the Government of Gaul for five
other years. Having drawn by lot the Governments of Syria and Spain. Syria fell
to Crassus, and Spain to Pompey, with which all Men were well satisfied. For
the people were pleased that Pompey should not go far from the City, and there
was great likelihood because he extremely loved his Wife, that he would not
willingly absent himself for any long time. On the other side Crassus as soon
as he saw himself Governor of Syria, dissembled not his satisfaction. He
thought no greater happiness could have arrived him, and so far did his Excess
of Joy transport him, as to make him in his familiar conversation with his
friends, utter a thousand extravagancies, which savored of the young Man, and
seemed contrary to his nature, who had never been taken for a Proud Man or a
Boaster; but now exalting his thoughts above their due level, his judgment was
perverted, insomuch that he not only promised himself to subdue the Syrians and
the Parthians, but as if the Victories gained by Lucullus against Tigranes, and
by Pompey against Mithridates had been but sports, his depraved imaginations
carried him as far as the Bactrians, the Indians, and the Oriental Ocean.
Though in his Commission there was not any mention made of a War against the
Parthians, yet no Man doubted but he was resolved to undertake it. Caesar
himself writing to him from Gaul commended his design, and exhorted him to
pursue it, but many good and understanding Men, thought it strange he should go
to make War against innocent people who only demanded peace. Wherefore Crassus,
having intelligence that Atteius Tribune of the people had a design to hinder
his going out of the City, was afraid, and entreated Pompey who had a great
power over the spirits of the people, to be his Conductor, they found in the
Street a great number of Persons disposed to Arrest him, but Pompey observing
them, went to meet them, and with a smiling countenance appeased them; so that
they held their peace, and gave him passage. Atteius only made opposition,
first by forbidding Crassus to pass any farther, and then by commanding the
Usher to sieze his person, but the other Tribunes not thinking it convenient,
let him pass. Then Atteius ran to the Gate, and filling a chafing dish with
fire, as Crassus past by made efusions thereon, pronouncing Execrations against
the Consul, and invoking Gods, whose names were new and dreadful. This manner
of cursing is very Ancient, and the Romans are of Opinion that these
Imprecations are so powerful, that whoever they are pronounced against cannot
escape, nor can any good happen to him that pronounces them, wherefore they
never use them rashly, and now many persons blamed Alteius, in that by
declaring himself Enemy to Crassus though in favor of the Commonwealth, he had
filled the minds of the whole City with fear and Superstition. Yet all this
hindered not the Consul from setting forward to Brundusium, and though the
Winter which was not yet near past might have diverted him from adventuring to
Sea, yet he would stay no longer, so that he lost many of his Ships by Storm,
and having rallied the remainder of his forces, took his way by Land through
Galatia, where he found King Deiotarus, who was of a great age, building a New
City to whom he said in raillery. You begin to build at twelve a clock, to
which the other replied smiling, and you I perceive go not against the
Parthians very early. For Crassus had already past sixty years of age, and
looked much Elder then he was.

Euphrates, and received under his obedience many Cities of Mesopotamia which
surrendered to him; One he besieged called by the Greeks Zenodocia, which was
defended by a Tyrant named Apollonius, and because he had lost before it one
hundred of his Soldiers, he stormed it with his whole Army, took it, razed it,
and sold all the Inhabitants he could find by Outcry. After this he permitted
his Army to call him Emperor by which he lost much of his Reputation, as if
having gained this Victory, his hopes had reached no higher. In conclusion he
placed Garrisons in all the Cities had surrendered, whose numbers amounted to
seven thousand Foot, and a thousand Horse, and with the rest of his Army, came
to take up his Winter Quarters in Syria, whither his Son who had born Arms in
Gaul under Caesar, from whom he had received many Military rewards, came to him
with a thousand chosen Horse. This was in my opinion the second fault Crassus
committed, after having rashly undertaken this Enterprise, for whilst he ought
to have advanced as far as Babylon and Seleucia, Cities in all times Enemy to
the Parthians, by keeping at this distance he gave the Enemy time to make
preparations. The stay he made in Syria gained him not more glory, for he lived
rather like a Tax-gatherer then a General. The time which should have been
employed in making provision of Arms, and exercising the Soldiers, was spent in
reckoning up the Revenue of the Cities, and in weighing and measuring the Gold
and Silver consecrated to the Goddess of Hierapolis. And when he had Ordered
the Lords and Commonalty of the Country to set out a certain Number of
Soldiers, he presently dispensed with them for Money, whereby he drew upon
himself the scorn of all the World. It was at the Temple of the forementioned
Goddess, whom some will have to be Venus, others Juno, others Nature, which
contains in her the seed of all things, there it was I say that he received the
first presage of his ill fortune. For as the Father and Son came out thence,
the young Man stumbled, and fell before the Gate of the Temple, and the old Man
fell upon his Son.

Whilst he was drawing his Forces out of the Garrisons there came to him
Ambassadors from The General name of the Kings of Parthia.
Arsaces who said but little to him, the sense of which was this. That if the
People of Rome had sent that Army, the War would not end, but by the absolute
ruin of one of the parties, but if it were true (as was reported) that Crassus
without his Countries consent, and for his own particular interests had
undertaken it, Arsaces would not then do his utmost, but having compassion on
the Consuls age, would let the Romans go, whom he considered rather as men
besieged then Conquerors, To which Crassus having arrogantly replied that he
would give them an answer at Seleucia, Vagises chief of the deputation in a fit
of laughter showing the Palm of his hand; Crassus said he, there shall hair
grow here before thou see Seleucia, and therewith the Ambassadors departed to
give advice to The Kings particular Name.
Orodes their King that he must resolve for War. Immediately after, some of
those who had been placed in Garrison in the Cities of Mesopotamia, having
escaped through all the difficulties in the World, came to the Camp, where they
bred no small disturbance. They gave account of the vast number of Enemies they
had seen, the labors they had undergone in defense of the Cities from whence
they were driven, and aggravating every thing, as is usual in such cases, they
assured their fellows that it was impossible to escape from the Parthians when
they pursued, nor to overtake them when they fled, that their Arrows wounded
before they could be perceived, and that nothing was proof against them, whilst
they were Armed with such strong Curasses that nothing could offend them. The
Roman Soldiers hearing these discourses were appalled, for being persuaded that
the Enemies differed nothing from the Armenians, and Cappadocians whom Lucullus
had beaten till he was weary, and believing that the most of their labor would
be the length of the way, and the trouble to pursue Enemies that durst not stay
for them, they saw that quite contrary to the opinion they had entertained,
this War would be both doubtful and dangerous; Insomuch that the Chief Officers
of the Army were of opinion to hinder Crassus from proceeding farther, till he
had considered more maturely of an affair, which concerned the safety or loss
of so many Men. Moreover the Augures gave private notice that the Entrails of
the Beasts promised no good, and that Crassus his Sacrifices were not pleasing
to the Gods. But he would hearken to nothing from them or any other but those
who encouraged him generously to pursue his design; among which the counsel of
Artabasus King of Armenia made great impression on his Spirit, for he came to
the Roman Camp, with six thousand Horse which they call the Kings guards with
promise to furnish ten thousand Horse more, and thirty thousand Foot at his own
expense, persuading to assault the Parthians, by the way of Armenia, and he
would take care to guide the Army a commodious way, and to furnish them with
all necessaries, and that thus Crassus would have continual Mountains to March
through, and places difficult for Horse Service, in which the Parthian strength
chiefly consisted. The Consul highly applauded the Kings good will, and praised
the Magnificence of his Troops, but told him he would take the way of
Mesopotamia, where he had left a great quantity of Valiant Men of the Roman
name. After this conference the Armenian returned into his Kingdom. As for
Crassus, as he caused his Army to pass over a Bridge, great Claps of Thunder
began to make a dreadful noise, and continual flashes of lightning darted in
the Soldiers eyes, besides all on the sudden an impetuous storm, raged against
the Bridge, and carried away a part of it. It happened likewise that the
lightning fell twice in the place whereon they were to encamp, and one of the
Consuls Horses in his most stately Trappings carried the Esquire that rode him,
into the River notwithstanding all endeavors to stop him, nor were either Horse
or Man ever seen afterward; They say likewise that the Eagle that was first
taken up by the Standard Bearer, of it self sell backward, and that when the
Army having past the River sat down to eat, they by chance gave the Soldiers
nothing but Lentils and Broth, which is counted doleful meat, because only
served at Funerals. Afterward as Crassus made an Oration to his Army, there
escaped from him a word which struck a strange terror into the minds of the
Soldiers. For he told them he had caused the Bridge over the River to be broke
down, that not one of them might return; and though that absurdity might have
been repaired by explaining the words, and that the Consul ought to have
interpreted it, that he might not leave upon their Spirits an Impression of ill
Presage, yet he would not do it out of Stubbornness. After this having mustered
his Army, he offered a Sacrifice, and as the Priest put the Entrails of the
beast into his hands, he let them fall, at which the assistants being
scandalized, he laughing said, These are the inconveniences of old age, but our
Armswill never fall out of our hands. He then found that the Army which passed
the River consisted of seven Legions, about four thousand Horse, and as many
light Armed Foot.

Crassus conceived some good hopes, and the Soldiers began to despise the
Parthians, believing they would never stand to fight them. However Crassus, and
some of the Consuls Friends, advised him to retire into some one of those
places he held in that Country, till such time as he had received more certain
advice of the Enemy, or at least that he would march them toward Seleucia,
along the Banks of the River, for so greater plenty of provisions might be
brought him by water, and in case the Enemy came to assail him, the River might
serve as a Rampire, so that they could not encompass him about, and by that
means he might fight them with equal Forces. As Crassus was consulting about
the importance of this Counsel, there arrived in the Camp an Arabian Gentleman
called Agbarus, cunning but treacherous, whom Fortune made use of as the
Principal Instrument, for destruction of the Army; some who had born Arms under
Pompey, knew him, and remembering that Great General had obliged him, thought he
might have an affection for the Romans. But indeed he was sent to Crassus by
those who Commanded the Kings Army, to draw him if possible from the River, and
Foot of the Mountains, and make him take into the Plain, where the Horse had
more advantage. For they were resolved on nothing less then to come to a pitched
battle with the Romans in that place. Agbarus therefore coming to salute
Crassus, and being well spoken, began his discourse with the praises of Pompey,
and the kindnesses he had received from him, then he sell to discourse of the
mighty power of Crassus, setting forth that he wronged himself in spending time
in consultation, when he was but more than too strong, for there was not any
need of Arms, but only of nimble Feet and Hands, to deal with a People; who had
a long time been prepared to pack up their Money and Choicest Riches, and fly
into Scythia or Hyrcania, But if you will fight, said he, you must make have
lest the King resuming Courage Rally up likewise his Forces, for at present you
have only to deal with Surena who is the Rear-guard of those Forces that make
their Retreat, for as for the King, they know not where he is. Now all this was
false, for Orodes had upon the first of the War divided his Forces into two
Armies, with one of which he had invaded Armenia, where he made strange Havoc
to Revenge himself of Artabasus, and had given the other in charge to Surena to
oppose the Romans. Not out of scorn as some say, for there is no likelihood
that he should disdain to deal with Crassus a Roman Consul or that he could
think it more Honorable to wage War with Artabasus or Plunder the Villages of
Armenia, but for my part I am of the opinion he retired thither for fear of the
danger, or as into an Ambuscado, to expect the success of the War. For Surena
was no Common Man, being both for Riches, Birth and Quality, the second to the
King, and for Valor and Vigor of Body, the Chief among all the Parthians,
besides he was large of Stature, and of as Noble an Aspect as any Man living
could be. He had continually in his train a thousand Camels for burden, two
hundred Coaches for his Women, and for his Guard a thousand Men at Arms,
besides a greater Number of Light Horse, so that the Ordinary Train of his
Household, was ten thousand Horse, reckoning his Vassals and Slaves, and by an
Ancient Hereditary Right of his Family he had the Honor first to set the Crown
on the head of the new King of the Parthians: He had brought back this same
Orodes from Exile, and restored him to the Throne, he had by Storm taken the
Great Seleucia, being the first that mounted on the walls, from whence himself
drove the Guards that defended them, and though he were not now above thirty
years of age, he was esteemed one of the most Politic Men of the time he lived
in, which he showed by entrapping Crassus, who yet in truth was easy to be
deceived, first by reason of his pride and daring, and at last because of his
fear, and the distress to which he saw himself reduced. Agbarus therefore
having by fair words persuaded him to leave the River, caused him to take his
march through the midst of vast plains, naked of trees, untilled, and of which
they saw no end, so that the Soldiers grew fainthearted, not only for thirst,
and the tediousness of the way, but because they found no refreshment in their
travel, they saw neither River nor Mountain, nor any green thing, but as if
they had been in the wide Sea, they beheld nothing on all sides but an
affrightful solitude. All this already gave them some suspicion of Treason
which was confirmed, when Ambassadors from Artabasus came to acquaint the
Consul that their King being engaged in a War against Orodes, who had invaded
his Country could not send him any assistance, but that he advised him to turn
his Arms that way, and to join with the Armenians to give battle to the
Parthians, or if that were not his judgment, at least so to order his march
that he took care not to engage in the plains, where the Horse should have too
much advantage, but that he should as much as he could draw toward the
Mountains. To all which Crassus who would not write a word in Answer to the
king, brutishly and like a Man in Choler made Answer, That he was not now at
leisure to think of the affairs of Armenin, but that at his return he would
Chastise Artabasus for his treachery. Whereupon Cassius and those that were of
his mind grew angry, but without saying a word to Crassus, who would not listen
to any good counsel given him, they fell to reviling Agbarus with a thousand
reproachful words. What niischievous Devil brought thee hither, thou most
villainous of all mankind (said they to him) by what Witchcraft or Enchantments
have thou been able to persuade Crassus, to take his march through these vast
Solitudes, a road more proper for a Numidian Robber then a Roman General? But
he being cunning entertained them still with fair words, exhorting them to have
a little patience, and encourageing the tired Soldiers to march, and with
flattering smiles telling them: What do you think you are marching now through
Campania, or do you hope to find here Fountains, Rivers, Shades, Baths, and
continual Inns? Remember, pray remember that you pass now by the confines of
Arabia and Syria. Thus Agbarus treated the Romans as if he had been their
Paedagogue, and before his Treason was discovered he left them, not by stealth
but by consent of the Consul, whom he made believe he went to give Orders about
things necessary, and to create some disorder in the Enemies Camp. It Is said
that that day Crassus came forth not in a Purple Robe, according to the manner
of the Roman Generals, but clothed in Black, which yet he went and changed as
soon as he perceived it, and that some Ensigns pitched in the ground stuck so
fast, that those who were to carry them, could scarcely pull them out, at all
which Crassus did but laugh.

Crassus, who began to draw his Army into Battle, but with a great deal of
Irresolution. First, according to Cassius advice, he drew up his Legions at
length, extending them as far as ever he could, that the Enemy might not
surround them, and placing his Horse on the wings, but afterward changing his
mind, he formed his Legions into a Battle of four Fronts, each of which he
covered with twelve Cohorts, each Cohorts strengthened by a squadron of Horse,
that all four might be equally defended by the Horse. One of the wings he gave
in charge to Cassius, the other to his Son, and kept himself in the main
battle. Marching in this Order they gained a River called Balissa, which though
neither deep nor large was very welcome to the Soldiers, who had had so
toilsome a March through heat and dust, most of the Officers advised not only
the refreshing the Soldiers, but resting that night there, to the intent, that
making the best discovery they possibly could of the number and posture of the
Enemy, they might be the better able to encounter the next Morning: but young
Crassus, and his Horsemen, calling out for the Battle, the Consul again
re-incouraged, commanded that those, who had a mind to take any repast, should
eat without stirring from their Ranks; and scarcely had he allowed them to take
what Food was necessary, but he marched forward the Army, not slowly and often
halting, as is usually done by those, who would preserve their Men for the
Fight; but upon the gallop, and all in a breath, till such time as the Enemy
appeared sooner than they looked for them; but neither in any great numbers,
nor in a posture to give any terror to the Romans; for the main Body of the
Army was hid by these Vant-curriers, who by Surena's order had with loose Coats
covered their Armor.

But when they drew nearer, and that the Enemies had given Signal of Surena
made a show above all the rest, the Magnificence of whose habit seemed somewhat
effeminate, and disagreeable to the high Reputation he had gained: but in this
he followed the Custom of the Medes, who go to Battle painted and curled,
whereas the Parthians tuck up their Hair on their Foreheads, to make them
appear more formidable. At first they charged on the Spur with Lances in their
Rests against the Front of the Roman Battle, to try to break it: but having
observed the Legionary Bucklers joined so close, and their Ranks fast locked
together, they retired, and as if they had disbanded, and quitting their Ranks,
wheeled about the Roman Army: Crassus sent against them his light armed Men,
who went not far; for the Soldiers soon finding themselves overwhelmed, and
beaten down with showrs of Arrows, ran to save themselves among the Ranks of
the Legions, bringing amongst them great confusion and disorder; especially
when it was perceived, that those were discharged with such a violence, that
they equally wounded those that were armed, and those that were not. And now
the Parthians began to fight at a distance with Flights of Arrows from all
sides, which were never shot in vain; for the Romans were so closed together,
that though the Parthians would, they could not well have mist them; and their
Bows being great and strong, and managed by vigorous Arms, made no slight
Wounds: Insomuch that the Romans were already hard put to it. If they stood
firm without quitting Ranks, they were wounded; and if they pressed to assault
the Enemy, they could not reach them, and yet were wounded still; for the
Parthians discharged their Arrows, as they fled; and next the Scythians are
certainly the most skilful Nation in the World in this Exercise, invented
doubtless to defend at once, both from the Enemy, and from the shame of flight.

Crassus seeing no end of this kind of fight, began to afflict himself, and
sent to tell his Son, that he should advance to charge the Enemy, before they
were enclosed; for they pressed hard upon him, and wheeled about the Wing,
which he commanded to fall on in the Rear. This young Man having therefore
taken thirteen hundred Horse, of which Caesar had given him a thousand, and
eight Cohorts of Foot armed with Bucklers, which stood next him, drew off, and
went furiously to charge the gross of the Enemy; but they (whether that place
were miry, as some say, or that by this stratagem, they had a mind to draw the
Consuls Son, as far as was possible, from the rest of the Army) turned tail and
fled. He presently with loud cries declared the Enemies flight, and addressed
himself to pursue them, accompanied by Censorinus and Megabachus; this last
famous for strength of Body, and height of Courage; the other a Senator, and
besides a great Orator, both of the same age with young Crassus, and his
familiar Friends. The Horse followed, and the Foot after them, all filled with
joy and hope, believing they gave chase to a Vanquished Enemy; but they had not
gone far e're they discovered the cheat, beholding those return to the charge,
who had made a show of flight, supported now and strengthened with great
numbers: Whereupon those who were at the Head of the Romans stood still,
believing, because of their small number, the Enemies would come and assault
them at hand: but they opposed them only with their Lanciers, whilst the rest
scouting up and down the Plain, with their Horsehoofs broke the surface of the
Earth, from whence arose such clouds of Sand and Dust, that the Romans could
neither see nor speak: So that being thus locked up close together in a crowd,
they were wounded, and dyed not of a quick and easy death, but with strange
pains and convulsions caused by the Arrows sticking in their Bodies, which not
being able to endure, they rolled themselves upon the ground to break them in
their wounds, or else striving to pull them out with the barbed heads, which
had pierced into the Veins and Nerves, they grievously tore themselves, and
added fresh anguish to the former. Thus most of all those Cohorts that followed
the Horse being slain, the rest remained useless, because of their wounds; and
when their Captains commanded them to go charge the Parthian Men at Arms, they
showed their hands nailed to their Bucklers, or their Feet struck through and
fastened to the ground; so that they could neither fight nor flee. Hereupon
young Crassus resolved to make one brisk attempt with his Horse, but the
strokes they gave with their weak and slender Javelins, having but small
effects on the others Currasses of boild Leather, guarded with bands of Iron;
whilst on the contrary their steel-headed Lances piercing through and through
the Gauls lightly armed, and almost naked, made the march very unequal. He had
great confidence in these Gauls, and indeed they did act wonders, they siesed
on these Lances with their naked hands, and in endeavoring to wrest them away,
tumbled the Men at Arms from off their Horses; who being over-laden with Iron,
could very hardly mount again: There were likewise some of them, who quitting
their own Horses, went and thrust their Swords in the bellies of those of the
Enemy, who mounting at the smart of the wound, tumbled back with their Riders,
so that many were by this means trampled to death under the Horse Feet, as well
of the Romans as the Parthians: but nothing was more insufferable to the Gauls
than the heat and drowth, to which they were not accustomed; and besides, many
had lost their Horses, which had been slain by the Pikes or Lances. Wherefore
they resolved to recover the Legions, having in the midst of them the young
Crassus, already tortured with many wounds: but seeing nigh unto them a Hillock
of Sand, which formed a kind of Eminence, they retired thither, and tying in
the midst those Horses they had left; fortified themselves with their Bucklers,
which they ranked round about them, thinking by this means to defend themselves
from the Barbarians: but it fell out quite contrary; for though in a Level
those before do in some measure cover those behind, yet here, by reason of the
declining ground, one standing above another, no person could be in security.
They were all wounded alike, and dyed with the more vexation, that they could
not revenge themselves, but must all perish without Glory. There were along
with the young Crassus two Greeks, Citizens of of Carres, called Hierom and
Nicomachus, who would have persuaded him to have saved himself with them in the
City of Ichnes, which took part with the Romans: but* he made answer, There
were no death so cruel, that for fear of it. Publius would forsake his
Companions, who had not engaged themselves in that danger, but for his sake.
And at the same instant gave leave to them, exhorting them to take care of
themselves; but for his own part, not being able to make use of his hand,
because of a wound he had received by an Arrow, he presented his breast to his
Esquire, commanding him to run him through. Some say Censorinus dyed in the
same manner, and that Megabachus, and most of the Nobility slew themselves. The
rest assailed by the Parthians, dyed generously defending themselves, and it is
reported five hundred only were taken alive. The Enemy forthwith cut off the
Heads of young Crassus, and his Companions, and returned to seek out his
Father, who in the mean time had acted, as we shall now relate.

After the Command given to his Son to charge, and that some came Crassus
perceiving himself in danger, dispatched away several Messengers to his Father,
to give him notice of it, of whom the first were slain by the Enemies; and the
next, who hardly escaped brought word, that Publius was certainly lost, if not
suddenly relieved. Upon this news the Consul found himself tossed with sundry
passions which blinded his reason, so that he knew not what to resolve on: He
was fearful of loosing all, if he went to the succor of his Son; yet he loved
him, and therefore was in doubt whether he should go to his relief, or
endeavor to save the rest. At last he caused the Army to March toward the
Enemy, who presently appeared to meet them; witnessing by their loud and
terrible shouts that they had gained the Victory; and letting the Romans know,
by the confused noise of their Drums, that they must again prepare to fight.
Thus they made their approach, bearing the Head of Publius upon the end of a
Lance, and asking by way of derision, who were the Parents of that young Man,
and of what Family he was? for they could not believe that Crassus the basest
of all men could beget a Son so Brave and Valiant. This sight cast down the
spirits of the Romans more than all the Calamities they had suffered; and
instead of stirring up in them that indignation and desire of revenge, which it
ought, overwhelmed them with horror and fear. However, Crassus Valor appeared
upon this occasion extraordinarily, he cried out, as he marched on Horse back
through the Ranks:

The Oration of Crassus.
THis Misfortune concerns me only, fellow Soldiers, the glory and felicity of
our Country remains yet entire, whilst you are in a condition to defend it. And
if you have any compassion upon me, for having lost a Son of that Value,
discharge your anger on your Enemies, and deprive them of their joy by
punishing their cruelty. Loose not your Courage, for the misfortune happened to
me, whoever pretends to great recompenses is subject to like disgraces.
Lucullus did not Vanquish Tigranes, nor Scipio Antiochus, without the expense
of blood. Our Fathers lost a thousand Ships in the Conquest of Sicily; and in
Italy it self many Generals and Captains have perished, whose loss has not
hindered their party from gaining the Victory; for the Roman Empire is not
mounted to this Greatness and Power by the good Fortune of the Romans, but by
their Patience and height of Courage in Adversity.

After these words Crassus, perceiving that most of the Soldiers received them
but coldly, commanded to give a great shout all together, which made but their
inward grief the more known; for they shouted with weak and discordant Voices,
whilst the Barbarians answered them in a Tone high and Harmonious. The Fight
presently began, wherein the Enemies light Horse wheeling about the Romans,
galled them in Flank with showrs of Arrows, whilst the Lanciers, who assailed
them in Front, made them recoyl and crowd close together. However, some out of
fear of the Arrows, drew off from the gross to charge nearer at hand: but they
did their Enemies little^hurt, and were presently killed by their Lances, whose
Iron head entering the Body, was followed by a thick Staff, thrust forward with
so great violence, that often times it went through and through both Horse and
Man. After the Battle had thus lasted till night, the Parthians retreated,
saying, That they gave that night to Crassus to bewail his Son, unless he made
choice of the better way, and had rather go and present himself to Arsaces than
be carried: And having said these words, they went and lodged in a place hard
by, with full hopes the next Morning to put an absolute end the Victory.

to the Enemy of their departure: And though they imputed all their misfortune
to Crassus, they wished, notwithstanding, they might either see or hear him;
but he had withdrawn himself, and with his head bound up, had cast himself on
the ground in the dark. Whereby he became a great Example of the inconstancy of
Fortune to the Vulgar, and of rashness and ambition to the Learned; having
suffered himself to be so far transported by those two failings, that he could
not content himself to be one of the Prime among so many thousands of Citizens,
but believed himself miserable, because he was accounted but the third Man in
Rome. Octavius his Lieutenant, and Cassius his Quaestor, having found him in
this posture, roused him up, and entreated him to take courage; but seeing he
was in utter despair, by advice of the Colonels and Captains.
Tribunes and Centurions, they themselves published the Deaf March, and began
to discamp without noise: but when the sick and wounded perceived that they
were about to forsake them, with their cries and roarings they spread a general
trouble throughout the Army, even those who were already got into the Plain,
took the Alarm, as if the Enemy had been ready to fall on: wherefore they made
many halts, putting themselves in order to fight, and perplexed with the great
numbers of the wounded that followed them, of which they took up some, and left
others, they made but little way, save only three hundred Horse that fled away
by themselves, with whom Ignatius arrived about Midnight at Carres, where
having called in Latin to those were upon the Guards of the Walls, he bid them
go and tell Coponius, the Governor of the place, that there had been a great
Fight between Crassus and the Parthians; and without explaining himself
farther, or so much as telling his name, advanced toward the Bridge; the truth
is, he saved those Horse, but he was blamed by all the World for forsaking his
General, not but that Crassus had some benefit by Coponius, having this advice;
for the Governor conjecturing by the ambiguity of his words, and by the
suddenness of his departure, that the Messenger brought no good news,
immediately drew to Arms what Force he had; and when he had advice that the
General was upon the way, went out to meet him, and gathering up as many of the
Soldiers as he could, conducted them to the City.

As for the Parthians, though they knew well that the Romans were Vargonteius,
who having stragled in the March by night, fell into their hands enclosed in a
strait, where having valiantly defended themselves, they were all cut in
pieces, except only twenty Soldiers, who with their Swords in their hands
opened themselves a passage through the midst of their Enemies; and whose
courage the Enemies themselves admiring, suffered them to pass at an easy rate
to Carres, without pursuing them. Mean while false intelligence was brought to
Surena, that Crassus was escaped with all the considerable Persons in the Army,
and that those who were retired into Carres, were only a company of wretches
not worth any consideration. Which was the reason that not thinking his Victory
perfect, and desiring to have more certain news, he quitted his design of
pursuing Crassus, and sent one of his people, who understood both Languages,
before the Walls of Carres, to ask in Latin either for Crassus himself, or
Cassius, as if Surena desired a conference with them, which being heard, and
told to Crassus and his Friends, displeased them not. A little while after,
came on the part of the Barbarians certain Arabs, who knew the faces of Crassus
and Cassius, having frequented their Camp before Battle. These knowing Cassius
upon the Wall, told him that Surena would grant Peace to the Romans, provided
they would be friends to the King, and depart out of Mesopotamia, and that they
believed they had better accept of that condition, than reduce things to the
last extremities; whereupon Cassius demanded a time and place for a Conference
betwixt the Generals, and they promising to let Surena know it, went their way;
Surena rejoying that he had now these two Men now shut up, sent next Morniing
under the City Walls some Parthians, who injuriously reviling Crassus and
Cassius, demanded them to be delivered up, if the Romans had a mind to Peace.
And now the Chiefs of the Roman Army knowing that they were betrayed, fell into
despair; but yet consulting what was best to do, they resolved on a sudden
flight, beseeching the Consul to give over those vain and distant hopes he
placed in the assistance of the Armenians. This design was not to have been
communicated to any of the Inhabitants of Carres, before the time of its
execution, and Crassus discovered it to the most per^idious of them all, called
Andromachus, to whose Faith he committed himself, taking him for the Guide of
the Army: So that by the means of this Traitor, all the Roman designs were
presently known to the Parthians. And because these were not accustomed to
fight in the dark, as not easy for them to do, Andromachus to retard the
Romans March, and by that means give the Enemy time to overtake them, placed
himself at the Head of them, going sometimes on one side, and sometimes on
another, till such time as he had engaged them in deep Marshes, and places
full of Ditches, whose high Banks sorely perplexed the Army, who yet followed
this Traitor; insomuch, that they were often forced to go a great way about to
find a passage. This begat a distrust in some, who imagining by the many
twinings and windings, that Andromachus had an ill intention, refused to follow
him, of which number was Cassius, who returned to Carres: And when his Guides,
who were Arabs, urged him to advance before the Moon had passed Scorpio: For my
part, said he to them, I am much more afraid of Sagitarious signifies an Archer.
Sagittary. However, parting from Carres, he took the way toward Syria, with
five hundred Horse; and having found faithful Guides, gained the Mountains,
called Synaces, where before day, there rallied together about five thousand
Soldiers, conducted by Octavius, an excellent Man. As for Crassus, day
surprised him, as he followed Andromachus with incredible labor. He was
accompanied with four Cohorts with Bucklers; some few Horse, and five Lictors
or Sergeants, with whom having with all the pain and labor imaginable,
overcome the difficulty of the way; the Enemies now drawing near, he went and
possessed himself of an Eminence, distant about A Mile and half.
twelve Furlongs from that, to which Octavius was retired, but nothing so
strong of situation, nor of so difficult approach for the Horse, but it lay
under the Synbaces, to which it was joined with a long neck, that crossed the
Plain. So that Octavius could not be ignorant of the danger in which the Consul
was; wherefore himself ran first to his assistance with a few people, and soon
after the rest of his Forces, reproaching each other with cowardice, followed.
They altogether drove the Enemy from the Hill, and drawing up round about.
Crassus, and lining their whole Body with their Bucklers, bravely protested,
that no Arrow of the Parthians should reach their General's Body, so long as
one of them remained alive. Wherefore Surena, who saw the Parthians gave
ground, and that if night came on, the Romans, who had already gained the
Mountains, would escape him, assaulted Crassus with cunning, he let go some
Prisoners, who had heard some of the Barbarians of purpose saying, That the
King would not be dissatisfied to have Peace with the Romans, but desired their
Friendship, and that if he might obtain it by Crassus means, he would treat him
favorably. In the mean time, causing the fight to cease, he after by little
and little drew near to the Hill, and unbending his Bow, presented his hand to
Crassus, desiring him to consent to an accommodation, he told him that the King
having taken up Arms much against his will, the Romans had made trial of his
Strength and Power, and that now he would make them taste of his Goodness and
Clemency, by showing them his Favor, and granting security for their Retreat.
Not only the soldiers, but the Leaders glad to hear these fine words of
Surena's, easily believed them. Crassus was the only man was not deceived.
Indeed he saw no reason for so sudden a change, wherefore he would not
presently consent, but stood thinking what answer to return, when the Soldiers
began to cry out with one voice, that they would have Peace, and withal to
revile him, for exposing them to men, he durst not himself approach disarmed,
as they were; he endeavored first to persuade them by entreaties and reasons
to have patience the rest of that day, since at night they might easily make
their retreat, by gaining the Mountains, he showed them the way they should
take, begging them not to loose all hopes of safety, which was now so nigh; but
when he saw that the Soldiers enraged, threatened him, and smote upon their
Bucklers, he was afraid of them, and at parting said only these words to those
about him:

The Oration of Crassus.
Octavius, and you Petronius, and all you Gentlemen of Quality here present,
you see how I am forced to go, you are witnesses of the violence done me; yet
tell all the World, when you have gained a place of safety, that Crassus lost
his life deceived by his Enemies, but not delivered up to them by his Citizens.

However, Octavius and the rest staid not upon the Hill, but went down with the
Consul, who would not suffer the Lictors to follow him. As they were going
down, two Mongrels or half Greeks came to meet him, and alighting, made their
Reverence to Crassus, entreating him to send some of his people before to view
Surena and his Train, and epsy if they were not armed. To which the Consul
made answer, That if he had yet the least desire to live, he would not have
come to put himself into their hands. However, he sent the Riscones Brothers to
spy into their designs, and discover their number; but Surena caused them to
be arrested; and forthwith advancing with the Chief Men of his Army all mounted
on Horseback toward Crassus: And how (said he, coming near him) A Roman
General on Foot, and we on Horseback; and at the same instant commanded a
Horse to be brought him. Crassus having answered, That neither one nor the
other did amiss in that, since each came to the Conference, after the manner of
his Country. Surena said, That the Peace was already concluded between Orodes
and the people of Rome, and that there wanted nothing but putting the Articles
in Writing* which they would do on the River side: For you Romans (said he) do
not usually remember your Treaties very well; and at the same instant he gave
him his hand: Thereupon the Roman called out to bring his Horse: To which
Surena said, there was no need of it: For see, added he, one which the King has
sent you; and forthwith one was brought ready Bridled with a Bitt of Gold, upon
which the Footmen mounted him, and placed themselves on both sides to make him
advance forward: whereupon Octavius first of all laid hands upon the Horse
Bridle to stop him, and one of the Tribunes called Petronius, and after him all
the rest placed themselves about the Consul, to hinder his going farther, and
to pull away from about him those that would have led him forward: Insomuch,
that thus pushing and shoving one another, they came at last to blows, Octavius
drawing his Sword, slew one of the Barbarian Horsemen, but another slew him
with a blow behind. Petronius had no offensive Arms, but having received on his
Cuirass the thrusts made at him, withdrew himself from the bustle without any
wound. As for Crassus, he was slain by one Maxarthes a Parthian, though some
say it was done by another, and that Maxarthes, as soon as he was down, cut off
his head and his right hand: but all these are conjectures, for of all those
that were present, some were slain upon the place, and the rest nimbly regained
the Hill, before which the Parthians appeared, and called out on the part of
Surena, that since Crassus was punished, all the rest might come down in
safety: Some yielded themselves, others fled away by night, of which few
escaped, being most taken and slain by the Arabs. It Is said that in this
expedition there were twenty thousand Soldiers slain, and ten thousand taken
Prisoners.

Surena sent Crassus Head and Hand to Orodes into Armenia; and himself having
beforehand caused a Rumor to be spread abroad at Seleucia that he brought
Crassus alive, he prepared a certain ridiculous Entry, which in Mockery he
called a Triumph. To this purpose he took one of the Prisoners, called Caius,
who much resembled Crassus, and having clothed him in a Woman's Robe, and
taught him to answer to those, who called him either Crassus or Emperor, made
him enter on Horseback into the City, before him marched, mounted on Camels,
Trumpets and Lictors carried Rods with Purses fastened to them; and Axes, to
which were tied the Heads of Romans newly cut off: He was followed by the
Curtisans of Seleucia, playing on Instruments, and singing infamous and
ridiculous Songs of the faintheartedness and cowardice of Crassus more becoming
a Woman than a Man. Such was the public Spectacle: but having in particular
assembled the Senate of Seleucia; he exposed to them the lascivious Fable of
Aristides the Milesian, which indeed had been found among Rustius his Baggage,
from whence he took an ample Subject to declaim against the Romans, who even in
time of War could not abstain from uncleaness, but brought their Books along
with them. The Seleucians upon this took occasion to admire the Wisdom of Aesop
in his Fable of the Wallet, seeing that Surena carried open in the Pouch before
the Sensualities of the Milesians, and kept shup up in that behind the
Sybaritick or Effeminate Wantonness of the Parthians, bringing along himself in
his Train, multitudes of Coaches full of Concubines; and his first appearance
being like that of Hydra, dreadful and terrible* where nothing was to be seen
but Horses, and Lances, and Bows, whilst his tail ended in Cimbals, and Songs,
and continual Debauches of Women; not but that Rustius was to be condemned: but
the Parthians are in the wrong to blame what comes from Miletum; since most of
the Family of the Arsacides, who have been their Kings, were born of Milesian
and Ionian Curtisans. Whilst these things passed, Orodes was reconciled with
Artabasus, having married his Son Pacorus to the Armenians Daughter* which was
followed by Feastings, Rejoicing, and Debauches. They acted likewise Greek
Comedies, for Orodes was not ignorant of the Greek Tongue, nor of Letters; and
for Artabasus, he composed both Tragedies, Orations and Histories, part of
which have been preserved to our times. When Crassus Head was brought to the
entrance of the Court, they were at Table, and a Comedian, called Jason the
Tr^llian was reciting some Verses of the part of Agave in the Bacchides of
Euripides* which much delighted the Company. At the same instant Sillaces
entered the Room, where they were at Meat; and making a profound Reverence,
threw down the Head in the middle of the Hall, which being taken up by the
Parthians with shouts and general rejoicing: the King commanded the Officers
they should make room for Sillaces at the Table, which they did: then Jason
giving one of the Players upon the Flute his part to play the Funerals of
Pentheus; and himself taking the Head of Crassus, as if he had entered in a
fury, began as loud as his voice would reach to sing these Verses: From the
Chase we bring to you,
Tender Venison fat and good,
Which was taken in this Wood.
All the Company were pleased at this Spectacle, but one accident pleased them
more; for when at every Couple the Choire answered singing It Is to me the
Honor's due. and that one of the Actors danced to it; Maxarthes (for he
likewise was at the Feast) leaped from the Table, and took the Head out of his
hands that held it, as having more right to it than any other. Whereupon the
King made him Presents according to the Custom of the Country, and gave Jason a
Talent. Thus Crassus his Expedition ended in a Tragedy. However, Orodes
received soon after a punishment equal to his cruelty, as Surena did first,
what his so many violated Oaths deserved; for the King soon after made him away
out of the Envy he bore to his Glory: and for Orodes, being fallen sick of the
Dropsy, after that his Son Pacorus had been slain in fight against the Romans,
Phraates his other Son gave him Poison, which the force of the Distemper
expelled, so that the King grew better upon it, whereupon Phraates would no
more trust to Poison, but taking a shorter way strangled his Father.

Sometime after the Parthian Army marched into Mesopotamia whither their
Captains sent for Labienus, and chose him General, resolved under his conduct
to invade Syria; and carry their Arms as far as Alexandria. He accepted the
Dignity, and at the head of that Army had already pillaged and spoiled all that
part of Asia, lying between Euphrates and the Ionian Sea, when complaints
thereof came to Anthony, who thereupon took a resolution to make War upon the
Parthians. But being recalled by the prayers and tears of his Fulvia, he
returned into Italy, where having made an Alliance with Caesar and Pompey, who
was in Sicily, he sent Ventidius before into Asia to oppose the Parthians, and
hinder their further Progress, and having for himself by the favor of his
Friends, obtained the Dignity of high Priest, which was held by the defunct
Caesar, he stayed sometime in Rome, managing in fellowship with them the
Public affairs with great Concord. There was at this this time in Anthony's
train an Egyptian Astrologer who (whether it were to gratify Cleopatra, or
that it were so indeed) took the boldness to tell him, that his fortune was
indeed very great and splendid, but that it was obscured by Caesar's,
counselling him to keep as far off that young Man as he could; for said he to
him your Genius is over awed by his. This discourse displeased Anthony, however
he followed the Egyptians Counsel, and having recommended his affairs to
Caesar, came into Greece, and stayed that Winter at Athens, where having advice
of the first success of Ventidius Arms, that not only Labienus but Phraates the
greatest of Orodes Captains were slain, he made a Solemn Feast for the Greeks,
and gave them the Divertisement of Plays and Exercises. And afterward being
ready to set forward to the War, he took a Crown of Sacred Olive, and to
satisfy a certain Oracle, carried along with him a Jar full of the Water of
the Fountain Clepsydra. Mean while Pacorus the Kings Son, being newly entered
Syria with a powerful Army, Ventidius defeated him at Cyrista. The slaughter
here was very great, and Pacorus himself was slain fighting in the head of his
Army, so that this great Victory revenged the loss the Romans had suffered
under Crassus, and the Parthians after having been thrice more beaten, were
forced to keep within the bounds of Media and Mesopotamia. Ventidius would not
pursue them farther, lest he should contract Anthony's envy, yet whilst he
expected him, he reduced to obedience those Cities, had revolted and held
Antiochus Commagenes besieged in Samosata so closely, that he offered a
thousand Talents, and to refer himself to Anthony's discretion. He was not now
far off, wherefore Ventidius thought it best that he should send Deputies to
him that he himself might conclude the peace, being well content that Anthony
should have the pre-eminence in this affair, lest he should think Ventidius
assumed to himself all the Authority, but the Siege having lasted long, and the
besieged out of despair resuming Courage, Anthony was satisfied to take up with
three hundred Talents, and granted peace to Antiochus. Afterward having taken
some order in the Syrian affairs, he returned to Athens, giving Ventidius all
those testimonies of his Esteem, his Services had merited, and sent him to Rome
to receive the Honor of Triumph, and he is the only Roman, who till these our
times ever Triumphed over the Parthians. He was but of mean Birth, and mounted
not to that high degree of Glory, but by the Friendship of Anthony, which he
made such good use of, that he confirmed the opinion, that Anthony and Caesar
succeeded more happily by their Lieutenants then by themselves, for Sosius one
of Anthony's Captains had done Worthy Actions in Syria, so had likewise
Canidius in his Station on the Confines of Armenia, having overcome the Kings
of Armenia, Iberia, Albania, made his way as far as Caucasus, and gained to the
name of Anthony, Fame and Honor among the Barbarians.

Phraates having possessed himself of the Estates of his Father Crodes Moneses,
a Man of Esteem, and Power, addressed himself to Anthony, who comparing the
Fortune of this Fugitive with that of Themistocles, and equalling himself to
the Persian Kings both for Riches and Largness of Mind, gave him three Cities,
Larissa, Arethusa and Hierapolis, formerly called Bambice. Afterward the King
having recalled and given him security for his return; Anthony freely dismissed
him, that he might flatter Phraates with hopes of peace; whilst himself out of
a passionate desire he had to recover the Ensigns Crassus had lost, and the
Captives that were yet living, sends back Cleopatra into Egypt, and by the way
of Arabia, sets forward toward Armenia where he had appointed the Rendevouz of
his Forces and those the Kings were to bring him, for there were many Friends
and Allies of the Romans of whom Artabasus King of Armenia, the most
considerable, furnished him with sixteen thousand Horse and seven thousand
Foot, so that at the Muster taken when his Army was drawn together, the Roman
and Italian Foot, amounted to sixty thousand Men, the Spanish and Gaul Horse to
ten thousand, and the Auxiliary Forces to thirty thousand, accounting the
Light-armed Horse and Foot. It Is said that all this great preparation, and all
these Forces, which struck terror into the Bactrians and farthest distant
Indians, proved invalid, by the means of Cleopatra only, That Anthony, that he
might the sooner see her, began the War without staying for a season proper for
the Execution of his designs, that having as it were his understanding
infatuated, he did all things inconsiderately, and was so deeply in love with
this Woman that he thought not so much of overcoming as of returning speedily
to her. For whereas he ought to have let his Army Winter in Armenia, the better
to refresh it, tired as it was with a march of A thousand M^les.
eight thousand furlongs, and in the Spring have fallen into Media, before the
Parthians were in the Field, he could not brook this delay, but setting forward
with his Troops, and leaving Armenia on the left hand, and entering into
Atropacena, spoiled that whole Country, besides having in his Train three
hundred Wagons laden with Engines for Sieges, among which there was one Ram of
seventy Foot long, which could by no means be repaired if once it were broken,
because in those Countries no Materials were to be found, there neither growing
any trees long enough, nor Wood hard enough: to the end he might march the
swifter, he left behind all these carriages under the Guard of one Officer with
some Forces. After which besieging a great City called Phraates in which was
the Wife of the King of the Medes, with his Children, he was soon sensible what
a fault he had committed in leaving behind those Engines; yet he attempted to
take the City by raising Tarasses against the Wall, but this was a work of
labor and advanced but slowly.

Mean while Phraates took the Field with a powerful Army to come Stratianus and
ten thousand Foot that he Commanded. And after having taken the Engines slew a
great quantity of others of which number was the King Polemon, which
disheartened, and not without reason, those who had engaged in Anthony's party,
dismayed at so mournful a beginning; Insomuch that Artabasus King of Armenia,
who had been the Principal cause of this War giving over all those hopes he had
conceived of the Romans retired with his Army into his own Country. And now the
Parthians having sent relief into the City with a thousand injurious threats
reviled the Romans, so that Anthony, that he might not let the courages of his
Men cool in the Idleness of a Siege, took with him ten Legions, three
Praetorian Cohorts and all his Cavalry to go and gather in Provisions and
Forage, hoping the Enemy would come to oppose him, and so he might gain an
opportunity to Fight. After his first days march the Parthians appeared, and he
seeing that they began to enlarge their Battle round about the Roman Camp with
design to cut off his way of return, he Commanded to Sound a March, and to pack
up the Tents, as if he were preparing to discamp, and not to Fight, which done
he caused his Army to March before the Enemies in form of a Crescent with
Orders to the Cavalry to charge as soon as the Vanguard was advanced, that so
the Legions at the same time might come to the Charge. The Parthians mean while
admired the Excellent Order of the Roman Army, seeing the Soldiers pass along,
keeping their Ranks, and Brandishing their Piles without making the least
noise, but as soon as the Signal was given, and the first shout made, the Roman
Horse pressed forward to Charge the Parthians, and came in so close to them,
that they could no more make use of their Arrows. Yet they stood their ground
for some time till the Legionary Soldiers running in with their shouts, and the
noise of their Bucklers, so horribly affrighted the Horses of the Enemy, that
they turned Tail without striking blow. Anthony hoping that this battle would
end the War, or at least give a good stroke toward Victory, pursued them hard.
But when the Infantry had driven them before them Above six Miles.
fifty furlongs, and the Horse had followed them, thrice as far* and that they
found but thirty Prisoners, and not above fourscore slain, their courages fell
at the consideration of how few they had destroyed in this victory in
comparison of the Numbers they had lost at the defense of the Carriages. Next
Morning they advanced to go and force Phraates his Camp, but meeting in their
march at first with a few Parthians, after that with a greater Number, and at
last with the whole Army, who as if they had not been beaten the day before,
came to the charge and assailed them on all sides, they with much pains and
difficulty recovered their Camp, where the Medes whom they besieged, having
stormed the Palisado, and driven off those that defended it, Anthony fell into
such a passion that he decimated all those had quitted their Posts, he drew
them off by Decuries or Tens, and making them draw Lots, condemned the
unfortunate to death, and instead of Wheat gave only Barley Bread to the rest.
This War was troublesome to both parties, and each feared more grievous
consequences. For Anthony could no longer go abroad to seek Provision or
Forage without having some of his People slain or wounded, and Phraates who
knew well that the Parthians would rather endure any thing than to keep the
Field all Winter out of their own Country, was afraid left if the Romans
continued the War his People would forsake him, the Air already growing cold by
reason of the Autumnal Equinox. Wherefore he made use of this Artifice. Some
Parthians known to the Romans, meeting them forraging treated them kindly,
letting them go away with their burdens and praising their valor which their
King himself admired, and that with reason, for indeed they were the most
valiant Men in the World, and then by degrees drawing nearer they blamed
Anthony, that he would not make peace with the King, and spare the lives of so
many brave people, whom he only suffered to lose time, and without giving them
opportunity of Fighting made them wait for two cruel Enemies, Famine and
Winter, and that in such places as their March would be difficult, though the
Parthians themselves were their Guides. This being several times reported to
Anthony, he began to be more tractable; yet he would not send to the Parthian,
till he had caused inquiry to be made of these honest Barbarians, whether it
were by their Kings Order they had spoke to the Roman Soldiers: which when they
had assured it was, conjuring them not to have the least fear or jealousy, he
dispatched one of his Friends to the King, to demand the Taken in Crassus War.
Ensigns and the Captives, that he might not seem to be content with an
honorable Retreat only; to which answer was returned, That he should not speak
of that, but that Peace, and a safe Retreat should be granted him, on condition
he would speedily depart, which he did few days after.

Though he were very Eloquent in all Assemblies, whether Civil or Domitius
Aenobarbus to take his place, and to exhort the Soldiers to be courageous; some
took it ill, thinking he did it in scorn; but the greater part knowing the
cause, the easilier composed themselves to his thoughts. As he was designing
with himself to return the way he came through the naked Deserts, a certain
Mardian, of whose Courage and Fidelity the Romans had trial in the Fight for
defense of the Engines, and who knew the manner of the Parthians living, came
to him, and advised him to take his March by the Foot of the Mountains, which
lay on the right hand, and not to expose his Army laden with Arms, to such
infinite numbers of Archers on Horseback in Plains so vast, and without any
covert; for that Phraates had no other design, but to fall upon him, when by
fair words he had made him leave his Trenches; and therefore he offered
himself, both to lead them a shorter way, and in which they should find
abundance of whatever was necessary for the Soldiers. Anthony proposed this in
Council, not seeming to distrust the Peace agreed on by the Parthians, but
telling them he should be well satisfied to take a shorter way, by which they
should find good Villages, and that nothing else was to be done, but to take
good security of the Mardian: And he of himself desired he might be bound till
they had reached Armenia; and thus bound, put himself at the Head of the Army,
and led them two days without any alarm: but on the third, whilst Anthony
thought of nothing less than the Parthians; and that upon the assurance of the
Peace, the Army marched without standing on their Guard, the Mardian espying
the Bank of a River newly broken, and the way, by which they were to pass, full
of Water; he judged the Parthians had done it to put a stop to the Romans, by
making difficult the passage, and showing it to Anthony, advised him to prepare
to receive the Enemy. The Roman General presently Martialled his Army, leaving
between the Ranks spaces for the Darters and Slingers to make their discharges.
At the same time the Parthians appeared, persuading themselves they should now
compass in the Army, and defeat them; but the light-armed Foot drawing off to
receive them, charged them so briskly, that after many wounds given and taken
they retreated; yet for several times they renewed the skirmish, till the Gaul
Horse marched against them in a Body, and treated them so severely, that the
remainder of that day they durst attempt them no more. Anthony, by this
assault, knowing what he had to do hereafter, made the Army March in Battalia
on four Fronts, linining not only the Rear, but likewise the Flanks with
Darters and Slingers, and giving Order to the Horse to repulse the Enemy, if
they came to attack them, but not to pursue them too far, after they had chased
them back; so that the Parthians, after having thus followed them four days
with equal loss, began to give it over, and making the ground of their
departure to be the approaching Winter, disposed themselves on the morrow to
leave off the pursuit.

Anthonies Captains, called Flavius Gallus, a Valiant and Worthy Man, requested
a greater number of the Light-armed Foot, for defense of the Rearguard, and
some part of the Calvalry from the Wings, as if he had some brave exploit to
put in execution. Having obtained his desire, he set himself to chase back the
Enemies, that came to skirmish, not as before, retreating in his Body, as soon
as he had made them give ground; but charging them home, and obstinately
maintaining the Fight, which being observed by those who maintained the
Rearguard, they recalled him for fear lest being divided from the Army, the
Enemy should encompass him. It Is said farther, that Titius the Questor staid
the Ensigns to make him return, reproving him for loosing so many brave Men;
but that Gallus quarrelling with him, and bidding him meddle with his own
Affairs, he left him, and joined with the main Body. Gallus charging forward on
the Enemy, with two much heat, found himself beset in the Rear, and on all
sides oppressed with Showers of Arrows, so that he was forced to send for aid;
in which the Colonels of the Legions, and among the rest Canidius, who had much
power with Anthony, seem to have committed a great fault; for whereas they
ought to have marched with all their Force thither, they sent only some few
Cohorts; and as those were defeated, others, not observing that by this means
the Army would by little and little be put to the rout, and had been so, if
Anthony himself had not speedily made in with all the Vanguard; but now the
third Legion advancing athwart the Flyers, and standing the shock of the Enemy,
stopped them short, and hindered their passing farther. There were no less than
three thousand men slain in this Engagement, and five thousand brought off
wounded, among whom was Gallus thrust through and through with four Arrows, of
which he dyed not long after. Anthony went among the Tents to visit the others,
comforting them, and weeping himself out of grief and compassion; but they
rejoicing to see him, took him by the hand, and prayed him to take care of his
own health, and not afflict himself any more. They called him their Emperor,
and told him their wounds were all healed, whilst they saw him well. And
indeed, there appears not in all that Age to have been any General that had an
Army so vigorous, so brave, and so patient; and if we have regard to the
respect and obedience they bore him, as well great as small, Officers as
Soldiers, and the high account they made of his favor, preferring it before
their own safety, or their very lives; certainly he yielded to none of the
Ancient Romans, and surely they were disposed to it by many Motives, by his
Nobleness, his Eloquence, his Uprightness, his Liberality both frequent and
great; and by the sweetness of his familiar Conversation: but above all his
tenderness and compassion for the afflicted, and the care he took to see them
furnished with all things necessary, made the sick and wounded almost as well
satisfied, as if they had been well. Now this Victory had so raised the Enemies
hearts, before almost tired and despairing, that they passed that night near
the Camp in hopes ever long to be plundring the Public Treasure and find the
Tents deserted. On the morrow they assembled in far greater Numbers, so that it
is thought they could not be less then forty thousand Horse; for the King sent
those of his own train one after another, as to an evident and assured victory
(for as for himself he never engaged in person.) In the mean time Anthony
designing to make an Oration to his Soldiers would have put on a sad colored
habit to move the more Compassion, but his Friends diswading him from it, he
came to the Assembly in the Habit of General, he praised those had behaved
themselves well, and declaimed against those that fled, of whom the first
desired him to be of good Courage, and the last having given reasons for their
flight offered themselves to be decimated or what other punishment he pleased,
so that he would forbear to afflict himself, and to look ill upon them.
Thereupon lifting up his eyes to heaven, he besought the Gods, that if any
Divinity were jealous of his past happiness, they they would let all the
miseries wherewith he was threatened to fall upon his own head, and give Victory
to the rest of the Army. The next day they again set forward in better Order,
so that the hopes of the Parthians who a^^ailed them began to decay, for they
thought they were come to Pillage and Plunder and not to fight; but finding
themselves stiffly beat back by the Roman Piles, which the Soldiers now
discharged with a wonderful Alacrity, they once again were forced to give
ground. Yet ceased they not from following the Roman Army, and one day as they
galled them with their Arrows, whilst they were descending a little Hill, the
Targetiers faced about, and after having received the light Armed Foot into the
Ranks, set their Knees to the ground, and Ranging their Bucklers one above
another, formed a So called because of its resemblance to a Tortoise shell.
Testudo, where the Bucklers rising by degrees Resembled in some measure the
Seats of a Theater. And indeed this was an Excellent Rampire against the Arrows
for they slid away on both sides the Testudo. The Parthians thinking the Romans
were thus set down out of weariness, giving over their Bow's came to charge
them at Push of Pike, but they Rising all at once and giving a great shout,
with their Piles broke the foremost Ranks, and forced the rest to Flight.

But in the mean time Famine began sorely to oppress the Army, for the Athens
Measure, was sold for fifty Drams, and Barley Bread for its weight in Silver,
they were forced at last to eat Roots and Herbs, and because they found but few
that were known they were necessitated to make experiment of all they met with,
and unhappily fell upon an Herb that caused Madness, and in the conclusion
proved death, for as soon as any had eaten of it, they lost their Understanding
and Memory, and fell to turning upside down, and removing all the Stones they
met with, believing they were at work upon some very serious matter, so that
all the Camp was filled with People rooting up, and removing Stones from one
place to another, who at last died vomiting of Cholor. Wine was the Cure for
this Distemper, but it was not to be had, insomuch that it is said Anthony
seeing so many of his People die, and the Parthians still at his heels, often
cried out, Oh the ten thousand! Admiring those ten thousand Men who under the
Conduct of Xenophon marched a much longer way making their retreat from the
Plains of Babylon to the Sea without loosing so much as one Man though in their
way they were often assaulted by far greater Numbers of Enemies. The Parthians
seeing they could not hinder the Romans March, nor engage them to divide one
from the other, and that they had been often beaten, began again to talk
civilly to those, went abroad for Corn and Forage, showing them their unbent
Bows and telling them that now they might freely go, and indeed there appeared
only some Medes, who passed a day or two's march farther, without committing
any Act of Hostility, but only under pretense to secure the Towns distant from
the great Road. After these Civilities and Fair words, the Romans were somewhat
more hearty. Anthony himself grew a little pleasant and began to have some
inclination for the way of the plain, because it was told him, that there was
greater convenience of Water then in the Mountains. As he had resolved it, one
of the Enemies called Mithridates, Cousin to that Moneses who had fled for
refuge to Anthony, and to whom he had given three Cities, came to the Camp, and
asked for any one that could talk with him, either in the Syrian or Parthian
Tongue. Alexander of the City of Antioch a trusty Friend of Anthonies
presenting himself, the Parthian after having told him, that what he did was
for Moneses, sake, asked him if he saw far before those high Mountains that
touched one another. He making Answer he saw them well. The Parthians (said the
other) lie there in Ambush with all their Forces (for this Plain extends it
self as far as those Mountains) and there they wait for you out of hopes that
giving credit to their fair words, you will leave your Road to Cross the Plain.
In the other way you have nothing to suffer but Labor and Thirst to which you
are already accustomed, but if you engage in this, Anthony will scarce come
better off then Crassus. And having said thus much he departed. This being
reported to Anthony he was afraid, and conferred with his Friends, and with the
Mardian, whom he found of the same judgment, for he knew that the way of the
Plain though there were no Enemy to be feared, was hard to find, and many
difficult passes whilst all the inconvenience of the other was want of water
only for one days march. Determining therefore to take the way of the Mountains
and to depart the same night, Orders were given to the Soldiers to furnish
themselves with water, and because the most part wanted Vessels, they filled
their Head-pieces and certain skins sewed together. The Army was already set
forward, when the Parthians having intelligence of it, contrary to their custom
followed them by night. About break of day they came up with the Rearguard, and
fell upon them, tired as they were with Travel and want of sleep, for that
night the Romans had marched Thirty Miles, a thing almost incredible though so
good an Historian write it.
two hundred and forty Furlongs, and did not believe the Enemy could be so soon
upon them, which made them almost loose their Courage, besides their thirst
increased with their Fight, being forced to fight and march together. Mean
while the Vanguard met with a River clear and cool, but whose salt and venomous
waters, ulcerated the bowels as soon as they were drunk, and provoked an
intolerable thirst. The Mardian had given notice to the Soldiers of it, but
that could not hinder them, though he forbad it never so much from drinking.
Anthony himself came amongst them, and conjured them to have yet a little
patience, showing them that they were not far from another River where they
might drink, and that henceforward the way was craggy and unaccessible for
Horse, and therefore the Enemy must of necessity retire; at the same time he
caused the Retreat to be Sounded, that at least the Soldiers might a little
refresh themselves in the shade.

As they pitched their Tents, and that the Parth^ans were retired, according
Mithridates came again, and Alexander going out to meet him, he advised him to
raise the Camp, after the Army had never so little refreshed themselves, and to
march with all the speed they could past the other River, for that was the
bounds of the Parthians, beyond which they wo^ld not go. This advice being
brought to Anthony, he sent to the Parthians by Alexander Cups and Vessels of
Gold, of which he took as much as his Coat would cover. The rest of this days
March was without any Alarm, but the night following was troubled by the Romans
themselves, who made it both hurtful and dangerous; for they killed those who
had any Gold or Silver to rob them, plundered the public Treasury laden on
the Beasts of Carriage, and at last, Anthony's ow^ Equipage, even to his
necessary Vessels and Tables of inestimable price, which the Thieves broke in
pieces, and divided amongst them, that occasioned so great a tumult, and so
strange an affright (for they thought the Enemy already master of the Baggages)
that Anthony having called to him one of his Guards, named Ramnus, who was his
freed Man, he forced him to promise him upon Oath to run him through with his
Sword, as soon as he should command it, and to cut off his Head, lest he should
fall into the power of the Enemy, or be known when he was dead. This discourse
having drawn tears from Anthony's Friends: The Mardian came to entreat him to
take Courage, by telling him, that by a certain moist and fresh Wind very
pleasant to the Nostrils, he knew well they were not for from the River, which
he guessed besides by the length of the way they had gone; and the time (for
the night was far spent) At the same time they brought him word, that all the
Tumult was occasioned by the avarice of the Soldiers, who had plundered one
another; wherefore that he might put in order this troubled and dispersed
multitude, he made a halt; about break of day, the Tumult being quite calmed,
every one began to fall into his Rank, when on a sudden the Rearguard felt the
Parthian Arrows; the Light-armed Foot was presently commanded out, and the
Targetiers, as before, formed a Testudo against the Enemies shot, who durst not
approach them too nigh. At last, having fought in this manner for some little
way, the Vanguard perceived the River, where being arrived, the Horse was sent
out against the Parthians, and they began to pass over the sick. The Fight by
little and little grew colder, for the Parthians at the sight of the River
unbent their Bows, telling the Romans they might pass without any fear, and
highly commending their Courage: When they were got on the other side, they
reposed themselves at leisure, then set forward on their March, not confiding
too much in the words of the Parthians; and six days after their last Fight,
they arrived on the Banks of Araxis, a River which divides Media from Armenia,
they thought it both deep and rapid; and there was a rumor spread, that the
Enemy was coming to encounter them at their passage: but after they had happily
crossed it, and saw themselves in security, in the Territories of Armenia, as
if they had gained a Port after a Storm; they adored the Earth, embracing one
another, and weeping for joy; yet it happened, that coming into a Country
abundant in all things, after so long a scarcity, they so overcharged their
Stomachs, that many of them fell sick, either of the Dropsy or Colic.
Anthony, out of danger, took a Muster of his Army, and found that he had lost
in this Expedition twenty thousand Foot, and four thousand Horse, of which more
than half dyed of sickness. Since his departure from about Phraates till this
time, he had made seven and twenty days March without resting, during which he
had fought eighteen times against the Parthians with advantage: But these
Victories were to no purpose; for not being able to pursue the Enemies far
after he had routed them, they remained imperfect. Now it is firmly believed,
that Artabasus, King of Armenia, was the cause that Anthony gained not an
absolute Victory; for had he had with him the sixteen thousand Horse armed
after the manner of the Parthians, and accustomed to fight with them, which
that King led back out of Media, the Parthians so many times overcome, could
never have rallied, because that after the Romans had routed them, the
Armenians following the chase, had made it a perfect Victory. Wherefore all men
advised Anthony to punish Artabasus; but he thought he did more prudently, not
to reproach him with his perfidiousness. On the contrary, he remitted nothing
of the Honor and Civity he usually showed him, because he saw his Army weak,
and in a tired condition: but making another Voyage into Armenia, he obliged
him by fair words to come and meet him; and having arrested him, led him
Captive to Alexandria, whither he entered in Triumph, which much displeased the
Romans, who were vexed that he communicated the Honors of their Cities to the
Egyptians: but this happened in the time of the Declination of the Republic.
After this, the Kings of the Medes and Parthians quarrelled about the Roman
Spoils; wherefore the Median seeing himself the weakest, and fearing to loose
his Kingdom, sent to Anthony to engage him to begin the War afresh, offering
him to that effect his Forces, and his Alliance. Upon these offers the Roman
conceived great hopes, because he believed that to have subdued the Parthians,
he wanted nothing but Archers and Horsemen, which now offered of themselves: he
was therefore resolved to pass into Armenia, with design to make^ a conjunction
of his Forces, with those of the Mede on the Banks of Araxes; and ^o go
together to make War upon the Parthians; but being prevented by the dissentions
of Octavius and Cleopatra, he referred this Expedition to another Season,
though it is said the Parthians were at this time divided among themselves. He
notwithstanding once afterward returned to Media, where having contracted an
Alliance and Friendship with that King, he demanded one of his Daughters, whom
he married to one of his Sons he had by Cleopatra; and that done, he returned,
because of the Civil Wars, which now began to break out into a flame.

The End of the Parthian War.
APPIAN OF ALEXANDRIA, HIS HISTORY OF THE Roman Wars WITH MITHRIDATES.
PART I.
BOOK IV.
The Argument of this Book.
I. THe importance of this War, and the Power of Mithridates. II. The
Foundation of the Kingdom of Bithynia. III. Foundation of the Kingdom of
Cappadocia, and the cause or pretense of the Roman Wars against Mithridates.
IV. Mithridates sends Pelopidas to the Roman Commissaries to complain of
Nicomedes. V. Mithridates sieses on Cappadocia for his Son, and Pelopidas in
vain remonstrates the State of Matters to the Roman Commissaries. VI. The
beginning of the War by the first Battle between Nicomedes, and the Lieutenants
of Mithridates, wherein Nicomedes is defeated. VII. Sundry successes of
Mithridates Arms. VIII. The Commission of this War given to Sylla, and the
Massacre of the Italians in Asia. IX. The Siege of Rhodes by Mithridates, who
is forced to raise it. X. The Siege of the Port of Piraeum, and of Athens by
Sylla. XI. The City of Athens taken and sacked, and after it the Port of
Piraeum. XII. The Battle between Sylla and Archelaus, near Cheronea, where
Sylla defeats Archelaus. XIII. Mithridates cruelty to the Tetrarchs of Asia,
and Inhabitants of the Island of Chios. XIV. The fight between Sylla and
Archelaus near Orchomene, where Archelaus is beaten. XV. The Actions of
Fimbria, and the second sacking of Troy. XVI. The first accommodation betwixt
Mithridates and the Romans. XVII. The death of Fimbria; Sylla's settlement of
Asia, and return to Rome. XVIII. The second War with Mithridates by Muraena,
which soon ends with a second Peace. XIX. The beginning of the third War of the
Romans against Mithridates, wherein he at first has the advantage. XX.
Lucullus being Consul, has Commission for this War, raises the Siege of
Cysica, and besieges Mithridates, to the loss of his whole Army. XXI. Many
Fights between Lucullus and Mithridates, who is at last forced to retire to
Tigranes. XXII. Lucullus makes War on Tigranes, and Mithridates together, and
after many Victories is revoked. XXIII. Pompey's War against the Pirates. XXIV.
Pompey's actions against Mithridates, who forsakes his Kingdom. XXV. Pompey's
Conquests in Asia. XXVI. Mithridates returns with new Forces, and prepares to
renew the War. XXVII. His Son Pharnaces conspires against him: his Death and
Elogy. XXVIII. Pompey settles the Asian Affairs, returns to Rome, and enters in
Triumph.

MIthridates being dead, after having maintained War against the Romans for two
and forty years; they added to their Empire Bithynia, Caappdocia, and all the
Neighboring Nations bordering on the Euxine Sea: and as the putting an end to
this War, raised their Courage; so they subdued, as a confequence to it, all
the rest of Cilicia; the Provinces of Syria, which are Phoenicia, Coelosyria
and Palestine, with all the Upland nigh the Euphrates, which were never
possessed by Mithridates: They imposed Tributes presently on some of these
people, but subjected not others to it, till some time after. As for
Paphlagonia, Galatia, Phrygia, the Mysia contiguous to it, together with Lydia,
Ionia, Caria, and other parts of Asia, which depended on the Kingdom of
Pergamus, with the old Greece and Macedon, of which Mithridates was seized,
they reduced them under their obedience, and imposed Tributes on several
Nations, that had never before paid them any. It Is for these Reasons (as I
imagine) they esteemed this War of such importance to them, that they termed
this Victory so Magnificent; and that they gave (which remains to this our age)
that General, under whose Conduct they had performed all these brave Actions,
the surname of Great, because of the great numbers of Provinces, he either
restored to their Empire, or added by Conquest: besides, also for the length of
this War, and the Generosity of Mithridates, who was both powerful and
indefatigable, (as he sufficiently made appear) for he had more than four
hundred Ships of his own, and has somteimes had in Arms fifty thousand Horse,
and two hundred and fifty thousand Foot, with all Engines of War, and Arms
necessary for so great a Multitude. He was likewise supported by the Kings and
Sovereigns of Armenia, Scythia, and all those Nations inhabiting from Pontus,
and the Palus Maeotis to the Thracian Bosphorus. He was sent likewise to make
Alliance with some of the principal men of Rome, who were then engaged in a
troublesome Civil War, and some of which had siesed on Spain, he treated with
the Gauls, that on that side he might desturb Italy. He likewise filled the Sea
from Gallicia to the Pillars of Hercules with Pirates, who disturbing
Navigation, and hindering Traffic between the Cities, caused for a long time
great scarcity of Provisions. In short, he did and attempted all that was
possible. Insomuch, that all the people, from the East to the West, found
themselves, or sent Auxiliary Troops, or were tormented by the Corsaires, or by
their Neighbors, or else for their Neighbors sakes: So many different
interests there were in this War. The Romans alone gained advantage by it: For
after it was finished, they extended their Empire from the West, as far as
Euphrates. I could not possibly divide by Provinces what passed in each,
because the most considerable Actions were done at the same time, and are
linked one within another: But I have treated of them apart where ever they
would admit of a separation.

The Greeks are of opinion, that the Thracians, who went to the Wars Troy under
Rhaesus (their Captain being by night slain by Diomedes, as Homer says) retired
themselves to the Mouth of the Euxine Sea, where there is but a small strait to
pass over into Thrace; but for want of Shiping, a part of them staid there, and
called the Country Bebrycia; and the rest passed over above Byzantium, to the
place where the Bithynian Thracians inhabit, near the River Bithyas; from
whence being forced by Famine, they returned to Bebricia, whose name they
changed, and called it Bithynia, from the name of the River they had left, and
that name did perpetuate in their Descendants, there not being very great
difference between Bithynia and Bebricia. This is the opinion of some: Others
say that Bithys, the Son of Jupiter and Thrace, was the first King of Thrace
and Bithynia, who gave names to these Regions. I was willing to say thus much
of Bithynia, by way of Preface; and I believe it likewise necessary, being
writing the Roman History, to say somewhat of the nine and forty Kings that
Reigned in this Kingdom, before the Romans became Masters of it. Prusias,
surnamed the Hunter, had married the Sister of Perseus, King of Macedon.
However, when the War happened between the Romans, and his Wives Brother, he
remained Neuter; and yet after Perseus was taken Prisoner, he went and
presented himself before the Roman Captains, (in his Gown and Slippers, with a
Hat on, and his Head shaven, just like those Slaves, to whom their Masters had
given liberty by will; and to all this ridiculous dress, he had a villainous
aspect, and was very low of stature) when he came near the Captains, he told
them in Latin, I am the freed man of the people of Rome: at which they burst
out in a laughter, and sent him to the City, and he appearing the same
ridiculous Creature at Rome, obtained favor. Not long after, being fallen at
variance with Attalus, King of that part of Asia, which lies about Pergamus, he
in hostile manner invaded his Country; which being come to the Senates
knowledge, Deputies were sent to him, forbidding him to proceed any farther in
a War against Attalus, Friend and Allie of the people of Rome; and when he
seemed somewhat unwilling to obey the Deputies, vigorously charged him, either
to comply with the Orders of the Senate, or come only with a thousand Horse
upon the Frontier, where Attalus expected him with a like number to decide the
difference by Combat; he despising the small numbers that were with Attalus,
and hoping by this means easily to defeat him, sent some of his before to give
notice, that he would be suddenly at the place appointed with his thousand
Horse: but he came with his whole Army, as if he were to give Battle. Attalus,
and the Roman Commissaries, who had intelligence of it, escaping several ways,
he came and took their Baggage, which they were forced to leave behind, and
went and besieged a City, called Nicephoria, took it, rased it, and set fire on
their Temples. After which he pursued Attalus so close, that he blocked him up
in Pergamus. Hereupon the Senate sent other Commissaries, who ordered him to
pay all the damages Attalus had sustained in this War, which so terrified him,
that he obeyed, retired, and for interest delivered up immediately to Attalus
twenty Ships with Decks, and agreed to pay him at a certain day, five hundred
Talents of Silver, according to the Order of the Commissaries. He was very
cruel, and therefore hated by his Subjects; but his Son Nicomede was extremely
beloved, wherefore his Father growing jealous, sent him to sojourn at Rome;
from whence, hearing that he was there likewise in good esteem, he gave him
Commission to demand of the Senate a release of the money he still owed to
Attalus. He had sent Menas to assist him in the soliciting the Affair, with
private Order to say nothing to his Son, if it were granted; but if it were
denied, to kill him in the City; and to favor his retreat, after the Murder,
he caused to lie ready near unto Rome some Ships with two thousand Soldiers.
Menas seeing the release would not be granted, (because Andronicus sent by
Attalus to oppose the Demand, had made it appear that the sum adjudged came far
short of the damages he had sustained) and that on the other side Nicomedes was
much esteemed at Rome, knew not what to resolve on. He durst neither undertake
to kill him, nor to return into Bithynia. In short, he staying at Rome after
his Commission was expired, the young Prince came to see him, at which he was
not at all displeased. They conspired against Prusias, and associated in the
conspiracy Andronicus, the Envoy of Attalus, to the end he might persuade his
Master to assist Nicomedes, and to put him in possession of the Kingdom of
Bithynia. They came to this end together to Bernice, a little City of Epire,
where meeting together on board by night to consult what they had to do, after
the Conference they parted every one to his own Ship. Morning being come,
Nicomede appeared on the Hatches, in a Purple Robe, with a Diadem round his
Head, after the manner of Kings. Androni^ns goes to him, and salutes him in the
Quality of King, and with five hundred Soldiers he had there, joins himself to
his Train. Menas seems surprised, as if he had not known of Nicomedes being
there, and conferring with his two thousand Soldiers, seems at first extremely
enraged; but after some discourse, Of two Kings which we have (said he) the one
is at home, the other is abroad, wherefore consider what you are to do for the
future, and consider well, since on this opportunity depends your safety. I am
of the opinion we ought to stick to him, who is likeliest to become Master; one
is old, the other young; one is hated by the Bithynians, they desire the other;
the most considerable persons of Rome love the young Man; Andronicus, who has
joined with him, promises the assistance of King Attalus, the next Neighbor to
Bithynia, a powerful and ancient Enemy of Prusias. To this he added the cruelty
of the old King, the violence he had committed, the indignities he had done to
an infinite number of people: and in short, the public hatred. And perceiving
that the Soldiers did, as well as himself, abhor his Crimes, he led them to
Nicomedes, and was the next after Andronicus that saluted him King, and
submitted to him with his two thousand Men. Attalus gladly received this young
Prince, who went forthwith to him, and sent to summon Prusias to give his Son
some Cities for his Residence, and some Lands for his Maintenance. He made
answer, That he would ever long give him all Attalus his Kingdom, to the
Conquest of which, he was already come into Asia: And therewithal sends to
Rome, to make complaint of Nicomedes and Attalus, and to cite them to
judgment. But Attalus entered immediately into Bithynia, with those Forces he
had in readiness, where by little and little, all the people declared for
Nicomedes. As for Prusias, not trusting in any person, and hoping the Romans
would disingage him of this Affair, he obtained from Digilles the Thracian, his
Father-in-law, five hundred Soldiers, with whom he confided the guard of his
person, and shut himself up in the Fortress of Nicea. The Deputies of Prusias
being come to Rome, the Praetor of the City, for some time, delayed their
Audience, because he favored Attalus his concerns. At length having introduced
them into the Senate, he had Orders to make choice of three Commissioners to
put an end to this War. He chose three, of which one having formerly received a
blow on the Head with a Stone, the Scars still remained, which made his Visage
deformed; the second was lame of his Feet; and the third was little better than
a Fool; which made Cato, scoffing at this Deputation, say, That it had neither
Head, Feet, nor Soul. The Commissaries being gone to Bithynia, ordered the
Kings to lay down their Arms, upon which Nicomedes and Attalus made a show of
yielding to the Authority of the Senate: but the Bithynians, whom they had
suborned, loudly declared, That they should never be able to undergo the
cruelty of Prusias, especially now he had known their aversion to him:
wherefore, because the Senate had yet heard nothing of these complaints, and so
the Commissaries could have no Orders concerning them, they returned without
doing any thing. Prusias seeing himself frustrated of the Romans assistance, on
the reliance of which he had made no preparations, retired to Nicomedia, a very
strong place, where he resolved to sustain a Siege; but the Inhabitants
betrayed their King, opening the Gates, and letting in Nicomedes and his Army;
and Prusias taking Sanctuary in the Temple of Jupiter, was slain by orders of
his Son. Thus Nicomedes began to Reign in Bithynia, instead of his Father.
After him his Son Nicomedes, surnamed Philopator succeeded, and was confirmed
in his Kingdom by Decree of the Senate. Such was the State of Affairs in
Bithynia; and if any desire to know more, the Grandchild of this last, called
likewise Nicomedes, by his last Will and Testament, appointed the people of
Rome Heir to this Kingdom.

As for what concerns Cappadocia, I cannot certainly say upon whom Darius his
Kingdom: But it is likely that Alexander, going to War against Darius, left
these people Tributary under their own Princes, because we find that he
restored Amisa, a City which had been a Colony of the Athenians, to a popular
administration, according to the Custom of the Ancestors. The Historian
Hieronymus says, He did not so much as come near these Nations; and that to
encounter Darius, he took his March nearer the Sea by Pamphilia and Cilicia.
Perdiccas, who commanded the Macedonians after Alexander, took Ariarathes,
Governor of Cappadocia, and hanged him; whether it were for revolting, or to
reduce that Country under the Macedonian Dominion, I know not. He gave to
Eumenes of Crdis the Government of the Province, who having been slain for
shaking off the Macedonian Yoke; Antipater, who had the Administration of the
Affairs of Macedon after Perdiccas, sent Nicanor Satrapas into Cappadocia. Some
time after dissension happening among the Macedonians themselves, Antigonus
drove Laomedon out of his Government of Syria, and seized it. Now he had for
his particular Friend, Mithridates of the Blood Royal of Persia, and once
sleeping, he dreamed that he sowed Gold in a Field, and Mithridates gathered
it, and carried it to Pontus, upon which he made him Prisoner, and would have
put him to death, but he escaped, accompanied only with six Horsemen, and
fortifying himself in a certain Village of Cappadocia, many others came in to
him, and whilst the Macedonians were engaged in other Affairs, made himself
Master of Cappadocia, and all the Nations neighboring on Pontus. At length
having mightily extended his Dominion, he left to his Children a great scope of
Country, over which they Reigned one after another, till this Mithridates, who
had War with the Romans. But both the Kingdoms of Pontus and Cappadocia, having
been jointly possessed by the Successors of the first Mithridates; it is of
importance to know how they came divided, and who were Kings of Pontus, and who
of Cappadocia. The first, under whom the change began, was Mithridates
Euergetes, who only styled himself King of Pontus, hating the Cappadocians, and
treating them like a conquered Country. He had made an Alliance with the people
of Rome, and did effectually send them Auxiliary Shipping against the
Carthaginians. There succeeded him his Son of the same name, with two sirnames,
Eupator and Dionysius, whom the Romans commanded to quit Cappadocia to
Ariobarzanes, who had put himself under the protection of the people of Rome,
and seemed to have more right to that Kingdom than the other. It Is possible
too, that being jealous of the greatness of Mithridates Monarchy, they were
glad of this pretense to divide it. However it were, the King obeyed. But
Socrates, surnamed Chrestus (Brother of Nicomedes, the Son of the first
Nicomedes, and Grandchild to Prusias, the same that had been confirmed in his
Kingdom of Bithynia by the Decree of the Senate) having some controversy with
his Brother, was assisted by Mithridates, who sent him with an Army into
Bithynia, where he seized on the Kingdom, and at the same time Mithraas and
Bagoas, having driven Ariobarzanes out of the Kingdom of Cappadocia, wherein
the Romans had established him, placed Ariarathes in his stead. So that the
Romans found themselves obliged to restore Nicomedes and Ariobarzanes each to
his Kingdom. To this purpose they sent their Commissaries, of whom Manius
Aquilius was the Chief, and gave Orders to L. Cassius, who commanded in that
part of Asia, with a little Army to assist them; and likewise gave the same
commands to Eupator himself: but he, who had still a pretense to Cappadocia,
and remembered that not long since the Romans had despoiled him of Phrygia (as
we have said in our History of the Affairs of Greece) would not concern
himself. However, Cassius and Manius with those Forces Cassius had, and what
they could raise in Phrygia, re-established Nicomedes in Bithynia, and
Ariobarzanes in Cappadocia, and afterward counseled them both to make
incursions into Mithridates his Country, and to pick with him any occasion of
War, assuring them that the Romans assistance should not be wanting; yet
neither of them durst attempt so powerful an Enemy: but when the Commissaries
again pressed them to it; Nicomedes, who owed a great sum of Money to the
Commissaries, and the Captains, by the agreement made for his re-establishment;
and had likewise formerly taken up great sums at interest from the Romans
settled in Asia, who now called them in, invaded (as it were whether he would or
no) the Territories of Mithridates, pillaging all as far as the Gates of the
City of Amestris, without any opposition. For though the King of Pontus had
very good Forces ready, yet he still gave ground, that he might make his tale
the better.

But Nicomedes being returned with a booty of inestimable value, Mithridates
sent Pelopidas to the Roman Captains and Commissaries, and though he knew they
wished for the War, and had been the cause of this invasion, he took no notice
of it, expecting greater and more worthy causes of the War that was preparing.
He gave him in charge only to speak of that Friendship and Alliance he and his
Father had with the People of Rome. But (said Pelopidas) instead of Protecting
him, you have taken from him Phrygia and Cappadocia, of which this last was the
inheritance of his predecessors, and left to him by succession from his Father;
and the other the recompense of his Victory over Aristonicus, a recompense he
received from your General, or rather which he bought with his money; and now
you suffer Nicomedes to stop up his passage from Pontus, and spoil all his
Country as far as the Gates of Amestris. Not but that the King was as you know
sufficiently powerful, and too well prepared to resist him, but he would have
you eye witnesses of what has passed. And now you have seen it, Mithridates
your Friend and Allie, begs you in quality of his Friends and Allies (for those
are the Terms of the Treaty) to succor those Nicomedes thus wrongs, or at
least impeach his farther violence. To this the Deputies from Nicomedes made
Answer. That it was not at this instant only, that Mithridates had laid
Ambushes for him, that he had made Socrates his Brother to enter in Hostile
manner into his Kingdom, who but for him had been quiet, and yielded to the
right of Primogeniture in his Elder Brother. It Is most true Gentlemen (said the
Chief of this deputation) Mithridates alone stirred up that young Man to make
War against him, whom the Senate and People of Rome had made King of Bithynia;
To whom do you think this injury was meant more than to you? and though by your
Edict the Kings of Asia are forbid to meddle with Europe, he with the same
injustice has seized several places in the Chersonesus; all these Actions are
but Signals of the violence he intends to you. You may if you please wait for
the effects; for what mean his great preparations as if the War were already
Declared? Why so many Auxiliary Troops of Thracians, Scythians, and so many
other Neighboring Nations? He allies himself with the King of Armenia, sends
Agents into Egypt and Syria to solicit the Alliance of those Kings, has
already three hundred Ships of War fitted, and is still building more, having
fetched from Phoenicia and Egypt Mariners and Pilots; such mighty preparations
are never made against Nicomede, but against you. He is exceeding angry too,
that having bought Phrygia of one of your Generals, that suffered himself to be
over-reacht, you have commanded him to restore it as goods unjustly got. And as
much vexed he is that you have given Cappadocia to Ariobarzanes, and fearing
lest your power should increase from day to day, the complaints he makes to
you, serve him only for a pretense to Arm, and assault you as soon as he shall
find an occasion, but it will be your wisdom not to stay till he openly
declares himself your Enemy. Consider more his actions, than his words; and for
pretenses of feigned friendship, do not forsake your true friends, nor suffer
those ordinances you have made concerning our Kingdoms to be scorned, and made
invalid by one that is a common Enemy to us both.

After the Deputy had thus spoken, Pelopidas again desired the Romans to be
judges of the complaints made by Nicomedes. And for what remains (said he) you
see the present State of Affairs, how Mithridates Dominion is lessened, the
entrance of the Sea stopped against him, infinite Spoils carried off his Lands.
But we entreat you a second time Gentlemen, either hinder Mithridates from
being thus wronged, either defend him from oppression, or suffer him to defend
himself without perplexing your affairs. Pelopidas spoke this so sternly, that
though before they had resolved to support Nicomedes, yet now they would hark
to them both as Judges, and because they had some respect for Pelopidas words,
and could not reproach Mithridates with any breach of Alliance, they stuck at
it a little, but after long Consultation they at last Answered in these terms;
We will neither have Nicomedes to offend Mithridates, nor suffer any to make
War upon Nicomedes, for we judge it the interest of the Commonwealth not to
suffer him to be wronged.

Pelopidas would have rejoyned, as not thinking it reasonable; but they made
him depart the Assembly. Wherefore Mithridates manifestly wronged by the Romans
sent his Son Ariarathes with a Powerful Army to seize upon the Kingdom of
Cappadocia, who presently drove thence Ariobarzanes, and settled himself in his
place. Whereupon Pelopidas going once more to the Commissaries, spoke to them
in this manner.

The Oration of Pelopidas.
YOU have lately been told, Gentlemen, with what patience Mithridates suffered
Phrygia and Cappadocia to be taken from him contrary to all Reason: You made no
account of the injuries done by Nicomedes, even in your sight; and when we had
recourse to your Friendship and Alliance, you Answered us rather like Men
accused than Accusers, That your Republique would not have any injury done to
Nicomedes, as if any one had done it. You then are the cause, if there has
lately passed any thing in Cappadocia to the prejudice of your Republique; for
the disdain wherewith you treated us, and your scornful Answers obliged
Mithridates to what he has done, and he is now sending Deputies to your Senate
to complain of you. Therefore if you please, find some body to plead your
cause; but he conjures you not to attempt any thing which is not resolved on by
the common consent of the Senate and People of Rome, and to think of the
importance of this War. Consider that the Kingdom he holds by Succession from
his Father, is 2500 miles.
twenty thousand Furlongs in length, and that he has added to it, many
Neighboring Nations, and among other Colchis full of Warlike People, of Greeks
that inhabit on the Euxine Sea, and of Barbarians confining on them. That he
has Friends ready at his Service, Scythians, Taures, Basternes, Thracians,
Sarmatians, and in short all the people near Tanais, Ister, and the Palus
Maeotis; that Tigranes King of Armenia is his Son in Law, and Arsaces King of
the Parthians, his Friend: in conclusion, that he has a mighty power of
Shipping, all either fitted or almost ready with all their Gang. Besides, the
Bithynians told you no lie in what they said of the Kings of Egypt and Syria,
for it is very likely if the War once begin, they will declare for us, and not
only they, but your Provinces of Asia, Greece and Africa. As for Italy, the
most part of it not able to suffer your boundless Avarice is already revolted:
and certainly it is matter of amazement to all the World, that not being yet
able to suppress that War, you undertake Mithridates by setting on Foot
intrigues, sometimes with Nicomedes, sometimes with Ariobarzanes, whilst yet
you make profession to be our Friends and Allies; but it is only in appearance
you are so, for in effect you treat us like Enemies. And if what has past
displease you, give better Orders for the future, prevent Nicomedes from
farther offending your Friends; which if you do, I promise you on the behalf of
King Mithridates, his Arms and Assistance against your Allies in Italy which
have revolted. If not, break off that specious and vain Friendship, or let us
go to Rome and plead our Cause.

After Pelopidas had finished this Discourse, the Romans thinking it too
insolent, Replied, That they forbad Mithridates from attempting any thing
against Nicomedes, and ordained him to quit Cappadocia in which they would take
care to reestablish Ariobarzanes. As for Pelopidas, they enjoined him a speedy
departure, no more to return unless the King disposed himself to do what they
desired.

With this Answer he was sent away, but under a good guard, that by the way he
might not corrupt any Person; and forthwith without expecting from the Senate
and People of Rome, their advice upon a War of such Importance, the Romans
assembled all the Forces they could draw together in Bithynia, Cappadocia,
Paphlagonia, and Galatia.
Gallogrecia of Asia. The Army which P. Crassus commanded and designed for the
guard of Asia being in a readiness, and all the Auxiliary Troops drawn to a
head, they divided themselves into three bodies. Cassius went and encamped on
the Confines of Bithynia and Galatia; Manius in the passage by which
Mithridates might enter Bithynia; and Q. Oppius on the Frontiers of Cappadocia:
being all together about forty thousand Men Foot and Horse. They had likewise a
Fleet commanded by Minucius Rufus and C. Populius to guard the mouth of the
Pontus. Besides, Nicomedes was likewise in Arms, to second them with fifty
thousand Foot, and six thousand Horse, all in good order. As for Mithridates,
his Army alone consisted of two hundred and fifty thousand Foot, and forty
thousand Horse. He had three hundred Ships of War, and three hundred Galleys,
with all Stores, and Ammunition necessary for so great a Fleet and Army. Two
brothers called Neoptolemus and Archelaus had the Command of all these Forces
in quality of his Lieutenant Generals, but the King had his eye upon all, and
did many things himself. As for the Auxiliary Troops, Archathias his Son
brought him ten thousand Horse out of Armenia the Less. Dorilaus Commanded the
Phalanxes, and Craterus one hundred and thirty Chariots armed with Scythes.
Such were the preparations on both sides, when at first Mithridates and the
Romans Armed against each other, which was about the hundred sixty sixth
Olympiad. The first Engagement was near the River Amniae, in a spacious plain,
where Nicomedes, and Mithridates Generals met. As soon as they discovered one
the other, they drew into Battalia. Nicomedes had all his Forces; but
Neoptolemus and Archelaus had only their light Armed Soldiers, and Arcathias
Horse, with some Chariots: for the gross of the Army was a great way distant,
wherefore they espying a Rock in the middle of the plain, sent to possess it,
that they might not be enclosed by the Bithynians, who were much the greater
number. Those they sent being driven back, Neoptolemus was more then ever in
fear of being encompassed; wherefore he posted in with all speed possible
making Arcathias do the like. Nicomedes who knew him came to meet him, and now
began a bloody battle, wherein the Bithynians proved the stronger, and put
their Enemies to the Rout; but as they pressed home upon them, Archelaus
wheeling about from the left Wing, came and charged those in the Rear, who
thought they had been Victorious, and as soon as he had made them face about,
gave ground, that Neoptolemus might have time to Rally, as soon as he knew he
was again in a Posture, he renewed the charge, and the Chariots Armed with
Scythes being violently driven into the Enemies squadrons, caused a strange
disorder, some they cut through the middle of the body, and tore others in
quarters, which extremely terrified the Bithynians: for they saw the one half
of Men still breathing, the trunks of bodies and other members hooked fast, and
drawn along by the Chariots, so that the horror of these spectacles daunting
them more then the fight it self, fear siesed them, and begot a wonderful
hurly-burly in the Ranks. However though Archelaus pressed upon them on one
side, and Neoptolemus and Arcathias were rallied on the other, they took heart,
and facing both ways defended themselves generously for a good space, till such
time as Nicomedes after a dreadful slaughter of his Men fled with the rest to
Paphlagonia. After this Victory (in which Mithridates Phala^^x was not
concerned) Nicomedes Camp fell into the Victors power who found therein good
store of Silver, and took a great Number of Prisoners, whom the King treated
kindly, sending them home to their houses, and giving them Money to bear their
charges that he might make his Clemency known to his Enemies themselves. But if
Mithridates rejoiced at this first success, the Roman Generals were no less
startled at it. They began to perceive they had kindled this important War
without the Senates Orders, with more Rashness then Prudence; They observed how
great Numbers of their had been defeated by a handful of Men, who had neither
assistance from any advantage of ground, or any miscarriage in the Bithynians,
but only by the virtue of the Leaders and Valor of the Soldiers.

Nicomedes retired into Manius Camp; and Mithridates encamped on Mount Scoroba,
which separates Pontus and Bithynia. One day his Scouts which were a hundred
Sarmatian Horse, met with eight hundred of Nicomedes Men, of whom they took
many Prisoners, whom Mithridates sent likewise into their Country, after
furnishing them with wherewithal to live by the way. Another time as Manius
retreated, Nicomedes being gone to find out Cassius, Neoptolemus and Nemanes
the Armenian pursued him, and about the One a Clo^k.
seventh hour overtook him at a Village called Pachia, and forced him to fight:
he had four thousand Horse, and ten times as many Foot of whom they killed ten
thousand, and took three hundred prisoners whom Mithridates, caused to be
brought before him, and then dismissed as he had done the others, that he might
gain the hearts of his Enemies. Manius lost all his Baggage, and flying along
the side of the River Sangara passed over it by night, and escaped to Pergamus.
Cassius, Nicomedes, and all the Roman Commissaries, seeing themselves every
where thus ill-handled, went and posted themselves at Leontecephalus the
strongest place in Phrygia, where they began to make new Levies of Soldiers,
they Enrolled the Artificers, Laborers and Plough-men, and all Men of what sort
soever that could be found in Phrygia capable to bear Arms, whom for a while
they began to exercise, but finding them so unhandy and improper for War, that
they could never be made serviceable, they forbore any longer tormenting those
poor People, and after having dismissed them, retired, Cassius to Apamea,
Nicomedes to Pergamus, and Manius toward Rhodes. Those who had the Guard of
the mouth of Pontus, hearing this News, not only quitted their Station, but
likewise Nicomedes his Ships as a prey to Mithridates. Thus the King of Pontus
being by one only blow become Master of all Bithynia went through all the
Cities settling necessary Orders; from thence he passed into Phrygia, where
lodging his Army in the same place where Alexander had lodged; he took it for a
happy presage, to have spent one night in the place where that Great Conqueror
had once encamped. Proceeding forward he overrun the rest of Phrygia, Mysia,
and all the Provinces which the Romans had newly Conquered in Asia, and sending
abroad his Captains several ways he subdued Lycia, Pamphilia, and all that
stood in his way as far as Ionia* There was only Laodicea near the River Licus
that opposed him, because that Q. Oppius was retired thither with his Horse,
and the Mercenary Soldiers. But when a Herald sent from the King told the
inhabitants that the King promised Indemnity to all those of Laodicea,
provided they would deliver Oppius into his hands, they sent away the Mercenary
Soldiers, and carried Oppius to Mithridates with Lictors marching before him in
derision. The King did him no injury, but causing him to be unbound, carried
him every where along with him, well pleased to see a Roman General his
Prisoner. Sometime after Manius Aquilius, Chief of the Commission and Principal
Author of the War, was taken, but he was not treated so kindly, they carried
him about mounted on an Ass, from City to City, and forced him to proclaim
aloud as he went that he was Manius, and at last at Pergamus, poured melted
Gold into his mouth to reproach the Romans of Corruption and Covetousness.
Mithridates having placed Governors in all places, as he went, passed along to
Magnesia, Ephesus and Mitylene, where he was received with so great applause,
that the Ephesians threw down the Roman Statues that were in their City, for
which they were not long after chastized. Then returning into Ionia he took
Stratonicea, where he made the inhabitants pay a great Sum of Money, and placed
a Garrison. Here he fell in love with a very beauteous Virgin whom he took into
the Number of his Wives, if any desire to know her name, she was called Monima
the Daughter of Philopoemen, he likewise by his Lieutenants made War against
the Magnesians, Paphlagonians and Lycians who would not yet wholly submit.

Whilst Mithridates was doing these things, the Senate and People of Rome
having intelligence of the first Irruption into Asia, decreed that an Army
should be sent against him, though they were embroiled with intestine
seditions, and had then a War with their Allies, which lay heavy upon them by
reason that almost all the People of Italy revolted against them one after
another. The Consuls drawing the Provinces by lot; Asia fell to Cornelius
Sylla, together with the Commission of the War against Mithridates, and because
there was no Money in the Treasury, it was Decreed by the Senate that all which
Numa Pompilius had consecrated to the Gods to make Public Sacrifices, should
be sold. So much was the public honor considered in this necessity. However
they sold but a part, from which they raised nine thousand pound weight of
Gold, which sufficed for the expense of this War, for as great as it was they
made use of no more. Sylla was detained a long time by the seditious, as we
have related in the History of the Civil War. Mean while Mithridates slept not.
He made ready a great Number of Ships to send against those of Rhodes. He wrote
private Letters to all the Governors of his Provinces, and the Magistrates of
all his Cities, by which he ordained that on the thirtieth day from the date
the whole multitude should fall upon all the Italians they could find, with
their Wives, Children and Houshold-servants that were Italians, and after
having cut their throats, throw them out upon the Dunghils without Burial,
Confiscating their goods, one half for the King, and the other for those that
slew them. He likewise commanded at the same time to publish by sound of
Trumpet, strict prohibitions to all persons, under the penalty of a great fine,
either to bury the dead or conceal the living, with a recompense to such as
should discover any that were hid, that the slave who slew his Master should be
free, and the Debtor that slew his Creditor released of one half of his Debt.
This Private Order being dispatched to all parts, and the day appointed come,
all Asia was filled with infinite Examples of horrible Cruelty, some of which
we will relate, The Ephesians after having pulled by force from the Statues on
which they hung those that had fled for Sanctuary into the Temple of Diana,
slew them upon the very Altars. Those of Pergamus when they could not make
those wretches, fled into the Temple of Esculapius, quit the place, shot them
with Arrows as they hung upon the Statues. The Adrumetans pursued into the Sea,
those who thought to save themselves by Swimming, and sent those miserable
people with their Children to the Bottom. The Caunians, whom the Romans after
having vanquished Antiochus had put under the Dominion of Rhodes, and whom the
Senate soon after had released and made free, plucked from the Altars those
Italians which had fled for refuge into the Sacred Palace of their City, first
cut the Childrens throats before their Mothers Faces, then Massacred the
Mothers in the sight of their Husbands, and threw the Men's dead bodies upon
those of their Wives and Children. Those of Tralles that they might not defile
themselves with the blood of their Guests, employed a certain cruel fellow a
Paphlagonian called Theophilus, whom they hired to that purpose, who having
shut up the Italians in the Temple of Concord, made so cruel, and horrible a
Butchery, that he cut of the hands of those that hung upon the Images. In
short, all the Romans and Italians that could be found in Asia, Men, Women and
Children, even to the very Freedmen and Slaves were all involved in this
General Massacre; which was sufficient evidence that the People of Asia were
transported to these Cruelties, not out of fear of Mithridates, but out of hate
to the Romans; But however, they were doubly chastised, first by Mithridates,
who treated them with all sorts of indignities, and afterward by Cornelius
Sylla, who put them to exemplary punishment.

Coos, where being willingly received he found there the Son of that Alexander,
who had reigned in Egypt, him he took and caused to be Royally brought up,
sending to the Kingdom of Pontus, vast Riches taken out of the Treasures of
Cleopatra's precious movables, Jewels and magnificent Habits, together with
great store of Silver Money. Mean while the Rhodians repaired their Walls and
Gates, fortifying them with Engines, by the Assistance of some Telmissians,
Lycians, and all the Italians, who escaping out of Asia, had fled for refuge to
Rhodes, among whom was L. Cassius Proconsul of Asia. Mithridates being come to
besiege them, they destroyed their Suburbs for fear the Enemy should possess
them, they likewise drew up their Ships in Order of Battle, one part to Fight
in Front, and the other to defend the Flanks. Whereupon Mithridates Rowing
round his Fleet in a Galley of five Banks gave Orders to his Fleet to extend
themselves as much as they could in form of a Crescent, that so by force of
Oars they might encompass in their Enemies Ships, who were much fewer in
Number. The Rhodians who were fearful of it, began by little and little to give
way, and at length turning their Prows fled and got into their Port, whose
Booms having shut, so that the King could not enter, he was forced to retreat
because of the Shot made at him from the Walls. He came to an Anchor hard by,
and after having several times in vain attempted the Port, resolved to stay
till his Army came out of Asia. Mean while they were perpetually skirmishing,
in which the Rhodians always had the better, which much heightened their
Courage. On a time as all their Ships were in a readiness, and they wanted but
an opportunity to go and charge the Enemy, a laden Ship of the Kings passing
by the Port was Boarded by a Rhodian Gally of two Banks, which being on each
side assisted by those of their party who Rowed in, in great Numbers, there
happened a considerable Engagement, Mithridates transported with anger, and
pestered with too great a Number of Ships, could not give Orders Necessary. But
the Rhodians more experienced in Sea affairs, made nimble turns about the Kings
Ships, whom charging on the broadside, they bilg'd many of them, and took and
brought into the Port a Galley of three banks (boarded on the quarter by one of
theirs) with all the Gang, and great quantity of Arms and Plunder. However they
mist one of their Galleys of five Banks, and not knowing any thing of it is
being taken by the Enemies, they sent their Admiral Demagoras with six of their
nimblest Vessels out to Sea in search of it. Mithridates sent five and twenty
after him, Demagoras got into the open Sea without their being able to reach
him, but when night drew on, seeing the Kings Galley's were about to make their
retreat, he fell on and sinking two pursued two others into Lycia, and after
having spent that night at Sea, came and joined the rest of the Fleet. This was
the success to that Sea Fight, as much unhoped for by the Rhodians by reason of
their few Ships, as unlooked for by Mithridates, because of his great Numbers,
and indeed it was all but a confusion. In the heat of the Engagement, an
Auxiliary Ship of the Isle of Chios, run so full on Board the Ship the King
Commanded, that it broke her to pieces, at which he was so offended that he put
the Pilot and the Mate to death, and ever after bore a secret Malice to the
Inhabitants of that Island. Sometime after as Mithridates Land Army came upon
Laden Ships and Galleys, a sudden Storm arose which brought all the Fleet
toward Rhodes. The Rhodians presently came out with their whole Force, and
finding the Enemies Ships, still in disorder, sunk some, burnt others, and
brought in four hundred Prisoners. Wherefore the King prepared once again to
Fight them by Sea, and withal to storm their City: causing to that intent a
Harp to be built, which is a great Engine, raised upon two Ships. And having
understood by the Runaways that it was easy to take the Town on that side
where stood the Temple of Jupiter Tabyri^s by Scaling the Wall, which was in
that part very low, he caused some of his Soldiers to Embarque on the Ships,
and giving Scaling Ladders to others, ordered them all to keep silence, till
they saw a signal of fire given them from the place, and that then raising as
great a shout as they could, some should fall in at the Port, others at the
Wall. As they were going to put this design in execution, without making the
least noise, the Guards of the City who had notice of it, showed a fire, which
they taking for the signal to be given from the place called Tabyria broke
silence; and both Soldiers and Mariners began to make the Air ring with Shouts
of Joy; but being answered with the same Notes, by those of the City that stood
upon the Walls, the Royalists attempted nothing all that Night, and in the
Morning were forced to retreat; It is true that the Harp which they drew nigh
unto the Wall opposite to the Temple of Isis, extremely terrified the
inhabitants, for it cast at the same time mighty quantities of Darts and
Arrows, there were likewise upon it Rams which battered the Walls, and besides
multitudes of Soldiers ran out of the Ships with their Scaling Ladders to mount
the Walls, but the Rhodians made a resolute resistance, till the Engine broke
with its own weight, and the Statue of the Goddess Isis, was seen to dart
flames of fire against it. Whereupon the King after this last trial, losing all
hopes of taking the Town, raised his Siege. After this he went and besieged
Patoria, where as he was about to cut down a Forest (consecrated to Latona) for
building of Machines, he was frightened by a dream from touching those sacred
trees. Whereupon leaving Pelopidas in Lycia, to continue the War, he sent
Archelaus into Greece, to draw what Cities he could to his side either by good
will or constraint. And henceforward easing himself of the Labors and Toils of
War, which he committed to his Generals, he did nothing but leavy Soldiers, and
make provision of Arms, passing away his time with that Woman of Stratoni^ea,
and in giving judgment upon those who were accused of having plotted against
his life, done any thing against his Service, or favored in any kind whatsoever
the Roman party. Whilst he busied himself in these matters, affairs in Greece
passed in this manner. Archelaus going with a Fleet, well appointed took by
force the Island of Delos, which had revolted from the Athenians, together with
some places which he gave to that Republic, after the slaughter of twenty
thousand Men the most part Italians, and rendering by these Actions the Power of
Mithridates formidable in those parts, he gained him the Friendship and
Alliance of that People; he sent to them, likewise the consecrated Treasure at
Delo^s by Aristion one of their C^^y, to whom he gave two thousand Men for a
Guard of that Money; but he employed them to another purpose, for seeing two
thousand Men at his Command he lived like a Tyrant in his Country, putting to
death many of his Fellow Citizens, and delivering up others to Mithridates,
under pretense they were of the Roman Faction. Yet he made Profession of being
a Philosopher of the Sect of Epicurus, but he was not the only Philosopher that
has tyrannized in Athens, Critias and his Companions who professed the same
Philosophy, played the Tyrants before him. The followers of Pythagaras did the
same in Italy. Nor were there any of those who were called the seven Wisemen
of Greece, and had any hand in the Government of the Commonwealth but exercised
their Authority with more Tyranny then an unlearned Man would have done. So
that it is not without reason that some have doubted whether the other
Philosophers followed the Study of Wisdom so much, out of the pure Love of
Virtue, as to be a comfort to their Poverty, and an excuse for their Sloth*
Since even to this Day we see many leading a close and necessitous Life, who
cloak their Poverty under a pretense of Wisdom, furious by railing at all rich
men and Magistrates, which they do not so much out of contempt of Riches, as
out of envy to those which possess them, wherefore I think those much wiser
then, who know how to slight and contemn their Invectives. Thus much by the way
against Aristion, who gave occasion to this short digression. To proceed,
Archelaus drew to his Party the Acheans, Lacedaemonians, and Beotians, all but
the City of Thespia, to which he laid Siege. At the same time as Metrophanes
whom Mithridates had likewise sent into Greece with another Army, made havoc
in the Isle of Eubea, Demetriada and Magnesia, who had refused to declare for
the King, Brittius came out of Macedon and falling upon his Fleet, with a very
small force beat them, sunk a great Ship and a Foist, and slew all the
Mariners, and this in the very face of Metrophanes, which put him in such a
fear that he fled. Brittius when he could not overtake him, went and besieged
Sciatha a nest of barbarous Pirates, and having taken it hanged the Slave, and
cut of the Masters hands, from thence he went to Boeotia, whither a recruit of
a Thousand men, as well Horse as Foot being come to him out of Macedon, he gave
Battle to Aristion and Archelaus, which lasted three days without knowing which
had the better, till such time as the Lacedaemonians and Acheans having sent
relief to the Enemy finding himself then two weak he went and encamped near
Pyraeum, which Archelaus coming afterward with his Fleet to seize, took him
there Prisoner.

Sylla, to whom the Senate had given the Commission for the War against
Mithridates, not able before to leave Italy, now passed over into Greece, with
five Legions, some Or Regiments of Guards.
Cohorts, and a few Horse; whither Money being sent him, and Auxiliary Troops
come together, with Provisions of Victuals out of Etolia and Thessaly, finding
himself sufficiently prepared, he advanced into Attica against Archelaus. He
took his march through Boeotia, which almost all yielded to him, not the great
City of Thebes which out of giddiness of temper had before preferred
Mithridates to the Romans, durst now make Trial of his Arms, but in its turn
deserting Archelaus and his Party, declared for the Romans. The Consul being
arrived in Attica, divided his Forces into two Bodies, one he sent to Besiege
Aristion in the City, and with the other marched directly to the Port of
Pyraeum where Archelaus had engarrisoned himself, confident in the strength of
the place, the Walls of which were near forty Cubits high and all of hewn
stone. It was indeed a mighty work which had been raised by Pericles in the
time of the War of Peloponnesus; who when all the hopes of Victory consisted
only in this Port, had fortifyed all he could. Yet the height of the Walls
amused not Sylla, who presently clapped to his scaling Ladders; but the
Cappadocians bravely defending themselves, after giving and receiving many
Wounds he gave over and retreated to Eleusina and Megara, where he fell to
building Engines, resolved to take the Pyraeum by raising Platforms or Terrases
higher then the Walls. Thebes furnished him with Workmen and Materials, as Iron
Instruments for Battery and such like things, he cut down Timber in the Academy
to frame his great Engines, and beat down all those long Walls which joined the
Port with the City, that their Ruins might serve to raise his Platforms. There
were in Pyraeum two Athenian Slaves, who whether they were affectionate to the
Romans or to provide for their own security, in case they succeeded, writ on
Bullets of Lead what passed within, and threw then with Slings into the Roman
Camp. Sylla observing that they continually slung them, and examining the
matter more narrowly, found writ one of the Bullets. Tomorrow the foot will
sally out on the Laborers in Front, while the Horse charge the Roman Army in
Flank. Whereupon he laid an Ambush for them and when they thought to surprise
the Romans they were themselves surprised by the Romans, who after a great
Slaughter drove the rest into the very Sea. Archelaus seeing the Platforms
advanced in height, caused towers to be erected directly opposite to them, from
whence with Darts he sorely vexed the Workmen, and having caused Forces to come
from Chalcis and other Isles, he arrived not only the Mariners but the
Galley-Slaves, seeing himself in such an extremity of danger. Thus he who
before much exceeded the Besiegers in Numbers, seeing his Forces increased by
these new Recruits, made the Night following about the second Watch a vigorous
Sally, wherein carrying lighted Torches he burnt one of the Testudo's with all
its Engines. The Consul soon repaired the loss, and in ten day's rebuilt and
planted others in their stead, against which Archelaus opposed a Tower he
erected on the Wall. After this Dromichetes whom Mithridates had sent with new
Recruits being arrived, Archelaus drew out the Kings Army in Battle,
intermixing the Slingers and Archers and drawing them all up so close under the
Wall, that those who had Guard might from thence annoy the Enemies at distance
with their Bows and Slings, whilst a Party he had placed near the Gates sallyed
out upon a signal given, with Torches in their hands, to set fire on the
Machins. The Fight was fierce and continued a long time doubtful, sometimes one
giving Ground, and sometimes the other, the Barbarians were the first that
turned their Backs, but Archelaus soon forced them to stay and return to the
Charge, which so startled the Romans that they themselves fled, till Murena
coming to the head of them forced them to turn again upon the Enemy. At length
some Companies of Soldiers returning from the Wood (to whom those who had been
branded with Infamy for their flight joined themselves) and arriving in the
heat of the Fight, they charged so furiously upon Mithridates Battle, that
after having slain two thousand, they forced the rest to save themselves in the
Port, in spite of all the resistance of Archelaus, who did all he could to stop
them, and was so obstinate in it, that the Gates being shut before he could get
in, they were forced to draw him up the Walls with Ropes. Thus Sylla had the
honor of keeping the Field, who discharged of the Infamy those had been noted
for it, because of their good service upon this occasion, and honored the
other with military Recompenses. And because Winter was coming on, he went and
encamped near Eleusina, and that he might not be annoyed by the Excursions of
the Enemies Horse, he caused a deep Trench to be dug from the Mountains to the
Sea. Whilst they wrought at it, there happened daily Skirmishes, some or other
continually either going from the Trench or coming from the Wall, and throwing
Darts or shooting Arrows, Stones or Bullets of Led. This Work finished, Sylla
who stood in need of Shipping, sent to Rhodes to furnish himself, but the
Rhodians who could not pass the Seas, which were covered with Mithridates his
Fleets, advised Lucullus a man very considerable among the Romans and one of
Sylla's Lieutenants, to embarque privately for Syria and Alexandria, to demand
of the Kings and the Maritime Cities Ships to join with the Rhodian Fleet. He
took their advice, and fearless of any thing embarked himself on a pitiful
passage Boat, and often changing Boats that he might not be known, came to
Alexandria. About this time the two Slaves cast from the Walls Bullets of Lead
on which they had written, that the next Night Arc^elaus sent to Athens (where
the people were very much oppressed with Famine) some Soldiers laden with
Corn, upon which advice Sylla laying an Ambush for them, took both the men and
the Corn. The same day Munatius engaging with Neoptolemus the other of
Mithridates his Generals, wounded him, killed him fifteen hundred of his men
and took a far greater number Prisoners: Some time after, whilst the Guards of
the Port yet slept, some Romans cast Ladders from their Engines upon the Walls,
and being got up slew the first they met with, which so surprised the
Barbarians, that some believing all was taken by the Enemy, leaped from the Top
of the Walls, but others more resolute put themselves upon their defense, slew
the Captain of those were got up, and threw the rest headlong down. And some of
them were so bold as to sally out of the Gate with Torches in their hands, with
intent to set fire to one of the Romans Towers; And they had done it, had they
not been prevented by Sylla who after a Fight which lasted all Night and next
Day, forced them to retreat within their Walls. After this, Archelaus caused to
be raised on the Wall a great Tower opposite to the greatest of the Romans,
where they fought without intermission with shot from their Arbalists or
Cross-bow's, till such time as Sylla discharging from his greatest Crossbow's
twenty large leaden Blluets at a time against the Enemies, slew a great Number
of them, and shook the Tower in such manner, that it cleaving almost asunder,
they were forced to draw it under their Walls, that they might not have the
discouragement to see it tumble down in pieces. Mean while Famine from day to
day increasing in Athens, Archelaus was designing to send them Provisions by
night, of which the leaden Bullets soon gave notice. But that General doubting
that some one advertised the Romans of his designs gave order that at the time
when the Corn was to be sent, there should be a Party ready at the Gates to
Sally out with Torches in their hands upon the Romans at the same instant that
Sylla assaulted those which carried it, and indeed it happened that Sylla took
the Soldiers that carried the Corn, and Archelaus burnt some Engines. Whilst
these things passed Arcathias the Son of Mithridates being entered Macedon with
another Army defeated some Roman Forces, left for the Guard of that Province,
became Master of all Macedon, dividing it into Satrapies, and being on his
March toward Sylla, to cause him raise his Siege, dyed of Sickness near Tidea.
The news of his death being come to the Consuls he caused Forts to be raised
quite round the City of Athens, which was heavily oppressed with Famine, to the
end that no person being able to get out, the Famine should increase so much
the more among so vast a Multitude. That done, he began to batter the Walls of
Pyraeum with his Engines, raised on the Platforms, but Archelaus had with long
labor privately undermined them, so that they beginning to sink; the Romans
discovering the Mine, readily drew off their Engines, and filled up the Hollows
with Earth and other Rubbish. Then in imitation of the Barbarians they began to
undermine the Wall, till their Mines coming to meet, there happened a Skirmish
between the Miners underground, such a one as could be maintained in the Dark.
All this while they battered the Wall more then ever with their Rams planted on
the Terrasses, till such time as one part being beaten down, Sylla caused fire
to be cast into a Tower hard by, with intent to burn it, at the same time
commanding all the brave men he had to storm the place, both Parties fought
valiantly, but the Tower was at last burnt, and the Romans became Masters of
one part of the Wall upon which they lodged themselves. Almost at the same
instant, another part of the Wall undermined by the Romans, the Foundations of
which they had underpropped as they went, after that the stanchions which they
had set on fire with store of Pitch, Flax, and Brimstone, were burnt, began to
tumble with all those that defended it, making the Crash the more terrible,
because so unexpected. Insomuch that those who had the Guard of the Walls were
utterly daunted, every one trembling for himself, as if he were presently to be
^rushed in pieces by a like ruin, wherefore those who where planted in any
suspected places, ran fearfully down in Crowds, taking more care to preserve
their own lives, then repulse the Enemy. Sylla the more fiercely pursued the
assault, relieving his wearied Soldiers with fresh men, continually
encouraging them and mingling Threats with Prays, assuring them that upon this
Brunt which could not last long, depended the whole Victory. Archelaus showed
no less courage: He opposed Sylla with fresh men in the place of those whose
fears had made them useless, renewed the heat of the fight, pressing forward
and heartning all his people; by telling them they had but this shock to
sustain, and after it there was nothing to be feared. Thus both Parties
returned to the Charge with wonderful Alacrity, they fought and slew on both
sides, with equal loss. Yet at last Sylla taking Compassion of his Soldiers, so
tired that they were able to do no more, and admiring their bravery caused the
retreat to be sounded. The night following Archelaus set to work to repair the
two ruined places, making retrenchments within in form of a half Moon. Sylla
thinking these fortifications yet moist would easily be beaten down, went
presently to assault them with all his Forces, but he was soon forced to give
it over, for being looked up in that half Circle very close together, his men
could not fight, but were both in Front and Flank exposed to the Enemies shot,
which indeed annoyed them on all sides.

Pyraeum by storm, hoping at last to reduce the besieged by Famine. But first
understanding that the City was at the last gasp, that they had eaten all their
Horses, and after having boiled the very Hides for sustenance, had been forced
at last feed on dead Carcases, he caused a Trench to be drawn round about it,
to the end that none might previly escape. And having f^nished that work, he
raised his Batteries and planted his ^calnig Ladders, upon which the Soldiers
mounted with such a furious violence that those weak and feeble people betaking
themselves presently to flight he became master of the Walls. The whole City
was presently filled with Slaughter, for there was none had strength enough to
escape, and no quarter was given, nor either Sex or Age spared. For Sylla
incensed that so readily and without any cause they had taken part with the
Barbarians, and so obstinately defended themselves against him, had given
Orders to put all to the Sword, which made many who had heard his voice, that
proclaimed this Ordinance, come and offer themselves voluntarily to death. As
many as could, made their retreat into the Castle, among whom was Aristion,
having first of all set on fire the Theater for Music, for fear least Sylla
should make use of the Wood, in the assault of the Fortress. The Consul having
taken the City, would not let it be set on fire, but he gave the Plunder to the
Soldiers, who ransaking every where, found in many Houses Humane Flesh ready
dressed to eat. On the morrow he sold all the Slaves at outcry, and declared that
he left at liberty all the free people, who had escaped the nights slaughter,
of whom but few were found, yet those he deprived of any^suffrage or
jurisdiction, as bebeing Enemies, but promised to restore it to their
posterity. This done Sylla besieged the Fortress, wherein Aristion and those
fled for Refuge with him, were so sore oppressed with hunger and thirst that
they were constrained to surrender, of whom he put to death Aristion with his
Guards, and all that had born Commission under him during his Tyranny, or in
any manner whatsoever had acted contrary to the Ordinances left them by the
Romans since they first became Masters of Greece; He pardoned all the rest, and
left them under almost the same Laws they had received from the Romans, and in
conclusion carried out of the Citadel forty pound weight of Gold, and six
hundred of Silver. The City thus taken, Sylla believed that holding only the
Port of Pyraeum invested, it would be a long time before he should starve the
Barbarians. Wherefore he again applied himself to his Batteries and Engines,
and caused to be made Galleries and Mantelets, to go under Covert up to the
Walls, and undermine them. But Archelaus had made provision against him, for he
had raised many Walls, one behind another, all after the same manner, so that
Sylla saw no end of his labor, having no sooner taken in one Wall, but he found
another of the same Fabric, yet he indefatigably attempted all the Walls he
met with, causing his Soldiers to relieve each other by turns, and going
sometimes to one party, and sometimes to another encouraging them to labor, and
assuring them of the great recompenses prepared for them, when they had
overcome these difficulties. And indeed the Soldiers promised themselves an end
of their labors, after this Victory, and hoped to gain so much the more praise,
the more they incountred with danger and difficulty, wherefore they did all
they could to gain these last Walls, till such time as Archelaus astonished at
their obstinacy deserting them, retired into the strongest part of the Pyraeum,
which being on all sides begirt with the Sea, the Consul who had no Ships could
attempt nothing against him. From thence he took his march by Boeotia to go
into Thessaly, and being got to Thermopylae, he rallyed the remains as well of
those Troops which himself had brought into Greece, as of those which came
under the Conduct of Dromicheses, He sent likewise for all that Army which had
followed Arcathias the Kings Son into Macedon, which were all fresh Men that
wanted nothing, and besides all these Mithridates had sent him some new
Recruits, for he was continually sending. Sylla in the mean time burnt the
Pyraeum which had given him so much more trouble then the City, sparing neither
Arsenal nor Dock, nor in short any thing that was considerable.

This done he took the Field to follow Archelaus, taking as well as he Boeotia.
As he was upon his March, those Troops lately assembled at Thermopylae came
forward to meet him as far as Phocida; Thracians, Pontique Scythians,
Cappadocians, Bithynians, Galatians, Phrygians and others came from the
Provinces, newly Conquered by Mithridates, amounting in all to sixscore
thousand Men, under several Generals, over whom Archelaus was Generalissimo.
Sylla's Forces were composed of Romans and Italian Allies, together with such
Greeks and Macedonians as had come over from Archelaus to him: And possibly
some Auxiliary Troops of the Neighboring Countries, but all these amounted not
to a third of his Enemies; when they were encamped close by each other;
Archelaus every day drew out his Army to invite Sylla to a battle, but he
considering the Nature of the place, and the great Number of his Enemies,
thought it best to temporize; At length they retreated toward Chalcis, whither
he followed them waiting for a favorable opportunity, and a convenient place.
And at last perceiving that near to Cheronea, they were encamped in a place
environed with Cragged Rocks, which were very difficult to pass, he posted
himself hard by in a spacious plain, and drawing up his Army resolved to force
Archelaus to a Battle, whether he would or no: He found the place was
advantageous for him, either to charge or retreat in, whereas Archelaus was
shut up among the Rocks, which would not permit him to fight with all his
Forces together, nor could he well form his Bodies or draw in Battle among
those uneven Cragged Stones, where if any misfortune happened, those Rocks
themselves would hinder his Escape. In short having according to his desire met
him in a place where Numbers would be useless, he advanced to engage him; He
who thought of nothing less then Fighting had fortified his Camp with
Negligence enough, nor had he taken notice of the disadvantage of the place
till the Romans furiously advanced to the Charge. He then commanded a party of
his Horse to make head against them, but they being defeated and driven into
the Precipices, he sent next sixty Chariots to endeavor to break the Ranks of
the Legions, who opening to the Right and Left, gave them way quite through,
till they had past the Rearguard, where before they could turn, the Horses and
Drives were all slain by the Darts thrown at them from all sides. Archelaus
defended as he was by the Rocks, might have staid in his Post, but receiving
Intelligence that Sylla was at hand, he chose rather with all speed possible to
draw up those vast Multitudes into Battle in those straits: and then pressing
forward with the Horse of his Vanguard he broke quite through the Battle of the
Romans, dividing it into two, and then easily surrounding each part because of
their small Number, these two half-bodies seeing themselves enclosed cast
themselves into an Orb and bravely defended themselves, but that where Galba
and Hortensius commanded was sorely put to it, because Archelaus himself being
at the head of his Men pressed on them extremely, and all the Barbarians
Fighting in his presence strove to show their General some signal Marks of
their Valor. At last Sylla coming with a Gross of Horse, Archelaus who guessed
by the Cornets, and by the dust arising from the Horsefeet, that it was he,
gave over this manner of Fighting to regain his Order of Battle, but the Roman
Charging home (with all the Flower of his Cavalry and two Regiments of Foot,
which he had laid in Ambush) amongst the thickest of the Enemies, yet
astonished, and not able to recover any Order, over-pressed them, broke them,
put them to the Rout, and gave them Chase. The Victory thus begun on this part,
Murena did wonders to advance it on the Left, for after having pricked forward
those about him by reproaches, he violently led them on upon the Enemy, and put
them likewise to the Rout, Thus Archelaus two Wings being defeated his Main
Body stood not long, but all equally took their Flight, nor was Sylla deceived
in the Judgment made of the Success of this Enterprise, for the Enemies
entangled in those streits, could not fly, or if they did, threw one another
down the Precipices, and if they turned head fell into the hands of the Romans,
wherefore the wisest of them returned to their Camp, but Archelaus who could
not believe the discomfiture so great, stopped their entrance, and sent them back
upon the Enemy, which they obeyed though they had no Captains to put them in
order, nor saw no Ensigns, which every one in the Rout had thrown here and
there, and besides they had neither Room to Fight, nor to Retreat. Thus in this
extremity they were slaughtred like Sheep, either by their Enemies, on whom
they could not revenge themselves, being too close crowded, or by their own
Comerades, as it often happens in a too close and disordered Battle, wherefore
they returned in throngs to the Gates of the Camp, complaining to those had
shut them out and reviling them, that adoring the same Gods, and being tied by
so many bonds one to the other they contributed more to their destruction, then
the Enemies themselves. At last Archelaus opened the Gates, but too late. They
entered in confusion and disorder, and the Romans encouraging one another threw
themselves Pell Mell among the Flyers* where they gave the last push to the
Victory. Archelaus and all those that escaped from the Slaughter met together
at Chalcis, where of one hundred and twenty thousand Men, they found but ten
thousand. The Romans believed they had lost fifteen Men, but two of them
afterward returned. Thus ended this battle fought between Sylla and Archelaus
General under Mithridates near to Cheronea, the Success whereof was as well
deserving of the Prudence of Sylla, as of the foolish rashness of Archelaus.

Sylla seeing himself Master of a great Number of Prisoners, of great Euripus,
hoping, he might there meet with Archelaus; But he had made no stay there, but
because the Romans had no Fleet at Sea, went about overrunning the Islands and
plundring the Seacoasts. He was likewise so bold as to land upon Zant, and to
besiege the City, but some Romans that came against him, having set upon him in
an Ambush by Night, he hastily reembarked his Men, got out to Sea, and returned
to Chalcis, doing things all along rather becoming a Pyrate then a Man of War.
Mithridates hearing of this great defeat was amazed as indeed he had reason,
however he began to make new Levies of Soldiers in all the Countries under his
obedience, and growing jealous, that after his being thus beaten, there would
be some People, that either at present, or as soon as they had opportunity
would make attempt upon his Person, before he would renew the War he assembled
all that he had the least suspicion of, such were the Tetrarchs of Galatia, and
all those who attended on his Person as Friends, but yet owned him not as
Subjects. All these he put to death with their Wives and Children, some by
surprise, others at a feast by night, only three escaped and fled, for he
thought that if Sylla came nearer, none of them would continue faithful to him.
After this he siesed upon their goods, placed Garrisons in their Cities, and
sent Eumachus Satrap or Governor into Galatia, whom the Tetrarchs that had
escaped, assisted with some Forces of their Vassals raised in the Country,
drove thence with his Garrisons; so that of all the Goods of that Nation,
Mithridates enjoyed only the Money. Having likewise born a secret hate to the
Inhabitants of Chios, since one of their Galleys unawares ran aboard the
Admiral at the Fight of Rhodes, he first confiscated all their Estates, who
were gone into Sylla's Army, then he sent Commissioners to inform themselves of
all those who were of the Roman Faction, and at last Zenobius landing there as
it were in his passage for Greece siesed by night on the Walls, and most
advantageous places of the City, and after having placed Guards at the Gates he
caused Proclamation to be made that all the Guests and Inmates should take
their repose, and that all the Inhabitants should assemble themselves to know
the Kings Pleasure. That done, he told them that the King was Jealous of their
City, because some of their Inhabitants took part with the Romans, and that
there was no way to remove that suspicion, but by surrendering up their Arms and
delivering such Children, as should be chosen out of their best Families for
Hostages. They see^ng their City in his hands, yielded both to one and the
other, whom ^enobius sent immediately to Erythrea, telling them, that as to
what was farther to be done the King would write. And indeed his Letter came
containing matters to this purpose.

Mithridates Letter to the Inhabitants of Chios.
YOU Favor the Romans, many of your Citi zens being at this present in their
Army, and your selves enjoy Lands they have given you in Fee, without paying
any Tribute to us. Your Galley likewise ran on Board mine in the Fight at
Rhodes, which fault I had only imputed to those had the Government of it, could
my Clemency have made you wise, but you have privately sent the Chief Men of
your City to Sylla, and have not discovered to me any of those who without the
consent of the whole City were guilty of this crime, which you ought to have
done, had you not all been accomplices. I might according to the advice of my
Friends punish you with death as Enemies to my self and my Estates. However I
have chosen rather in reparation of these crimes to condemn you in a Fine of
two thousand Talents.


After having heard this Letter read, they desired Zenobius's permission to
send Deputies to the King, which being refused them, disarmed as they were, and
tied up by those Hostages they had given, and besides seeing a great Army of
Barbarians, ready to cut them in pieces, they began to weep, and were forced to
sell the Ornaments of their Temples, and their Wives Jewels to raise the two
thousand Talents. When they had paid it in, Zenobius under pretense that it
wanted weight, caused them to Assemble in the Theater, and there encompassing
them with Soldiers, and lining the Streets leading to the Seaside with Guards,
all with drawn Swords, he caused them to be led out of the Theater, one after
another, and put them on Shipboard, the Men on one side, and the Women and
Children, on the other, whilst the Barbarians, as they past affronted them with
a thousand indignities; thus he took them all out of their Country, and sent
them to Mithridates in the Euxine Sea. Those of Chios being treated in this
manner, Zenobius came before Ephesus with all his Forces, but the Ephesians
made him leave his Arms at the Port, and would not let him enter the City but
with a very small train. He submitted to it, and went and lodged at
Philopoemens (Father of Monima, Mithridates Mistress, to whom the King had
given the Government of that place) and soon after proclaimed an Assembly off
the City, but the Ephesians, who expected nothing but mischief from him, put
off the business till next morning. Mean while they assembled in the night, and
mutually encouraging each other, clapped Zenobius in Prison, where they put him
to death. At the same time they planted good Guards on their Walls, armed the
people, made Provision of Victuals, and became Masters of their Ci^ty. Those of
Trulles, Hypapa and Mesopolis and others, whom the Calamity of the Inhabitants
of Chios had terrifyed, hearing the news, follow the Example of the Ephesians:
So that Mithridates was forced to send an Army against these Rebels, severely
punishing those who returned not to their obedience till they were forced. And
to hinder others from revolting, he declared all the Grecian Cities free, and
all Debtors released from their Creditors, and gave the Inmates freedom of
Burgesses in all places where they inhabited, and set the Slaves at liberty.
Hoping (as it happened) that the Debtors, Inmates and Slaves engaged by these
benefits, would employ all their force to maintain the Royal Power. Mean while
Mini^ and Philotirous, Natives of Smyrna, and Clysthenes, and Asclepiodorus of
Lesbos, all well known to the King, Asclepiodorus himself having sometime
commanded his Mercenary Troops, conspired against him, but the conspiracy being
discovered by Asclepiodorus, (who to give a manifest Proof of it ordered
matters, so that the King hid behind a bed heard it from Minio's one mouth) the
conspirators ended their lives in torments. Many were afterward suspected of
the same crime, fourscore of the Inhabitants of Pergamus, being thereupon
arrested, besides many others in other Cities, the King sending Spies into all
parts, under his obedience, to find out the Criminals, every one of which
making discovery of his Enemy, there perished about sixteen hundred men; but
the Accusers soon received their Chastisement: for of them, some were punished
by Sylla, others slew themselves, and others fled with Mithridates, to the
Kingdom of Pontus.

Whilst these things passed in Asia, the King had raised an Army of Dorilaus
carried into Greece to Archelaus, who had still ten thousand men, the remainder
of his former Forces. When Sylla who now lay encamped within sight of him, near
to Orchomene beheld so vast a Multitude of Horse arrive, he caused several
Ditches to be dug through the Plain, ten foot wide, and when Archelaus advanced
toward him, put his Army in a posture to receive him, but perceiving the
Romans fought but coldly, against such numbers of Horsemen, he rid himself
through the Ranks, stirred them up, threatened them, and at length not being
able to provoke them, leaps from his Horse, takes a Colors in his hands, and
advancing with his Guards in the midst between two Battles, cries out. If any
asked you fellow Soldiers, where you left your General Sylla, tell them it was
fighting near Orchomene. Hereupon the Officers moved by the danger in which
they saw him, advanced from their standing, and ran to his assistance, the
Soldiers urged with shame followed, and all together made the Enemy give ground
who before put them hard to it: Sylla perceiving this entrance toward Victory,
mounts again on Horse back, shows himself every where, praises his Soldiers,
encourages them, and at last remains Master of the Field; After having slain
fifteen thousand men, the most part Horsemen (among whom was Diogenes, the Son
of Archelaus,) and driven the Foot into the very Camp of the Barbarians: At the
same instant for fear left Archelaus should save himself at Chalcis, as he had
done the time before, he disposed Guards throughout the whole Plain, to keep
Watch that night, and in the morning caused to be drawn before the Camp a
Trench not above a Furlong distant from it. Archelaus in the mean time kept
within his Trenches, but Sylla after having exhorted his Soldiers to make an
end of the remain of this War, since the Enemies durst not appear, undertook to
force them, and marched directly to the Assault. Upon this great change, and in
this pressing necessity, the Enemies began by Speeches, to encourage their
Troops: Each Captain showed his Solders the danger they were in, if they did
not defend themselves, representing to them how cowardly a thing it would be,
if they should not have Heart enough, to drive from their Trenches an Enemy,
they far surpassed in number. Whereupon there presently arose a great noise, on
both sides, each Party was set on fire, and did actions wonderful. At last the
Romans leaped into the Ditch and stormed an Angle of the Camp, out of which
they plucked the Palisado's. The Barbarians who perceived it, lined the Angle
close, with their Swords drawn ready to fight nearer at hand, inso much that no
person durst enter, till Basilius the first Tribune of a Legion, leaped up and
overturning him he first encountered with, the whole Army thereupon followed,
and made a mighty slaughter of the Barbarians. Some they slew in the Chase,
others they drove into a Lake hard by, and some who could not swim, cried out
for Quarter, but in vain, for their Language not being understood, they were
cut in pieces, Archelaus hid himself in a certain Marsh, and having there found
a little Boat, escaped to Chalcis, where he speedily drew together all the
remains of Mithridates Forces. Next Morning Sylla gave a Crown to the Tribune,
and distributed Military Recompenses to the others. After which he went and
spoiled Boeotia, because those people were perpetually changing Parties, and
from thence passed into Thessaly where he took up his Winter Quarters,
expecting Lucullus with the Shipping, of whom receiving no certain
intelligence, he set to building of others.

Cornelius Cinna, and Cajus Marius his particular Enemies declared him at Rome
Enemy of the Commonwealth, pulled down his Houses, seized his Lands, and put
to death his Friends. Yet ceased not he to do all he could, having a most
obedient Army, composed all of valiant Soldiers. Now Cinna having drawn to his
Party, his Colleague Flaccus sent him into Asia, with two Legions, to Command in
the Province, and make War on Mithridates, in the place of Sylla, who was
declared Enemy, and because he was not very expert in War, Fimbria one of the
Senate in good esteem with the Soldiers, went along with him. They embarked at
Brundusium, to cross the Sea, a good part of their Ships were lost by Storm,
and those who gained the other side were taken and burnt by the new Army, sent
by Mithridates. Flaccus was proud, covetous, cruel in punishing, and therefore
hated by the Soldiers, which made some Troops that were sent before into
Thessaly, to go over into Sylla's Camp, and it was only Fimbria, (whom they
esteemed the better Captain, and more merciful then Flaccus) that prevented the
others from doing the like. There happened by chance some difference between
the Questor and he about encamping, wherein Flaccus who was Judge, not having
duly considered the Quality of Fimbria, he threatened him to return to the City.
Flaccus presently named a successor in his charge, and forthwith embarked for
Chalcedon: Whereupon Fimbria taking the opportunity of his absence, took away
the Rods from Therinus, whom he had made Propretor, saying the Army had given
him that Dignity, and Flaccus thereat offended, returning to punish him, he put
him to flight, and forced him to hide himself in a private House, from whence
escaping by night over the Walls, he got to Chalcedon, and from thence to
Nicomedia where he caused the Gates to be shut. But Fimbria was presently
there, and drawing him out of a Well where he had hid himself, slew him though
a Roman Consul, and more then that his General, whilst he was but a private
man, who had followed his friend of greater Quality then he, at his coming into
the Province. He cut of his Head, which he threw into the Sea, leaving the rest
of the Body unburied, and having made himself General of the Army, fought
afterward successfully, in several Engagements with Mithridates Son. At length
having to deal with the King himself, he drove him to the very Gates of
Pergamus, whence he flying to Pisane, had been there besieged had he not taken
shipping and escaped to Mitylene. After this Fimbria going through the
Province, ill entreated those who favored the Party of the Cappadocians, and
spoiled their Lands, who refused to open their Gates to him. The City of Ilium
he besieged, whose Inhabitants having recourse to Sylla he promised to come,
and sent to Fimbria not to do any injury to those who had yielded to him,
praising them for being returned into the friendship and alliance of the Roman
people. Notwithstanding he required to be likewise received into their City,
being likewise of Rome, and telling them I know not what of that ancient
Kindred of which the Ilians boast. At last he entered by force, slew all he met
with, set on fire the City, and particularly put to several sorts of death,
those who went to Sylla, on the behalf of the City. He had neither respect to
the sacred places nor to those had fled thither for refuge, but burnt the
Temple of Minerva, with a great multitude of people, who had retired thither,
as to a Sanctuary. He rased the very Walls, which he went round about next day,
to see if any part were left standing. Thus was that City worse treated, by a
Man who took thence his Original, then it had formerly been, by Agamemnon, for
he left not a house, nor a Temple, nor a Statue standing. Some there are that
believe, that the Image of the Goddess, which is called Palladium, was now
found whole, after the removal of the Rubbish, wherewith it was covered, but
there is more reason to believe it was taken away by Diomedes and Ulysses in
the time of the Trojan War. This Massacre of the Ilians, happened about the end
of the hundred and third Olympaid, and it is thought to be about one thousand
and fifty Years between this sack of Troy and that of Agamemnon.

Now Mithridates receiving advice of the defeat at Orchomene, and considering
Greece, he had lost such vast Multitudes in so short a time, wrote to
Archelaus, that he should conclude a Peace, upon the fairest terms he could
get. He therefore demanded a conference with Sylla, which being granted, he
told him; Sylla, the King Mithridates your Fathers friend, and yours, was
forced by the avarice of those who had the Command before you, to make the War:
But having now experienced your Valor, he demands a Peace, provided what you
shall desire of him, be just. Whereupon Sylla, who had neither Fleet nor Money,
receiving nothing from Rome, since his Enemies had declared him Enemy of the
State, and having already spent all the Silver of the Temples of Pythia,
Olympia and Ragu^a.
Epidaurum, for which he had engaged half the Lands confiscated from the
Thebans, because of their continual Rebellions, and who besides all this, was
impatient, to transport that Army fresh and every way complete to Rome against
his Enemies, consented to his Peace, by telling him; Archelaus, Mithridates
should have sent Ambassadors to Rome, to complain of the injuries he had
received, but instead of that he himself injured others, entering in hostile
manner into their Territories, plundring their Treasures as well Public as
Sacred, seizing on the Goods of those he had put to death, and showing no more
faith nor goodness to his own friends then to us, destroying many of them, and
murdering the Tetrarchs, his familiars who had all their throats cut in one
night, with their Wives and Children, though they were not guilty so much as of
a design. As for what regards us, he rather made appear his inveterate hatred,
then any necessity he had to make War, when he let loose his rage against the
Italians in Asia, by a thousand sorts of Torments, sparing neither Age, Sex nor
Quality. So much hate does this man bear to the Latin Name, who calls himself
my Fathers Friend, but never remembered that friendship till I had slain him a
hundred and sixty thousand men. Wherefore we have no reason to trust you any
more. However for your sake I promise he shall obtain favor from the Senate
and People of Rome, if it be in good earnest that he ask it, but if he still
feign, I advise you Archelaus, to consider the present estate of his affairs
and your own, how he treats his Friends, and how we have dealt with Eumenes and
Massanissa. At these words Archelaus interrupted him, angry that he should
tempt him, and telling him he was not a man to betray Forces entrusted to his
charge, but that he really hoped for peace if Sylla demanded only just things.
Whereupon Sylla, after some moments Silence: Provided (said he) Archelaus, that
Mithridates put into our hands all the Fleet he has, restore the Generals
Deputies, and other Prisoners, deliver up the Runaway's and fugitive Slaves,
send back to their Cities those of Chios, and others transported to the Euxine
Sea, withdraw his Garrisons from all places where he has planted them, save
only those he had before the Peace was broke, pay the Expense of this War,
which he has been the cause of, and content himself with the Kingdom of his
Ancestors. I hope to prevail so far that the Roman people shall forget the
Offenses they have received. Archelaus hearing these conditions, began
presently to withdraw his Garrisons, and about the rest wrote to the King.
Sylla, that he might not in the mean while loose any time; went and spoiled the
Countries of the Henetians, Dardanians, and other Neighboring Nations, who
made delay incursions into Macedon, by that means exercising his Soldiers.
Mithridates Deputies returning some time after, agreed to all, save only about
Paphlagonia, but added that they could have had better terms from the other
General Fimbria. Whereupon Sylla offended at that comparison, made answer, that
that word should cost Fimbria dear, and that as soon as he came into Asia, he
would see whether Mithridates stood in need of Peace or War. Whereupon he
caused his Army to take their March through Thrace, that he might bring them to
Cypsela, having sent Lucullus before to Abydos, for he was now returned, having
often very narrowly escaped falling into the hands of Pirates. However he had
brought with him a kind of Fleet of Ships, which he had been furnished with at
Cyprus, Phoenicia, Rhodes, and in Pamphilia, with which he had pillaged all the
Coast as he came along, and skirmished with Mithridates his Fleet: Sylla
therefore parting from Cypsela, and Mithridates from Pergamus, met together,
and began a new conference, being drawn out into the Field, with few followers
in the sight of both Armies. Mithridates began his discourse with the alliance
which he and his Father had with the people of Rome, complained of the injuries
he had received from the Roman Generals and Commissaries, who had established
Ariobarzanes in Cappadocia, taken from him Phrigia, and favored by their
dissimulation the Violences of Nicomedes. And all this (said he) for Money
which they received sometimes from me, and sometimes from my Enemies, for there
is nothing, you Gentlemen of Rome may so justly be reproached with as love of
Money. In short, your Generals being come to make War against me, whatever I
have done in my own defense, ought rather to be attributed to necessity then to
any deliberate purpose. Mithridates having only said thus much, Sylla answered
in this manner. Though this be not the business, we are met for, but only to
conclude a Peace on the conditions by me already proposed, yet I will likewise
in few words satisfy you in what you reproach us with. When I commanded in
Cilicia, I reestablished Ariobarzanes in Cappadocia, by the Senates order, and
I did it because you yielded to the Authority of the People, for you ought
either to have opposed it and showed your reasons in Judgments, or after having
suffered it, acquiesce in the Decree of the Senate. As for Phrygia, Manius gave
it you, corrupted by your gifts, which made it a common crime betwixt you, and
by saying you got it by corruption, you own the possession unlawful, and indeed
Manius being convicted of having done many things of like nature for Money, the
Senate declared them all null. Wherefore Phrygia being granted to you unjustly,
they would not make it tributary to Rome, but set it at liberty. And when we
dispense with our dominion, over a Country which by right of War belonged to
us, as Conquerours of it, what reason have you to siese on it? As for
Nicomedes, he complains that by your persuasion Alexander who designed to kill
him, wounded him, and Socrates Chrestus invaded his Kingdom. He confesses that
thus injured, he entered armed into your Territories, but if you thought your
self injured without cause you should have sent your Deputies to Rome, and
expected the answer of the Senate. Yet granting that in the assault of
Nicomede, you only repelled force by force, what had Ariobarzanes done, that
you should drive him out of his Estates? Therefore the Roman Generals that were
upon the place, were obliged to reestablish him, and by resisting them, you
kindled a War long time premeditated, and to begin which, you sought only an
opportunity, out of the hopes to become Masters of all the World, if you could
overcome the Romans. We have manifest Proofs of this, since before any War was
begun, you entered into alliance with the Thracians, Scythians, and Sarmatians,
solicited the Kings your Neighbors by your Ambassadors, caused Shipping to be
built, provided your self with Pilots and men of War; but above all, the Time
you chose for the Execution of your Designs is your conviction, for as soon as
you knew that our Allies in Italy were resolved against us, you made use of
that opportunity while we thus were embroyled to assail Nicomedes, and
Ariobarzanes, and one after another, Galatia, Paphlagonia, and our own province
of Asia. What cruelties have you not acted? Whether to the Cities which you
have submitted to Slaves and Debtors, the first of which you freed from
Servitude, and the last from the Power of their Creditors: Whether to the
Greeks of whom you put to death sixteen hundred for one sole crime. Whether to
the Tetrarchs of Gallogrecia, whom you murdered eating at your table. Or
whether to the Italians, whom in the same day you put all to the Sword, or
drowned them in Water with their Wives and Children, without respect to the
sacred places, or the Temples, whither they had fled for Sanctuary. What
Inhumanity did you not manifest in this occasion? What Impiety, what furious
hate against us? In conclusion, after having seized the Treasures of all these
people, you sent over great Armies into Europe, contrary to our Edict, by which
it is expressly forbid all Kings of Asia, to enter there. That done you forraged
Macedonia, one of our Provinces, deprived the Greeks of their liberty, and
never repented of all this, nor made any use of the Intercession of Archelaus
till after I had recovered Macedonia, and delivered the Greeks from your
violence by slaying one hundred and sixty thousand of your men, and taking two
of your Camps, with all their Munition. And now I cannot but wonder, that you
should excuse your self of the same matters for which you asked pardon by
Archelaus, unless it be that when I was far off, you were afraid of me, and now
seeing me near, you think I am come to plead; but pleadings are in vain when
Arms are once taken in hand. We do make War upon you, and have defended our
selves bravely hitherto, and will defend our selves to the end.

Sylla pronouncing these words in Anger, the King was afraid, accepted the
conditions proposed to Archelaus, and after having surrendered up his Shipping,
and executed all that was contained in the Articles of Peace, he returned into
Pontus, reduced to the Kingdoms of his Father only. Thus was the first War
against Mithridates appeased.

Sylla after this went and encamped within two Furlongs of Fimbria, and sent to
summon him to deliver into his hands, the Army which he commanded contrary to
the Laws, to which he in raillery returned answer, that Sylla himself had no
very legitimate command. Sylla thereupon besieged him in his Trenches, and many
publicly forsaking him, he assembled the rest to beseech them to stay, but
they told him they would not fight against Roman Citizens: He thereupon rent
his Robe, addresses himself to every one in particular, begging with Tears in
his eyes, but they having an aversion for such a meanness of Spirit, the
greatest part went over into Sylla's Army. Then he ran from Tent to Tent to
solicit the Tribunes, part of whom having gained by Money, he once again
assembles the Soldiers to renew the Oath. Upon which the Henetians crying out
all with one voice, that the Soldiers should be called out and sworn man by
man, he gave Orders first to call out those who had received kindnesses from
him, and particularly Nonius the Companion of all his Crimes, who refused to
swear, he drew his Sword, and had thrust it into his belly, had not a great
shout suddenly raised throughout the whole Army, stopped his proceeding farther.
After this he suborned a Slave with Money and promises, to go into Sylla's Camp
as a Runaway and to kill him, but he not having been able to bear up with
constancy enough, his trembling made him suspected, so that being taken, he
confessed the whole matter. This attempt inflamed all Sylla's Army with just
anger, and made Fimbria so despisable, that the Soldiers going to the Ditch of
his Camp, reviled him, calling him Aristion, after the name of one of those
fugitive Slaves in Sicily, who for a few days was King. Wherefore Fimbria ^ost
to all hopes, advanced to his Rampart, and demanded to speak with Sylla, who
sending Rutilius in his stead, put Fimbria quite in despair, seeing a
conference would not be granted to him, which had not usually been denied even
to Enemies. Yet he spoke to Rutilius, and told him he desired pardon for the
faults he might have committed, through the imprudence of his Age. To which
Rutilius answered, that if he would depart out of Asia, where Sylla was
Proconsul, he would give him passport as far as the Sea, he replied he knew a
way more convenient, and at the same time returning to Pergamus, and entering
the Temple of Aesculapius, he thrust himself quite through the body with his
Sword, but the wound not being mortal, he desired the assistance of one of his
Slaves, who dispatched him, and afterward slew himself. Thus ended Fimbria, the
second Plague of Asia, next to Mithridates. Sylla gave his body to his freed
men to bury it, saying he would not imitate Cinna and Marius, who had deprived
many in the City, not only of life, but Burials; he received likewise the Army
of the defunct, which came to yield themselves up to him, and joined them with
his own. After this he commanded Curio to reconduct Nicomedes and Ariobarzanes
into their Kingdoms, and wrote to the Senate of all that he had done, without
taking the least notice of his having heard that he was declared Enemy of the
State, then he proceeded to settle Necessary Orders in the Province, he
enfranchized and placed in the Number of the Allies of the people of Rome those
of Ilion, Chios, Lycia, Rhodes, Magnesia, and some other people in
acknowledgement of the good services they had done the Commonwealth of Rome,
or the better to comfort them for the miseries they had undergone for taking
part with the Romans. And after having sent Parties of Soldiers to all the
other Cities, he caused an Ordinance to be proclaimed by which all Slaves were
enjoined to return under the Power of their Masters, but because that many
would not obey, and that many Cities likewise revolted, the publishing of this
ordinance caused a multitude of disorders, and was followed by strange
Slaughters, as well of Slaves, as free people, besides the ruin of several
Cities whose Inhabitants were sold at outcry. He likewise severely chastised
all those who had taken part with the Cappadocian as well in general as
particular, especially the Ephesians, who out of a base complacence for
Mithridates, had shamefully taken out of their Temple, the gifts presented by
the Romans. After this Heralds were sent to all the Cities, to give notice to
the principal Inhabitans, to appear upon a certain day before Sylla at Ephesus.
Where being assembled he took his seat on the Tribunal, and spoke to them in
this manner.

The Oration of Sylla.
THe first time we passed with an Army into Asia was when Antiochus King of
Syria spoiled your Province, whom we drove beyond the Tanais and Mount Taurus,
and though after that we might have kept you under our Dominion, we left all at
liberty, save some few people, whom we gave to Eumenes and the Rhodians, our
Allies, rather as Subjects then as Tributaries, which is manifest because when
the Lycians complained against those of Rhodes, we freed them from their
obedience. These benefits we have done, you observe now your acknowledgment.
After that Attalus Philometor had left us his Kingdom by Will and Testament,
you assisted Aristonicus against us for the space of four Years, till such time
as he being taken Prisoner, some of you returned to your duty either through
necessity or fear. After which remaining in Peace four and t^enty Years
together, you in that time became so prodigiously rich, as well Comonalties at
private persons, that the repose and delights which you enjoyed revived in your
Spirits your animosities and aversion against us, and taking occasion from the
differences we had with our Allies, some invited Mithridates to make War
against us, and others joined with him, as soon as they saw him in the Field.
But that which is most heinous, you conceived no horror to murder, by his order
on the same day all the Italians with their Wives and Children, not sparing
those who had fled for refuge into the Temples, consecrated to your Gods. It Is
true you have in some measure been chastised by Mithridates himself, who
violating the Promises he had made you, gave you over to the Plunder of his
Soldiers, and filling your Province with Blood and Slaughter, despoiled you of
your Lands, discharged your Creditors of the Money they ought you, gave liberty
to your Slaves, and set Tyrants in many places over you, and encouraged the
Retreats of Thieves, and Pirates in all places, both by Sea and Land. So that
it was longere you made trial of the difference between the Protectors you had
cast off, and those you had chosen; We have likewise inflicted some punishment
on the Persons of the Authors of these disorders, but that is not enough; It is
but just to impose some public penalty that may be agreeable to your crime;
But fear not from the Roman Clemency Massacres, rash confiscations,
insurrections of slaves, or other barbarous actions of that Nature. We allow
something to the Grecian Name, to the glory of Asia, and to our Ancient
Friendship. I therefore condemn you only in the advance of five years tribute
which you owe, together with the money expended in this War, and a certain Sum
to be employed in the affairs of the Province. I my self will appoint the
contribution of each City, and the time of payment; and take notice whoever
will not obey I shall treat them as Enemies.

Having said these words he Assessed the several Sums, sent the Rolls to the
Deputies, and appointed Commissioners for Collecting of the Moneys. Now they
being Poor and already very much in Debt, and besides sorely oppressed with the
quartering of Soldiers, were constrained to Mortgage to the Usurers, some their
Theaters, others their places for Excercises, others their Forts or Gates or
some Public Building; Thus great Sums of Money were brought in to Sylla, and
Asia groaned under its Calamities; for besides all this the Pirates kept the
Sea with such great Fleets, that they might almost compose so many perfect
Armies, with which they publicly pillaged the Sea Coasts. Mithridates sent
them first to spoil those places, the Dominion of which he was like to loose,
but they were extremely increased and grown formidable, not only to those that
sailed on the Sea, but likewise to the Ports, Castles and Maritime Cities. So
that Iassos, Samos, Clazomene and Samothracia were taken and sacked before
Sylla's face, and it is said they took out of the Temple of Samothrace, Riches
to the value of a thousand Talents. He would not relieve them, whether he
thought them unworthy because of their infidelity, or because he hastened his
return to Rome, by reason of the seditious, wherefore he passed into Greece,
and from thence into Italy, with the greatest part of his Army. We have writ
what he did there in the History of the Civil Wars, proceed we now to set forth
how the second War began between Mithridates and the Romans.

Murena whom Sylla had left with Fimbrias two Legions to settle the remaining
orders necessary in the province, sought only some occasion of war, out of a
Passion to obtain the Honor of Triumph, and Mithridates being returned into his
Kingdom made War upon the Colches, and the Bosphorans who had revolted against
him. As for the Colches they only demanded Mithridates Son for their King, and
having obtained it returned to their obedience. But the King having a suspicion
that what they had done was by his Sons solicitation, sent for him, fettered
him in chains of Gold, and soon after made him away, though he had served him
well in Asia against Fimbria. As for those of Bosphorus, Mithridates set forth
a Fleet and raised so powerful an Army, that such great preparations gave
occasion to believe they were not made against the Bosphorans but against the
Romans. For the King had not yet so absolutely quitted the possession of
Cappadocia to Ariobarzanes, but that it was with the reserve of some places. He
had moreover entertained a suspicion that Archelaus, when he was in Greece had
granted to Sylla conditions beyond what was reasonable which that Captain
perceiving was afraid, and fled to Murena for protection. He animated him so
far against Mithridates that he presently took the field to be beforehand with
him, and entering his Country by the way of Cappadocia, forraged as far as the
Gates of Comanes the greatest City of the Kingdom, Celebrated for a famous and
rich Temple, where having defeated some Horse of the Kings, the Deputies on his
behalf came to him, remonstrating that by this Action he broke the Articles of
Peace, to which he answered that he saw no Articles, and indeed, Sylla had
drawn no writings, but only contenting himself with the Execution of the
conditions, was departed out of the Province. Murena giving only this short
Answer, pursued his Enterprise, and after having pillaged even the Consecrated
Moneys, returned to take his Winter quarters in Cappadocia. The King sent
Ambassadors to the Senate, and to Sylla to make his complaint of Murena, who in
the mean time forbore not crossing the River Halis (though very broad, and at
that time extremely swollen by reason of the Rains) and sacking four hundred
Villages of Mithridates Kingdom, without receiving any opposition from the
King, who expected the return of his Ambassadors. So that the Roman General
returned into Phrygia* and Galatia with a great booty, where Callidius sent
from Rome because of Mithridates complaints, came to meet him. He showed him no
Ordinance of the Senate, but only told him before a great company there present
that the Senate forbad him to do any injury to a King, with whom they had
contracted a Peace, and after having said those words in public, he
entertained him a good while in private. Murena forbore nothing of his former
Violence, but on the contrary presently caused his Army to March toward the
Frontiers of Mithridates Kingdom, who seeing now it must of force come to an
open War, commanded Gordius to possess himself of the Neighboring Villages.
That General forthwith made provisions of beasts for burden and munitions, and
gathering together all the Country, and as many Soldiers as he could, went and
encamped on the River, directly opposite to Murena, but neither one nor the
other put themselves in a posture to fight, till such time as the King being
come with a more powerful Army, there happened a great Engagement: For the King
having passed the River, notwithstanding all the Resistance of the Enemy forced
Murena to give ground, and to secure himself on an eminence naturally
fortified, from whence taking the byways of the Mountains, he recovered
Phrygia, after having lost many of his people, either in the flight or in the
Battle. The Fame of this great Victory, gained so suddenly, and as it were in
passing, being soon spread abroad in all places drew Multitudes of people to
Mithridates. And he to return his thanks to Jupiter Militaris, after having
driven out all the Garrisons Murena had left in Cappadocia, sacrificed to him
according to the custom of the Country. The place where this Sacrifice is made
is on a high mountain, on the top of which they raise a mighty pile for the
Victims, to which the Kings bring the first Wood, then they raise another
smaller Pile on the top of that, whereon they pour Milk, Honey, Oil and Wine,
and all sorts of Odoriferous Drugs. At the foot of the Pile is a Feast made for
the Assistants, like to those the Kings of Persia were accustomed to make at
Pasargada, and after all they set fire to the Pile, the flame of which rises so
high that it is ordinarily seen a An hundred twenty and five Miles.
thousand Furlongs, and the fire so heats the Air thereabout, that the place is
not to be approached for some days after. Thus Sacrificed Mithridates. But
Sylla judging that it was a blemish to his Honor to have the War still
continued against a King, with whom he himself had concluded a peace, prevailed
to have Gabinius sent to Murena, to order him positively to give over this War,
and to reconcile Mithridates with Ariobarzanes. They met therefore together in
a place where Mithridates delivered to Ariobarzanes in Hostage one of his Sons
of four years old, to the end, that part of Cappadocia where he had placed
Garrisons, might remain to him with some augmentation, and that being agreed he
made a feast for all the company, where he proposed a reward for those who
excelled either in Drinking, Eating, Jesting or Singing, and in short all sorts
of Divertisements, from which only Gabinius excused himself. Thus ended the
second War between Mithridates and the Romans, after having lasted three years.
Sometime after the King finding himself at peace, subdued the Bosphorans. And
made King of that Nation one of his Sons called Machares. After that, he
invaded the Acheans, which are on the Frontiers of the Colches, and who as some
say, are the remainder of those who returning from the Wars of Troy, were
brought by chance to that Coast. But having lost one half of his Army partly by
Ambushes, partly in set battle, or by the Extremity of the Cold, he returned
into his Kingdom, from whence he sent Ambassadors to Rome, to ratify by
writing the Articles of the Peace. Ariobarzanes for his part whether of his own
motion, or set on by some other, sent likewise to complain against him, that he
had not restored to him Cappadocia, for Mithridates still withheld a good part.
Whereupon Sylla ordained that Mithridates should absolutely quit Cappadocia,
which he did, and then again sent Ambassadors to Rome to demand a Ratification
of the Treaties. But because Sylla being dead, no person would move it in the
Senate, he underhand engaged his Son in Law Tigranes to make an irruption into
Cappadocia, as done of himself, which yet was not so closely carried, but the
Romans had knowledge of it. The Armenian however entered violently into
Cappadocia, and carried away into Armenia three hundred thousand men whom he
employed with other Country People in Tilling the Land. He had not yet taken
the title of Armenia, but now he assumed it, and caused Tigranocerta to be
called by his own Name, that is to say the City of Tigranes, these things
passed in Asia.

Sertorius having siesed upon Spain, not only made an insurrection in that
Province, but among all the Neighboring People, against the Romans, and
composed a kind of Senate of those of his Faction; of the Number of his
Senators, there were two of the name of Lucius, the one Manius the other
Fanius, who gave advice to Mithridates, that if he he made an Alliance with
Sertorius, he might soon become Master of the greatest part of Asia, and the
Nations thereunto confining. The King suffered himself to be persuaded, and
sent Ambassadors to him, whom he caused to be brought into his Senate to
receive Audience, and after having spoken advantagiously of his own glory, the
regulation of which had reached even to the Kingdom of Pontus, so that he
beheld himself in a Condition to make War upon the Romans, both in the East and
West, he made an Alliance with Mithridates in favor of which he gave him in
Asia, Bithynia, Paphlagonia, Cappadocia, and Galatia, and sent M. Varius to be
his General, and the two Lucii to serve him as Counselors. And indeed they
counseled him to undertake this third War, wherein he lost all his Empire,
Sertorius being dead in Spain, and the Romans having sent against him two
Generals, first Lucullus, who commanded the fleet under Sylla, and after him
Pompey under whose Conduct all the Estates of Mithridates fell under the Roman
Power, and with them all the Neighboring Nations as far as Euphrates, Pompey
taking from this way opportunity to reduce them. Mithridates then who had
already made trial of the Roman Arms, and hoped for no favor, began this War,
with great Gaiety and Courage, laboring might and main in his preparations, as
one resolved to overcome or perish. He employed the rest of that Summer, and
all Winter in cutting down Materials, and building of Shipping, and forging of
Arms, and sent into his Sea Ports two Millions of Mina's of An uncertain
measure.
Wheat; besides his old Troops he had presently great Numbers of Auxiliaries.
Those he raised in Asia, were composed of Chalybes, Armenians, Scythians,
Taurians, Achaeans, Heniochiens, Leucosyrians and those people inhabiting on
the Banks of the River Thermodoom called Amazones. Those he leavied in Europe
were Sarmatians, Basilides, Jaziges, Coralles, of all the People of Thrace,
near the River Ister, and the Mountains Rhodope and Haemus, and likewise the
Basternes the most Valiant Nation of all. Thus comprizing the Europeans, his
whole force was found to amount to one hundred and forty thousand Foot, and
sixteen thousand Horse, besides Multitudes of Pioneers, Sutlers, and Merchants
that followed the Army: Spring being come he took a review of his Fleet,
sacrificed to Jupiter Militaris according to Custom, and caused to be cast into
the Sea a set of white Horses Harnassed, as an offering to Neptune, and after
all that marched into Paphlagonia with his Forces, under the command of Taxiles
and Eumocrates his Lieutenant Generals; being arrived there, he made an Oration
to his Army, speaking proudly of his Predecessors and of himself, how from a
little Kingdom he had made it a mighty Empire, without ever having been
overcome by the Romans, where himself was in Person. In conclusion he declared
against their unsatiable and unlimitted ambition, which had even reduced Italy
it self, their Native Country to Slavery. Then he began to speak of their
Infidelity toward him, refusing to ratify the Peace by writing, that they
might be at liberty upon the first opportunity to renew the War; and then after
having laid down the reasons that induced him to the War, he began to talk
wonders of his own prepaparations, and to speak with contempt of the Roman
affairs, whom Sertorius overpressed in Spain, and which in Italy were become
deplorable by domestic Seditions. It Is for these reasons, said he, that though
the Pirates have so long reigned at Sea, they have not been able to take any
Course with them, for they have no Allies that assist them, nor no Subjects but
those they keep in awe by force of Arms. See you not here said he (pointing to
the two Lucii) their most considerable Citizens, who have declared themselves
Enemies of their Country to make an Alliance with us. Having encouraged his
Army by these words, he made an Irruption into Bithynia, which Nicomedes lately
deceased without Issue had given by will to the Roman people. Cotta was at
present Governor, but being a heartless Man he fled to Chalcedon with all his
Forces. Thus Bithynia fell once more under the power of Mithridates, the Romans
being all retired with Cotta to Chalcedon. The King advancing to assault that
City, Cotta who was nothing of a Soldier durst not come to an encounter with
him, but his Admiral called Nudus, drew into the field with one half of the
Army, and posted himself in an advantageous place; yet he was driven thence,
and forced to fly toward one of the Gates of the City, where every one
pressing to enter, the Enemies that pursued them, threw no dart in vain upon a
Multitude so crowded together, those which guarded the Walls being in fear for
themselves, let down the Portcullis, and drawing up Nudus and some other
Officers by ropes, left the rest to mercy, who were slain in the midst, between
Friends and Enemies, stretching out their hands in vain to one and the other.
Mithridates thinking it best to pursue his good fortune, caused his Fleet the
same day to come about to the mouth of the Port, and having broken the Iron
Chain, that crossed it, burnt four of the Enemies Ships, and Towed out the
rest, about sixty in Number, at their Sterns, whilst neither Nudus nor Cotta
endeavored to prevent them, not daring to stir out of the Circuit of their
Walls. There died three thousand Romans amongst whom was L. Manlius a Senator,
Mithridates lost only twenty Soldiers of his Basternes, who were most forward
in the assault of the Port.

Lucius Lucullus sent to this War, brought with him one Legion from the City,
to which those two of Fimbria's, and two others being joined, so that he might
have about thirty thousand Foot, and sixteen hundred Horse, he went and
encamped near Mithridates, who besieged Cysica, where having understood by the
Runaway's that the King had about three hundred thousand Men, and that what
Provisions he had were partly brought by Sea, and the remainder by those that
went out on Forage, he turned himself to his people, and said he would soon
have his Enemies at discretion, bidding them remember what he now told them. He
observed after this a mountain very proper to encamp on, of which if he could
possess himself he might have abundance of Victuals, and on the contrary the
Enemy would want. Wherefore he designed to post himself there, thinking it of
infinite importance to overcome without danger. There was only one very narrow
avenue to it, of which Mithridates was siesed and had placed there a strong
guard, according to the advice of Taxiles, and his other Captains, but Lucius
Manius, who had been Arbitrator of the Alliance betwixt Mithridates and
Sertorius after the last was dead, sent privately a man to Lucullus, and having
got his word for himself persuaded the King to let the Romans pass, and incamp
where they pleased, because Fimbria's Legions who had fought under Sertorius
had a design to yield themselves to him, and would do it in few days, and that
there was no need of the expense of blood or sweat, when they might vanquish
without fighting. Whereupon Mithridates doubting nothing, accorded very
imprudently to this advice, suffering the Romans to pass in all security by the
strait, and fortify against himself a high mountain, of which being once
Masters, provisions might freely be brought to them from behind, whilst a Lake,
Mountains and Rivers hindering the bringing of any by Land to Mithridates, it
soon began to grow scarce; besides he had no way left to make a retreat by, nor
could he by force draw Lucullus from his post, having let go his advantage, and
to all this Winter approached, when no more Provision could come by Sea. Now
Lucullus remembered his friends of the promise he had made them, showing them
the thing almost done. Not but that Mithridates possibly might, having such a
Multitude of Men, have forced his passage through the midst of his Enemies: but
he chose rather to employ his power against Cysica, believing that the taking
of that City would prove a remedy both against the difficulty of the way out,
and the scarcity of Provision; And because his Army was so vastly numerous he
undertook at the same time all manner of ways to storm it. He enclosed the Port
where Ships were with a double Wall, drew Lines of Circumvallation about the
rest of the City, raised a great Number of Platforms, Built Towers of Wood, and
Batteries covered with Testudoes and other Engines, of which one which was the
greatest was called Hellepolis, one hundred Cubits large, on which was a tower
furnished with instruments to cast stones, and darts of all sorts. He likewise
drew up close to the Port, two Galleys joined together, which bore a tower from
which they might lay a bridge to the wall. Things thus prepared he caused three
thousand Cysicenian prisoners, to be embarked upon Vessels, and sent under the
walls, who when they came near, stretched forth their hands to their fellow
Citizens, beseeching them to have compassion of them in the danger wherein they
were. But Pisistratus Governor of the place caused them to be told from the
wall, that being now reduced under another power, they ought to resolve with
themselves, and with constancy undergo their misfortune. This way not
succeeding, Mithridates caused to advance toward the wall, the Engine built on
the two Galleys, and having presently let fall the Bridge; four Soldiers leaped
upon it and gained the wall. The Cysicenians surprised at this Novelty, seemed
at first to give a little ground, but seeing no more hastened to follow them,
they took heart, and made those four leap from the top to the bottom. Then
pouring pitch on the Galleys, and casting fire on it, they forced the besiegers
to retire; and get off their Engine. Thus the assault from the Seaward proved
unsuccessful. The same day a third attempt was made, they brought at the same
time, all the Batteries up to the Wall on the Land side, but the inhabitants
bravely defended themselves running from side to side, and from one place to
another, so wherever the Assault was most violent, they crashed in pieces the
Engines with great Stones which they let fall upon them, or turned off their
blow with Cords, wherewith they entangled them, or rendered them ineffectual by
placing before them Sacks of Wool hung over the wall, quenching their flaming
Darts with Water and Vinegar, and breaking off the force of the others by
placing before them bundles of Cloths, and Coverlids. In short, they put in
practice all that the wit of Man could invent to defend themselves; yet all the
pains they took could not prevent one part of the Wall, to which the besiegers
had applied fire, from falling before night, but the fury of the flame being
then so great that they durst not attempt to enter, and the besieged the same
night built up another Rampart from which they defended themselves, till such
time as there arose a mighty tempest, which* utterly broke to pieces all the
Kings Engines, and made them useless. It Is said that Jupiter gave this City in
Dower to Proserpina, whom the Cysicenians adore above all other Divinities, and
that during the siege, her Feast day on which they used to Sacrifice to her a
Black Cow being come, and they having none of that hair had made one of Paste
to offer in Sacrifice to her, when behold at the same time a Black Cow coming
from the Sea, and cutting through the waters, passed over the booms that were
drawn cross the Port, and entering into it, ran through the City directly to the
Temple, and stopped before the Altar, on which the Inhabitants sacrificed it with
hopes of Relief. Mithridates Friends upon this, advised him to raise his siege
from before this Sacred City, but he would not be moved. He got up to Mount
Dindymus which is above the City, from whence he caused to be continued a
Terrass or Platform directly to the Walls, upon which he made Towers to be
erected, he likewise wrought hard to undermine the Walls, and having many
useless Horses, some too lean for want of Forage, and others lame for want of
Shoo's, he sent them back to Bithynia, Lucullus pursued them, and overtaking
them at a passage of the River Rhyndace made a great slaughter, took fifteen
thousand Prisoners, six thousand Horses for Service, and a great Number of
Beasts for Burden. Whilst these things passed at Cisica, Eumachus one of
Mithridates Generals making inroads into Phrygia, with a flying Army, slew a
great Number of Romans with their Wives and Children, subdued the Pisidians the
Isaurians and Cilicia, till such time as Deiotarus one of the Tetrarchs of
Galatia drawing into the Field to pursue him, at last overtook him, defeated
him, and slew a great quantity of his people. Mean while Winter being come,
Mithridates found himself deprived of those few Provisions that came by Sea, so
that Famine surprised his Army, some dyed, and others lived on dead Carkases,
after the manner of the Barbarians, others again feeding on nothing but Herbs,
contracted mortal distempers, besides the stink of the Corpse that lay in the
Fields unburied brought the Plague amongst them. Yet for all this Mithridates
courage failed not, for he hoped at last to take the City by the Terrass he was
raising from Mount Dindymus. But when the Inhabitants had undermined that and
burnt all his Engines, and that knowing his Soldiers were weakened by Famine,
they began to vex him with continual Sallies, he resolved to raise his Siege,
he therefore embarked by night to go with his Fleet to Para, and his Land Army
took their march toward Lampsacus, but because the River Aesopus was more
swollen then ordinary, Lucullus overtook them at the Passage, slew a great
Number, and pursued the rest as far as that Town, to which having laid Siege,
Mithridates sent Shipping thither, and brought away both Soldiers and
Inhabitants by Sea. After this he left in one part of his Ships, ten thousand
chosen men, commanded by that Varius whom Sertorius had sent to him. Alexander
the Paphlagonian, and Dionysius the Eunuch, and himself went toward Nicomedia,
with the rest which where the greatest Number, but the greatest part of the one
and other, perished by storm: Thus the Cisicenians so powerfully assailed saved
themselves, by their own Valor, and by the assistance of Lucullus, who starved
the Enemies Army. Wherefore to this day they exhibit solemn Plays in memory of
him which they call Lucullians.

Asia, to his Lieutenants, of whom one called Triarius made a descent at
Apamia, forced the City, and made a horrible Slaughter of the Inhabitants who
had taken Sanctuary in the Temples. The other called Barba made himself Master
of Nicea, and Prutiade seated on a Mountain, both deserted by Mithridates
Garrisons, and then keeping the Sea, went and took thirteen of the Enemies
Ships out of the very port of the Achaeans. And having met near Lemnos with
Varius, Alexander and Dionysius in a desert Isle, where is to be seen the Altar
of Philoctetes, tied about with a brazen Serpent, a Bow and a Corslet, tied
about with Bands, which are the Monuments of his misfortune. He made directly
toward them, without knowing who they were, but seeing they stood firm, he
sent off only two Ships to draw the Enemies to a Battle, who would not quit the
road, but were content to defend themselves from the Land, he therefore sent
other Ships about, who putting ashore some foot on the other side of the
Island, he by that means forced them again to betake themselves to their Ships,
but they not daring to venture out to Sea, for fear of Lucullus, but coasting
along, were beaten both by Sea and Land, with a great slaughter, and a strange
discomfiture. The three Commanders were taken, hid in a Cave. Dionysius having
drunk poison he had with him dyed instantly. Varius was slain by Lucullus his
order, who thought it improper to lead a Roman Senator in Triumph, but
Alexander was reserved for that Pomp. This done Lucullus gave advice to the
Senate by letter, which he sent with Laurels, according to the custom of the
Victorious, and took his march toward Bithynia. As for Mithriddates as he
sailed toward Pontus, he was twice battered by Tempest, whereby he lost ten
thousand men, and sixty Ships, the rest being dispersed as the Wind carried
them, and he, the Admiral being split, contrary to the advice of his Friends,
embarked in a Pirates Vessel, which brought him to Sinope, from thence he went
to Amisa, and there dispatched away into Armenia to his Son in law Tigranes and
into Bosphorus to Machares, his Son, to leavy speedily Auxiliary Forces; and
deputed Diocles to the Neighboring Scythians with presents and a great Sum of
Money. But he went both with Presents and Money, and surrendered himself to
Lucullus; who in the mean time pursuing his Victory still, advanced with his
Army, subduing and plundring all as he went* so that being entered into a rich
Country, and which for a long time had known no War, he found every thing so
extraordinary cheap, that a Slave was sold for four Drachms, an Ox for a
Dram, and Goats, Sheep and Cloths at a proportionable rate. At length he
besieged Amisa and Eupatoria, which Mithridates caused to be built near Amisa,
calling it by his own Name, and designing it for the residence of the Kings. He
assaulted it with Towers, Terrasses, and Mines so vast, that they oftimes
fought underground, besides the besieged having met with their Works, and
opened them from the City side, did with Hives of Bees drive against the
Laborers, Bears, and other Wild Beasts* But yet he found more difficulty at
the siege of Amisa, for the Inhabitants defended themselves gallantly, making
frequent Sallies, and provoking the Besiegers to fight man to man. Besides
Mithridates supplied them with as much Provision, Arms and Soldiers as he
pleased, which he sent from Cabires, where he spent the Winter, in gathering
together another Army, which he soon found to amount to forty thousand foot and
four thousand Horse. About the beginning of the Spring Lucullus took the Field,
and took up toward the Mountains to march against the King, who to hinder the
Consuls passage had placed there very good Troops, with orders to give him
notice by fires of whatever passed. They were commanded by Phoenix, a man of
reputation, and of the Blood Royal, who soon gave the Signal of Lucullus coming
according to appointment, but went and deliveerd up himself and his Forces to
him, so that having securely passed the Mountains he descended to Cabires,
where being defeated in a Battle of the Horse, he again recovered the Mountain,
Pompey Colonel of his Cavalry was wounded and brought before the King, who
asking him what he would do for him, if he gave him his life. Much (said he)
provided you become a Friend to Lucullus, but as long as you are his Enemy, I
have nothing to say. Upon this answer the Barbarians would have killed him: but
the King prevented them saying he would never injure Valor forsaken by
Fortune. After this he several times drew up his Army in Battle in the Plain,
and seeing that Lucullus would not descend, he observed on all sides how he
might gain the Mountain. Mean while a certain Scythian called Olcaba, who had
sometime before fled out of the Kings Army to Lucullus, and had saved a great
part of his Forces in the last Battle of the Horse, and therefore eat at the
Generals Table, and was of his Counsel, and had knowledge of his secrets, came
to his Tent, as he reposed in the heat of the day, and would needs enter,
having no Arms about him, but a little Dagger which he usually wore; But when
the Guards stopped him he grew angry telling them that there was a necessity to
wake Lucullus, but they told him again, that nothing was more necessary for
Lucullus as life. Whereupon he mounted on horseback, and went and surrendered
himself to Mithridates, whether it were that he believed himself suspected, or
that he was angry at the injury he imagined he had received, he presently
discovered to the King another Scythian called Sobadacus, who being arrested,
was accused of a design of going over to Lucullus, who stayed still on the
Mountain; for he would not descend into the plain, because the Enemies were
stronger in Horse, so that seeing no other way to go to Mithridates he found in
a Cave a Huntsman, who knew all the ways, under whose Conduct he came, by
unknown passages just over the head of Mithridates, from whence he descended,
and without entering the plain where the Enemies Horse lay, he went and pitched
his Camp, behind a certain Channel full of Water; being there encamped he would
soon have been in want of Provision; but he sent for Corn as far as Cappadocia,
and was continually skirmishing with the Enemy, till Mithridates one day, as
those of his party fled issuing out of his Camp, ran to meet them, and after
having reviled them with reproachful words, forced them to turn head again,
which struck such a terror into the Romans that they fled, and all in a breath
run up to the Mountain, continuing their flight a long time after the Kings
party had given over the chase of them, for every one took the companion of his
flight for an Enemy, so much had fear distracted them. Mithridates puffed up with
this success sent through all the Territories under his Dominion, news of that
Victory, and drew off the greatest and best part of his Horse, giving them
Order to Ransack Lucullus his Forragers, as they brought Corn from Cappadocia,
hoping to reduce him to as great necessity of Victuals as himself had been at
Cysica. And indeed it was a plausible Design to cut of Lucullus Provisions
which could be brought to him from no other part but Cappadocia, but the Kings
Horsemen meeting with the Vanguard of the Forragers in certain straits, where
their Horses could hardly do any service, had not the patience to stay till
they were come into the open plain. The Romans presently put themselves into
order, and favored as they were by the advantage of the place, killed a great
many of their Enemies, drove others down the Precipices, and put all the rest
to the Rout. Some saved themselves by night in the Camp, and believing they
only were escaped made the noise of this defeat, though truly it were great,
much greater then indeed it was. And because this news came sooner to
Mithridates then to Lucullus, the King judging that after the loss of his
Cavalry, the Enemy would not fail to fall upon him, grew fearful, and disposed
himself to remove thence, of which at the same instant he gave notice to his
friends, that were in his Tent; But they without staying till he published the
march, sent every one out of the Camp before day, his Equipage, with such have
that at the Gate the Baggage-horses overthrew one another. This being observed
by the Soldiers who knew those that led the Horses, their fear increased their
suspicion, and the whole Army thinking themselves wronged, that they had not
all notice of it, in a fury flew to the Palisade, broke it down, and spread
themselves in disorder through the Plain, every one flying what way he thought
best, notwithstanding all their Generals and Officers could do to prevent it.
The King himself could not appease this Tumult and Rage; for when he perceived
it, he went out of his Tent to say something, but not being listened to by any
one, he threw himself on the ground in the midst of the crowd, from whence
being taken up, and set on Horseback, he fled by the way of the Mountains, with
very few in his Train. Lucullus having intelligence of the Victory of the
Forragers, and seeing the flight of his Enemies, sent the greatest part of his
Horse to give them chase, and encompassed with his Foot those who remained in
the Camp prepared to receive the assault. He had before strictly forbid the
Soldiers to plunder, till the Enemy were utterly defeated: but when they beheld
so many Vessels of Gold and Silver, and so much costly Raiment, they quite
forgot his Orders. Mithridates himself had been taken, had they not cut open,
and straw'd abroad some Males full of Gold, wherewith a Mule was laden, which
while those that followed him, busied themselves to gather up; he escaped to
Comanes, from whence he went with two thousand Horse toward Tigranes, who
would not see him, but gave him some Castles for his abode, and caused him to
be treated and served like a King. Insomuch, that despairing of ever entering
again into his Kingdom, he sent an Eunuch, called Bacchus, to his Seraglio, to
put to death in any manner whatever, his Sisters, his Wives, and his
Concubines. They became their own Executioners, and either by Steel, Poison or
a Halter ended their Lives, of which the Governors of the Garrisons left by
Mithridates having advice, surrendered (all but a very few) to Lucullus.

Lucullus after this seeing himself Master of the Province, went about to
Amastris, Heraclea, and all the rest except Sinope, which for some time
generously defended it self, and got the better of him in a Sea f^ight. But
when the Inhabitants saw they must be taken, they set on fire their largest
Ships, and going on board their lighter Vessels, fled. Sometime after he
restored them their liberty, being thereto advertised by his Dream. It Is said
that Autolycus the Companion of Hercules, in his expedition against the
Amazones being driven by tempest into Sinope, reigned there, and that after his
death, his Statue was reverenced as a God, and uttered Oracles. Those of Sinope
willing to have their God along with them, when they fled, wrapped it up in
Linen, and tied it round with Cords, to carry it away the more secretly, but
though Lucullus knew nothing of it, nor no one living had given him notice, he
thought he saw that God calling to him, and on the morrow as some passed by
him, carrying that Statua so bound up, he commanded them to unfold the Linen
that covered it, and beheld the same Image that had appeared to him. So this
Dream proved advantageous to the Citizens of Sinope. Lucullus likewise
restored to liberty the Citizens of Amisa, who like the others had escaped away
by Sea. He had heard tell that in the same time when the Athenians were Masters
of the Sea, they had sent thither a Colony, and established a Government of
which the people had the Administration, that afterward that City falling
under the Dominion of the Kings of Persia, Alexander first restored them to
that liberty which afterward the Kings of Pontus had deprived them of.
Whereupon he took pity on them and imitating the goodness of Alexander, and in
favor of the Attick people, he made it free, and gave order that the
Inhabitants as well of Amisa as Sinope, should forthwith return to their
dwellings. After these two places were thus taken by Lucullus, and restored to
liberty, one of the Sons of Mithridates, called Machares King of the Bosphorus,
having sent him a Crown of Gold, he received him into the friendship of the
people of Rome. Afterward he dispatched Messengers to Tigranes, to demand
Mithridates, and then marching toward Asia, which still owed one fourth part
of their fruits of the fine adjudged by Sylla, he imposed a Tribute upon them
according to the Value of their houses, and the number of their Slaves, withal
sacraficing to the Gods of Victory, as if his Enemies had been already totally
overcome. The Sacrifices performed, he marched forward with two chosen Legions,
and five hundred Horse, to make War upon Tigranes, because he would not deliver
up Mithridates to him. As soon as his Army had passed the Euphrates he went on
without doing any injury to the Barbarians, save only making them pay
contribution, for the people of these Countries were Enemies to War, and would
not engage themselves in the differences between Tigranes and Lucullus. No one
durst give advice to Tigranes of Lucullus design, for one unhappy man that
adventured but to speak of it, was hanged up as a disturber of the public
Peace, but at last when he saw he came on, he sent Mithrobarzanes before with
two thousand Horse, to oppose his march, and gave orders to Manceus to make
have to Tigranocerta to defend that place. This King (as we have said before)
had caused this City to be built for the Glory of his Name, and to the intent
that he might people it with Persons of Quality and Condition, had by Edict
declared that all movables were not brought thither, should be confiscated.
The Walls were fifty Cubits high, at the foot of which there were Stables quite
round. He had likewise in the Suburbs built a most stately Palace, with
magnificent Gardens, and a great number of Channels full of Fish, with Parks
for Beasts, and some distance from thence a strong and beautiful Citadel: All
these things he committed to Manceus Guards, whilst he on all sides levied
Forces to compose an Army. Mean while Lucullus meeting with Mithrobarzanes,
soon defeated him, and gave him chase; and Sextilius having shut up Manceus in
Tigranocerta, pillaged the Royal Palace without the Walls, besieged the City,
planted his Batteries, and set the Miners to work. Whilst Sextilius was busied
at this siege, Tigranes had gathered together two hundred and fifty thousand
Foot, and fifty thousand Horse; about six thousand of which he sent to
Tigranocerta, who opening a passage through the midst of the Roman Army,
rescued from thence the Kings Concubines, and carried them away with them. For
his part he marched against Lucullus, with the rest of his Forces, where
Mithridates came to him, and advised him not to come to a set battle with the
Romans, but to keep the Field with his Horse, and wast all the Country round
about their Army: so that, if possible he might serve him in the same manner,
as Lucullus had done his Army before Cysica, and destroy them without fighting.
But the Barbarian laughing at this advice, continued his March always in order
of Battle, and seeing the small number of the Romans, said in a Jeer: If they
be Ambassadors, they are a great many, but if they be Enemies they are very
few. Lucullus having taken notice of a Hill behind Tigranes Army, gave order to
his Cavalry to go charge the Enemy in Front, and to betake themselves to
flight, as soon as they had drawn them on to a Battle, to the end, the
Barbarians might break their Ranks to pursue them, whilst he with the Infantry,
taking a compass, went and gained the Hill, without being perceived by the
Enemy: When he saw them scattered and in disorder, in chase of his Horse, as if
they had already been victorious; and their Baggage remaining at the foot of
the Hill, he crying out the Victory is ours fellow Soldiers, went down, and
first of all charged upon the Train and Baggage Horses, who forthwith betaking
themselves to flight, pressed upon the Foot, and the Foot did the like upon the
Horse; so that the whole Army was immediately in a rout; for on one side the
Roman Horse turning head against those, who had separated themselves from the
main Body to pursue them, cut them in pieces; and on the other side, the
Baggage Horses, as if they had been thrust forward, overthrew all they met
with; and the whole multitude pressing one upon another, by reason of their
great number, without knowing the reason of the disorder, the Romans made a
wonderful slaughter. Not a man stopped now to plunder, for Lucullus had expressly
forbid it, with severe threats on the transgressors. Wherefore trampling under
foot Collars and Chains of Gold, they followed the Massacre for the space of
Fifteen miles*
sixscore Furlongs, till night coming on, they returned back, and spoiled the
dead, by permission then given them by Lucullus. After this defeat, Manceus,
Governor of Tigranocerta, disarmed all the Mercenary Greek Soldiers in the
City, having entertained some suspicion of them: Wherefore they fearing to be
likewise made Prisoners, got them Clubs, and trooped together; so that they
parted not one from another, either marching or standing still. And when
Manceus came to charge them with some armed Barbarians, they wrapped their left
Arm in their Coats instead of Bucklers; and running desperately into the midst
of their Enemies, slew a great number, whose Arms they divided amongst them;
when they thought they had Arms enough to serve their turn, they went and
seized upon some Towers that flanked the Walls, from whence they called to the
besiegers, and helping them to mount upon the Wall, made them Masters of the
City. Thus Tigranocerta newly built, whither out of mere vanity Inhabitants
were forced to come form all parts, became a prize, and enriched the Army with
a most prodigious booty. Tigranes and Mithridates, in the mean time, gave
orders to set on foot another Army, of which Mithridates had the command,
because the other thought him more capable, being instructed by the experience
of so many losses; they sent likewise to demand assistance from the Parthians;
but Lucullus having likewise dispatched to that King, to request him to assist
him with his Forces, rather than the others, or at least to be but a looker on;
he in particular promised both parties, but kept his word neither with one nor
the other. There was no City but Mithridates set on work to forge Arms, nor
scarce a person in Armenia capable to bear them, but came and enrolled himself
in these new Levies. But he thought it not best to employ such a multitude, he
chose only seventy thousand Foot, and half as many Horse of the ablest Men, and
dismissed the rest: And after having distributed them into Companies and
Regiments, almost according to the Italian Discipline; he gave it in charge to
the old Pontick Soldiers to exercise them. They were no sooner in the Field,
but Lucullus appeared resolved to fight: but Mithridates kept firm upon an
Eminence, where he had posted himself with all his Foot; and the greatest part
of his Horse; and Tigranes being gone with the rest to charge the Romans, who
were forraging abroad was defeated, which gave liberty to the Romans, for the
future, to fetch Corn without any fear, to forage in the very face of
Mithridates, and to draw nearer to his Camp. At last the Kings were resolved to
block up Lucullus in the midst between them; to this end Tigranes took the
Field, but the dust discovering his March, the General, who knew their design,
drew off the flower of his Horse, with Orders to go as far as they could to
meet the Armenian, and to charge him before he could put his people in order.
Mean while he did all he could to draw Mithridates to a battle, he attempted
the making a Ditch round about the Hill, but he could not oblige. him to
descend, till Famine beginning to afflict both Armies, they all retreated
without doing any thing. Tigranes into the heart of Armenia, and Mithridates
into what was left him of the Kingdom of Pontus, with four thousand Men of his
own, and as many of Tigranes. Lucullus followed them in the Rear; but being
himself oppressed with want of Provision, he returned back again: and
Mithridates having made a swifter March than could be imagined, surprised
Fabius, whom the Consul had left to command there, and forced him to betake
himself to flight, after having five hundred of his Men slain; yet he returned
to the charge, strengthed with the assistance of all the Slaves that followed
the Army, to whom he gave their liberty, and held out the fight all that day,
till such time as Mithridates wounded with the blow of a Stone on the Knee, and
with an Arrow below the Eye, was suddenly carried out of the Battle. This
occasioned the passing away of some days without fighting, whether the Enemies
were in pain for the Kings health, or whether their wounds required rest.
However it were, the King was soon cured, being dressed with medicaments composed
of the Poison of Serpents, by the Agbares, Scythians by Nation, who for this
purpose always followed the Court. To Fabius succeeded Triarius, who brought a
new Army of Lucullus his Forces, with which he presently marched against
Mithridates; but as they were ready to engage, both sides were forced to part,
there arising such a furious Tempest, as had never being seen in the memory of
man; it threw down the Tents of both Camps, carried the Beasts of Burden out
of the way, and likewise took up some Soldiers and threw them among the
Precipices. Upon the Rumor of Lucullus his coming, Triarius desirous to do
some memorable action whilst he commanded, went about break of day to make an
assault upon Mithridates Out-guards. They sought a long time with equal
Fortune, but at last the King making an onset with the Wing in which he was,
began to overcome, broke the Romans and drove their infantry into a miry
Valley, where the Soldiers not able to stand upright, suffered themselves to be
killed without any resistance. After which pursuing his advantage he fell into
the Rear of the Cavalry, to whom he gave chase with much eagerness, when a
Roman Captain of an hundred m^n.
Centurion Galloping by his side as if he had been one of his Train, gave him a
great wound with his Sword in the thigh, for he was doubtful if he should have
struck him in the Reins he should not have pierced his Armor. The Roman was
presently cut in pieces by the Guards, and Mithridates carried into the Rear of
his Army. However they ceased not pursuing the Victory, which had been much
greater, had not those who were about the King, caused the retreat to be
sounded. This surprised those who followed the Chase, and troubled them
strangely; for they were fearful, left some misfortune were happened elsewere,
till such time as the thing being known, they came and gathered in Throngs
about the wounded King, in the midst of the Plain, where Timotheus his
Surgeon having stopped the blood, showed them him standing, as Alexander was
in the Indies shown to the Macedonians, who were in fear for his safety.
Mithridates himself would needs be dressed upon the Arlop of a Ship, to the end
every one might see him, where being somewhat recovered, he reproved those who
had caused the Retreat to be sounded, and the same day caused his Army to march
toward the Roman Camp, which they for fear had already deserted, there were
found among the dead, four and twenty Tribunes, and one hundred and fifty
Centurions, nor ever did the Romans in one only defeat loose so many Officers.
After this Victory, the King retired into Armenia called the less, carrying
along with him all Provisions that he could transport, and corrupting what he
left, left if Lucullus came into that Country, he should make use of them. At
the same time a certain Roman Senator called Attilius who for fear left process
should be made against him, had escaped to Mithridates* and had by him been
received with all possible demonstrations of friendship, was convict of a plot
against his person. Yet he would not out of respect to his former Dignity, let
him be put to the Torture, but was content to let him suffer an ordinary death:
but his accomplices were cruelly tormented, save only those of his freed man,
to whom he had communicated his design, whom the King let go because they had
only obeyed their Master. As for Lucullus he soon was come up to Mithridates,
and was now upon the point to engage with him, when the Proconsul of Asia sent
to proclaim through all the Province, that the Senate blamed Lucullus for
having spun out the War so long and therefore dismissed the Army, injoyning the
Soldiers not to stay any longer upon pain of confiscation of their Goods. The
news of this Ordinance being come to the Camp, most began to file off, there
remaining only with Lucullus some poor Wretches who having nothing to loose,
feared no confiscations. Thus Lucullus no more then those before him, could not
make an end of this War, for the Allies being revolted in Italy, and the City
afflicted with Famine, by reason that the Pirates were Masters of the Sea, it
was not thought proper to embroyl themselves in so great a War, till they were
delivered from the present Inconveniences.

Mithridates having advice hereof entered into Cappadocia, and began to Pompey,
and that he was come into Asia, they renewed the War against Mithridates,
giving that great Captain Commission to be their General. Wherefore what this
great man acted on the Sea before he bore Arms against Mithridates, making a
part of that expedition, and not relating to another History, I am of the mind
to make a Summary recital of it in the place. Mithridates at the beginning of
his first War against the Romans having made himself Master of Asia, because
Sylla was then employed in Greece about Affairs of importance, believing that
his Dominion there would be of no long durance, spoiled all that Country, and
continued all those Cruelties we have related. He likewise at the same time
sent forth Pirates who at first coasting up and down with a few small Barques,
only got some booty, but the War growing hot, they increased in Number, and
fitted out great Ships, and afterward finding a sweetness in the vastness of
their gain, whether the King were overcome, or whether he had made Peace, or
whether the were in flight, they continued their Robberies; for they said that
having lost their Goods, and abandoned their Countries by reason of the War,
necessity had driven them from the Land, to seek their Fortune for the future
by Sea. They elected among themselves Arch-pyrates, who commanded a certain
Number, as if it had been a lawful War. They assaulted weak Cities, and
sometimes very strong ones too, whose Walls they either scaled or threw down.
They pillaged them after they had taken them, carrying to their places of
retreat all the rich men they took, to make them pay their ransom, and giving
their Crimes honorable names they shook off the name of Pirates, and called
themselves Soldiers adventurers. They had likewise Artificers whom they kept in
Fetters, and continually stored up Wood, Iron, Brass, and other Materials. For
their vast booty had so heightened their courages, that preferring that kind of
life before any other, they imagined themselves Sovereigns, and Kings,
comparing their Power to that of Armies, and esteeming themselves invincible,
when ever they pleased to unite together, they built Ships and forged Arms
especially in Cilicia called the Rough, which was the common retreat of all
these Corsairs, or as we may saw the principal Seat of War. Not but that they
had in other places Castles and Forts in desert Islands and cunning Harbors,
but they usually retired to that Coast of Cilicia the Rough, which was
inaccessible, and bounded with Rocks reaching almost out of sight, and
therefore all the World commonly called them Cilicians. This mischief which was
begun in Cilicia infected likewise the Syrians, Ciprians, Pamphilians, Pontick
Nations, and almost all the Oriental people, who tired with the length of the
Mithridatick War, and choosing rather to do ill then suffer it, changed their
dwellings on Land for the Sea, so that in a short time they amounted to many
thousands, and not only become Masters of the Sea that wets the Oriental
Coasts, but spread themselves throughout all the Seas as far as the Pillars of
Hercules, for they defeated some Roman Pretors in Sea Fights, and among others
the Praetor of Sicily. No Ship durst appear about that Island, the very
Husbandman had abandoned the Fields, because of the continual descents they
made, which very much annoyed he Romans, for besides that they beheld their
Provinces pillaged, want of Corn brought a Famine into the City. Besides it
was not easy to defeat such great Forces, that spread themselves over all
parts both of the Sea and Land. Who were always ready either to fly or fight,
whilst none knew their Country or place of retreat, nor indeed had they any
residence or propriety, but what fell in their hands. Wherefore these
extraordinary kind of Enemies who gave themselves a dispensation against all
the Laws of War, of whom nothing clear or certain could be made out, were very
formidable, and few would have accepted a Commission for this War. For Murena
having undertaken these Pirates did nothing memorable, no more did after him
Servilius Isauricus. They were grown so bold as to Land upon the Coasts of
Brundusium and Tuscany.
Hetruria, from whence they carried away some Women of Quality whom they found
in the Country. And defeated two Bodies of an Army, whose Eagles they carried
away. The Romans no longer able to suffer these Losses and Affronts, by Decree
of the Senate, gave to Pompey the greatest man of that time Command of their
Armies for three Years, with Authority over all the Seas, as far as the Pillars
of Hercules, and within all the Maritime Provinces for Fifty Miles.
four hundred Furlongs from the Sea, and to Command all Kings, Governors and
Cities, to furnish him with necessaries. They permitted him likewise to make
new Leavies, both of men and Moneys, and in the mean time gave him an Army
composed of standing Legions, all the Ships they had, and six thousand Attick
Talents in ready Money. So difficult a thing they believed it to overcome so
many Naval Armies, to pursue them in so vast an extent of Seas, and to seek
them out in so many holes, having to do with Enemies, they could not get within
reach of except they pleased, and who were ready to fall on, when they were
least thought of. Nor indeed did ever any Roman General go to War with so large
a Commission as Pompey's. Soon after they furnished him with sixscore thousand
foot, four thousand Horse, and two hundred and seventy Ships, comprizing the
Brigantines, and for his Lieutenants, they gave him five and twenty Senators,
among whom he divided the Seas, giving them Horse and Foot and Shipping, with
the Ensigns of Praetor. Every Lieutenant had absolute power in the Quarter he
Commanded, and he like a King of Kings, went from one part to another, to
disperse his Orders, and to see that every one kept in his Post without
quitting it, or pursuing the Enemy far from it, if he could not gain the
Victory upon the place, to the end that there being always people in a
readiness in all places, to take up what others had not fully done, the Pirates
might find* no security in flying from place to place. After having disposed
things in this manner, he gave the Commission of Spain, and the Streit to Tib.
Nero and Manlius Torquatus jointly, of the Gaul.
Celtrick and Genoua.
Ligustique Sea, to Marius Pomponius; of Africa with Sardinia, Corsica and the
Circumadiacent Islands to Lentulus Marcellinus, and P. Attilius; of the Coast
of Italy from Sicily to Acarnania to L. Gellius and Cn. Lentulus; of the Ionian
Sea to Plotius Varus and Terentius Varro; of Peloponesus, Attica, Euboea,
Thessaly, Macedon and Boeotia to L. Cinna; of all the Aegaean Sea, and the
Hellespont to L. Cullius. Of Bithynia, Thrace the Propontick, and the mouth of
Pontus to L. Piso, of Lycia, Pamphilia; Cyprus and Phoenicia to Metellus Nepos.
Note, there were 25 Lieutenants, and here are Commissions but for 1. 3.
These were the Quarters he assigned every Lieutenant, where they were to
fight, and to give them their Chase; so that saving themselves from one, they
might fall into the hands of another, forbidding them to pursue beyond their
Bounds, for fear lest those long Chases might be a means to delay the War, for
his own part he flew (if one may so say) from one part to another, to see what
passed, and having in forty days gone the Circuit of the Western part of the
Sea, he returned to Rome from whence he went to Brundusium, where again taking
Shipping, and running over all those vast Oriental Seas, he brought every where
a dread of his Name, by the swiftness of his motion, the greatness of his Force
and Power, and the opinion had of a Captain of such high reputation. So that
the Pirates who as it was thought would have assaulted him, or at least would
have found ways to have made his Victory difficult, presently raised their
Siege, before those Towns they had blocked up, and out of the fear they had of
him, retired into their Forts, and sheltring places. Thus Pompey cleared the
Seas without fighting, and his Lieutenants every one in their Quarter took all
the Corsairs that haunted there. After this he went into Cilicia with a great
number of Soldiers and Workmen, and store of Engines, believing he should be
put to the assaulting after sundry manners those Forts built upon such high
Rocks. But the renown of his name alone and the vastness of his preparations
struck such a terror into the Pirates, that they believed they should make the
better composition if they yielded without fighting. Those who were in the two
largest Forts, called Crague and Anticrague were the first who submitted at
discretion, and after them all those who held the Mountains of Cilicia one
after another, yielded themselves with great quantities of Arms, either already
furnished, or else only begun in the Shops, besides a great number of Ships,
some half built, others ready to sail, with Copper, Iron, Canvas, Cordage, and
diverse others Materials, which they had gathered together for their use. There
were found also many Captives which they kept there, some for Ransom, others
to labor in their works. Pompey burnt all their unwrought Materials, carried
the Ships along with him and sent the Captives home* many of whom found that
their Funerals had been performed, their friends believing them dead. As for
the Pirates who appeared not to have engaged themselves in this kind of life,
but because they had lost their substance by the War, he assigned them for
their dwellings, Malle, Adane, Epiphania and such other Cities as were but
thinly inhabited in the upper Cilicia, some of them likewise he sent to Dima in
Achaia. Thus the War against the Pirates, which all Men thought would have been
long, was ended in a few days by Pompey. There were seventy two Ships taken,
three hundred yielded up, with sixscore Towers, Forts and others places of
retreat, and about ten thousand slain of those who stood out upon their Defense.

Rome, in acknowledgement of the great Service done by Pompey conferred on him
signal Honors. They gave him the Commission of the War against Mithridates,
continued to him the same Power to make Peace and War, and at his own
Arbitrament to declare Friends and Enemies to the People of Rome, those whom he
should think Worthy, and over and above all this made him Generalissimo of all
their Forces out of Italy. Never before had the People of Rome given so much
Power to one Man at once, which possibly was the Reason, why they called him
GREAT, for as to any thing else, the other Generals had before left but little
to do in this War. Pompey then having Assembled the Forces of Asia, went and
encamped on the Frontiers of Mithridates Estates, who had at present a very
gallant Army, composed of thirty thousand Foot, and three thousand Horse all
chosen Men, raised upon his own Lands for the defense of his Kingdom. Lucullus
had not long before spoiled all that Country, so that victuals were still
scarce, which made many of Mithridates Soldiers run into the Roman Army, and
though the King inflicted cruel punishment upon those, were surprised in the
attempt, throwing some headlong down the Rocks, squeezing out others eyes, and
burning some alive, so that fear kept many of them in their duty; yet did his
Army by little and little wast, by reason of the scarcity. Which occasioned his
sending Ambassadors to Pompey, to demand upon what conditions he might have
peace, to which the Roman answered; by delivering up the Runaways and yielding
himself at discretion. The King having reported this answer to the Revolters,
and seeing them terrified at it, swore he never would have peace with the
Romans, because of their cruelty, Nor would consent to any thing but what
should be for the Common good of those had done him Service. Whereupon Pompey
having laid a party of Horse in Ambush, sent the rest to skirmish with
Mithridates Camp, with Orders to give ground after the first charge, as if they
had been surprised with fear, till such time as having drawn the Enemy into the
Ambush they charged them both together. And indeed the Romans put them to the
Rout, and might possibly have entered the Camp in the Rear of those that fled,
if Mithridates fearing the disorder had not drawn out his Foot, and placed them
in Order before the Camp which forced them to a retreat. This was the first
Engagement of Horse between the two parties. At length the King oppressed for
want of provisions returned into the heart of his Kingdom, in hopes that the
Enemy could not subsist in that ruined Country, at least without much
inconveniency. But Pompey presently discamped, and bringing in provisions along
with him marched as far as the Eastern parts of the Kingdom where he caused a
Line to be drawn of (...).
one hundred and fifty furlongs in length fortified with many Forts, to enclose
the King and cut of his passage to fetch in Corn and Forage. Mithridates gave
no hindrance to this work, either out of fear or out of imprudence which
ordinarily precedes Calamity, and soon found himself once more reduced to such
want that he was forced to kill all the beasts of burden, to sustain his Army,
keeping only the Horses of Service. With infinite trouble he made a shift to
subsist thus for fifty days, and afterward with great silence made his escape
by night through difficult ways. On the morrow Pompey overtaking him fell upon
his Rearguard, but the King notwithstanding all the Counsel of Friends, would
not give Battle, but contenting himself to oppose the Romans, with some Horse
to keep him off, gained toward Evening, the Forests which served him for
Retreat. The next day he possessed himself of a Village fortified with Rocks on
all sides, to which there was but one Avenue in which he placed four Regiments
for Guard, directly opposite to which the Romans went and pitched their Camp,
that so the King might have no way to escape. On the morrow the two Armies
betook themselves to their Arms very early, and those which had the Guard on
one Party and the other, began the skirmish. Some of the Kings Horsemen
alighting from their Horses, without Command went to assist their Infantry, but
seeing a great party of the Roman Cavalry, come forward to the charge, they all
at once set a running toward the Camp to take their Horses, that they might
return to fight against the Romans on equal terms. But those who were still
above, and ready to descend in a posture of fighting, seeing these People run
with great cries and in disorder, and not knowing the reason, believing that
the Camp being taken on the other side, they fled; themselves likewise threw
down their Arms, and betook themselves to flight, and because the way was
narrow, the crowd was so great, that they overthrew, and tumbled one another
down the Precipices. Thus the Army of Mithridates was defeated by those who
going to assist their Companions without any Orders, occasioned the Rout. It
was an easiy Victory to Pompey, for he had nothing to do but to kill, or to
take Prisoners those unhappy disarmed wretches, engaged among the Rocks, there
were about ten thousand slain, the Camp was taken, and all Mithridates Baggage
and Munitions, who escaping himself behind his Camp accompanied only with his
Guards, found by chance some Mercenary Horse, and about three thousand Foot,
with whom with all speed he got to the Fort of Synorega where he had abundance
of Money. And having given both a largess, and a whole years Pay to the
Companions of his flight, he carried with him about six thousand talents,
taking his way toward the springs of Euphrates, that from thence he might get
to Colchis; he made such have that in four day march he passed the Euphrates,
where he stayed three days to refresh his Men, and Arm those other Troops he
had gathered together, he thence entered into the Country of Cotenea, which is a
Province of Armenia where he defeated the Coteneans and Iberians who would have
stopped his passage, and from thence gained the River Aspara. Some say that the
Asiatick Iberians, are descended from the European, that is to say, the
Spaniards, others on the contrary, say the Spaniatds came from these
Asiatiques, others again, that there is nothing common between the one and the
other but the name, there not being the least conformity either in their
Language or Manners. Now Mithridates having taken up his Winter quarters at A
City of Colchis built by Castor and Pollux, who are said to be Sons of Jupiter,
Dioscuri in Greek signifying Son of Jupiter.
Dioscuriade (which is a City said to be founded by the Argonautes and Castors
in the voyage they made) began no more to have mean thoughts, nor that savored
of the fugitive, he laid a design to march along the banks of the Euxine Sea,
and by the Scythians, neighboring on that Sea, and the Palus Moeotis, that so
he might this way arrive at Bosphorus, and after having driven thence his
ungrateful Son Machares, he might thence renew the War against the Romans, and
from Europe transport his Arms into Asia, which are only divided by a strait
which some believe to have taken its name from (...) Bous in Greek signifies
Bull or Cow.
because Io transformed to a Cow passed there flying from the jealous Juno.
Though these designs were extraordinary and scarce credible Mithridates
attempted to put them in Execution, he marched through all the Scythian
Nations, whether Enemies or unknown, partly by force and partly by sufferance:
He was still both respected and feared, fugitive and miserable though he were.
The Heniochians willingly gave him passage, but the Acheans endeavoring to
oppose his march he forced it. It is said that these people being cast by
Tempest on the Coasts of the Euxine Sea, as they returned from Troy, were ill
treated by the Barbarians, because they were Greeks, and that having demanded
some Ships from the Cities of their Country and being refused them, they
conceived such an indignation or rather such a rage, that all the Greeks they
could catch they made Sacrifice off, at first, without any distinction,
sometime after choosing out the fairest, and at last drawing them by lot. But
let thus much suffice concerning the Scythian Achaeans. Now Mithridates being
entered into the Country bordering upon the Palus Maeotis which is divided among
many petty Kings, there was not one but out of respect to the great reputation
of his actions, and of his Kingdom received him favorably, and gave him passage
through their Lands, they likewise made him presents, and he ordered things so,
that having drawn them into alliance with him, and given some of his Daughters
in Marriage to the most powerful of them there entered into his thoughts a
wonderful Expedition. He formed a design to March through Thrace and so through
Macedon, and thence by the way of Pannonia to pass the Alps, and enter into
Italy. Machares his Son understanding that in so short a time he had traversed
all those Salvage Nations, and those which are called the Straits of Scythia,
where never Man before him had passed, sent Ambassadors to make his excuse,
that out of fear he had made an accommodation with the Romans, but knowing him
implacable, he fled toward the Pontique Chersonesus, after having burnt all
the Ships he had to hinder his Father from pursuing him, but his Father sending
a Fleet after him he slew himself. As for Pompey he pursued Mithridates as far
as Colchis, but never imagining that he would take the way we have spoken of,
or that a fugitive Prince would attempt any thing Great, he went through all
that Province wellpleased to see the Country whither the Argonautes, and Castor
and Pollux, had made their Voyage; and particularly the Rock, where they say
Prometheus was chained on Mount Caucasus. There are in this Mountain several
springs, that cast forth Grains of Gold, but so small, that they are scarce
perceivable. Wherefore those of the Country, put into the streams skins covered
with wool, by which means they get the golden sands, which gather in the
fleece. And possibly that famous golden fleece of Aaete is nothing else. As
Pompey passed through the Country to see these rarities, all the neighboring
Nations came to wait on him, and be his Conductors. Only Oreses and Artocus
Kings of the Albanians, and Iberians laid an Ambush for him with seventy
thousand men near the River Cyrus, which discharges it self into the Caspian
Sea by nine Navigable Channels, and into which a Multitude of other Rivers
loose themselves among which the Araxes is the greatest of all. The Roman
General having intelligence hereof caused a Bridge to be laid over the River,
crossed it, and drove the Barbarians into the Wood, from whence they being
accustomed to fight sallying out as from a fortress, and when they were least
thought of renewing the charge, Pompey having placed People round about the
wood, set fire to it, and as they came forth gave them chase, till such time as
coming to give him presents and hostages, they served likewise as matter for
his Triumph. He found among the Hostages and Prisoners many Women who had
received no less wounds then the Men. They deemed them to be Amazons, whether
the Nation of the Amazons, who are not far off, had sent assistance to those
Kings, or whether the Barbarians by a general name call all Warlike Women
Amazons.

Pompey returning after this Victory marched his Army into Armenia Tigranes, as
the Allie of Mithridates taking the way of Artaxata the ordinary Residence of
those Kings. But Tigranes was not for War. He had had three Sons by Mithridates
Daughter, two of which he had slain with his own hand, one for turning his back
in the fight, and the other as he was hunting, because he happening to fall,
his Son had not vouchsafed to help him up, but on the contrary had taken off
his Diadem as he lay upon the ground, and put it on his own head. As for his
third Son Tigranes, because he seemed grieved for his fathers fall, he gave him
the Crown, yet he soon after raised War against Tigranes, but being defeated in
a Battle escaped to Phraates King of the Parthians, who had newly succeeded in
that Kingdom to his Father Syntricus. Upon Pompey's approach the Fugitive
Armenian by the Advice of his Host; who for his own particular sought the favor
of the General, came and submitted himself to the Romans in the posture of a
Suppliant, though he were Grandchild to Mithridates, being the Son of his
Daughter, but the reputation of the Justice, and uprightness of Pompey was so
great among the Barbarians, that Tigranes himself relying upon it, without so
much as sending a Herald before came to meet him, to put his cause into his
hands and to complain of his Son as to a Judge. Pompey having sent some
Officers before to receive the King in Honor of him, those who accompanied him
not thinking themselves in security, because he had not sent a Herald before
turned tail, but Tigranes continued on his way, and being come near unto
Pompey, paid him his respects as to his Superior, after the manner of the
Barbarians. Yet there are some say the Lictors brought him to Pompey by his
Command. However it were, he came, gave an account of his Actions, made a
present to Pompey of six thousand Talents, fifty drams to every Soldier, a
thousand to every Centurion, and ten thousand to every Tribune. Pompey pardoned
what was past, reconciled the Son with the Father, ordained that the Son should
enjoy as King the Province of Sophena and Gordiana, which are at this day
comprised under the name of Armenia the less, and adjudged to the Father the
rest of Armenia, on condition that he left it by succession to his Son, and
that he quitted to the Romans the Provinces he had conquered, and indeed he
quitted all Syria, from the Euphrates to the Sea, with part of Cilicia which he
had possessed himself of, after having driven out Antiochus the Pious. The two
Kings were not yet parted from the Roman Camp, when the Son by persuasion of
those Armenians, who for fear had abandoned his Father, when he came to meet
Pompey, designed an attempt on his life, but he was discovered and Arrested,
and being afterward Convicted* that though Prisoner as he was, he had
solicited the Parthians to make War upon the Romans, he was led in Triumph, and
afterward put to death in Prison. Pompey believing the War was ended built a
City in Armenia the less, in the same place where he had overcome Mithridates,
which because of his Victory he called Nicopolis. He gave likewise the Kingdom
of Cappadocia to Ariobarzanes and joined to it Sophena and Gordiana which he
had before given to the young Tigranes, and which at present belong to the
Province of Cappadocia. He gave him likewise Cabala a City of Cilicia, and some
others, so that Ariobarzanes left to a Son that succeeded him all that Kingdom,
subject to many changes, till the time of Augustus Caesar* under whose Empire
it was, with many others, reduced into the form of a Province. Pompey after
this passed Mount Taurus, and went to make War upon Antiochus Commagenes, to
whom he afterward granted Peace with the Title of Friend to the People of
Rome, he defeated likewise the Mede Darius, because he had assisted Antiochus,
or possibly Tigranes before him. Afterward he led his Army against Areta King
of the Arabian Nabathaean, and at length against the Jews, who were revolted
against their King Aristobulus, from whom he took by force their holy City
Jerusalem, besides all this he reduced under the Roman obedience without
fighting, and as it were only in passing by, the remainder of Cilicia, which
yet acknowledged not the Roman Empire, together with all the habitable Syria on
this side Euphrates, Coelosyria, Phoenicia, Palestine, Idumea, Ituria and all
the other members of Syria. Not that the Romans had any cause of complaint
against Antiochus the Pious, who was present at all this, endeavoring to obtain
the Kingdom of his Fathers by force of Prayers; but the Roman General believed
that having driven Tigranes out of these Provinces which he had conquered, they
by right of War belonged to the People of Rome. As he was settling necessary
Orders in his Conquests, there came to him Ambassadors on the behalf of
Phraates and Tigranes who began to make War on each other. The Armenian
demanded his assistance as his friend, and the Parthians desired to be received
into the friendship of the People of Rome, and he unwilling to enter upon a War
with the Parthians, without a particular Order of the Senate, sent
Commissioners who made Peace between the two Kings.

Mithridates had taken the whole compass of the Euxine Sea, and having siesed
upon Panticapea a Merchant City situate in Europe on the mouth of Pontus, very
near the Strait, he slew his Son Xiphares for a fault committed by his Mother,
in this manner. Mithridates had great quantity of Vessels of Brass bound about
with Iron, and filled with Silver, hid under ground in a certain Castle, the
Guard of which he had entrusted to stratonice one of his Concubines or of his
Wives. She only knew of it, and yet whilst the King was making the Circuit of
Pontus, she delivered to Pompey the Castle, and all the Treasures, only on this
condition, that if her Son Xiphares fell into his power he should save his life
in favor of his Mother, he took the Money, promised to preserve her Son, and
permitted him to retire whither he pleased with his Equipage. The King coming
to know this, slew Xiphares on the Seaside in the sight of his Mother, who
stood on the other side the Strait, and threw the body into the water, not
permitting it burial, so small account he made of paternal piety, that he might
revenge himself of the Mother, who had committed the fault. After this he sent
Ambassadors to Pompey who was in Syria, and knew not that he was yet living,
offering to pay Tribute to the Romans if he would leave him the Kingdom of his
Fathers, to which Pompey sending him word that he should come and meet him as
Tigranes had done, he answered that he could not do it, for that it would be
unbecoming the Person of Mithridates; yet offering to send his Sons, and some
of his Friends. Upon this answer he began to make new Leavies of all Men of all
sorts and conditions indifferently, to cause to be made great quantity of Arms,
Bows and Engines, without sparing any thing whatsoever, the very Oxen used to
Labor, being killed only for their Nerves, he imposed likewise new Tributes
from which the very poorest were not exempt, whilst those who had the charge of
Collecting them, committed a thousand Extortions unknown to Mithridates. For he
had got an Ulcer in his face, which so disfigured him that he let no person see
him but three Eunuchs that dressed him; being recovered he found all his Forces
in a condition to march being composed of sixty Regiments of six hundred Men
each, besides multitudes of all sorts of People with quantity of Ships, and
strong places which his Captains had sieised upon during his distemper. He
therefore passed over a part of his Army to Phanagoria, another Merchant City
situate on the other side of the Strait, to the end he might on both sides be
Master of the passage. Pompey was still in Syria, but a certain Inhabitant of
Phanagoria called Castor, whom Tryphon the Kings Eunuch had formerly put to the
Torture, killed the Eunuch as he entered, and began to cry out Liberty. The
people presently rose upon it, and though the Fortress was guarded by
Artaphernes and other Children of Mithridates; yet they brought Wood round
about it, and set it on fire, which so affrighted Artaphernes, Darius, Xerxes,
Oxathres and Eupator the Kings Sons, that they yielded themselves. They were
all very beautiful, but they were all but Children, except only Artaphernes,
who might be forty years old; there staid in the Fortress only one of their
Sisters called Cleopatra, who would not go out* and whose generosity so much
pleased the King that he sent Brigantines which brought her off. All the
Castles thereabouts, which Mithridates had lately surprised, followed the
Example of Phanagoria, Chersoneses, Theodozia. Nymphaea, and other fortified
Cities above in the Pontick Sea, did the like, insomuch that the King seeing so
many revolts, and not placing any confidence in the Fidelity of an Army, most
of whom went to the War by Constraint, besides the great Exactions he had made
to bring this Army on foot, and his own unfortunate condition, in which Estate
a Prince can have no reliance on the Faith of his Subjects, he sent some
Eunuchs into Scythia with his daughters to give them in Marriage to the Kings
of that Country, entreating them to come to his succor with all the Force they
had. He had appointed these Eunuchs a guard of five hundred Soldiers, for the
Conduct of these Princesses, but scarce had they lost sight of Mithridates but
they slew the Eunuchs, who by virtue of the power they had over the Kings
Spirit, had always tyrannized over them, and carried the Ladies to Pompey. The
King though he had lost so many Children, so many strong places, nay indeed his
whole Kingdom, nor had now any hopes of aid from the Scythians, abated not at
all the fierceness of his courage, nor entertained any thoughts that were mean
or suitable to his present Calamity; He formed a design to march into Gaul and
stir up that people to Arms, with whom he had to that purpose before hand made
a league and entered into alliance, thinking with them to cross the Alps, and
fall upon Italy, where he had hopes many people would join with him, out of the
hate they bore the Romans; for he had heard tell how Hannibal making Wars
within Spain had laid the same design and succeeded, and after so daring an
attempt made himself formidable to his Enemies; besides he had intelligence
that almost all their allies in Italy were revolted against them, out of a
general hate, and had a long time bore Arms against them, and likewise favored
to their prejudice the Gladiator Spartacus a vile fellow. Upon these hopes he
was ready to take his march toward Gaul, if the Army terrifyed with such
prodigious boldness, had not made abortive these magnificent Designs. The
Soldiers seeing he had a mind to lead them so far off, to encounter people,
they could not defend themselves from, in their own Country, thought that
Mithridates despairing of his own Affairs, thought it more honorable to die
generously like a King, then to lie idle and do nothing. However they said
nothing but received his orders without any murmuring, for this King was a man
of no mean Soul, nor despisable in the very midst of Calamity.

Pharnaces the most beloved of all his Sons and whom he had often designed his
Successor in the Kingdom, laid a design against his life; whether it were that
he thought this expedition might prove prejudicial to his Affairs, and blast
the hopes he yet had, the Romans would grant him pardon, which he was sure they
would absolutely refuse, if his Father went to ravage Italy, or whether it were
for other reasons, or else out of an impatient desire to reign. His Accomplices
being taken and put to torture, Monophanes persuaded Mithridates that being
ready to march, it was not convenient to put to death a Son he had so tenderly
loved, that such disorders would happen during the War, and would end with the
War, insomuch that he suffered himself to yield and pardoned his Son. But
Pharnaces being affrighted with some private intelligence given him, and
knowing that the Army had an aversion for this Expedition, went by night, and
conferred with the Principal of the Roman Fugitives, whose Tents were not far
from the Kings, aggravating to them the danger they ran into (which was not
unknown to them) if they went into Italy; and making them great Promises if
they would stay with him, he prevailed with them to forsake Mithridates. At the
same time he sent some of his people to the neighboring Tents to make the same
Proposition to the Officers, who likewise gave him their word. Morning being
come, the Runawayes began to shout all together, to which those who were
encamped next them, answered in the same tone, after them all the Army, even to
the very Fleet did the like. It Is possible they were not all of the Conspiracy,
but those who were not engaged followed the others, out of a natural facility
men have to despise the miserable, and to affect Novelty. And some too not
knowing the number of the Conspirators, believed the whole Army concerned, and
believing themselves alone unable to resist such a Multitude, shouted with the
rest more for fear then good will. Mithridates wakened by these cries, sent
some to them to know what they desired, to whom they returned answer, they
demanded his Son for their King, a young man for an old one, overswayed by his
Eunuchs, and a Murderer of many of his Children, Captains and Friends. Having
heard this return, He came out to speak to them, and in the mean time a Troop
of his Guards going to join with the Runa ways, they told them they would not
receive them, unless to gain belief amongst them, they would do some notable
action, and at the same time showed them the King. They then killed his Horse,
seeing him dispose himself to flight, and then as if they had done what was
desired of them, called Pharnaces King, and some one having taken out of a
Temple a certain Band of Parchment tied it about his head instead of a Diadem;
the Old man seeing all this from a high Gallery whither he had escaped, sent
several Messengers one after another, to his Son, to desire security for his
retreat, but none returning, he was afraid lest they would deliver him up to
the Romans. Wherefore having given orders to his Friends and those of his
Guards, who had not yet forsaken him, to go and submit themselves to the new
King, after having extolled their fidelity, he took out some Poison which he
always carried hid in the Belt of his Sword, and began to dissolve it, but two
of his Daughters lately brought to him, Mithridatis and Nissa, promised in
marriage to the Kings of Egypt and Cyprus, earnestly besought him to permit
them to drink before him, and hindered him from taking it, till they had first
swallowed it. The violence of the Poison soon gave them their death, but on
Mithridates, though he walked up and down a great place on purpose to heat
himself, the Poison had no effect, because of the Preservative he had used
daily to take for fear of being poisoned, which to this day is called
Mithridate, seeing therefore near him a certain Captain of the Gauls, called
Bituitus. Your hand (said he) has done me many excellent Services in War, but
the most excellent of all would be to kill me now, lest I should be led in
Triumph, after having so long reigned in so great a Kingdom. I cannot die by
Poison, because I have been too cautious against it, insensible that I was to
have taken so much care of what I eat, and not to foresee that cruel and
domestic Venom to all Kings, the Treason of my Children, my Friends and my
Armies. Bituitus moved with this discourse performed for the King this last
Office he desired of him. Thus dyed the sixteenth Descendant from Darius the
last King of the Persians, and the eighth Successor to that Mithridates, who
shaking of the Macedonian Yoke, made himself King of Pontus, the sixty eighth
or sixty ninth Year of his Age, and the fifty seventh of his Reign, for he was
but an Infant when he took Possession of the Kingdom. He subdued all the
neighboring Barbarians, and a great part of Scythia, he maintained War against
the Romans forty Years space, during which he several times made himself Master
of Bithynia and Cappadocia, made several Inroads into Asia, Phrygia,
Paphlagonis, Galatia, Macedon, besides many memorable Actions in Greece. He had
likewise the Empire of the Sea from Cilicia as far as Ionia, but he quitted it
when Sylla forced him to confine himself with the Bounds of the Kingdom of his
Father, after the loss of one hundred and sixty thousand men. Yet after that
mighty loss, he forbore not to renew the War, and did it without much
difficulty, having besides always had to do with great Captains. It Is true that
Sylla, Lucullus and Pompey overcame him, but he had likewise the advantage ore
them in many Encounters, and withal he took Prisoners L. Cassius, Q. Oppius and
Manius Aquilius, carrying them about Captives with him, till he put one of them
to death, as the Principal Author of the War, and delivered up the others to
Sylla. He defeated likewise Fimbria, Murena, Cotta Proconful, Fabius and
Triarius. He appeared always great, always constant, even in the midst of
Calamities, and vanquished though he were, omitted nothing that might be
attempted against the Romans, even to the allying himself with the Maeotiques
and Gauls, sending Ambassadors to Sertorius into Spain. Notwithstanding all the
wounds he received from Enemies or from Traitors, he never gave himself any
rest, no not in his Age, nor ever was there any conspiracy against him, but was
discovered, save only the last, and possibly he now perished for suffering
himself willingly to be deceived; so ungrateful is the malice of those to whom
we grant pardon. He was yet so cruel and bloody that he slew his Mother, his
Brother, three of his Sons and as many Daughters, he was of great Stature, as
his Arms sent to Delphos, and Nemaea make appear, and so strong that even to
his last end, he was one of the lustiest Horsemen and most vigorous thrower of
a Javelin in his whole Kingdom, he had traveled in one day a One hundred
twenty and five Miles.
thousand Furlongs drawn by a Chariot with eight Horses, and having fresh ones
led. He had learned the Greek Tongue, and was well instructed in the Ceremonies
of Religion of the Greeks. He was likewise a lover of Music, was patient in
labor, sober in diet, but intemperate in the love of Women. Such was the end
of Mithridates, surnamed Eupator Dyonsiuis, whose death delivered the Romans
from a troublesome War, which they testified by their joy when they heard the
News.

Pharnaces sent to Pompey to Sinope Mithridates body in a Galley, and with it
those who had arrested Manius, with a great number of Hostages, as well Greeks
as Barbarians, supplicating him to continue him in the Kingdoms of his Father,
or at least in that of Bosphorus which Mithridates had given to his Brother
Machares. Pompey delivered the Kings body to those that brought it to be
Royally interred and would himself be at the expense, giving orders it should
be laid in the usual Sepulcre of the Kings at Sinope, praising him as the
greatest King of his time, and who had done the noblest actions. As for
Pharnaces in acknowledgement of his having freed Italy from many difficulties,
he gave him the Kingdom of Bosphorus, except only Phanagoria whose Citizens he
would have remain free, because they first forsaking Mithridates, who again
levied Forces, and had already a Fleet and Army, and strong places of retreat,
had put a stop to him, and by the Example they had given others, been the cause
of his death; As for Pompey himself having in this War alone cleared the Sea of
Pirates, overcome the greatest of Kings, waged War succesfully (besides the
Pontick Nations) with the Colches, Albanians, Iberians, Armenians, Medes,
Arabs, Jews, and all other Oriental People, he extended the Roman Empire from
the East as far as Egypt, whither he would not go, though Ptolemy called him
to his assistance against his seditious people, and to that end sent him
Presents of Silver, and Cloths for all his Army, whether he feared to give
occasion of envy to his Enemies, by attempting what the Oracle had forbid, or
for other reasons, we shall specify when we come to treat of the affairs of
Egypt. As for what concerns the Nations which he had subdued, he gave some
their liberty, because they had sent him Succors, others he reduced into the
form of a Province, and to others gave Kings. To Tigranes Armenia, to Pharnaces
Bosphorus, to Ariobarzanes Cappa^ocia and its dependances, as we said, to
Antiochus Commagenes what he Conquered in Mesopotamia, dividing Gallogrecia,
inhabited by the Galatians Neighbors of the Cappadocians, among four
Tetrarchs, of whom Deiotarus was one. He gave Attalus the Sovereignty of
Paphlagonia, and Aristarchus that of Colchis. He made Archelaus Highpri^st to
the Goddess adored by the Commaniens, a dignity comparable to any Principality
whatsoever. He honored Castor of Phanagoria, with the Title of Friend of the
people of Rome, and in short gratifyed a multitude of other Persons with
Governments, and likewise with great Sums of Money. He built also Cities,
Nicopolis in Armenia the less, as a Monument of his Victory. Eupatoria in the
Kingdom of Pontus, which Mithridates Eupator had called by his name, when he
founded it, and afterward had rased it for opening its Gates to the Romans,
which Pompey afterward rebuilding from the ground called Magnopolis. He
reedifyed likewise Mazaca, a City of Cappadocia, which had been demolished
during the War, and repaired diverse others which were ruined or decaying in
diverse places of Pontus, Palestine the lower, Syria and Cilicia, in which last
is situated that City formerly called Soly, and at present Pompeiopolis, which
he peopled for the most part with Pirates. He found in the City of Talauris
where Mithridates Magazines were, two thousand Vessels of A certain kind of
Marble.
Onichit is bound about with Gold, quantity of Flagons, Cups, Or beds, for they
then eat on beds.
Tables, and Seats, all perfectly beautiful. There were likewise such vast
numbers of Bridles and Saddles, enriched with Gold and precious Stons, that the
Questor was thirty days in receiving and counting them. One part of these
precious movables came to Mithridates by succession from Darius the Son of
Histaspes having passed from hand to hand, to the several Successors of the
Kings of Persia* unto him; Cleopatra had taken another part out of the
Treasures of the Ptolemies, and given them in keeping to the Inhabitants of the
Isle of Coos, from whence Mithridates had brought them, and the rest that King
had bought and stored together himself, being very curious of rich movables.
Toward the end of Winter Pompey distributed rewards to his Victorious
Soldiers, fifteen hundred Attick Drams to every Soldier. And to the Tribunes
and Centurions proportionably, so that it is said the whole Sum of this
distribution amounted to sixteen thousand Talents. After this he went from
Ephesus to Italy by Sea, and dismissing his Army at Brundusium returned to
Rome. And by this popular action, astonished the Romans as if they had seen a
Miracle. The whole City went forth to meet him, the youngest a great way, and
others according to their Age; and after all came the Senate themselves
admiring the prodigious greatness of the actions he had done. For never before
him had any person defeated so powerful an Enemy, nor added so many Provinces
to the Roman Empire, or extended their Dominion to the Euphrates. And in like
manner he entered in Triumph in in a more Magnificent manner then ever any had
done before in the five and thirtieth year of his age. The Pomp lasted two
days, for it required a great deal of time for the passing by of so many
different People, Ponticks, Armenians, Cappadocians, Cilicians, the several
Nations of all Syria, Albanians, Heniochians, Acheans, Scythians, and Iberians.
He brought likewise into the Ports seven hundred Ships completely fitted, and
sent into the City Chariots laden with Gold, and Rarities of inestimable price,
among which was the Or beds, for they then eat on beds.
Table of Darius the Son of Histaspes, the Chair and Scepter of Eupator, with
his Figure of Massy Gold eight foot high, and yet was only the Breast and
Head, and seven hundred thousand five hundred and ten Talents of Silver Money.
There were likewise a great number of Wagons laden with Arms, and some with
Ship Beaks. After followed a multitude of Captives and Pirates, chained and
habited every one according to the fashion of his Country, before the Triumphal
Chariot marched the Satrapes, Captains, and Sons of Kings, some Captives,
others Hostages, to the number of four hundred twenty four. Among whom was
Tigranes the Son of Tigranes, five Sons of Mithridates, Artaphernes, Cyrus,
Oxathres, Darius and Xerxes, and two Daughters Orsabaris and Eupatra, and among
the rest Olthalces, and Aristobulus King of Colchis and the Jews, the Tyrants
of Cilicia and the Queens of Scythia. Three Iberian Generals, two of the
Albanians, with Menander of Laodicea who commanded Mithridates Horse. Those
absent were carried in Picture. Tigranes and Mithridates fighting, giving
ground and flying. Mithridates besieged, his secret flight by night, his death
and with him his two Daughters companions of his misfortune, there were shown
likewise the Pictures of his Children of both Sexes that dyed before him, and
the Figures of the Gods adored by the Barbarians adorned after the manner of
their Country, and near to them a fair Table with this Inscription. Ships of
War taken, eight hundred; Cities built in Cappadocia, eight; in Cilicia and
Caelosyria, twenty; in Palestine Seleucia. Kings overcome, Tigranes of Armenia,
Artoces of Iberia, Oreses of Abania, Darius of the Medes. Areta of the
Nabathaeans, and Antiochus Commagenes. Then appeared Pompey on a Chariot all
glittering with precious Stones, clad (as some say) in the Coat of Alexander of
Macedon, but if that may be believed, it is likely it was found among
Cleopatra's Movables, which the Inhabitants of the Isle of Coos delivered to
Mithridates. At last after the Chariot marched the Officers of the Army who had
served him in this expedition some on Horseback others on foot, who all
together conducted their General to the Capitol. When he was arrived there, he
put not to death any of the Captives, as all who triumphed before him had done,
but sent them back into their own Countries at the public charge, except only
the Kings and Kings Children, of whom he not long after put to death
Aristobulus, and after him Tigranes. As for Pharnaces he in the mean time kept
the Inhabitants of Phanagoria blockt up, till such time as Famine made them
resolve to give him Battle, however the King granted their pardon, and without
injuring any of them was content to take Hostages. Sometime after he took
Sinope, and desirous to make himself Master of Amisa, he made War upon
Calvisius, who then Commanded the Roman Forces in the Country, in the time that
Caesar and Pompey were engaged against each other, and at last the Romans being
elsewhere busied he was driven out of Asia by Asander upon a particular
Quarrel. He had likewise to do with Julius Caesar, as he returned from Egypt
after the Rout of Pompey (which happened about that Mount where his Father had
beaten Triarius) and being beaten escaped to Sinope, with a thousand Horse,
whither Caesar wanting leisure to follow him, sent Domitius to whom he yielded
the City, who after he was come out with his Cavalry according to the Articles
of Peace, agreed between them, caused all the Horses to be killed, which did
not well please the Horsemen, with whom Shipping himself he retired by Sea to
the Kingdom of Pontus. As soon as he came there he assembled a great number of
S^ythians, and Sarmatians and made himself Master of Theodotia and Panticapea,
but Asander renewing the War with him, his Horsemen being dismounted and not
used to fight on foot, were beaten, and Pharnaces showing himself the only man
of Valor was slain, after having received many wounds, the fiftieth year of
his Age, and fifteenth of his Reign in Bosphorus. C. Caesar gave his Kingdom to
Mithridates of Pergamus who had served him well in Egypt, but at this day all
those people are free, and there are yearly Praetors sent into the Kingdoms of
Pontus and Bithynia, Caesar confirmed all those who had received favors from
Pompey in the Estates and Governments he had given them, though he complained
they had taken part with their Benefactor to his Prejudice, save only the
priesthood of Commanes, which he took from Archelaus to give to Nicomedes. But
some time after not only these Estates, but also all that C. Caesar and M.
Anthony had given to others, were reunited to the Roman Empire, after that
Augustus became Master of Egypt, for the Romans let slip no opportunity to
enlarge their Empire. Wherefore having extended it by the Mithridatick War,
from the Euxine Sea, to the sandy Deserts of Egypt, and from the Pillars of
Hercules, which are in Spain, to the Euphrates. It was not without reason they
called this Victory great, or gave to Pompey who made all these Conquests the
Title of Great, they possessed likewise all Africa, as far as Cyrene it self,
which was given them by the Testament of Appion, the last King of that
Country, who was a Bastard of the Race of the Lagides, so that to have the
whole Circuit of the Mediterranian Sea, they wanted only Egypt, which was
their last Conquest.

The end of the fourth Book of the Romans War with Mithridates.
APPIAN OF ALEXANDRIA, HIS HISTORY OF THE Roman Wars IN ILLYRIA.
PART I.
BOOK V.
The Argument of this Book.
I. DEscription of Illyria, and those who first inhabited it. II. Apollo 's
Chastisement of the Illyrians Sacrilege. III. The Romans War with Agron King
of Illyria. IV. Their Wars against Demetrius, and against Genthius. V. Against
the Ardians, Palarians, Iapodes, Segestians and Dalmatians. VI. The affairs of
C. Caesar with the Dalmatians and other Nations of Illyria. VII. Beginning of
Augustus Conquests in Illyria. VIII. His War against the Iapodes and the Siege
of Metulia. IX. His Wars against the Segestians and Paeonians. X. His
Expedition against the Dalmatians, and the siege of Promona. XI. The Conclusion
of this History.

Sclavonians.
Illyrians according to the opinion of the Greeks, are the People that inhabit
above Macedon and Thrace, from the Charnians and the Thesprotes as far as the
Ister, and this is the Length of Illyria, its breadth extends from Macedon, and
the Mountains of Thrace, as far as the Paeonians, and the Ionian Sea, and the
end of the Alps. It contains five days Journey in breadth, and its length is
thrice as much as the Greeks report, the Romans after measuring it found it
Seven ^undred and fifty Miles.
six thousand Furlongs long, and One hundred and fifty Miles.
twelve hundred broad, and assure us that it took its name from Illyrius
Polyphemus, and that Polyphemus the Cyclops had three Sons by Galatea; Celtus,
Illyrius and Gallus, who going out of Sicily gave their Names to the Gauls.
Celtes, Illyrians and Galatians, of which Nation they made themselves Kings;
and indeed this opinion seems to me the most probable of all. They say likewise
that Illyrius had sons Achilles, Autarius, Dardanus, Medus, Taulantius and
Perhebius, and Daughters Partha, Daorta, Dazera and others, from whom are
descended the Taulantians, Perhebians, Achilleians, Autarians, Dazeretians and
Darsians. That Autarius had two Sons Pannonius or rather Paeonius and
Scordiscus, from which Paeonius came Triballius, who all three gave their names
to three Nations as we learn in Ancient Records. Illyria therefore (as we find
to this day by several Public Testimonies in that great Country) was formerly
possessed by the Scordisks and Triballians, who continually made War, till such
time as those that remained of the Triballians went away to the Getes above the
Ister. And this Nation which to the time of Philip and Alexander, had a great
reputation is at this day so utterly decayed that there scarce remains to us
the memory of its name. The Scordicks are likewise much weakened, for being
subdued by the Romans they retreated within the Isles of the River Ister.
However sometime after a party returned and inhabited a Corner of Paeonia.
Wherefore the Scordisks are to this day reckoned among the Paeonians. The
Autarians who likewise possessed a good tract on the Sea Coast, were likewise
driven out by the Ardians. After that the Croats or those of the County of Zara.
Liburnians who were esteemed excellent Seamen, came and settled themselves in a
part of Illyria, from whence they scoured all the Ionian Sea, plundring all the
Ships they met with, and because they had Ships very swift and extremely light,
the Romans call Vessels that excel in swiftness Liburnicks.

Apollo's anger was the cause of the utter destruction of the Autarians, and
that they going with those Celtes that are called Cimbrians to besiege the City
of Delphos, were forthwith defeated and took their flight in disorder, some of
them not staying till the battle began, by reason of the Rain, Tempest and
Thunder which terrified them. Those who returned found their whole Country
covered with infinite multitudes of Frogs who stinking poisoned the Rivers with
their putrefaction, and that at last the Earth casting forth Malignant Vapors,
bred a cruel Plague in Illyria. This Malady siesed chiefly on the Autarians,
who leaving their Country carried the Contagion along with them, so that no
person durst receive them, after three and twenty days travel they stopped in a
marshy and unhabited Country, and built Cities on the Confines of the
Basternes. As for the Celtes Apollo sent into their Country such Earthquakes as
swallowed up whole Cities at once, and that this Calamity ceased not till they
as well as the others had quitted their habitations and come into Illyria,
where finding the Associates of their crime extremely weakened by the Plague,
which had swept away the greatest part of them, they easily overcame them, but
the Contagion siesing likewise upon them by their touching of infected Cloths,
they departed thence, and for change of air went as far as the Pyrenaeans.
Afterward taking their way toward the East, the Romans who were fearful lest
the Celtes with whom they had several times been engaged should once more pass
the Alps and fall into Italy, sent against them their Consuls, who were
defeated, with their whole Army. This defeat of the Consuls, and the dreadful
name of the Celtes struck a terror throughout all Italy, till such time as
having chosen Marius General who had lately gained a great Victory against the
Lybians, Numidians and Marusians, they overcame the Cimbrians, and afterward
had the better of them in several Engagements (as we have set down in the
recital of the Roman Wars against the Gauls.) So that weakened by such vast
effusion of blood, and grown hopeless of settling themselves in any other
place, they again recovered their Ancient Seat after having done much mischief,
and suffered innumerable losses. And here ended Apollo's punishment of the
impiety of the Illyrians and Celtes. Yet this deterred them not from afterward
committing other Sacriledges, for at another time part of those two Illyrians
and Celtes.
Nations, and especially the Scordisks, Medes and Dardanians made inroads into
Macedonia, and likewise into Greece, robbing many Temples and assaulting that
of Delphos, where they again lost a great Number of their People. Two and
thirty years after the first Battle between the Romans and the Celtes, during
which they had several Engagements, the Romans who had already conquered Greece
and Macedon, declared War against them for the like Sacrilege, and gave L.
Scipio the Command of their Armies. The Fame has reached even to our times that
their Neighbors were the Companions of their Impiety, but remembering the
punishment of the Autarians of whom not one was left alive in Illyria, left
them to Scipio's mercy without giving them any assistance. And that Scipio
having cut in pieces all the Scordisks, except a small Number who saved
themselves on the other side of Ister, and on the Isles of that River, suffered
himself to be bribed with the Sacred Gold, and for it made an Alliance with the
Medes and Dardanians, which gave occasion to some Historians of Italy, to write
that this corruption was the cause of all the Civil Wars, wherewith the Romans
were tormented from Scipio's time till the Establishing of the Monarchy. These
were the Greeks opinions of the Illyrians, on which I was willing to enlarge my
self. As for the Romans they reckon with them not only the People we have
spoken of but likewise the Austria and Hungaria.
Paeonians which are beyond them, and the Rhetians, the Naricks, and the The
Northern Bavaria.
Mysians which inhabit in Europe; and also all the Neighboring People which lie
on the right hand of Ister, whom they distinguish (as the Hellens and the
Greeks) by particular Names, but in General call them all Illyrians: This
opinion which they have held from the beginning, and persist in it till our
times, has been the cause that they have not yet found out the limits of those
Nations, and that they set the bounds of Illyria from the Springs of Ister far
as the people upon the Pontick Sea, where they levy Tribute. I know not well in
what manner the Romans subdued them. So in writing the affairs of Gaul I have
declared that I could not gain a sufficient and ample knowledge of the
beginnings and occasions of these Wars; wherefore I have exhorted those who had
the better knowledge of the Affairs of Illyria to write the History of them. In
the mean time I shall present the public with such things as are come to my
knowledge.

Agron, King of that part of Illyria situate on the Gulf of the Ionian Sea,
once possessed by Pyrrhus and his Successors, became likewise Master of a
Corner of Epyrus, and with that of Corcyra, Epidamnum, and Pharos, under
pretense of protecting them. And being at Sea to sieze upon the rest of Ionia,
a certain Island called Issa, revolted from him, to submit to the Romans, and
at the same time sent Deputies to Rome to complain of the oppressions they had
suffered under Agron. As they returned they were assaulted by the Illyrians,
who slew their Deputy called Calemporus, and a Roman Commissary, who according
to the opinion of some was Carnicanus, which struck such despair into the rest
of their Company that they all slew themselves. The Romans (as it said) took
this occasion to declare War against the Illyrians, and assaulted the Illyrians
both by Sea and Land. Mean while Agron died leaving only a Son; yet under age
called Pina, and to oblige his Wife to take care of the Child though she were
not his Mother, left her Regent of the Kingdom. Demetrius to whom Agron had
given the Government of Pharos having likewise siezed upon Carsu.
Corcyra delivered both to the Romans, who then kept the Sea with a Fleet: they
afterward drew Dy^rhachium
Epidamnum to their party, and the Issians and Epidamnians being besieged by
the Illyrians, they sent an Army to their relief who made the Illyrian forces
raise their sieges and return home, but some of them called the Atintanes, went
and submitted to the Romans. This occasioned Agrons Wife to send Ambassadors to
Rome, restoring the Captives and Fugitives, and demanding pardon, by
remonstrating that what was past, ought to be imputed to Agron and not to her,
to which the Senate answered, that Corcyra, Pharos, Issa, and Epidamnum, as
also those Illyrians called Atintanes, belonged now to the Roman Empire. That
they would leave to Pina all the remainder of that Country possessed by his
Father, and receive him into the Alliance of the Roman People, on condition, he
meddled not with any of the rest, nor suffered the Illyrians to sail to the
Island of Issa, save only with two boats unarmed. These conditions the
Ambassadors accepted, and this was the first War, and the first Peace between
the Romans and those of Illyria.

Corcyra and Apollonia, and rewarded Demetrius for his treason, because of the
advantage they had gained by it, not but that they hated his Infidelity, of
which they themselves soon after found the effects. For when the Romans and the
Celtes were engaged one against the other about the River Po.
Eridanus, Demetrius who thought they had their hands full, beginning not to be
so much afraid of them as before, went about to lord it at Sea, and made
himself Master of the Is^ria a peninsul^ in the gulf. of Venice.
Istrians, and forced the Atintanes to revolt against the Romans, but they as
soon as they had made Peace with the Celtes, set out a Fleet to Sea, and took
the Corsairs, who were joined with Demetrius, and the revolted Illyrians; As
for Demetrius he at first escaping to Philip King of Macedon, and afterward
retreating into the Country, and committing Pyracies on the Ionian Sea's with
some few Ships, they slew him at last, and utterly ruined Pharos his Country as
an Abettor of his mischiefs. But for the Illyrians they pardoned them for
Pina's sake, who had kindly received them. This was the second War and second
Peace with the Illyrians. Now in the pursuit of this History I shall neither
respect time nor order, but content my self to write the affairs of every
particular Illyrian Nation, as far as I have learnt them. The Romans having
sent their Armies into Macedon against Perseus, who then possessed that Kingdom
by succession from Philip, Genthius another King of Illyria, prevailed with by
the Macedonians Money entered into an Alliance with him, and engaged himself in
this War. He forthwith stirred up the Illyrians against the Romans, and laid in
Irons those Ambassadors they sent, under pretense they were not come within his
Lands as Ambassadors but as Spies. Wherefore Anitius the Roman Praetor being
then at Sea, took some of that Kings Ships, and afterward Landing in his
Country, defeated him and afterward so closely besieged in a place that he
only asked for quarter. Upon which the Praetor returning answer that he could
grant him no other terms then surrendering at discretion, he desired three days
to consider of it, which being granted, and the mean while finding that his
Subjects ran away to Anitius, he only desired security to come to him himself.
When he came before him he fell upon his knees, and with abasance insupportable
in a man of courage besought the Roman to grant him his life. Anitius seeing
him tremble, bid him take courage, raised him up with his own hand, and made
him eat at his Table, but when Dinner was done, gave Order to his Officers to
keep him Prisoner, and afterward led him and his Son in Triumph to Rome. The
War with Genthius was ended in twenty days, after which, Aemulius Paulus
pillaged seventy Cities in this manner. After having defeated King Perseus,
whom he sent to the Senate going himself privately to Rome, and returning with
all speed, he caused it to be published in the name of the Senate, throughout
all the Cities, that they promised pardon for all the faults yet committed, on
condition they brought in what Gold and Silver they had, which being agreed to,
he sent his Army divided into so many parties, into every City, and gave Order
to the Commanders to cause it to be proclaimed upon the break of the appointed
day, that every Burgess should within three hours, bring his Money into the
Public place, which being performed he gave up the rest of the City to
plunder. Thus Paulus despoiled seventy Cities of all their goods.

Another time the Ardians, and another of the Neighboring Nations Illyria,
because they were busied elsewhere, they sent Ambassadors to forbid them to
pass any farther, whom when they would not obey they took a resolution to send
an Army of ten thousand Foot, and six hundred Horse. The Illyrians who were yet
scarce sufficiently prepared for such a War, dispatched to Rome, and as if they
had seriously repented of what they had done, demanded Pardon. Upon which the
Senate condemned them to pay to them that they had oppressed, the full value of
the damage they had sustained, but when yet they performed not this Decree,
Flaccus was sent with a powerful Army. Yet all this exploits amounted to no
more then some Inrodes and Skirmishes, for he could not so suddenly end this
War. I find likewise in History, that Sempronius surnamed Tuditamus and
Tiberius Pandusius defeated the Japodes which inhabit the Alps, and that they
submitted to both at a time, in the same manner, as the Sagistains yielded to
L. Cotta and to Metellus. As for the Dalmatians who are likewise a Nation of
Illyria, but on the other side, it is certain that they made War upon the
Illyrians, subject to the Romans, and that they would not receive the Deputies
that came from Rome to confer about this Affair. Wherefore there is some
likely^hood that the Romans sent Forces against them. They dispatched (say
some) an Army Commanded by Marcus Figulus then Consul, but as soon as he was
entered the Country they fell upon his Vanguard, put the whole Army to a rout,
and pursued them as far as the River Naro, from whence they returned home
because of the approaching Winter. Then Figulus judging he might surprise them
as they retired in disorder, followed them in the Rear, defeated and pursued
them as far as the City of Dalminium which gives Name to the Dalmatians, and
that not being able to take this City, so strongly was it fortifyed, by
assault, nor to make use of any Engines by reason of the vast height of the
Wall, and besides wanting many things and not being secure because of the
frequent Sallies made by the Besieged, he had recourse to another Artifice: He
took Stakes two foot long and wrapping them about with Tow dipped in Pitch and
Brimstone, and setting them on fire, shot them from his Engines into the Town,
the violence wherewith they were darted, making them burn more vehemently, they
flew through the Air like so many flaming Torches, setting on fire all that
they fell upon, in so much that the greatest part of the City being burnt,
Figulus returned to Rome Victorious. Some time after Cecilius Metellus having
obtained the Consulate, went by Decree of the Senate to make War upon the
Dalmatians, who had given no occasion, but he had only set this design on Foot,
out of a desire to Triumph. But those people receiving him as a Friend, he
spent the Winter at Salone one of their Cities, and at last returned to Rome in
Triumph, though he had done nothing to deserve it.

Caesar marching against the Gauls who lay not far distant from Illyria, found
that the Dalmatians with other people of Illyria had some advantage over the
Liburnians, another Nation of the same Country, and took from them the City of
Promona, wherefore the Liburnians submitting themselves to the Romans, fled
toward Caesar, then not far off, and Caesar sent to those who had taken
Promona, to exhort them to restore it, but they having no respect to this
advertisement he sent a great Army which being defeated by the Illyrians,
Caesar diverted by other Affairs, for Pompey's Party was now forming, and he
who saw it of necessity to come to Arms with him, would attempt nothing more at
that time against them: But though the Season was troublesome and inconvenient,
passed from Brundusium into Ionia, with the greatest part of his Army to go
thence into Macedonia to War with Pompey, leaving Anthony to bring the
remainder. But afterward Gabinius having likewise fifteen Cohorts and three
thousand Horse to carry to him, attempted to go through Illyria, at which the
Illyrians being alarmed because of those things lately happened, and judging
that Caesar's Victory would be their Ruin, slew them all; except only Gabinius
and some Horsemen of his Guard, who escaped with him, gaining by this defeat
vast Spoils and Treasure. The Importance of this War wherein Caesar was engaged
with Pompey, obliged him at present to dissemble this Affront. But after that
Pompey was defeated, and that Caesar had pursued the remains of his Party into
diverse places, and settled all things in good order and returned to Rome, he
made preparations for an expedition he had determined against the Getes and
Parthians. Whereupon the Illyrians fearing, lest Caesar in his way should
revenge himself of the injury he had received, sent Deputies to Rome, to ask
pardon for what they had done, offering Caesar their alliance and Friendship,
which might be of great concern to him in his expedition against the Parthians,
because of the valor of the Illyrians, the reputation of which was spread
through the whole Earth, but he answered them very sharply that he would not
entertain any correspondence or friendship with people had so highly offended
him, however he was content to pardon them if they submitted to pay Tribute,
and deliver up Hostages. After they had promised both the one and the other, he
sent Atinius with three Legions to impose some small Tribute, and receive the
promised Hostages. But Caesar being in the mean time murdered, they thought the
Roman Power must by his death, that was its chief support, fall to ruin,
wherefore they would no more obey Atinius's orders nor either pay Tribute, or
deliver up Hostages, and as he wasted the Country with five Cohorts, they
surprised them, put them to rout, and slew Bebius who commanded the Party, and
Atinius himself escaped hardly to Epidamnum, with his scattered Forces. After
which the Senate gave that Army with all Macedon and Illyria, of which he was
Governor, to Marcus Brutus who slew Caesar, and Syria to Cassius an associate
in that tragic action, so that during the War they maintained against Anthony
and Caesar surnamed Augustus, the Illyrians enjoyed not much repose.

As for the Peonians they are a great Nation inhabiting along the Danube^*
Ister, Huns*
Pannonians, and reckon them among the people of Illyria. Wherefore being
writing the History of Illyria, I think it now very apposite to speak of their
Affairs. They were already grown famous by the mighty actions done by the
Agrians under Philip and Alexander, for the Agrians were Peonians, and
inhabited the lower part of Peonia, but after they had so shamefully driven
back Cornelius, who came with an Army to make War upon them, the mighty
reputation of the Peonians filled all Italy with fear, and for a long time
there was not any Roman Consul found so brave as to attack them. And this is
all I can find, great or memorable, concerning the Peonians and Illyrians, in
any History after diligent search made, nor have in perusal of the Commentaries
of Augustus Caesar seen any thing of more Antiquity concerning the Peonian
Nation. Indeed I find there was a certain other Nation of Illyria, besides
those by me mentioned that paid obedience to the Romans, but I can neither tell
where it is situate or how it is called, for Augustus writ not the Actions of
others, but those properly his own. In what manner he made the revolted Nations
pay Tribute, subdued those that were independent, and at last by force of Arms
brought under subjection those warlike people, who dwelling on the the tops of
the Alps, because of their bordering upon Italy, committed often Robberies, and
made frequent inroads. And really it somewhat amazes me, that so many Roman
Armies having passed the Alps, to make War in France and Spain, should take no
notice of these people; and that Caesar himself, who was so succesful in War,
and who for almost ten years together wintred about this Country whilst he was
reducing the Gauls, should make so small account of those that lay behind him.
But I believe these Generals principally intent upon those places, whither they
were designed, thought no farther then of passing the Alps, and that Caesar
whilst he was lodged on the Frontiers of Gaul, applied himself wholly to the
ruin of Pompey's Party, who would have made his Conquests his own; besides
it is probable that when he took the Government of Illyria and the Gauls; it was
meant only of what depended on the Romans. But Augustus at last made himself
Master of all. Though not without great labor; for he that had formerly said
in the Senate that Anthonies easiness had made the Illyrians tame and supple
(though so warlike they were, they had often put him hard to it,) was forced to
make use of all the experience he had, to bring under the Oxeans, the
Perthenetes, the Bathiares, the Taulantians, the Cambians, the Cinambres, the
Merromenians and the Pyrissians: and found yet more difficulty in reducing the
Docleates, the Carinians, the Interfrurians, the Narisians, the Clintidiones
and the Taurisques, and obliging them by force to pay that Tribute they had for
sometime been exempted from. It Is true the Victories he gained served for
Example to their Neighbors, and that the Hippassians and the Bessians, fearful
of his power submitted. But the Melitinians and the Corcyrians, which inhabited
the Isles being revolted, he was constrained to employ a great part of his
Forces to reduce them, for they made Courses, and committed Robberies on the
Sea with their Ships, of which they had a great number. Wherefore Caesar put to
the Sword all he took above fourteen years of Age, and sold the rest at Outry;
he also took from the Liburnians their Ships, because they likewise drove a
trade of Pyracy. Of the Nation of the Japodes which inhabit in the Alps, the
Moentines and Edeates yielded themselves upon the news of his coming, but the
Aurupins who are esteemed the most warlike of those people as well as the most
numerous, retired out of the Country into the City, and hearing he was at hand
quitted it, and fled to the Woods for shelter. Caesar having taken the City,
would not let it be burnt, judging they would submit themselves to him as well
as the others, and therefore not long after left it and permitted their return.
But they of all these people that most perplexed Caesar were the Salassians,
the Japodes dwelling beyond the Alps, the Segestains, the Dalmatians, the
Daissans and the Peonians, who voluntarily engaged on the Salassians Party.
These last inhabited on the tops of the Alps, in a place almost inaccessible,
and not to be approached but by one difficult and narrow passage. Veterius
falling on them unawares, seized upon the Avenue, and besieged them. The Siege
lasted two Years, at the end of which for want of Salt, of which they stood
most in need of, they received a Garrison. At last being revolted they
demolished those Fortifications raised by Veterius to keep them in awe, and
possessing themselves of the Crags and Streits, made a mock of those sent by
Caesar against them, who could not come to do them any hurt. Wherefore Caesar
being then upon the point to make War against Anthony, let them live at
liberty, pardoning the attempt they had made upon Veterius. But they conceiving
a wrong opinion of Caesar's facility, began to draw other Cities to their
Party, and to spoil the Lands under the Romans obedience, till Messala Carvinus
sent by the Emperor to besiege them, reduced them by Famine, and thus the
Salassians fell under the Roman Empire.

Alps, who are a fierce and almost Salvage people, they repulsed twice in
twenty years, the Romans that came to make War upon them, made inroads as far
as Aquileia, and sacked Targia a Roman Colony. Caesar going in person against
them, by rough and difficult Passages, they grew but the more furious, and to
hinder his Passage, cut down the Trees that grew by the way side, so as they
fell across the way. After which Augustus taking his march through another
Forest they seemed to fly, but went and lay in Ambush for him, but he being
doubtful of it, sent some of his people over the tops of the Mountains to come
and fall upon them on all sides, and continued his march by the Valleys,
causing the Wood to be cut down before him. The Japodes all upon a sudden
sallyed out of their Ambush, and wounded many of his men, but the most part of
their Forces were cut in pieces by the Romans, who came down from the
Mountains, and the rest chose rather to retreat in the Woods, than into one of
their Cities called Terpona, which they had abandoned. Caesar having taken it,
would not burn it, for he thought as he had made trial in others, that would
engage them to submit, which they did; after which he marched toward another
of their Cities called by the Inhabitants Metulia, and is esteemed the Capital
of the Country of the Japodes. It is situate on a high Mountain covered with
Wood, and built upon two Eminencies divided by a small Valley. The best armed
and bravest young men that any one can imagine ever to have seen defended it,
and with ease repulsed the Romans, as often as they approached the Wall. The
Besiegers would have raised Terrasses, but the Metulians day and night fallying
out on all sides upon the Laborers, hindered the Work, and by the means of
certain Engines which they had taken, in the Battle fought not far from thence
by Brutus against Anthony, and the same Caesar, and now planted upon the Walls,
forced the Besiegers to fall off, yet the Romans made a breach in the Wall, but
whilst they fought, the Besieged had raised other Fortifications within, over
which they, though tired with defending the breach, leaped into the City. The
Besiegers thus become Masters of the Wall which the Inhabitants had quitted,
set These Walls were part of Wood, and part of Stone.
fire on it, and to gain the rest raised two Terrases from which they laid over
four Planks to the Rampart newly raised. Things thus disposed, Caesar gave
order to one party of his men to assault the other side of the City to draw the
Inhabitants that way, whilst the others forced their entrance over the Planks,
and he in the mean time took a view of the Action from a high Tower. The
Barbarians ran upon the Wall to oppose those that passed, whilst another Party
behind them strove to heave up the Planks with their Pikes, which much
heightened their courage, for one Plank being overturned, and then another, and
after it a third, fear so seized on the Romans that not a man durst engage upon
the fourth. Caesar from the Tower sharply reproves them, but seeing that all he
could say, would not move them, he takes his Buckler and began himself to run
upon the Plank. Agrippa, Hieron and Lucius, three of his Captains and Iolas one
of his Guards followed him with some Targetiers and got likewise on the Plank.
Caesar thus deeply engaged, shame made the Soldiers run on in such Crowds that
the Plank overcharged broke in the middle, and a great Number of people that
were upon it fell one upon another, some were slain, other brought of sorely
bruised, and the Emperor himself was wounded in the Thigh and both the Arms.
He again ascended the Tower with some followers of Consular dignity, that all
might see he was well, lest a rumor of his death might beget some Tumult, or
the Enemy should think he fled, and at the same instant set on work the laying
of another Plank. This more daunted the Metulians then any thing before, seeing
they had undertaken War against a man whose courage was invincible, whereupon
on the morrow they sent Deputies to treat with him, delivered him the fifty
Hostages he demanded, and promised to receive a Garrison, to whom they left the
higher Eminence, retiring themselves into the other. But when the Garrison
being entered required them to yield up their Arms, they entered into such a
fury, that shutting up their Wives and Children in the Townhouse, and having
likewise caused the Officers of the Garrison to enter there, they told them
that if* they were so hardy to attempt against them any thing extraordinary,
they would set fire on that building, and by one act of despair endeavor to
wreak themselves on the Romans. After this discourse they drew together at the
foot of the higher eminence, as if they had a design to mount up. The Garrison
set the Townhouse on fire, many of the women killed themselves with their
Children, and some threw themselves alive into the flames. Thus almost all the
youth of Metulia being slain in the conflict, and most of the useless persons
burnt, all the buildings were likewise consumed in the flames, so that there
scarcely remained any mark of so great a City. The Metulians thus totally
ruined, all the rest of that Nation submitted to Caesar for fear of a like
misfortune, and thus fell the Japodes under the Roman power. Caesar being gone,
the Possenians shook off their yoke: but Marcus Elbius being sent against them,
reduced them by force, punished with death the authors of the Rebellion, and
sold the rest by Outcry.

Caesar resolved to make war upon them, and to take his passage through the
Territories of the Peonians not depending on the Roman Empire. Peonia is a
woody Country, whose length extends from the Japodes to the Dardanians. The
people inhabiting it have no Cities, but live in the Fields, and have Villages
separate, according to their Families; They have not among them either Judge or
Prince that has Superiority over others. They had at present a hundred thousand
Men, but because they knew no Command, could never form a Body. So when Caesar
came amongst them they presently fled into the woods, where if they found any
Roman straggling from the rest they cut him in pieces. As long as Caesar thought
they would could come in, he neither touched their Villages nor Towns, but when
he saw they kept themselves close in the woods, he set all on fire making an
inestimable spoil for eight days together, as he crossed the Country of the
Segestains and Peonians as far as the Sava. Caesar on the banks of this River
found a City fortified on one side with the River which was very broad, and on
the rest with a large Ditch, deep and dug downright, so that it was as broad at
bottom as top. Wherefore he made an attempt upon it as a place very convenient
for his stores in the War he designed against the Dacians and Basternes, which
inhabit beyond the Ister, which in these places is called the Danube. But when
a little lower it is enlarged with great quantity of waters, it takes the name
of Ister, instead of that of Danube. Now the Sava discharges it self into the
Ister, and Caesar had Vessels upon that River, which might bring provisions up
the Danube, for the subsistence of his Army. He therefore invested this City,
but scarce had made his first approaches when the inhabitants of Segesta, for
that was the name of the place, sent Messengers to him to know what he demanded
of them. Whereupon he ordered them to receive a Garrison, and to deliver him
one hundred Hostages for security of such Provision and Ammunition as he should
store up in that City for his Service in the War against the Dacians; and that
they should bring him in so much Corn; The Chief Men of the Town thought not
these conditions unreasonable, and had certainly granted them had not the
People hindered them. The Commons were not troubled about the delivering the
Hostages, for they were well assured none of their Children would be accepted
but only those of the best Families of the City; but when they saw the Garrison
approach, they could not endure to look on them, but in a fury ran to the
Gates, shut them, and mounted afresh upon the Walls to defend them. Wherefore
Caesar caused a Bridge to be built over the River, and began his Lines of
Circumvallation. After which keeping the inhabitants enclosed, he began to
raise two terrasses, to hinder which the besieged made several Sallies, which
not succeeding they threw down abundance of firebrands; Exspecting relief to
come from Peonia. And indeed the Peonians came; but Caesar having laid an
Ambush in their way, killed a great party of them, and put the r^st to flight,
so that they no more concerned themselves in the relief of Segesta. However the
Segestains bravely sustained the siege till the thirtieth day; but at length
after a long and obstinate resistance their hearts failed, and they learnt to
ask pardon. Caesar admiring their Valor and moved to compassion at their
Prayers, would not put them to death, nor make them suffer any thing in their
Persons, but contenting himself to make them pay a sum of Money, ordered them to
retire into one quarter of the City and placed there five and twenty Cohorts in
Garrison.

That done he went back to Rome with design to return into Illyria, And
Gabinius they had defeated five Roman Cohorts, whose Ensigns they had taken,
their hearts were so puffed up, that for ten years together they had not laid
down Arms, but were resolved to come with the Segestains to Encounter Caesar.
They were in Number more then twelve thousand, all men of courage, Commanded by
a chosen General called Versus, who assaulting once more the City of Promona in
Liburnia, had Entrenched himself with a large ditch and a good Palisado, and
had siesed likewise on some places very strongly situate, for it is a
Mountainous Country full of sharp and pointed Rocks. He therefore continued his
siege of that City with the greater part of his Forces, the rest he posted on
the Mountain tops, from whence they might with ease discover the Roman Camp.
Caesar made a show as if he would enclose them with a wall, but indeed sent
privately the most daring of his men to discover the paths that led up to the
mountain tops. They marched through the woods and having without any noise
gained the top of the Rocks, they fell upon those that guarded them by night,
while they yet slept, and made a great slaughter. At the same time they sent to
tell Caesar that they had found the end of the way, but wanted more forces to
perfect the rest. In the mean time they let go from those Rocks they had
surprised by force, some Prisoners one after another, whose report so terrified
those were posted on the other heights that they thought themselves enclosed on
all sides, and especially some who wanting water, in some of the highest places
fearing lest all the retreats should be siesed on, that they forthwith
descended to Promona, Caesar caused the City and two hills which the Enemy yet
held to be environed with a wall of forty furlongs about, and in the mean time
went to encounter Teutinius who was coming with another Army, to relieve the
besieged, defeats him, chases him among the Mountains, and in the very teeth of
him takes Promona; for before the Circumvallation was finished, the besieged
making a Salley were so vigorously beaten back by the Romans, that they entered
Pell Mell with them into the City, where having slain one part of the
Inhabitants, the rest saved themselves in the Citadel, he presently siezed on
the Town Gates, and gave the Guard of one to a Roman Cohort, which was the
fourth night assailed by the Barbarians and surprised with the sudden fright
quitted their Post, but Caesar coming in enclosed the besieged, who the next
morning yielded to discretion, he pardoned them, but for the Regiment that had
quitted their Post, he made them draw Lots, and put to death every tenth
Soldier with two Captains, and for the rest of that Company gave them only
Barley, while the others had Wheat. Thus was Promona taken. As for Teutinius he
had in his flight dispersed his Army into several parties, wherefore the Romans
pursued him not very far, for not knowing the Country, and seeing in the woods
so many different paths, which answered not one to the other, they were fearful
of dividing their Army into so many several bodies. There was in this wood a
deep valley of a long extent between two Mountains, where formerly the
Dalmatians had lain hid to surprise Gabinius. Here likewise they laid an Ambush
for Caesar, but he set the wood on fire, where the ways met, and dividing his
Army into three parts, of which two took their march on both sides, along the
skirts of the Mountains, that they might at any time come in to his relief, and
he with the third marched through the valley, causing the wood to be cut down
before him, or setting all on fire, and storming the Towns. He besieged one
called Setovia, whither the Barbarians flocked in great Numbers to cast in some
relief, but he being ready to receive them routed them, so that none could get
into the City. Yet he was wounded in the Knee with a blow of a Stone, which
made him for some time keep his Bed. Being somewhat recovered he returned to
Rome to make himself Consul with Barbatius Tullus, whom he took for Colleague,
and in the mean time left Statilius Taurus to command the Army. After he had
taken possession of the Consulate in the beginning of the Month, he quitted the
same day the Government of the Commonwealth to Anthony, and departed to
Dalmatia assuming again the quality of Triumvir though the last five years time
was expired since Augustus, Anthony and Lepidus had usurped the Sovereign
Authority which was afterward confirmed to them by the People. The Dalmatians
therefore oppressed with famine, because all passages for bringing them
Provision were cut off, yielded at discretion, and delivered seven hundred
Hostages of their own Children. He demanded of them the Roman Ensigns which
Gabinius had lost, and ordered them to pay the tributes formerly agreed upon by
C. Caesar, of which till now they had deferred the payment. Thus for the future
they became more obedient, and Caesar sent away the Ensigns in the Galley
called the Octavian.

Caesar marched toward them, sent him likewise Deputies to implore his favor
with offers to give Hostages, and pay those tributes, they had for some time
neglected, so that when he came nearer they delivered up their Hostages, and
confirmed the Ancient Treaty, which they had refused to do whilst he was
farther from them, by reason of his wound. It seems to me that of all the
people of Illyria* they were the last reduced by Caesar under his obedience,
either of those revolted against the Romans or which had never been under their
Dominion. Wherefore the Senate granted him the Honor of Triumph over the
Illyrians, though he triumphed not till after the Defeat of Anthony. The rest
of the People of Illyria according to the opinion of the Romans, are the
Rhetians situate before the Peonians, and after the Peonians the Noricks and
the Mysians, who extend themselves to the Euxine Sea, and I am of opinion that
the Rhetians and the Noricks were either subdued by C. Caesar, when he made War
upon the Celtes, or by Augustus in his Expedition against the Peonians, for I
find not that any Roman did particularly make War upon these Nations, which
makes me the rather think they were made subject at the same time with their
Neighbors. True it is that Marcus Lucullus brother to Lucius Lucullus that
defeated Mithridates, overran all Mysia as far as the Ister, near which there
are four Greek Cities Istros, Dionysopolis, Odyssa and Mesembria, and that he
brought out of Gaul that great Statue of Apollo which is to be seen in the
Palace; but I do not remember to have read, that ever any Roman that had
Command in the Commonwealth, ever had any thing farther to do with the Mysians,
or ever forced them to pay tribute, no not Augustus himself. As for Tiberius,
who was Emperor after Augustus, certain it is that the Mysians were under his
obedience, but I have spoken of all these things in writing the actions of the
Roman People before the Conquest of Egypt. And as for the Countries possessed
by the Emperors after the subduing of Egypt as they relate to their particular
Actions, so after having treated of general Affairs, I have wrote a particular
Book wherein mention is made of the Mysians in diverse places. But since the
Romans reckon the Mysians among the people of Illyria, I was willing to make
this mention of them in this Volume, Entitled the wars of Illyria, which I
should not have thought perfect, if I had not set down, that a long time before
Lucullus commanding under the authority of the People, had made incursions into
Mysia, and that Tiberius had reunited it to the Empire.

The End of the Illyrian War*
APPIAN OF ALEXANDRIA, HIS HISTORY OF THE Roman Wars AGAINST THE GAULS.
PART I.
BOOK VI.
The Argument of this Book.
I. THE Gauls coming to invade Italy, are several times defeated. II. Caesar
going against the Gauls conquers them, and is the first of all the Roman
Generals that passed into England or crossed the Rhine.

THE Gauls were the first of any people in the World, that Camillus defeated
them, and chased them from Rome, and sometime after being returned in Arms to
the Gates of the City, the same Camillus again defeated them, and triumphed at
the age of fourscore Years. They undertook a third expedition into Italy, but
the Roman Army commanded by T. Quintus, enclosed them round, and made a
horrible slaughter. After that the Burbon^i*
Boiens the most valiant of all the Gauls, being entered in Arms into the Roman
Territories, Sulpitius the Dictator, went against them and overcame them, by
this way of fighting, he divided his Forces into four Battalions, of which the
first went and discharged their piles upon the Enemy, and presently retired;
the second did the like, and so the third, and fourth in their order, avoiding
by this means the Darts thrown at them by the Enemy. And after they had all
discharged they joined their Bodies, and with terrible shouts ran desperately
with their Swords in their hands upon the gross of their Enemies, for they
thought the Gauls already maimed with showers of Piles, would be absolutely
daunted, when they saw themselves so furiously charged, by so many men
together. And indeed all the Army of the Boiens were cut in pieces by the
Romans, who with much bravery, put the Orders into Execution; now the Pile is a
sort of Arms differing from the Javelin; for the Shaft is square, and the Iron
of the same length with the Shaft, square in like manner and only sharp at the
point. Popilius defeated likewise another Army of the Gauls, and after him
Camillus, the Son of the first Camillus another. Aemilius Probus likewise
erected Trophies for a Victory gained ore the same Nation, but sometime before
the consulate of Marius, a prodigious multitude of Gauls, all valiant men, and
in the Flower of their Age, made an Irruption into Italy, and into the
Narbonese Province; where having beaten some Roman Consuls, and pillaged their
very Camps, Marius was sent against them, who cut them all in pieces.

The last and greatest of all the Wars the Romans had against the Gauls,
Caesar, for in ten Years that he commanded in Gallia, he defeated four Millions
of men, of which one Million were taken Prisoners in Fight, and as many slain,
he reduced under his obedience four hundred Nations, and eight hundred Cities,
reckoning as well those who being revolted he forced to return to their duty,
as those he conquered. It is true that before Marius, Fabius Maximus
Aemilianus, having with a small Power assailed a vast Army of Gauls, killed
sixscore thousand of them, in one only Battle; and though he was then afflicted
with a Wound newly received, yet he performed this noble Action by going
through the Ranks sometimes in his Litter, and sometimes on foot, sustained
only by two men on each side of him, encouraging his men, and teaching them how
to deal with the Barbarians.

To proceed. Caesar having began his War by the Suisses.
Helvetians and Canton of Zurick.
Tigurians put two hundred thousand of them to the Rout; of whom the first were
defeated by Labienus his Lieutenant, and the other with the Tricourians that
assisted them, by himself (these were the same Tigurians who formerly had
caused the Army of Piso and Cassius, to pass under the Yoke, as we read in the
Chronicle of Claudius Paulus) After which he made War upon Ariovistus and the
Germans, the lowest of whom was taller then the tallest Roman. They were fierce
and salvage, despisers of death (being persuaded they should one day rise
again) equally patient of heat and cold, and upon a need could live themselves
on raw Herbs, and feed their Horses with the green Sprouts of Trees. Yet they
seemed to be people not addicted to labor, and who fought not so much with
Reason and Discipline, as with fierce and brutish Violence, in which the Romans
had the advantage of them, for they for their parts ran on all together with
such a fury that they made whole Legions recoyl, whilst the Romans easily
giving ground without breaking their Ranks, got the day by their Conduct, and
at last cut in pieces fourscore thousand of them. After this Victory Caesar
having assailed the Hollanders.
Belgians at the Passage of a certain River, and killed such numbers, that the
heaps of dead Bodies served for a Bridge to pass over his Army, but he was hard
put to it by the Those of the Diocese of Cambray.
Nervians who surprising him in his March, before he could put his Army in
order, made a horrible slaughter. Most of his Tribunes and Centurions were
slain in this conflict, and himself forced to retreat to a Hill with his
Guards, where the Enemies kept him besieged, till the tenth Legion falling into
the Besiegers Rear cut them all in pieces, though they were no less then sixty
thousand men descended of the Cimbrians and the Teutons. The same Caesar
defeated the Savoyards.
Allobroges, and slew four hundred thousand Dutchies of Zupthen Cleves and Berg.
Usipetes and Tencterians, as well armed as disarmed, but the Sicambres
assaulting at unawares five thousand of his Horse only with five hundred put
them to flight, yet they were afterward defeated, and paid dear for their
boldness. Caesar was likewise the first of the Romans that crossed the Rhine,
or passed over into Britain, an Island so great that it seems another
Continent, and of which till then the Romans had no knowledge, He took his time
when the Sea was low to embarque his men, and the Flood coming in, his Fleet
was raised up by the Waves, at first insensibly, then a little faster, till at
last having Wind and Tide, he came over into Britain.

The end of the Gallick War.
APPIAN OF ALEXANDRIA, HIS HISTORY OF THE IBERIAN, OR Spanish War.
PART I.
BOOK VII.
The Argument of this Book.
I. DEscription of Spain. II. The occasions of the Wars in Spain, between the
Romans and Carthaginians. III. Hannibal made General besieges Saguntum. IV. War
declared, and Hannibal marches to Italy. V. Pub. and Cn. Scipio slain in Spain.
VI. Scipio the Son of Publius Proconsul into Spain, takes Carthagena by storm.
VII. He defeats Asdrubal Son of Gisco at Lersa, and at Careo totally routs him,
Mago and Massanissa. VIII. Asdrubal Son of Amilcar marches with his Army into
Italy and Scipio goes himself to King Syphax in Africa. IX. Scipio and his
Lieutenants take several Cities, the desperate Courage of the Astapians. X.
Mutiny in Scipio's Army punished: Indibilis suppressed: Massanissa seeks
Scipio's friendship. Mago goes for Liguria, and Scipio for Rome, where he
triumphs. XI. Cato sent into Spain defeats the Confederate Cities, his policy
to dismantle the Cities of Spain. XII. The successes of Flaccus and Gracchus in
Spain. XIII. A General Revolt of the Spaniards. Nobilior Wars against them with
ill success. XIV. Marcellus makes a peace with the Spaniards which is
disallowed by the Senate. XV. Lucullus Treachery, Cruelty and Covetousness:
Cornelius Scipio's single Combat. XVI. The War carried into Portugal, Manlius
prosecutes it first with ill, but afterward with good success. XVII. Attilius
and Galba carry on the War: Galba's cruelty and covetousness. Viriatus chosen
General of the Barbarians. XVIII. The Viriatick War. XIX. The continuation of
that War and Viriatus death. XX. The beginning of the Numantine War, with ill
success to the Romans. XXI. Scipio made Consul and sent into Spain, reforms and
disciplines the Army. XXII. He lays close siege to Numantia. XXIII. The
unexpressible miseries endured by the Numantines: they surrender to Scipio.
XXIV. The Actions of several other Generals in Spain, and the conclusion of
this History.

Celtae surnamed Galatians, or Gauls, and to the West the Celtiberi, possessing
all that circuit of ground, which is washed by the Tyrrhene Sea, and so round
about by the Pillars of Hercules to the vast Septentrional Ocean; for all Spain
save only what is enclosed by the Pyrenaean Mountains, which with a mighty and
almost straight line separate it from the rest of Europe, is embraced by the
Sea. But though it may be sailed round, yet the inhabitants only navigate the
Tyrrhene Sea, as far as Hercules Pillars, forbearing the West and Northern
parts, unless when they are carried to Britain with the tide which sets that
way only half the day. Beyond, neither the Romans, nor any of the Romans
Subjects ever adventured. But Iberia, or (as some call it) Spain, is of too
vast an extent to be imagined only one Region, for as well in length as breadth
it reaches near One thousand two hundred and fifty miles.
ten thousand Furlongs, abounding with diverse and sundry Nations, and many
Navigable Rivers. Who were the first and most ancient Inhabitants of Spain
(being only to write a Roman History) I think not very necessary to make any
strict inquiry into, but certainly the Celtae at some time or other climbing
over the Pyrenaeans, and mixing their habitations with the Iberians, from
thence gave them the Name of Celtiberians. It Is my Opinion likewise, that from
very Ancient time, the Phenicians for Traffic sake sailing to and fro,
possessed themselves of some parts of Spain. As also some Greeks brought to
Tartessus, to King Arganthonius by Sea, might very probably seat themselves in
those places (for Arganthonius then Reigned in Spain, and Tartessus was a
Maritime Town which is now called Carpessus). But that Temple of Hercules which
at this day stands near the Pillars, seems to be built by the Phenicians; from
this sole Argument, that even with in our memory, that God was there worshipped
with Phenician Ceremonies, and called the Tyrian, and not the Theban Hercules.
But I willingly forbear writing of those Antiquities. This fruitful Country
abundant in all good things, the Carthaginians before the Romans attempted and
invaded, and already were possessed of some parts, and spoiled and robbed
others, until the Romans driving them out, soon became Masters of all they
possessed, and the Remainder likewise, after long time, much labor and
frequent revolts, being by them brought under, they divided into three parts,
to each of which they sent Pretors. Now how they subdued them, and how first
with the Carthaginians, and afterward with the Celtiberians they waged War,
shall be the subject of this Book; the first Part of which contains the
Carthaginian Affairs: For their concerns in Spain, it was necessary for me to
transfer to the Spanish History, for the same Reasons as I have in the Sicilian
History treated of such things, as were acted between the Romans and
Carthaginians in Sicily, from the time that the Romans first crossed over into
that Island, and began to usurp the Dominion of it; for the Romans first waged
a tedious War with the Carthaginians, in Sicily for Sicily it self, and another
in Spain for Spain, whilst at the same both led mighty Forces into other of
their Enemies Territories, and these wasted Italy and those Lybia.

Now this War began in the hundred and fortieth Olympiad, principally Amilcar,
surnamed Barcas, at such time when he commanded as General the Carthaginian
Army, had made promise of great rewards to the Mercenary Gauls, and Auxiliary
Africans, which when they at his return into Lybia laid claim to kindled the
African War. In which besides many damages suffered by the Carthaginians from
the Africans themselves, they yielded up Sardinia to the Romans, as a reprizal
of those losses the Roman Merchants had in this African War sustained.
Wherefore Barcas summoned by his Adversaries to Judgment, as the Instrument of
inflicting all these calamities upon his Country, having drawn to his party the
Heads of the Commonwealth (by the means especially of Asdrub^l his Son-in-law,
who was very popular) not only evaded a Trial, but a War then happening with
the Numidians, prevailed to be chosen General with Hanno, surnamed the Great,
before he had given any account of former administration. This War ended, and
Hanno for some Crimes recalled, he remaining sole Commander of the Army, with
his Son-in-Law Asdrubal, crossing the Strait, comes to Cadiz, and though he had
received no injury from the Spaniards, wastes their Confines, seeking only an
opportunity to continue abroad, do some great Actions, and be able to exercise
his liberality to the people: For whatever he took by War he so divided, that
the Soldier had one part, to oblige them to be the trustier Associates of his
Rapines, one part he sent to Carthage, and another distributed into Gifts, to
such of the Heads of the Commonwealth as favored him; and this course he held
till several petty Spanish Kings, and other powerful men, conspiring against
him by this means, cut him off. They yoked Oxen into Carts laden with Wood,
and driving them toward the Enemy, marched themselves armed behind, which when
the Africans perceived, not dreaming of any such daring deceitful design, they
burst out into a laughter; but when they came so near as to engage, the
Spaniards setting fire to the Wood, drove their Carts amongst the Enemy, and
the flame growing violent, the Oxen hurrying them hither and thither,
disordered the Africans, and breaking their main Body, the Spaniards slew
Barcas himself, and many others coming in to their relief. But the
Carthaginians having already tasted the sweetness of Spanish plunder, would not
so give over, but sent again fresh Forces into Spain, whom they gave Commission
to Asdrubal, Amilcars Son-in-Law, to Command: And he chose Hannibal (soon after
famous for warlike exploits) though now but a young man, yet very daring, and
well beloved by the Soldiery, for his Lieutenant General. By whose labor and
diligence in Warlike Affairs, together with his Courtesy and Eloquence (in
which he excelled) he added to his Command a great part of Spain, extending the
power of his Arms from the Western Ocean to the River Ib^rus, which divides
Spain in the midst, and about five days journey from the Pyrenean Mountains
runs into the Septentrional Ocean. But the Saguntines, which were a Colony of
the people of Zant, and other Greeks, who inhabited the Mart-towns, and other
places of Spain, growing jealous of their own safety, sent Ambassadors to Rome.
The Senate, who were unwilling to have the power of the Carthaginians advanced
or enlarged, dispatched an Embassy to Carthage, where it was agreed, that the
limits of the Carthaginian Empire should be the River Iberus, beyond which
neither should it be lawful for the Carthaginians by Arms to provoke their
Allies, nor for them to pass over to make War upon the Carthaginians, but the
Saguntines, and other Greeks should enjoy their liberty. And to this end a
solemn Instrument was signed on both sides. In the mean time, while Asdrubal
governed that part of Spain, subject to the Carthaginians, a Slave (that he
might offer an acceptable Sacrifice to the Ghost of his dead Master, cruelly
murdered by Asdrubal's command) suddenly and privately assaulting him, as he
was carelessly hunting, slew him, and being soon after convicted of the Fact,
was with dreadful Torments put to death by Hannibal; who forthwith, though very
young, yet dearly beloved by the Soldiers, was by the Army saluted General, and
their Military Grant confirmed by consent of the Senate. When the death of
Amilcar and Asdrubal was known among those, who in several parts of the
Commonwealth stood in fear of their Power, they began to despise Hannibal's
youth, and to transport the crimes of the dead on their Clients and Friends;
the people consenting with the Accusers, and mindful of past injuries, making
others guilty of the sorrows they had under Amilcar and Asdrubal patiently
endured: even to the compelling those that from them had received great
presents to restore them to the Public, as part of the Prey gotten from the
Enemy. They therefore sent Letters to Hannibal, desiring his assistance and
support, and warily advising him, that if he neglected those, who should be his
assistants as home, he would become contemptible to all his Fathers Enemies:
But he of himself foreseeing all these things, and not being ignorant, but
that by endangering his Friends, they laid Snares for him, as formerly they had
done for his Father and Brother-in-Law, though it behoved him to be very
careful of his Conduct, lest always fearfully delaying and dissembling his
hate, he should be tormented with continual debate, and perpetually exposed to
the lust and will of the Carthaginian people, light and inconstant, and ever
ungrateful to those deserved best of them. Besides Fame reported, that when yet
a Boy, his Father had at the flaming Altars made him swear, That when ever he
should be called to Office in the Commonwealth, he should be an eternal Enemy
to the Romans. For this reason he imagined, that if he could involve his
Country in lasting and difficult troubles, and distract them with high and
doubtful undertakings, his Friends would be safe: He now beheld not only Africa
in Peace, but likewise the Carthaginian Dominion in Spain; but if he could stir
up War with Rome (which he vehemently desired) he thougt his fellow Citizens
would have their Heads filled with cares and fears, whilst he, if this War had
happy success, should gain immortal glory, having added to his Country the
Empire of the World, which if taken from the Romans there were no other
Competitors for it: Or if his hopes failed him, future Ages would at least
applaud his noble attempts.

To give a brave beginning to these Designs, he consulted how to cross Iberus;
and having commanded the Torboletae, Neighbors to the Saguntines; whose Fields
the Saguntines had wasted to come to him, sends them to Carthage, and among
other secrets, writes that the Roman Spaniards solicited the Carthaginian
allies to revolt, charging herewith those of Saguntum, and weaving all he did
with craft, so often writes this, that at length the Senate decreed he should
deal with the Saguntines, as he thought fit. Laying hold on this occasion, he
contrived that the Torboletae should again come to him to complain against the
Saguntines, who summoned to send to him their Deputies; when they were come, he
commanding all matters of Controversy, between both parties, should be
disputed before him, they answered, That they referred all things to the
Romans; whereat Hannibal enraged, commanded them forthwith to depart the Camp,
and himself the same night, with all his Forces, crossing the Iberus, began to
waste their Territories, and to bring his Engines before the City, which
because he saw he could not take by force, he begirt with a Trench and
Pallisado, raising Towers at convenient distances, and resolving to reduce it
by Siege. The Saguntines oppressed with this sudden and unexpected invasion,
sent Ambassadors to Rome, and the Senate with them dispatched away others:
First, to admonish Hannibal of the League; and if he would not obey, then to go
to Carthage to complain of him. These arriving in Spain by Sea, were coming
toward the Camp, when Hannibal forbid them to advance any farther. Wherefore
they bent their course directly toward Carthage, where being arrived, and
pleading the Solemn League and Contract, the Carthaginians accused the
Saguntines of having wronged their Subjects: the Ambassadors proposed, That the
difference should be decided by Roman Judges: they replied, They used not to
refer wrongs to judgment, which they could revenge themselves of. This being
reported at Rome, some voted the sending present assistance to the Saguntines,
but others judged it better to delay it, because in the Articles of Peace they
were not written Allies to the people of Rome, but free, and to enjoy their
Liberty. This last opinion carried it: So that the Saguntines despairing of the
Roman aid, all things growing scarce, by reason of the long Siege (for Hannibal
finding it at first well stored, and abounding in all things, was the more
industrious to straiten them) they by Public Proclamation commanded all the
Gold and Silver, both Public and Private, to be brought into the Market place,
and there that it might be of no use of Hannibal, melted it down with Lead,
Brass, and other baser Metals. Then thinking it more honorable to dye
fighting, than be starved with hunger; made a Sally by night, and with great
fury fell into the Africans Quarters, yet sleeping, and suspecting no such
thing, killing some, as they rose out of their Beds, and trembling, snatched at
their Arms, and others, as they opposed them: but after a tedious conflict,
many Africans, and all the Saguntines were slain. The Women from the Walls
beholding the death of their Husbands, some threw themselves from the Roofs of
their Houses, others hanged themselves, and others cut their Childrens Throats.
This was the sad end of a City, once rich and potent. Hannibal finding how they
had cheated him of his Gold, in a rage caused all the Captives, and Youth
remaining, to be slain. But the City being seated near the Sea, and not far
from Carthage, in a fruitful Soil, he restored and replenished with new
Inhabitants, making it a Carthaginian Colony, which is now, as I think the same
called Car^agena.
Carthago Spartagena.

Carthage, whom they demanded to deliver up Hannibal, as having broken the
League, unless they would by public assent own whatever he had done, and if
they refused to deliver him, forthwith to declare War. The Demand being made,
because they would not deliver up Hannibal, the War was in this manner
denounced. The Ambassador smiling, and putting his hand into his bosom, told
them, I bring you here, O Carthaginians, either War or Peace, choose which you
will have: They cried out, Do thou then give us which thou please: Whereupon he
profering War, they all said they accepted it, and forthwith sent commands to
Hannibal, that freely the League being now broken, he should now overcome all
Spain. He marching to the neighboring people, either by persuasions, force or
fear gained them; gathered together mighty Forces, but revealing to none the
design he had, though his strength were bent to the War in Italy, he had
already sent Agents into Gaul, and some to make discovery of the passages of
the Alps, and how he might best carry his Forces to Italy, leaving his Brother
Asdrubal in Spain, whilst the Romans supposed they had only a War to manage
against the Carthaginians in Spain and Africa, without the least suspicion that
ever they would enter Italy: For they had sent Tiberius Sempronius Longus with
one hundred and sixty Ships, and two Legions into Africa. But what Longus, or
other Roman Generals did in Africa, is set down in the Punick War. Moreover,
into Spain they sent P. Cornelius Scipio with threescore Ship, ten thousand
Foot, and seven hundred Horse, and gave him Cn. Cornelius Scipio for
Lieutenant. Of these Publius more certainly informed, by the Marsilian^
Merchants, that Hannibal had already passed the Alps into Italy, fearful lest
finding the Italians unprepared, he should oppress them, leaving the Army he
had in Spain with Cneus his Brother, and embarking on a Galley, he landed in
To^cany.
Hetruria. But what as well he, as other Generals commanding in this War did,
till such time as after the expiration of sixteen years, they then hardly
forced Hannibal out of Italy, the next Book shall declare, wherein all
Hannibals exploits performed in Italy are contained, wherefore it is entitled,
The Roman Wars with Hannibal.

Cneus did nothing memorable in Spain, before his Brothers coming; But the time
of his Magistracy expired, the Romans gave Commission to the new Consuls to
prosecute the War in Italy, and against Hannibal in the room of Publius; and
commanded him to go Proconsul into Spain: from which time both of the Brothers
jointly maintained the War against Asdrubal, the African General till such time
as Syphax King of the Numidians making War upon the Carthaginians, they called
him home with the greatest part of his Forces, and in his absence they easily
overpowred the rest, and as they were no less expert in the Duty of Generals
then skilful in alluring, and pacifying the minds of men, they drew many Cities
to their Party. But after Peace concluded with the Numidian King, the
Carthaginians sending Asdrubal with a more powerful Army and thirty Elephants,
joining in Commission with him two Colleagues, Mago, and another Asdrubal the
Son of Gilco, War lay heavier upon the Scipio's, who yet oftentimes retired
victorious with the slaughter of many Africans and Elephants. Till Winter
coming on, the Africans retired among the Turditani and for the Scipio's, Cneus
went and wintred among the Orsonenses, and Publius among the Castulovenses;
which last having advice of Asdrubal's advancing that way, going out of the
City with a small Party, only to discover the Enemies Camp, imprudently fell in
with Asdrubal and his Horse, by whom both he and all that were with him were
overpowred and cut in pieces. In the mean time Gneus Ignorant of this Calamity,
had sent some Soldiers to his Brother to receive Corn, who joining Battle with
another Party of Africans they unexpectedly met upon the way: news of it being
brought to Cneus, he made have to their relief, with such Soldiers as he had in
readiness, but the Carthaginians having before cut in pieces the other Party,
fell upon Cneus likewise, and forced him to fly for shelter to a certain Tower,
which setting on fire they burnt him and all his people. This misfortunate end
had those two brave men the Scipio's, leaving the Spaniards, especially those
gained by their Conduct, to the Roman alliance, in no small regret for their
loss.

The Fathers at Rome grievously afflicted at this distaster, sent Marcellus
Sicily) and with him Claudius into Spain with a thousand Horse, ten thousand
Foot, and store of Provision, who whilst they sloathfully manage Affairs, the
Carthaginian Power mightily increased in Spain, almost all the Province being
possessed by them, and the Romans shut in the Pyrenean Mountains, which
reported at Rome, more sadly disquieted the Fathers, fearful lest whilst
Hannibal wasted those parts of Italy next the Alps, the Africans should make a
descent at the other end, wherefore though they willingly would have given over
this Spanish War, yet they thought it not safe, apprehensive lest it likewise
might be transferred to Italy, and therefore appointed a day of assembly, for
the nominating a Proconsul for Spain, but when no man then stood for it, their
fears revived, and a sad silence seized all the assembly. Till Cornelius Scipio
(the Son of Publius slain in Spain) a very young man (being not yet twenty four
years of Age) but prudent and valiant, and of a strong constitution, stepped
forth in the midst of the people, and with a brave and noble boldness,
discoursing first of his Father, and then of his Uncle, deploring both their
misfortune, added that he alone was left of that Family to be the revenger of
his Father, his Uncle, and his Country, and copiously and magnificently
subjoyning many other things, as if inspired by some Divine Spirit promising
not only the recovery of Spain, but the Conquest of Africa and Carthage it
self, so that his discourse seemed to some to proceed only from youthful
Levity, but because he cheared the peoples fainting minds with hope (for
promises are Cordials to any that are in fear) thinking he had a heart fit for
these great things, they chose him General for Spain, but the Old men
interpreted this rather a confident rashness in him, then a settled bravery of
mind; which when Scipio perceived he recalled the people to the Assembly, and
with the same Gravity as before, speaking of his Age, said that it ought to be
no objection to his undertakings, yet if any one of riper Years, would accept
the command, he was ready to yield it to him. But none taking up the offer, he
went with greater admiration and applause to this War, with (...) thousand
Foot, and five hundred Horse (for he was not permitted to carry greater Forces,
whilst Hannibal wasted Italy) with Money and other warlike Provision, and twenty
eight Ships, which carried him into Spain, where ^oyning the Remain of the old
Spanish Army to those he brought, and calling a Counsel, he confirmed the
Soldiers minds, with a noble and eloquent Oration. And already the Fame was
spread throughout all Spain, weary of the Carthaginian Government, and desirous
of Scipio's Virtue, that Scipio the Son of Scipio was come, a General sent to
them by the Counsel of the Gods. And Scipio himself knowing the opinion
conceived of him, much improved it, by pretending to do nothing but by advice
from above. But when he had certain knowledge that the Enemy had four standing
Camps, at good distance from each other, and that their numbers were five and
twenty thousand Foot, and two thousand five hundred Horse, and that all their
Stores, Money, Corn, Arms, Darts, Ships, Captives and Hostages for all Spain,
were laid up in the City, called formerly Saguntum; but now Carthagena, where
Mago commanded with ten thousand Carthaginians; he resolved, as thinking the
Garrison of no great strength, first to invest this place, both because he was
desirous to possess himself of such Stores, and because he understood, if he
took this City, abounding in Silver, Gold, and all Riches, and whence it was
but a short passage into Africa, it would be a secure retreat for him both from
Sea and Land. Encouraged by these hopes, all men knowing whither he designed,
about Sunset he Discamped, and all night long marched toward Carthagena, and
about break of day, began to open his Trenches, to the great terror of the
Enemy, who dreamed not of his coming; the next day he prepared for the assault,
and disposed his Engines and Scaling Ladders, about all parts of the Town, save
only in that place, where the Walls are low, by reason of the Seas washing
them; for which reason likewise they are the less vigilantly defended. Then at
night, when all were armed with Darts and Stones, the Fleet likewise lying
before the Haven, lest the Enemies Ships should slip out (for this brave
spirited man had conceived a certain hope of taking the Town) before day he
advanced with his Machines, commanding those on the Machines to charge: Mago at
the Gates instructs his ten thousand, that when they saw it convenient, they
should rush forth only with their Swords, for that Spears would be of little
use in those narrow places; the rest of his Soldiers he posted upon Towers,
disposing many Engines, Stones, Darts, and Catapults upon the Walls, and with
great diligence attending the Affair: At length the shot being given, the
charge was stoutly made and received, Stones, Darts, and other sorts of missile
Arms, flew about with great violence, some from hands, some from Machines, and
some from Slings; and if there were any other device, it was made use off. But
Scipio's men were hard put to it, for those ten thousand men that were at the
Gates, rushing out with their Swords in their hands, upon those that thrust
forward the Engines, and giving and taking many wounds, the dispute was a long
time equal: till at length by unwearied courage, and fixed resolution, the
Romans got the the better; and then Fortune changing, those who stood upon the
Walls began to be afflicted: but when the Scaling Ladders were applied; the
Carthaginians, who had sallied only with their short Swords speedily returning
into the City, shut the Gates, and leaped upon the Walls: So that now new work
and labor was cut out for the Romans. Whilst these things were doing, Scipio,
who was no where absent, encouraging and chearing up his men; observing about
noon that the water was fallen away, from that part where the Bay washed the
ower Wall (for at certain hours the Sea Eb'd and Flowed) and was now so shoal,
some places it was not above breast, and in others scarce midleg high; and
knowing the Nature of the Bay, that it would continue thus shallow all the
remainder of the day, until the accustomed return of the Tide, he cried out
with a loud voice, Now Soldiers, now is the time, now God our helper comes, now
storm that Wall, where the Sea of its own accord withdrawing opens you a way:
Now with speed bring your Ladders, I my self will show you the way. This said,
snatching a Ladder, he sets it to the Wall, and would himself first have
mounted, if his Esquires and other Soldiers had not hindered him; but they
therewith clapping many Ladders at once to the Wall, and both sides meeting
with great noise and fury, made a mighty slaughter of each other, till the
Romans having possessed themselves of some of the higher Towers. Scipio filling
them with Trumpets and Cornets, commanded them to sound as loud as possibly
they could, according to the custom when a City is taken; whilst in the mean
time others running about, filled all places with tumult and confusion; and
some in this disorder of their Enemies leaping over the Walls, and let in
Scipio's whole Army, whereupon the Townsmen run to their Houses, and Mago with
his ten thousand drew up into the Market place, where being most at the first
charge slain, and he only with a few fled to the Castle; Scipio presently
following, and Mago perceiving no hopes of safety left, his Soldiers being all
utterly dismayed and astonished, yielded himself. Thus by his Gallantry and
good Fortune, a rich and powerful City in one day (the fourth of his setting
down before it) reduced under Scipio's power; he began to conceive hopes of
mighty things, and now the common Fame spread concerning him, that he acted
nothing but by Divine Counsel, was more and more confirmed, and himself had the
same opinion, believing henceforward all his undertakings directed from above;
and whenever he went into the Capitol, having caused the Gates to be shut, he
often staid there a long time, as if he had been conferring with some God;
whence now in solemn Pomps a Statue of Scipio's is only brought out of the
Capitol, and all the rest out of the place of Assemblies. This City thus taken,
furnished with all things necessary for Peace or War: Scipio found there vast
quantities of all sorts of spoil, store of Arms, Darts, Engines, Rigging, and
thirty three Galleys, Corn and sundry sorts of Provisions; Ivory, Gold and
Silver, as well wrought into Vessels and coined, as uncoined in abundance,
together with all the Spanish Hostages and Prisoners, and such as had before
been taken from the Romans. The next day having sacrificed, celebrated the
Victory, and applauded the Soldiers Valor; he likewise assembled the Townsmen,
and in an Oration admonished them to keep in memory the Name of the Scipio's.
Then he sent the Captives every one to their homes, hoping by this kindness to
bring over their Cities to his party. He likewise distributed rewards to the
Soldiers; to him who first mounted the Walls, a very large one, to the second
half so much, to the third a third part, and to the rest according to their
Deserts and Valor. What Gold, Silver or Ivory he found, he sent upon the
Enemies Ships to Rome, where they decreed three days Supplication, because
after so many Miseries the Public Happiness began to take breath: but the
greatness and celerity of this bold attempt, sorely terrified both the
Spaniards, and the Carthaginians that were in Spain. Scipio leaving a Garrison
in Carthagena, and giving orders for raising higher the Wall to the Sea side,
went himself about the rest of the Province, or sent Friends into several parts
to renew an alliance with them, and those who would not comply, he reduced by
force of Arms.

Asdrubal, the Son of Amilcar, one of the Carthaginian Generals had far distant
in Celtiberia, a chosen Army of Mercenary Soldiers, and the other the Son of
Gisco, sending Agents to those Cities, who had hitherto continued faithful to
the Carthaginians, to persuade them still to continue their fidelity, in a
short time hoped to see innumerable Forces in Spain; and Mago he sent into all
the adjacent parts to list men under pay, whilst in the mean time himself in
Lersa entering in hostile manner into their Territories, who had fallen off;
prepared to lay Siege to some Towns, but frightened with Scipio's sudden
approach, he retreated to Baetica, and fortified both the City and his Camp,
where few days after he was overcome by Scipio, who possessed himself both of
Camp and City: whereupon he issued out Orders for all the Carthaginian Forces
throughout Spain, to come to the City of Careo, resolving with his whole united
Power to fall upon Scipio. And already, there were come in to him no small
number of Spaniards under Mago's Conduct, and Numidians under the Command of
Massanissa. Asdrubal with his Foot lay entrenched, Massanissa and Mago with his
Horse in Quarters: Scipio had so divided his Foot as to send Laelius with one
part against Mago, whilst himself with the other fell upon Massanissa. This
fight was somewhat doubtful and dangerous to the Romans; for the Numidians at a
distance threw their Darts, and so wheeling off, returned again to the charge
at pleasure; but when Scipio commanded his men, that after throwing their Piles
with all their force, they should press in as hard as they could upon the
Enemy, then the Numidians not having room to wheel, were worsted, and fled away
to their Camp: Scipio in a strong and safe place, as he could wish for, pitched
his Camp, within ten furlongs of his Enemy. In the Carthaginian Army were
seventy thousand Foot, fifteen hundred Horse, and thirty six Elephants. Scipio
had not a part of that number, wherefore he for some time forbore fighting,
save only for some light skirmishes; but when through want of Provisions,
hunger began to afflict his Army, thinking it dishonorable to retreat, having
first sacrificed; suddenly (though otherwise his Army were both willing and
ready enough) he affirmed, God had according to custom appeared to him, and
exhorted him to engage the Enemy, that they should rather rely upon the Divine
Conduct, then upon force and multitude; for the greatest Victories were not
gained by numbers of Men, but by the grace and favor of the Gods. And whilst
they gave credit to his words, he commanded the Diviners to bring forth the
Entrails; and as he was speaking, seeing some Birds fly to and again with great
rejoicing and earnestness he showed them, as a certain sign of Victory, given
him from above; and as if at the sight of them, he had been possessed by some
spirit, now viewing them, and now crying out, turned about after them, the
whole Army imitating their General in his several postures; and he turning this
and that way toward the Soldiers, stirred them up as to a Victory already
prepared for them, till now having wrought them up to his wishes, he thought
not convenient to let their Courage cool by any delay; but whilst they were
persuaded, all he yet spoke was by Divine Instinct, not in the heat of that
persuasion, after such lucky signs, protract the fight: Wherefore, as soon as
they had eaten, he commanded his Soldiers to Arms, and giving the charge of the
Horse to Syllanus, and of the Foot to Laelius and Martius rushed unexspectedly
upon the Enemy, for the Camps being but ten furlongs distant from each other,
Scipio was upon them before Asdrubal's, Mago's or Massanissa's men could take
any food to refresh them, forcing them hastily to snatch up their Arms, not
without great Consternation and Tumult. Both Horse and Foot being then engaged,
the Roman Horse got the better; for as they had done in the former fight,
charging home, and with great fury upon the Numidians, so that they could not
make a retreat, and then again wheel about upon the Enemy, they soon made their
Darts ineffectual. But the Foot much inferior in number, were oppressed by the
Africans, and were now yielding up the honor of the day, nor would by any of
Scipio's encouragements or exhortations be persuaded to stand, till the General
himself giving his Horse to his Boy, and snatching a Shield, runs alone between
both Battles, and with a loud voice crying out, Now or never Romans rescue your
Scipio from danger. At that voice, both those those who stood next and saw, and
those farther off who heard what danger he was in, altogether moved, as well
with respect as fear for their General, with great outcrys ran violently upon
the Enemy, whose charge the Africans not able to sustain, (for toward evening
their strength failed them for want of Food) began to give ground. Then in a
short time was made a most horrible slaughter; such success had Scipio at the
Battle of Careo, which long time seemed doubtful and dangerous, there were
slain about eight hundred of the Romans, and about fifteen thousand of the
Enemy. Scipio pursued the Africans, who made a hasty retreat, infesting and
charging them in Flank or Rear, wherever he could reach them, till they
having gained a certain Post, fortified by Nature, commodious for Water and
Provisions, and inexpugnable by any means, but a tedious Siege, called upon by
other Affairs, he left Syllanus to block them up, and went himself through the
rest of Spain, reducing the Cities to obedience. The Africans besieged by
Syllanus, by little and little made their retreat toward the Sea side, that
they might get over into Cadiz, followed in their March by Syllanus, who
incommoded them to the utmost of his power, and returned to Scipio to
Carthagena.

Now Asdrubal, the Son of Amilcar, having toward the Northern Hannibal into
Italy, taking his March along the Coasts of the North Sea, that he might secure
himself from Scipio; and crossing over the Pyrenean Mountains, he got down in
Gaul with a numerous Army of Celtiberian Mercenaries; and thus unknown to the
Romans made haste into Italy. Mean while Lucius returning from Rome, told
Scipio that the Romans had some thoughts of sending him to command in Africa;
which being what he himself had often before hoped and wished for, he
dispatched away Laelius in five Ships to Africa, with presents to King Syphax,
to put him in mind of Scipio's Friendship, and to entreat him to enter into a
League offensive and defensive with him, if the Romans should send any Forces
into Africa: Syphax having accepted the presents, and returned others, promised
to do as he desired; which when the Carthaginians heard, they likewise sent
Ambassadors to Syphax, to treat an Alliance with him, whereof Scipio having
certain intelligence, and judging wisely, that if the Carthaginians should rob
him of Syphax friendship, it would be a thing of no small importance, he
resolved to go in person to him, and accompanied with Lelius, embarked on two
Galleys, and steered his course toward Africa, when he came nigh the shore,
and was upon the point of entering the Harbor, the Carthaginian Ambassadors
(unknown to the King) armed out those long Ships they had, and in hostile
manner went to meet him, but Scipio setting his Sails was too swift for them,
and got safely into Port. Syphax invited both parties to be his guests but
privately made a league with Scipio, and having engaged himself by faithful
promise dismissed him, and lest the Carthaginians should have any design to
intercept him, detained them somewhat longer with him, till he had reached so
far off to Sea, that he was out of danger, this hazard Scipio run both in the
Voyage and in Port. It Is reported that at a Banquet made by that King, Scipio
and Asdrubal being placed upon the same bed, Asdrubal discoursed with him about
many things, and admiring his gravity, said afterward among his Friends. That
he was a man not only formidable in Wa^ but even in the midst of jollity and
feasting.

Mago the Carthaginian, whom Martius falling upon, slew about fifteen hundred
of, and putting the ^est to flight, dispersed them among the Cities, besides
having driven another body of an Army commanded by Hanno, consisting of seven
hundred Horse and six thousand Foot, to a certain eminence, he reduced them to
such scarcity, that they sent Agents to him for peace, he commanded them to
deliver up Hanno and the Fugitives, and then he would treat with them;
Whereupon presently laying hold upon Hanno (who stood by and heard all this)
they delivered him up with all the Fugitives. Martius then demands the
Prisoners, whom having also received he orders them to bring down the sum of
money promised and agreed upon, into the Plain and Champian Fields, for high
places, said he, not well suit with punishment; when they were come into the
plain, You are the Ringleaders, said he, of those who when their Countries
have submitted to us, yet continue to bear Arms under the Enemy against them,
however laying down your weapons I permit you to depart unpunished. Hereat the
Celtiberians grievously incensed cried all out with one voice they would not
lay down their Arms, whereupon followed a sharp engagement: wherein some of
them (not unrevenged) being slain, the rest got safe to Mago who sometime
before was advancing toward Hanno's Camp, but hearing of his loss crossed over
into Cadiz, where he lay idle in great want, expecting the Issue of things. But
Scipio having sent Syllanus before to the City of Castace to receive them into
Friendship, they not harkening to peace he prepared to besiege them, and
communicated his resolutions to Scipio, who dispatching away some Engines for
the assault, himself followed, but in his march resolved to force the City of
Illyrgis. This Town had been confederate with the Romans in the time of the
former Scipio's who being slain, the Romans that escaped the slaughter flying
hither they received them, but (though at that time in alliance with them)
delivered them up to the Carthaginians. Scipio enraged at this treachery, in
four hours time overcame them, and though himself received a wound in the neck,
gave not over the fight till he saw the Victory certain, the Soldiers at their
own instance, without any command, neglecting the spoil and plunder (so much
did their Generals wound, wound their very souls) spared neither Sex nor age,
not suffering their rage to cool till they levelled the whole City with the
ground. Scipio being from thence come to Castace, dividing his Forces into
three parts, laid siege to it, but forbore the assault to give the inhabitants
time to repent, which he had intelligence they were already disposed to, and
not long after having slain those of the Garrison, that opposed their
intentions, the Conquerors yielded themselves to Scipio, who placing there a
new Garrison, and committing the care of the City to one of the inhabitants, a
man of good fame and reputation, he returned himself to Carthagena, sending
Syllanus and Martius toward the Seacoasts, that as far as they could they
might wast and spoil the whole Country. There was a certain town called Astapa,
which had ever sided with the Carthaginians, the inhabitants whereof being
besieged by Martius, and well forseeing if they were overcome by the Romans
they should be subjected to perpetual slavery, brought all things they had of
value into the Marketplace, and piling up wood about them, placed their Wives
and Children on the top of all, then fifty of their stoutest men compelled by
oath promised, that when they saw the City in such distress, that it must needs
be taken, they would first kill the Women and Children, and then setting fire
to the pile slay themselves. And so invoking the Gods against Martius, with
great Noise and Clamor they sallied out, when nothing was less feared by the
Enemy, then that they durst appear without their Walls, wherefore they easily
repulsed the light Armed Foot, and Horse, which first engaged them, and when an
Armed Legion advanced, the desperate Astapians still fought most courageously,
but at length were forced to fall under their multitudes, whom they did yield
to in valor; being all slain with their Arms in their hands, those fifty left
in the City slew the Women and Children, and then setting fire to the Pile cast
themselves into it, leaving no fruits of the Victory to the Conquerors. Martius
admiring the Astapians, spared the buildings.

After these things Scipio fell sick, and while Martius commanded the Scipio,
openly deserted Martius, and encamped by themselves, to whom many in like
manner flocked from the Garrisons, Mago hereupon sent some with Money to
encourage them to a revolt: the Money they received, and created among
themselves new Leaders and Centurions, who managed all things as they pleased,
and had their own Councils; when Scipio heard hereof, he sent Letters apart to
these deserters telling them, that being prevented by sickness he could not yet
reward them. Others he sent to those not yet infected with this Contagion,
advising them to recall their mad fellow Soldiers to their duty, and others
again, to all together, as if they were reconciled, wherein he wrote that he
should be ready to pardon any that had slipped aside, commanding them all to come
to Carthagena, and receive their pay; while these letters were reading, some
thought they were not to be trusted, others gave full credit to them, At last
they agreed among themselves to go all together to Carthagena. In the mean time
Scipio gives directions to those Senators, that were with him, that as soon as
any of the heads of this conspiracy came, they should accost them in a friendly
manner, pleasantly admonishing them, and inviting them to be their guests,
privately secure them: he likewise gave Order to his Tribunes, that at dawn of
day they should get together the most faithful of their Soldiers, with their
Swords by their sides, and posting them in the most convenient places of the
Assembly, if any tumult should begin they should presently fall on, and kill
without expecting a signal. Not long after day light, the General getting up
was brought to the Tribunal, and the Cryers were commanded to call the Soldiers
to the Assembly. They not expecting the Cryers call, thinking it would be very
rude if they should make their General, who had not yet fully recovered his
strength, wait longer for them (imagining withal that they were called to come
and receive rewards) ran in have from all parts, some without Swords and others
for have, only with a loose Coat about them, not staying to put on other
Clothes, Scipio (the appointed guards keeping close) first reproved them
sharply for their Villainous Action, but Yet, said he, punishment is only to be
inflicted on those were Authors of the crime, in doing which I will use your
help; Scarce had he spoke these words but the Crowd dividing as if he had given
them a sign to do it, the heads of the mutiny were by the Senators set forth in
the midst, exclaming as they were led along, and imploring their fellow
Soldiers help, but whoever at their Outcrys did but murmur, were presently
slain by the Tribunes. The rest of the Crowd perceiving the whole place of
Assembly beset with Armed Men in a sad silence hung down their heads, whilst
those brought into the midst of them, were by Scipio's command first scourged
with Rods, and then fastened to the stake, had their heads struck off with Axes;
which done he made the Cryers to proclaim pardon to the rest. In this Condition
stood Scipio's Army. There was one Indibilis a little King, and one of those
who had made a League and Confederacy with Scipio, who at the same time that
the mutiny was in Scipio's Army, in hostile manner invaded the Territories of
some of Scipio's Allies, and when Scipio led the Army against him, maintained
so stout a fight, that he slew twelve hundred of the Romans, but having lost
twenty thousand of his own, he sent Ambassadors to Scipio to crave peace, which
for a considerable sum of Money was granted him. Massanissa likewise crossing
the Sea unknown to Asdrubal, came to a conference with Scipio, and giving him
his right hand promised, that if he could come over into Africa, he would give
him all the assistance he could. This was a man in all things constant to his
Faith, but he for this reason fell off from the Carthaginians, Massanissa was
betrothed to the Daughter of Asdrubal, the General under whom he now made War,
and Syphax almost died for this Ladies Love, wherefore the Carthaginians
judging of what importance it would be to them, in this present War if they
could join to their party against the Romans so Potent a King, without
consulting the Father, gave him the Daughter in Marriage, and and this Asdrubal
out of respect to him, kept secret from Massanissa, but he finding it out some
other way, sought thereupon Scipio's friendship. Mago, having still a fleet to
command, seeing the affairs of Spain grown desperate, sailed among the
Ligurians and Gauls, there to raise Mercenary Soldiers. After his departure
those of Cadiz, as if betrayed by Mago, yielded themselves to the Romans, from
which time first began the Roman Custom to send Annual Magistrates into Spain
as to a Conquered People, to keep in Peace and Govern the Province, which
happened in the hundred forty fourth Olympiad. But Scipio leaving the whole
Country in Peace, with no very strong Garrisons (placed all the Soldiers
weakened with wounds, together in one City, which from Italy he called the
Italian, famous for the birth of Trajan and Adrian, who after in succeeding
times came to be Roman Emperors) and himself building a Magnificent Fleet, with
a great Number of Captives, and laden with Money, Arms and other spoils,
returned to Rome, where he was received with mighty Pomp to his great and
incredible glory, as well because of his youth, as because of the Expedition
wherewith he had done so many Noble exploits, insomuch that those who envyed
him, confessed that his actions had far exceeded his Rich Promises, wherefore
to the admiration of all Men he received the Honor of Triumph. Indibilis who as
soon as Scipio was gone rebelled, was by those who Commanded in Spain,
gathering together Forces out of the Garrisons, and Auxiliaries from their
Allies, fought with and slain, the stirrers up of the Rebellion were brought to
trial, their goods confiscate, and they condignly punished. The People their
confederates condemned to pay fines, disarmed, and forced to give Hostages, and
receive stronger Garrisons. This Issue had the Romans first Attempts in Spain.

In succeeding times the Romans being employed in War against the Po, and
Philip of Macedon, the Spaniards laying hold of the opportunity, began to form
new designs. To suppress which were sent Generals from Rome, Sempronius
Tudertinus and M. H^lvidius, and after them Minucius, to whom, because the
troubles grew greater* Cato, with larger Forces was sent for Successor, a young
Man indeed but solid, patient in labor, and so famed for Prudence and
Eloquence, that he was among the Romans called Demosthenes, by way of comparing
him with that most Excellent of all the Grecian Orators, He arriving in Spain,
when he came among the Mart Towns, there gathered about him from all parts
above forty thousand Enemies. Having taken a little time to Exercise his
Soldiers, when the signals on both sides were hung out, and the Armies ready to
Engage, he sent away his fleet to Marsilia, telling the Soldiers the present
danger was not so great, in their Enemies being superior to them in Numbers
(for that nothing was difficult which steadfast courage could not overcome) as
in their want of shipping, so that they had no way of refuge or safety left but
in being victorious, And having thus spoken led his Soldiers to the fight, not
filled with hopes according to the custom of other Generals, but with the
terror of their danger. The Battles being joined he went every where
entreating, pressing forward, and encouraging his Men, and when the fight had
continued doubtful till evening, not a few falling on both sides, he with three
Cohorts of the reserve went to the top of a high hill, from whence he had a
clear prospect of the whole Action, where observing his Main Body much
oppressed, running down with great shouts and fury upon the Enemy, and first
exposing himself to danger, he gave a beginning to the Victory. All Night he
gave the Enemy chase slaying Multitudes, and possessing himself of their Camp:
at his return he congratulated his Soldiers embracing them as the Authors of
the Victory, then giving them that time to refresh their bodies by repose,
which their labors required, he afterward sold the prey. But when Deputies
came to him from all parts to crave Peace, he first demanded Hostages, and
afterward signing Letters, sent them to all the People severally, giving order
to those that carried them, to take care, that they might be delivered in one
day, which he had appointed, having before computed in how long time a
Messenger might be going to the remotest City, and accordingly to the rest. By
these Letters he Commanded the Magistrates of every particular City, that the
same day on which they received his Orders, they should demolish the Walls of
their City, which if they delayed, he denounced their slavery. They newly
overcome in battle, and ignorant, whether these Commands were sent to the rest,
or to them only, were tormented with great fears, for if this Command were to
them alone, they knew themselves not able to withstand the Romans, and if the
Command were general, they were no less fearful lest they should be the only
City delayed it is execution. Therefore, and because they had not time to send
mutual Messengers to each other, and were likewise urged to dispatch by those
who brought the Orders, every one having their own safety only in prospect,
they all diligently set themselves about throwing down their Walls, for when
they had once decreed obedience, they thought their Celerity would prove to
their advantage, and those whose Walls were first demolished should have the
Honor of it. Thus all the Cities about the River Iberus by the policy of the
General, in one day levelled their own Walls, the consequence of which was,
that by reason of their weakness, they continued longer in Peace.

Iberus, and the Lusones with many Spanish Exiles and Fugitives revolted from
the Romans. These being defeated by Fulvius Flaccus fled to their several
Cities, but the greatest part having no land, and only laboring for their
bread, chose Complega for their habitation, a City newly built, and strangely
and suddenly become powerful; from hence sending to Flaccus, they commanded
that the (...).
Cloaks, Horses and Swords of several Men by name slain in the late War, might
be given up to them, and that he would suddenly, before any thing worse befell
him, depart from Spain. Answer being returned that he would bring them many of
those Cloaks, Flaccus with the Army following their Deputies, pitched his Camp
before the City. But they having Souls too mean to maintain so lofty a Command,
betook themselves to flight wasting the lands of the Barbarians their
Neighbors. Now the Spaniards went doubly clad, their upper garment being loose
and fastened together with buttons which they called a Saga, or Cloak.

Tiberius Sempronius Grac^hus succeeded Flaccus in Command at the same time
when twenty thousand Celtiberians besieged Carabis a City in Alliance with the
Romans. Which because strong reports were raised of it is being taken, Gracchus
hastened the more to relieve. But when he found it so encompassed with Enemies
that he could not give the besieged any notice of his coming. Cominius Captain
of a Troop of Horse having first well weighed the matter, and acquainted
Gracchus with it, puts himself in the Spanish dress, and cunningly mixing with
the Enemies Forragers, passed through their Camp for a Spaniard, and thence by
running reached the City, telling the Townsmen, that Gracchus was at hand,
whereupon they with courage underwent all difficulties till the third day, when
the Enemies retreating at Gracchus approach, they were delivered from the
siege. About the same time near twenty thousand Men coming out of Complega
toward Gracchus Camp, with boughs in their hands after the manner of
suppliants, when they drew near, as if upon a sudden they had changed their
minds they made an assault, filling the whole Army with fear and terror, but
Gracchus by singular policy dessembling a flight, deserted his Tents and
presently after facing about, and setting upon them intent on the Plunder, slew
a great number, and taking the City subdued likewise the Confines. After which
dividing the Lands among those wanted, and giving them seats to inhabit in he
made a League with all the People that inhabited those quarters, chiefly on
condition that they should be friends to the people of Rome, and to that end
mutual Oaths being given and taken, they in future Wars proved very serviceable
to the Romans, for these things Gracchus name grew famous both in Spain and at
Rome, which he Magnificently entered in Triumph.

Not many years after, a new and general War was kindled in Spain Segada, a
large and powerful City of those Celtiberians called Belli, received into the
League by Sempronius Gracchus, inviting the Citizens of lesser Towns to join
with them, began to build a Wall four hundred furlongs about; and compelling
the Titthi, a neighboring people to do the same. The Senate having certain
intelligence hereof; first forbid the building of the Wall, next demanded the
Tribute imposed by Gracchus: And lastly, (for this was an Article in Gracchus
League) commanded they should attend the Romans in War. As to what concerned
the Wall, the Celtiberians answered, That indeed they were forbid by Gracchus
to build any new Cities, but about restoring or fortifying old ones, there was
not a word spoken; and for the Tribute, and Service, it was since Gracchus
time, remitted by the Romans themselves. And indeed so it was; but when the
Senate dispenses with any such privileges, they always add this exception, so
long as it shall be to theirs, and the people of Romes good liking. Nobilior
was therefore sent against them with an Army of near thirty thousand; whose
coming the Segedians foreseeing, because their Wall was not yet perfect, fled
with their Wives and Children to the Arvacci, beseeching them to receive them,
who not only entertained them, but chose likewise Carus a Segedian, a man
qualified for War, for General; who the third day after entrance into his
command, with twenty thousand Foot, and five thousand Horse, takes his Post in
a place fit for Ambushes, being quite covered over with Trees. There as the
Romans passed by, he charged them, and fought a long time without advantage:
but at length, with the death of six thousand Roman Citizens (as that time no
small loss to the City) he bravely overcame them; but after the Victory, with
too much eagerness and disorder, pursuing those that fled; the Roman Horse left
in guard of the Carriage, falling on, first slew Carus, bravely opposing them,
and with him no fewer than six thousand men. Night coming on, ended this
dispute. This slaughter happened on a day by the Romans consecrated to Vulcan,
wherefore unless forced to it, they will not on this day engage an Enemy. The
very same night the Arvacci met together at Numantia, a very strong City; and
created two new Generals, Ambo and Leuco. Three days after Nobilior following
them, encamps within four and twenty Furlongs of the City, whither came to him
three hundred Horse, and ten Elephants sent from Massanissa, with which he
advances toward the Enemy, placing the Elephnts behind the first Battle, that
they might not at first be discovered by the Enemy. The Fight beginning, his
Front falling off, the sudden sight of those Beasts so terrified both the
Celtiberians and their Horses, who never before had seen Elephants, that
turning their backs they fled to the Town. The Roman General pursuing, the
Flyers turns the Elephants to the Wall, there maintaining a sharp conflict, one
of the Elephants wounded in the head with a great Stone, grew angry, and
setting up a horrible roaring, turns upon his own Party, and without
distinguishing Friend from Enemy, began to rage against all he met. The rest
set on by his roaring began to do the same, and in all places to ^rample under
foot, overturn and disorder the Romans, for it is usual for Elephants when they
are once vexed, to take all they meet for Enemies; for which perfidiousness,
they are by some called the common Enemy. A general flight hereupon began among
the Romans, which the Numantines from the Walls beholding, made a sally, and
falling in upon them, dispersed and trampled down, slew four thousand of them,
and three Elephants, and took many Arms, and some Ensigns: Of the Celtiberians
there were about two thousand slain: Nobilior a little recruited after the
loss, endeavoring in vain to force the City of Auxenium, where the Enemy had
stored up their Provisions, with the loss of no few men retreated into his
Camp. Thence he sent Biasius, who commanded his Horse, to certain neighboring
people, that joining friendship with him, they might assist him with some
Horsemen. He returning, and bringing some Horse with him, the Celtiberians lay
in Ambush for him, who being discovered, his associates fled; but Biasius, and
many of the Romans with him were slain: So many losses and disasters began to
turn their Allies hearts from them. Ocylis, a City in which were the Magazines
of Provisions and Treasure, revolted to the Celtiberians. Nobilior distrusting
all things in the present necessity, wintred in his Tents, covered and close
stopped: but his want of Corn (for he had his store with him) was very great;
besides the violent hail, and bitter cold cruelly afflicted the Soldiers, so
that many of them going to fetch in Wood, and others in their hard Winter
Lodgings dyed with Distempers, caused by the extremity of the weather.

Claudius Marcellus succeeded Nobilior in his command, bringing with him eight
thousand Foot, and five hundred Horse. At his first coming the Enemy in vain
laid ambushes for him, for proceeding circumspectly and cautiously, he brought
the Army in safety, and pitched Camp before Ocylis, which City (being a General
fortunate in War) he presently subdued, and taking Hostages, and thirty Talents
of Silver, pardoned them. The Nergobriges hearing of this clemency, asked what
they should do to obtain Peace likewise with him, he demanded a hundred Horse
to go to the War with him. Those they promised, but in the mean time, some of
them falling in the skirts of the Roman Army, plundered some of the Baggage;
soon after the Horse they had covenanted to send coming, and being demanded
concerning the Baggage, they made answer, that some ignorant of the agreement
made had done it; but Marcellus commanded them to be dismounted, and their
Horses sold; and afterward dividing among his Soldiers the prey he had
gathered, wasting their Fields, he besieged the City. The Nergobriges, when
they saw that the Engines brought close to the Trench, had shaken their Walls,
sent a Herald, who instead of a Caduceus, was clothed in a Wolves skin, to ask
pardon for their faults: the General refused it, unless with them all the
Arvani, Belli and Titthi would ask it likewise, which when they signified to
them, they forthwith sent all of them Deputies to Marcellus, to entreat him
that content with a moderate punishment, he would again receive them into the
Conditions of Gracchus League. This Petition some people a little before by
them provoked to War opposed; wherefore Marcellus commanded the Legates of both
parties to dispute it before the Senate; but by private Letters he advised the
Fathers to decide all Controversies; for he was very desirous in the time of
his Government, to put an end to this War, supposing he should thereby get
Renown and Honor. Now Ambassadors sent from confederate and associate Cities,
were wont to be admitted into the City, and treated as Guests; but these, as
coming from Enemies, were according to Custom commanded to lodge in the
Suburbs; the Senate taking it ill that they, though Nobilior, who was in Spain,
before Marcellus had given his opinion for them, had not permitted it to the
Romans, so they disallowed the Peace, and gave the Legates no other answer,
then that Marcellus should declare to them the Senates pleasure. Then decreeing
an Army for Spain, they chose the Soldiers by Lot, which formerly they used to
enrol by Centuries; but because many had complained to the Consuls, that they
had hard measure, while others were employed and taken up for easier service,
they thought it best to choose the Army by Lot. Licinius Lucullus Consul was
made General, and Cornelins Scipio his Lieutenant. Whilst he is going to this
War, Marcellus advises the Celtiberians of the approaching War, and restores
the Hostages to those redemanded them. After which privately sending for the
Chief of the Ambassadors, sent to Rome in the name of the Celtiberians, and
keeping him a long time with him, he gave occasion to a suspicion (which he
afterward much more increased) that he was endeavoring to persuade the
Celtiberians to leave all things to his Arbitrament, he endeavoring by all
means possible to put an end to the War, before Lucullus coming: For presently
after this Conference, five thousand Arvacci got into the City of Nertobriga.
And Marcellus leading his Army against Numantia, and their Camps lying within
five furlongs of the City, when he drove the Numantines into their Walls,
Litennus their Prince stopping their course, cried out he desired conference
with Marcellus. This Marcellus heard with joyful ears, and receiving the
Hostages and Money he demanded, sent them all home in peace. By this means,
before Lucullus came, the War with the Belli, Arvacci and Titthi was brought to
an end.

But Lucullus, as covetous of Glory, as of adding to his private Fortune,
Vaccaei, a Nation of the Celtiberians, bordering upon the Arvacci, though he
neither had command from the Senate, nor had they made any War upon the Romans,
or any other way offended him; and crossing the River, called Tagus, comes to
the City Cauca, and sets down before it: The Citizens inquiring wherefore he
came, and what occasion there was for War; he answered, He came to the
assistance of the Carpitani, whom they had wronged, whereupon they retreated
into their City; from whence, not long after, making a sally upon Lucullus men,
gone to provide Wood and Corn, they slew many, and drove the rest to their
Tents. And whenever they came to an Engagement, the Caucaei, who were almost
all Light Armed Men, were at the first for a while superiors; but when their
Darts were spent, then they turned their backs, unskilful, and unaccustomed to
a standing Fight; so that once flying to their City, by reason of the crowd at
their Gates, near three thousand of them perished. The next day all the gravest
of the Citizens came out to Lucullus, with Crowns and Olive Branches to know of
him upon what Conditions they might buy his friendship; they were answered by
Hostages, an hundred Talents in Silver, and their Horsemen going to the Wars
with the Romans; which being presently agreed to, Lucullus desired he might
place a Garrison in the City, which the Caucaei likewise yielded to; he brings
in two thousand of his chosen men, whom he commanded, as soon as they were got
in to possess themselves of the Wall. This done, he lets in all his Army, and
at the Signal given by sound of Trumpet, commands them to fall on, and kill all
the Caucaei, without any distinction; who invoking the Gods, presiding over
Oaths and Covenants, and bitterly cursing the Roman perfidiousness, were
cruelly murdered, of twenty thousand very few escaped, by breaking open the
Gates: Lucullus having sacked the City, cast thereby a great infamy on the
Roman Name. The rest of the Barbarians flying out of the plain Country, fled
among the Precipices and places inaccessible, others carried all they could
into fortified Towns, and what they were forced to leave they burnt, that
nothing might be left for Lucullus to plunder. He therefore having wandered long
enough in that Desert Country, came to the Town of Intercatia, where were drawn
together twenty thousand Foot, and two thousand Horse; whom when Lucullus, with
imprudence enough, would have persuaded to enter into a treaty of Peace, they
reproached him with the slaughter of the Caucaei, asking whether it were not
with the same Right Hand, and the same Faith he had already pawned to the
Caucaei: With which revilings (as it is ordinary for those whose consciences
accuse them of guilt) being extremely galled, he laid waste their Country. And
then besieging the City, and intrenching himself, he often drew out his Army in
Battle, to try if by any means he could draw the Enemy to a Battle: but as
they, by all means avoided a set Fight, so by continual skirmishes of Light
Armed Foot they annoyed him. But among the Barbarians there was often seen a
man remarkable, for the brightness of his Armor, who often coming on horseback
between the two parties, dared any of the Romans to engage him in single
Combat, and when none offered themselves, scoffing at the Romans with many
postures of scorn and derision, he returned among his own people. When he had
often done this, Scipio, though yet but young, much afflicted at it, himself
advancing out, and undertaking the Duel, though but a middly sized man,
overcame this Barbarian of a Gigantick stature. This Victory much raised the
Spirits of the Romans; but the next night sundry terrors seized them, which
sprung from this occasion. The Barbarian Horse before Lucullus approach, being
gone to Forage, at their return, finding the City besieged, went about,
calling out, and filling all the places with their clamours, which being
answered by those within the Town, the Romans were possessed with doubtful
fears, knowing their posts not over strong, and the Soldiers by continual
watchings, and unusual food extremely weakened, and feeding only on Wheat and
Barley, with the Flesh of Stags and Hares, boiled without Salt, they fell into
Fluxes, which swept many of them away. At length having filled the Ditch, and
by often playing their Engines, shook the Wall, so that part of it fell, they
broke into the City; whence violently repulsed, they upon their retreat, not
knowing the ground, fell into the Common Sewer, where many of them perished.
The next night the Barbarians repaired their Walls. After which neither party
able any longer to dissemble their miseries and losses, the famine growing
violent upon them; Scipio freely promised the Barbarians, that if they would
enter into League, they should be treated without any Fraud or Treachery. The
opinion of this man's Virtue was so great among the Barbarians, that to his
Faith they committed themselves, and the War upon these conditions was removed,
that the Intercations should give Lucullus six thousand Sagas or Cloaks, a
certain number of Cattle, and fifty Hostages, for as for Gold and Silver, (the
thirst after which, believing Spain every where abounded with it, had begot
this War) none was given, for it not being of any esteem among these people,
they had it not. From hence Lucullus went to Palantia, a City much renowned for
the Valor of its people, and whither many others were fled. Wherefore some
advised the General to pass by without making any attempt upon it; but a
covetous man could not be drawn away from a City he had been told was rich;
till after being by many Excursions of the Palantine Horse, cut off from going
to Forage, through want of Provisions he was forced to divide his Army into
four Bodies, and so make his retreat, pursued by the Palantines in the Rear,
till he came to the River Dorium, where they gave over following him. Lucullus
wintred in Turdetania: These were the Actions of the War with the Vaccaei,
which though Lucullus undertook, and carried on without any command from the
people of Rome* yet he was never called to question for it.

Much about the same time the Lusitanians (another people of Spain, Manlius and
Calphurnius, slew six thousand men, and among them Terentius Varro the Questor;
with which Victory the Carthaginians puffed up, marched as far as the Ocean, and
taking with them the Vetones, besieged the Roman Subjects, called the
Blastophaenicae. These as fame goes, were brought out of Lybia by Hannibal the
Carthaginian, and from thence took that name. Here the Punick General wounded
in the head with a stone dyed. In his place they substituted a man, called
Caesaras, who engaged in fight with Mummius (lately come from Rome with an
Army) was routed and fled; but when Mummius's men scattered and dispersed
pursued the Victory, rallying, he slew nine thousand of them, recovered all the
plunder of his Camp, and got all that of the Romans, with many Colors and
Arms, which the Barbarians in derision carried throughout all Celtiberia.
Mummius with the five thousand he had left entrenched himself, not daring to
take the Field, till he had somewhat confirmed the minds of his Soldiers,
terrified with the last slaughter. Whence observing the Barbarians, carrying by
part of their Booty, setting upon them unawares, they slew many, and recovered
the Spoil and the Ensigns. The Lusitanians inhabiting the other Banks of the
Tagus, incensed against the Romans, of their own accord declared War, and under
the Conduct of Caucaenus their General, invaded the Cunaei, a people subject to
the Romans, taking from them the large City of Conistergis; and thence crossing
over the Straits at the Pillars of Hercules, some of them went to people
Africa, others went and besieged the City of Ocylis. These Mummius following
with nine thousand Foot, and five hundred Horse, slew fifteen thousand of them,
that were overrunning the Country, and as many more at raising the Siege of
Ocylis, meeting likewise those who were conveying away the Spoil, he cut them
off so clearly, that there was not a Messenger to tell the news. Now all the
prey that he could carry along with him, he divided among the Soldiers, and the
rest, (consecrated to the Deities, presiding over the War) he burnt, and for
these things at his return to Rome Triumphed.

M. Attilius, Successor to Mummius making an inrode into Lusitania* Oxthracas,
so terrified all the neigbouring places, that they surrendered on conditions,
among which were some of the Vetones, the farthest people of Lusitania. But
Attilius being gone, in Winter they all revolted, and besieged some of the
Roman Subjects, whom, whilst he was hasting to receive Seroclius Galba (who
came to succeed Attilius) marching in a day and a night five hundred furlongs,
comes within sight of the Enemy, and without any stay, or giving the Soldiers
any time to refresh themselves, after such tedious travel, falls on, and after
having fourtunately broken and put them to flight, he very imprudently pursued
them; for his men through weariness following sloathfully, and in disorder: The
Barbarians perceiving them thus dispersed to lie down by the way side to rest
themselves, gathering again into a Body, fell upon them, and slew seven
thousand. Galba, with the Horse whom he had kept about his person, got by
flight to the City of Carmelis, whither many others likewise fled for safety,
whom drawing into a Body, and raising twenty thousand men among the Associates,
he went among the Cunaei, and there wintred.

Lucullus, who without any orders from the people of Rome, had made War upon
the Vaccaei, wintring in Turdetania, having intelligence that the Lustitanians
had invaded the Neighbors, sending out some of his best Captains, slew about
four thousand of them; and they making a new irruption with other Forces, he
about Cadiz killed fifteen hundred more, and pursuing the r^^t to a Hill, where
they had posted themselves, besieged them, and took a mutitude of men, and at
last entering Lusitania, he by parcels depopulated the Country. The same did
Galba on the other side; and when Deputies came to him and desired they might
again renew the League, which agreed upon before with Attilius, then General,
had been violated, he received them kindly, and gave them his word, seeming
grieved for them, that through mere want, they had been forced to use Robbery,
make War, and break Articles of Peace: But under me, said he, be no longer in
doubt, that your poverty, and the barrenness of your Country shall force you to
these things; for if you will henceforward be friends, I will give to such of
you, as are in want, good Land, and dividing you into three parts, appoint you
fruitful seats to dwell in. Allured by these promises, they forsook their old
Seat, and assembled in great numbers where Galba had commanded, whom dividing
into three parties, he ordered each to march down into the Plains he assigned
them, and there for a while wait till he returned to them. Then coming to the
first, as already friends, he commanded them to lay down their Arms, and thus
disarmed, drew a Ditch about them, and then sending in some with Swords, slew
them all, crying out, and invoking the Faith of Gods and Men. Thus with all
imaginable speed, he served the second and third party, before they could have
any notice of their Companions Calamity. Thus was Treachery revenged, not as
became Romans or Roman Clemency, but incitating the Barbarians savegness and
cruelty: yet some of them escaped, among whom was Viriatus, who not long after
commanded the Lusitanians, and performing many worthy Exploits, killed a
multitude of Romans; but of those things, as done afterward, we shall speak in
due time. Galba surpassing Lucullus for covetousness, distributed but little of
the prey to the Soldiers, less to his Friends, and the rest converted to his
own use. And though he were one of the richest of all the Romans, yet as is
reported in time of Peace, he never scrupled at lie nor perjury, so it turned
to profit, hated therefore by all, and cited to judgment; yet by force of
Money he got off* Not long after those that remained after Lucullus and Galba's
Treachery, being gathered together to about ten thousand men, with incursions
wasted the Country of the Turd^tani. Against whom C. Vetelius come from Rome
with new Forces, and joining with those before in Spain, marched with about ten
thousand men, who first falling in among their Forragers slew many of them, and
forced the rest to a certain place, where if they staid, they perished by
Famine, and if they removed, were in imminent danger of falling under the
Romans Swords. So great a strait they were in, wherefore sending Legates to
Vetilius with Olive Branches, they desired a place to dwell in, promising
thenceforward to live under the Roman Power. Vetilius gave his word to perform
their request, and already Conditions were agreed on, when Viriatus (who
escaped from Galba's wicked cruelty, and by chance at that time sojourned among
them) began to admonish them of all the Romans Treachery, who after having so
often pawned their Faith to them, had perfidiously assaulted them, telling them
their present Army was only the Relics of Lucullus and Galba's perjury.
Adding, if they would obey him, he would show them a safe way to retreat out of
that place. By which words forewarned, and their hearts quickened by some hope,
they chose him General, whereupon he first of all draws them up, as if
preparing them to fight, then gave orders, that as soon as they saw him mount
his Horse, dispersing themselves all over the Country, they should by diverse
ways get to the City of Tribola, and there staid for him. In the mean time a
thousand chosen Horse he kept with him in a Body: and things thus disposed, at
one instant Viriatus mounts his Horse, and they all took their flight.
Vertilius afraid to pursue men so dispersed; seeing Viriatus standing, turned
toward him, thinking to provoke him to fight, who seemed to offer the
occasion: but Viriatus by the swiftness of his Horse, eluding all his
endeavors, sometimes retreating, and sometimes advancing, but keeping in
continual motion, spent all that day, and the next upon the same ground. Till
conjecturing that by this time, his fellows fled before might be in safety; he
set forward by night, and through by-ways, and on nimble Horse soon got to
Tribola. The Romans, both because of their heavy Armor, ignorance of the ways,
and withal being mounted on other kind of Horses, not being able to follow him.
Thus Viriatus saved the Army, when themselves were in utter despair, and lost
to all hopes. The bravery of which Exploit being spread among the Barbarians,
added to him both Honor and Power, many joining with him, by whose assistance
he held out three whole years against the Romans. I have therefore designed to
write here at once all this Viriatick War, which gave no small trouble to the
Romans; and if any thing happened in the mean time in Spain, to relate it
afterward.

Vetilius therefore pursuing Viriatus, came to Tribola, but in the way as
Viriatus having got behind with his Horse, and an Ambush rising in Front both
at once, set upon the Romans, whereof they slew many, threw others down into
the Valleys, and many fell into their hands alive, among whom was Vetilius whom
he that took, seeing old and fat, thinking him good for nothing, slew him. Of
ten thousand Romans scarce six thousand escaped to Carpessus, which I suppose
was once by the Greeks called Tartessus, where King Arganthonius (who is
reported to have lived one hundred and fifty years) once reigned. The Soldiers
escape by flight, and yet trembling, Vetilius his Questor dispose upon the
Walls, and five thouand associates, which he had desired from the Belli and
Titthi; he sent out to meet Viriatus, who made such a slaughter of them, that
not a Messenger was le^t to bring back the news. So thenceforward the Questor
lay quiet in the City, expecting assistance from Rome. In the mean time
Viriatus, without control, wastes the Country of the Carpeti, which was
sufficiently fertile, till C. Pla^tius comes from Rome with ten thousand Foot,
and thirteen hundred Horse; when dissembling a flight, Pla^tius sent four
thousand men to pursue him, whom turning upon, he cut off all but a very few;
and crossing the Taegus, went and encamped among the Olive Mountains, upon that
which is called Venus Hill, whither Plautius following out of an earnest desire
to repair his former loss, fights a set Battle with him, and being with a
mighty slaughter overcome, flees without any order to the Towns for refuge, and
in the midst of Summer takes up his Winter Quarters, not daring look abroad.
Wherefore Viriatus freely ranged over the whole Country, forcing the owners of
the Ground to pay a value for the Crop, then almost ready for their Sickle, or
else he destroyed or burnt it. These things being understood at Rome, the
Fathers sent Fabius Aemilianus Maximus (Son to Aemilius Paulus, who subdued
Perseus, King of Macedon) with Power to raise an Army; who because the strength
of the City was in a manner exhausted, first by the subversion of Carthage,
then by subduing the Greeks, and lastly by bringing to a happy issue the
Macedonian War, that he might spare those had outlived so many Engagements,
enrolled two Legions of raw young Men; and having procured some further
assistance from the Associates, with an Army of about fifteen thousand Foot,
and two thousand Horse, came to Orso, a City of Spain; from thence that he
might not throw himself upon the Enemy, with an undisciplined and unexperienced
Force that had never yet seen any fighting, he crossed over into Cadiz, to
sacrifice to Hercules. Viriatus met with a party of his men going to wood, slew
a great many, and put the rest to flight; and his Lieutenant again bringing
them out to engage, Viriatus again defeated them, and took a great booty; but
when Maximus himself came, bringing armed Soldiers to try if he could entice
him to a Battle, and daily provoking him, seeing Viriatus avoided a general
Engagement, sending out parties by frequent skirmishes, he made trial of the
Enemies strength, and increased his own men's courage and confidence: aed
whenever he sent out to Forage, he gave a Convoy of Legionary Soldiers and
Horse to the light armed Foot, for this Discipline he had learned from his
Father in the Macedonian War. Winter being past, and his Army well exercised
and confirmed, he made a sharp War upon Viriatus, and putting himself to
flight, took two of his Cities, and burnt another. Viriatus himself flying to a
place called Baecor, he followed, and slew many of his men, and then went and
wintred at Corduba. Viriatus being now no longer secure as formerly, drew off
from the Roman Alliance the Arvacci, Titthi and Belli, warlike people, who
waged another long and laborious War by themselves, which from Numantia, one of
their Cities, was called the Numantine, which immediately after the Viriatick,
we shall proceed to treat of. Viriatus therefore, in another part of Spain,
coming to a set Battle with Quintius, another Roman General, and being
overcome, retreated to the Mountains of Venus; from whence turning again upon
the Enemy, he slew some of Quintius men, took some Colors, and forced the rest
into their Camp. He likewise by force drove out the Garrison at Ituca, and
wasted the Country of the Basitani, whilst Quintius, out of weakness, and want
of Military knowledge, lay shut up in Corduba (where in the midst of Autumn, he
took up his Winter Quarters) and only now and then sent out C. Martius, a
Spaniard of the Italian City against the Enemy. That year being expired so,
Quintius Aemilianus succeeded his Brother Fabius Maximus Aemilianus, bringing
with him two Roman Legions, and some Allies, so that all his Forces might be
about sixteen thousand Foot, and sixteen hundred Horse. He wrote likewise to
Micipsa, King of Numidia, to send him with all speed some Elephants: but
hastening to Ituca, and leading with him only part of his Army; Viriatus met
with six thousand men, coming on with great noise and clamor, and with long
hair, which the Barbarians used to wear and shake in time of fight to terrify
their Enemies; yet he bore his charge with so much courage, that the Enemy was
repulsed without effecting any thing. But when the other part of the Army, with
ten thousand Elephants, and three hundred Horse from Lybia were come to him,
enlarging his Camp, he first drew out his Army against Viriatus, and
over-powring him, routed and put him to flight: but when breaking their Ranks
in the pursuit, Viriatus observed the confusion, rallying, he slew about three
thousand men, and drove the rest to the Camp: He likewise assaulted their Camp,
while scarce any would shut the Gates again the invading Enemy, but most struck
with pannick fear, hid themselves in their Huts, and neither by the General nor
Military Tribunes could be got out to fight, yet above all Fannius, the
Brother-in-Law of Laelius, did in this Battle, in a singular manner make his
courage manifest. Night coming on, favored and saved the Romans. But Viriatus
night and day omitted no opportunity, sometimes with light armed Foot, and
sometimes with nimble Horse to weary out the Romans, till at last he forced
Servilianus to raise his Siege from Ituca. And himself beginning to be pinched
with hunger, and having but slender Forces, setting on fire his Tents by night,
marched toward Lusitania, Servilianus in his going off, not being followed,
translated the seat of War into Baeturia, where he seized upon five Cities,
that bore good will to Viriatus: Thence led his Forces among the Cunei, from
whence he again marched into Lusitania against Viriatus himself. In this way
meeting with two Captains of Thieves, Curious and Apuleius, with ten thousand
men, they very much vexed the Romans, acd joining Battle wherein Curious was
killed, they yet got some booty, all which Servilianus not long after
recovered, and likewise took by force the Cities Escadia, Gemella and Obolcola,
in all which Viriatus had placed Garrisons, some of which he made Captains, and
others he let go. Of ten thousand Prisoners he had, five hundred he made pass
under the Ax, and sold the rest. After this he went to Winter Quarters, leaving
the War to him that was to Command next year, and these things done, returned
to Rome. Quintius Pompeius Aulus succeeded him in Command.

Mean while his Brother Maximus Aemilianus, having received upon Connoba, a
Captain of Thieves, did indeed pardon him, but cut of all his Companions hands:
but when pursuing Viriatus, he was about to enclose Erisane, one of his Cities,
with a Trench and Palisado. Viriatus entering the City by night, and making a
Sally by break of day, not only drove those that were working upon the Lines
from their labor, making them throw away their Spades and Mattocks, but
likewise forced all the rest of Aemilianus Forces ready drawn up, and in a
posture to engage him, to flee among the Rocks and Precipices, from whence
there was no way to escape; yet here succes made not Viriatus insolent; but
supposing he now might upon fair Conditions lay down Arms, and enter into
friendship with the Romans; he contracted a League, which the people of Rome
afterward confirmed, and called Viriatus friend, giving Orders his Associates
should enjoy the Lands they possessed. Thus a War heavy to the Romans seemed on
easy Conditions quite extinct; but this Peace proved not lasting, for Cepio,
brother to Aemilianus, Author of this League, and his Successor in Command,
finding fault with the Conditions, as dishonorable to the Roman people,
prevailed with the Senate to have leave privately to incommode Viriatus, as he
thought fit, and continually urging them, and plying them with Letters, at
length procured a Decree to declare open War against Viriatus, fortified with
which Decree he received upon surrender the City of Arsa, Viriatus looking on;
and pursued Viriatus himself, flying and wasting all as he went to Carpetane,
bringing with him greater Forces than Viriatus, who by reason of the paucity of
his men, not thinking fit to engage, sending away the greatest part of his
Forces, by an obscure Valley, drew up the rest upon a certain Hill, making a
show, as if he were willing to fight the Enemy, but when he thought those sent
before were out of danger, he flew after with so much scorn of the Enemy, and
so much celerity, that those who followed him, knew not which way to take.
Cepio turning his Arms against the Vetones and Callaici wasted their Country:
but now following Viriatus Example, many other Bands of Rovers, by their
incursions wasted Lusitania. Against whom Sex. Iunius Brutus being sent, he
considering the distance of places (being all that ground between the four
Navigable Rivers of Tagus, Oblivio or Limia.
Lethe, Dorius and Boetis) gave them a hard chase, they running hither and
thither, after the manner of Thieves, and now following, and then flying,
dispairing to catch them, and yet thinking the not taking of them would be
dishonorable, though on the other side the taking of them would be no great
Triumph; he led his Army into the Thieves own Country, thinking with the same
trouble to take revenge of them (for he thought they would all come home to
defend their own) and withal enrich his Soldiers by the spoil. Led on with
these thoughts and imaginations, he seized upon all stood in his way. The
Barbarians coming out to oppose him, and the Women assisting and bearing Arms
with such courage and eagerness, that even in the midst of slaughter their
voices were not to be heard. Some indeed there were, who taking what they
could, fled up to the Mountains, to whom, because they asked pardon, Brutus
gave whatever remained of theirs. Thence crossing the River Dorius, carrying
Fire and Sword through all parts far and near, and receiving Hostages of all
that yielded, at length he came to the River of Lethe or Limia.
Oblivion, and first of any Roman crossed it. Thence going to Nimis another
River, he made War upon the Bracari, because they had stopped, and taken the
Provisions, bringing to the Roman Camp. 'Twas the Custom likewise of these
people to bring their Women armed into the Field, who would rather die than
turn their backs, or utter any unworthy cry; nay, these very Women, when led
away Captives, would some kill themselves, and others cut their Childrens
Throats, thinking Death much better than Slavery, yet some Towns yielded to
Brutus, who not long after revolting, he again reduced to obedience; among
others Talabriga often accepting Conditions, often rebelled. Thither Brutus
coming, the Townsmen imploring mercy, and referring themselves to discretion,
he first commanded them to deliver all Roman Fugitives, Captives and Arms, then
that with their Wives and Children they should leave the City, which when
readily they submitted to, enclosing them with his Army, he began to let them
understand how often they had revolted, and how often renewed the War;
possessing them with an extreme fear and opinion, how grievously he was
offended with them, and ending all in reproaches of their Treachery; but yet
taking away their Horses, Provisions, and public Money, beyond their own
hopes, he restored them their Town to dwell in. After doing all these things,
Brutus returned to Rome. These attempts of other Bands of Thieves happening in
the same time, and after the Example of Viriatus, I thought convenient to place
with that War. But now Viriatus sent Audax Ditalco, and Minurus, the most
faithful of his Friends to Cepio to make Peace. These Cepio engaged by great
Gifts, and large hopes, to make him a promise to kill Viriatus, which at length
they in this manner performed: Viriatus was a man given little to sleep, as
well because of the sundry cares distracted him, as because of his continual
employs, wherefore likewise he often slept in Armor, that he might be ready
upon all services, and to that end by night the entrance to him was always open
to his Friends, being by this means free to be called at all seasons. Audax,
and the Consorts of his villainy, observing his first lying down, as if they had
some earnest business, went into his Tent, and wounding him in his Throat, for
that part only of his Body was naked, slew him as he lay; then without any
noise, no one thinking they had given him his deadly wound, they went out and
fled to Cepio, and demanded their reward. He only granted them the enjoyment of
what then they had, and referred them to the Senate for rewards. The Day coming
on, Viriatus Clients, and indeed the whole Army thinking him still at rest,
wondered what should make him sleep more than ordinary, till some going in, let
them understand he lay slain in his Arms. Then presently a general lamentation
and mourning was heard throughout the whole Camp, all afflicting themselves for
his death; and beginning to be doubtful of their own safety, for so they
reputed themselves, having lost a General, who had been conversant in, and had
freed them from so many dangers. But that which most of all tormented them was,
that they could not find the Authors of this Villainy. Therefore covering the
Body with most magnificent Habits, they burnt it upon a very high Pile, then
Horse and Foot marching in Troops, and Companies round about in Arms, after a
barbarous manner, celebrated Viriatus Memory; nor departed they from the Pile,
till the fire of it self went out. The Funeral Rites performed, they set forth
rewards for Gladiators. So great a desire of him did Viriatus leave behind him,
a man (as among the Barbarians) most worthy of Command, behind none in
encountering dangers, and the most exact man living in dividing the Prey, for he
never took nor offered his friends more than their share, and himself
distributed it to the Valiant, whereof this was the consequence (which is very
rare, and I know not whether ever it happened to any other General) that though
he had an Army composed of many diverse Nations; yet in eight years, which he
waged War, no Mutiny every happened amongst them, but he had always his
Soldiers in a ready obedience, and forward in the encountering of danger. Having
created Tantalus General in the room of Viriatus, they undertook the Expedition
against Saguntum. This City Hannibal having subversed, restored, and from his
Countries name, called Carthagena. The Spaniards repulsed thence, as they
crossed over the River Baetis, Cepio following pressed so hard upon them, that
Tantalus distrusting his Affairs, delivered up himself and his Army, upon
Condition they should be treated no worse than Subjects. So being disarmed,
that they might no more live like Thieves, they had sufficient Lands set out to
them: And thus ended the Viriatick War.

Now let us return to the War with the Vacc^ei, or Numantines, whom Viriatus
had engaged to a revolt, Caecilius Metell^s sent against these with larger
Forces, terrified and oppressed by his Expedition (for in the height of their
fear, he set upon them unawares) they were soon reduced. There remained only
two Towns, Termantia and Numantia, of which the latter, by reason of its being
surrounded, as it were, with two Rivers, Valleys and extreme thick Woods, was
of very difficult approach, there was only one way to it by the Plain, and that
fortified with Ditches and Turn-pikes. The Numantines themselves excellent
Soldiers, both on Horseback and Foot, but not more than eight thousand, with
which number, though small, yet by reason of their signal Valor, they for a
long time vexed and tired the Romans. But Winter being past, Metellus delivered
over the Army admirably well exercised to Q. Pompeius Aulus, being then thirty
thousand Foot, and two thousand Horse. Pompey raising his Camp from Numantia,
whither to go I know not; the Numantines making a Sally, oppressed some of his
straggling Horse, whereupon he returning, drew up his Army in the Plain; the
Numantines half flying, by little and little retreated. At length Pompey
seeing, that by reason of the difficulties of the Turn-pikes, and Ditches, and
the continual Execution of light armed Numantines, his Army began to diminish,
and waste insensibly, removed his Camp to Termantia, where he thought there was
less to do. Here likewise engaging with the Enemy, he lost seven hundred
Soldiers, and the Military Tribunes bringing Provisions to the Camp, were by
the Numantines put flight, the same day in a third conflict, many Roman Footmen
and Horsemen, with their Horses being driven into rough and craggy places, the
rest stood in Arms all night without any sleep, then at break of day the Enemy
sallying out, they fought all day with equal Fortune till night coming on
parted them. Thence Pompey marched toward a little Town, called Malia, held by
a Garrison of the Numantines. The Malians having by treachery slain the
Garrison, delivered the Town to Pompey, who disarming them, and taking their
Hostages, he marched to Sedetania, to deliver those people from the robberies
of Tanginus, a Captain of Thieves, him he overcame, and took many of his
people, but so much gallantry of Spirit was found among Thieves, that none of
the Captains would submit to slavery, but some slew themselves, others, those
that bought, and some sunk the Ships, in which they were transported: Pompey
returning to the Siege of Numantia, endeavored to divert the course of a
certain River, that so he might subdue the City by Famine; the Inhabitants
making a silent Sally without Trumpets, hindered the work, and forcing the River
upon those would have turned its course, effectually did their business,
repulsing all that came without their Lines; and in short, confining the Romans
to their Tents, whom again engaging as they went out to Forage, they slew
many, and among others Oppius, a Tribune of the Soldiers. And another party of
the Romans being throwing up a certain Ditch, they set upon them, and slew
forty with their Over-seer. About the same time came certain Counselors from
Rome, and a fresh Army of new raised men, who the old being dismissed (for they
had served six years in this War) supplied their places. Pompey ashamed of so
many defeats, desirous to wash away the stain, lay all Winter in his Tents. The
Soldiers thus quartered under the open Firmament, in a bitter cold Season, and
having never before experienceed inclemency of Air and Water, fell into Fluxes,
of which several dyed. And another part going out to Forage, the Numantines
having laid an Ambush close to the Roman Camp, provoked the Romans to skirmish,
who not enduring to be dared, threw themselves without the Lines. Then those in
Ambush suddenly rising, many both of the Commons and Nobility fell, and the
Forragers coming in at the same time, they laid a good parcel of them on the
ground. Pompey grieved at so many losses, retreats with his Counselors into
Towns, there to pass away the rest of the Winter, till his Successor expected
with the first of the Spring came: but fearing to be called to account for the
ill management of the War, he had some private Conferences with the Numantines
about putting an end to it: The Numantines being themselves broken by the death
of many gallant Men, by their Fields lying fallow, by want of Provision, and
the unexpected durance of the War, were easily persuaded to send Agents to
Pompey to treat of Peace. He indeed publicly advised them to submit themselves
to the Romans discretion, (nor could he contrive any other Conditions
Honorable for the Roman People) but privately he taught them what was to be
done; when they were come to terms, and they had yielded to the Romans, he
demanded Hostages, Captives and Runaways, and had them delivered, and of thirty
Talents of Silver, which was agreed to be paid, the Numantines counted part to
him, and part he was to give time for. But it happened that when they had got
together the rest of the Money, and brought it to Pompey, his Successor M.
Popilius Laena was come. Wherefore being no more in fear of War now, he had one
to succeed him, knowing well that he had made a dishonorable Peace, and that
without any Orders from the People, he began to deny he had any dealings with
the Numantines; but they by the Testimony of many Senators, Commanders of
Horse, and Military Tribunes; easily convinced him. Popilius referred them to
Rome, there to come to a Trial with Pompey; the report being made to the
Senate, they left Pompey and the Numantines to contest with each other. Mean
while the Senate gave Orders to continue the War, and Popilius having done
nothing else (till the coming of his Successor Attilius Mancinus) save leading
the Army into the Territory of the Lusones, neighbors to the Numantines,
returned to Rome. Mancinus often engaging with the Numantines, was always
overcome; at length, with the loss of many, flying into his Camp, upon a false
rumor cast abroad, that the Cantabri and Vaccaei were coming to the relief of
the Numantines; growing fearful in the dead of the night (all which he had
spent without any Fires) flees into a Desert place, where once was a Trench of
Nobilior's, in which place, neither prepared nor fortified, being enclosed by
break of day by the Numantines, standing round about, and threatening death to
all, unless he made Peace, he granted Conditions equal to the Numantines and
Romans, and bound himself to the performance, which when it was brought to
Rome, all men were exceedingly enraged at so base and ignominious a League, and
sent one of the Consuls, Aemilius Lepidus into Spain, recalling Mancinus (whom
likewise the Numantine Legates followed) to show reasons for his Conduct.
Aemilius while he stays for an answer from the City, impatient of idleness,
(for in these times men sought not after Command for the Public good, but
either out of ambition of Glory, or private gains, or hopes of the Honor of
Triumph) he falsely accused the Vaccaei, that in this War they had supplied the
Numantines with Provisions. Whereupon he spoiled their Country, and laid Siege
to Palantia their chief City, which had not in the least title violated their
Covenants. Calling to him, and joining with him in this work, Brutus his
Son-in-Law, who, as we have before mentioned, was sent into the other part of
Spain. To them Cinna and Caecilius coming Legates from Rome, declared that the
Senate was doubtful, whether after so many losses it was convenient for
Aemilius to engage in a new War, and to that end they produced a Decree of the
Senate, whereby Aemilius was forewarned not to make War with the Vaccaei. But
he having already begun the War, thinking the Senate were ignorant of many
things, as first, that he had joined Forces with Brutus, then that the Vaccaei
had assisted the Numantines with Men, Money and Provision, besides his retreat
now might make a strange alteration in Affairs, there being danger, lest
thereupon the Enemy contemning the Romans as fearful, all Spain should rebel.
So Cinna returned without doing any thing, only wrote thus much to Rome. After
these things, Aemilius took care in a well-fortified place, to cause Machines
to be built, and to lay in stores of Corn. Flaccus, who was for that year
Commissary General of Provisions, as he brought Victuals to the Camp, fell into
a manifest Ambush; from whence he freed himself by this cunning, he spread a
rumor among the Soldiers, that Aemilius had taken Palantia; at the news of
which his party beginning to shout and rejoice, the Barbarians hearing them,
and believing it to be so indeed, of their own accord drew off: by this policy
Flaccus saved his Provision from the Enemy. But the Siege of Palantia being
still prolonged, and food failing, Famine began sorely to afflict the Romans,
for not only all the Cattle, but many men died. Indeed the Generals, Aemilius
and Brutus long bore out against these misfortunes, bravely and constantly; but
at length compelled to yield to them, about the last watch of the night, they
gave Orders to Discamp; and the Military Tribunes and Primipiles running up and
down, urged every one to get ready to march by the first Light, so that doing
all things in a hurry, they forsook their sick and wounded men, hanging upon
them, and beseeching them not to betray them: In such confusion they marched
away, that it could only be said, they did not flee; the Palantines several
times falling on them, and keeping close up to them from morning till it was
night, and doing them much detriment. As soon as it was dark, the Romans spent
by hunger and travel, dispersed themselves by Companies about the Fields, and
the Palantines, some Deity turning them back, went home. The Romans, for this
ill management, depriving Aemilius of his Consulate and Command, fined him
besides in a sum of Money. The cause likewise between Mancinus, and the
Numantine Legates was heard in Senate; these alleging their League with
Mancinus, he transferring the fault upon Pompey, the former General, who had
delivered over to him a vicious and unwarlike Army, which was therefore often
overcome, and that he himself had likewise made Peace with the Numantines; he
likewise added, that it was no wonder, if this War had no good success, which
they had against all Justice decreed. Though the Fathers were equally angry
with them both, yet Pompey, against whom there had been a former sentence
given, came off: But Mancinus, for being Author of so base a Peace without
their Orders, they condemned to be delivered up to the Numantines, after the
Example of those Fathers, who once gave up naked to the Samnites twenty
Generals, who without their Command had concluded a League. Mancinus being
brought to Spain, was by Furius, in like manner, yielded up naked to the
Numantines, but they refused to accept him. Against them Calphurnius Piso was
next chosen General, who brought not his Army against Numantia; but entering the
confines of the Palantines, returned thence with an inconsiderable booty, and
the rest of the time of his Government, spent in Winters Quarters in Capertania.

The People of Rome offended at this Numantine War, which in all Cornelius
Scipio newly come from Carthage, for they believed him the only Man by whom the
Numantines could be subdued. But being under the Consulary Age, appointed by
the Law made in the Carthaginian War, by the Tribunes of the People, they now
repealed that Law, and the next year again confirmed it. Thus Scipio being
again declared Consul hastened to Numantia with no Army, the City Forces being
wasted by so many Wars, and there being strength enough in Spain. Yet by the
Senates permission he carried some Volunteers from other Cities, and Kings, who
out of particular Friendship went with him, to whom he added about five hundred
Clients and Friends out of the City, whom listing in one Band he called (...),
that is, the Band of Friends, all these amounting to about four thousand he
committed to the leading of Buteo his Nephew, he himself slenderly accompanied
went before to the Army in Spain, whom he was informed were debauched with all
manner of Idleness, Discord and Luxury. Wherefore knowing well enough he could
never overcome his Enemies, unless he first thoroughly purged and suppressed the
Vices of his Army, as soon as he came to the Camp, he thought nothing more
fitting then to expel thence all Hucksters, Whores, and Southsaying Priests, to
which last the Soldiers, dismayed with so many unfortunate Engagements, were
but too much addicted, forbidding for the future, the bringing any thing not
absolutely necessary into the Camp, and strictly prohibiting all Sacrifices for
Divination, sending away all Wagons of useless Baggage, and all Cattle, but
such as they could by no means be without. Nor was any one to have more
Utensils for dressing meat then a Spit, a Brass Pot, and one Cup. Meats
likewise were prescribed Boild and Roasted, Beds forbidden, and for Example
himself first lay in a Hamock, he forbid the Riding upon Mules upon a March,
for what hopes was there of their service in War who could not walk on Foot; he
likewise reproved those had servants to anoint and bath them, jestingly telling
them Mules which had no hands wanted others to scrub and scratch them: by these
means he reclaimed them all to temperance. He accustomed them likewise to a
Fear and Reverence of his Person, making the access to him, difficult in any
unjust Petitions, having always these sayings in his mouth, That those Generals
who were strict and severe observers of Laws, were serviceable to their
friends, but those who were easy and greedy of gain, only profitable to their
enemies. That the Armies of these might indeed be more merry, but ignorant of
order and obedience; but those more grave, and withal more dutiful and ready
upon all occasion of service. Nor would he at all engage the Enemy till he had
first excerised his Soldiers in a thousand sundry labors, daily removing about
the Country, he caused to be fortified new Camps, and then demolished them,
deep ditches to be dug, and then filled up, mighty Walls to be Built, and then
pulled down again, himself from Morning till Evening, going about and
overseeing what was done. And that none upon a march (as had formerly been
used) might straggle from the Army, he always drew up in a square body, and when
it moved, kept himself in continual motion from Front to Rear, nor was it
lawful for any to shift the place assigned him by the General. In the midst, as
in the most proper place, he posted the sick and weak, commanding the Horsemen
to dismount, and set them upon their Horses: the beasts of burden that were
heaviest laden he divided among the Foot: And where he intended to lodge those
designed for the guard of the Lines that night he commanded to stay without at
their Arms, and kept a party of Horse scouting abroad for discovery, but to the
rest of the Soldiers he appointed every one their task, these to dig in the
Tre^ch, those to raise the Rampire, and others to pitch the Tents, and set a
certain and definitive space of time, in which every thing was to be done. And
when he had brought his Army into a due posture of obedience, and made them
patient of labor, then he removed his Camp nearer to Numantia. Where, according
as some had used to do, he posted them not in Castles, for he would not
presently divide his Army, nor run the hazard of a loss at first, thereby to
make them run more into Contempt, with the Enemy, who contemned them enough
already. Nor did he think it convenient to engage them in Battle, till he saw
both good reason and opportunity for the doing it, and had thoroughly searched
into the Numantines Counsels and Designs. In the mean time he wasted all the
fields behind his Camp, and from thence fetched in all his Forage and cut down
the standing Corn, which done, and that he was in a readiness to proceed
farther, his Friends advising him, that by a nearer way through the Field he
might go forward to Numantia, but I, said he, fear my return, the Enemy naked,
and nimble Sallying out of the City have again into the City a retreat, but
ours returning from forage are laden with prey, and tired, besides they bring
with them Laden Cattle, Carriages and Baggage; and that would be a hard and
unequal fight, where being overcome they must run much danger and being
Victorious yet, but little praise or profit, it being the height of madness to
run into danger, for things of no moment. Nor was he worth the Name of a
General, who unless compelled would throw the Dice of War, but he on the
contrary who when necessity required and opportunity offered, would undantedly
throw himself upon all dangers; Adding hereunto this similitude, that
Chirurgions used not to incise or cauterize before they applied Medicaments.
These things said, he Commanded his Colonels to lead the Army the farther way
about, then making some Excursions beyond the Camp, he came among the Vaccaei,
from whom the Numantines bought their Provisions, there preying upon all
whatever was useful for the subsistence of the Camp, they gathered and brought
away, the rest heaped together and burnt. In the Country of the Palantines was
a place called Caplanium; there the Palatini, upon a certain hill laid Ambush,
and with another party openly provoked Scipio's Forragers. Scipio Commands
Rutilius Rufus, who was then Military Tribune (and has likewise writ a History
of these things) that taking four Troops of Horse he should break the Enemies
charge. Rufus, they giving ground, pressed on too immoderately, so that mixing
with the flyers, they were got together to the hill, where when he discovered
the Ambush, he gave advice to his Horsemen not to think of following or
pressing forward, but keeping their ground and order with their Lances at full
length to keep off the Enemy: But Scipio who yet a great way off, had perceived
that Rufus had already run beyond his Orders, ^ollicitous of the event,
immediately followed and found himself likewise taken in the snare; wherefore
he commanded they should both ways charge the Enemy, and having thrown their
Javelins, make their retreat not all in a huddle, but by degrees and keeping
their Ranks, and by this means he brought his Horse off safely into the plain.
Afterward knowing for certain that near the passage of a River whose Ford was
troublesome and Muddy they had laid another trap for him, he drew off, by a way
farther indeed about, but not so fit for Ambushes. And because of the heat of
the weather marching by night, sinking several Wells, he found the waters of
many of them bitter, so that thence though very hardly the Men got safely off,
but some of the Horses and Cattle died with thirst. As he passed through the
Country of the Caucaei, whom Lucullus had with so much treachery abused, he
caused Proclamation to be made that the Caucaei might with all safety return to
their habitations, thence he went and wintred on the Confines of the
Numantines, whither Iugurtha Nephew to Massanissa came to him out of Africa
with twelve Elephants, fitted with Archers and Slingers to gaul the Enemy in
Front. In these places by frequent incursions, wasting and forraging the
Country the Enemy laid close Ambush for him. The convenience of the place
prompted them to the design. There was a Town almost quite encompassed round
with a slimy Marsh, but only on one side where there was a Valley, and in that
Valley the Ambush lay hid; Scipio's Soldiers were so divided that part entered
the Town, began to Plunder, others kept about on horse back, whom those from
the Ambush rising upon easily routed. Scipio who by chance stood without the
Village near the Colors, commanded back by sound of Trumpet those got into the
houses, and first with about a thousand running in to the relief of the baggage
horses, and many out of the Town coming to join with him, he forced the Enemy
to turn their backs but not following at all the chase, retreated himself into
his Trenches with the loss but of few on both sides.

Not long after having pitched two Camps near Numantia (one of Maximus, and the
other commanded himself) when the Numantines drawing out, often provoked the
Romans to fight, he scorned and laughed at them, saying, it would redound much
to his dishonor if he should choose rather to fight then reduce by famine men
made furious by utter despair, therefore to besiege them the closer he drew
seven Ditches round the City, and sent Letters to his Friends signifying how
many and what forces they should send to him, which when they came he divided
into several parts, and soon after divided his whole Forces into several
bodies, appointing each their Leaders, and Commanding them to enclose the City
with a Trench and Pallisadoes. The Circuit of Numantia was twenty four
Furlongs, but that of his Trench above twice as much. Now every party had their
distinct work set out to them, with orders that if the Enemy made any onset,
they should give the signal by day a red cloth hanging on a long spear, and by
night fire, that forthwith he or Maximus his brother might run in to their
help. The work being brought to that forwardness that if the Enemy attempted
any thing they might repulse him, he dug another ditch without that, and
fastening thereon Palisadoes, built a Wall eight foot thick, and ten foot high
below the battlements round which he raised Towers, at one hundred and twenty
foot distance from each other, and because he could not run the Wall over the
marsh, he threw up a bank in height and breadth equal to it, which served
instead of a Wall, and Scipio is in my Judgment, the first that ever begirt a
City, not refusing to fight him, with a Wall. But besides all this the River
Durius running through his Fortifications was very convenient for the Townsmen,
as well to bring them what they wanted, as for the transporting of Men, whether
by swimming, or in little Boats, in which they privately stole by the Romans,
either with Sails, the wind blowing fresh; or which Oars down the Stream. When
therefore by reason of the largness and violence of the Waters no way could be
found to make a Bridge over, instead thereof he built two Castles, from which
he drew over Scipio's Boom.
Beams of Timber fastened together with Cordage, quite athwart the River, there
were likewise very thick upon the Timbers, fastened very sharp Irons like
Spear-heads, which move about by the force of the Water suffered none to pass,
who either by Swimming or Diving, or Boat had design to deceive the Enemy: For
it was Scipio's chief desire that none coming to them from abroad they might be
ignorant of all was done, and want both intelligence and supplies. After all
the works were perfected, and the Catapults, Crossbows and other Engines raised
upon the Towers and the Bulwarks, well stored with Stones, Darts and Javelins,
and the Archers and Slingers placed in the Towers, he disposed messengers quite
round the Lines, who taking the word from one another might give it about, as
any thing happened, he gave order likewise, that the first Tower that was
assaulted by the Enemy should first show their Colors, and then others by the
same Example do the like, that by the moving of this sign, and the word going
about by the messengers he might know the certain cause of every thing; Then
Mustring his forces and finding he had sixty thousand men, he so divided them,
that one half had charge of the guard of the wall, and if need were might be
ready for other service, twenty thousand upon occasion to fight for the wall,
and ten thousand for their reserve, who had likewise their post assigned them;
but none without the Generals Command was to change his Post, so that upon any
signal given, every man was ready at his stand: with so much diligence did
Scipio order all things. In the mean time the Numantines made several assaults
upon the guards of the Wall, but then immediately, not without horror, they
beheld assistance come from all parts, the signals made, the messengers
running, those appointed for defense of the Walls leaping up, the Trumpets from
the Towers sounding a charge, so that in an instant, all that whole circuit of
fifty furlongs was put into a formidable posture. The whole round of which
Scipio continually went both day and night believing his Enemies thus enclosed
and wanting both Provisions, Arms and Men, could not very long make opposition.
In the mean time Retogenes a most valiant Numantine, whose Surname was
Cauraunius, taking with him five friends whom he had wrought his parties in the
enterprise, as many servants, and a like number of Horses in a cloudy and very
dark night passing closely over the space between the Town and the Trenches,
with a little Bridge to be set together, that he brought with him, gets with
his friends upon the Enemies Works, and having slain the Sentinels, drew over
the Horses by the same Bridge, and sending back the servants, they forthwith
dispersed themselves among the Towns of the Arvacci, and in the manner of
suppliants with Olive-branches in their hands, besought them to assist their
kinsfolks the Numantines; but many out of fear of the Romans, without hearing
them commanded them to depart their Territories. But the youth of Lutia (a rich
Town about three hundred furlongs distant from Numantia) pitying the
Numantines condition, urged their City to send them aid, whereof Scipio having
certain intelligence from the Seniors of the City, taking with him a nimble
party, in eight hours time flies to Lutia, and by break of day begirting the
City commanded the heads and ringleaders of the youth to be delivered up to
him, and when they made answer, that they were broken out and fled, threatened
by a Herald to Sack the City unless they were delivered up, wherewith terrified
they brought out about forty to him, whose hands having cut off he marched away
with his Forces, and by the next morning again recovered his Camp.

Hereupon the Numantines oppressed with hunger, sent five men to Scipio, to try
whether if they yielded, they might be received with favor and clemency; the
chief of this Deputation called Avarus, began to discourse in a brave and lofty
manner, of the Institutions and Valor of the Numantines; adding, they had not
been guilty of any delinquency, since only for their Wives and Childrens sakes,
and the Liberty of their Country, they were fallen into these miseries.
Wherefore it would be an action worthy thee, O Scipio (said he) who art famed
for a man of admirable generosity, to spare a brave and worthy people like
ours, and not impose harder Conditions than humanity is able to bear on men,
who sadly experienced the change of Fortune; for it is no more in our powers,
but thine, by proposing moderate Conditions to save our City, by accepting our
surrender, or else by fighting to suffer us utterly to perish. Avarus having
thus spoken, Scipio (before well assured of the Cities distress by the
Captives) made no other answer, but that they must deliver up the City and
their Arms; which being told to the Numantines, the Citizens already enough
enraged (as men that were resolute to enjoy their Liberty, and submit to no
others Empire) now by these provoking miseries made more violent and fierce,
slew Avarus, and his fellow Deputies, as the Messengers of ill News, and
perhaps, as suspecting them to have made some private bargain for their own
safety. Not long after all manner of food being spent, and neither Corn, nor
Cattle, nor Herbs left, first (as in close sieges has often happened) they fed
upon boiled Hides; which being likewise consumed, they minced small the flesh
of dying men, and devoured it, but their stomach soon loathing the flesh of
these sick men, the stronger began to lay hands upon the weaker. In short,
there was no misery to be imagined which they did not endure; their minds made
fierce and bloody by this food, and their bodies oppressed with hunger and
plague; having long time neglected themselves, they grew rough and shaggy, and
in all points resembled wild Beasts. In this lamentable condition they
delivered themselves up to Scipio; by whose Command they one day brought all
their Arms into one place, and were appointed on the next day to assemble
themselves in another; but they thought that day long; many yet out of desire
of Liberty, professing they wished for death, and on that day only asking for
some kind of death to be appointed them; so much Love of Liberty was there in a
small and a barbarous City; for when before the War they were but eight
thousand, with how frequent slaughters did they afflict the Romans? How often
upon good terms did they enter into Leagues, which the Romans would not
afterward ratify or maintain? How often did they provoke to Battle this last
Roman General, besieging them with threescore thousand men? But he had so much
knowledge in Military Affairs, that he would not engage in fight with wild
Beasts, but chose rather to reduce them by Famine, the only way to tame those
creatures, and by which they at last were tamed and broken. Wherefore when I
considered, that the Numantines with so few Soldiers, so constantly held out so
lasting a Siege, I thought it would have been a crime to have past by the
particulars of it in silence. Surrendry being therefore made, many of them slew
themselves in what manner they best thought fit; the rest assembled on the
third day in the place appointed, with Bodies like Carcases, a brutish kind of
Countenance, their Bodies covered with filth and nastiness, their Hair shaggy,
their Garments foul, tattered and loathsomely stinking; so that in that
condition they appeared miserable to their very Enemies, though the sick struck
horror into all that looked upon them; for with anger, grief and labor, and a
mutual consciousness of having fed on Humane Flesh, their very Eyes looked
fiery and bloody. Fifty of them only reserved for his Triumph, Scipio sold the
rest under the yoke. The Town he levelled with the ground. Thus this Roman
General subverted two famous Cities. Carthage by Decree of the Senate (lest the
power and strength of the City and Empire, and convenience of its Situation,
should invite them to War) and Numantia, a small one, and not very populous,
without so much as the peoples knowledge; whether he believed it the sense of
the Commonwealth, whether out of a sudden rage and anger against those people;
or rather (as many think) to gain himself two Illustrious Sirnames from the
ruins of the two Cities; for even to this day the Romans call him, the African
and the Numantine, from the destruction and ruin of those two Cities. Having
divided the Lands of the Numantines among the Neighbors, and gone a progress
through the other Cities to administer Justice, and threatened or fined those
which had any way been their Associates, he returned home.

Scipio now, or Brutus before, had subdued either by surrendry, or force of
Arms, to establish Order, and settle all Affairs in Peace. In succeeding times,
new stirs arising, Calphurnius Piso was sent thither General, whom Servilius
Galba succeeded. But when Italy was oppressed with the Cimbrian War, and Sicily
again with that of the Slaves; they sent no Forces into Spain, but only
Lieutenants, who as far as they were able, kept all things in quiet. The
Cimbrians being driven out of Italy, T. Didius coming thither, slew twenty
thousand of the Vaccaei, and transplanted the Town of Tremisum, always
unfaithful to the Romans, from a strong situation unto the Plain, commanding
the Inhabitants to live without any Fortifications. Then after seven Months
Siege he took the City Colenda by surrendry, and sold all the Citizens with
their Wives and Children. Not far from Colenda dwelt a mixture of several
people of the Celtiberians, whom Marius, five years before, when he had made
use of them against the Lusitanians, had by consent of the Senate there
appointed Habitations. These through want, living on thievery, Didius, by
consent of the ten Commissioners, who were not yet gone, approved the
settlement and signified to their Leaders, that he would to those wanted,
assign the Lands of the Inhabitants of Colenda, which proposition they eagerly
accepting, he presently commanded them with their Wives and Children to come to
the division of the Land: when they were come, he commanded his Soldiers to
come out of his Camp, and them to go in, the men apart from the Women and
Children, for that he would take a Roll of their Names, to compute how much
Land was to be divided. They being all gone within the Lines; the Soldiers
surrounding them, put them all to the Sword, for which things he likewise
triumphed. The Celtiberians again rebelling: Flaccus was sent against them, who
with the slaughter of twenty thousand suppressed them. But in the City of
Belgeda, the people inclining to a defection, and the Senate demurring upon it,
and refusing, the people burnt them all in their Seats, of which Villainy,
Flaccus at his coming finding out the Authors punished them. These are the
Actions of the Romans against the Spaniards, which I have found most worthy of
Memory.

In latter time when Sylla and Cinna, being at variance raised Arms and
conspired aginst their Country, Q. Sertorius being of Cinna's party and chosen
General of Spain, stirred up that whole Province against the Romans, and having
got together a mighty Army, and formed a kind of a Senate out of his Friends,
with great courage and confidence was about to march toward the City. At which
the Fathers terrified, they sent two Excellent and famous Generals of their own
order Caecilius Metellus, with one strong Army, and Cn. Pompey with another, to
divert him from Italy; yet laboring for strength after the late Civil War. But
Perpenna one of Sertorius party slew him and made himself General of the
Faction, who being by Pompey overcome in battle and slain, that War which had
struck a great terror among the Romans, was ended: but of this we have written
more accurately in Sylla's Civil Wars. After Sylla's death, C. Caesar was
created General in Spain with power to make War as he should think fit against
any that seemed to stagger, or were never yet subdued to the Roman Power. After
him Octavius Caesar Son of Caius, Surnamed Augustus, reduced some people which
had again rebelled, from which time the Romans (as I suppose) divided Iberia
which they now call Spain into Terraconensis, Boetica, Lusitania.
three parts, sending Praetors into each of them, two of which are nominated by
the Senate, and the third appointed by the Emperor.

The end of the seventh Book of the Spanish War.
APPIAN OF ALEXANDRIA, HIS HISTORY OF THE Roman Wars WITH HANNIBAL.
PART I.
BOOK VIII.
The Argument of this Book.
I. THe occasion of this War briefly rehearsed. II. Hannibal passes the Alps,
takes Turine, twice defeats Scipio, slay's Flaminius, and destroys his whole
Army. III. Centenius defeated by him: the City in great fear make Fabius
Dictator. IV. The Battle at Cannae, Varro's Cowardice. V. The Peoples fear
after the defeat at Cannae: The Senates Courage, and Hannibal's cruelty. VI.
Several Roman Allies revolt to Hannibal. Gracchus the Proconsul slain. VII.
Capua besieged by the Romans. Hannibal to divert that Siege, marches directly
to Rome, the Cities fears: Nevertheless he returns, having only viewed it.
VIII. Hannibal's Stratagem defeated by Claudius, Capua taken by the Romans. IX.
Titia taken and recovered: Salatia revolts from Hannibal. X. The Consuls
Fulvius and Marcellus slain; yet Hannibal's Affairs grow worse and worse. XI.
Asdrubal, Hannibal's brother, with the Army he brought out of Spain totally
routed. XII. Hannibal quitting all the rest of Italy, retires among the
Brutians, and in vain expects aid from Carthage. XII. Scipio sails with an Army
into Africa: several of the Brutians fall off from Hannibal. XIII. He is
recalled home, his cruelty at his departure, and the end of this War.

NOw what was done by Hannibal the Carthaginian, when out Spain he led his
Forces into Italy, during the full sixteen years that he there continued in
Arms, acting, and in his turn suffering all the extremities of War; till by his
fellow Citizens (his own Country being in jeopardy) he was recalled, and by the
Romans driven out of Italy, shall be the Subject of this Book; and though the
causes, both of the breaking out, and of the carrying on this War into Italy,
as well what in reality they were, as what was openly pretended, be in the
Spanish History most accurately declared; yet it will not be amiss for the
refreshing the Readers Memory, to make some short rehearsal. Amilcar, surnamed
Barcas, Father of this Hannibal, in that War waged between the Romans and
Carthaginians in Sicily, was General of the Carthaginian Forces; and being for
his ill Conduct accused by his Enemies, and thereof doubtful, he so managed
Affairs, that before rendering any account of his former charge, he was created
General against the Numidians. In which War, because he much advanced the
Commonwealth, and by Gifts and Rapines pleased that Army, he was first sent by
the Carthaginian people to Cadiz, whence crossing over that Strait into Spain,
by sending many rich Presents out of the Spoil of that Country into Carthage,
he reconciled himself to the people, striving by all means to wipe off the
Memory of the Sicilian Ignominy. At length having subdued many People, and got
great Glory, he drew on the Carthaginians, with a hope and desire of possessing
all Spain, as a thing easily effected; whereupon the Saguntines, and other
Greeks, inhabiting Spain, sought for refuge to the Romans: Whereupon it was
agreed between the Romans and Carthaginians, and ratified by Writings, that the
Bounds of the Carthaginian Dominion should be the River Iberus. After which
Barcas settling in Spain the Affairs of the subdued People, was in a certain
Battle slain; and Asdrubal, the Son-in-Law of Barcas, substituted in his place,
who being likewise (as he was hunting) killed by a Slave, whose Master he had
put to death; the third from them, who for his skill in, and love of warlike
Affairs, was chosen General by the Army; was this Hannibal, the Son of Barcas,
and Brother to Asdrubal's Wife, a young man indeed: but who had lived all his
time with his Father or Brother-in-Law; and having now the Command given by the
Soldiery, the Carthaginian people approved it; and so this Hannibal, of whom I
am about to write, was declared General for the Carthaginians against the
Spaniards; who perceiving his Fathers friends exposed to the designs and malice
of their Enemies, who despising his Youth, began to set things on foot against
them, not being ignorant, but their dangers would one day fall upon his own
head. That out of the public fear he might acquire and establish freedom and
security for himself; he devised how to embroil his Country in a War, and
thinking none more fit for his purpose, more lasting, nor likely to be more for
his Glory, than a War with the Romans; the very attempting which, though he
succeeded ill, would get him no small Renown (to omit the report spread abroad,
that when a Boy, his Father made him swear at the Altar, never to be at peace
with the Romans) he resolved, notwithstanding the League, to cross over the
Iberus, which he thus found occasion to effect: He set on some to accuse the
Saguntines, and plied the Senate with frequent Letters; alleging that the
Romans solicited all Spain to revolt; till at length he obtained leave to deal
with the Saguntines, as he himself thought fit: so he crossed the Iberus, and
utterly rased the City of the Saguntines. Thus were all the Leagues made
between the Romans and Carthaginians, since the Sicilian War, utterly broken.

Hannibal and others, either Carthaginian or Roman Generals, did in Spain, the
Spanish History declares: He gathering together vast multitudes of Africans,
Celtiberians, and many other Nations, delivering over Spain to his Brother
Asdrubal, and climbing over the Pyrenean Hills, came into Celtica, which is now
called Gallica, leading with him ninety thousand Footmen, twelve thousand
Horse, and seven and thirty Elephants, and joining to him some Gauls, partly
gained by Gold, partly by Promises, and partly by Force, lead them along with
him: whence proceeding on his March, when he came to the Alps, though he saw
no ascent nor passage (for all before him seemed craggy and inaccessible) yet
with a strange confidence of mind, which no labor could make bend, he settled
himself to go forward; and finding all the passages stopped with deep Snow, and
Ice congealed together, thawing it by kindling mighty Fires, and quenching the
Ashes with Water and Vinegar, and then breaking the scorched and cleaving Rocks
with Iron Hammers and Wedges, by little and little lessened them, and opened
himself a way, which to this day lies so, and is called Hannibals passage. But
when hunger began to afflict his Army, he with more speed lead them on, whilst
none yet knew of his coming into Italy. After six Months spent after his
departure from Spain, with great difficulty and the loss of many men, he in the
end got down from the Mountains into the Plain; where giving his Army some
short rest, he went and took Turine, a City of the Gauls, which being gained by
storm, and the Captives (to strike a terror into the rest of the Gauls) all
slain, he marched his Army to the Eridanus (now called Po) whereabouts the
Romans, at that time waged War against the Boian Gauls. P. Cornelius Scipio,
the Roman Consul, then sent to wage War against the Carthaginians in Spain,
hearing of Hannibal's being gone into Italy; leaving Spain, and the Command of
that Army to his Brother Cn. Scipio, sailed into Tuscany.
Hetruria; from whence making haste, and gathering together all the force he
could, he got to the Po before Hannibal passed it; and sending Manlius and
Attilius, who commanded in the War against the Boians to Rome (for the Consuls
being present, their Commission was at an end) and joining their Forces with
his, drew up his Army to give Battle to Hannibal. The Fight being begun by the
light armed Darters and Horsemen, the Romans circumvented by the Africans, fled
to their Tents, and next night having first broke down the Bridge over the Po,
retreated to Placentia, a place well fortified; but Hannibal making a new
Bridge, brought his Army likewise over. These brave Exploits, after his coming
down from the Alps into the Plain, stood him not in little stead among the
Transalpine Gauls, who thought him an invincible Leader, and a man to all whose
attempts Fortune showed her self favorable and propitious; which Renown to
increase among these Barbarians already astonished, with admiration of him, and
therefore easily to be deceived; he often changed his Habit and Hair, which
daily was by some new Artifice prepared and colored, so that passing through
their Country, he sometimes appeared like an old, sometimes like a young, and
sometimes like a middle aged man; so that seeing him continually varying from
himself, they forthwith judged Divine Nature to be in him. Sempronius, the
other Consul, who was then in Sicily, having certain intelligence of these
things, came to Scipio by Sea, and sets down within forty Furlongs of his
Colleague; and now all things were prepared for the next days Battle. Only the
River Trebia ran between, which the Romans before it was light on a cold and
mizling Winters Morning, passed over almost up to the breast in Water, whilst
Hannibal till the second hour refreshed his Solders in their Tents. The two
Consuls so drew up their Army, that they might be on the Wings, placing the
stoutest of their Foot in the main Body. Hannibal opposed his Elephants to the
Horse, and his Foot to the Phalanx, and commanded his Horse to stand still
behind the Elephants, till he gave them the Signal. The Battles being joined,
the Romans Horse affrighted with the sight and smell of the Elephants, to which
they were unaccustomed, dispersed all abroad and fled; but the Foot, though
stiff with cold, soaked in Water, and tired and broken with continual
watchings, yet with courageous hearts flew upon those Monsters, and cutting
them cross the Nerves, wounded them, and had doubtless put to flight his Foot,
had not Hannibal, giving his Signal to his Horsemen, sent them to flank the
Enemy: For then the Roman Foot left naked by their Horse, whom the terror of
the Elephants had scattered, and oppressed by multitudes, fearing to be
enclosed by their Enemies, took a speedy flight toward their Camp. Then were
many of the Foot intercepted by the Horse, and others that reached the River,
(which was not a little swelled with the Snow melted by the heat of the Sun)
were swallowed in the Stream, the depth of the Water not giving them foothold,
nor their heavy Armor suffering them to swim. Scipio following them, and still
encouraging his Soldiers, was very near slain, and desperately wounded, brought
with much difficulty to Cremona. Near Placentia was a little Castle, which
Hannibal going to storm, with the loss of forty of his men, went off himself
wounded. After which both Armies betook themselves to Winter Quarters, Scipio
in Cremona and Palantia, and Hannibal about the Po. The Romans hearing of this
defeat given near the Po (for before Hannibals coming they had been worsted by
the Boians) enrolled a new Army in the City, which accounting those at the Po,
completed thirteen Legions, and twice as many they commanded from their
Allies. Some of these they thought fit to send into Spain, foam to Sardinia
(for there they were at War too) and foam into Sicily the greater part which
were left behind the Consuls Cn. Servilius, and Flaminius (who succeeded Scipio
and Sempronius) led against Hannibal, and Scipio as Proconsul sailed into
Spain. Flaminius with thirty thousand Foot, and three thousand Horse had the
Guard of Italy, within the Appennine, which alone is properly called Italy; for
the Appennine from the middle of the Alps stretches it self to the Sea; on the
right hand of which lies that part, which is truly called Italy; that on the
left hand toward the Ionian Sea now indeed is Italy (for Hetruria is now
likewise Italy) but part of it toward the Ionian Sea Coasts is inhabited by
Greeks, and part by Gauls, who once making War upon the Romans, burnt the City;
and whom Camillus pursuing to the Appennine; I am of the opinion, that crossing
those Hills, they then seated themselves upon the Ionian Sea, and made that
their Country, whence part of that Region is to this day called the Italian
Gaul. But to proceed, the Romans having now at the same time many powerful
Armies in several places, Hannibal having thereof intelligence, very secretly
upon the first approach of the Spring, entered Hetruria, wasting that whole
Country, and drawing toward the City, struck a mighty terror in the Romans,
who had now no Army there to oppose him; yet of those that remained, they
levied eight thousand men, whom for want of other Magistrates, they gave
Centenius the Command of, a private man indeed, but of the Patritian Race, and
sent him into Umbria to the Plestine Marsh to guard that passage, which was the
nearest way to the City. In the mean time Flaminius, who with thirty thousand
men kept the interior Italy, hearing of Hannibal's celcrity; and being afraid
of the City, forthwith removes his Camp; and giving his Army no rest, being a
man ignorant of Warlike Affairs; and who by pride and popular boasting came to
be chosen to this Command* by great journies hastens toward Hannibal, with
resolution to fight him as soon as possible. Hannibal, who knew the man's
furious temper, and unskilfulness in War, pitched his Tents behind a certain
Mountain and Marsh, and hid all his Horse and Light Armed Men in the Valley. In
the Morning at break of day, Flaminius seeing the Enemies Tents, stayed there a
small while to refresh his Army, and threw up a Trench; which done, he drew up
his Army in Battle, before they had yet recovered strength, after so much
labor and watching: but when the Ambushes rose upon them on all sides, then
penned in between the Mountains and the Lake, and on both sides charged by
their Enemies; the Consul himself, and twenty thousand with him were slain. The
remaining ten thousand, who had fled to a certain Village, fortified by Nature,
Maharbal, one of Hannibal's Commanders, who had himself gained great Renown in
War, seeing he could not easily vanquish them by force, and thinking it not
prudence to engage with desperate men, persuaded them to lay down their Arms,
engaging upon his Honor, they should all have free leave to go whither they
pleased. They having thereupon laid down their Arms, he carried them naked to
Hannibal, who denying that Maharbal had any power without his Orders to promise
any thing, such of the Associates as he found, he treated with all kindness,
and dismissed without any ransom, by this Clemency, enticing and alluring the
Cities to his party, but all the Romans he kept Prisoners. Among the Auxiliary
Gauls, that by gain he might sweeten them, he likewise divided part of the
prey, and then began to march on.

Servilius the Consul, who lay in his standing Camp near the Po, he with forty
thousand men made haste toward Hetruria. Centenius still with his eight
thousand men kept his Post. Hannibal viewing the Plestine Marsh, and the
Mountain hanging over it, and Centenius guarding the Passage, diligently
enquired of the Chief of his Guards, if there were any way to go about the
Mountain; and though they told him they were no way passible, but all was rough
and craggy; yet he commanded Maharbal, with some Light Armed Men to fetch a
compass about the Mountain, and about the same time that he conjectured he
might have recovered the tops of the Hills, charged Centenius in Front; and
whilst they were disputing it, Maharbal having stoutly recovered the tops of
the Hills, with great shouts and clamor shows himself. Then the flight of the
Romans, and the slaughter of them was great, three thousand were slain, and
eight hundred taken Prisoners, the rest hardly escaping. The news of this
slaughter being brought to Rome, they were in a dreadful fear left Hannibal
should now march directly to the City, wherefore they manned their Walls, and
furnished them with Darts, and the Old Men armed, and for want of Arms, they
took out of the Temples such, as being taken in former Wars, had been there
hung up for Trophies; and according to their Custom in all extremities, they
created Fabius Maximus Dictator. But Hannibal, God averting him, turned off
toward the Ionian Sea, and wasting all their Coasts, got a vast prey. Servilius
the Consul opposing himself to Hannibal, came to A^minium, and that he might
keep those Gauls, not yet alienated in their fidelity, staid with his Army one
days march from thence, till Fabius the Dictator coming, sent Servilius, who
after the creation of a Dictator, had no more power either as Consul or
General, to Rome; and himself followed Hannibal close at the heels: but yet
forbearing to engage him, though often provoked to it, thinking it enough, if
warily watching him, he prevented him from besieging any Towns. Hannibal, the
whole Country being wasted, began to be in want, wherefore ranging it over once
more, and for many days drawing up his Forces, he endeavored to tempt Fabius
to fight. But the Dictator made no show of having any thoughts to engage him*
though Minutius Rufus, General of his Horse, disallowed this proceeding, and
wrote to his Friends at Rome, that Fabius through fear and cowardice declined
Battle. But it happened that Fabius going to Rome to perform the usual
Sacrifices, Minutius fought a set Battle with Hannibal, wherein he seemed to
have the better; whereupon grown more furious, he wrote to the Senate, accusing
Fabius, that he had no mind to overcome. The Senate at Fabius return to the
Army, thereupon made the Power equal between the Dictator and Master of the
Horse: So they divided the Forces between them, and pitched their Camps apart,
each steadfast in his own opinion. Fabius, that Hannibal was to be dealt with by
temporizing, still vexing him, and taking care that he did no mischief
Minutius, that he was presently to be fought with: But when he a while after
engaging Hannibal, Fabius, who lay still with his Forces, well foreseeing what
after happened, received Minutius's Soldiers put to flight and repulsed, Hannibal
pursuing them, thereby securing Minutius from a very great slaughter; and being
nothing less kind to him, notwithstanding all his false accusations; then, I
say, Minutius of his own accord condemning his own want of knowledge, resigning
his Command, delivered his part of the Army up to Fabius: Which passages
Augustus in after times often remembered, who was himself wary of fighting, and
chose rather to prevail by Policy than Power. Fabius no less diligently than
before watched Hannibal's motions, hindering him from forraging; and though
declining a general Engagement, still falling upon all straggling parties, not
doubting in a short time to reduce Hannibal to want of Provisions. Till both
Armies drawing nigh to certain straits, which Hannibal foresaw not, Fabius sent
before four thousand men, who forthwith possessing themselves of the straits,
he himself pitched his Camp upon a certain Hill on the other side, where he lay
secure. Hannibal seeing himself thus besieged, being shut in one side by
Fabius's Army, and on the other by those guarded the passes, was struck with
such a violent fear, as he never had been before; for he could perceive no way
of escape, all other places being craggy and inaccessible: So that despairing
how to get loose from Fabius, being so close blocked up, in this fear and
trouble of mind, he caused five thousand Prisoners (left taking the opportunity
of this present danger, they might raise some Tumult and disorder) to be killed
in cold blood. Then he commanded Torches to be tied to the Horns of all the
Cattle he had in the Camp, whereof there were abundance; and the next night
setting on flame the Torches, and putting out all other Fires in the Camp,
committed it to the care of the stoutest young men in his Army, to drive them
up the craggy ways, between the straits and Fabius's Camp, with all the
violence they could. The Oxen pricked forward by their Drivers, and scorched
with the Flame of the Torches, run up with great fury among the Craggs and
Precipices, and when any of them fell down, with greater violence they strove
to clamber up again. The Romans, who were on both sides, when they saw a
general silence and darkness in Hannibal's Camp, and perceived many lights
shining in several places among the Mountains, could not plainly, especially
being in the night, discover what the business should be. Fabius indeed
suspected some device of Hannibals, but being certain of nothing, kept within
his Trenches. But those set for the Guard of the straits, thinking (which was
all he wished they would do) that Hannibal sled, and was making his escape over
the tops of the Mountains, ran to the places whither the lights guided them,
imagining to oppress Hannibal's men, laboring to get up. They were scarce
moved from their Post, when Hannibal with deep silence, and without any light
to keep the closer, runs in with his swiftest men, and possessing himself of,
and placing a good Guard in the straits, by sound of Trumpet gave notice
thereof to the rest; at the sound of which the whole Camp answered them with
acclamations, and forthwith blew up their Fires. Then the Romans knew the
cheat; so the rest of Hannibal's Army, and those that drove the Cattle, got
safe to the passage; and he with his whole Army having thus beyond his own
hopes got the Victory, and brought all his men safe off; he marched forward
till he came to Gerione, a City of Apulia, stored with Corn, which making
himself Master of, he spent the Winter in the midst of plenty and abundance.
Fabius with the same resolutions and constancy still following him, pitched his
Camp within ten Furlongs of Gerione, the River Aufidus running between both
Armies, but the six Months being expired (which is the time established for the
Dictatorship at Rome) the Consuls Servilius Attilius, again entering into their
Magistracy, came to the Army, and Fabius returned to Rome. This Winter many
skirmishes and engagements of Parties happened betwixt both Armies, in which
always the Romans came off with the greater Honor and Glory; wherefore
Hannibal, who till that time writing to his friends, used to adorn and set out
his Letters with his own praises, now began to distrust his Affairs, and
require Supplies of Men and Money. But his Enemies who from the very first
condemned his undertakings, then especially feigned not to understand him, for
Conquerors, said they, did not use to ask, but freely to send Money to their own
Country, which Hannibal proud with so many victories yet demands. At which
words the Carthaginians moved sent him neither men nor money, which Hannibal
deploring sent Letters into Spain to Asdrubal his brother commanding him, that
with the first of the Summer with all the force he had, and what quantity of
gold he could raise, he should make an irruption into Italy, and wast the utter
parts thereof, that both sides burning, the Romans might be afflicted with a
doubtful War: in this Posture stood Hannibals affairs.

The Fathers sorely grieved for the defeat of Flaminius and Centenius Apulia
consisting of four Legions, enrolled not without great regret in the City, and
a mighty power of their Allies. Withal they created two Consuls one famous for
Warlike Prowess L. Aemilius, who had made War in Illyria, the other of the
Popular Faction Terentius Varro, a man who only with lofty promises soothed the
minds of the Common people, whom when they sent out armed to the War, they
besought as soon as they could to engage the Enemy, and not by longer
Protracting the War exhaust the City by so many recruits, of Men, Money, and
Provisions, and through Idleness suffer the Country to burn. The Consuls
receiving the Army that was in Apulia, and being now in all seventy thousand
Foot and six thousand Horse, pitch their Camp in Cannae a Town of Apulia
directly opposite to the Carthaginians. Hannibal who had always been desirous
to fight, and impatient of lying idle, at this time more especially did not
decline an Engagement, being pressed to it by his own necessities, and a fear
le^t the Mercenary Soldiers not having their wages paid, should either run away
from him or be scattered about the Country to get in Forage. Wherefore he
daily provoked the Enemy, whilst the Consuls were of quite different, and
disagreeing judgments, Aemilius thought that Hannibal was to be defeated by
Temporizing and patience, for that having only such Provisions as he day by day
fetched in, he could not long subsist; whilst it was hazardous fighting an Army
and a General so long versed in Battles and accustomed to Victory: but
Terentius (raised by the people and therefore remembering the Peoples Commands)
was for present fight. None save only Servilius Consul the year preceding were
of Aemilius mind, but all the Senators and those of the Order of Knights, who
had any Office in the Army, were of Terentius opinion. Whilst the Romans lay in
this manner, Hannibal who having a party sent out either to Wood or Forage,
set upon by them; first overcome, about the last watch of the night discamped,
and feigned a flight as if he had fought to return to his own Country; which
Varro beholding he drew out the Army as if he had been to pursue a flying
Enemy, Aemilius in the mean time earnestly forbidding it, and calling them
back, which when he saw did nothing avail, he went himself according to the
Roman Custom, to take the usual signs, and he seeing the Chicken peckt not,
Commanded to let Varro know the ill Auspices. He indeed yielded to Religion,
but being returned into the Camp before all the Army tore his Hair, crying out,
that his Colleague had out of envy robbed him of the victory, the whole crowd
assenting to what he said, and making the like complaints. But when Hannibal
saw his deceit had little profited him, he forthwith returned into his Camp,
and discovered his dissembled flight, yet all this would not prevail with
Varro, thence forward to suspect Hannibal, but on the Contrary going into the
Praetorium before all the Senators, Centurions, and Military Tribunes, he
grievously inveighed against Aemilius, who either by falsely representing the
Religious auspices, had robbed the City of a Certain Victory, or through Fear
and Cowardice, not daring to fight himself, had envyed him the glory of the
day; in Raving manner uttering these speeches, the Soldiers who stood about the
Tent greedily receiving, and gladly hearing these words with bitter reproaches
blasted Aemilius, who yet forbore not though in vain to advise many useful
things, but when all save only Servilius were furiously carried away by Varro's
persuasion, the next day which was almost the last of his Command (for he after
yielded it to Varro) he drew out his Army to fight: Hannibal perceived it, but
because he was not that day sufficiently prepared, drew not out his Army. The
next day both Generals drew into the field. The Romans in a triple Battle, so
as that the main body consisted of Armed Foot and the two Wings of light Armed
Foot and Horse. Aemilius commanded the main body, Servilius the left Wing, and
Varro the Right, and each had with them a body of about a thousand chosen Horse
to run up and down upon all occasions, and give assistance where it was
needful. This was the Order of the Roman battle. Hannibal not ignorant, that a
certain stormy wind (which they call Vulturnus, and is the North East) blew
usually about Noon in those parts, made it his first care to take possession of
the ground so, that he might have the wind upon his back, Then upon a certain
hill covered over with trees, and broken in sunder by several close Valleys, he
placed some Horse and nimble Soldiers in Ambush, to whom he gave orders, that
in the heat of the battle, and when the wind was risen they should charge the
Enemy in the Rear, to these he added five hundred Celtiberians, who besides
their long Swords, wherewith they were girt, had under their Coat Armors or
Jacks, short Daggers, to stand in a readiness till he had occasion for them,
and quietly to wait for the signal to be given them. Then having likewise drawn
his Army into a Triple Battle, and extended his Horse as far as he could upon
the Wings, to enclose the Enemy, he gave the right Wing to Mago his brother,
the left to Hanno his Nephew, and kept the main Battle himself to be opposite
to Aemilius, who had the greatest Fame and knowledge in War, he had likewise
two thousand Horse besides a thousand commanded by Maharbal whom he appointed
to keep continually moving, with orders upon occasion to assist any that were
oppressed. And doing these things delayed the battle till the second hour, at
what time the wind began to rise, when all things were put in good order, the
Generals began to encourage their respective Soldiers, the Romans by putting
them in mind of their Parents, Wives and Children, and withal by remembering
them of former defeats, let them know they fought this battle for the last
stake, and their own general and particular preservation. Hannibal on the other
side remembering his Men of their many famous Exploits, and the several
Victories they had already gained against this very Enemy, told them
dishonorable it would be, should they now be vanquished by those they had so
often overcome. And now the Trumpets sounding a charge and the Foot giving a
shout, the light Armed Men first began, and then forthwith the Legions advanced
to the Battle, then the slaughter was great, and the labor mighty, both sides
courageously maintaining the ground. In the mean time Hannibal gave Orders to
his Horse to enclose the Enemies Wings, whom the Roman Horse, though far
inferior in number, yet being drawn out in length, and extended as far as
possible, with noble and undaunted courage received, especially those in the
left Wing toward the Sea. Wherefore Hannibal and Maharbal taking along those
Horse they had with them, with a violent shock, and a savage and barbarous
howling, fell in upon the Romans, as if by one fierce onset they would break
through, and overset them; but the Romans received their charge without
amazement, or giving the least ground. Hannibal seeing all these endeavors
fruitless, lifted up the Signal for those five hundred Celtiberians, who soon
after going out of the Body, as if they had deserted their party, delivered up
to the Enemy their Shields, Darts and Swords, which were all the Arms that
appeared about them. Servilius praising them, and soon disarming them, having,
as he thought no other Armor but their Coats of Male, commanded them to set
down behind the Army, not thinking it honorable in the Enemies sight to cast
Revolters into Bonds; and seeing them disarmed all to their Coats, he feared no
hurt from them; besides the Army being in all parts engaged, it was a time very
unseasonable to do any thing more to them. About the same instant, some
Regiments of the Africans dissembling a flight, began with great cries to run
toward the Mountains, that warned by the Signal (for so it was agreed on)
those who lay in the clefts of the Hill, might fall upon such as pursued them.
So at one instant all the Horse and light armed Foot rising out of their
Ambushes, and at the same time a great and violent storm of wind blowing the
dust into the Romans faces, and blinding them, besides the force of the wind
driving back the Roman Darts, and making them flee faintly and uncertain,
whilst the Carthaginians coming with it, flew more sure and strong; the Romans
not able any way to avoid these things, fell foul of one another, and the whole
Army began to stagger; when those Celtiberians laying hold of this occasion to
act their design, unsheathing their Daggers, first slew those at whose backs
they stood; and siesing on their Shields, Darts and Swords, fell more freely
upon the whole Body, and being behind them, made a horrible slaughter. The
Romans, (having their Enemies before them, and being enclosed by Ambushes, and
withal slain by these mixed amongst them, upon whom they could not turn, being
so pressed by the Carthaginians in Front, and being likewise deceived by the
likeness of the Arms, for the Celtiberians having got Roman Shields, they were
scarce to be distinguished from their own men) were distracted with various and
doubtful dangers; but among these misfortunes, the dust raised by the wind, did
most of all afflict the Romans, for they could neither understand their own
loss; but (as is usual in all frights and tumults) believed every thing worse
than it was, and thought the Ambushes greater, and those five hundred much more
numerous; wherefore at length believing their Camps already encompassed by the
Horse and Fugitives, they began to make a disorderly flight, first on the right
Wing, Varro himself leading the way, and afterward on the left, whose
Commander Servilius running in to Aemilius, and about ten thousaud stout Horse
and Foot gathering about these two Commanders, they first, and by their
Example, the rest of the Horsemen soon after alighting, though they were on all
sides encompassed round, yet on foot renewed the fight against Hannibal's
Horse. There might be beheld all that men skilful in War, and reduced to utter
despair, could in that rage and fury act against an Enemy; yet they were slain
on all sides, and now Hannibal himself enclosing them, encouraged his men,
sometimes with exhortations to perfect the relics of the Victory, and
sometimes reproaching their cowardice, that when the whole Army was scattered
and fled, they could not overcome so small a number: Yet the Romans, as long as
Servilius and Aemilius stood, kept their Orders, giving and receiving
multitudes of wounds: but when those two Generals fell, stoutly forcing their
way through the midst of their Enemies, and then dispersing themselves, they
fled, and many of them escaped to several Quarters. There were about fifteen
thousand, who at the beginning of the rout, had fled into the two Camps, these
Hannibal forthwith besieged: two thousand that had fled into the Town of
Cannae, yielded themselves to him, a few got safe to to Canusium, and the rest
were dispersed through the Woods. This was the event of the Battle at Cannae,
begun the second hour of the day, and continuing till two hours within night,
till this very time famous for the great slaughter, there being in few hours no
less than fifty thousand killed, great numbers taken alive, many Senators
slain, with all the Centurions and Primipiles, and the two bravest of three
Generals; for as to the third he most cowardly (though the Author of this
Calamity) ran away at the beginning of the rout. Thus the Romans in two years
War with Hannibal had lost of their own, and their Allies, no less than two
hundred thousand men.

Hannibal having gained this famous and signal Victory, in which by four
several Actions he demonstrated the Excellency of his Conduct, when he gained
the wind of the Enemy, when he made the Celtiberians feign a revolt, when he
dissembled a Flight, and when he placed his Ambushes. The next thing he did was
to take a view of the dead, among whom when he beheld many of the bravest of
his Friends; it is said that sighting he cried out, He stood not in need of more
such Victories: Much like to which is reported to have in the former Age been
said by Pyrrhus, King of Epire, That by such defeats he should hardly vanquish
the Romans. Those who were fled into the greater Camp, under the leading of
Publius Sempronius, broke through Hannibal's Watches, tired for want of sleep,
and fighting resolutely, and got about ten thousand of them to Canusium, but
the five thousand that staid in the lesser Camp, were the next day taken by
Hannibal. The Consul Terentius, gathering together the relics of the Army, and
comforting them (sad, and quite cast down as they were) in the best manner he
could, and leaving the Command of them to Scipio, Tribune of the Soldiers, went
his way toward Rome; whither when this news was brought, great multitudes
promiscuously flocked to the Gates, lamenting their Friends, and calling them
by name, and deploring their own misfortunes, as if the Enemy were already come
to seize upon themselves; Mothers with their Children ran up and down to the
Temples, imploring the Gods, that at length they would by some means put a stop
to all these Miseries. The Magistrates likewise seeing the City thus oppressed
by the Divine Anger, endeavored to appease the Gods with Prayers and
Sacrifices, beseeching them to rest satisfied with the past slaughter. The
Senate sent Q. Fabius (who likewise wrote a History of these things) to the
Oracle at Delphos to enquire about the present state of things, and manumitted
eight thousand slaves, strong young men, freely given by their Masters; gave
Orders throughout the City, for preparing Bows and Shields; and Claudius
Marcellus, who was about to fail into Sicily, changing their minds, they
decreed to go against Hannibal. He dividing his Fleet with Furius his
Colleague, and sending part of his Forces into Sicily, with the rest consisting
of Citizens, Associates and Slaves to the numbers of about ten thousand Foot,
and two thousand Horse went to Theanum, that he might discover what Hannibal
designed. But Hannibal permitted some of the Captives to go as Deputies to
Rome, to see if the Citizens would at his price redeem any of them, and three
among all the rest being chosen to this office, of whom Cn. Sempronius was
chief, taking no other pledge but their Oath to return, he let them go. Then
the Neighbors of the Captives, standing round about the place, offered with
their own private Money to redeem whoever they had a kindness for, beseeching
the Senate to give them leave so to do, the people all weeping, and approving
their motion; some of the Senators were of the opinion, that after so many
Battles, the Commonwealth was not to suffer the loss of so many men; and the
Slaves were not to be preferred before Freemen: but others argued that such
indulgence would accustom men to flight, who were rather to be taught how to
overcome or die. Nor was it just that those, who fled, should experience any of
their Clemency or Mercy. After many Examples produced for and against it, the
Senate at length forbid the Neighbors to redeem the Captives, as judging
whilst they were still beset with so many dangers, their present Clemency would
be converted into furute damage, and that though this at present seemed a
doleful severity, and inhumanity, yet it would turn to future advantage; and
indeed at that very time the strange boldness of this resolution appeared
dreadful to Hannibal himself. Wherefore Sempronius, and the other two Captives,
returned to the Enemy. Hannibal hereupon sold some of the Prisoners, and
commanded others to be slain, of whose dead Bodies he made a Bridge, whereon
his Army marched over the River; such of the Senate and Nobility, as he had in
his Camp, he set Father against Child, and Brother against Brother, compelling
them to fight against each other for a divertisement to his Africans; in a
word, he omitted no insulting cruelty that the pride of man could invent.

Thence he turned his Arms to the wasting the Territories of the Roman Petelia.
The Petelians, though few in number, yet stout of heart, bravely resisted him,
and the Women assisting (who in courage yielded little to the Men) often
sallying, and stoutly fighting burnt his Engines; but at length, being wasted
by often skirmishes, and Famine creeping upon them, as soon as Hannibal had
advice of it, he begirt the City with a circumvallation, and left Hanno to
prosecute the Siege. The Townsmens miseries increasing upon them, they thrust
out all the crowd useless for War, between the Wall and Trench, looking on with
steadfast countenances, whilst Hanno caused them to be slain, as envying their
better manners of dying; yet almost all the rest fell not long after under the
same fate; for being oppressed with extreme want, they made a sally upon the
Enemy, where after having performed many noble exploits, not caring to return
to the City there to starve, or wanting strength through hunger, they were
almost all slain, and Hanno possessed himself of the Town: some of the
strongest, who were able to flee, escaped, whom the Romans, when this War was
ended, for their singular fidelity and good will toward them, and their
incredible Valor, caused to be diligently sought out (being in all about eight
hundred) and restored them to their Country. But when the Celtiberian Horse,
who were Auxiliaries in Hannibal's Army were observed to fight stoutly. The
Roman Generals commanding in Spain, desired of their Subjects a like number of
such Horsemen, whom they sent into Italy to oppose the other. These by reason
of the neighborhood of the Camps, found opportunities of free converse, and
every one invited his fellow Citizen or Country man, to come over to them;
whence it happened that part of them fled over to the Romans, and other part
slipped away, so that Hannibal now thinking nothing safe, grew jealous of them,
whilst they on the other side grew no less jealous of the fall of the
Carthaginian Affairs: yet in Arpis, a City of Apulia, built as some say by
Diomedes the Argive, one Dasias, reported to be descended from the same
Diomede, though but upon uncertain gounds, however no way worthy of so noble a
Stock; after that signal slaughter at Cannae, revolted from the Romans to
Hannibal, and drew his Country into the same defection; but when, after
Hannibal began to grow less successful, coming privately to Rome; and being
brought into the Senate, he offered as an amends for his fault, to bring the
City again under the Roman Power, he hardly escaped being slain by the Romans,
but most certainly they presently cast him out of their City, so that now
fearing both them and Hannibal, he wandered like a vagabond about the Country,
whilst Hannibal burned his Wife and Children alive. The Arpi betrayed by
others, were taken by Fabius Maximus, who slaying all the Carthaginians he
found, placed there a Garrison. But Tarentum, which was at the same time kept
by a Roman Garrison, was by this means betrayed to one Cononeus. This man being
much addicted to Hunting, and usually presenting some of his Game to Iunius,
Governor of the Garrison, began to grow very familiar with him; but because in
a Country not free from War, he pretended it much better for the taking more
Game, to go out by night, he brought it to a Custom, that what time of the
night he pleased, the Gates were to be opened to him; then meeting with
Hannibal, and receiving Soldiers from him (some whereof he hid in a Wood, not
far from the Town, others he commanded to follow him at a certain small
distance, and others carried with him clad outwardly like Huntsmen, but
underneath with Coats of Male and Swords) he came to the Gates, having sent
some before, who carried a huge Bore upon a Pole. The Gates being opened
according to Custom, those that entered with him presently slew the Guards, then
those that followed presently rushed in, receiving with them their Companions
that were in the Wood, then they all broke open the Gates, and let in Hannibal;
he being entered, easily possessed himself of all the City; and granting
Conditions to the Tarentines, set himself to the besieging of the Citadel,
held out by the Romans. Thus was Tarentum betrayed by Cononeus: but five
thousand Romans were still in the Citadel, and with them a good number of the
Tarentines, and to these the Governor of Metapontum, brought half his
Soldiers, and a great multitude of Darts, and all manner of Engines, with which
they easily drove Hannibal from the Wall: but he abounding in all those things,
brought up his Testudo's and Catapultas to the Towers, and shook some of them,
and with Hooks fastened to Ropes, pulled down the Battlements, and laid the Wall
naked. The Romans throwing down Stones broke the Engines, and with Nooses
pulled away the Hooks, and with frequent Sallies issuing out upon the Enemy,
seldom returned without putting them to disorder, and doing good execution. And
when upon a clear day a sudden wind arose, the Romans laying hold upon the
opportunity, whilst some of them from the Wall threw Firebrarnds, tied about
with Flax and Pitch upon the Carthaginian Engines, others made a sally and put
Fire under them; so that Hannibal despairing to take it by force, drew Lines of
Circumvallation quite round, save only toward the Sea, which was not to be
done, so leaving the care of the Siege to Hanno, returned into Apulia. The Port
of the Tarentines looks toward the North, if any sail in by the Isthmus; but
they cut off the Isthmus by Bridges, which when the Romans held, they easily
had Corn brought to them by Sea, and hindered any from being brought to the
Tarentines: so that the Tarentines were reduced to extreme want; wherefore
Hannibal at his return, advised that digging through the public way, which
leads from the Port toward the other Sea to the Southward, they should make
another Isthmus, which being performed, the want of Corn was soon remedied, and
they with their Brigantines much incommoded the Roman Garrison, who had no
Fleet, especially in a smooth Sea, intercepting all Provisions brought to the
Romans. The Romans therefore struggling with the want of all necessities, the
Thurini sent them by night some Ships laden with Corn, accompained with some
Triremes, whom the Tarentines, who now were all one with the Carthaginians,
having notice of, laid wait for, and took with all their Corn and Men, but they
sending often about redeeming the Captives, the Tarentines enticed their
Deputies to Hannibals party, so Hannibal released all the Thurini that were
taken, who returning home against the will of the rest, opened their Gates to
Hanno, so the Thurini endeavoring to preserve Tarentum for the Romans, most
imprudently fell themselves under the Carthaginian power. The Garrison that was
in the City, retreated privately to Brundusium, The Metapontines, after part of
their Garrison was drawn off to Tarentum, slaying those few that remained,
delivered themselves up to Hannibal; whose example, out of fear rather than
good will, Heraclea, which is situate between Metapontum and Tarentum followed;
and now Hannibal's Affairs appeared again very glorious. The year following,
some Lucanians, who had fallen off from the Romans, Gracchus chastised by War.
But one Flaccus, a Lucanian of that party, which yet stood for the Romans, a
friend and host to Gracchus, proved a Traitor to him. This man persuaded him to
come to a certain place, where the Lucanian Pretors (who repenting their fault,
desired to be again received into the Roman friendship) would mutually give and
receive their Faith, he not imagining any deceit in the matter, followed only
with thirty Horse: But when the Numidian Enemy rose and encompassed him about,
and Flaccus joined himself with them* Gracchus discovering the Treason, with
many others leaped from their Horses, and bravely fighting in the midst of his
Enemies, was with all his men slain. Three only Hannibal could take alive,
though he endeavored all he could to make the Roman Proconsul his Prisoner;
whom though thus basely overcome by treachery, yet admiring him for the extreme
valor showed at his death, he honored with Funeral Rites, and sent his bones
to Rome. Thence marching into Apulia, made it his business to fetch in Corn
from all parts.

But when the Romans had determined to march toward Capua, Hanno being sent
before by Hannibal, with a thousand Foot, and as many Horse, he unknown to the
Enemy, got into the City; day breaking, when the Romans beheld many of them
upon the Walls, and knew the matter, they forthwith drew off their Army from
thence, and set themselves to reaping all the Cap^ans, and the rest of the Corn
of Campania, which the Campanians being much troubled at, Hannibal sent them
word he had Corn enough in Apulia, whither they might send for it, as often as
they pleased* they sent not only their Men and Cattle, but even their Wives and
Children to fetch in Corn, fearing no danger in the journey; Hannibal being
upon return out of Apulia into Campania, and lying encamped near the River
Alor, not far from the Beneventines, whom only because they continued faithful
to the Romans, they were afraid of; but now because of Hannibal's presence they
despised. But it happened that about the same time Hannibal being called by
Hanno among the Lucanians went thither, leaving the most troublesome part of
his Baggage in the Camp, near Beneventum, with an indifferent Guard, of which
the Roman Generals (for they were two, Claudius and Annius) having certain
advice, fell upon the Campanians, that were gone to fetch Corn, and finding
them a disarmed and undisciplined multitude, slew many, and gave their Corn to
the Beneventines, then plundering Hannibal's Camp took thence all that he had
there left. Then the two Roman Generals joining together, whilst Hannibal staid
in Lucania, begirt Capua, with a Trench and a Wall; and drawing other Lines
without, pitched their Camp between both, raising Bulwarks both toward the
City, and toward the Country, to oppose the assaults of the Enemy: so that the
face of their Camp was like a great Town, enclosing a little City, and the
space between their Lines and the Town, being about two Furlongs like a
Theater, where daily Combats were to be seen (the stoutest men on both sides
continually challenging and provoking one another) among which, that of
Claudius Atellus was very memorable, he was challenged by one Taureas, a
Campanian, whom having overcome, the vanquished fled toward the City: Claudius
pursuing him to the very Walls, not being able to turn his Horse, the Gate
standing to receive his Enemy, he was carried in, and running through the whole
Town, got out at the other Gate, and came safe to his own party, a strange
success of undesigned boldness. Hannibal without doing the business, which he
was sent for into Lucania returned to Capua, to undertake the defense of that
City, which he knew for so many, and so great things commodious for the Romans,
wherefore he assaulted their Works: but when he could by no manner of means
prevail to send in any supply of Men, or Provisions into the Town, (for the
Siege was so close, that he could neither send in, nor get any intelligence out
of the City) he with all his Army marched directly toward Rome, moved
thereunto, because he heard that Famine was in the City, and out of hopes,
either to draw the Romans from the Siege of Capua, or act something greater
than the relief of that place. Wherefore continuing his March with a great
confluence of Warlike People (wherefore some persuaded themselves, that for
want of strength, they would not so much as stop his passage; others thought
they should not so much as fight for it) he came and encamped by the River
Anien within thirty Furlongs of the City. Never was Rome struck with such Fear
and Tumult: They wanted all manner of Forces (those they had being in Campania)
and unexpectedly a mighty Army was coming toward them, led by a General, whose
Valor and Fortune made him unconquerable; yet with such Forces as they had, who
were able to bear Arms, they set Guards at the Gates: The Old Men leaped up on
the Walls, and the Women and Children brought Darts and Stones, great
multitudes flocked to them out of the Country, the whole City rung with
Howlings, Lamentations, Prayers, and mutual Exhortations, some going out of the
City broke down the Bride that was over the Anien. The Romans had built a very
little Town among the Aequi and called it Alba, after the name of their
Metropolis or mother City; but in Process of time whether by lengthning or
corrupting the word, or to distinguish them from the Albans, they were called
Albenies, two thousand of these coming to participate in the danger of Rome
were presently armed, and placed at the guard of the Gates. So much faith and
kindness at that time one only Colony among so many showed toward the Romans,
imitating the Example of the Plateans, who with a small Number joined with the
Athenians at the fight at Marathon, that by united force they might repulse the
present danger. The Roman General Annius stayed at Capua not doubting to reduce
that City, the other Claudius Flaccus by another way, with incredible
expedition came and pitched his Camp opposite to Hannibal on the other side of
the Anien. Who when Hannibal saw the bridge broken down, and found Claudius
encamped on the other side, he resolved to march round by the springs of the
River, and Claudius likewise thereupon removed his Camp. Here Hannibal made use
of his wonted stratagems he left some Horse, who when the Armies were retired,
Fording the River wasted the Roman Territory, and when they had terrified the
City, according to orders returned to Hannibal. When he had got round the
springs, it is reported that he came by night with three spies to the City not
far distant, and privately taking a view of the site of it, observed the great
fear and solitude within the walls, yet after all this he returned to Capua,
whether some God or any other accident at that time averted him, whether he
dreaded the Valor and Fortune of the City, or whether (as he used often to say
to his Friends exhorting him to the Conquest of it) that he would not ruin it,
least when that was done the Carthaginians should take from him the Command,
and reduce him to the quality of a private Man; for as for the Claudian Army it
was no way to be compared with Hannibal's. Yet Claudius at Hannibal's return
followed him at the heels, thinking he did enough if he hindered him from
Forraging, and took care that by Ambushes he did not damnifie him.

Yet Hannibal in a dark and moonless night having discovered the place Claudius
Army tended, built indeed no wall, but throwing up a trench, and leaving some
intervals for Gates, and lastly raising a Rampire (which might serve instead of
a Wall) opposite to it, there continued himself, and sending his Horse to a
certain eminence fortified by Nature charged them there to stand quiet, and not
move from the place till the Romans should possess themselves of that place he
hoped they would believe to be void. Then he gave Command to his Indians that
getting upon their Elephants, they should by any means between the intervals or
over the Rampire get into Claudius Camp. At a little distance from these he
commanded some Trumpets and Cornets to follow, with Orders as they entered to
make the greatest noise they could possible, that their Numbers might seem the
greater; sending along with them some that could speak the Latin Tongue, who
were to call out aloud to the Soldiers by Claudius Orders to desert their
Tents, and escape to the next hill. This stratagem of Hannibal's succeeded at
first to his mind, and according as he had designed it, for Elephants trod down
the Rampire, and the Trumpets followed them, whose noise filling the ears of
the Roman* Soldiers starting out of their beds in a dark night, and so
unexpectedly, struck a mighty terror into them. Besides hearing in the Latin
Tongue, Command given about possessing the other Hill; they already addressed
themselves to flight. But Claudius to whom all Hannibal's devices (as full of
deceit and treachery) were suspected, immediately out of his own prudence, or
by instinct from some God, or else being by some Captive informed of the whole
project, dispatched away the Military Tribunes into the way leading to the
hill, to stop such as rushed out, and tell them, that those Orders were
Proclaimed not by their Generals Command, but by Hannibal's, and therewithal
himself drawing first strong guards to the Rampire, to repulse the Enemy if
perhaps any assault should be made, ran through the tents, crying out, that
there was no danger, that only a few were broke in with the Elephants, whose
small Number indeed when it appeared (for by this time by Claudius command
Torches were lighted, and fires blown up) the Romans fear was turned into
anger, and falling upon them being but light armed men they easily slew them.
As for the Elephants there wanting room to receive them, they ran confusedly
among the Tents and Huts, and no Darts (because of the narrowness of the place
and the vastness of their bodies being thrown in vain) they were every where
wounded till with anguish they grew so enraged, that tumbling down and treading
under foot their riders (for they could not govern nor turn them upon the
Enemy) with rage and horrid yellings they broke out of the Camp. Thus Claudius
Flaccus by steadfast courage and diligence circumvented Hannibal in an
unexpected stratagem, and by defeating him of his purpose both overcame him,
and by his prudence preserved his trembling Army. Hannibal failing in this
enterprise drew his forces into Lucania to their Winter quarters, where this
fierce man never before accustomed to delights gave himself over to Lust and
Luxury. By which means by degrees, and not long after he brought a strange
change upon all his affairs. Claudius returned to his Colleague to Capua, and
now both of them strove their utmost to reduce this Town, hoping to force it
whilst Hannibal lay quiet in his Winter Quarters. The Campanians in want of all
things (for nothing could be brought them from abroad) and ready to perish for
hunger yielded themselves up to the Roman Generals. And with themselves Hanno
and Bostar, who commanded the Carthaginian Garrison with all their Soldiers,
and the Romans placing a Garrison in the City, cut off the hands of all the
Fugitives they there found, the African Nobility they sent to Rome, the rest
they sold. Then turning upon the Campanians, the Authors of the Defection they
punished with death, the rest only with fines upon their Lands. The Country of
Campania, because a Champian, is very Fertile. Capua thus restored to the
Romans, the Carthaginians were deprived of a very considerable place for the
convenience of their affairs in Italy.

Among the Brutians (who are a part of Italy) a Man of the City of Sisia, a Man
addicted to Hunting, and accustomed to bring part of his game to the Governor
of the Punick garrison had so wrought himself into his friendship, that he was
in a manner his Consort in Command, who grieved in mind to see the Soldiers
insolences and abuses of his Countrymen, made a contract with the Roman
General, to which they both pledged their Faiths, and by degrees brought into
the Citadel as Prisoners many Roman Soldiers, whose Arms himself siesed on as
his spoils, when he thought his Number sufficient, he loosed their Bonds, and
arming them, overpowring the Punick Garrison, brought in a Roman; but not long
after Hannibal passing that way, the Garrison affrighted fled to Rheginis, the
Tisiatae delivered themselves to Hannibal, who burning the chiefs of the
Revolts, placed there another garrison. At Salatia in Apulia, which was then
under the Punick power, there were two kinsmen, who both for their Riches and
Power, might well be esteemed Princes, but between whom there was perpetual
discord. Dasius favored the Carthaginian, and Blasi^s the Roman affairs. As
long as Hannibal was prosperous Blasius lay still, when the Roman Power by
recovery of most part of it is Empire began to revive, Blasius had the
confidence to move his Enemy, at least to consent with him for the safety of
his Country, le^t if the Romans should take the place by storm, he should
become engaged in an irrecoverable misfortune. Dasius dissembling a consent
betrayed the matter to Hannibal, Hannibal was Arbitrator and Judge, Dasius the
accuser. Blasius being guilty had only this one thing to say in his defense,
that out of private enmity, he laid false crimes to his charge, and indeed the
knowledge that his accuser had long been his enemy, and bore him a secret
grudge, procured him the more freedom to argue in his own defense. Hannibal
neither contemning the thing, nor giving too much Credit to an Enemy, Commanded
them both to withdraw, as if he would consider of it by himself; But the place
as they went out being very narrow, and none being nigh enough to bear witness,
Blasius thus whipped Dasius. And will not you good man yet save your Country,
Dasius crying out immediately, repeats it to Hannibal, upon which Blasius
making his complaint, Now, now (said he) there is no man but will believe
snares laid for my life by the cunning of my Enemy, but this trick of his if I
before lay under any suspicion will perfectly clear me of it, for who pray that
is not mad would trust such a thing to an Enemy? But you may object, it may be
at first I was deceived in him, but I beseech you what man that is brought to
his Trial, and denying the Fact before the Tribunal in the hearing of many, his
accuser present who may reveal it will afresh communicate such a thing to him,
who has already showed his mind to betray him? But if he were a faithful friend
indeed what help could he bring to me toward the safety of his Country? or why
should I implore his help who has no power to give any? These words Blasius
pronounced aloud, and as I believe foreseeing the event, and then making way to
whisper Dasius in the ear, told him that he would lessen his future Credit and
Authority, and so work Hannibal, that he should not believe any crime he
objected against him. Nor did Blasius after he was dismissed forbear to ply his
adversary in this manner, as a man whom now he contemned, having taken off all
belief of what he said. Therefore Dasius at length feigned himself moved by his
solicitations with intent to get from him all the manner how he had formed his
design which he nothing demurring upon; I will said he, go to the Roman Camp
(which the other knew to be then very remote) and thence receiving some forces
from the Praetor, who is my very good friend, bring them hither. Thou shall
work for me here and stay to keep the City, and having thus said presently
without Dasius being privy to it he went from the City directly to Rome, and
not to the Camp, where leaving his Son for Hostage, and receiving from the
Senate a thousand Horse, makes a speedy return, already in his mind presaging
the event. Dasius for some days after not seeing his adversary, strait way
conjectured that having now his word, he was gone to perfect the business, and
whilst he meditated upon the great distance he was to find the Camp at, slowly
and securely he goes to Hannibal not doubting but to return time enough to be
there before the other. And being come to the speech of Hannibal, Now, said he,
whilst he is bringing an Armed Power into the City, I will in the very Action
deliver Blasius into thy hands, and so telling the whole matter and receiving
some Soldiers from Hannibal, he flies toward his Country which he imagined
Blasius could not yet be come nigh to. But he having already slain the Punick
Garrison which was but small, took diligent care that none should go out of the
City, and shutting all the rest of the Gates, left that only open by which
Dasius was to return, he likewise to avoid all suspicion left the Walls every
where naked; but the way within was so broken, and block't up with Ditches,
that there was no way of breaking out. Dasius coming and finding the Gates
open, rejoicing, and thinking he was got thither before his Enemy, entered the
City triumphing, but he and all that came in with him being enclosed, and
because of the Ditches, having no way of retreat Blasius easily slew them,
except only a few that leaping over the Walls escaped. So Blasius catching
Dasius in the snare at last overcame him.

Now whilst Fulvius the Roman Consul besieged Herdonia, Hannibal unknown to him
pitched his Camp close by him, putting out (the better to lie hid) all fires,
and Commanding a strict silence through all the Camp. And the morning happening
likewise to be very cloudy, he sent before some Horse to provoke the Romans,
they indeed with some trembling at first (as being raised out of their beds)
but soon with better confidence (because they believed them only a few picked up
here and there) repulsed the Enemy, but Hannibal fetching a Compass about the
other part of the Town, that he might take a view of it, and put the Townsmen
in hopes, at length whether because they had spied him, or else by chance falls
in upon the Romans and incloses them. Then set upon on both sides they rushed
on in disorder, so that the Consul Fulvius with eight thousand men were slain,
the rest making a speedy retreat within a Trench before their Camp, and bravely
fighting preserved both that and their Tents from being taken by Hannibal.
After this whilst the Romans wasted the lands of the Apulians, because they had
revolted, Hannibal did the like to the Campanians who were all but the
Attellani returned to the Romans obedience whom (because they should not be
vexed with the Wars of the Brutii, Lucanians and Apulians) he brought to
Thurium, and the Romans sent the Exiles of Nuceria to inhabit Attella, and with
their Army infesting Hannibals associates, came to Antonia which they took, and
laid wast all the Brutians Fields, and at the same time besieged Tarentum by
Sea and Land, which then was kept by a Punick Garrison under Carpalo the
Governor who because the Carthaginians were few, had taken the Brutians into
association with him; the Commander of whose Forces loved a Wench, whose
brother was a Soldier among the Romans, who by his sisters means wrought the
Brutian officer to betray that part of the Wall he had the Charge of, so the
Romans recovered Tarentum a Town very convenient for them both to Sea and
Landward. Hannibal made all the have he could to Tarentum, but on his march
having certain intelligence of it is being taken, being much troubled he
retreated to Thurium, from whence he went to Venusium, where Claudius Marcellus
who had subdued Sicily, now the fifth time Consul, and T. Crispinus had their
Camp: yet they forbore fighting. But Marcellus by chance espying a party of
Numidians, going out upon the spoil, and thinking them but few, with three
hundred Horse securely charged them, being a man of a daring courage, and in
all dangers too rashly forward, but when the Africans coming in from all parts
fell upon him, the Rear of the Romans first began to fly, but Marcellus who
still thought they followed him, fought valiantly till struck through with a
Dart he fell* his body being brought to Hannibal when he saw it wounded on all
sides, he commended him as a Soldier, but much condemned him as a General, but
taking off his Ring, he Magnificently burnt it, and sent the bones to his Son
into the Camp. And then before the ^ame of his death should spread too far,
being deadly mad with the Salatians he dispatched away a Roman fugitive to
Salatia with letters sealed with Marcellus Ring, signifying that Marcellus with
his Army was coming thither, and commanding them to open their Gates. The
Citizens having a little before received letters from Crispinus (for he sent to
all the Cities Messengers to acquaint them that Hannibal had got Marcellus
Ring) lest if they stayed the messenger any time they should betray their own
Counsels, sent him away with promise to obey the Commands. Mean while arming
and disposing themselves upon the Walls, they expected the issue of the deceit,
Hannibal coming with his Numidians wearing Roman Arms, the Port-cullis being
drawn up, and the Gate opened, they with great joy and Alacrity received them,
as if it had been Marcellus, but when as many were come in as they thought they
were handsomely able to deal with, they let fall the Port-cullis, and slew all
those were got within the City. Hannibal thus frustrated of his hopes at
Salatia retreated.

Whilst these things were doing, Asdr^bal brother to Hannibal had Italy that
mercenary Army leavyed by him in Spain, being in his march kindly received by
the Gauls, and in two months passing the Alps (before laid open by Hannibal,
and which he very hardly effected in six) he falls down into Hetruria with
thirty eight thousand Foot, eight thousand Horse, and fifteen Elephants; thence
he wrote letters to his brother of his coming, which being intercepted by the
Romans, who thereby understood his strength, Salinator and Nero gathering
together all the Force they could make, met with him at Siena, he who did not
yet design fighting, but to join as soon as he could with his brother by night,
removes his Camp, and wandering through marshy places, and along the Banks of
Rivers that were not fordable, made no great progress. At the break of day the
Romans having discovered them, and following hard upon them tired with labor
and watching, many Centuries being drawn up together in a body, and coming up
with them, fell all at once upon Asdrubal's Army, and taking many alive, routed
his whole Army (which had it been joined with Hannibal would have made him
appear invincible) thereby freeing Italy from an unexpressible fear and terror.
And it is my Judgment that Providence thought fit to give the Romans this
victory by way of reprizal for the loss sustained at Cannae, for this was equal
and parallel to that both in the death of the Commander, and the utter ruin of
the whole Army. It happened likewise that in both many Captives were taken, and
the next Morning the Conquerors in both became Masters of the spoil of the
vanquished Camp. Of such various fortune* sometimes adverse and sometimes
prosperous, did the Romans now make experience. The Celtiberians who escaped
from the slaughter, returned some of them to their own Country, and some got to
Hannibal, who not a little tormented for this loss of his brother, and so great
an Army, through too much have and ignorance of the ways, slighting all the
rest that in full fourteen years he had with vast labors been getting in
Italy, retreated among the Brutians, who were the only people that continued in
association with him, and there quietly expected new recruits from Carthage.
And the Carthaginians did send him an hundred Ships laden with Corn, and
supplies of Men and Money, which being conveyed by three hundred Triremes, the
Praetor of Sardinia set upon with his Galleys, and sinking sixty, the rest got
back to Carthage; From hence the penury of all things in Hannibals Camp much
increased, but especially the despair of getting any help from Carthage; And to
all these misfortunes this was annexed that Mago, who was sent into Gaul and
Liguria to hire Soldiers, sent no aid, but lay idle expecting the Event of
things. Wherefore Hannibal plainly foreseeing that he could not long continue
in those parts, began to contemn the Brutians themselves, as men that would ere
long be strangers to him, and to oppress them with heavier taxes, several towns
fortified by nature as if they practiced a revolt he forced to remove into the
plain, and many persons whose Estates he had a desire to siese upon he
condemned upon false accusations.

Licinius Crassus and P. Scipio, famous for his Conquests in Spain. Crassus
went into Apulia against Hannibal. Scipio advised the people that Hannibal and
the Carthaginians, could not possibly be driven out of Italy, till an Army were
transported into Africa, and they terrified with Domestic danger. And
assiduously insisting upon it, and daily urging them all to it, he at length
got Africa decreed for his province. Then without any delay trasporting his
Army into Sicily, when he had spent a little time in Rendevouzing and
Ex^rcising his Soldiers, he was first carried to Locrisa a City of Italy (where
Hannibal had placed a Punick Garrison) whom having overpowred, leaving
Pleminius as his Lieutenant in that City, he passed over into Africa, but
Pleminius forbore not to treat the Locrians with all manner of villainous and
contumelious usage and cruelty, insomuch that he robbed the very Temple of
Proserpine. Wherefore the Romans for these horrible dealings with their Friends
and Kindred put him to death in Prison, and confiscating his goods delivered
them to the Locrians to be laid up in the Treasures of the Goddess, and of the
Money taken away by Sacrilege they recovered as much as they could, and what
remained it pleased them to supply out of the public Exchequer. At the same
time Crassus drew away from Hannibal's party, Consentia a great City of the
Brutians and many other Towns; but when at Rome. the dismal prodigies had
filled the minds of men with superstition, the Decemvirs commanded to bring the
Sibyls Books relating that few days before in Pessinuntium a City of Phrygia,
where the Mother of the Gods is Worshipped, something was fallen from heaven
which should be brought to Rome, and not long after the news of its falling
came, and the image of the Goddess was brought to Rome, and on the same day
that it happened to come thither was celebrated the Feast of the Mother of the
Gods. There is a report that the Ship which brought it struck upon a Shoal in
the River Tiber, and that when by no means possible it could be removed, the
Southsayers foretold that it would follow, if drawn by a woman that was pure
and chaste from any strange bed. Claudia Quintia suspected but not guilty of
Adultery (but her too loose and free way of living had got her that ill report)
first earnestly calling upon the Goddess to witness her innocence of that
crime, and then tying her Girdle to the Ship was followed by the Goddess. So
Claudia from an evil fame which she before lay under, got a most glorious name.
But before this exploit of Claudia's, the Romans admonished by the Sibyls
books, that by the best man of all the City they should send for the image out
of Phrygia, presently sent thither a man judged to be the best of those times,
Scipio Surnamed Nasica Son of Cn. Scipio, who died General in Spain, and Cousin
Germain to that Scipio, who abating the Carthaginian pride first bore the
Surname of African. Thus was the Goddess brought to Rome by the best of Men and
Women. But when the Brutians had intelligence that the Carthaginians in Africa
had in several Battles been defeated by Scipio, they seemed to be at strife who
first should desert Hannibal, and some of them slew the Punick Garrisons, and
others thrust them out of their Cities. Those who could do neither, privately
sent Deputies to Rome, to declare their good Will, though they wanted Power.
Hannibal came with his Army to Petelia, which City was given by him to the
Brutians after having expelled the former inhabitants. When therefore he
expostulated with them that they had sent Deputies to Rome, and they earnestly
denied it, he seemed to believe them, but that he might prevent any occasion of
suspicion, he gave up their Great Men separately into the keeping of his
Numidians, and disarming the Citizens gave their Arms to the Slaves, and to
them committed the Charge of the City. Nor did he deal less severely with other
Cities to which he went in progress, for the Thurini's goods he exhibited to
his Soldiers Rapine, and besides three thousand Citizens whom he knew great
lovers of the Carthaginians, and five hundred Country people he carried away,
and leaving the City under the guard of the Prefidionary Soldiers, brought them
all to Crotona, which because of it is convenient Situation, he chose both for
his Granary and Seat of War.

Asdrubal their Admiral) he was sent for to come home, and bringrelief to his
Country then in danger by Scipio's many victories, he grievously complained of
the Carthaginians, who had always been ungrateful and perfidious to their
Generals, as he had sufficiently and for a long time experienced, and because
he had given the first beginning to this War in Spain, he began to be
apprehensive of himself; Yet he resolved since 'twas fit he obeyed to go, and
forthwith caused a great Number of Ships to be built, Italy furnishing him
abundantly with all Materials; But before his departure he exposed all the
Associate, and subjected Cities, whom now he looked upon as Enemies to the
Spoil and Plunder of his Army, that thereby enriching them, he might by their
kindness be secure from his Citizens Calumnies. Yet ashamed himself, against
Faith and Equity, to wrong in this manner the Associates, he sent Asdrubal the
Admiral under a feigned pretense of visiting the Garrisons to do it, who going
into every City and Commanding the Citizens and their Slaves to pack up what
they could carry, and march elsewhere, he gave all that remained up to be
plundered; Which usage being divulged, many before Asdrubal came to them, rose
in Arms against the Garrison Soldiers, and with various fortune, sometimes the
Townsmen, sometimes the Soldiers had the better, hence followed mighty
slaughters, with the Rapes of Matrons, and Virgins, and other villainies usually
committed at the Sack of Towns. As for those Italian Soldiers who had deserved
well under him. Hannibal knowing them to be stout and well excercised Men, with
magnificent promises tried to draw them over with him into Africa. Such as for
any villainies committed were afraid to return into their own Country condemning
themselves to voluntary banishment; followed him, but those who had no guilt
upon their consciences refused to go. Those therefore who chose rather to stay,
then go, having commanded to assemble all in one place (as if he either
designed to speak to them or to reward them for past services or command them
somewhat for the future) he encompassed with his Army, and commanded his men to
choose out among them as many as they listed for Slaves. Some there were that
those, others were ashamed to take into such base servitude, those who as
fellow Soldiers had done so many brave things with them. Those that remained
that they might never be useful to the Romans he caused to be thrust through
with Darts; Likewise of four thousand Horses and Oxen, no small Number, he
caused the throats to be cut, because he had not the Convenience to carry them
into Africa. After which embarking his Army leaving only a few for a show of a
Garrison in the Country of the Brutians he stayed only for a wind; but the
Petelini and other Italians rising upon them at their departure slew some and
so retreated. Thus Hannibal returning to Africa left Italy, which for sixteen
whole years he had wasted, and by a thousand miseries often reduced the
desolate inhabitants to the last Extremities, treating the Roman Subjects and
Associates with all contumelious Cruelty, and for those whose service, not so
much out of good will as necessity, he had formerly made use of, now they could
yield him no more help or advantage, he treated them likewise as Enemies.
Hannibal being gone, the Senate pardoned all those Italian people had revolted
to the Carthaginians, granting a perfect act of Oblivion for all things past.
But the Brutians because they had continued his ready Associates to the last,
they condemned in part of their Land, and took away all their Arms if they had
any left after Hannibal's plundring them. All Service in the Militia (as people
who had lost their right of Freedom) was likewise forbidden them, and when the
Roman Consuls went into the Provinces to oversee any public works, they
Commanded them to follow them like Servants. This was the Conclusion of
Hannibal's Expedition into Italy in the two and fiftieth year of the Punick
Wars.

The end of the Eighth Book of the Roman Wars with Hannibal.
APPIAN OF ALEXANDRIA, HIS HISTORY OF THE Civil Wars OF ROME.
In Five BOOKS.
PART II.
BOOK I.
The Argument of this Book.
I. A Short Recital of the several Dissentions and Civil Wars of the Romans,
and the division of this History. II. Gracchus attempts passing the Law about
Lands, wherein all the people are concerned; some for the Law, and some against
it. III. It is at last passed. IV. Gracchus thereupon is slain. V. Flaccus,
Carbo, and young Gracchus would notwithstanding put in execution: Scipio the
African opposes it, and is found dead. VI. Young Gracchus and Flaccus pursue
their enterprise, and declaring against the Senate, are at length slain. VII.
The Enterprise of Apuleius and Glaucia against Metellus, who is banished. VIII.
Apuleius and Glaucia slain, and Metellus recalled from Exile. IX. The beginning
of the War against the Allies, and the death of Drusus. X. The Tyranny of the
Roman Knights, occasioned by the Revolt of the Roman Allies, who at first
prosper in their Attempts. XI. The Romans subdue them, and put an end to the
War. XII. Sedition of Usurers ^ithin the City. XIII. The beginning of the War
betwixt Marius and Sylla; and the entrance of Sylla and Q. Pompey Con^uls, in
Arms into the City. XIV. Orders imposed by the Consuls in the City: the death
of Sulpitius: flight of Marius, and death of Q. Pompey. XV. Cinna being Consul
strives to pass a Law in favor of the new Citizens, but is driven from the
City, and deposed from his Consulate, whom Merula succeeds. XVI. Cinna and
Marius besiege the City. XVII. They enter it, and make a dreadful Slaughter.
XVIII. Sylla after his Victory over Mithridates, returns toward Italy, writes
to the Senate; an Accommodation is debated; and Cinna preparing for War is
slain. XIX. Sylla arrives at Brundusium, makes his preparations, as the Consuls
do likewise. XX. Many Victories of Sylla's, who comes to Rome, where he is well
received. XXI. Sylla again takes the Field, continues his Victories, and at
last being Master of Rome, after the taking of Praeneste and Norba, War ceases
in Italy. XXII. The cruelty exercised by Sylla over his Enemies in the City.
XXIII. He makes himself perpetual Dictator, and reigns like a Tyrant. XXIV. He
lays down the Dictatorship, retires into the Country, his Death and Funerals.
XXV. The War of Sertorius, his and Perpenna's death. XXVI. The War of Spartacus.

THe Roman People often fell into Dissentions with the Senate, upon the account
of the Publication of Laws, the Abolition of Debts, the Division of Lands, and
the Election of Magistrates, but yet they came not to Blows; for these
Differences were decided by the ways of Justice, because both Orders bore to
each other a mutual respect; so that though the people often saw themselves
already armed against some Foreign Enemy, yet they abused not that power to
make any Sedition. And then when they drew up to the Aventine.
Mount, which therefore is called Sacred, they restrained themselves from
committing any extraordinary violence, contenting themselves only to create for
the maintenance of their Rights a new Magistrate, whom they called Tribune of
the people. The creation of this Office was designed only to counterpoise the
Power of the Consuls, whose Election then depended only on the Senates, and to
keep them from exercising the whole authority in the Administration of their
Republique: yet this bred abundance of Hate and Quarrels amonst these
Magistrates, the one seeing themselves supported by the Senate, and the other
by the favor of the people; and each party thought themselves robbed of that
which was added to the other. These same Contentions were the cause that Marcus
Coriolanus, being condemned without any desert of his, went into Banishment
among the Volsces, and soon after made War upon his Country; and this was the
first Civil Division wherein Arms were made use of, and which only began by a
Fugitive: yet after this they never bore Arms in the Assembliess nor began any
Massacre of their Fellow Citizens, till such time as Tiberius Gracchus raised a
Sedition, wherein he perished, and with him some others, who being fled to the
Capitol, were slain near the Temple. But after this Sacrilege, the Seditions
were almost continual; the people mutinying upon the least occasion, the
Assassins ran up and down the City, sometimes on the one side, and sometimes on
the other, Persons of Quality were slain, either in some Temple, or in the
Assembly, or in the Palace, and that by order of the Tribunes, Praetors,
Consuls, or other Superior Powers; insomuch that these Reciprocal Offenses
increased by little and little the contempt of Justice and the Laws. This
infection at last spreading it self through all parts, open Conspiracies were
made against the Commonwealth, great Armies brought into the Field, sometimes
those had been banished and condemned, attempting some Novelties, and sometimes
the principal men of the City fighting among themselves, as well without as
within for the Government of the State. There were likewise some powerful and
ambitious Citizens who aspired to the Government, either by keeping the Command
of Armies entrusted to them by the people, or levying fresh Soldiers by their
own authority, to defend themselves, as they said, against their Enemies: but
under pretense of making War against their Enemies, they made War against their
Country, each party striving who should first seize upon the City; so that
whilst they treated each other as Enemies, all places were filled with
Assassinations, Proscriptions, Banishments, Executions and Tortures. In short,
there was no cruelty left uncommitted, especially then when about fifty years
after the death of Gracchus, one of the Factions driving away one mischief with
another, became absolute Master of the Commonwealth, and for some time
governed it alone under the Title of Dictator, a certain Magistrate among the
Romans whom they never created but in extreme danger, for six Months only, and
whose use seemed to be abolished when Sylla obtained that Dignity by force.
Nevertheless, though all men believed that he was created Dictator to
perpetuity, yet having glutted himself, as one may say, with power, he deposed
himself; and certainly he was the first (at least that ever I could gain
knowledge of) that was so bold as to change a Tyranny for a private life. He
added to this action a discourse no less worthy of memory. He declared he was
ready to give an account of his Administration to whoever should demand it; and
some time after came and walked in the place in the habit of a private man, in
the face of all the world, from whence he returned to his House without having
received the least affront from any person; so much was that respect to the
Sovereign Authority he had possessed, engrafted in the minds of men, whether
that they were astonished at his laying of it down, or that they were ashamed
to demand an account of that man who offered himself to give it, or that they
thought it an inhumanity to hate that Power, how tyrannical soever it were,
that was joined with the public good. Thus the Seditions ceased for a time,
Sylla having applied Remedies to the present Distempers, but they were only
fallen asleep; for they awakened again, and continued till such time as Julius
Caesar after having for some years made War in Gaul, would not dismiss his
Army, though the Senate decreed it; saying, it was not the Senates desire, but
Pompey's, who being at present at the Head of the Army in Italy, and his Enemy,
had designed to reduce him under his power as well as others. Yet he proposed
these Conditions of Accommodation, that either both should keep their Armies,
or that Pompey, disarming as well as he, should live like a private man under
the authority of the Laws. But not obtaining either the one or the other, he
departed from Gaul, marched against Pompey and his Country, entered the City,
drove thence his Enemy, overtook him in Thessaly, defeated him in a memorable
Battle, and pursued him as far as Egypt. Finding Pompey slain by the Egyptians,
he returned to Rome, after having settled the Egyptian Affairs, and settled
their Ptolomy and Cleopatra Brother and Sister.
Kings in that Kingdom; so that beholding himself secure by the death of so
powerful an Enemy, the mightiness of whose Actions had gained him the Title of
Great; and no person having thenceforth the boldness to oppose his will, he was
created perpetual Dictator the next after Sylla. And now again the Seditious
were quieted, till such time as Brutus and Cassius, either out of envy to his
Power, or out of a desire they had to settle again the Commonwealth in it is
ancient form, slew in open Senate this man, so cherished by the people, and so
knowing in the Art of Reigning. He was so generally lamented, that they sought
out for his Murderers, to put them to death, that they solemnized his Funerals
in the public place, and there where they had burnt his Body, erected a
Temple, and offered Sacrifices to him as a God. But now the Civil Discords
began again, and in a short time grew to that height, that they were followed
by the Murders, Proscriptions and Banishments of many as well of the Order of
Senators as Knights, the Faction interchangeably delivering up the Enemies of
one another; so that to gain their own satisfaction, they spared neither
Friends nor their own Brothers, so much were men hurried on by their passion to
the prejudice of natural Piety. At last by a horrible boldness the Roman
Empire, as if it had been the Stock of some private Citizen, was divided
between Anthony, Lepidus, and he who at first was called Octavius, but
afterward took the name of Caesar, having been adopted by his Uncle. After
this division they made War on each other, as it was but just they should, and
Caesar more prudent and politic than the other, first despoiled Lepidus of
Africa, which had fallen to this share. And in conclusion, after the Victory of
Actium, which he gained over Anthony, drove him out of all the Provinces,
extending from Syria to the Adriatic Gulf. The whole world astonished at these
prodigious Successes, he made himself likewise Master of Egypt, the most
ancient and richest Kingdom possessed by any of the Successors of Alexander,
which only was wanting to complete the Roman Empire to that height we now
behold it. That done, he was placed among the number of the Gods, whilst he was
yet living, and beheld it; and being called Augustus by the people, he assumed
an authority over his Country, and the subjected Nations, greater than ever was
attributed to his Father Caius, not so much as in the least appearance asking
the votes of the people: so that having secured his power by length of time,
always happy, and feared by all the world, he left his Successors capable of
sustaining the weight of that great Empire, and the Sovereign Power being
reunited in a single person, Concordance once more took place of Sedition. This
will be the subject of this work, which will contain the wonderful Adventures
of these People who aimed at Honor and Dominion through all sorts of
Calamities: and I shall write it the more willingly, because I am obliged to
treat of all these things before I write the Affairs of Egypt, which are but a
consequence of them; for those divisions wherein Cleopatra took the part of
Anthony, were the cause of the Reduction of Egypt under the Roman Empire. And
that I may settle some order in so great a confusion of things, I will first
speak of what passed from the Gracchi to Sylla's time, then what was done until
the death of Caius Caesar, the following Books shall treat of the Wars of the
Triumvirs with the Roman People, and against one another, until the last and
greatest of these Misfortunes; I mean the Battle fought by Caesar at Actium
against Anthony and Cleopatra, where I intend to begin the History of Egypt.

The Romans, as they now subdued one, and then another of the people Italy were
accustomed to make seizure of a part of their Lands, to which they sent
Colonies, or otherwise gave Cities already built, to be inhabited by their own
Nation. These Colonies were placed in the conquered Provinces in the nature of
Garrisons, and they either set out by shares to these new Inhabitants such
Lands as were fit for Tillage, or otherwise sold them to them, or let them out
to Farm. As for the unprofitable ground (as War often makes places desert) it
not being qualified to bear a part in the Dividend, it was proclaimed and given
to the first that made offer to manure it, on condition to pay an annual
Tribute, the fifth part of the increase of Trees, and the Tithe of the Corn,
with an Impost upon all sorts of Cattle, as well Flocks as Herds. Thus strove
they to preserve the Italian Nation, esteemed very laborious, that they might
always have in a readiness Soldiers of their own people to serve them upon
occasion; but the success proved contrary to their expectations; for the rich
undertaking at first the unprofitable or desert Lands, and by prescription of
time, not only assuring to themselves the possession of them, but likewise
joining to them the Dividend of their poor Neighbors, either by force, or by
money, became possessed not of Villages, but of whole Countries, which their
Slaves improved and manured for them, that they might not take Freemen from the
profession of Arms. Thus they receiving vast Revenues, and their Slaves still
multiplying, because they were not obliged to go to War: the most powerful
among them grew prodigiously rich, and the Country was filled with Slaves,
whereas there remained but very few of the Italian Nation, and those few too
were oppressed with poverty, by reason of the continual Expeditions, in which
they were forced to bear Arms, and the cruel Exactions of the Tax-gatherers:
and if at any time they had some respite from their Sufferings, then Idleness
corrupted them, having no Land of their own to manure, nor finding any work
from others, by reason of the multitude of Slaves. This extremity troubled and
perplexed both the Senate and People of Rome, who with grief beheld that they
could not as heretofore, upon any sudden occasion, draw together a considerable
Force of Italians, and they began to fear their Government unsecure, by reason
of the Countries being filled with such multitudes of Slaves. They sought long
time for a remedy to these inconveniences; for they neither judged it easy,
nor indeed just to dislodge men, after so long a possession, from those Lands
where they had habituated themselves, and been at great expense. In conclusion,
after much debate the Tribunes made a Law whereby all persons were prohibited
from keeping more than five hundred Acres of Land, one hundred Head of Cattle,
and five hundred Sheep; and besides, they designed a certain number of free
people to have the oversight of the Tillage, and care of the Corn. This Law was
confirmed by solemn Oaths, and punishments decreed against the infringers of
it: it was designed likewise, that all those Lands possessed by any above the
proportion prescribed by the Law, should be equally distributed among the poor,
but neither Oaths nor Law prevailed. Those who appeared most zealous in the
observation of it, underhand made Contracts, conveying over their advance to
their Friends, and others publicly laughed at it, till such time as Tiberius
Gracchus of Noble Race, covetous of Glory, very eloquent, and well known in the
City for all these qualities, having obtained the Dignity of Tribune, made a
grave speech in favor of the Italian People, much lamenting that a Nation so
warlike, and allied to the Roman People, should be reduced to so small numbers,
and to such an oppressive poverty, that there scarce appeared any remedy, but
that they must be utterly extinct. Then he declared against the vast numbers of
Slaves, useless in War, and treacherous to their Masters, a fresh example of
which he related of the Slaves, rebelling against their Patrons in Sicily,
where the Slaves being grown numerous by reason of their being employed in
Husbandry, had raised such a War against the Romans, as was not suppressed
without much danger, and many bloody Engagements. This Speech did the work, and
gained a new publication of the Law concerning Lands, whereby it was forbid any
one to be possessed of more than five hundred Acres, adding to it, that the
Children of the Family might be possessed of two hundred and fifty; and that
after reduction made, the remaining Land should be divided among the poor by
Triumvirs, who were to be changed every year, which sorely grieved the rich
men, who durst no more attempt any thing against the Law, nor for the future
buy other men's proportions; for Gracchus, to prevent frauds, had by the same
Law forbid all such kind of Contracts, which occasioned, that in every corner
might be seen people got together, reproaching the poor with the pains they had
taken in manuring their Ground, and the charge they had been at in building,
crying out, that it was not just to make them lose, not only their Lands, but
likewise the money they had paid to their Neigbours, and withal deprive them
of the Sepulchers of their Predecessors, interred in those grounds left to them
by Succession. Others demanded the restoring of their Wives Dowry, which they
had thus employed, or that their Children might have leave to enjoy those Farms
they had settled upon them at their Marriage: others again showed the Contracts
and Statutes they had entered into, taking up moneys at great interests to
purchase those Lands. In a word, all places were filled with murmuring and
complaint. On the other side, were heard the lamentings of the poor, that from
rich, that they once were, now they had reduced them to extreme poverty: nay,
even to despair, having nothing left to feed their Children, they recounted the
many Expeditions wherein they had served the Commonwealth, to the end, they
might maintain themselves in the possession of these Lands, and vowed never to
serve more, if they were not restored to what belonged to them. They likewise
accused the rich men, that they disdained to employ them in their Tillage, but
rather made choice of Slaves their Enemies, faithless people, and useless in
War. During these reproaches, and mutual laments, the contagion of this
Distemper spread it it self among the Colonies, the Municipal Cities, and in
all places where Lands were possessed by what Title soever: every one feared to
lose, and there as well as in the City the multitude was divided into two
parties, and each relying on the number of their Faction, stirred them up
against the other; and all people being concerned in the execution of this Law:
one party disposing themselves to hinder it, and the other being ready to
attempt any thing to maintain it, men's minds were strangely inclined to
Sedition. So neither one nor the other party resolving to yield, they waited
only the day appointed for the passing the Law in the Assembly.

Gracchus's Design was not so much to relieve the poverty of particular men, as
to repeople the Country, because he believed it the interest of the
Commonwealth, and that hereupon depended the fortune of all Italy: nor doubted
he of the success of the Enterprise, though it were as difficult as it was
important. When the Assembly was met, after having a long time discoursed the
business in Question, he asked the Auditors, if they believed it not just, that
what belonged to the Public should be shared among the People, if a Citizen
were not to be preferred before a Slave, if a Soldier were no more serviceable
to the State than a Ploughman, and if a natural Inhabitant were not more
affectionate to the Commonwealth than a Stranger: and without insisting long
upon these comparisons, as absurd, he began to discourse of the hopes and fears
of the City. That the Romans had conqueeed many Countries, and been in hopes to
extend their Conquests to the most distant Climates: but that as things now
stood, there was cause enough to doubt whether they should be able to complete
the Conquest of the rest, with that small number of Soldiers wherewith Italy
was peopled, or should not rather lose their own Country, by reason of the
weakness of their Armies, and the powerfulness of their Enemies, and withal
exaggerating the Glory and Riches on one side, and the danger and fear on the
other; he exhorted the rich men to consider with themselves if it were not much
more to the purpose willingly to quit to the unfortunate poor who had great
charge of Children the possession of some Lands, out of hopes of those great
advantages might thereby accrue, than to neglect things of most import, by
disputing Trifles. That besides five hundred Acres of good Land well secured,
and for those had Children, half as much for every Head, was no contemptible
recompense of their past Services. After having largely discoursed on this
subject; and the minds of the poor people, and of all such as suffered
themselves to be rather led by reason than passion remaining suspended, he gave
command to the Serjean^ to read the Law, when M. Octavius his Colleague, who
was suborned by the rich men to prevent the passing of the Law, imposed silence
upon the Sergeant. Whereupon Gracchus publicly reproaching him, adjourned the
Assembly till the morrow; when having caused some Armed Men to be there, as if
by force he would have constrained Octavius to yield to him, whether he would
or no; he with threats commanded the Sergeant to read the Law, and Octavius on
the contrary forbad him. Whereupon the Colleagues quarrelling, and it being
impossible to read the Law by reason of the Tumult, the most Considerate of the
Assembly besought the Tribunes to refer the Difference to the Senate's
judgment. Gracchus consented; and out of hopes that this Law would displease no
reasonable man, went straight to the Palace; but not being received there with
so great applause as among the Vulgar; nay, on the contrary, having reviling
words cast at him by the Rich Men, he returns to the Assembly, and promises
that on the morrow he would gather their Voices both concerning the Law, and
the dismission of his Colleague, who opposed the good of the People. He
accordingly did it: And as Octavius presented himself unconcerned, he first put
it to the Vote concerning him, The first Tribe having given their Vote against
Octavius, Gracchus turned to him, and desired him to desist from his
Enterprise; but seeing him obstinate, he persisted to demand the advice of the
rest; for at this time there were five and thirty, of which seventeen all in a
fury having voted with the first, if the eighteenth were joined with them the
Law became ratified. Wherefore Gracchus once more publicly besought his
Colleague, now upon the very point of being deposed, not so stubbornly to
disturb a Work so holy and so beneficial to all Italians, nor any more oppose a
thing which the people so ardently desired, the Execution whereof his Office of
Tribune obliged him to; and in fine, not to suffer himself to be deposed. After
which Entreaties he called the Gods to witness, that it was with regret he thus
acted against the honor of his Colleague: but then seeing nothing would
persuade him, he began again to gather the Votes. Thus Octavius being deprived
of his Office and Charge, and retired out of the Assembly, they substituted
Mummius in his stead; and at the same time the Law was ratifyed. They created
Triumvirs for dividing the Land, Gracchus himself, Caius his Brother, and
Appius Claudius his Father in Law; for the people were fearful the Law might
remain without Execution, unless he that made it and his Alliance had the
Support of it in their own hands.

Gracchus, ravished with joy that this Law had passed, he was carried back by
the people to his House, as if he had been the restorer not of one City or one
people, but of all the Nations of Italy. After which the victorious Party went
into the Countries from whence they were come to this contention; and the other
in despair for being overcome, staid still in the City, publicly declaring
that Gracchus should repent, as soon as he was out of employment, the daring to
violate an authority so holy and sacred, and be the mover of such a Sedition in
Italy. Summer being already come, the time of the Assembly for the Creation of
Tribunes drew nigh, and it was very likely the rich men would so contrive it,
that the dignity might fall upon Gracchus's enemies, which somewhat terrified
him, and fearful lest any thing might pass in the Assembly to his prejudice, he
did his endeavors to recall the people out of the Country. But all people being
now employed in their Tillage, as is usual in Harvest; and the day of Assembly
approaching, he was forced to have recourse to the people of the City; and with
kindnesses and submissions solicit every one in particular, to continue him in
the Tribuneship, in acknowledgment of the dangers to which he had exposed
himself for their service. When it came to the Vote, Gracchus had those of the
two first Tribes: Whereupon the rich men cried out, that it was not allowed by
Law to continue the same dignity in the same Person: and Rubrius, Tribune of
the people, whom Lot made President of the Assembly, making a demur upon it,
Mummius the Successor of Octavius, obliged him to resign his place, and suffer
him to gather the Votes; but the rest of the Tribunes maintained that Lots
ought again to be drawn for the Pre-eminence, and that Rubrius Resignation
could not be made, but in equal favor of all the Tribunes. In this Contest
Gracchus seeing his Party the weakest, adjourned the Assembly till the morrow;
and finding his Affairs grow desperate, before he was dismissed of his Charge,
he spent the rest of that day in the place in mourning, having his Son with
him, whom he recommended to all he met, as foreseeing himself likely to perish
by the violence of his Enemies. The Rabble moved to compassion for the man, and
withal judging that there must be no more talk of Equality between them and the
other Citizens, but they must resolve to suffer the Tyrannick Rule of the Rich
if they forsook their Protector in the danger he was in for their sakes, they
carried him to his house in the evening, and wished him to be courageous next
morning. Hereupon he took heart; and assembling before it was day those of his
Faction, gives them a word in case there should be occasion to fight, and so
seizes on the Capitol and place of Assembly. The rich men, by the joining of
some Tribunes with them, having hindered Votes to be taken about his
Continuation, he gave to his Party the Signal agreed upon between them:
whereupon they rose with great clamor, and straightway fell to blows; some
gathering about his Person as his Guards, and others tucking up their Robes,
snatching the Rods out of the Lictors hands, and untying them, drove all the
rich Men out of the Assembly with many blows and wounds; in so much, that the
Tribunes affrighted fled, and the Priests shut up the Temple. The terror of
those who ran flying up and down, filled all the City with disorder and
uncertain rumors. Some said Gracchus had taken the Tribuneship from his
Colleagues; which seemed the more credible, because none of them appeared in
public: And others, that without expecting the people's Votes, he had created
himself Tribune. Mean while the Senate assembled in the Temple of Faith. And
surely it is to me a wonder, that neither now nor afterward it entered into the
thoughts of any of the Fathers, to propose the saving way of a Dictator, so
often tried in the like Commotions. After a short Consultation they ascended
the Capitol, led by Cornelius Scipio Nasica, High Priest; who having cried
aloud, that all who loved the safety of the Commonwealth should follow him,
cast one of the Skirts of his Robe over his shoulder and over his head; whether
for a sign to assemble the multitude, or to give them Signal of Battle, or to
testify his respect to the Gods, in concealing from them the design he had in
his heart. Being come to the Capitol, and Gracchus people having made way for
that great Man at the head of the Senate; those that followed him snatched the
Clubs out of their Enemies hands; and getting pieces of Forms which they broke,
or any thing that might serve for offense, they fell upon the others with so
much fury, that they drove the greatest part of them down the Precipices, and
slew Gracchus himself near the Temple Gates before the Statues of their Kings,
with a great number of his followers; whose bodies were in the night cast into
Tyber. Thus ended Gracchus, Son to a Father that had been twice Consul; and to
Cornelia, Daughter to Scipio the Affrican. He was slain being Tribune, and in
the Capitol, serving his Country but with too much violence. And this Riot, the
most infamous we have upon Record, was committed in the sacred place where
Magistrates are chosen. His death wrought two different effects in men's minds;
some rejoiced, and others mourned, for many lamented not less their own
condition than his; calling the present State not the Republic, but the
Insolence of the victorious Party; whilst others, believing they had nothing
more to fear, found themselves at the top of their wishes. All this happened in
the time of that War, when Aristonicus fought with the people of Rome for the
Empire of Asia.

After Gracchus death, Appius being likewise deceased, Fulvius Flaccus Papirius
Carbo, together with the young Gracchus, undertook to cause the Law about Lands
to be put in Execution. And when the ancient Possessors stood off what they
could to hinder the Arpentage or Division of Lands, they caused Proclamation to
be made, that whosoever would might summon them before them, which gave Rise to
numberless difficult Lawsuits; for all contiguous Lands that either had been
sold or divided, fell into dispute, to know how they were sold or divided: no
Writing of Sale appearing, and many having lost the Possession of what was let
out to them by Division; and besides, whatever did appear done by contract, was
very doubtful. And moreover, in making a general Survey, in order to a new
Division, some who had sowed or otherwise improved their Farms, were
transplanted to a corner that at present lay Fallow; and others from Arable, to
a Wast, Clay or Marshy Ground. For from the first, there had been no very exact
Division made of the Lands gained from the Enemy. And because it was enacted
that Lands so set out should be tilled by the Possessors, some that were more
diligent had advanced upon their Neighbors, and so confounded the Bounds:
Besides, time having changed the face of places, it was no easy matter to
discover the Encroachments of the rich Men, though they were very great. In a
word, by the often change of Dwellings, all things were in confusion and
disorder. The Italians, tired with their Lawsuits, and feeling themselves
oppressed with the Execution of Judgments; that they might be no longer subject
to these Injustices, besought Cornelius Scipio the African to undertake their
Protection. They had served him so well in many occasions of War, that he could
not refuse them his Assistance: He therefore went to the Senate; where at first
dash he struck not directly at the Law for fear to offend the people; but
having touched somewhat upon the difficulty of the Affair, he moved that the
cognizance of such Causes as should happen might be taken from the Tribunes as
Men suspected, and others be sent in their stead. His Opinion being found very
just, the Senate confirmed it by Decree; and gave the Commission to Tuditanus,
then Consul. But he having undertaken a business which he found very difficult,
taking for a pretense the War of Illyria, went into that Province; and no man
longer acknowledging the Triumvirs for Judges, all matters were at a stand.
This lost Scipio in the hearts of the Common People; who believed that this
Man, for whose sake they had often offended the prime Men of the City, and
without consideration of the Law, twice made Consul; now served the Italian
Allies to their prejudice. Which coming to the knowledge of Scipio's Enemies,
they ran up and down the Streets, exclaiming that he was resolved to abolish
the Law by Arms, and by the Massacre of the Citizens; and thus they terrified
the multitude. In short, Scipio being one evening retired into his Chamber,
with Table-Books to write, during the night, an Oration he was to make to the
Assembly, was found dead without the appearance of any Wound: Whether he were
poisoned by Cornelia, the Mother of the Gracchi (who feared lest this Law
should be abrogated) having for an Accomplice Sempronia her Daughter, Scipio's
Wife; who being ugly and barren, was neither beloved, nor loved him: Or whether
(as some believed) he gave himself this death, because he saw he could not
perform what he promised. Though there be others say that his Slaves under
Torment confessed that some unknown men they had let in at the back door, had
strangled him; and that they durst not discover the Murder, because they knew
the people hating Scipio, rejoiced at his death. Thus died that man, so
serviceable to the Roman Empire, for whom no public Funerals were celebrated;
so much did present Indignation transcend the power of those Acknowledgments
the people owed to his past Services. And this gave occasion of increase to the
Seditions about the Law concerning Lands.

Fulvius Flaccus, now Consul, and likewise Triumvir for the Execution of the
Law, stood stiffly to this Proposition. But the Senate could not endure that
the Subjects of Rome should be made equal to her Citizens: So there it stopped
to the great displeasure of those people, troubled to see their hopes
frustrate. Matters standing thus; Caius, Brother to the Elder Gracchus, and
heretofore his Colleague in the Triumvirate, offered himself very seasonably to
be Tribune. He had layen still some time after his Brother's death, contemned
by the Fathers; against whom he could not defend his Authority. But having put
himself in the number of those who stood for the Tribuneship, he carried it
roundly to the general satisfaction of the people; and forthwith began to put
in practice all ways possible to revenge himself of the Senate: For he made a
Law, that every Month a certain quantity of Wheat should be delivered to the
people by head, at the public Expense. This had never before been practiced.
So that having suddenly gained the people by this new Establishment; and
withal, being supported by Fulvius Flaccus, he was again chosen Tribune for the
Year following. For it was already enacted by an express Law, that if it were
necessary for a Tribune to be continued in order to the perfecting of something
begun, he ought to be preferred before any of the Competitors in the next
Assembly. This Dignity being then prolonged to him for the following Year, and
the people already engaged to him for the forecited favor, he cast about, how
to gratify the Knights the next Order after the Supreme, and proposed the
Transferring to this Order, the Cognizance of all Concussion, public
Extortion, or evil Management of Offices and Charges; reproaching them with the
fresh Examples of Aurelius, Cotta, Salinator and Manlius Aquilius, Conqueror of
Asia: All which being accused of mis-employing the public Treasure, had been
cleared by the Corruption of their Judges; which was likewise attested by the
Deputies of the Provinces still in the City, and loudly complaining of the
Injustice done them. The Senators were so ashamed to hear these discourses,
that they never opposed the public Decree; so that the cognizance of those
Crimes was consigned over to the Knights: And it is reported that at the
ratifying this Law Gracchus was heard say, That the power of the Senate was
thoroughly quashed. And indeed the consequences proved the saying true: for
another Order being henceforward Judges, both of the Affairs of the City, and
of Italy; nay, even of the Senators themselves: whether the Question were
concerning a Pecuniary Fine, or Condemning to Banishment or Infamy, the whole
power seemed to be in the hands of the Knights, and the Senate reduced to
depend on them. Besides, the Order of the Knights contributing to the Election
of the Tribunes of the people, and the Tribunes being ready to return them
kindness for kindness, the Senate began to be started; and there wanted very
little but by overturning the whole Frame of the Commonwealth, the Knights had
had all the Authority in effect, leaving the Senate only the Honor and Show:
For some time after not only this Supreme Order was submitted to the Knights,
but the Senators daily received Injustices from their Judges; who tickled with
the sweetness of the profit they had now tasted, abused their Power with all
sorts of infamy and disorder. They suborned Accusers against the Rich; and
entering into a Cabal, eluded those Laws made against corrupt Judges, or with
scorn contemned them. Hence came it, that because no account was required of
their Proceedings, a new Sedition was raised, because of Judiciary Laws, which
proved not less than others, and likewise lasted some time. Gracchus likewise
set on work the Levelling, Paving and Repairing the High ways of all Italy,
wherein he employed Multitudes of people living only by Day-labour; whom by
this means he perfectly gained to attempt any thing for his Service. He founded
several Colonies; and obliged the Latins to demand a Right of Freedom of the
City; alleging it was an unworthy thing for the Senate to hinder what people,
their Allies, desired with so much passion; and at last he gave to other Allies
a Right to give in their Votes, contrary to ancient Custom, because he hoped to
make use of them in the Publication of Laws he designed to prefer. This more
allarmed the Senate than all had passed before. Wherefore after a Consultation
the Consuls published their Defenses, forbidding all persons not having Right
to vote to stay in the City, or to come within the Five Miles
fifth Stone. They likewise drew in Livius Drusus to oppose all Laws proposed
by Gracchus his Colleague, without giving any reason of his Opposition before
the people; which liberty they likewise gave to all Opposers whatsoever.
Lastly, to sweeten the Multitude, they granted them twelve Colonies; which
Concession so charmed their minds, that they began to disgust the new Laws. So
that Gracchus frustrated of the people; and Fulvius Flaccus, a Consular, who
had been made Gracchus his Colleague, went over for the same reason into
Africa; where by reason of the fertility of the Soil, a Colony was appointed to
be established, and Inhabitants expressly sent thither, that the City being
disburthened, the Senate might in some measure be delivered from popular
Seditions. The Tribunes set out the place of their Habitation among the Ruins
of Carthage; without consideration that Scipio, when he demolished it, had
decreed it to remain eternally desert, with Imprecations against all those who
should attempt to rebuild it. They likewise made account to bring over six
thousand Inhabitants more than were appointed by Ordinance of the Senate, to
gain so much the more the people's good grace. From thence they returned to
Rome, with design to gather together from all parts of Italy those six thousand
persons destined for Carthage. But those who stayed in Africa, to lay the first
Foundations to that Colony; having writ to the City that the Wolves had tore
away the Mark set by the Tribunes, the Augurs declared it Sacrilege to send
Inhabitants thither, and the Senate published an Assembly to consult of the
Abrogation of the Law in what related to that Colony. Whereupon Gracchus and
Fulvius having likewise lost this hope, ran like mad men through the Streets,
crying out that the Prodigy of the Wolves was a lie of the Senate's. The most
resolute of the people took their parts; and armed, they came to the Capitol,
where the Tribes were in Convocation to give their Votes, touching the Colony.
After the people were assembled, and Fulvius had begun to speak, Gracchus, who
to that end had ordered his people to follow, attempted to go up to the Temple
of Jupiter; but being hindered by those who knew he had some ill design, he
returned no more into the Assembly, but retreated into the Porch, waiting an
opportunity to engage the adverse Party. Mean while a certain man of the people
called Attilius, who sacrificed under the same Porch, seeing him moved, went to
accost him: and whether knowing any thing, or having some suspicion, or else
only by way of entertainment, besought him to have compassion of his Country:
Whereupon seeming troubled as if he had been discovered; and looking awry upon
the man, one of his followers, without receiving any Command, or staying for a
Signal; but judging by his Master's Countenance that it was time to strike, and
that by beginning first, he would be the more obliged to him; drew his Sword,
and run Attilius into the Belly. Whereupon, a great cry being raised, when the
dead body was seen upon the Pavement, all the people were affrighted, and every
man fled from the Temple as fast as he could. Gracchus went into the Assembly,
to give an account of this Action; but when none would hear his Justification,
but all looked upon him as impious and irreligious. Flaccus and he, troubled to
have lost the opportunity of executing their design, went to their several
Homes, whither others of the same Faction retired to them. The rest of the
people, as it happens in a public Tumult, being about midnight got together in
Arms in the place, Opimius, one of the Consuls, who was left in the City, at
break of day places Guards in the Capital, gives order to call together the
Senate, and himself seizes on the Temple of Castor ano Pollux, which stood in
the heart of the City; that he might be in readiness, whatever should happen.
Things disposed in this order, the Senate sent to summon Gracchus and Flaccus,
to come and give an account of their Actions: but they having betaken
themselves to Arms, hastened to seize on the Mount Aventine; hoping if they made
themselves Masters of that place, the Senate would not refuse some conditions
of Peace. They endeavored likewise to raise the Slaves under promise of
Liberty, but in vain. So they fortifyed themselves in Diana's Temple with those
people they had; from whence they sent Quintus the Son of Flaccus to the
Senate, to treat of an Accommodation. Answer was given, they should lay down
their Arms and come themselves, and then they should be heard; but that upon
any other terms they should send no more. But Quintus again returning, contrary
to this Declaration made him by the Senate, Opimius no more considering him as
a Deputy, commands him to be Arrested, and at the same instant gave Order to
march against Gracchus; who fled over the wooden Bridge, to the other side of
Tiber, into a certain Thicket, followed only by one Slave; to whom, because he
would not fall alive into his Enemies hands, he presented his throat. Flaccus
escaped into a Shop of one of his Friends, where his Pursuers lost him; but
because they knew not which House he was run into, they threatened to burn the
whole Street: Whereupon, he who had received him not having the heart to
deliver him up himself, gave notice to another, who discovered him. So he was
taken, and slain upon the place. The two heads were brought to Opimius, who
pa^ed for them their weight in Gold. Their Houses were pillaged by the people,
and their Fellow-Confederates strangled in the Prison by the Consul's Order. As
for Quintus the Son of Flaccus, they gave him leave to choose his death. After
which, the usual Ceremonies for purging the City, polluted by these Massacres,
were performed; and by Decree of the Senate, the Temple of Concord was built in
the place.

The second Sedition of the Gracchi ending in this manner, soon after a
Gracchus; so that the Poor were soon thrust out by the Rich of all that they
possessed in the Country, either by Power or Money; till such time as Spurius
Borius absolutely abolished the Law of Lands; leaving the Country in possession
of the ancient Masters, on condition of paying a Tribute to the People, and the
Money arising thereby to be divided by head; which was a great comfort to the
Poor, and a Remedy against unpeopling the Country. Thus Gracchus Laws, very
advantageous to the Commonwealth if they could have been executed, being once
shaken, another Tribune of the People took off the Tribute; so that there
remained nothing to the poor People. Hence proceeded it that the Country became
depopulated, Soldiers grew scarce, the Revenue of the Roman People diminished,
Military Establishments were reduced, the Laws lost their Authority, ano Men
ceased to do Justice. And this was fifteen years after the Publication of the
Law concerning Lands. About the same time the Consul Scipio caused the Theater
begun by L. Cassius, to be demolished, though almost brought to perfection,
(whether he thought it might breed new matter of Sedition, or whether he
thought it not for the Commonwealths good to accustom the People to the
Grecians Voluptuousness.) And the Censor Q. Cecilius Metellus did all he could
to expel Glaucia and Apuleius Saturninus, who had been Tribune, out of the
Senate, for their debauched life; but his Colleague opposing it, he could not
succeed in the Attempt. For this reason Apuleius, to revenge this Affront of
Metellus, once more demanded the Tribuneship; and took the opportunity when
Glaucia, then Praetor, presided in the Assembly. Notwithstanding, Nonius, of
Noble Race, having with bloody Reproaches declaimed against Apuleius and
Glaucia, was designed Tribune. But they fearing lest he having obtained that
Dignity, should handle them roughly, broke up the Assembly; and presently
slipped after him a Troop of Murderers, who reached him as he was escaping
into a certain House, and slew him. And because this Murder struck all the
World both with horror and compassion, those of Glaucia's Faction being got
very early in the morning about him in the place of the Assembly, before the
people were come, gave the Tribuneship to Apuleius: So no more Inquest was made
after Nonius death, none daring to accuse the Tribune of such a Riot. Metellus
was likewise sent into Banishment by a Cabal of his Enemies, upheld by Marius,
now the sixth time Consul, who bare him a private Grudge. And this was the Trap
they laid for him: Apuleius made a Law touching the Division of Lands in the
Province of the Gauls, out of which Marius had lately driven the Cimbrians; so
that now it was under dependence of the Romans, and not of the Gauls: By this
Law it was enacted, that if the People passed it, the Senate should approve it
in ten days, and by Oath oblige themselves to stand to it; and whosoever would
not swear, to be expelled the Senate, with twenty Talents Fine. Thus an
opportunity of Revenge presented of it self; for there was not any likelihood
that many of the Senators, but especially Metellus, Noble minded as he was,
would endure to be forced to swear. Apuleius appointed a day of Assembly; and
mean time sent Messengers from himself, to give notice to the Tribes in the
Country, in whom he had great confidence, because the greater part of them had
born Arms under Marius. This Law which seemed made in favor of the Allies, was
not very pleasing to the Roman People. So that no Order was kept in this
Assembly; and whosoever stood up against it, was thrown headlong down by
Apuleius. Hereupon the People of the City began to cry out that they heard
thunder, as often as which happens, it is Sacrilege to enact any thing. But
when Apuleius Party gave not yet over their Violences, the Citizens trussing up
their Gowns, and seizing on the Arms of all they met, dispersed the
Countrymen; who, notwithstanding, being recalled by Apuleius, Rallyed, and
returning to the Charge with Clubs likewise in their hands, made such a bustle,
that at length the Law past. That done, Marius assembled the Senate to consult
about the Oath demanded from the Senators; and because he knew Metellus
constant and steady in his Resolutions, he spoke his opinion first, and assured
them he would never willingly swear; Metellus did the like: and the rest of the
Senate praising both one and the other, the Consul dismissed the Assembly: but
on the fifth day, the time prescribed by the Law to swear on, Marius having
about ten of the Clock assembled the Senate in great haste, told them he was
afraid of the People, eager for the Execution of the Law; but that he had found
a device to secure them: That they ought to swear to that Law so far as it was
legitimate; with which the Country People, whom they had most cause to
apprehend, being satisfied, would be gone; and then it would be very easy to
make it appear to be no Law, being published by force, and whilst it thundered,
contrary to the Customs of their Ancestors. And having thus said, without
staying to ask any one's opinion, or so much as giving time to think of it;
whilst all kept silence through fear and surprise, he rises up and goes to the
Temple of Saturn* where the Treasurers of the Exchequer were to swear them; and
first of all himself and Friends oblige themselves by Oath to the Observation
of the Law. All the rest of the Senators, every one in fear for himself, swore
likewise, save only Metellus, who remained steadfast and fearless in his
Resolution. So Apuleius next morning caused in Usher to lay hold of him, to
make him go out of the Palace; and when the other Tribunes of the People
commanded the Usher to let him go, he ran to the Country Men, and told them
they could have no Lands, nor would the Law be of force unless Metellus were
driven out of the City. In so much that it was decreed in the Assembly of the
people that he should be banished, and that the Consuls should forbid him Fire
and Water; and they allowed one day to the Senate, to consider of the matter.
The Citizens enraged at this Action, assembled with Arms under their Gowns, to
conduct him through the City. But he thanking them for their good will, with
all the Civilities imaginable, told them he would never suffer his Country to
run any hazard for his sake. Then Apuleius published the Ordinance for his
Banishment, which Marius soon confirmed by Decree. And thus this man, esteemed
by all the World, went into Exile.

After this Apuleius was again nominated Tribune of the people for the
Gracchus, for whom all the rabble gave their votes with much eagerness, out of
the respect they had to the said Gracchus. After this, was held an Assembly for
the election of Consuls, where Anthony, by general consent of all the world was
nominated to this Dignity. 'Twas not yet known who of Glaucia or Memmius that
strove for it, should be his Colleague; but because Memmius was of much the
better House, Glaucia and Apuleius fearful he should carry it, caused him to be
set upon in the very assembly of the People, by certain Murderers, who in the
face of the whole world slew him with Clubs; so that by reason of this
disorder, the Assembly broke up, after having beheld the violation of all that
respect due to the authority of the Laws, to Justice, to Men and to God. On the
morrow the people incensed with the horror of the Action, gathered together to
punish it in the person of Apuleius, but he assisted by great numbers of the
Country people, whom he had caused to come of purpose, and taking along with
him Glaucia and C. Sanfeius Quaestor went to seize the Capitol. The Senate
declares them Enemies, and Marius with regret arms against them; but so few
people, and so slowly, that the people tired with his delays, cut the Pipes
which carried water to the Temple, till Sanfeius no longer able to endure
thirst, gave advice to fire the Capitol, but Glaucia and Apuleius, out of the
confidence they had in Marius, yielded first, and Sanfeius after them: but when
the people cried out with one voice to put them presently to death, the Consul
shut them up in the Palace, under pretense to punish them by form of Justice:
the multitude thinking it a Fiction, climbing up on the Roof of the Palace, and
pulling off the covering, never left throwing down Tyles on the Heads of those
within, till the Quaestor, Tribune and Praetor lost their lives, having yet on
the Habits and Badges of their Magistracy. All the rest of their party perished
likewise in the same tumult, and among others, the Tribune who said he was Son
to Gracchus on the first day of his Tribuneship. No person could any longer
promise himself to preserve his liberty, there was now only the shadow of a
Commonwealth, no regard being had to Laws or Dignity, or Magistracy, since the
holy and sacred power of the Tribunes, which was established to oppose Riots
and Murders, and to protect the people, was become polluted with the crimes of
those which exercised it, and violated by the outrages which they received from
others. After they were thus rid of the Tribunes, all the Senate and People of
Rome began to demand the repeal of Metellus, save only P. Furius, whose Father
was but a Freed-man, who opposed it with boldness, and would never be moved
from this opposition, though Metellus the Son of him banished, besought him on
his Knees, with tears in his Eyes, which was the cause that this Son whom all
men saw in that condition, so worthy of compassion, got the Surname of Pious,
and that C. Canuleius the Tribune, offended at Furius his obstinacy, undertook
to cause him to be condemned to death by the people, and pleaded his accusation
so vehemently, that without hearing the Accused's defense, the incensed
multitude tore him in pieces: so ordinary it was now grown, daily to commit
some new murder, in the place designed to do justice: at length they agreed to
Metellus's return; and it is said, that when he entered the City, the whole day
was not sufficient to receive the Complements of those went to meet him at the
Gate. Thus the stirs made by Apuleius in Rome, were the third in order after
those Tempests raised under the Tribuneship of the two Gracchi.

Italy, which not being foreseen, and increasing prodigiously in a short time,
put some stop to Domestic Seditions, by the fresh terror it brought. After it
was ended, other flames of Division were kindled between the chief Heads of the
Commonwealth, which were not quenched by making new Laws, or raising sudden
tumults; for they charged each other at the Head of mighty Armies. I have
especially thought fit to insert this War in this History, as well because it
took birth from a popular tumult, as because it was followed by another
Dissension, much more pernicious to the Commonwealth than any of the former.
It began then in this manner, Fulvius Flaccus being Consul, was the first that
ever blew up the desires of Freedom in the minds of the Allies, out of hopes to
be no longer subject to the Romans. but to share with them the Honors and
Dignities of the City; and because he was obstinate in this proposition, the
Senate sent him to a certain War, where the time of his Consulate being
expired, he came to demand the Tribuneship, and prevailed so, that they gave
him young Gracchus for his Colleague. Both one and the other being slain for
making Laws of that kind in favor of the Italians, as we have already related,
the spirits of the Allies were imbittered more and more, incensed, that they
were treated rather like Vassals than Allies, and that Fulvius and Gracchus had
perished so miserably, for declaring themselves their Protectors. After them
Livius Drusus Tribune of the People, of Noble Race, upon the request of the
Allies, promised, to pass the Law they desired, touching the right of Freedom:
for it was all they longed for, having no other way to become Masters as well
as the others, to whom now they were but Subjects. Mean while, the Tribune, to
gain the favor of the People, settled many Colonies in Italy and Sicily, in
pursuance of an ancient Decree which had till that time lain dormant. He
undertook likewise to reconcile the Senate and Knights, mightily imbroiled
about the cognizance of crimes of concussion assigned to the Knights. He could
not openly restore it to the Senators, wherefore he devised this stratagem,
whereby he thought to content both one and the other. The number of the
Senators not amounting to above three hundred, by reason of all the past
Seditions, he made a Law, ordaining the taking a like number of Knights of the
worthiest men to fill up the Senate, and that all these together should for the
future choose Judges, before whom all that were suspected of Corruption or
Concussion, should appear to give account of their Actions; for that mischief
was now so common, that men forbore to account it a crime, so boundless was
impudence grown. But this design succeeded quite contrary to his imaginations;
for the Senators thought it strange, that in a moment so many Knights should be
mounted with them to the supreme Order, who probably seeing themselves raised
to a new Dignity, would never well accord with the ancient Standers. And the
Knights, who had tasted of profit and power, feared, (and that surely with
reason) lest by this means all the authority should be restored to the Senate,
to their detriment. Besides, it raised a jealousy between the Knights
themselves; for no man could resolve to yield that to another (as more worthy)
which he thought himself well deserved; and most certain it is, no one could be
preferred, but with the Envy and Hate of all the rest. But nothing disturbed
them more than the Prosecutions which ought to be recomced against those who
had suffered themselves to be corrupted by Bribes, the practice of which seemed
quite abrogated. So that though the two Orders were at no good accord among
themselves, yet they agreed in this point, equally to hate Drusus; and there
were none but the People satisfied with him, and that because of the Colonies.
For the Allies themselves, though the Tribune had done all these things with
design to serve them, had an aversion to the Law of Colonies, because if the
Lands were not divided, the rich men seized them partly by force, and partly by
cunning, framing Intreagu^s with their Neigbours to enlarge their own bounds,
by driving them from their proper Inheritances. The contagion of these
Disorders had spread it self even to Tuscany.
Hetruria and Duchy of Spoletto.
Umbria, whose people whom the Consuls had caused to come into the City, (in
appearance to oppose the publication of the Law, but indeed to rid themselves
of Drusus) cried out publicly, that they waited for the Assembly, which being
come to the Tribunes knowledge, he went very seldom abroad in public, but held
his ordinary audiences at his House in a kind of a dark Gallery, where one
Evening, as he dismissed the multitude, he cried out he was wounded, and at the
same instant falling, was found struck in the Thigh, and a Shooemakers Knife in
the Wound. Thus Drusus as well as others was slain in his Tribuneship.

The Knights were not wanting to draw advantages against their Enemies, Drusus
his Designs, and to find out matter of Calumny, and to this effect they
persuaded Q. Valerius Tribune of the People to make a Law, declaring all such
Criminals, who openly or underhand favored the Allies, in their design to
enter into the Government of the Republic, out of hopes soon to expose to
their Accusers the Head Men of the City, to become the Judges of this crime* so
odious to all Citizens, to destroy their Enemies, and make themselves almighty;
wherefore when the other Tribunes opposed the publication of this Law, the
Knights all drew their Swords, and presenting the points to the Throats of the
Opposers, made them pass it by force. That done, they presently suborned
Accusers against the most considerable of the Senate. Bestia, one of the first
accused, would not come at their Summons, but went of himself into exile,
rather than submit himself to the power of his Enemies. Cotta, called next to
judgment after him, appeared, but after he had given a brave account of the
Employments he had undergone in the Republic, and declared against the
Knights, he left the City without staying for their Sentence. Mummius surnamed
the Achaick, after having been fooled by his Judges, who promised to absolve
him, was banished to Delos, where he ended his days. This mischief falling upon
the worthiest and best men, the People began to be afflicted to see themselves
in so short time robbed of the presence of so many great persons, and the
Allies when they knew of Drusus's Death, and the cause of the Banishment of so
many illustrious men, thought it was no longer time to suffer their Protectors
to be so unworthily treated; and seeing no other way to succeed in their hopes,
resolved to revolt against the Roman People, and to make War upon them with all
their power. To this purpose they sent secret Deputations to each other, signed
an Union, and gave reciprocal Hostages, of all which they had but late notice
in the City, now wholly busied in trials and tumults. At last when they had
advice of it, they sent into all corners the properest people they could find
out, to discover the truth of this news, under pretense of doing something
else; one of which espying a Child of Ascoly in another City, whither he had
been sent for Hostage, advised Servilius thereof, who governed as Proconsul in
those Quarters: from whence we may gather that even from those times the
Countries of Italy were distributed to Proconsuls, a custom which many ages
after the Emperor Adrian revived, though not to last long after his death.
Servilius came forthwith to Ascoly, when the Inhabitants happened to celebrate
a Solemn Festival, where whilst he thought to frighten them with his threats,
when they perceived the League was discovered, they slew him, and with him
Fonteius his Lieutenant. After having begun with them they spared no Roman, but
put all to the Sword, and plundered their Goods. Thus they proceeded to an open
Revolt, and all the Neighboring People took Arms, the Marsians, the
Pelignians, the Vestins and the Marucians, who were followed by the The Marches
of Ancoma.
Picenians, the Ferentins, the Hirpins, the Pompeians, the Venusines, the
Apulians, the Those of the Basilicate.
Lucanians and the Abruzzo.
Samnites, all Nations long time Enemies to the Roman Name. And in short, all
the people from the River Garigliano.
Liris, which I believe is at this day called Literva, to the bottom of the
Adriatic Gulf, as well within Land, as on the Seacoasts. Their Deputies going
to Rome to complain that the right of Freedom was not granted them, though by
their assistances and Services they had highly contributed to the increase of
the Empire. The Senate answered them very roughly, that when they were returned
to their duty, they would hear their Deputations, but otherwise they would give
them no audience; so fallen from all hopes, they prepared for War, raised
Forces, and set out a hundred thousand men as well Horse as Foot. The Roman
Army was not less numerous, comprizing those Allies continued faithful to them:
Sext. Julius Caesar and P. Rutilius Lapus Consuls, commanded for the Romans;
for this Intestine War was thought so important, that they put them both in
Commission. They began to keep Guards at the Gates for the security of the
City, and likewise of the Neighbors; for since these Novelties were sent on
foot, they knew not whom to trust. There was great likelihood of division, even
in the City it self. To the Consuls they appointed Lieutenants, the greatest
men of the Age, A. Rabirius, Cn. Pompey Father to him gained the Surname of
Great, Q. Cepio, C. Perpenna, C. Marius, Valerius Messala, A. Sextus Caesar, P.
Lentulus his Brother, T. Didius, Licinius Crassus, Cornelius Sylla and Marcus
Marcellus. To each they assigned his Quarter with the authority of Proconsul,
and from time to time sent them Recruits, so dangerous did this War appear: as
for the Allies, besides particular Captains chosen by every City, they gave
command to T. Afranius, P. Ventridius, M. Egnatius, Q. Popedius, C. Papius, M.
Lamponius, C. Iudacilius, Hirius Asinius, and Vetius Cato who likewise divided
the Forces among them, and took every one his portion to make Head against the
Roman Forces. There happened several Defeats on both sides, which I will
succincty relate. Vetius Cato killed two thousand of Sextus Julius his Men, and
forced him to shut himself up in Isernia, (which remained firm to the Roman
Alliance) with the remainder of his Forces, of whom L. Acilius and L. Scipio
got thence in Slaves Habit, the rest pressed with hunger, yielded at
discretion. Marius Egnatius took Venafra by treason, and cut in pieces two
Roman Cohorts. P. Presenteius encountering Perpenna with ten thousand Men, put
him to flight with the slaughter of four thousand, and taking most of the
others Arms, who threw them away to hasten their Flight. Wherefore the Consul
Rutilius took the Command from Perpenna, and gave the remainder of his Army to
C. Marius; M. Lamponius engaging Licinius Crassus, killed eight hundred of his
men upon the place, and pursued the rest fighting, as far as Clarimont*
Grumentum; C. Papius possessed himself of Nola, which was delivered up, and
made offer to two thousand Romans that were there in Garrison, to receive them
into his Army if they would join party with him, which they accepted all, save
the Officers, whom he put in prison where they died by Famine. The same took
Stabia, Minterna and Salerna, which were a Colony of the Romans, and gave
employment in his Army to all the Inhabitants of those Towns, and likewise to
their Slaves, after which, having spoiled all the Country of Nocera, the
Neighboring Cities yielded to him for fear of the spoil, and sent him ten
thousand Footmen, and one thousand Horse, which he had demanded of them, with
which Recruits he went and besieged Acerra: Sextus Caesar came with ten
thousand Gaul Foot, and the Numidian Horse, and encamped near unto Papius, who,
to debauch the Numidians from the Roman Party, took Oxinta Son of Iugurtha,
formerly King of Numidia, out of the Prisons of Venusa, where he was kept,
caused him to be clothed in Purple, and to show himself to his Subjects;
insomuch that the Consul perceiving that some of the Numidians were daily
running away to their King, sent the rest into Africa, as suspected, After
this, Papius was so rash as to attempt to force the Roman Camp, and was already
pulling down the Palisade, when a great Body of Horse sallying out of the
Postern Gate, charged him, and slew six thousand of his men. However, this
Victory prevented not the Consul's quitting that Post, and marching elsewhere
with his Army. In Povilla the Canusians together with the Venusians and several
other People, yielded to Iudacilius, and those who would not submit he subdued
by force, slew all the Noble Romans, that he found, and made the Citizens and
Slaves serve in his Army. Mean while the other Consul Rutilius, together with
C. Marius, having built two Bridges over the Liris, not far distant from each
other, with intent to pass over their Armies, Vetius Cato, who was encamped on
the other side with his Army directly opposite to Marius his Bridge, to dispute
their passage, laid by night an ambush in a Valley near Rutilius his Bridge;
and after having let him (heedless as he did) pass, on a sudden fell upon him
with his Ambush, who cut in pieces great numbers of the Romans, and drove
multitudes into the River. The Consul himself was wounded in the Head, and
sometime after died. But when Marius, who was still at the lower Bridge,
understood the misfortune by the number of Bodies brought down by the Current,
he presently passed with all his Army, and forced the Enemy's Camp, which had
but a slender Guard; so that Cato was forced to stay that night on the place
where he had gained the Victory, and on the morrow to march away for want of
Provisions. The Bodies of the slain Consul and other Persons of Quality, which
were no small number, being carried to the City to give them Burial, occasioned
an universal sadness in Men's minds which was not soon shook off, so grieved
they were to behold the loss of so many Citizens. Wherefore the Senate upon
Consultation enacted, that hereafter the Bodies of all such as died in Battle
should be buried in the same place where they were slain, lest the sight of
them should daunt the Courages of others, and dishearten men from going to the
War. Of which as soon as the Enemies had advice, they made a like Ordinance. No
person succeeded Rutilius in the Consulate for the remainder of the year,
Caesar not having leisure to go to the City to hold the Assembly: What remained
of his Army was divided between C. Marius and Q. Cepion. But Cepion suffered
himself to be deceived by Q. Popedius, who Commanded a Body of the Enemy's
Forces. He came to him as a Runaway, bringing along with him as Hostages two
young Slaves, clad in the Praetexta.
Robe worn by the Sons of Persons Free and Noble; and the better to gain his
Confidence, brought him some Bars or Pigs of Lead, covered with Gold and
Silver. After which, he persuaded him to go and charge the Enemy's Army,
whither he would conduct him, and that instantly, while there was no one to
command them. So he placed himself at the head of Cepion's Forces: and when he
was come to the place where he had laid his Ambush, he put on his Horse toward
a rising Ground, as if he would discover where the Enemies were, and from
thence gave the Signal to his Men; who falling upon Cepion's, slew him with
many others; those that escaped were by the Senate's Order joined with Marius.
About the same time Sextus Caesar, whose Army was composed of thirty thousand
Foot and five thousand Horse, having marched among certain difficult Streits,
was unexpectedly fallen upon by Marius Egnatius; who drove him into a Valley,
and forced him to run away in his Litter (because he was sick) toward a
certain River, passable only by one Bridge; where, after having lost the
greatest part of his Army, and the Remainder at every step throwing away their
Arms, with much difficulty he at length secured himself in Theana. He armed
again as well as he could those men he had left; and with a Recruit sent him,
took the Field to go and relieve Acerra, which Papius still besieged; where
encamping near the Besiegers, they lay a long time without eithers daring to
assault the other.

Caius Marius, he bravely repulsed the Marsians who came to engage him, and
gave them chase to the very Hedges of their Vineyards; which seeing they had
clambered over with much difficulty, he would pursue them no farther. But
Sylla, who was encamped on the other side the Vineyards, encountering the
Flyers, slew likewise a great number of them. So that that day the Marsians
lost six thousand Men, besides great quantity of Arms, which the Victors got.
Yet this Victory did but the more increase the fierceness of the Marsians. They
gathered new Forces, and had the boldness to come and offer Battle to the
Romans; who, for fear of being overpowered, kept within their Trenches: For
this Nation is very Warlike* and as report goes, never lost the Day before; and
indeed to this very day never any triumphed in Rome over the Marsians, or
without the Marsians. On another side of the Country about Mount Falernus,
Iudacilius, T. Afra^nius and P. Ventidius, with all their Forces joined
together, engaged the Army of Cn. Pompey; routed him, and pursued him to the
very Gates of Firmo, where he shut himself up: And leaving Afranius to besiege
the City, the other two went each a several way about other Affairs. Pompey
presently gave new Arms to such as were preserved from the Defeat, but he durst
not adventure a Shock till such time as a fresh Army being come to him, he
caused Sulpitius to take a Compass by unfrequented ways, and gain the Backs of
the Enemy; giving him Orders to fall on in the Rear, whilst he charged them in
Front. They fought so well on both sides, that the Victory remained a long time
in equal Balance; but when the Enemies saw their Camp burning, which Sulpitius
had set on fire, and that Afranius was slain upon the place, their hearts
failed them, and they fled away in disorder; and as many as could, escaped to
Ascoly. Pompey forthwith besieged the Town; which Iudacilius, who was a Native
of it (fearing for his Country) strove to succor with eight Cohorts. He gave
advice hereof to the Besieged, with Orders to make a Sally upon the Besiegers
so soon as they should discover him coming at a distance, that the Enemy might
not know on which side to defend themselves: But the Inhabitants were so
cowardly, that they never stirred foot; which yet hindered not Iudacilius from
forcing a Passage through his Enemies, and with as many as could follow him
entering the place, where he reproached them with their Cowardice and
Disobedience. After which, despairing of the safety of his Fellow-Citizens, he
caused all his Enemies to be slain, as well out of former hate as because of
the fault lately committed in despising his Orders, and giving by their Example
occasion to others to do the like. Then he caused a Pile to be raised in the
Temple; upon which setting up a Bed, after having been very merry at a Feast,
to which he invited his Friends, he took a draught of Poison; and laying
himself upon the Bed, desired them to se^ fire to the Pile, and so died, that
he might not survive his Country. Mean while the time of Sex. Caesar's
Consulate was expired, but the Senate prolonged his Command for the year
following, with the Authority of Consul. As soon as he had his new Commission,
he fell upon twenty thousand of his Enemies as they discamped; killed eight
thousand upon the place, and carried off the Field an infinite number of
Bucklers which the rest that fled had left. But his Sickness having forced him
to stay some time about Ascoly, at length carried him off; and according to his
desire, C. Bebius succeeded in his Charge. Whilst these things passed on the
Coast of the Ionian Sea, on the other side the Hetrurians and the Umbrians with
some of their Neighboring People, drawn on by the Example of others, inclined
to a Revolt. It was soon known at Rome, and the advice of it put them in new
fears: Wherefore the Senate, apprehensive of seeing themselves encompassed by
Enemies on all sides, caused the Coasts between Cuma and the City to be guarded
by new Forces, in which for want of men, they entertained the Freed Men, a
thing never before done; and granted to those Allies who had continued faithful
the Freedom of their City, which was the only thing in the World they desired.
This Decree being published by all the People about Hetruria, was received with
general satisfaction. By this Act of Grace they engaged more firmly the true
Friends of the people of Rome, settled in their duty such as were wavering, and
made the Enemy more mild, in hopes of the same favor. They distributed not
these new Citizens into the Tribes, which were already five and thirty, for
fear they should out-number the old ones; but they formed new Tribes, wherein
they were put by Decuries; so that they gave last of all their Voices, which
were often superfluous, because the five and thirty Ancient were more than half
the number of the Tribes. This design was not at first observed; or perhaps the
Allies contenting themselves at present herewith, demanded no more.
Notwithstanding, being afterward considered, it gave fresh occasion to
Tumults. The people above the Coasts of the Ionian Sea, who yet knew not that
the Hetrurians had changed their minds, had sent fifteen thousand Men to their
Assistance, whom they had ordered to march through all the by ways imaginable.
Cn. Pompey, lately made Consul, surprised them, killed about five thousand of
them, and the rest dispersed, endeavoring to recover their Countries through
rough and craggy ways, and in all the Rigors of a sharp Winter; having nothing
but Acorns to eat, perished almost all with Cold and Hunger. During the same
Winter Portius Cato, Colleague to Pompey, going to War upon the Marsians, was
slain. After which L. Cluentius, to brave Sylla, who lay encamped on the
Pompeian Hills, went and encamped within three Furlongs of him: And Sylla, not
able to brook the affront, without staying for those that were gone to Forage,
went out and charged him; but he was beaten and forced to retreat. The Foragers
being returned, he once more fell on, put Cluentius hard to it, and forced him
to remove his Camp further off; whither there coming to him a Recruit of Gauls,
he returned once more to try the Fortune of the Field. As the two Armies were
drawn up; a Gaul of very large Stature advanced, and dared any Roman to a
single Combat; but he being slain by a very small Numidian, struck all the rest
of the Gauls into such a Panick, that they turned their backs; and by the
disorder of their Flight, caused all the rest of Cluentius Army to do the like,
and fly by the way toward Nola. Sylla pursued them so eagerly, that he slew
thirty thousand of them by the way; and because they would not open more than
one of the Gates of Nola, to let them in, the Inhabitants fearing lest the
Enemy should press in with them, there were twenty thousand more slain under
the Walls; among whom was Cluentius, performing to the last all the Offices of
a brave and gallant Leader. The General going, marched against the Hirtians,
and began to besiege Boiona.
Equilania. Whereupon, the Inhabitants expecting the Assistance of the
Lucanians, who were to come the same day, demanded time to consider about their
Surrendry. He who knew their Cunning, gave them an hours time; during which he
caused to be brought great quantity of Bavins of Vine-twigs to the Foot of the
Wall, which was only of Beams of Timber; and the hour being past, set fire to
them. So they surrendering only for fear, he gave the Plunder of the Town to the
Soldiers as if it had been taken by Storm; which Example made other Cities of
the Hirpins willingly submit themselves to the Romans. Those being yielded, he
carried the War to the Abruzzo.
Samnites; not by those Avenues which were guarded by Mutilus their Chief, but
by fetching a Compass through Ways by which they never thought an Enemy could
come. So that falling in among them, at unawares, he slew great numbers, the
rest flying every way they best could; and Mutilus himself being wounded,
escaping with very few into Is^rnia. Sylla, after having pillaged the Camp,
marched to Tro^ja.
Boviana, where was held an Assembly of the Rebel People; where because there
were three Forts, whilst the Inhabitants thought only of defending themselves
from him, he caused some Cohorts to march about, with Order to strom each of
these Forts on the other side, and signify to him by the smoke when they were
Masters of them: Which succeeding happily, he approached the Walls; and after
three hours Assault, took the Town. This was what past under Sylla's Conduct
during this War; after which he went to Rome, to demand the Consulate. As for
Cn. Pompey, he reduced the Marsians, the Marcinians and the Vestins. On the
other side C. Cosconius, Praetor, burnt Salpe.
Salapia after having taken it by force, reduced Cannes under the Obedience of
the Romans; and having besieged Canosa.
Canusa, which the Samnites came to relieve, after a stout and rugged Fight;
with great loss of men on both sides, he was repulsed, and forced to retire
into Cuma: But he soon got a Revenge; for as the Army of the Samnites lay only
parted from the Roman by a River, Trebatius their General sent to Cosconius,
that he should either pass the River, and he would retire; or that he should
retire, and himself would pass the River, that they might come to a Battle.
Cosconius chose rather to retire; and as soon as Trebatius was passed, defeated
him; pursuing his routed Men to the River side, where most of them were
drowned: So that the Enemy lost fifteen thousand men, and the rest with
Trebatius escaped into Canusa. Cosconius after this Victory, went to spoil the
Countries of Larinate, Venusa and Pouilla; and assaulting the Pediculi, in two
days became Master of all the Nation, who came and submitted themselves. His
Successor Cecilius Metellus, to whom he delivered up the Army, defeated those
of Pouilla in a Battle, where Popedius, one of the Authors of the Rebellion,
being killed, the Remainder of his Forces came by Bands to submit to the
Conqueror. Thus the War of the Allies continued with much heat until in the end
all Italy obtained the Right of free Citizens of Rome, save only the Lucanians
and the Samnites; who notwithstanding, soon after were admitted as well as the
rest, and distributed by Tribes, as we have said before, for fear they should
have more Votes than the ancient Citizens, being indeed more numerous.

About the same time there arose another Tumult in the City about Debts, for
some exacted the Interest of money lent with more rigor than was permitted by
the ancient Laws. For it seems the Romans, as well as the Greeks, abhorred
Usury as a Trade ruinous to the Poor, and an occasion of Lawsuits and
Enmities. The Persians themselves had no better opinion of it; and made the
difference but very small between the practice of it, and cheating and lying*
Notwithstanding, because Usury was now permitted by a Custom introduced some
years past, the Creditors had some Right to demand it, but the Debtors delayed
Payment under pretense of Wars and Tumults: Some there were likewise, that
seeing themselves oppressed by the Usurers, threatened to have them condemned in
a Fine. Asellio the Praetor, Judge of these matters, did all he could to compose
all Differences; but not being able to compass it, he left them to the Law,
after having explained to the other Judges, as in a difficult matter, what was
Right, and what was Custom. Whereupon the Usurers, who could not endure mention
should be made of the old Laws; got rid of the Praetor in this manner: One day,
as he sacrificed in the Temple of Castor, surrounded with a great Crowd of
people, as is ordinary, some one having thrown a Stone at him he set down the
Cup, and began to ^ly toward the Temple of Vesta; but being prevented by
others who stopped his passage, he ran into a Tavern to hide himself, where they
cut his throat. In this Confusion many who thought he had escaped into the
Cloister of the Vestals, pursuing him with too much heat of passion, ran into
those places where men cannot enter without Sacrilege. Thus was Asellio the
Praetor killed in exercising his Office, clad in the holy Habit of Cloth of
Gold, worn only on solemn Festivals, about two of the Clock, in the middle of
the place, and offering a Sacrifice. The Senate caused to be published by sound
of Trumpet, that they would give to whoever should discover the Authors of this
Murder a Reward in Money, if a Free Man, his Liberty, if a Slave, and Pardon,
if one of the Accomplices: Yet they could never gain any intelligence of it;
for the Usurers took a course to stifle even the Memory of this Riot, which we
may likewise reckon among the Tumults of the City. It was followed by those
Differences which happened between the Chiefs of the Factions, who as in open
War assailed each other with formed Armies, each proposing no less price of his
Victory than his Country, of which he pretended to become Master. It was
immediately after the War of the Allies that these Dissentions took Birth, and
thus they began.

Mithridates King of Pontus, and other Countries had seized on Bythinia,
Phrygia, and the neighboring Asia, as we have said in one of our former Books;
Sylla, then Consul, obtained for his part of the Government the Province of
Asia, with Commission for the War against Mithridates. Before his departure
from the City, Marius, who thought there would be more profit than danger in
this War; and besides, spurred forward with a desire to Command; engaged by a
World of Promises P. Sulpitius, Tribune of the People, to serve him in this
Affair; and at the same time put the new Citizens in hopes to raise them to an
Equality with the old ones in their Votes, and cause them to be distributed
among the ancient Tribes. By doing them this kindness, he labored for himself;
of which, though he made no show, yet was it only for his own ends he sought
their favor. Sulpitius presently made a Law, which if it had passed, had given
Marius the whole Authority in the Commonwealth, so much would the New Citizens
have out-voted the Old by reason of their numbers. The old ones who perceived
it, opposed it with all their might; and at last, upon this difference they
grew to so much heat, as to come to handy Strokes and Stones. The mischiefs
increasing, the Consuls fearing lest in the Assembly, which was nigh at hand,
they should come to the last Extremities, ordained Feasts for several days like
to the solemn ones, with intent to prolong the time of the Assembly, and the
danger wherewith the City was threatened: But Sulpitius, without having regard
to the Feasts, gave order to those of his Faction to meet forthwith upon the
place, with Arms under their Gowns, to make use of upon occasion, even against
the Consuls themselves: And prepared in this manner, he began to declare
against these Feasts, as unlawful; commanding Sylla and Q. Pompey to revoke
them at that very moment, that the People might pass their Suffrages concerning
the Laws. This discourse raised a great Tumult; Swords were drawn as before was
agreed on, and the Points presented to the Consuls, who would not yet give way
to it, till such time as Pompey luckily and nimbly getting away, Sylla withdrew
under pretense to go and consider of it. Mean while Pompey, Son to the Consul,
and Son in Law to Sylla, for having spoken something (I know not what) too
freely, was slain by Sulpitius Faction; and Sylla returning in a small time
after, revoked the Feasts; and at the same instant went away for Capua, where
his Army lay, with design to march from thence into Asia, against Mithridates;
for as yet he knew not the Plot laid against him. The Feasts being revoked, and
Sylla gone, Sulpitius passed the Law about which so much stir had been made;
and withal, instead of Sylla, gave Commission to Marius to make War against
Mithridates. Sylla having advice hereof, resolved to defend his Commission with
Arms: And to this end draws together his Soldiers, who hoped as well as he
every man to do his own business in this Expidition against Mithridates; and
judged if Marius went he would employ others. After having recounted to them
all the causes of Complaint he had against Marius and Sulpitius, without
explaining himself farther (for he durst not openly declare himself in this
matter) he exhorted them to be in a readiness to receive his Commands. They who
knew his design, and feared to lose the Booty of the Asian Expedition,
discovered to him what he kept secret; and besought him to take courage, and
lead them to the City. He received this discourse with infinite joy, and
forthwith caused six Legions to march; whose Officers not daring to resolve to
bear Arms against their Country, drew off, to present themselves at Rome; so
that there remained not in this Army any Person of Quality but the Questor.
Upon advice of this brought to the City, Deputies were sent to meet him, to
demand of him, for what reason he came thus armed into his Country: To whom he
answered, that it was with intent to deliver it from Tyranny. He made the same
Answer to all those whom they sent one after another. Yet in the end, he
promised, that if the Senate would assemble in the Field of Mars, and cause
Marius and Sulpitius to be there, he would come likewise, and do all things
that should be agreed on by all the World. As he drew nearer, his Colleague
Pompey came to meet him; and having applauded his Action, promised his
Assistance. As for Marius and Sulpitius, who had not had time enough to prepare
themselves, they sent other Deputies in the Senate's name, who proposed to him
not to advance nearer the City than the fifth Stone till this Affair were more
fully considered of. The Consuls, who discovered the Cheat, granted the
Deputies what they demanded; but scarcely were they gone but they followed
them, and siesed on the Celimontane Gate, and the Contiguous Wall with one
Legion; Pompey commanding another, siesed on the Little Hill, the third gained
the Wooden Bridge, and the fourth drew up in Battle before the Wall, whilst
Sylla entered the City in a fighting Posture. He was recieved as an Enemy, for
at first they withstood him with hurling of Darts out of their Windows; but
when he had threatened those in the Houses to set fire to the next Streets, they
threw no more. Marius and Sulpitius, and the rest of their Faction, having
presently armed themselves, encountered them in the place called the Esquiline;
where was fought the first Battle ever seen in the City between two Contrary
Parties; not in disorder, as formerly in their Tumults; but in open War, with
Ensigns displayed, and Trumpets sounding: For their Animosities had urged
things to these Extremities, because no person had endeavored to apply a
Remedy in the beginning. Sylla's Party had at first the worst of it, and began
to give ground; when himself took an Ensign, and ran to carry it into the Gross
of his Enemies. Then the Soldiers, either out of respect they bore their
General, or fear of that Infamy wherewith those are branded that forsake their
Colors, quitted all thoughts of Flight, and returned to the Charge. There was
brought to them likewise from the Camp another Body of fresh Men, and another
was sent about by the way of the Suburra, to charge their Enemies in the Rear.
Whereupon Marius Soldiers, who, already tired, defended themselves but faintly
against fresh Men; and who besides, feared lest they should enclose them
behind, invited those Citizens who still fought from their Houses to come down
to them, and pronounced Liberty to such Slaves as would come to their
Assistance. But when they saw that no one stirred to help them they lost all
hope, and went out of the City, and with them all the Persons of Quality of
their Party. Sylla being gone into the Via Sacra, (or the Holy Way) where the
Soldiers had the boldness to take something by force, he caused them to be
punished in the sight of all the people: And after having placed Courts of
Guard through all the principal places in the City, he divided with his
Colleague the labor of that night, which they spent without any sleeping,
still going from Quarter to Quarter to take care lest the Citizens should
receive some injury from the victorious Soldier.

Servius Tullius. That thus the first deliberation of Affairs depending on the
Senate, and being no longer committed to the suffrage of the people, who having
nothing to lose, feared nothing, violence would give place, and good order be
established, nor would there remain any more matter for Sedition. Having by
this means and many others retrenched the authority of the Tribunes, which was
mounted even to excess, because the Body of the Senate was in a manner
despised, by reason of the ^mall number of the Senators, they added to them
three hundred of the greatest and most worthy men of all the City: but before
all other things they cancelled as void and contrary to the Laws all that
Sulpitius had done since the Feasts ordained by the Consuls. Thus from Tumults
they came to Murders, and from Murders to Wars; and never before did any Roman
Army enter their Country to commit acts of Hostility: but after this time all
the Differences that happened between their Citizens, were determined by Arms:
sometimes one party became Masters of the City, sometimes the other, which yet
was no hinderance, that in the mean time other places were not besieged and
sacked, or that they felt not elsewhere those calamities usually attendant upon
War: for in sum, there was no longer any Honor or Conscience, Love to the
Commonwealth or their Country, which they violated not by numberless Crimes.
After all this, Sulpitius Tribune of the People, Marius who had been six times
Consul, his Son, P. Cethegus, Iunius Brutus, Cn. and Q. Granius, P.
Albinovanus. M. Lectorius and other Senators, to the number of twelve, who were
gone out of the City, accused to be the Authors of Sedition, and to have called
the Slaves to liberty, were declared Enemies to the Roman People, with
permission to the first that met them, to kill them unpunished, or to bring
them to the Consuls; besides which they confiscated their Goods, and sent Men
into all parts to search for them, some of which found Sulpitius, and slew him.
As for Marias, he escaped without Usher, or without so much as a Servant to
Minturnum, where, as he slept in a Room into which there came not a spark of
light, the Magistrate of the City fearing the Decree of the Roman People,
whilst on the other side he himself could not resolve to kill a man who had
been six times Consul, and done such great things, gave it in commission to a
certain Gaul he met by chance, whom he furnished with a Sword to that purpose.
But this man (as report goes) drawing near Marius's Bed in the dark, grew
fearful, because he imagined he saw a flame dart out of his eyes; and when he
raising himself up, cried out, Dare thou kill Caius Marius? The Gaul
astonished, fled hastily out of the Chamber, roaring with a loud voice, that he
could not kill Marius. Whereupon the Magistrate, who before with much inward
trouble had resolved upon the action, was now touched with a sense of Religion;
besides, he remembered the presage which when Marius was yet an Infant, promised
him the seventh Consulship. For it is said there fell upon his Bosom seven
Eaglets, whereupon the Divines foretold, that he should seven times obtain
supreme Honor. Those of Minturnium seriously weighing this, and judging what
had happened to the Gaul, came from above, forthwith led Marius out of the Town
to a place where he might be in greater safety, who knowing that Sylla's
Horsemen sought after him, left that place, and went toward the Seaside
through By-ways, till he found a small Cabin, into which he entered, and laid
himself down among the Leaves to repose himself a little; he had not lain there
long, but he heard a noise which made him creep closer under the leaves, but
then the noise increasing, he leaped into a Fisher-boat which lay there by
chance, out of which he put an old Fellow that was the Master of it, and then
cutting the Boat-rope which fastened it, and hoisting Sail left himself to
Fortune, he was carried to a certain Isle where he saw by accident pass by a
Ship in which he knew some of his Friends, with whom he went into Africa, yet
he could not land, being hindered by Sextus Governor of that Province, because
of his being declared Enemy; so he was forced to spend that Winter on the
Numidian Sea. The news whereof being come to Cethegus, Granius, Albinovanus,
Lectorius, and those others condemned by the same Judgment, and who leaving the
City with Marius the Son had taken Sanctuary in the Court of Mandrestal King of
Numidia, they embarked and came to Marius, being themselves likewise jealous
lest that King should deliver them to the Enemy. They wanted neither good will
nor courage to assault their Country after Sylla's example, but because they
had yet no Army they waited only an opportunity. Mean while, Sylla, who was the
first ever made himself Master of the City by Arms, contenting himself with
being revenged on his Enemies, without doing any violence to the other
Citizens, sent his Army before to Capua, and resumed the charge of Consul. But
the Faction of the Fugitives, and principally the rich, with some well monied
women no longer standing in fear of Arms, desired the return of their Citizens;
so that they spared neither pains nor cost, nor the attempting the lives of the
Consuls themselves; for they thought their design would never take effect so
long as they lived. As for Sylla, he might be safe in the midst of that Army
granted him by the Senate to make War upon Mithridates, who would not forsake
him, though his Consulate were expired; but for Pompey his Colleague he was in
great danger, so the people took compassion of him, and gave him the Government
of Italy with the Army then commanded by Cn. Pompey. This mightily troubled
Cneus, yet when Quintus was come to the Army, and on the morrow began to
exercise his Command, the other submitted to him as a private man; but a short
time after all the Soldiery being crowded about the Consul, under pretense of
hearing what he said, he was slain, and upon the action every one flying a
several way, Cn. came in, feigning to be mightily troubled, as at a Villainy
committed against all Right and Justice. However, his anger lasted not long,
but he presently resumed the Command of the Army. When the Consuls death was
known in the City, Sylla began to be fearful of himself, and after walked not
the Streets without a good company of Friends, who deserted him not by night,
but not staying long after, he departed for Capua, and thence took his march
toward Asia.

After this, the Friends of those Banished, supported by the authority of
Cinna, Successor to Sylla in the Dignity of Consul, began to let the new
Citizens know the design Marius had to mingle them among the ancient Tribes, to
the intent, that not giving their Votes last, they might have as much power in
the Commonwealth as others, which was the first cause of Marius and the other
Exiles return. The ancient Citizens opposed it all they could, upheld by
Octavius the other Consul, while Cinna stood for the new, suspected to have
been corrupted by three hundred Talents he had received. Now those of Cinna's
Party came to the place armed with Swords under their Gowns, where with loud
cries they began to demand their being mixed among the other Tribes, but the
best part of the people came in like manner armed about Octavius, who attended
in his House, what would be the issue of this Tumult. They brought him word,
that the greatest part of the Tribunes opposing the Demand, the new Citizens
had with Swords driven them from the A place so called from the Beaks of Ships
called Rostra, taken from the Enemies, and set up here.
Rostrum, upon report of which he hastens by the Via Sacra, followed by a good
company of men of Valor, and like a Torrent falls in upon the Assembly, passes
over the Bodies of those that first encountered him, disperses the multitude,
and after having terrified the contrary Party, returns to the Temple of Castor
and Pollux, without doing any more, for his Colleagues sake, to whom he bore
respect. But those which followed him without staying for his command, threw
themselves upon the new Citizens, and after the killing of many pursued the
rest to the City Gates. Cinna, who confident in the multitudes of the
Countrymen, had promised himself Victory when he perceived courage had made the
lesser number victorious, he ran through the City, and called the Slaves to
liberty; but when he saw no person join with him, he went out to the
Neighboring Cities to whom the Right of Freedom had been granted, as Tivoly.
Tibur, Praeneste, and others as far as Nola; and after having solicited them
to revolt, began to raise money to defray the Expense of the War. Whilst he
made preparation for the execution of his Designs, C. Milonius, Q. Sertorius,
and another C. Marius Senators of the same Faction came to him. But the Senate
declared Cinna, for having forsaken the Commonwealth in imminent danger and
called the Slaves to Liberty, to have forfeited his Freedom of the City, and
Dignity of Consul, and substituted in his stead L. Merula then Priest of
Jupiter, who is the only Priest that goes continually with a Mitre; for the
others wear it only when they sacrifice. Mean while, Cinna went his way toward
Capua, where lay another Army for the Roman People, being arrived he labored
all he could to gain the good will of the Officers and Military.
Tribunes, and such Senators as were there, going to this purpose to the
Assembly in the habit of a private man, without Rods, and tears in his eyes, he
spoke to them in this manner:

The Oration of Cinna.
YOu behold me here, (Gentlemen) despoiled of an Honor I received from you.
The People gave it me by their Votes; and yet the Senate have deprived me of
it, without asking the consent of the People. Though this Affront be done to my
person, I complain less of my own interest than yours: for to what purpose now
should we court the favor of the Tribes? In what can you be serviceable to us?
or to what end are your Assemblies or your Votes, since they can cancel what
you do; and you your selves so easily change your minds?

After having spoke thus to provoke them to anger, and made many complaints of
the misery of his condition, he rent his Robe, and leaping from the Tribunal,
threw himself upon the ground, where he lay extended a long time, till out of
pure compassion they raised him up, returned him into the Tribunal-Seat, and
having restored him the Rods in Quality of Consul, desired him to take heart,
and lead them wherever he had occasion for their Service. He accepted their
offers, and improving the opportunity, received the Oath of Officers and
Soldiers. Being in this manner confirmed, he went through the Cities of the
Allies, exciting them as the causers of his present calamity, and for that
reason drew from each good sums of money. There were likewise many principal
men of the City, which came to join with him, only because it troubled them at
any time to see the Commonwealth at quiet. Whilst Cinna was thus wholly
employed in making his preparations, the Consuls Octavius and Merula, fortified
the City, raised Engines on the Walls, and levied Soldiers as well among those
Allies continued faithful to them, as among the Gauls; they likewise gave order
to Cn. Pompey, who was with an Army on the Ionian Sea, to come speedily to the
relief of his Country, which he forthwith did, and encamped before the
Collatine Gate.

Cinna coming about the same time, pitched his Camp very near, and as Marius
had notice of it he came with the companions of his Banishment, and landed in
Etruria, whither about five hundred of his Friends out of the City went to meet
him. He appeared in a slovenly dress, his Beard and Hair long, untrimmed and
unkembed, to beget the more compassion: thus went he from City to City, talking
of his Fights and Victories against the Cimbrians, and (which they hearkened to
with more delight) promising them to employ his utmost power and credit to
procure the passing of the Law in favor of the new Citizens. Having by these
means assembled six thousand Etrurians, he comes and joins with Cinna, who was
joyful to have this great man his companion in the War. All the Forces of that
Faction being come up, they encamped in three Camps on the Banks of the Tiber,
Cinna and Carbo directly against the City, Sertorius above it, and Marius to
the Sea-ward: they likewise made Bridges over the River to cut off the City
from Provisions. Marius took Ostia by storm, which he pillaged, and Cinna took
Rimini, whither he sent part of his Forces, that no relief might come to the
Besieged from the Province of Gaul. Mean while, the Consuls were extremely
disquieted, because they still stood in need of an Army; and since they could
not recall Sylla, who was already gone over into Asia, they sent to Metellus
employed in the Remains of the Social War against the Samnites, to put an end
to that Affair upon the best conditions he could, and come to relieve his
besieged Country; but whilst he delayed granting their Demands, Marius having
advice of it, prevented him, and promised them all they desired: so the
Samnites took Marius's Party. He had likewise intelligence in the City with
Appius Claudius the Tribune, who had the command of the Guard at the Ianicula,
who in the acknowledgment of favor formerly received from Marius, opened him
one morning the Gate, and gave him entrance into the City, whither Cinna came
likewise with him, but they were soon repulsed by Octavius and Pompey, who came
speedily in. Soon after fell many Thunderbolts into Pompeys Camp, which slew
sundry persons of Quality, and among the rest the Proconsul himself. And now
that Marius had taken order that no Provision could come to the City neither by
the River nor by Sea, he assaulted the Neighboring Cities, where lay the
Granaries of the Roman People: He took by Stratagem Antium, Laricia.
Aricia, City of Lavinia.
Lanuvia, and several others; and became Master of some by Treason. So that
having now likewise cut them off from Provision to the Land-ward, he was so
bold as to design going to Rome by the Appian Way, before the Besieged could
get any Provision from elsewhere; and to this end he with Cuma, Carbo and
Sertorius went and encamped at the Abo^t twelve Miles and an half.
twelfth Stone from the City. Octavius, Crassus and Metellus went and encamped
right against them on the Alban Hill, to oppose their Enterprises; and though
they were the stronger both in the Valor of their Soldiers and their Number,
yet they would not engage them, not thinking it convenient to commit the safety
of their Country to the hazard of one sole Battle. But when Cinna had sent
Cryers about the City, to proclaim that he gave liberty to all Slaves that
would come list themselves in his Service, and that they saw they went away by
whole Bands; the Senate fearing lest by too long want of Victuals the People
should grow mad, changed their mind, and sent Deputies to Cinna, to treat of
Peace. He first of all demanded if they came to him as Consul, or as a private
Person; but they finding themselves perplexed with this Question, could answer
nothing, and so returned: Soon after a great multitude of Free Persons left the
City, and came and yielded to Cinna; some for fear of Famine, and others as
having no Aversion to his Party, and finding the Occasion favorable. Wherefore
now, no more fearing any thing, he advanced with his Forces, and came and
encamped within Flight-shot of the Walls, which put Octavius Party into great
perplexity: Besides, they durst no more attempt any thing, seeing continually
Run-aways and Messengers going and coming from one side to the other. Mean
while the Senate knew not what to resolve on; they looked upon it as an
unworthy thing to depose Merula, whom they had made Consul in the place of
Cinna; a man who was Priest to Jupiter, and never deserved any Reproach: Yet in
the end they were constrained to send Deputies to Cinna, to treat with him for
Peace, and to Complement him in the Quality of Consul. They were not to propose
him any Conditions, but only to request him to swear he would not slay any in
the City: He would not take an Oath in those terms; However, he gave his Word,
that by his good will, or by his consent, there should not be a Person put to
death in the City; and sent word to Octavius, who was entered the City by the
Gate on the other side, that he should depart, lest something might happen to
him which he could not prevent. He gave this Answer to the Deputies, seated in
the Tribunal like a Consul. But Marius, who stood up by him, kept silence; and
by the sternness of his Looks made it sufficiently appear what a Slaughter he
did intend. After this Word given, the Senate having recalled Cinna and Marius
(for they well perceived this last was the Author, and that the other did but
subscribe) Marius answered in a scoffing manner, that it was not lawful for
banished Men to return into the City: So the Tribunes of the People immediately
cancelled the Sentence of Banishment, given against him and the rest, under the
Consulate of Sylla.

Rome with a public Consternation, and presently they began to plunder the
Goods of all such as seemed but any way inclined to the contrary Party, without
any persons forbidding them. Cinna and Marius had upon Oath promised Security
to Octavius. The Divines assured him he need fear nothing, yet his Friends
advised him to leave the City; but he answering them that he would never
forsake his Country, especially as long as he was Consul, retired to the
Ianiculum, with the most Considerable of the City, and a part of the Army,
mounting the Tribunal habited like a Consul, and accompanied by Lictors with
Rods and Axes. And just when Censorinus was coming with his Horsemen, and that
his Friends yet offered him a Horse to make his Escape on, he vouchsafed not to
stir, but expected his death with an admirable Constancy. Censorinus carried
his head to Cinna, who caused it to be fixed on the Tribunal for Orations; and
this was the first Consul's head that ever was fixed there. Soon after the
heads of others, who dyed in this raging fury, were likewise exposed as
Spectacles in the same place: And this horrible Custom endured long after in
all Massacres committed at Rome between the Enemy Factions. Every one of the
Victors sought out his Enemy to destroy him; no person was defended from the
cruelty of these Murderers neither by the Dignity of Senator, nor that of
Knight; and as many Senators as they killed, they brought their heads to the
Tribunal. There was no longer any respect either toward Gods or Men; and after
having committed such dreadful Crimes, they sought to satisfy themselves with
Spectacles yet more shameful, cutting off the heads of the Slain, and making a
show of their misfortune, whether to strike terror into, or to give a Criminal
satisfaction to the eyes of the Vulgar. Among those that perished, the two
Iulius's, C. and Lucius; Serranus, Cousin to Lucius; P. Lentulus, C.
Numitorius, and M. Bebius, were found dead in the Streets. Crassus flying,
killed his Son, for fear he should fall into the hands of those pursued him,
from whom himself could not escape. M. Anthony, the Orator, escaped to a
certain Farm-House, where the Farmer gave him a Retreat, and kept him some time
concealed; but the Farmer's Servant, because of this Guest, going to the Tavern
for Wine oftener than he was wont; the Vintner enquiring the reason, he
privately told him; who, as soon as he had given him his Wine, gave present
advice to Marius. Upon the News of it Marius was so transported with joy, that
he would have come himself to have been his Executioner; but his Friends
dissuading him, he sent a Tribune with Soldiers. Anthony discoursed them with
so good a Grace, and persuaded them with so many Reasons, that he gain^d their
Compassion; till such time as the Tribune, who had stayed below, wondering at
this delay, came himself into the Chamber; and whilst he was yet talking,
thrust his Sword into his Belly; and cutting off his head, sent it to Marius.
Cornutus being hid under the Tiles, was saved by the Cunning of his Slaves; who
having found a dead Body, cast it on a Pile; and when they saw those that came
to search for him, putting fire to it, said, they burnt the Body of their
Master, who was strangled. Q. Acharius waited an opportunity till Marius went
to the Capitol to sacrifice, out of hopes that out of Religion to the place he
would grant him Pardon: But as he was coming to do his Reverence to Marius; as
soon as he perceived him, he commanded his People forthwith to cut his Throat,
and that in the very Temple; and his Head served for a Spectacle as well as
that of the Orator Anthony, and so many other Pretorians and Consulars. Nor was
it permitted to give Sepulture to their Bodies, the conquering Party would have
them exposed to be devoured by Dogs and Fowls of the Air. The Seditious
themselves did, unpunished, kill one another at every turn. Some they drove
from their House, others they spoiled of their Goods, others deprived of their
Dignities, Sylla's Laws they cancelled, slew his Friends; and after having
pulled down his House, and confiscated his Goods, declared him Enemy of the
State. They sought likewise for his Wife and Children, to put them to death;
and they escaped but very narrowly. Thus was the City oppressed with all sort
of Mischiefs and Calamities. At length, after so many Executions of Persons
without Condemnation, they thought it convenient under pretense of observing
Forms of Justice, to bring Merula, the Priest of Jupiter, to his Trial; and to
that end suborned Accusers. He was not guilty of any Crime; but Cinna hated
him, because he had been named his Successor, though it was never his seeking.
At the same time they gave a Summons to Lutatius Catulus, who had been
Colleague with Marius in the Cimbrian War, and was obliged to him for saving
his life; but forgetting that good turn, had been his cruel Persecutor during
his Banishment. They appointed Guards, which they perceived not, to watch their
Motions, till the day assigned; which being come, they were called four several
times by the Usher, with the Interval of some hours between each Call: And when
they should have come to have pleaded their Cause, Word was brought that Merula
had cut his own Veins; having writ one Tablet, which he left, that he had first
laid aside the Mitre, for it is Sacrilege for a Priest to die with the Mitre
on. As for Catulus, he had shut himself up in a close Room, newly plaistered
over, and still moist; where causing Charcoal to be kindled, he voluntarily
smothered himself. What remains concerns the Slaves called to Liberty by Cinna,
and now serving in the Militia; they broke open House, carrying away all they
found, and killing the first they met; and some of them were found abusing
their own Masters. He had tried several ways to correct them; but seeing he
lost his labor, he caused them all one night, as they slept, to be encompassed
by the Gaul Infantry, who cut them in pieces. Thus were they punished for their
Perfidiousness, as they deserved. The Consuls named for the year following were
Cinna for the Second Time, and Marius for his Seventh; so that in spite of his
Banishment and Proscription, the Augury of the seven Eaglets was accomplished.
But whilst he was contriving ways to ruin Sylla, he was carried away by a
Distemper in the first Month of his seventh Consulate. Cinna caused Valerius
Flaccus to be substituted in his place, whom he sent into Asia; where he dying,
he took Carbo for his Colleague.

Sylla hastening his Return, to be revenged upon his Enemies; after (having in a
short time vanquished Mithridates (as we have before related) killed one
hundred and sixty thousand Men in less than three Years; re-conquered Greece,
Macedon, Ionia and Asia, and the other Countries which Mithridates had siesed
upon; despoiled that King of his Fleet, and reduced him to the Kingdom of his
Predecessors) he begun his Journey toward Italy with an Army that loved him,
accustomed to Labor, and heightened with the happy Success of his Arms. He had
likewise store of Ships and Money; and was, in short, in a Power capable of
undertaking the greatest things; so that his Enemies began to be terrified: And
for fear of him Carbo and Cinna sent Men through all Italy, to raise Money and
Soldiers, and lay up Stores of Corn for their Service in the Depending War.
They endeavored likewise to engage on their side all Persons of Riches and
Authority, and to gain the People, particularly the new Citizens; persuading
them they had not fallen into the present danger, but for espousing their
Interests. They fitted out a Fleet, and gave Orders to guard the Coasts with
Ships they had caused to be brought from Sicily. In short, they forgot nothing
that could be done to make speedy Preparations for their Defense against such
an Allarm. As for Sylla, he wrote to the Senate a Letter full of Anger; wherein
after having made an Enumeration of all the Labors he had undergone for the
Commonwealth; in Numidia against Iugurtha, Questor; in the Cimbrian War,
Lieutenant; in Cilicia, Praetor; and in the War with the Allies, Consul; besides
those great things he came from doing against Mithridates: Amplifying each
Action in particular, and principally, the great number of Provinces he had
reconquered from Mithridates, and reduced under the obedience of the Roman
People: But above all, he put a value upon the Obligation they had to him, for
having been the Refuge of those Roman Citizens driven from the City by the
violence of Cinna, and for having comforted and assisted them in their
Calamities and Distresses. Adding that for a full Acknowledgment of so many
good deeds his Enemies had proscribed and set a price upon his Head, demolished
his House, killed his Friends, and driven away his Wife and Children, who with
much difficulty escaped to him; but he should now suddenly be in the City,
where he would revenge both private and public Injuries, and punish the
Authors of these Disorders, which notwithstanding, he did not impute to any of
the Citizens, either Ancient or New. This Letter read in the Senate struck a
terror into all the World; wherefore they sent to him Deputies to ^econcile him
with his Enemies; with Order to tell him, that if he desired any Security, the
Senate would become bound for what they agreed on, provided he would forthwith
declare his Intentions. And in the mean time they forbad Cinna from making any
new Levies, until Sylla had returned an Answer. Hereupon Cinna said, that he
would put all his Concerns into the hands of the Senate. But scarce were the
Deputies gone, but he designed himself with his Colleague Consuls for the
following Year, that he might not be obliged to return to the City to hold the
Assembly. That done, they both left Rome; and coasting all Italy, enrolled some
Legions, and sent over several Troops, one after another, to Dalmatia, with
which they pretended to go and meet Sylla. The first arrived safely at those
Ports where they designed landing, but those who embarked afterward were by
Storms cast back on the Coast of Italy: where the Soldiers coming again to
their Homes, protested that never by their good will would they bear Arms
against their Citizens: Which coming to the knowledge of others that were ready
to depart, they refused to pass into Dalmatia. Cinna enraged at this Refusal,
gave them order to come to the Assembly, thinking to oblige them to obey by
force of threats. They came thither as angry as he; not sticking to say, that
if they were too much pressed upon, they knew how to defend themselves. But as
he was going away, the Lictor, who marched before to make way for him, having
pushed one of them to that purpose, a certain Soldier returned him a Blow;
whereupon, the Consul commanding the Soldier to be arrested, a great noise
suddenly arose, which was followed by throwing of Stones; and some that stood
next to Cinna drawing their Swords, ran him through and through. Cinna thus
slain in his Consulate, Carbo caused those Troops carried over into Dalmatia,
to be brought back; and so doubtful he was what to do in this Conjuncture, that
he durst not return to the City, though the Tribunes of the People had summoned
him to come, to the end he might in a lawful Assembly substitute another Consul
in the place of him that was slain. At last however, when they threatened to
reduce him to the Rank of private Men, he went and appeared at the day
appointed for the Nomination of a Consul; but because the Birds gave ill Omens
of that day, he adjourned the Assembly to a farther day, on which the Thunder
falling on the Temples of Luna and Ceres, the Augurs were the occasion that the
Nomination of a Consul was deferred till after the Solstice, and that till then
Carbo remained singly in that Dignity. Mean while Sylla had returned in Answer
to the Senate's Deputation, That he would not contract Friendship with Men
blackned with such horrible Crimes. However he would not hinder the People of
Rome from giving them security, but there would be much more for those who
would join with him, being Master of an Army affectionate to his interests.
This word alone was sufficient to make them believe he was resolved to keep his
Command, and that he had a design to seize on the absolute Dominion; for he
demanded likewise that they should entirely restore his first Dignity, his
Goods, his Priesthoods: and in short, all the Honors that he had; and indeed
he had sent with the Deputies of the Senate some to demand all these things,
but when they heard at Brundusium that Cinna was dead, and the Commonwealth in
trouble, they returned to find Sylla without proceeding farther.

Pyraeum with five Italian Legions, six thousand Horse, and the Auxiliary
Forces of Macedon and Peloponnesus, which amounted to about sixty thousand Men:
from Pyraeum he came to Patras, from whence he passed over to Brundusium on a
Fleet of six hundred Ships. He was received into the Port without any
contradiction; and in acknowledgment of that seasonable kindness, he granted to
the City an exemption from all kind of Imposts for the future, which they enjoy
to this day. That done, he set forward with all his Forces, and by the way met
with Metellus Pius, who some years before had commanded the Body of an Army in
the War with the Allies; but not being willing to return to the City, for fear
of Cinna and Marius, was retired into Genoua.
Liguria expecting some change. Now therefore he came to offer Sylla what
Forces he had, having still the Title of Proconsul; for when once that Honor
is attained, it lasts till he enjoys it returns to his Country. Some time after
Cn. Pompey, who afterward gained the Title of Great, Son of that Pompey who
was killed with a Thunderbolt, came to him likewise. In former appearance he
was no Friend to Sylla, but now he made him lay aside all suspicion of him, by
bringing with him a Legion out of the Country of Marches of Ancona.
Picene, where he was well beloved in memory of his Father's name, he raised
two other Voluntier Legions soon after; and among all those that took Sylla's
Party none did him more important Service: and though yet very young, Sylla had
so high a value for him, that whoever arrived he was the only person for whom
he rose up from his Seat; that he sent him into Africa to put an end to the
Remains of the War, quell Carbo's Party, and reestablish Hyempsal in his
Kingdom, who had been driven out by the Numidians; and that for the Actions he
there did, he granted him the Honor of Triumph, though he had not yet arrived
to the age prescribed by the Laws, and was then but a plain Knight. In so much,
that after so fair beginnings, being advanced in age as well as reputation, he
was sent against Sertorius in Spain, and afterward to the Kingdom of Pontus
against Mithridates. Cethegus likewise came to meet Sylla, though he had been
the greatest Enemy he had, and was therefore banished with Cinna and Marius,
but now he presented himself before Sylla in the condition of a Suppliant,
offering him to serve him in all he should be pleased to employ him. Thus
beholding himself fortified with a great number of Soldiers and store of
illustrious Friends whom he made his Lieutenants, he placed himself at the Head
of his Army with Metellus, both being Proconsuls; for Sylla going to the War
against Mithridates in Quality of Proconsul, had not yet quitted that Dignity,
though Cinna had declared him Enemy to the State. He mortally hated those that
had offended him, but he kept his hatred close, for which reason those which
remained in the City knowing his temper, were sorely terrified. They had not
forgot what passed the first time he entered in Arms, they knew he was incensed
at the Sentences given against him, they saw his House pulled down, his Goods
confiscate, his Friends killed, and his Family in flight, who very hardly
escaped; and therefore thought they must resolve to overcome, or utterly to
perish, so that in this common fear they threw themselves into the Consuls
Party, and began to fetch from all parts of Italy Soldiers, Provisions and
Money with all the diligence necessary in extreme danger. The Consuls C.
Norbanus and L. Scipio, and with them Carbo Consul the year precedi^g (who
hated Sylla as much as the others, but feared him more, out of a remorse for
the injuries he had done him) after having levied Soldiers throughout all
Italy, took the Field with each his Body of an Army. They had at first but two
hundred and fifty Men in each Cohort, but soon after they found many more; for
all people had a far greater inclination for the Consuls than for Sylla,
because Sylla seemed to come against the City like an Enemy, whilst the Consuls
fought for their Country: but this was only in appearance, for in truth they
labored only for themselves. Besides the vulgar sensible they were sharers in
the fault, were carried on to defend it by the same fear, and no person was
ignorant that Sylla had not simply the thought of chastising, reforming, or
striking terror, but that he meditated upon Sackings, Burnings, Massacres, and
in a word, the general ruin of the City. And surely, they were not deceived:
all places they soon found sacked and filled with slaughter by the continual
Fights, in which there perished sometimes ten thousand, sometimes twenty
thousand in one only Engagement, and at once in and about the City fifty
thousand, where yet the Conqueror forgot no cruelty he could exercise on the
Remainder as well in general as particular, till in the end he reduced the
Roman Empire under his Dominion, and disposed of it at pleasure. They received
from on High presages of these miseries by a great number of Prodigies, Ghosts
presented themselves to an infinite many people throughout all Italy, as well
alone as in company; they set themselves to examine ancient Oracles, where they
still found matter of greater fear and distraction: a Mule engendered, a Woman
was delivered of a Serpent, a great Earthquake overthrew some Temples in the
City. And though the Senate and People of Rome keep constant watch against such
Accidents, the Capitol built by the Kings above four hundred years before was
set on fire, none could tell how. And indeed these were all Signs which
threatened Italy with Murders and Desolations, and the Roman People with
Servitude, and that Change which was to happen in the Commonwealth. The
beginning of this War, accounting from the time that Sylla landed at
Brundusium, happened in the hundred seventy fourth Olympiad. The Actions of it
were much greater, than the time of its continuance long; for each party
running with fury to the ruin of the other, the losses they sustained were so
much the greater and more quick; yet it lasted three years, till such time as
Sylla made himself Master of the State; and even after Sylla's death it yet
continued a long time in Spain. There was through all Italy many Fights and
Skirmishes, Sieges and other Exploits of War in great number, and very
remarkable, as well in Pitched Battles as in Rencounters. We will only relate
those Actions are most considerable, and best worthy memory, and that the most
succinctly we can.

The first Battle fought was about Canusa between the Consul Norbanus Norbanus
retreated to Capua. After which, the Proconsuls being encamped near Theana, L.
Scipio led against them another Army, more disposed to Peace than War, which
being observed by the Chiefs of the contrary Party, they sent Deputies to the
Consul to treat of an Accommodation, not that they hoped to succeed, or that
they stood in need of it, but with design to sow Dissension among Troops not
very fiercely set on, as indeed it happened; for Scipio, after having received
Hostages, went into the adjacent Fields to confer with the others, whom he
found there likewise, They were but three of a side, so that it was not known
what passed in the Conference, save only that they remained of accord, that
Sertorius by the Consul's order should go and find his Colleague to communicate
with him, and that while they staid for an answer, there should be a Cessation
of Arms. But Sertorius having seized upon Suessa that held for Sylla, and he
making complaint to Scipio, whether he had consented to it, or knew not what to
answer, surprised as he was with the unexpected news, he resigned up the
Hostagesto Sylla; whereupon the Army offended at the Action Sertorius had so
unseasonably done, and at the redelivery of the Hostages, began to blame the
Consuls, and caused Sylla to be privately informed, that if he would draw a
little nearer, they would all come over to him. This composition made, the
Consul found himself so forsaken, that he knew not what to resolve, he was
taken alone in his Tent by Sylla's Men, having no body with him out Lucius, his
Son. But certainly it seems to me a thing unworthy of a General not to have the
foresight to perceive so great a Conspiracy of a whole Army. Sylla not being
able, whatever he could plead to them, to make the Consul or his Son take his
part, dismissed them both without any injury done; and at the same time sent
other Deputies to Capua, to treat the peace with Norbanus, whether he indeed
feared, seeing the most part of Italy took the Consuls part, or whether he laid
the same snares for him he had done for Scipio; but seeing no one came to him,
nor that any answer was returned him (for it is probable the Consul took care
not to give his Army occasion of like scandal) he took the Field to march
against Norbanus, wasting all the Country as he went; Norbanus on the other
side did the like, and Carbo went before to the City, to declare Metellus and
all the other Senators who were joined to Sylla, Enemies to the Senate and
People of Rome. 'Twas at this time that the Capitol took fire, about which ran
diverse reports, some accused Carbo, others suspected the Consuls, others said
Sylla had caused it to be done. But it being hard to discover the truth of so
uncertain a thing, we will leave it in its incertainty. For Sertorius, who
sometime before had obtained the Government of Spain, after having taken
Suessa, he went into his Province, where refusal being made him of quitting the
Command, the Roman Armies had enough to suffer. Mean while the Consuls Forces
increased daily by the great number of Soldiers that came from the farthest
parts of Italy and Gaul, about the Po: and Sylla on his side did not sleep, he
continually sent Messengers to all the People of Italy to draw them to his
Party, either by inclination, or fear, or money, or by the power of promises,
insomuch that the rest of the Summer was consumed in these Affairs. In the
beginning of the next year were named for Consuls Papirius Carbo for the second
time, and Marius Son to the Brother of the illustrious Marius, of but seven and
twenty years old; and because in this Season the Colds were too great, each
Party drew into Garrisons, but as soon as the Spring was come on, there was
^ought by the River Esis between Metellus and Carmus Lieutenant to Carbo, a
very fierce Battle, which lasted from Morning to Night, wherein the Lieutenant
being defeated, with a great loss of Men, the Neighboring Places that held for
the Romans yielded to Metellus: but Carbo having reached Metellus, besieged him
till such time as understanding that his Colleague had been defeated in a great
Battle near Pal^strina.
Praeneste, he brought off his Forces to Rimini, pursued by Pompey, who sorely
galled his Rear-Guard. Now the defeat of Praeneste was thus, Sylla having
s^ised on Sezza.
Setia, Marius drew thither with his Forces, then falling off by little and
little, when he came to Sacriport he drew up in order of Battle; Sylla having
done the like, they fought bravely, till Marius's Left Wing beginning to
stagger, five Cohorts and two Squadrons, who had turned their backs of set
purpose, threw down their Colors, and went all and yielded to Sylla; which was
the sole occasion of the Rout; for all the rest presently took their flight
toward Praeneste, Sylla still following them close at the Heels. The
Praenestines let the first that presented themselves enter, but because the
Enemy was so close in the Rear of them, they shut their Gates, and drew up
Marius over the Wall with Ropes; and now there was a great Slaughter before the
Walls, and many Prisoners taken, among which all that were found to be Samnites
were by Sylla's command cut in pieces, as obstinate Enemies of the Roman Name.
About the same time Metellus defeated another Army of Carbo's, five Cohorts
having come over to his Party in the heat of the Fight, which much advanced the
Victory. Pompey likewise beat Marius about Siena, and took and sacked the City.
As for Sylla, after having shut up Marius in Praeneste, he caused the place to
be encompassed with a very large Circumvallation, which he gave in charge to
Lucretius Offella, that he might take the Consul by Famine, there being no
necessity of Fighting. He seeing his Affairs desperate, and unwilling his
Enemies should survive him, wrote to Brutus Praetor of the City, that he should
call the Senate upon any other pretense, and then cause Antistius, the other
Carbo, with Lucius Domitius and Mutius Scaevola the High Priests to be slain.
The two first according to Marius's order were killed in the Senate by
Murderers sent thither, Domitius flying, was slain at the Door, and Scaevola at
some distance from the Palace. Their Bodies were cast into the River; for the
custom was now grown ripe, not to suffer Burial to be given to those were
slain, Mean time, Sylla drew off his Forces toward Rome by several ways, with
order to seize on the Gates, and if they were repulsed to retire to Ostia,
which way soever they marched the terror of their Arms made the Cities receive
them, and Rome it self shut not her Gates; for the Citizens were straitened
with Famine, and already accustomed no more with stubborness to resist
Calamities at hand. As soon as Sylla had this intelligence he immediately
advanced, and drawing up his Army in Battalia in the Field of Mars before the
Gate, entered the City, where not finding one of the contrary Faction, he
forthwith confiscated their Goods, and publicly sold them; and assembling the
people, complained, that he had been forced by the malice of his Enemies to
come to these Extremities, exhorting the Citizens to take courage, with promise
they should in a few days behold the end of their miseries, and the
re-establishment of the Commonwealth.

After having applied some remedies to the most pressing Distempers, Chi^si.
Clusa, where there was yet a Remain of War not to be neglected. Whilst he was
at Rome some Celtiberian Horse sent from the Praetors of Spain were joined with
the Consul's Army, which occasioned a Fight betwixt the Horsemen near the River
Glanis, where Sylla's Horsemen had the better, he killed about five hundred of
the Enemy, and two hundred and seventy Celtiberians came over to his side; all
the rest Carbo caused to be cut in pieces, either to revenge the treachery of
their Countrymen, or for fear his Men should follow their example. At the very
instant of this Victory, Sylla's Party fighting against their Enemies about
Saturnia, defeated them; and Metellus going by Sea to the Borders of Ravenna,
reduced under his obedience the Country of the Uritanians, which is a vast
Champain very fruitful in Corn. Another Body of Sylla's Men entering by night
into Naples by treason put all to the Sword (save a few that escaped by flight)
and made themselves Masters of all those People's Galleys. As for what passed
at Clusa, Sylla fought a whole day together against Carbo, and the Field was so
resolutely maintained, that only night parted them, Victory inclining neither
to one side nor the other. But in the Country of Spoletto Pompey and Crassus
both Lieutenants to Sylla cut in pieces about three thousand of Carbo's Men,
and kept Carinas, who commanded them, blocked up, till Carbo sent another Army
to relieve him, of whose March Sylla having intelligence, crossed their way,
and charged so briskly, that he left about two thousand in the place. but yet
Carinas taking the opportunity of a dark and rainy night, escaped from the
Besiegers hands, who though they knew it well enough, yet let him pass because
of the cruel weather. The same Carbo, to rescue his Colleague Marius besieged
in Praeneste, and ready to perish with Famine, sent Marcius with eight Legions,
whom Pompey, that lay in ambush for him, so vigorously assaulted, that he slew
the greatest part, and forced the rest to retreat to a rising ground, where he
invested them; but Marcius causing great Fires to be kindled, to make the Enemy
believe he still was there, marched off closely in the dark, but his Army
imputing to him the fault committed in falling into the Ambuscade, mutinyed,
and whether he would or no took their march toward Rimini, where the greatest
part disbanding themselves, went home; so that Marius had but seven Cohorts
left, with which after all these misfortunes he went to find out Carbo. After
this M. Lamponius, Pontus Telesinus and Gutta of Capua being upon their March
with seventy thousand Men, as well Lucanians as Samnites, to go and disengage
Marius; Sylla seized of a certain Strait, by which only they could pass to go
to Praeneste, so that they were forced to return without doing any thing. And
now the Consul falling from all hopes of being relieved, caused a Fort to be
raised in a spacious place between the City and Trenches, whither he brought
Engines, and drew together all his Forces with intention to make Lucretius
retire, and open himself a passage by Sally: but after diverse continued
endeavors for many days he shut himself up again within the Walls of
Praeneste. About the same time Carbo and Norbanus after a long hard March
perceived themselves toward Evening to be near Metellus his Camp, and though
there were but an hour more of daylight, and that they saw all about the
Vineyards lay very thick, yet they drew up their Army in Battalia with more
passion than prudence. They thought to fright Metellus by this surprise, but
both time and place being disadvantageous to them, they fell one upon another,
and were so cruelly defeated, that they left six thousand upon the place, six
thousand yielded to Metellus, and the rest fled every man his way, so that a
thousand only retreated in order to Arezzo. Upon the news of this defeat a
Legion of Lucanians commanded by Albinovanus, joined with Metellus's Party, and
that in despite, as it were, of their General, who yet not losing courage, went
to find out Norbanus; and yet after all this, having underhand treated with
Sylla, upon condition to do some memorable service, he invited Norbanus to a
Treat with his Lieutenants C. Apustius and Flavius Fimbria Brother to that
Fimbria who killed himself in Asia, together with all the Officers of Carbo's
Party, who being all met save only Norbanus, he caused them to be slain in the
midst of the Feast, and yielded himself to Sylla. After this Treachery Norbanus
hearing that Rimini because of this accident, and of some Armies that lay nigh
to it had likewise fallen off to Sylla's Party, and believing (as it generally
happens to all men in declining fortune) that he could no longer confide in the
friendship of any man, embarked on a Vessel belonging to a private man, and
got safe to Rhodes, whither Sylla having sent to demand him, whilst the
Rhodians were consulting about it he slew himself in the midst of the place:
Carbo yet sent two Legions under the command of Damasippus to Praeneste, to
raise that Siege with all speed possible, but they could no more than the
others force Sylla's Men posted in the Strait. Beside all this, all the
Cisalpine Gauls yielded to Metellus; and Lucullus encountering another Army of
Carbo's near Placentia, gained the Victory; so that this General after so many
losses, though he had still thirty thousand Men about Clusa, the two Legions
with Damasippus, and two others commanded by Carinas and Marcius, besides a
great number of Samnites continually engaging with Sylla's Men to drive them
from the Strait where they were posted, lost all hopes, and fled to Africa with
his Friends, in which he certainly committed a great weakness to leave Italy
being Consul, as if after having lost it, he could make himself Master of
Africa. The Army which he left at Clusa engaging with Pompey, after the loss of
twenty thousand Men, dispersed, and every man returned home. As for Carinas,
Marcius and Damasippus having joined Forces they marched toward the Strait of
which we have so often spoke, hoping with the assistance of the Samnites to
come to a good issue, but not succeeding better than others before them, they
advanced toward Rome, which they thought might easily be taken, wanting both
Men and Provision, and went and pitched their Camp upon the Alban Hill at the
Ten Miles off.
tenth Stone. But now Sylla, who was afraid for the City, caused the Vanguard
of his Horse to advance first to retard the Enemies March, and himself
following with the rest of his Forces by great journies arrived about noon at
the Colline Gate, and went and encamped near the Temple of Venus. The Enemies
were likewise encamped on the Skirts of the City, so that though the Sun were
declining, the two Armies came to a Pitched Battle, Sylla's Right Wing had the
better of it, but his Left Wing being overborn, fled toward the Gates, where
the old men that were upon the Walls seeing that the Conquerors and Conquered
ran pell-mell together, let fall the Portcullis, which by it is fall crushed in
pieces many Soldiers, and likewise some Senators. Then the greater Party forced
through fear and necessity turned head upon the Enemies, and having continued
the Fight all night cut in pieces a great number, among whom were found
Tel^sinus and Albanus. Their Camp was taken, and Lamponius, Lucanius, Marcius,
Carinas and all those Officers of Carbo's side that escaped took their flight
several ways. The number of the dead on both sides was adjudged to amount to
fifty thousand, and that of the Prisoners more than eight thousand: of which
the greatest part being Samnites, Sylla caused them all to be slain by his
Bowmen. On the morrow, Marcius and Carinas being taken in their flight, Sylla
pardoned them not, though his Fellow Citizens, but causing their Heads to be
cut off, sent them to Lucretius to be carried about the Walls of Praeneste.
When the Besieged saw them, and understood that all Carbo's Forces were lost,
that Norbanus was fled from Italy; and in a word, that the City it self was in
Sylla's power, they yielded up the place. Marius run into a Mine to hide, but
there soon after slew himself. His Head was carried to Sylla, who set it up
before the Tribunal for Orations, with some Railleries about the Consuls Age,
who ought to have exercised himself at the Oar before he took the Helm.
Lucretius become Master of Praeneste, found there many Senators; some of which
he caused to be slain, others he put in Prison, till Sylla coming upon the
place, put them likewise to death: For the Soldiers, he caused them to march
into the Field unarmed; and after having picked out some that had served him,
he divided the others into three Bands; the Romans were set in one place, the
Samnites in another, and the Praenestines in a third: Then he caused the Romans
to be told by Cryers, that they had deserved death, but however he pardoned
them; the rest were all slain, only the Women and Children were saved; and the
City, which was one of the richest of those times, was plundered. Praeneste
being treated in this manner, yet the City of Norba held out stoutly till such
time as Emilius Lepidus getting in one night by Treason, the Inhabitants mad
with rage and despite, found a way to die; some by their own Swords, others
mutually killed each other, others died by strangling, and some, after having
shut fast the Doors of their houses, set fire to them; which inflamed by a
sudden Wind, at once devoured them and all that should have been the Soldiers
Prey. The taking of Norba put an end to this War, which had been the occasion
of so many miseries to both sides, and by Fire and Sword to all Italy. And now,
the better to secure the Victorious Party, Sylla's Lieutenants went through all
the Towns, and placed Garrisons in such as were suspected; and Pompey had
Commission to go and pursue the Remainder of the War in Africa against Carbo,
and in Sicily against those still held his Party.

Sylla now become Master of Rome, called an Assembly of the People; where
having spoken haughtily of his Actions, and said a great many things to strike
terror into the People, he concluded his Discourse with saying he would make
the people's condition better than it was, so they would obey him, but he would
pardon none of his Enemies; on the contrary, there should be no Punishment nor
Calamity which he would not make them undergo: And since Scipio had broke his
Word with him, would likewise do all he could to destroy those had favored the
contrary Party, without sparing Pretors, Quaestors or Tribunes. The Assembly
was scarce broke up, but he proscribed forty Senators and sixteen hundred
Knights; for it is said that he was the first Inventor of the Proscription of
Heads, and the first that proposed Rewards to Murderers and Discoverers of
those Unfortunate Wretches that hid themselves, and decreed Penalties against
those who discovered them not. Some time after he added likewise other Senators
to the number of the Proscribed; some of which were slain before they heard any
thing of it, in whatsoever place they were found; in the Streets, in their
Houses, in the Temples. They hanged several whom they came and threw dead at
Sylla's feet; they dragged along others, set their feet upon their Throats,
whilst at all these horrible Spectacles no one durst say a word. Some they
drove from the City, despoiled others of their Goods: And those sent into the
Country to search for them that fled, ran up and down every where, searched in
every hole, and murdered as many as they could find. The Allies who had obeyed
the Orders of Carbo, Norbanus or Marius, or their Lieutenants, fared no better;
all places were filled with Massacres, Plundring and Banishment. Throughout all
Italy they set themselves to inform of these things, as of great crimes, to be
severely punished, who had born Arms, commanded Troops, furnished Money, or
done any Service against Sylla, though it were but giving Counsel to his
Enemies; so that Men accused their Hosts, their Friends, their Creditors and
their Debtors. Some were made criminal for only having given some relief to
those of the contrary Faction, and some for but traveling upon the Road with
them. But above all, the rich Men were in greatest danger. After the
Accusations against particular Persons were over, Sylla undertook to punish
whole Bodies of People, which he did in diverse manners; he demolished the Forts
and rased the Walls of some, laid great Fines upon others, tormented others
with cruel Exactions, transplanted others to another Country, that he might
give their Lands to his Soldiers who had served him in the War; to the end,
that they being planted in the most commodious places of Italy, might reduce
all people under his Obedience; which fixed the Soldiery to his Interest for
the whole Course of their life: For they knew they could not maintain
themselves in those Inheritances, unless all that Sylla had done stood good;
and therefore were always ready to maintain his Authority, even after his
death. Whilst these things passed in Italy, Carbo, who had escaped out of
Africa into Sicily, with many Persons of Quality, was taken flying from thence
to Corcyra by people sent after him by Pompey, with Orders to kill all the
rest, without permitting them to see him; but for Carbo, though he had been
three times Consul, he suffered him to lie bound at his feet; where, after he
had said a thousand cruel things, he caused him to be put to death, and sent
his head to Sylla. After he had thus treated his Enemies to his hearts content,
so that there remained none of the contrary Faction but Sertorius, and he a
great way off, he sent Metellus into Spain against him, and began to dispose of
the Affairs of the City at his pleasure. There being now no regard to the Laws,
or Votes, or any of the ancient Formalities; all people hiding themselves for
fear, or at least holding their peace, the People and Senate of Rome ratifyed
all that Sylla had done, as well in his Charge of Consul as in the Quality of
Pro-Consul; and caused to be erected for him in the place for Orations a guilt
Statue on Horseback, with this Inscription.

To CORNELIUS SYLLA, Emperor the Happy. For his Flatterers called him happy,
because of the continual Success of his Arms against his Enemies; and it was
only Flattery gave him that Surname. I my self found in certain Memoirs, that
in the same Sessions of the Senate, they gave him the Title of THE GRACIOUS;
which I the easier believe because himself afterward took the name of FOELIX,
not much different in signification from that of GRACIOUS. There was likewise
found an Oracle which confirmed him in the Resolution of undertaking all these
things; and ran thus, Believe, brave Roman, Venus guides thy Fate,
Knowing thee sprung from Great Aeneas Line:
By mighty Actions then advance thy State,
Sure of Assistance from the Powers Divine.
But let not Gods their Favors cast away;
Delphian Apollo waits for Gifts of thine.
And when War brings thee to Mount Taurus, pay
A Golden Axe to Carian, Venus Shrine.


However it were or whoever it was that wrote either of these two Epithites on
his Statue, in my Opinion good Raillery might be made of either. But they
stopped not here to gain the good Grace of the Conqueror; they sent to that
place an Axe with a Crown of Gold, and put on it this Inscription. Great Venus,
let this Gift Acceptance meet,
Which Sylla, head of Rome, lays at thy Feet,
Dreaming he saw thee ready for the Fight:
Provoke his Soldiers to maintain his Right.
Being then in Effect King or Tyrant, since he mounted not to this Supreme
Power by the consent of the People, or the Authority of the Senate, but by
force; yet standing in need of some pretense, that he might seem lawfully
elected, he made use of this Artifice.

Rome the most virtuous were Kings; and when any King died, the Senators by
turns from five days to five days presided over the Government of the
Commonwealth, till such time as another, elected by the Votes of the people,
succeeded in the Kingdom; and this Five Days-Magistrate was called Inter-rex.
Afterward when the Republic was governed by Consuls, instead of Kings; only
those Consuls going out of Office, had Right to call an Assembly for the naming
new; and if by any Accident they happened to be wanting, they created an
Inter-rex to preside in the Assembly. According to this custom Sylla took the
occasion now there were no Consuls in the Commonwealth, Carbo being cut off in
Sicily, and Marius in Praeneste; and retiring for some time out of the City,
sent word to the Senate, they should create an Inter-rex. The Senate having
received his Orders, gave that Dignity to Valerius Flaccus; hoping that by this
means they should soon have an Assembly for the Election of new Consuls. But
Sylla writ to Flaccus, to acquaint the Senate from him, that the present Estate
of Affairs required they should name a Dictator; not for a certain time, as the
ancient Custom which had lasted four hundred years required; but till the
Affairs of the City, of Italy, and of the whole Empire, which till now had been
shaken with continual Wars, were settled and put in better order. There is no
doubt this new Proposition meant only himself, and indeed he was not shy in
showing the desired it; for in the end of the Letter he wrote, that if the
Fathers thought good, he offered himself to render that Service to the
Commonwealth. When this Letter was read in the City, the Senate and people of
Rome were grievously perplexed: They saw now they must no more hope for a
lawful Assembly, and that they were no longer Masters; wherefore under the Mask
of an Assembly, they willingly accepted of this false Appearance of Liberty
granted them, and created Sylla Tyrant, with an absolute Power for as long time
as he pleased; for formerly the Dictatorship was a bounded Tyranny, for a
certain time of short continuance: But having taken away these Bounds, there
wanted nothing to make it an accomplished Tyranny. Yet they gave him a more
honest name; saying, that he was created Dictator to make such Laws as he
should judge profitable to the Commonwealth, and to apply necessary Orders.
Thus the People of Rome, who had been under the Dominion of Kings about a
hundred Olympiads; and almost as long under Popular Government, where Consuls
presided, and changed every Year; returned under a Form of Royalty in the
Seventy fifth Olympiad of the Greeks: there was now no fighting at the Olympic
Games, nor any other Exercise but running: For Sylla, after the War with
Mithridates was ended, and the Intestine Disorders appeased, sent for all the
Combatants, and whatever else could give any pleasure to the City, under
pretense to recreate the people, wearied with so many Toyls. And that he might
not seem to incroach upon the ancient form of Government, he permitted the
People to choose Consuls. They gave that Dignity to M. Tullius and Cornelius
Dolobella, but he, in Quality of Dictator, reigned absolutely, even over the
Consuls themselves; for they carried before him four and twenty Axes, as they
did before the other Dictators, and as formerly before the Kings; and he always
went encompassed with Guards: Besides, he cancelled Laws, and made new ones.
Among others he made one, by which he enacted, that none for the future should
receive the Office of Praetor till he had been Quaestor, nor be Consul till he
had been Praetor, nor obtain one Dignity twice until ten years after he had
exercised it. As for the Tribuneship, he so en^eebled it, that it seemed quite
under foot; making a Law, by which it was enacted, that after being Tribune, no
Man should be admitted to any other Dignity; so that no Person either of
Quality, or desirous of Honor, would accept that Charge. Yet it is not
positively certain whether it was he that transferred it from the People's
Choice to the Senate's, as it is at present. However it were, seeing the
Senators reduced to a small number by reason of the Tumults and Wars, he added
three hundred, whom he took from the principal Cavaliers; yet not till having
first demanded the Suffrage of the Assembly for each of them. He augmented
likewise the number of the People with all the Slaves of the Proscripts, whom
he found well made, and in the Flower of their Age, to the number of ten
thousand; first giving them their Liberty, then the Right of Freedom, with the
name of Cornelians, as their Benefactor. Thus he had always ten thousand
Citizens ready at the first beck. And to make himself Creatures throughout all
Italy, he divided, as has been said, among twenty three Legions great Parcels
of Land, part Public, and part confiscated from the Cities who favored the
contrary Party. But he was so terrible hasty and choleric upon the least
occasion, that he caused Lucretius Offella, who took Praeneste, and gave the
last stroke to the War, to be slain in the midst of the place, because being
only of the Order of Knights, and having never past the Degrees of Quaestor or
Praetor, against the new Law, he stood for the Consulate, contrary to the
Dictator's mind, and in despite of those warnings he had given him to desist
the pursuit of it; grounding himself upon this, that he had served him well in
his War. After this Action, he thus spoke in full Assembly.

The Oration of Sylla.
KNow, Gentlemen, and take my Word for it, that Lucretius was slain by my
Order, because he would not do what I commanded him. Then he added this Fable;
A Labourer troubled with Lice that bit him as he wrought, twice interrupted his
Work, to search his Shirt; but finding they bit still, he pulls off his Shirt,
and throws it into the Fire. This I tell you, that the Vanquished may be
advised, lest Fire be the Punishment of their third Relapse.

So that having terrified them by this discourse, he rendered them ever after
absolutely submissive to his Will and Command. After this he triumphed for the
Victory obtained against Mithridates; and in time of Triumph all men having
liberty to say what they please, there were some gibeing People that called his
Government a disavowed Royalty; because, though he was King in effect, yet he
would not take the Title: Others, on the contrary, called it by its proper
name, that is to say, a manifest Tyranny. This City being fallen into this sad
degree of Misery by the Civil War, and Italy in like manner: The Provinces were
not exempt, some having been ruined either by the Pirates or by Mithridates, or
by Sylla; others almost undone by new Imposts, after the Public Treasure had
been exhausted by the continual Seditions. For all Nations, all Kings in Amity,
all Cities; not only those T^ib^tary, but likewise the Allies, and those that
for Services done the State had been made free: In a Word, all that depended on
the Roman Empire, were constrained to pay Tribute, and submit to the Will of
Sylla; in so much that some places, to which by solemn Treaties they had
granted Ports and Lands, were not exempt. We have elsewhere spoke of a certain
Alexander, Son to another Alexander, King of Egypt; who being bred up in the
Isle of Coos, the Inhabitants delivered him to Mithridates: Now this Alexander
flying for Refuge to Sylla, and gaining his favor, he gave him to Alexandria
for their King, under pretense that there were no more Males of the Royal Line,
and that the Daughters of the ^lood-Royal could not marry, unless to one of
their Kin; and indeed, out of hope to draw good store of Money out of so rich a
Kingdom. But when this new King, upheld by Sylla's Favor, began to reign too
insolently, the Alexand^ia^s drew him out of his Palace on the nineteenth day
of his Reign and slew him in the midst of the Place for Exercises; so much
boldness they still had, either because of their vast Riches, or because they
were ignorant of the Calamities of other Nations, of which they had no
experience.

Sylla, though Dictator, permitted the making of Consuls, to represent some
Form of a Commonwealth; and was himself Coll^^gue with Me^ellus Pi^s; From
whence perhaps that Custom took Bir^h* which is to this day practiced by the
Roman Emperors; who have the power to create Consuls at their pleasure, to take
that Honor to themselves, and think it a fine thing to join the Consulship to
the Sovereign Authority. The Year following, the People, to ^latter Sylla,
having offered him the Consulate, he would not accept it, but gave that Dignity
to Servilius Isaurius and Claudi^s P^lcher. And for his part, not long after he
deposed himself voluntarily from his Dictatorship, without any Man's proposing
it to him: Which certainly appears to me a thing worthy of all Admiration, that
this man, the most powerful of the Age he lived in, should of his own accord
quit so great an Empire; not to his Son, as Ptolemy in Egypt, Ariobarzanes in
Cappadocia, and Seleucus in Syria; but in favor of those over whom he had
exercised an insupportoble Tyranny, and indeed it seems quite contrary to
Reason; for why so much Toil and Labor? Why expose himself to so many dangers,
to raise him to this high Authority? Only to lay it down by his own Free Will.
And I wonder no less at this; that Rome being still peopled, after having lost
more than a hundred thousand Men in this War, of whom ninety were Senators of
the contrary faction, fifteen Consulars, two thousand six hundred Knights,
comprizing those banished of that Order, whose Goods had been confiscated, and
many of their Bodies left without Burial. Sylla, notwithstanding finding
himself in Security both at home and abroad; without fearing those whose Forts
he had demolished, whose Walls he had thrown down, whose Goods he had pillaged,
whose Immunities he had deprived them of, returns of himself to the Condition
of a Private Man, such was his Boldness or his good Fortune. It is said, that
when he deposed himself from his Dictatorship, in the middle of the place he
cried aloud, that he was ready to render an Account of his Actions to any one
that demanded it^ and at the same time sending away his Lictors with their
Axes, dismissed his Guards, and walked yet a long time with some few of his
friends only, before all the Multitude, astonished at this Change as at a
prodigy. In the Evening he returned to his house, none presenting themselves to
complain against him; save one young Fellow, who not being hindered by any, had
the Impudence to revile him with words: And he who had poured out his Anger
against so great men, and against whole Cities, suffered with patience the
reproaches of this Correction, by saying as he went into his house, either by
natural Foresight or Inspiration from above; This Boy will be the occasion,
that if any after me obtains the like Dignity, they will never lay it down. The
Event of which Prediction soon after happened: For Caesar mounted to a like
Estate, would not descend. Sylla then immoderate (at least in my Opinion) in
all he desired, being by the favor of Fortune, from a private man become a
Monarch; would from a Monarch become a private man, and spend the rest of his
life in the Country. So retiring to an Estate near Cuma, he divertized himself
with Fishing and Hunting, not that he was weary of a private life in the City,
or need be troubled for want of Armies to Command, if he had a desire to
undertake any thing, for he was yet young and vigorous, and had throughout all
Italy about Sixscore Thousand Men bred up in Fighting under his Banners, and
who possessed Lands and great Estates by his Liberality; besides the Ten
Thousand Cornelians of the City fixed to his Interest, with those of his
Faction who all together hated and feared by the contrary Party, and could no
way hope to avoid the revenge of those mischiefs they had done to others, but
by his preservation. But I believe that finding himself glutted with Wars, and
Dominion, and City Affairs, he began to love a Country life. After that he had
laid down the Sovereign Power, the people seeing themselves delivered from
Tyranny, and from the fear wherein they lived, suffered themselves by little
and little to be carried on to new seditious, matter to which was furnished by
the Consuls themselves, Catulus one of them was of Sylla's faction, and his
Colleague Emilius Lepidus on the contrary party, they mortally hated each
other^ and from the beginning of their Consulate, so little concord was
perceived between them then, that no man doubted but their division would cause
new miseries in the Commonwealth. Mean while Sylla retired in his solitude,
dreamed one night that Destiny called him; wherefore as soon as it was light he
rose, and after having told his Friends his Dream, that day made his Will,
which was no sooner sealed, but the Fever seized him, so that the night
following was the last of his life. His death immediately gave occasion of new
troubles; for one side were of opinion, that his Body should be carried in
Funeral Pomp through Italy, and so being brought to the City, they should give
him Burial in the place at the public Expense: which Lepidus and those of his
Faction opposed: however Catulus and Sylla's Party carried it. So his Body was
brought through Italy upon a Litter all covered with Gold, and adorned with
Royal Ornaments, before which marched at the sound of a great many Trumpets Men
carrying Axes and other Ensigns of the Dictatorship: the Light Horse, and Men
at Arms armed Cap-a-pee followed next all about the Litter, which was followed
by his Lieutenants and Tribunes in Arms, all following each other in their
Order and Degree to honor his Funerals. The People likewise ran in from all
parts in such vast numbers, that never were such crowds seen; but when the
Corpse entered the City, the Pomp augmented much, before were carried above two
thousand Crowns of Gold, which the Cities and Legions which he had commanded,
and his own particular Friends had caused to be made to present him with:
besides there were many other Magnificencies not to be expressed; and because
there was some reason to fear for the great concourse of Soldiery which were in
the City, endeavors were used to bring things in order. The Corpse then being
conducted by the Priests and Vestals, each in their degree, after them marched
all the Senate with the Officers, adorned with marks of their Dignity, next a
Troop of Roman Knights, and at last a multitude of Soldiers that had served
under him; for upon the report of his death they made all the haste they could
to come to his Funerals, with gilt Ensigns and Bucklers inlaid with Silver, as
the fashion is at this day. There were likewise between distance and distance
Trumpets that sounded some mournful air. There was nothing heard but fortunate
acclamations of the Senate, Knights, Soldiers and People. Some lamented Sylla,
others feared him yet, though dead, and the present spectacle did not terrify
them less than the remembrance of his past actions; so that his Friends and
Enemies remained of accord in this, that to the last day of his life he was
useful to the one, and dreadful to the other: his Corpse being set down in the
place for Orations, the most eloquent Orator of the Age, mounting the Tribunal,
made his Funeral Oraration, because his Son Faustus was not yet of age to pay
him that Office. After the Oration, some of the strongest Senators took the
Litter upon their Shoulders, and carried it to the Field of Mars, where they
had been accustomed to give Rights of Sepulture to none but Kings, and whilst
the Corpse burnt, the Knights and all the Soldiery kept marching round about the
Pile.

Sylla's Funeral Ceremonies finished, but the Consuls, as they returned began
to quarrel with each other, and the people of the City were divided in their
favor. Lepidus, to curry favor with the people of Italy, having said, That he
would restore them the Lands Sylla had taken away; whereupon the Senate, who
feared them both, obliged them to promise upon oath they would not take up
Arms. Mean while, Lepidus, to whom Gallia Cisalpina fell, in dividing the
Provinces, staid till after the Assembly for election of Magistrates, as if the
year of his Consulate being past, he had been discharged from his Oath, and
free to make War upon Sylla's Party. But his Designs being known to all the
world, the Fathers sent him command to return to the City, and he knowing the
cause of his revocation, sets forward with all his Forces, with a resolution to
enter Rome with them, which being forbid him, he causes his command to be
proclaimed in the City for all those of his Party to take up Arms. Catulus on
his part does the like, so there was a Battle fought between them, a little
distance from the Field of Mars. Lepidus was defeated, and forced to fly into
Sardinia, where he died of Sickness; and his Army, after having troubled and
overrun some places of Italy, mouldred away by little and little, what
remained of it was carried by Perpenna to Sertorins into Spain, who being the
only General remaining of all Sylla's Enemies, made yet eight years War upon
the Romans; they had a vast trouble to put an end to this War, having not only
the Spaniards to deal with, but likewise their own Citizens under the conduct
of Sertorius, who having obtained the Government of that Province in the time
he commanded Carbo's Forces against Sylla, had retired into Spain in Quality of
Praetor, after having taken Su^ssa during the Truce. This Government was
disputed with him by those that commanded, for they were of Sylla's Party, but
he having joined with those Forces he led out of Italy some Auxiliaries of the
Celtiberians drove them out, and Metellus himself being by Sylla sent against
him, he defended himself generously. At length his valor having gained him a
fair reputation, he formed a Council of three hundred of his Friends, which he
called a Senate, in derision to that at Rome. Sylla being dead, and some time
after him Lepidus, Sertorius recruited with the Forces brought him by Perpenna,
thought himself in a condition to mar^h into Italy, and possibly he had done
it, if the Senate, who were fearful of it, had not sent Pompey with a new Army
to join the first: Pompey was yet but a young man, but already in high esteem
for those brave things he had done under Sylla in Africa, and likewise in
Italy: so he undertook this Expedition with great courage, and to pass the
Alps after the example of Hannibal, he made a new way between the Springs of
the Po and the Rhosne, which are separated one from the other only by some
small Mountains, from whence these two Rivers go to discharge themselves in two
different Seas, the Rhosne into the Tyrhene Sea, taking its course through the
Transalpine Gaul, and Po into the bottom of the Adriatic Gulf, gliding along
the Cisalpine Gaul. As soon as he got to Spain he lost a Legion, which he had
sent to convoy his Foragers Beasts of Loading, and Boys; nor could he hinder
Sertorius from taking and pillaging the Town of Aurona in the sight of him. In
the taking of this Town a certain Woman, exceeding the ordinary strength of her
Sex, with her Fingers thrust out the eyes of a man that would have ravished
her, which coming to Sertorius's knowledge, he put the whole Cohort to death,
though they were all Romans, because they had already committed the like
crimes. Hereupon, Winter being come, the two Armies separated; but at the
beginning of the Spring they again took the Field. Metellus and Pompey setting
forth from the Pyraenean Hills where they kept their Winter Quarters, and
S^rtorius and Perpenna from Portugal.
Lusitania, they met near Sucrona, and gave Battle; where as they were hotly
engaged, there not being a Cloud to be seen just before, on a sudden the Air
was full of Thunder and Lightning, which would have passed for a Prodigy with
some other Armies; but these being all old Soldiers minded it not, nor did it
hinder them from making a great Butchery on one side and the other: Metellus
having defeated Perpenna, pillaged his Camp; but on the other Wing Sertorius
having wounded Pompey on the Thigh with a Javelin, routed him, so that it is
uncertain which side had the better. Sertorius had a tame white Hind which had
used to go at liberty in the Fields, she having been some days wanting, he
counted it an ill presage, and as long as he thought her lost, would not fight
with the Enemy, who scoffed at him; but seeing her come running to him, he took
the Field, and rejoicing at her return as a good Augur, began himself the
Skirmish. Short time after there was another great Battle fought near Mo^^iedra.
Sagunt^m, which lasted from Morning to Evening, without advantage on one part
or the other: but at last Pompey was fain to yield, after having lost six
thousand Men, and Sertorius three thousand; and for Metellus, he likewise cut
in pieces five thousand of Perpenna's Men. The next day Sertorius taking along
with him a great number of Barbarians, went in the Evening to assault Metellus
his Camp, who doubted of no such thing; and he had certainly forced it, if
Pompey bringing timely relief had not put him by his Enterprise. Mean while,
the Summer being slipped away, both Armies parted, and went to their Winter
Quarters. The year following, which agrees with the hundred seventy sixth
Olympiad, the Roman Empire increased two Provinces by the last Testament of two
Kings, Nicomedes having left to the Romans Bythinia, and Ptolemy surnamed
Apion, of the Race of the Lagides, the Province of Cyrene: but they had
likewise great Wars; in Spain this we are now speaking of; in the East with
Mithridates; over all the Sea with the Pirates; about Crete with the
Inhabitants of the Island, and in Italy against the Gladiators, who rose all
upon a sudden, and gave them a great deal of trouble. Though they had so many
Affairs upon their Hands, yet they forbore not to send to the Army they had in
Spain two Legions, which being arrived, Metellus and Pompey came down from the
Pyraenean Mountains; and Sertorius and Perpenna left Portugal to go meet them;
when they drew near, a great number of Sertorius's Soldiers went and yielded to
Metellus, which so angered Sertorius, that he treated many others with great
cruelty, and by his ill conduct got the hate of all the rest. But the greatest
complaint his Army made against him, was, that instead of Romans he had taken
Celtiberians for his Guard, and chose rather to trust his person with Strangers
than those of his own Nation. They could not endure to be accused of
infidelity, though they bore Arms under an Enemy of the Roman People; and that
which troubled them the more, was, that he, for whose sake they had been
perfidious to their Country, would not trust them; besides they thought it very
unjust, that they should be punished for Runaways, they who had kept constant
to their duty. Moreover, this gave occasion to the Celtiberians to tell them
upon all occasions, that they doubted of their fidelity. However, Sertorius was
not quite forsaken, the Soldiers standing in need of such a General; for indeed
there was not any in this age more successful, nor that better understood War:
wherefore the Celtiberians because of his activity and diligence, called him
Hannibal, whom they esteemed the most hardy and most prudent General of all the
Earth. Upon these wavering inclinations of Sertor^us's Army, Metellus went
daily out in parties, and never returned without bringing in whole Troops of
Prisoners: and Pompey besieging Palenza had undermined the Walls, so that they
were only supported by Stanchions of Timber; but Sertorius coming on, he was
forced to raise his Siege, and the besiegers having set fire to the Stanchions,
retreated with Metellus. Sertorius having repaired that part of the Wall that
was fallen, set himself to pursue the Enemies, and overtook them on the Borders
of Calagyra, and slew three thousand Men, and this was all passed in Spain this
year. In the beginning of the next the Roman Generals finding themselves the
stronger, assailed without fear those Cities that held on Sertorius's Party,
whose Affairs were now in an ill condition, and their first successes having
heightened their courage, they made great progress, yet there was no set
Battle; but having continued the War till the next year, they began to despise
Sertorius in such manner, that they wasted all his Province. For when he saw
fortune had turned her back to him he gave ground too, and abandoned himself in
such manner to the pleasure of Wine and Women, that he never afterward engaged
the Enemy but he was beaten. He grew likewise extremely choleric, his passion
took fire on the least suspicion, punishing with cruelty, and confiding in no
man; so that Perpenna, who after Lepidus's Death was come of his own accord to
join him with considerable Forces, began to fear, and having suborned ten
Soldiers, took a resolution to destroy him, but the conspiracy was discovered,
some of the Conspirators punished with death, and others escaped by flight,
Perpenna was so fortunate beyond his own hopes, as not to be comprised in the
accusation, which hastened so much the more the loss of Sertorius; for seeing
he never went unguarded, he invited him to a Feast, where, after having made
him drunk, and his Guards too, he executed his enterprise. The Soldiers at the
first knowledge of it detested the Parricide, and changed into good will all
the hatred they bore Sertorius, as ordinarily all anger is appeased by the
death of him from whom we believe we have received an offense, they now stood
no longer in fear of him, and compassion recalled into their minds the memory
of his virtue: besides, they considered the danger to which they were now
exposed to, Perpenna was despised by them as a vulgar man; whereas they
believed, that on Sertorius's valor only depended the safety of the whole
Army. In this general hate of Perpenna the Barbarians were most violent,
especially the Portugals, for whom the dead General had always a particular
esteem. But when after opening his Will they found his Murderer amongst his
Heirs, it is scarce possible to believe, how much it added to their horror of
this Villainy, committed upon the person, not only of his General, but likewise
of his Friend and Benefactor. And possibly they had done him some violence, if
he had not appeased them, some with gifts, and some with promises, and killed
some with his own hands to strike terror into others. He went likewise from
City to City, making Orations to the people; and to gain their good Will set at
liberty those Sertorius had laid in Irons, and returned the Hostages he had
taken from the Spaniards. These good deeds sweetened in some measure the minds
of men; so that they obeyed him in quality of Praetor, and Successor to
Sertorius; but yet they were not quite appeased: for as soon as he saw himself
settled, he grew extraordinary cruel, killing three Roman Gentlemen had fled to
him for Refuge, and putting to death his Brother's Son. After Sertorius's
death, Metellus withdrew to the other side of Spain, thinking there was no
danger in leaving Pompey alone to deal with Perpenna. They several times
engaged, and for diverse days skirmished together to try their Men, but the two
Armies stirred not till on the tenth day, when they had a Battle: both one
Party and the other thinking it convenient to come to an end of the business;
for Pomp^y slighted Perpenna, whom he thought no great Captain; and Perpenna
fearing lest his men would not long continue in good order and duty, made as
much haste as he could to try the fortune of Arms. The Fight was not long,
Pompey having to deal with an ordinary Captain, and an Army weak and
discontented, soon got the advantage: so that scarce any Stand being made,
Perpenna took his flight in disorder, and fearing to fall either into his
Enemies, or his own men's hands, he hid himself in a Thicket, from whence he was
pulled out by some Horsemen that found him. The Soldiers began to revile him,
calling him the Murderer of Sertorius; and he began to cry out aloud, that he
had many things to discover to Pompey, touching the Seditions of the City,
whether it were true, or only an invention to make them carry him alive before
Pompey. But Pompey commanded them to dispatch him before he saw him; for fear
left if he told them any new thing it might occasion fresh calamities in the
City; and surely he did prudently; and all men praised his discretion. Thus the
death of Sertorius put an end to the Wars of Spain, which certainly had lasted
longer, and not been so easily determined, had he longer lived.

Spartacus a Thracian by Nation, who had formerly born Arms in the Roman
Militia, and was now a Captive in Capua to serve as a Gladiator, persuaded
about seventy of his Comrades to fight rather for their own liberty, than to
please the spectators, and breaking Prison he gave them such Arms as he took
from Passengers, and went and posted himself on Mount Vesuvius. Store of
fugitive Slaves, and likewise some free people of the Country flocking to him
upon the news of his Revolt, he received them, and began to make Incursions and
Robberies in the Neighboring Places, he made Oenomaus and Crixus two
Gladiators his Lieutenants, and because he equally divided the Prey among his
Companions, in a short time he gathered together so great Forces, that first
Varinius Glaber and then P. Valerius being sent against him not with formed
Bodies, but such men as they could get together as they passed along, were
beaten: for the Roman People esteemed these only a concourse of Thieves, and
not worth the name of a War. Spartacus in the Fight took Varinius's Horse, and
there mist little but that the Gladiator had taken the Praetor. After these
Victories such multitudes came in to him, that he soon beheld seventy thousand
Men under his Command. He then set himself to provide Arms, and to make great
Preparations; so that the Consuls were sent against him with two Legions, one
of which engaging with Crixus near Mount Mount S. Angelo.
Gorganus, the Gladiator was killed with thirty thousand of his Men, scarce a
third part of his Army escaping: Spartacus having taken his March by the
Aventine to gain the Alps, and thence pass into Gaul, one of the Consuls got
before him to stop his passage, and the other Consul followed him at the Heels.
He fell upon them one after the other, and made them give ground, and indeed
put them to flight, in which the Vanquisher having taken three hundred Roman
Prisoners, he cut their Throats, and offered them in sacrifice to Crixus's
Ghost, his forces being afterward swelled to sixscore thousand Men, he marched
directly toward the City, and to make the quicker way, caused all the Baggages
to be burnt, his Prisoners murdered, and his Beasts of Loading slain. Upon the
way several Runaways offered themselves to him, but he would accept of none.
And when the Consuls to stop his March, engaged him once more in the Country of
Marches of Ancona.
Picene, he defeated them with a great loss of their Men. However, he changed
his design of going to the City, because he found himself too weak, his Army
not being sufficiently furnished with all things necessary for War: for he was
not aided by any Commonalty; and all his Forces were composed of fugitive
Slaves and Runnagate People. He went therefore and seized upon the Mountains,
and likewise of the City of Turine, and caused Proclamation to be made, that he
forbid all sorts of Merchants to bring any Gold or Silver into the Camp, and
all Soldiers to keep any: so with what they had they bought Iron and Copper,
without doing any wrong to those which brought it; and by this means they got
together abundance of Materials, with which they fixed themselves up Arms of
all sorts. Mean while they went daily out a skirmishing, and having once more
encountered the Romans, gained the Victory, together with a good store of Spoil
and Booty. It was now three years that this formidable War had lasted, which
only for having contemned it at first, because of the meanness of the Authors
of it, was so prodigiously augmented, and withal the ancient Roman Valor was
so bastardifed, that when the Assembly was held for naming of Praetors, there
was none found that demanded that Dignity, till Licinius Crassus a man of
Quality, and mighty rich, resolved to accept of the Pretorship offered; and
with six other Legions marched against Spartacus, there were joined to him the
other two Legions which the Consuls had, but he first decimated them as a
punishment of those shameful losses they had suffered: though some say, that
going to assault the Enemies with all the Legions together, and being beaten by
their fault, he then decimated them without considering the great number of
Men, amounting to no less than four thousand by which he weakened his Army.
However it were, after having managed so his Affairs, that his own men were
more afraid of him, than of the Enemy: ten thousand of Spartacus's Army being
encamped severally, he fell suddenly upon them, and made so great a slaughter,
that scarce a third part escaped into the Gross, commanded by their Captain.
Soon after he undertook Spartacus himself, defeated him, and drove him to the
Sea side, where, as he laid a design to get over into Sicily, to hinder him, he
shut him up with a Circumvallation he drew round his Camp, with a Ditch and
Palisade. Spartacus seeing himself invested, endeavored to break his way out,
to get into the Country of the * Samnites, but Crassus made him turn in again,
after having killed him six thousand Men in a Morning, and as many in the
Evening, with the lose of only three of his own, and seven wounded, so much did
the recent memory of their chastisement contribute to the Victory. After which
Spartacus, who expected some Horse which were to come to him from elsewhere,
durst no more engage with all his Forces, but contented himself to incommode
the Besiegers with frequent sallies, which he made sometimes on one side, and
sometimes on another, and with throwing flaming Faggots into the Ditch, to burn
the Palisade, and hinder the Work. Mean while he caused one of the Roman
Prisoners to be hanged up in the middle of the Place between his Camp and
Crassus's Trenches, to let his men know what they were to trust to, if they did
not gain the Victory. The news of this cruelty coming to the City, moved their
spirits to indignation, that a War should last so long against Gladiators. So
that judging the Remains of it were not despiseable, they gave order to Pompey,
newly returned from Spain, to go thither. But Crassus fearing lest Pompey
should carry away all the Glory of the end of this War, did all that he could
possible to draw Spartacus quickly to a Fight. On the other side, Spartacus,
who thought it not convenient to stay Pompey's coming, sent to demand peace
from Crassus, which being refused him as a thing unworthy the Grandeur of Rome,
and some Horse being come to him, he resolved to try the fortune of a Battle,
and having with all his Army froced the Circumvallation, he took his way
toward Brundusium, pursued by Crassus: but when he understood that Lucullus
returning to Rome after his Victory against Mithridates, was landed, he lost
all hopes of Retreat, and drew his Forces (which were yet numerous) into
Battalia. The Fight was very fierce, Crassus having to deal with so many
thousand desperate people, till such time as Spartacus wounded in the Thigh
with a Javelin; fell upon his Knees, where still he defended himself for a
while, covered with his Buckler, but at last was killed with all that were
fighting about him, all the rest were presently routed, and there was so great
a Butchery, that the dead could hardly be counted, nor could they find the body
of Spartacus. The Romans lost scarce a thousand men. Those that remained of
Spartacus's Men fled to the Mountains, whither Crassus having followed them, to
give the last stroke to the Victory, they formed of what were left forty
Battalions, and in that posture yet defended themselves valiantly, till they
were all killed, save six thousand, who were afterward hanged along the way
between Capua and Rome. Crassus having done all this in six Mouths, thought now
he yielded nothing to Pompey in Glory, and kept his Army as well as he. They
both demanded the Consulate, Crassus having passed the charge of Praetor
according to Sylla's Law, whereas Pompey had neither been Praetor nor so much as
Questor, and not above four and thirty years old, but he promised the Tribunes
to re-establish their ancient power. Thus these two Generals designed Consuls,
did not dismiss their Armies, but kept them near the City, and showed their
reasons for it, Pompey that he waited for Metellus, who ought to triumph at his
return from Spain; and Crassus that Pompey ought first to dismiss his Forces.
Now the people seeing this difference tended to new Dissentions, and that the
City was besieged by two Armies, besought the Consuls who were eminently feated
in the view of all in the great place, to be reconciled, at first both the one
and the other rejected their Prayers; but when the Divines told them that the
City was threatened with great miseries if the Consuls did not agree, the
people weeping, and casting themselves upon their Knees, renewed the same
entreaties, for they had not yet lost the memory of those miseries caused by
the Dissentions of Sylla and Marius. Hereupon Crassus beginning first to be
moved, rises from his Seat, and goes to present his hand to his Colleague, as a
sign of reconciliation: the other rising likewise went to meet him, and having
joined hands, all the people made acclamations of joy, wishing them all
happiness; so that before the Assembly broke up, both Consuls dismissed their
Armies. Thus was the Commonwealth happily delivered from the fear of a Civil
War. And this happened sixty years after the death of Tiberius Gracchus the
first mover of Seditions.

The End of the First Book of the Second Part.
APPIAN OF ALEXANDRIA, HIS HISTORY OF THE Civil Wars OF ROME.
PART II.
BOOK II.
The Argument of this Book.
I. CAtiline's Conspiracy. II. Caesar returned from Spain, renounces the
Triumph, and obtains the Consulate by the means of Crassus and Pompey. III.
During his Consulate he endeavors to get the favor of the People and Knights,
and obtains the Government of Gaul. IV. Cicero banished by Clodius, and
recalled by the favor of Pompey* V. Pompey underhand foments the Disorders of
the Commonwealth, to oblige the Citizens to create him Dictator: Milo kills
Clodius, and Pompey created Consul without a Colleague. VI. Pompey, Sole
Consul, issues out Warrants against those that had any way abused their
Charges. VII. Caesar demands the Consulate, which Pompey secretly opposes.
VIII. Curio declares for Caesar against Pompey; but at last in s^ight of Curio,
the Senate gives Power to Pompey to Arm against Caesar. IX. Curio* Anthony and
Cassius, Tribunes, go to Caesar; who receives them as Friends. X. Caesar
passing the Rubicon, strikes a general terror into Rome. XI. Pompey leaves
Rome, goes to Capua, the Consuls and most of the Senate follow him: He carries
over his Forces to Dyrrhachium, which he makes his Seat of War. XII. Caesar
comes to Rome; thence goes to Spain, to make War with Petreius and Afranius.
XIII. Curio goes to Africa, is defeated and slain. XIV, Caesar appeases a
Mutiny of his Army at Placen^ia, and prepares to pass into Epire. XV. Pompey
having made his Preparations, makes a Speech to his Army, and sends Garrisons
into Thessaly. XVI. Caesar, after encouraging those Forces he finds at
Brundusium, goes over Sea in Winter, and takes some places. XVII. Caesar
endeavoring to seize Dyrrhachium, is prevented by Pompey. XVIII. Caesar
endeavoring to come over Sea himself to fetch the Remainder of his Forces out
of Italy, being driven ^ack by Storm, sends Posthumus in his stead. XIX.
Anthony being landed with the rest of Caesar's Forces in Dalmatia, some light
Skirmishes happen. XX. Pompey gains a great Victory over Caesar. XXI. Caesar
retreats with his Army into Thessaly, and encamps about Pharsalia. XXII. Pompey
hopes to overcome him by Famine, without fighting. XXIII. At length he yields
to give him Battle. XXIV. Number of the Forces on both sides. XXV. Pompey and
Caesar encourage their Armies. XXVI. They draw into Battle, and give Orders.
XXVII. The Battle of Pharsalia. XXVIII. Pompey escapes into Egypt, where he is
murdered. XXIX. Caesar follows, revenges his death, and thence goes against
Pharnaces in Asia. XXX. He returns to the City; where after appeasing his
mutinous Soldiers, he resolves on his Expedition into Africa. XXXI. He defeats
Scipio, and the rest of Pompey's Party. XXXII. The death of Cato at Utica, and
the end of the African War. XXXIII. Caesar returns to the City, triumphs, and
rewards his Soldiers. XXXIV. He goes into Spain, and puts an end to the whole
War. XXXV. He returns to the City, where he takes on him the Sovereign
Authority. XXXVI. Lays a Design of War against the Parthians, and is thereupon
slain in the Senate. XXXVII. Brutus and Cassius retire to the Capitol. XXXVIII.
They treat an Accommodation with Lepidus and Anthony. XXXIX. Question put in
the Senate, if they ought to be justified; which Anthony with much Artifice
opposes. XL. He comes to the place of Orations, where the People applaud him;
he speaks against Brutus and Cassius in open Senate. XLI. Piso about to produce
Caesar's Will: Brutus and Cassius endeavor to justify their Action. XLII.
They descend from the Capitol, but are forced to leave the City: Caesar's
Funeral Honors celebrated. XLIII. His Elegy, and Comparison between him and
Alexander.

THe Dominion of Sylla, and all those things which passed afterward Spain
under the Conduct of Sertorius and Perpenna* were followed by diverse
Commotions, till the Civil War of Caesar and Pompey, which ended by the death
of Pompey; after which Caesar himself was slain in the Senate, as may be seen
in this Second Book of the Civil Wars. Now when Pompey had cleared all the Seas
of Pirates, than whom a greater Number was never seen in the Memory of Man;
brought to his end Mithridates King of Pontus, and reduced his Kingdom and
those other Countries he had conquered into what Form he pleased. Caeser was
yet but a very young Man; he was Eloquent, Capable of great things, Hardy,
Presumptuous, Ambitious beyond his Power; and being yet but Aedile and Praetor,
was run prodigiously in debt to gain the favor of the People, which is usually
given to the most prodigal. Catiline now likewise appeared at Rome, being of
one of the best Families of the City, but of no sound Wisdom; and besides, of
an ill Reputation, being suspected to have committed a Parricide on his own
Son, that he might espouse Aurelia Oristilla, whom he was in Love with, and who
would not contract Marriage with him as long as he had Children. He was with
all this, a great Friend of Sylla's, and very affectionate to his Party. Being
fallen into Poverty by his ambitious Profuseness, and yet considerable among
many powerful Persons, as well Men as Women, he set himself to demand the
Consulate, as a Step to raise him to the Tyranny: But he fell from his hopes;
most Men having conceived an ill Opinion of him, because they perceived him
affect an Authority not fit to be suffered in a Free City. Being then refused
the Consulate, which was given to Cicero, a Man well spoken of, and very
eloquent, he began to mock at the Suffrages of the People who had chosen this
Consul, whom out of Raillery he called New Man (for they had got a custom to
give that name to those who rendered themselves Illustrious, not by the Glory of
their Ancestors, but their own proper Virtue) and because that he was not born
in the City, they said that he was an Inmate, like those that lie in hired
Lodgings. After that time he meddled no more with the Government of the
Commonwealth; judging that it exposes Men to Trouble and Envy, and sets them
not a Round higher toward mounting to the Tyranny. Notwithstanding, he drew
great Sums of Money from many of those Women, who, weary of their Husbands,
hoped to get rid of them if any Change happened in the State: and with some
Senators, a quantity of Roman Knights, Plebeians, Slaves, nay, very Strangers,
formed a Conspiracy to seize on the Commonwealth: But his greatest Confidents
in this Affair were Cornelius Lentulus and Cethegus, at that present Proetors
of the City. He sent likewise throughout all Italy people to solicit those who
being enriched in Sylla's time, had ill spent what they had ill got, and would
be very well content to reach at such another Fortune. He sent C. Manlius to
Fesulae, and others to the Marches of Ancona, and into Pouilla, secretly to
levy Soldiers. The first advice of all these secret Preparations was given to
Cicero by Fulvia, a Woman of Quality, with whom Q. Curious (one of the
Conspirators, expelled the Senate for his scandalous life) was deeply in Love:
He boasted to his Mistress, that in a short time she should see him a great
Lord. Already the noise of the Attempts of those who had been sent throughout
all Italy increased, when the Consul set Guards in the City, and sent certain
Persons of Quality to the suspected Places. But Catiline, though no one durst
yet arrest him, because the business was not absolutely discovered, was fearful
lest Delay should increase the Suspicion; and hoping that the greatest
diligence would be most advantageous to him, sent Money before to Fesulae, gave
Order to the Conspirators to kill Cicero, and be night to set fire on diverse
Quarters of the City; and he causing Rods and Axes to be bore before him as a
Pro-Consul, and raising Soldiers all the way he passed, goes to find out Caius
Manlius, with design to fall upon the City as soon as it should be set on fire
with all the Forces he could get together. As for Lentulus, after having given
to the Conspirators every one his Quarter, Cethegus and he agreed that as soon
as they should have advice that Catiline was arrived at Fesulae, they should go
with Daggers under their Robes very early in the morning to Cicero's House,
where by reason of their Offices they might without difficulty get entrance;
and drawing him into a private place under pretense of some secret Conference,
stab him. That at the same time Tribune of the People.
Lucius Sextus should assemble the People, and accuse Cicero, that being
fearful by Nature, and suspicious without cause, he unseasonably and to ill
purpose troubled the City; and that the night following with a Band of
Conspirators they should set fire in twelve places, pillage the City, and kill
all the honest people they met with. Whilst Lentulus, Cethegus, Statilius and
Cassius, who were the Heads of the Conspiracy, formed these Designs, and waited
only for Opportunity to execute them, the Deputies of the Savoy and the
Dauphinate
Allobroges being come to Rome to complain of their Magistrates, were drawn
into this Conspiracy out of hopes they would cause the Gauls to rise against
the Republic. Lentidus being about to send them to Catiline, accompanied with
Vulturtius of Crotona, who carried Letters without Superscription: The
Allobroges, irresolute what they had to do, discoursed the matter with Fabius
Sanga, Protector of their City; for it is the custom of the Provincials, that
each Nation has his Protector at Rome. Cicero having received this advice from
Sanga, gave Order to arrest the Deputies as they were upon their Return, and
with them Vulturtius; who being brought into full Senate, confessed all that
they had negotiated with Lentulus, and attested that they had often heard him
say, that the Destinies had promised the Dominion of the City to three
Cornelius's; of which Cinna and Sylla had been the two first, and he should be
the third. Hereupon the Senate degraded Lentulus of his Dignity of Senator, and
Cicero went to cause the Conspirators to be arrested; whom having placed under
sure Guards in the Praetors Houses, he returned to the Senate to deliberate.
Mean while the knowledge of this Affair not being yet public, a great Tumult
was raised about the Palace; and all the Accomplices of the Conspirators took
the Alarm; in so much, that the Slaves and Freed Men of Lentulus and Cethegus
having raised a great number of Artisans, used their endeavors to break open
the Back Doors of the Praetors, to take thence their Masters by force: Which
being told Cicero, he came hastily out of the Senate; and having placed Courts
of Guard every where, returns and presses the Senate to give their Judgments.
The first whose Advice was demanded was Sillanus, designed Consul; for it is
the Custom to being to demand Opinions by those nominated to that Dignity,
because, as I imagine, the Execution of the Senate's Decrees regarding, them,
they ought to utter their mind with more Circumspection and Prudence. His
Advice was, the Conspirators should be punished with death; in which many
others followed him. Nero speaking in his trun, was of opinion they should for
some time be kept Prisoners, till Catiline was defeated, and they more fully
informed of the matter; which was also the Opinion of C. Caesar, who was in
some kind suspected as if a Partner in their designs, or at least to have had
knowledge of them: of which however, the Consul spoke not a word; not daring to
cope with a Man so beloved of the People. He added to Nero's advice, that they
should be distributed in the Cities of Italy, such as Cicero should choose; and
after the War was finished, be called to Judgment; for it was not reasonable to
condemn Persons of that Quality, without granting them a formal Trial. This
seemed just, and many returned to this Opinion, till Cato openly declaring his
suspicion of Caesar, and the Consul fearing that the night following a
multitude of Conspirators which were now in the Palace, and in fear for
themselves, should attempt some desperate Action, brought back the greatest
part of the Senators to the Opinion, that the Conspirators being taken in a
Flagrant Offense, ought to suffer without being allowed the Formality of a
Process. In so much, that before the Senate rose, Cicero himself caused the
Accused to be brought from the particular Houses where they were guarded, to
the Prison; where, without the knowledge of the People, he caused the Sentence
of death to be executed in his presence; then going to the place, attested to
all the World, they were no longer among the Living. Hereupon the rest of the
Conspirators dispersed, every one contenting himself that he had escaped; and
the City was that day delivered from great Inquietude. Catiline had already
assembled twenty thousand men, about the fourth part of which were armed; with
which he took his March toward Gaul, where he hoped to complete his
Preparations: But Anthony, the other Consul, overtaking him near the Alps,
defeated him without much pains; for as he had laid this Design with little
Prudence, so he as imprudently managed it, and was forced to fight before he
was prepared. Notwithstanding, most true it is, that neither Catiline nor any
of those Persons of Quality with him would fly, but were all slain fighting in
the midst of their Enemies. The death of Catiline was the end of this
Conspiracy, from which Cicero's Prudence secured the Commonwealth: So that
being before known only for his Eloquence, he in this Occasion made himself
famous for his Actions; and no Person doubted but he had saved his Country from
the Ruin wherewith it was threatened. Wherefore public thanks were given him:
and after many Acclamations, Cato saluting him, called him The Father of his
Country: Which is indeed an Appellation so glorious, that Cicero having been
the first to whom it was given for his Merit, it is the Custom to this day to
honor only such Emperors with it as are worthy: For as soon as any come to the
Monarchy they join not this Title with their other Sirnames, nor is it granted
but by a public Decree, and as a Testimony of accomplished Virtue.

As for Caesar, being ready to go for Spain, the Government of which he
According to Buda 's Computation, this will not amount to above forty thousand
Pounds. Plutarch says he owed one hundred and thirty Talents; which according
to the same Compatation of Buda, will be one hundred ninety five thousand
Pounds.
two Millions and five hundred Thousand Deniers to be worth nothing. He agreed
with them as well as he could; and being entered into his Government, he amused
not himself to go from City to City to hear talk of Affairs, or to administer
Justice; such things had no Correspondency with the Greatness of his Designs:
But he began to raise Soldiers, and to make War with the rest of the People of
Spain; whom after having plundered their Territories, he made Tributary to the
Romans: In so much, that having sent a great Sum of Money to the Treasury, the
Senate granted him the Honor of Triumph. As they were making in the Suburbs
Magnificent Preparation for his Entry, the day designed for the Election of
Consuls drawing nigh, of necessity those who demanded that Dignity must be
present; and it was not permitted after entering the City without Pomp, to make
another Entry in Triumph. He had a long time passionately desired the
Consulate, and the things necessary for his Triumph were not yet ready:
Wherefore he presented a Request to the Senate, that he might have permission
to demand that Dignity by his Friends, which he knew had been granted others,
though it were forbid by the Law. The last day being come whereon those that
pretend to the Consulate must give in their Names, and Cato continually
opposing Caesar's Request, he renounced his Triumph, entered into the City, and
made his Declaration, expecting the day of the Assembly. Mean time Pompey,
Illustrious and Powerful, because of the great Actions he had done against
Mithridates, demanded of the Senate the Ratification of many things he had
granted to Kings, Tetrarchs and Cities, which many opposed out of the Envy they
bore this Great Man: But especially Lucullus; who being recalled out of Asia
when he had quite weakened the Forces of that King, having left the same Pompey
that War easy to terminate, vaunted that the Honor of that Victory belonged
to him; and had drawn Crassus to his side. Pompey vexed that his Designs were
opposed, makes Alliance with Caesar, promising him upon Oath that he would
serve him to get the Consulship; and soon after by Caesar's means Crassus was
reconciled to Pompey. Thus these three great Men served one another, to obtain
what they desired* And the Historian Varro, who writ a Book of their Union,
calls it the Three-headed Conspiracy. Wherefore the Senate beginning to suspect
their Power, gave to Caesar, L. Bibulus his Enemy for his Colleague; between
whom there soon happened such a difference as made them take up Arms, one
against the other.

Caesar knowing the Art of Dissembling, made in full Senate an Oration to
Bibulus upon the Subject of Concord, as if he would prevent their Dissentions
from causing any Inconveniency to the Commonwealth. Now, whilst it seemed in
all outward appearance that he endeavored seriously for Peace, and that the
other, who doubted nothing, stood not upon his Guard, all on a sudden he comes
to the Senate accompanied with a great Multitude of People, and proposes a Law
in favor of the Poor: He distributed Lands to them; gave to them that were
Fathers of three Children Campania, the most fertile Territory belonging to
Italy; and by this means got the Love and favor of the People, for there were
twenty thousand found under that Qualification. And when many of the Senate
opposed the Publication of these Laws, he withdrew from the Palace, as if not
able to endure their Injustice; and all that Year there was no more Session of
the Senate. But he went to the place for Orations; and mounting the Tribunal,
demanded of Pompey and Crassus, who still assisted him, if those Laws did not
to them seem reasonable, and after having received their approbation, demanded
the suffrages of the people, who came to that Assembly with Arms under their
Gowns. As for the Fathers (for the Senate could not Assemble but by the order
of both Consuls) they held some private meetings in Bibulus house, but all that
did nothing against the Power and Interest of Caesar, yet they ceased not to
provoke Bibulus to oppose the Laws of his Colleague, whatever should happen by
it: That it might rather be said he was overcome by the Malice of another, than
by his own remissness. He ventured therefore upon the place one day as Caesar
was making an Oration to the people, and a Tumult arising about some words they
had together, they came to blows. Bibulus his Rods were broken, and some
Tribunes that took his part wounded, but he without being daunted, presented
his naked Neck to Caesar's Faction, with these words; If I cannot persuade my
Colleague what is just, I will at least by my death make him Criminal and
Execrable. However, his Friends pulled him thence, and caused him to enter the
Temple of Jupiter Stator, which is nigh the place. Then Cato being strong and
vigorous, overthrew all those stood in his way, got up into an eminent place,
and began to speak; but those of Caesar's Party drew him out of the place:
which yet made him not give over; for he returned again by another way, crying
out continually against Caesar; till being again carried away by force, the
Consul got the Laws past. The People having sworn to observe them, they would
have the Senators take the same Oath; which some by Cato's persuasion having
refused to do, he proposed to the People, to declare Criminal whoever would not
swear: And this Declaration being passed, they all took the Oath for fear; even
the Tribunes themselves, who had opposed in vain, since the Law was ratified.
Mean while a certain man of the People called Vetius ran into the middle of the
place, crying out he was sent by Bibulus, Cicero and Cato, to kill Caesar and
Pompey; and that Dagger was to that purpose put in his hand by Posthumous,
Lictor to Bibulus. Though this matter were much suspected, Caesar made use of
it to embitter the Multitude, and referred the Information till the next day;
but Vetius was the night following killed in Prison. This Accident admitted of
diverse Interpretations; but Caesar cast the fault on some who had a sense of
their being guilty; and managed things so, that the People permitted him to
take Guards, to secure him from such Attempts as might be made upon his Person.
And now Bibulus quitted absolutely the Government of the Commonwealth, and
remained in his house as a private Person all the Remainder of his Consulate.
But his Colleague seeing himself Master of all, without troubling himself to
make any Information about Vetius business, labored to make more Laws in
favor of the People; and according to his promise, made all that Pompey had
done to be approved. In these times the Knights, who were the middle Order,
between the Senate and the People; powerful, both by reason of their proper
Riches, and the Profits which they made of the Imposts which they farmed from
the People, highly courted Caesar; in so much, that supported by his favor,
they presented their Request to the Senate for an Abatement of the Rent of
their Farms: And when the Fathers demurred upon, and withstood it, without
taking notice of their Oppositions, by the sole consent of the People he abated
them a third part. Whereupon the Knights having received a greater favor than
they demanded or durst hope for, cried up to the Skies him from whom they had
received it: And now Caesar grew stronger than he was before in the favor of
the People, for by this only benefit he gained a great number of interessed
Persons to sustain his Dignity. Besides all this, to gain so much the more the
good Grace of the Citizens, he gave them often the Divertisements of Shows and
Chases; by which he ran in debt every where, much beyond what he was worth,
every day surpassing himself in the Magnificence of his Gifts, and the
Profuseness of his Largesses. At last he brought Matters so about, that they
gave him the Government of the Gauls, as well on this side as beyond the
Mountains, for five Years, with fonr Legions. After having obtained it, knowing
that he must be a long time absent from the City, and that Envy has more power
than Favor, he gave his Daughter in Marriage to Pompey; not but that they were
already very good Friends, but he was fearful left the too great Success of his
Arms might stir up Envy even in a Friend. Moreover, he designed for Consuls the
Year following the stoutest of his Faction, A. Gabinius, one of his greatest
Confidents; and L. Piso, his Father in Law, with whom he had lately Allied
himself ( Cato perpetually crying out that these Marriages tended to a Tyranny)
and for Tribunes of the People he nominated Vatinius and Clodius Pulcher. This
Clodius was infamous for having slipped into the Sacrifices of the good
Goddess, where none but Women ought to enter: in which place he had laid a
Blemish upon the Chastity of Caesar's own Wife; who yet never expressed any
Resentment, because this Man was beloved by the People; but however he
repudiated his Wife, there were some who afterward made him come to a Trial as
a Prophaner of Sacred Things. Cicero pleaded his Accusation, and Caesar himself
was called in as a Witness; but he deposed nothing against him: On the
contrary, he advanced him to this Office of Tribune in hate to Cicero, who
frequently used to blame the Union of Pompey, Crassus, Caesar.
these three Men, as tending to the Ruin of the Public Liberty. Nor thought he
much to pardon one of his Enemies the Affront he had received, so he might be
revenged of another, who had only offended him in suspecting he had an ill
Design; so much was his Ambition more violent than his Love. And yet there is
some appearance that Caesar received the first Obligation from Clodius, who
served him with all his Credit and Interest when he demanded the Government of
the Gauls. However it were, this is what passed in Caesar's Consulate; which
being expired, he went into the Province in Quality of Pro-Consul.

Clodius caused Cicero to be called to Judgment, for having contrary to Law put
to death Cethegus and Lentulus before they were condemned. But he bore this
Accusation with as much Cowardice, as he had showed Courage in the Noble Action
he did; for he went through the Streets with his Beard grown, his Hair
unkembed, clad in a sad Color, and begging of every one he met to assist him,
he was not ashamed to be importunate with People that were utterly unknown to
him; in so much, that having no regard to Decency, whilst he would have moved
Compassion, he made himself ridiculous; and that Man who all his life had
managed others Affairs with so much Courage, suffered himself to fall into the
Excess of Fear in his own Cause. It is reported, the like happened to
Demosthenes in Athens; and that Orator who had so bravely defended so many
accused, being accused himself, chose rather to fly than to defend himself
before the Judges. In like manner Cicero seeing that Clodius, whom he followed
through the Streets in the posture of a Suppliant, derided his Prayers and
Submissions, and reviled him with words, lost all hope, and resolved to go into
a Voluntary Exile, whither many of his Friends followed him, the Senate having
given him Letters of Recommendation to all Kings and Sovereigns where he
designed to make his Retreat. Whereupon Clodius demolished his Houses as well
in the City as the Country; and became so fierce and arrogant, that he esteemed
himself equal to Pompey, the most powerful Man of that time in the City.
Wherefore Pompey made an Agreement with Milo his Colleague, a Man of
Enterprise; to whom he promised the Consulate, to serve him against Clodius,
and obliged him to propose to the People the Return of Cicero; believing that
being returned, he could talk no more of the present Estate of the
Commonwealth, that he would have in mind the benefit newly received, and be
always ready to oppose the designs of Clodius. Thus Cicero banished by Pompey's
means, was by the favor of the same Pompey again recalled to his Country,
about sixteen Months after his departure, and his Houses both in City and
Country were rebuilt at the Public Charge. When he returned there went such a
Concourse to meet him at the Gates, that the whole Day was scarce enough for
their Complements; which happened also to Demosthenes, when after his Exile he
was received into Athens. Mean while Caesar, glorious for the great things he
had done in Gaul and Brittany (as we have said, speaking of the Affairs of
Gaul) and laden with vast Riches, repassed into Cisalpine Gaul, that he might
a little refresh his Army, wearied with continual War. As soon as he was
arrived there, and that he had sent store of Silver to a great many Persons in
the City, the Officers of the Commonwealth for that Year, together with all the
other Governors of Provinces, and Generals of other Armies, came to salute him;
so that there was sometimes sixscore Rods about his Person. There came likewise
more than two hundred Senators; some to thank him for Favors received, some to
get Money of him, or something else of that kind. For now he alone could do all
things, having so many Forces at his Service, and so much Money in his Coffers;
and besides, he was always ready to oblige all the World. Pompey and Crassus,
the Companions of his Power, being come as well as others to see him, they
consulted together about their Affairs; and agreed, that Pompey and Crassus
should take the Consulate, and should prolong to Caesar the Government of Gaul
for other five Years; after which they parted. At the time for Election of
Consuls, Domitius Aenobarbus standing up Competitor with Pompey, and the day of
Nomination being come, they came both before Day to the place where the
Assembly is held; and after some sharp words, fell to blows. In the Tumult he
that carried the Light before Domitius received a Wound with a Sword, upon
which all his People fled, and he with much hazard escaped to his House:
Pompey's Robe was also brought home bloody; so much danger did they both run in
this sudden Broil. Crassus and Pompey having obtained the Consulate, gave
Caesar, according to their promise, the Government of Gaul for five Years
longer, and between themselves they divided the Provinces and the Armies.
Pompey had the Governments of Spain and Africa, whither he sent Friends to
command in his place, and he stayed in the City: And Syria, with all the
Neighboring Countries remained to Crassus; for his Head run upon a War against
the Parthians, as a thing easy, and which would yield no less Glory than
Profit. But when he left the City to go toward it, there happened a great many
ill Presages: The Tribunes of the People forbad him to go to make War against
the Parthians, from whom the People of Rome never received any Cause of
Complaint: And because he did not forbear at their defense, they cursed him
with public Execrations; in contempt of which having passed farther, he
perished in the Enemy's Country, with all his Army, together with a Son he had
of the same name; for of a hundred thousand Men he lead thither, scarce ten
thousand escaped into Syria. But we have spoke of this Defeat in what we have
already writ of the Affairs of Parthia.

The People about this time being oppressed with Famine, gave to Pompey Iulia,
Pompey's Wife, dyed great with Child, and by her death left all the City in
Alarm, for fear left the Alliance between Caesar and Pompey being exterminate,
they should not ever long take up Arms against each other; for now for a long
time there had been nothing but Disorder and Confusion in the Commonwealth. No
Dignities were attained to but by Factions, or by Gifts, or by Criminal
Service, and sometimes by blows of Stones and strokes of Swords. No man was
ashamed to buy Votes, for the People sold them in open Assembly. In short,
there was one, who, to obtain an Office in the Commonwealth; spent About one
hundred and twenty thousand pounds Sterling.
eight hundred Talents. Besides, the yearly Consuls now made had no hopes to
make War or to command Armies; being excluded by the Management and Workings of
the three sworn Friends. III men enriched themselves with public Moneys, or by
taking Bribes from those they designed for their Successor; wherefore no honest
Man would put in for an Office; in so much that in this Disorder the
Commonwealth was eight Months without Officers. Pompey set his hand to all
this, that they might be obliged to choose a Dictator; and it was openly talked
already in the Companies, that there was no other Remedy for the Present
Distempers, than by giving the Sovereign Authority to some Person of Probity
and Power. This Discourse could mean no other than Pompey, who commanded great
Armies, and seemed affectionate to the Public Good, respectful to the Senate,
modest, prudent and desirable by all Men for his Courtesy, whether true or
feigned. Pompey appeared by his words, not to be at all rejoiced with the
Opinion the Citizens had of him; nay, he seemed to be troubled at it: but yet
he did all that was possible secretly to advance the Execution of his Designs.
He fomented the Disorders of the Commonwealth by leaving it without
Magistrates: And though Milo, who was now Tribune, had served him in the
reducing of Clodius, yet he hindered him from demanding the Consulate; still
temporizing, till Milo, vexed to see himself so deceived, left the City, and
retired to Lavinia, the place of his Birth: That City is reported to be the
first built by Aeneas in Italy, nineteen Miles from Rome. As he was going,
Clodius on Horseback was by chance returning out of the Country, to the City:
they met about Bovilles, and passed by without saluting each other; but a
Servant of Milo's, whether he had received Command to do it, or that of his own
accord he would rid his Master of an Enemy, fell upon Clodius, and with his
Sword, cut him into the Head that he fell: His Groom carried him into the next
Inn, whither Milo with all his Followers hasting to him, in the uncertainty he
was in, whether he were yet dead, or that there was some life left in him,
thrust him into the Belly; protesting, that what had before passed was without
his order or consent, but he willingly finished a Crime, for which he knew he
must answer. The People astonished with the report of this Accident, spent all
that night in the place in Arms; and when it was day, the Body was brought
before the Tribunal for Orations: Soon after it was taken up by some Tribunes
his Friends, assisted by the Multitude: Who, whether it were to honor this Man
of the Senatorian Order, or to shame the Senate, who by their negligence seemed
to favor such Actions, carried him into the Palace; where some of the most
violent of them, breaking down the Benches, made a Pile; and setting fire to
it, burnt not only the Body, but likewise the Palace and some Private Houses
adjoining. As for Milo, he still had so much boldness, that the fear he stood
in of being punished for such an Assassinate was much less than his indignation
to see so much Honor paid to the Memory of Clodius. Therefore taking in his
Train great numbers of Country People, together with his own Household: And
having gained the People by Largesses, and corrupted M. Cecilius, Tribune, with
Money, he came to the City full of Confidence. As soon as he appeared, Cecilius
arrested him in the midst of the Street, and led him as it were by force into
the place where those who had received his Presents were assembled, under
pretense of making him answer for his Action. The Tribune seemed to be so
enraged against him, that he would not grant him any time to prepare himself
for his Defense: But indeed he pressed the business out of hopes that Milo
being acquitted by this Judgment, might not be obliged to answer before other
Judges. Milo having at first declared that this Death was not premeditated, for
had he any such design he would never have taken his Wife and whole Family
along with him to execute it, spent the rest of his time in Invectives against
Clodius, who he would have pass for a debauched Castaway, and the Head of
those Debauchees who, in burning his Body, had burnt the Palace. Before he had
finished his Speech, the other Tribunes of the People and the Citizens who had
not been corrupted by his Presents, came running into the place, from whence
Cecilius and Milo withdrew disguised like Slaves; yet they failed not to make a
great Slaughter, making no distinction between Milo's Friends and others; but
charged indifferently on the Citizens and those that were none; especially on
those were best clad, or had about them any rich Ornaments which they had a
mind to; for there being no Form of a Commonwealth, in the first Tumult that
happened every Man gave himself over to Rage and Passion. And because in this
Occasion numbers of Slaves had taken Arms against People that had none, they
set themselves to rob, and run into Houses to see what they could catch, under
pretense to seek for Milo's Friends. Thus some Days passed in these Disorders,
wherein Fire and Stones, and all other Instruments of Fury and Rage were made
use of. Mean while the Senate affrighted, assembled in the Palace, and cast
their eyes on Pompey, as if they designed him presently Dictator; and indeed
there appeared no other Remedy for the Miseries wherewith the Commonwealth was
oppressed. But Cato dissuaded the Fathers, and brought them to his Opinion, to
make him Consul without a Colleague; so that he might have the Power of a
Dictator, disposing all things alone, but was subject to be called to an
Account of his Administration, according to ancient Custom. Being then the
first that ever was created Consul alone, Governor of two great Provinces,
General of an Army, and powerful in Treasure; he obtained the Sovereign
Authority in the Commonwealth by the Advice of Cato himself; who gave him his
Vote for fear he should hinder his Voyage to Cyprus, whither he was to go to
reduce that Kingdom into the Form of a Province. Clodius had got it so decreed,
to revenge himself of Ptolemy, King of that Island; who, out of Covetousness,
had contributed but two Talents to redeem him from Pirates when he was formerly
taken. And Cato, when he went, had not much trouble to settle the Affairs of
Cyprus; for as soon as the King had advice of the Decree of the Senate and
People of Rome, he threw all his Treasure into the Sea, and killed himself.

At first Entrance into his Charge Pompey brought to a Trial all those who this
space of time being almost twenty years, comprised likewise the Consulate of
Caesar, and those of his Party had some suspicion that it was done to affront
him; for why run so far back? they remonstrated therefore to Pompey, that it
was more convenient to provide against present Evils, than to go to rip up old
fores, and put to pain so many considerable persons, among whom they named
Caesar himself. He seemed to take it amiss they had alleged Caesar, as not
being suspected with any of those crimes; notwithstanding he reduced the time
to begin from his second Consulate, but he would not utterly suppress the Law,
saying, that the punishment of these crimes was of great importance toward the
re-establishment of a perfect good order in the Commonwealth. After this Law
was ratified, great number of Processes were formed, and that the Judges might
be free from all fear, himself sat President, attended by a strong Guard of
Soldiers. The first condemned in their absence were Milo for the death of
Clodius, Gabinius convicted to have violated Humane and Divine Right, by
entering armed into Egypt without the order of the Senate, and against the
prohibition of the Sibyls; with Hypsaeus, Memmius, Sextus, and many others for
having bought their Offices. As for Scaurus, when many people tumultuously
entreated for him, Pompey caused the Usher with a loud voice to tell them they
should expect the sentence of the Judges; and because notwithstanding they
continued to make a great broil with the Accusers. Pompey's Soldiers fell upon
and killed some of them; so after silence made, Scaurus was condemned to
Banishment; and for Gabinius, besides Banishment his Goods were confiscate. The
Senate after having given praises to Pompey, augmented his Forces with two
Legions, and extended his authority over all the Provinces of the Empire. Some
days after, the Law of Pompey promising impunity to whoever would accuse
another: Memmius one of the condemned summoned to Judgment L. Scipio
Father-in-law to Pompey, and guilty of the same crime: upon which, Pompey
having changed habit: imitated him; and Memmius, after having complained of the
ill orders in the Commonwealth, let fall his suit.

Pompey made Scipio his Colleague for the rest of his Consulate.
Notwithstanding he labored hard for those were to succeed him in that Dignity,
keeping the same power he had before, and disposing alone of all things in the
City; for the Senate had so great an affection for him, that Caesar grew
jealous. And indeed in his Consulate he had not at all considered that supreme
Order, whereas Pompey in a little time had restored the languishing
Commonwealth, without disobliging any of the Senators, unless where his Office
forced him to it: but though the banished men from all parts gathered
themselves about Caesar, giving him counsel to have a care of Pompey's Law, of
which he was the principal object; he seemed not to believe any thing of it,
and comforting them in their misfortunes, still spoke of Pompey with applause.
However, he obliged the Tribunes to pass an Ordinance by which he had leave to
make a demand of the Consulate the second time, though absent, the which was
granted him by the consent of Pompey himself yet Consul. But doubting the
Senate owed him no good will, and fearing if he descended to the condition of a
private man, his Enemies would treat him but ill, he contrived all ways
possible, that he might not quit his Army till he was designed Consul;
wherefore he demanded of the Senate the continuation of his Commission for some
time, at least in the hither Gaul, if he could not obtain it in both.
Marcellus, who succeeded Pompey, opposed it; whereupon Caesar told him that
brought him the news, This here shall gain it: clapping his hand on the Hilt of
his Sword. He had formerly founded the new Coma under the Alps, and given to
the City the Privileges of the Latin Cities, that is to say, whoever had been
Magistrate a whole year together was by right a Freeman of Rome, which gave
another occasion to Marcellus to show his spite; for finding at Rome an
Inhabitant of Coma, who the year before had exercised the Magistracy, and was
therefore reputed a Citizen of Rome; to affront Caesar, he caused him to be
beaten with Rods (a punishment they never make a Roman Citizen suffer, what
ever his crime be) and treating him as a Stranger, bid him go find out Caesar
and show him the print of his stripes. So arrogant was this man; nay, so far
did malice transport him, that he would have sent Successors to Caesar before
the time of his Commission was expired; but Pompey, whether he thought it
dishonorable for him to suffer it, or that he seemed to be Caesar's Friend,
would not let that brave man who had so well served his Country receive an
affront for so short a time. Besides, none doubted but at the time limited he
must return to the condition of private persons; wherefore they designed
Consuls for the approaching year Emilius Paulus, and Clodius Marcellus Nephew
to that Marcellus we were speaking of. And the Dignity of the Tribune of the
People was given to Curio a man in favor with the multitude, and withal very
eloquent. These were three declared Enemies to Caesar, of whom Clodius would
never be drawn to his Party what ever money he offered him; Paulus by means of
About two hundred and twenty thousand Pounds.
fifteen hundred Talents was wrought upon so as not to be against him; and
Curio, who was almost ruined with his debts, gave himself wholly up to him for
somewhat a greater sum. Paulus with his money built a most magnificent Palace,
which is still to be seen, called by his own name, and is one of the most
beautiful Works of the City. Curio, that he might not appear to pass all of a
sudden to the contrary Party, proposed a Law for the reparation of the
Highways, of which he demanded a Commission for five years, he had no thoughts
of gaining it, but only sought an occasion of Rupture with those of Pompey's
Party, who he knew would not fail to oppose it; in which he was not deceived.

Clodius then spoke of sending Successors to Caesar, because the time of his
Paulus kept silence: Curio, who seemed concerned for neither Party, applauded
Cladius's motions; but he added, that Pompey ought likewise to quit his
Provinces, and dismiss his Armies, and thus the Commonwealth delivered from
all fear, would be in perfect liberty. And when several alleged that not to be
just, Pompey's time not being expired, Curio began to cry out aloud, and
proclaim to all, that they ought not to send Successors to Caesar, if Pompey
did not likewise quit his Governments, and that they being one jealous of
another, the City would never be in peace, but by taking the command from both.
He said all these things because he knew Pompey would keep his Provinces and
his Armies; and perceived well that the people had an aversion for him, because
of the Law he had made against Largesses and Bribes; wherefore the people, who
thought this opinion generous, highly praised Curio, who only for the defense
of the public liberty, did not stick to oppose himself to the hatred of both
of them; so that sometimes they brought him to his House with universal
applauses, strewing Flowers in his way as he passed, who like a courageous
Wrestler durst engage in a Combat so hard and adventurous; for nothing was
accounted more daring than to oppose Pompey: yet at this time he was not in the
City, being sick and gone to take the Country Air, from whence he wrote to the
Senate: his Letter began with praising Caesar for his noble Actions; then he
proceeded to amplify what he had done himself, and that the third Consulate
being offered him, together with the Provinces and Armies, he had not accepted
of all these things, only to settle a better order in the Commonwealth: But,
said he, what I have accepted almost against my will, I will willingly resign
to those that would resume them, without expecting till the time limited by the
Command be past. This Letter was writ with much artifice to persuade all the
world of Pompey's integrity, and make Caesar at the same time odious, who even
after the time of his power expired* would not lay down Arms. Being returned to
the City, he talked after the same manner, nay, promising at present to depose
himself, and saying, that Caesar his Friend and Ally would not think it hard to
do the like; and that it was easy to believe, that after long and laborious
Wars against the most warlike people of the world, and having so far extended
the Dominion of his Country, he would be content to pass the rest of his life
in Honors, in Sacrifices, and in Repose, of which he stood in need. He said
not all this but with design to hasten the sending Successors to Caesar, whilst
he contented himself to promise. But Curio discovering his cunning, told him,
it was not enough to make promises if they were not presently executed, that
Caesar ought not to disarm unless he disarmed also; and that it was neither
advantageous for him to foment private enmities By this authority; nor for the
Commonwealth, that so great power should be in one man's hands; whereas being
divided between two, one would curb the pride of the other, if he attempted any
thing against the Senate and People of Rome. He pursued his Discourse,
declaming against Pompey, saying, that he aimed at Sowereign Power, and if the
fear of Caesar could not keep him within bounds of Duty, he would never be kept
in; and therefore it was his advice, that if they would not obey the authority
of the Senate, they should declare them both Enemies, and raise Forces to make
War upon them. Curio deceived all the world by uttering this his judgment, and
quite cancelled the opinion, that ever he had been corrupted by Caesar's Gift;
but Pompey grew angry, and after having severely threatened him, retired in
discontent to a House he had in the Suburbs, that the Senate began to enter
into distrust both of the one and the other. However, they esteemed Pompey more
affectionate to the public good; for they had not yet forgot the odious
Consulate of Caesar. There were likewise some who seriously believed, that the
City could not be secure if Pompey first dismissed his Forces, because his
Rival puffed up with the success of his Arms was abroad extremely powerful.
Curia thwarted that opinion, by saying, that on the contrary they had need of
Caesar to reduce the other. But seeing they could not follow his advice, he
dismissed the Senate without any thing resolved on; for the Tribunes of the
People have power to do it, which gave cause to Pompey to repent his having
re-established the authority of the Tribunes which Sylla had almost utterly
qualified. Yet it was agreed in the Senate before they parted, that Pompey and
Caesar should each send a Legin into Syria, to defend that Province, which
might be invaded after the loss sustained in Parthia. That being resolved on,
Pompey, pursuing his old cunning, sent to redemand of Caesar a Legion he had
lent him when Triturins and Cotta his Lieutenants were defeated; whereupon
Caesar gave every Soldier Twen^y five Crow^s.
two hundred and fifty Drachms, and sent them to the City with another of his
own; but because danger appeared toward Syria, they passed their Winter
Quarters at Capua. Those that led them sowed a great many ill reports of
Caesar, and assured Pompey, that Caesar's Army tired with long labor, and
willing to see their Country, would without any difficulty submit themselves to
him so soon as he should pass the Alps; which they either said to deceive
Pompey, or out of ignorance; for Caesar had none but good and faithful
Soldiers, whether it were that being accustomed to War they loved it, or that
led by interest, they were fixed to him, by those profits which ordinarily
attend Victories, together with the liberality of their General. Indeed he gave
profusely to them to prepare them to the execution of his Designs, of which
they were not ignorant, nor therefore became they less affectionate to him; but
Pompey giving credit to the reports brought him, neither made any Levies of
Men, nor any other preparations capable to sustain so great a War. To proceed,
when they next in Senate debated this Affair, and that the Fathers spoke their
opinion one after the other, the Consul by a wile having demanded them apart if
they were of the opinion to take away Pompey's Command, many were of a contrary
mind, and after asking if they thought it convenient to send a Successor to
Caesar, they all agreed to it: But Curio then asking anew if they would not
that both should dismiss their Forces, there was but two and twenty
contradicted it; and three hundred and seventy all affectionate to the public
good, followed Curio's judgment: whereupon the Consul dismissing the Assembly,
cried out, Well then, take Caesar for your Master. Soon after a false rumor
coming that Caesar had passed the Alps, and was marching directly to the City,
all the World was alarmed, and the Consuls proposed to the Senate to send for
the Legions were at Capua, to employ against him as an Enemy of the State.
Whereupon Curio saying that the news was false, the Consul grew angry, and
said, Since in consulting of Affairs with all the Senate, I am hindered from
providing for the safety of the Common-welth, I will provide alone according to
the power which I have. After which, going out of the City with his Colleague,
and presenting a Sword to Pompey: We order you, said he, my Colleague and I to
march against Caesar, and fight for your Country, and to that purpose we give
you that Army is at Capua, or in any other place of Italy with power to raise
Forces at your discretion. He declared he would obey them, because it was their
command, but adding withal these words, If no better Expedient can be found.
Which he did craftily to persuade them of the sincerity of his intentions.

Though Curio had no farther power in the Administration of the Commonwealth,
Pompey: but seeing he labored in vain, and lost all hopes of being able to
serve his Friend, the time of his Tribuneship being almost past, and likewise
growing fearful for himself, he departed on a sudden to go and find out Caesar,
who being lately returned from England, had crossed that France*
Gaul which is bounded by the Rhine, and passed the Alps with five thousand
Foot and three hundred Horse: He met him on the way to Revenna, which is the
Frontier of Italy, and the last Town of his Government, where he received Curio
with all possible testimonies of good will; and after having thanked him for
the services he had done him, desired his counsel in what he had to do. Curio
advised him to send as speedily as he could for his Forces, and lead them to
the City; but Caesar chose rather first to try some way of Accommodation,
wherefore he writ to his Friends that they should endeavor to obtain of the
Senate, that he might only keep two Legions with the Government of the hither
Gaul and Illyria, till such time as he was named Consul, and that he would
deliver up, to whoever they should send for Successor, all the rest of the
Province, and all the remainder of his Forces. Pompey was content with the
proposition; but because the Consuls opposed it, Caesar writ to the Senate a
Letter, which Curio, having rode About four hundred and ten Miles.
three thousand and three hundred Furlongs in three days, gave to the new
Consuls as they entered the Palace the first day of the year. In the beginning
he spoke in advantageous terms of the great things that he had done; then he
protested that he was ready to quit his command, so Pompey would do this same,
but if Pompey kept it, he would keep it too, and should suddenly be in the City
to revenge the outrages done as well to him as to his Country. When they heard
these last words, they all cried out that he declared War by this Letter, and
immediately nominated for his Successor L. Domitius, who departed soon after
with four thousand Men new levied: and because Anthony and Cassius, Tribunes of
the People, were of Curio's mind, the Senate grew so much the hotter against
him, and giving Pompey's Army the name of the Army of the Commonwealth,
declared that of Caesar Enemy to their Country. And at last Marcellus and
Lentulus Consuls ordered those Tribunes to go out of the Senate, for fear lest
without having regard to their Dignity, though sacred, they should be evilly
treated. Then Anthony leaping from his Seat in Choler, invoked with great cries
the faith of men and God, and lamented that an authority which had hitherto
been held sacred was no longer in security, and that they shamefully drove from
the Senate those who proposed saving advice, as if they had been guilty of
Murder, or some other crime. Afte having said these words, he departed in a
fury, foretelling, as if he had been a Divine, the Wars, Proscriptions,
Banishments and Confiscations wherewith the City was threatened, and making
horrible imprecations against those who were the cause of all their miseries.
Curio and Cassius withdrew likewise with him (for Pompey's Soldiers were
already come to environ the Palace) and they departed all three together in the
Habit of Slaves upon hired Horses, and so got to Caesar. He showed them in the
condition they were to his Soldiers, to enrage them the more, telling them,
that after all their great services they were declared Enemies to their
Country, and that those great men had been shamefully driven out of the Senate,
because they had only said a word in their defense.

Gaul could not come in a long time to Caesar, and that with so few Forces as
he had he would not take the Field, gave order to Pompey to send for out of
Thessaly thirteen thousand Men that were of the old Soldiers, and to enrol men
in pay of the most warlike Nations circumad^acent, with power to take money out
of the Treasury to defray the expense of the War; and in case the public money
should fail, there were several private men would advance it, till such time as
it could be levied upon the Cities of Italy, which they labored to do with
much haste and rigor. For Caesar's part he had sent people to bring his Army,
but being accustomed to succeed more by diligence, striking a terror and
hardiness, than any mighty preparations, he resolved to begin this great War
with his five thousand Men, and seize of some places of Italy, were commodious
for him: first he sent before to Rimini some Centurions and Men who were to
enter the City as Passengers, and then all of a sudden to seize on that City
(the first that offers it self coming from Gaul) and himself in the Evening
going out as if he had found himself ill after a Feast, leaves his Friends, and
mounting in a Chariot drove himself the same way, followed at a distance by his
Cavalry; when he came to the Banks of Rubicon he stopped some time, looking
upon the water, and thinking of the calamities he went about to be the cause
of, if he passed that River in Arms. At length turning to those of his Train;
My Friends, said he, if I pass not this River immediately, it will be to me the
beginning of all misfortunes; and if I do pass it, I go to make a world of
people miserable: and therewithal as if he had been pressed forward by some
Divinity, he drove into the stream, and crossing it, cries with a loud voice;
The Lot is cast. From whence continuing on his way with speed, he seized on
Rimini by break of day, and all in an instant places Garrisons in all the good
places of that Country, which he reduced either by force or favor. Mean while,
as it happens in these unexpected Allarms, the whole Country was filled with
people flying, the Countrymen forsaking their Habitations, and nothing was to
be heard but Cries, and Lamentations, and Groans, yet no man knew from whence
this disorder came, but all imagined that Caesar was upon them with all his
Forces. The Consuls receiving the news, gave not Pompey, who perfectly
understood War, leisure to prepare himself, and take his own time, they began
to press him to be gone out of the City, and make Levies of Forces in Italy, as
if Rome had been in immediate danger of being taken and plundered. And the
Senate surprised with so unlooked for an irruption, were terrified, and began
to repent they had not accepted those reasonable conditions offered by Caesar;
but this was not, till fear had opened their eyes, and led them back from
Partiality to Reason; for now men talked of a great many Prodigies and
extraordinary Signs which had appeared in the Heavens, that it had rained Blood
in many places, that in others the Statues of the Gods had sweat, that many
Temples had been struck with Thunderbolts, that a Mule had engendered, besides
an infinite of other things which seemed to foretell the change of the present
state, and the ruin of the Commonwealth, so as it should never be
re-established; wherefore they made Vows and Prayers as in a public
Consternation. And the people remembering again the miseries they had suffered
because of the Dissentions of Sylla and Marius, cried out, that they ought to
take away the Command as well from Caesar as from Pompey, since that was the
only means to prevent a War: Cicero himself was of opinion that Deputies should
be sent to Caesar to treat an Accommodation, but the Consuls absolutely opposed
it. Favonius quipping at Pompey because of a word he had once said with too
much arrogance, Bid him stamp on the ground with his Foot, and see if any armed
Men would rise. To which Pompey answered, You will want none so you will follow
me, and are not troubled to leave the City, and Italy it self if there be
occasion: for people of courage, said he, do not make liberty consist in the
possession of Lands and Houses, they cannot want in any place they come to; and
if they lose not their courage, will soon recover their Houses and Lands.

After having said these words, and protested he would hold him for an Capua.
The Consuls followed him presently, but the other Senators weighted it a little
longer, and spent all the night in the Palace, without resolving any thing* and
at length as soon as it was break of day the greater part followed the same way
after Pompey. Mean time, Caesar having reached at Corfinium L. Domitius, whom
they had sent for his Successor with four thousand Men; of which he had already
lost a part, he besieged him in the City, from whence endeavoring to escape,
the Inhabitants stopped him at the Gate, and brought him to Caesar, to whom the
Remainder of his Forces yielded themselves; he received them kindly, that he
might draw others by their example, and without doing any wrong to Domitius, he
suffered him to go whither he pleased, with all his Equipage, hoping by this
courtesy to oblige him to take his Party, yet without hindering him from going
to find out Pompey. These things being done in such an instant, Pompey on the
other side marches from Capua to Nucera, and from Nucera to Brundusium, that he
might from thence pass to Epire, where he designed to establish the Seat of the
War, he writ to all Provinces, and those that commanded them, to Kings
themselves, to Sovereigns, and particular Cities, that with all convenient
speed they should send him what Forces they could supply him with, in which
every one labored with all his power. He had his own particular Army in Spain,
ready to march at his first command, and for those Legions he had with him he
gave one part of them to the Consuls, whom he sent before into Epire, they
embarquing at the same time at Brundusium, happily crossed the Gulf, and landed
at Dyrrachium, which some by mistake think to be Epidamnum; for Epidamnus King
of the Barbarians, who inhabited those Countries, built near the Sea the City
to which he gave his own name; and Dyrrachus his Grandson by his Daughter,
whom they said was begot by Neptune, added to this City a Port which they call
Dyrrachium. This Dyrrachus being in War with his Brother Hercules, returning
from Erythrea, assisted him on condition to have a part of the Country for his
reward. Hence comes it that the Dyrrachians call him their Founder, as having
part in the Lands which they possessed, not that they disavow Dyrrachus, but
they are well pleased out of vanity to derive their original from a God, rather
than a Man. It Is reported, that in the Fight Hercules ignorantly slew Ionius
the Son of Dyrrachus, and after having paid him all Funeral Honors, threw the
Body into the Sea, which from him was called Ionian. Some Phrygians having
deserted their Country, seized afterward on this, and on the City it self,
where they remained a long time, till after them the like was done by the
Taulantieni, who are a people of Illyria; and again by the Liburnians another
Nation of Illyria who used to rob their Neighbors in very swift Brigantines,
which the Romans afterward making use of, called Liburnicks. The Dyrrachians
chased away by the Liburnians, having called to their assistance the
Corcyrians, powerful by Sea, drove out again the Liburnians, and received into
their City part of the Inhabitants of Corcyra, to whom in all likelihood they
gave habitation in the Port; and because the name of Dyrrachium was thought a
name of ill Augury, they called it Epidammun, after the name of the City which
stands at a good distance from the Sea: and so Thucydides calls it, though to
this day the old name carries it, and it be called Durazzo.
Dyrrachium* The Consuls were already arrived, when Pompey led the rest of his
Forces to Brundusium, expecting the return of the Fleet to transport them; and
Caesar coming thither to besiege him, he hindered his forming a Siege till such
time as the Fleet arriving in the Evening, he embarked, leaving only to defend
the Walls a party of his best Soldiers, who mounting the same night on those
Ships he had left for them; and having the Wind favorable, soon reached^ the
other. Thus all Pompey's Forces left Italy, and passed over in to Epire with
their General.

Caesar hereupon found himself at a stand, he knew not on which side to Pompey,
and he was fearful lest the Army of old Soldiers he left in Spain, should fall
into the rea^ of him, if he went to pursue those that seemed to fly from him.
In the end he resolved to march first of all for Spain, and having drawn off
five Bodies of Armies, left one at Brundasium, another at Otranto.
Hydrunto, another at Tarentum for the Guard of Italy; he sent Q. Valerius with
another to seize on Sardinia, because it was fruitful in Corn; and Asinius
Pollia went by his, orders with another into Sicily, where Cata commanded. At
his first coming Cato asking him if it were by Decree of the Senate, or
Ordinance of the People, that he thus entered armed into a Province of which
another was Governor, he made him only this short answer; He that is now
Master of Italy sent me hither. To which Cato having replied, That for the good
of the Province he forbore to revenge the affront till another time, embarked
himself for Corcyra, to go and seek out Pompey. As for Caesar himself having
drawn off some Forces toward the City, he came thither, and finding the people
affrighted with the miseries they had undergone in Sylla's time, he reassured
them, exhorting them to have better hopes, making them fair promises, and
justifying his clemency to his Enemies by the example of Domitius, who being
fallen under his power, he had sent away with all his Equipage, not doing him
the least displeasure. After which he broke open the Treasury, and
notwithstanding the opposition made by Metellus Tribune of the People, whom he
threatened to kill if he gave not over, carried away that Treasure which no man
till then durst touch. Some say it was put there during the invasion of the
Gauls, with public execrations on whoever durst be so bold as to touch it,
unless it were to make War upon the same Gauls: but Caesar said he delivered
the Commonwealth from those imprecations when he conquered the Gauls; and so
there was no more danger on that side. He gave to Emilius Lepidus the
Government of the City, and to Marc. Anthony the Command of all the Forces of
Italy, and of Italy it self. As for the other Provinces he nominated Curi^
Successor to Ca^o in Sicily; to Quintus Valerius he gave the Government of
Sardinia, to C. Antonius that of Illyria, to Licinius Crassus the Cisalpine
Gaul. He likewise gave order for the speedy fitting out two Fleets for the
Guards of the Ionian and Hetrurian Seas, of one of which he made Hortensius
Admiral, and of the other Dolabella. Having thus sufficiently fortified Italy
against any attempts Pompey might make, he advanced toward Spain, where being
arrived he set upon Petreius and Afranius Pompey's Lieutenants, over whom he at
first got no advantage, being encamped near the Enemy about Lerid^.
Ilerd^ in a high place surrounded with Rocks, whither he could not cause any
Corn of Forage to be brought him, but over the Bridges of the River Segre, the
River swelling on a sudden with the Winter Rains, broke down the Bridges, so
that those who were gone to guard the Carriages that were to come to Caesar's
Camp, not being able to repass the River by reason of this accident, were all
cut in pieces by Petreius's Men; and Caesar himself with the rest of the Army
were hardly put to it, to pass over the rest of their Winter, being to fight
against Famine, ill Weather, and the Enemy, who in a manner held them besieged.
But Summer being come, Afranius and Petreius retreating into the farther Spain
to join another Army newly set on Foot, Caesar got before and crossed them in
their March, continually intrenching himself in their way, and gaining the
Passages. One Evening part of their Army being advanced with design to choose a
place proper to encamp in, found themselves invested; so that seeing no way to
escape the Soldiers, by lifting up their Bucklers made a sign that they
yielded. But Caesar, to gain his Enemies by clemency, sent them to Afranius,
without stopping one, or suffering a Dart to be thrown at them, which
occasioned that there was continual intercourse between the two Camps, and in
common discourse the^ began to talk of an accommodation; for already were
Afranius and many of the Officers of opinion, that they should quit Spain to
Caesar, so he would grant them a safe retreat to Pompey, when Petreius running
through the Army began to cry out against this proposition, and to kill with
his own hand all such of the contrary Party as he found in his Camp, and this
in so great madness, that he run his Sword into the Body of one of his own
Tribunes who would have stopped him in this fury; whereby the Soldiers enraged
at this cruelty did but the more esteem the clemency of Caesar. It happened by
chance that he cut off their way to go to water, which put Petreius and
Afranius into a necessity of demanding a Conference between the two Armies. It
was agreed that they should quit Spain, on condition that he would conduct them
to the River Var, and from thence would permit them to retreat to Pompey. When
they were arrived at the Banks of that River, he caused all the Romans and
Italians they had in the Army to be drawn together, and spoke to them in this
manner:

The Oration of Caesar.
YOu know, my Enemies, (for you will understand me best by that name) that I
did no injury to those who were sent before to mark out a place to encamp in,
they yielding to discretion: nor to your selves when I had reduced you to want
of water; though Petreius finding a Party of my Men on the other side the Segre
cut them all in pieces: if you think your selves obliged to any acknowledgments
for these kindnesses, pray make report of them to all Pompey's Soldiers.

After having said these words, he suffered them in all saftety to pass the
River, and made Q. Cassius his Lieutenant in Spain.

Actius Varus commanding Pompey's Forces in Africa assisted by Iuba King of
Mauritania in favor of their amity and alliance: Curio had a design to go make
War upon him, and passed out of Sicily with two of Caesar's Legions upon twelve
long Ships, and some other Ships of Burden: being landed at Utica he put to
flight some Numidians in a small Engagement of Horse; and thereupon suffered
his Army drawn up in Battalia to proclaim him Emperor. This was an Honor
which formerly Soldiers gave to their Generals as a Testimony of their Valor,
and which the Generals accepted after having done some exploit in War: but at
present, as far as I can understand, this acclamation is made to none but who
had slain ten thousand of their Enemies. But to proceed, whilst Curio was yet
upon the Sea, the Africans imaginining that he would come and post himself in
that place which is called the Camp of Scipio, as pretending to the same Glory
which that General had gained in Africa, poisoned all the waters thereabouts;
and in effect they were not deceived, for Curio coming to encamp there, a
Sickness spread through his Army. As soon as the Soldiers had drunk of the
water, their sight grew dim, then they were seized with a great drowsiness,
which was followed by vomiting, and at last by Convulsions; wherefore he
transported his Camp near to Utica with great labor, making his sick Army
march over Marshes of so great extent. But when he heard of Caesar's Victories
in Spain, he took heart, and engaged the Enemy in a very strait place, where
after a fierce Encounter the Enemy had six hundred killed, besides many more
wounded, and Curio lost only one Man. Mean while, as Iuba came on with his
Forces, false intelligence was brought to Curio, that the King was returned
from the River Bagrada, which was not far off, to repulse his Neighbors, who
had made an irruption into his Kingdom, and had only left Saburra with some few
Forces: Curio believed it, and in the greatest heats of Summer, and about three
hours in the day made his Army march toward Saburra, through ways full of Sand
and Dirt, and no Water; for all Streams were dried up by the heat of the
Summer; and the King himself with Saburra were seized of the River; whereupon
Curio fallen from his hopes, made a swift retreat toward the Mountains,
equally incommoded with heat, thirst and weariness. The Enemies having observed
it, passed the River, and drew up their Army in Battalia, and he was so
imprudent as to come down into the Plain with his Forces, tired as they were,
and bring them to fight. The Numidian Horse having invested him, he sustained
them for some time, by giving ground, yet keeping his Battalions close, but
seeing the Enemy continued their charge, he once more regained the Mountains:
Pollio fled in a good hour to the Camp near Utica, for fear lest Varus taking
the opportunity should make some disorder; and Curio again rashly renewing the
Fight was killed, and all those with him; so that after Pollio not one returned
to Utica. After this ill success of Curio's rashness near Bagrada, the Enemies
cut off his Head, which they carried to King Iuba: and when the news was
brought to the Army which he had left near Utica, Flamma who commanded the
Ships got off to Sea with his Fleet before any of the Land Soldiers could
embarque; so that Pollio was forced to get into a Boat to go and entreat some
Merchants which were about to enter the Port of Utica, to bring their Ships
close to shore without the City, and take in his Soldiers. His prayers were so
urgent, that some of them in the night came near the Beach, but the Soldiers
thronged so fast into them, that some of them sunk to the bottom, and those who
got out to Sea were thrown overboard by the Mariners for the Money they had
about them. Those who stayed behind at Utica fared not a whit better; for next
morning yielding themselves to Varus, Iuba coming thither, made them all be set
upon the Walls, and saying they were part of his Spoils, caused them to be
slain with Darts, notwithstanding all the entreaties of Varus to save their
lives. Thus two Roman Legions going into Africa under the conduct of Curio
perished with all their Horse, light armed Foot and Baggage: and Iuba thinking
he had done Pompey a great piece of service returned into his Kingdom.

About the same time Anthony was defeated by Dolobella one of Pompey's Illyria;
and another Army of Caesar's that was at Placentia mutinyed against their
Officers, under pretense that they spun out the War in length, and that they
paid not the Soldiers the thirty Minas About thirty Crowns.
a Head, which Caesar had promised them at Brundusium. As soon as he had advice
of it, he hastened from Marsellia to Placentia, where finding the Soldiers
still disorderly, he spoke to them in this manner:

The Oration of Caesar.
YOu know my usual diligence, and see well, that the length of time whereof you
complain proceeds only from our Enemies flight, whom we cannot yet overtake;
and yet notwithstanding, you who have enriched your selves in Gaul, serving
under me, and are engaged to me not for a part of this War, but till it shall
be quite finished, forsake me in the height of the business, you mutiny against
your Officers, and would command those you ought to obey; wherefore being a
testimony to my self of the affection I have always born you, I will treat you
according to Petteius's Law, and decimate the ninth Legion because they have
been the first Mutiniers.

At these words all the Legion began to weep, and the Tribunes threw themselves
on their Knees to beg their pardon. At last Caesar after some denyals suffered
himself to be overcome, and pardoned the whole Legion, save only six and twenty
Soldiers, who appeared to be the Ringleaders of the Mutiny, of whom yet he put
only twelve to death, to whom the Dice proved unlucky; and it being made
evident, that one of these twelve was absent at the time of the Mutiny, Caesar
in his stead condemned to death the Centurion who had impeached him. The Mutiny
of Placentia thus appeased, he returned to the City, which he struck with a
general fear; and without staying for a Sessions of the Senate, or the suffrage
of any one Magistrate, created himself Dictator; but either thinking this
supreme Degree of Honor might expose him to envy, or possibly judging it
superfluous, eleven days after (as some say) he designed himself Consul with
Servilius Isauricus, and made Governors of Provinces, or changed those already
in Command as he pleased. To M. Lepidus he gave Spain; to A. Albinius Sicily;
to Sextus Peducaeus Sardinia; and to Decimus Brutus the new Province of Gaul.
He likewise distributed Corn to the People, then much straitened with Famine;
and at the request of the same people consented to the return of the Exiles,
except only of Milo. But when they demanded a Release of their Debts, into
which they had been forced to run by reason of the Wars and Tumults, it being
impossible for them to pay, because the inheritances they might otherwise sell
to clear themselves were now valued at nothing, he absolutely refused it; yet
he created Censors to put a value on things to be sold, and ordered that the
Creditors should take them as ready Money, and in part of so much of their
Debts as they should be valued at. That done, about the depth of Winter he sent
Commissaries of War to all his Armies, to bring them to the Rendezvous he had
appointed at Brundusium; and departed from a City in the Month of December,
without staying for the first day of the next year, as his Quality of Conful
obliged him. The people went out in great crowds to attend him, both to pay him
that Honor, and to beg of him to make a reconciliation with Pompey (for it was
mre than likely that which soever of the two got the Victory would become
Master of the Commonwealth) and he by great journies went on toward
Brundusium.

Pompey on the other side without any intermission caused Ships to be Caesar's
Ships in the Ionian.
Superior Sea, waited for his passing over. Mean while he continually employed
his Soldiers in some exercise, where himself was still present, and in person
began any work even beyond what his age seemed to give leave to, which gained
him all Men's Hearts, who thronged in from all parts as to some Spectacle to see
his Exercises. Caesar's Forces were composed of ten Legions: and for Pompey, he
had five Legions which went over out of Italy with their Horse, two of which
remained of Crassus's Forces which he had led against the Parthians, and some
part of those who went into Egypt under Gabinius, all amounting to eleven
Legions of Italians, and about seven thousand Horse, besides the Auxiliary
Troops of Ionia, Macedon, Peloponnesus, Boeotia, the Archers of Crete, and the
Slingers of Thrace; he had likewise some Gaul and Galatian Horse, and
Comagenians sent him by Antiochus, Cilicians, Cappadocians, and some Soldiers
of Armenia the less, Pamphylia, and Pisidia. He designed not to make use of all
these Strangers to bear Arms, but destined the greatest part of them to labor
in the Trenches and other Works, wherein he would not employ the Italians, that
he might not divert them from the Exercise of Arms. These were his Land Forces;
for the Sea he had six hundred long Ships fitted and armed for War, a hundred
of which besides Seamen were filled with Roman Soldiers, on whom was the
chiefest relyance, besides a great many Ships of Burden which carried his
Ammunition and Provisions; the Command of all this Fleet was committed to
several Vice-Admirals, over all whom M. Bibulus was Admiral. Things thus
prepared, he caused all the Senators and Knights he had with him to assemble
together, and at the Head of his Army thus spoke to them:

The Oration of Pompey.
THe Athenians (Gentlemen) formerly deserted the Walls of their City, when they
fought in the defense of their Liberty, because they thought the Men composed
the City, and not the Buildings, by which means they soon recovered them, and
in a short time after built them much more beautiful than before. Our
Predecessors likewise went out of Rome, when the Gauls like a Torrent invaded
them, and Camillus returning with them from Ardea, regained it in the same
condition they had left it. In a word, those that are wise think their Country
every where, where they can preserve their liberty. These examples and the
hopes of a like success have obliged us to come hither, not to forsake our
Country, but the better to prepare our selves to defend it* and to revenge it is
cause upon him, who having a long time designed to oppress it, is become Master
of it by their means whom he has with gifts corrupted. He, I say, who being by
you declared Enemy to the Commonwealth, has by his audacious Enterprises
invaded the authority of the Senate and Roman People, and given the government
of your Provinces to those of his Faction, to some that of the City, and to
others that of Italy. Judge after this, what violence and cruelty he will
forbear to exercise toward his Country, if we be so unhappy to let our selves
be overcome. He, who commits such insolences in the beginning of a War whereof
he fears the event, and whilst he is liable to receive the punishment of his
Crimes, which is what we ought to wish and hope to see by the Divine
Assistance; for he has in his Party none but Wretches corrupted by the Money
he has drawn out of our Province of Gaul, who chose rather to be his Slaves
than to live equally with other Citizens: for my part I never was wanting, nor
shall not be wanting to expose my self to all sorts of Dangers; I offer my self
to perform the Function of General or Soldier; and if I yet have the same good
fortune and the same experience which hitherto have made me every where
victorious, I beseech the Gods they may prove advantageous to my Country, and
that I may not be less happy now when the Dispute is whether I shall prevent
it is being oppressed, than when I extended the Bounds of its Empire. We have
reason to have confidence in the protection of the Gods, and in the Justice of
our Cause: for never can any be more just and honest to whoever loves his
Country and the Commonwealth. Besides those great preparations we have made
both by Sea and Land, and the Forces will come in to us from all parts as soon
as the War is begun, is sufficient to encourage us; for all the Levant Nations
as far as those bordering on the Euxine Sea, whether Greeks or Barbarians, are
of our side, and all the Kings of those people who are either the Romans
Friends or Allies or mine, will send us Soldiers, Arms, Provisions, and all
things necessary. Let us go then, and give to our Country the assistance it
merits, which your Virtue exacts from you, and my good Fortune demands from me;
but remember always Caesar's Pride, and with readiness to obey my Orders.

Pompey's last words were followed by a general acclamation of the whole Army,
Senators and other persons of Quality, who all desired him to lead them whither
he thought fit. But he considering that it was the very worst season of the
year; and besides, imagining that Caesar impeded in the City the creation of
Consuls, would not attempt to cross a Sea usually tempestuous, before the end
of Winter, gave order to those commanded the Sea Forces to guard the passage,
and sent his Army into Garrisons in Thessaly and Macedon; so little foresight
had he of what might happen.

Caesar he departed, as we have said, in the Month of December for Brundusium,
that by this unlooked for diligence he might startle the Enemy, and finding
neither Provisions nor Military Preparations, nor indeed those Men he hoped to
find, he assembled those were there; and thus spoke to them:

The Oration of Caesar.
THough we are now (Fellow Soldiers) in the depth of Winter, and that other
Troops that ought to have been here are not yet come, nor such Preparations
made as I expected, yet I am so firmly persuaded, that diligence has been the
principal thing has given me success in all my Undertakings, and so much
assured of your Generosity, that nothing can retard the resolution I have taken
to pass over into Epire. Wherefore let us leave here our Baggage and Servants,
that the Ships not being over-pesterd may with more convenience carry us, and
we cross the Sea without being perceived by our Enemies, let us oppose our good
Fortune to the bad Weather; and if our numbers be but small, let our courage
supply that defect, let us furnish out our wants at the Enemies Expense. All
those things they have in such abundance will be ours as soon as we are landed,
and we shall fall on the braver when we know we have no hopes but in Victory.
Let us go then and make our selves Masters of their Munitions, of their
Provisions, of their Baggage, of their Servants, whilst the cold shuts them up
in their Houses, and Pompey thinks I am spending the Winter in the City in the
pomps of the Consulate, and in Sacrifices. Your selves know how much sudden
surprises are advantageous in War. I will perform a brave exploit only by going
before, ordering things necessary, and preparing a secure retreat for those are
to follow us. I could heartily wish you were already on board, that the time I
waste in talking might be spent in sailing; so great an earnestness I have to
let Pompey see me whilst he thinks I am amusing my self in exercising the
Consulate in the City. Though I am sure of your good will, yet I expect your
answer.

All the Soldiers cried out he should lead them whither he pleased: as soon as
he descended from the place whence he had spoke to them, he caused five Legions
and six hundred chosen Horse to march toward the Sea, who being embarked,
rode at Anchor, because of a Storm that happened, as is usual in the Month of
December. The contrary Winds (do what they could) stayed them till the first
day of the following year, when two Legions more coming to Caesar, he caused
them to embark on the Ships of Burden; for he had left those few long Ships he
had for the Guard of Sicily and Sardinia. They they set sail all together; and
the whole Fleet being carried by the Storm to the Ceraunian Rocks, there landed
them, and went immediately back to fetch the rest of the Army. Caesar with
those he had marched toward Orica, but because the ways were rought and narrow
he was often forced to file off; so that had there been any suspicion of his
March, it might easily have been prevented, because of the cragginess of the
ways. At length having about break of day with much labor got together all his
Army, he presented himself before the City, where he that commanded, by consent
of the Inhabitants, who thought it not convenient to shut the Gates against a
Roman Consul, brought him the Keys, and afterward continued on his Party in
the same Quality of Governor of that place. Lucretius and Minutius who were on
the other side of Orica with eighteen long Ships to guard the Ships of Burden
which carried Corn to Pompey, hearing of this Surrender, sunk the Ships and
Corn to the bottom, and fled to Dyrrachium. From Orica Caesar hastened to
Apollonia, where the Inhabitants having opened the Gates, Tiberius the
Governor left the City.

Caesar after these fortunate Beginnings, drew together his Forces, and let
Orica and Apollonia without fighting, and already (as he had foretold) gained
from the Enemy what things they wanted, even before Pompey had knowledge of it.
But if now we can, said he, make our selves Masters of Dyrrachium, where
Pompey's Magazines both of Munition and Provision are, all that he with so much
Cost and Pains has been storing up together will become your Recompense. Having
said these words, he went right to the City, continuing his March Night and Day
by long and difficult ways. Pompey receiving advice hereof, advances from
Macedonia to prevent him, causing all along as he passed, trees to be cut down,
Bridges broken, and all Provisions to be burnt, to retard Caesar's March if he
should come that way; for he thought (as indeed it was true) the preserving of
his Stores was of no small importance. The Soldiers of both Armies were so
eager to gain Dyrrachium first, that if in any place they saw at a distance
either the dust raised by their Fellows, or Fire, or Smoke, they presently
imagined it was the Enemy, and run as if they had been to run a race; they gave
themselves neither time to eat, nor to sleep, but with Shouts and Hollas
encouraged one another, pressing their companions forward to follow the Guides,
which in the night carried Torches before them, and which sometimes caused
great tumults, and as often Allarms as if the Enemy had been upon them; some
quite tired threw away their Baggage, and others privately withdrawing out of
the Body, stopped in the Valleys to take a little repose which they stood in
need of, and preferred before the fear or danger they might be in of their
Enemies. Yet in the end of this Contention between the two Parties, Pompey got
first to Dyrrachium, and encamped near the Walls, he sent presently his Fleet
to Orica, which returned under his obedience, and after caused the Sea to be
guarded with more diligence than before. Caesar pitched his Camp directly
against him, on the other side of the River Alora, which parted the two Armies,
where yet there happened some Horse Skirmishes, now one Party and then another
passing the River, but neither would engage with all their Forces, because
Pompey thought good first to exercise his Forces that were newly levied, and
Caesar expected those that were to come from Brundusium. He thought if they
stayed till Spring, and then should come over with Ships of Burden (and he had
no other) they could no way be secured, Pompey having such a number of Galleys
to defend the passage; but if they embarked during Winter, they might slip by
their Enemies, who now lay harbored in the Islands, or if they were engaged,
might open themselves a passage by the violence of the Winds, and the Bulk of
their Vessels, wherefore he did all he could to hasten their coming.

Brundusium, he resolved himself to go privately over, thinking they would
sooner follow him than any other; wherefore without discovering his design to
any one, he sent three of his Slaves to a River not above twelve Furlongs
distant, to secure some very light Boat, and a good Pilot, as if he had an
intention to send him upon some design, and feigning himself ill, rose from
Table where he desired his Friends to continue, and taking the habit of a
private man, mounting his Chariot, came to the Boat as Caesar's Messenger. He
had given orders to his Slaves to command the Mariners what they had to do,
whilst he kept himself concealed under coverlids and the darkness of the night.
Though the wind were contrary, and very raging, the Slaves made the Pilot put
off, bidding him be of courage, and make use of his time to escape the Enemy,
who were not far from them, they labored so hard, that by force of Oars they
got the Mouth of the River, where the Waves of the Sea beating against the
stream of the River, the Pilot (who on the other side was afraid of falling
into the Enemies hands) did all was possible for man to do, till seeing they
gained nothing, and the Seamen not able to pull any longer he left the Helm.
Then the Consul discovering his Head, cried out, Courage, Pilot, fear no storm,
for thou carriest Caesar and his fortune. Whereupon the Pilot and his crew
astonished at these words, redoubling their force passed the Mouth of the
River, got out to Sea; but because the Winds and the Waves still drove them
toward the Lee shore in spite of all their endeavors, and day approaching,
the Mariners fearing to be discovered by the Enemy, Caesar angry at fortune
that envyed him, suffered the Pilate to ragain the River, and the Boat
presently running before the Wind, came to the place from whence they set out:
Caesar's Friends admired at his boldness, others blamed him for having done an
action more proper for a private Soldier than a General; and he seeing his
design had not succeeded, and that it was impossible for him to pass over
without being known, sent Posthumous in his place. He first had charge to tell
Gabinius that he should presently embark the Army, and bring it to him; and if
he refused, then to address himself to Anthony, and at last to Calenus, and if
none of these three had spirit enough to execute these orders, he had a Letter
for the Army in general, by which the Soldiers were exhorted to come over and
follow Posthumous, landing at any place they could, without regarding the
Ships; for he had more need of Men than Ships, so much confidence had he in
fortune, indeed more than in prudence.

Pompey then judging he ought no longer to delay, drew out his Army Caesar; but
two of his Soldiers being entered into the River to sound the Ford, and one of
Caesar's Men having slain them both, he took this as an ill presage, and led
back his Forces into the Camp, though many lamented the loss of so fair an
occasion. As for the Forces at Brundusium, Gabinius refusing to follow the
orders brought by Posthumous, with all that would follow him, went the way of
Illyria by Land, taking such long Marches, that his Men being quite tired, the
Inhabitants of the Country cut them all in pieces, for which Caesar could not
yet be revenged, being engaged in affairs of more importance. Anthony shipped
away the rest, and having the Wind right aft, passed in sight of Apollonia with
a merry Gale; but about Noon the Wind beginning to slacken, they were
discovered by twenty of Pompey's Galleys* who made up toward them, they were
fearful lest the Stems of the long Ships running on board them should pierce
through and sink them; however, they were preparing to fight, every Man laying
hold of his Sling, his Javelin, or Arms of the like nature: when on a sudden
there sprung up a fresher gale than the former; so that Anthony setting his low
Sails, went ^pooning away before, whilst the others not able to bear Sail, were
tossed too and fro, where the Winds and Waves pleased, and at length driven
into the Narrows, and cast upon Lee shores where there were neither Port nor
Harbor. Thus Anthony safely recovered the Port of Nymphaeum without losing
more than two Ships, which unfortunately running upon the Flats were taken by
the Enemies. Caesar having now with him all his Forces as well as Pompey, they
pitched their Camps in sight of each other, upon eminencies where each
entrenched themselves, raising out Forts, which were often attacqued by one
Party and the other, one General still striving to block up the others Army,
and cut them off from Provisions, so that there happened many Skirmishes. In
this new mode of making War, as Caesar's Men one day proved the weaker in a
Fort assailed by the Enemy, a Centurion called Sceva, famous before for many
gallant actions, being wounded in an eye, leaped from the Rampart, and making a
sign with his hand for silence, as if he had something to say, he called to one
of the Centurions of the contrary Party, a Man of Reputation, to whom he said,
Save the life of one of thy own quality, save the life of thy Friend, send some
body to lead me by the hand thus wounded as I am. Whereupon two Soldiers
stepping in to receive him as a Runaway, he slew one before he suspected the
deceit, and knocked the other down. He did this action out of pure despair he
was in of being able to defend the place; but it succeeded better than he
imagined; for this happy success so raised the courage of his Companions, that
they repulsed the Enemy, and remained Masters of the Fort. Minutius who
commanded had a great share in the Glory as well as in the danger of this
Assault; for it is said his Buckler was six and twenty times pierced through,
and he was wounded in the eye as well as Sceva; so Caesar honored them both
with many Military Recompenses. Mean time, he had formed intelligence in
Dyrrachium, and upon hopes the place would be delivered to him, he came with a
small company to the Gate which is near the Temple of Diana; but his design
being discovered, came off again without doing any thing. The same Winter
Scipio, Father-in-law to Pompey, bringing him another Army out of Syria, was
set upon in Macedon by C. Calvisius, whom he defeated, and slew him a whole
Legion, fourscore Soldiers only escaping. There came now no more Provisions to
Caesar by Sea, Pompey being the stronger, wherefore the Soldiers were forced to
make Bread of a certain kind of Herbs, pieces of which being by some Runaways
brought to Pompey, thinking it would be to him a joyful present: instead of
rejoicing at it, What sort of Beasts, said he, have we to deal with? Caesar now
pinched with necessity drew together his Forces, resolving to engage Pompey
whether he would or no; but Pompey being now possessed of several good Forts,
kept close in his Trenches, which so much troubled, Caesar, that he undertook a
work almost impossible, and scarcely credible, which was to enclose all the
Forts Pompey had, with a Trench drawn from the Sea, judging that though his
design took not effect, he should gain the reputation of a man capable of great
things; for this Trench must have been A hundred and fifty Miles long.
twelve hundred Furlongs in length. Pompey on his part drew Lines and Trenches
directly opposite to Caesar's Works: thus one eluded the Enterprises of the
other.

Pompey bravely repulsing Caesar's Men, and having put them to flight, pursued
them to their very Camp. Many Colors they took, and had taken the Eagle of a
Legion, if the Standard Bearer who carried it had not thrown it with all his
force into the Trenches, that he might preserve it for Caesar; for the Roman
Soldiery have a great respect for their Standards: Caesar with other Companies
came to the relief of those that fled, but so terrified were these too, that as
soon as they beheld Pompey at a distance, though they were near the Camp, it
was not possible for Caesar to stop them, nor to make them go in again, nor so
much as to hearken to him, the Soldiers fled away in disorder without shame,
without reason, or without any thing to oblige them to it: Caesar might well
run up and down, and with reproaches show them, that Pompey was yet a great way
off. This hindered them not from throwing down their Arms, and flying, or else
standing still silent and immovable, fixing their eyes upon the ground with
shame and confusion, so great was that panick fear had possesed them. There was
an Ensign who, as his General would have stopped him, presented him the point
of his Javelin, but he was upon the spot punished by the Guards as he deserved.
Those who escaped into the Camp were so cast down, that they kept no Guard at
the Gates, nor lined the Rampire, but the Trenches were left without any to
defend them. All men believed that Pompey might have thrown himself into the
Camp with the Flyers, and so have made an end of the War, if Labienus, (for God
would have it so) had not persuaded him rather to pursue those he had routed,
then march up to the Trenches; him therefore he believed, whether it were that
he was not in such haste as to make an end of all at once, or that seeing the
Camp defenseless, he feared some Ambuscade, or else being victorious, scorned
that little advantage. Going therefore to charge those were still abroad, he
made yet a great Slaughter, so that in two Engagements in one day he gained
twenty eight Colors, and twice lost the opportunity of ruining his Enemy
beyond redress. And Caesar himself stuck not to say that that day the War had
been ended, had his Enemy known how to make use of his Victory.

Pompey after this glorious Success, wrote largely of it to the Kings and
Caesar's Army, either oppressed by Famine or terrified with this Disgrace,
would yield themselves to him; especially the Tribunes, fearful of being
punished for a fault they knew themselves guilty of. But they and all the
Soldiers touched with Repentance as by Divine Inspiration, confessed themselves
Criminals; and afflicted themselves the more, that their General spoke kindly
to them, and granted them Pardon before they asked it: They would not forgive
themselves; but with a wonderful Change, desired, as a Punishment of their
Fault, they might be decimated, according to the custom of their Ancestors; but
he would by no means admit it; which increased their shame the more, that they
should be guilty of such Cowardice in prejudice of the best Man of the World,
and who most deserved their Faith and their Services. They besought him that at
least he would punish the Ensigns, who had been the Cause of this Rout; for in
flying they had only followed their Colors: and seeing Caesar could not
resolve to do that, but with much ado would consent to the Punishment of a few,
his Moderation begot in the minds of the Soldiers a General Joy. They began all
with one voice to cry out that he should lead them against the Enemy, that by
gaining a new Victory they might wipe away their Infamy; and in the sight of
their General they swore by whole Companies one to the other, never to return
from the Fight but Victorious. Wherefore his Friends advised him to take the
Army at their Words, and make trial of them upon this height of Repentance,
before their Zeal grew cooler: But he answered them before all the Multitude,
that he would choose a time more proper to show them the Enemy; exhorting them
then to remember the good Will they now protested: and in private he told his
Confidents, that it was convenient to let that fear, which so late a loss had
imprinted, be worn a little out of the minds of the Soldiery; and by
temporizing, let the fierceness of his Enemies, heightened by their late
Victory, be likewise a little cooled. He confessed withal he had committed a
great fault in coming to encamp so near Dyrrachium, where Pompey had all things
in abundance; whereas if he had drawn himself farther off, they might have met
with equal Difficulties. After having discoursed in this manner, he came to
Apollonia, and from thence privately by Night took his March toward Thessaly;
and on the way, coming to a little City called Gomphes, that refused to open
their Gates, he took it by Storm, and gave the Plunder to his Soldiers; who
having long endured Scarcity, fed now beyond measure, and filled themselves
with Wine; especially the Ger na^s;
Almains, whose Drunkenness made them ridiculous to all the rest: So that here
again in all appearance, Pompey lost a fair occasion of Victory by not pursuing
an Enemy he despised; but lying still, whilst in seven days March he got into
Thessaly, and encamped near Pharsalia. It is reported there happened at Gomphes
a thing very memorable, that in an Apothecary's Shop there were found twenty
Old Men, all People of Quality, lying grovelling upon the Ground, with Caps by
them, in the posture of Drunken Men, dead without any Wound; and another
sitting in a Chair, who, acting the Physician, had presented the Cups to the
rest.

Caesar's Departure, Pompey held a Council of his Friends; where Affranius
Advice was, that he should employ the Sea-Forces, in which they were the
stronger, to pursue Caesar now flying and necessitous, and to incommode him
what they could, whilst Pompey with the Land-Army past speedily into Italy,
which favored their Party, and where the other had no Forces; and placing good
Garrisons both in Gaul and Spain without stirring from home, settle the Seat of
the War in the Capital City of the Kingdom. But this Advice, though perfectly
good, was not followed; they chose rather to believe those who maintained that
Caesar's Army would soon by Famine be forced to yield to them; or if that
happened not, yet after the Success of Dirrachium, it was no great Task to give
Perfection to that Victory; that besides, it would be a shame to let Caesar fly
without pursuing him, or to let it be said that the Vanquished and the
Vanquisher fled each their several ways. Pompey therefore moved by these
Arguments, but principally out of Consideration of the Eastern Nation, and of
Lucius Scipio, lest any disgrace should happen to him in Macedon; and besides
this, assuring himself upon the Alacrity of his Soldiers, who ardently desired
to fight, followed Caesar: And as well as he encamped near Pharsalia, at about
thirty Furlongs distance from him, Provisions were brought to him from all
Parts; for he had before fortifyed the Passages, the Havens and the Forts; so
that he had continual Supplies by Land, and every Wind brought him some by Sea.
But Caesar had no more than what he daily with much difficulty sent out to
forage for; yet, for all that, none of his Men forsook him: On the contrary, as
if they had been animated by some Divine Spirit, they testified an incredible
earnestness to fight. They considered that being all Veterans, trained to War
for ten Years together, and having to deal only with Raw Soldiers, they should
prove the stronger; but if the War were spun out in length, and they forced to
labor in Trenches and other Works, Age already growing upon them, the
consuming more time would be to their disadvantage: Wherefore they desired no
longer delay; thinking it better to try the Fortune of Arms, than to fight
longer against Hunger and Famine. On the other side, Pompey, who knew all these
things, judged there might be danger in coming to an Engagement, and committing
himself to the hazard of a Battle with experienced Men, whom Despair had made
capable of attempting any thing; and who were besides commanded by Caesar, the
most fortunate General of the World: But that he might more securely and with
more facility defear them, streitned as they were, and already weakened with
want of all things, the Country where they lay not being over fertile, and they
having no Seaport, nor so much as a Ship to escape in: He therefore resolved,
and surely with a great deal of Prudence, not to fight; but vanquish his
half-starved Enemies by starving them more. But having with him a great number
of Senators of the same Quality with himself, the Choice of all the Roman
Knights, and many Kings and Potentates, they all exhorted him to give Battle;
some out of Ignorance, others having in their Heads the Victory at Dirrachium,
others relying upon the great number of their Forces, in which they had the
advantage; and some, who, weary of the War, chose rather to hazard Victory at
one push, than attend it from good Conduct. They showed him Caesar provoking
him to fight, and always drawn out in Battle. But he turned that Example
against themselves; and told them, Caesar did that, being forced to it by
Famine, and that he ought the rather to lie quiet, the more Caesar was
streitned for want of Provisions.

And yet at last, seeing all the Army, puffed up with the last Victory, desired
Agamemnon, because Agamemnon had likewise commanded Kings during the War; he
was constrained to forego the Resolution he had taken. And now Fortune, which
had not been over-favourable to him in many other Accidents of this War,
forsook him quite. He grew fainter and slower than ordinarily he used to be;
and prepared for this Fight much against his Will, to his Ruin, and the Loss of
those who counseled him to it. Caesar had that Night sent out two Legions to
go fetch in Corn; for praising Pompey for temporizing, and believing he would
continue to do so, he endeavored nothing more than the bringing Provisions to
his Camp from all sides: But when he had a little notice that his Enemy was
disposed to give Battle, he was very joyful, conjecturing him forced to it by
the headstrong humor of his Soldiers; and causing those two Legions sent out
for Forage, speedily to return, he gave all his Men Order to be in a
readiness: About Midnight he sacrificed to Mars and Venus his Mother (for it is
said, that the Family of the Iulii had their Original as well as Name from
Iulus, Son to Aeneas) and withal, made a Vow to build a Temple in the City in
Honor of that Goddess. After the Sacrifice, there having appeared a stream of
Lightning, which extended it self from Caesar's Camp over that of Pompey's:
Those of this Party promised themselves a bright and glorious Victory; but
Caesar interpreted it to his advantage; saying, he was going with one blow to
extinguish all the Glory and Power of Pompey. As Pompey sacrificed the same
Night, the Victims escaping, could not be retaken, a Swarm of Bees came and set
upon the Altars: There was raised a little before Day in Pompey's Army a Panick
Terror; which yet himself going from Quarter to Quarter, appeased, and after
slept soundly; and when his Friends waked him, told them, he dreamed he was
dedicating a Temple in the City to Venus the Victorious: His Familiars and his
Soldiers, who had heard nothing of Caesar's Vow, rejoiced mightily at it, they
believed the Advantage certainly theirs, and began to despise the Enemy, and do
things more by impulse of Passion than Reason; in so much, that some crowned
their Tents with Laurel, which is the Token of Victory, and made their Slaves
prepare Magnificent Feasts: Nay, some there were who disputed among themselves
for Caesar's High Priesthood. Pompey, who had great experience in what related
to War, had an aversion for all these things; but he let not his Anger break
forth, for it would have been a trouble to him, neither did he now think it
secure to reprove People who loved rather to command than obey, and who by
their Importunity had forced him to actagainst his Judgment. So stupifyed was
now this Great Man, who had ever before been so happy; whether he were troubled
that his Counsel was slighted, being so perfectly good, and that he was
constrained to hazard the safety of so many Men, together with his own Glory,
which never yet had any like it; or whether his Genius presenting to him his
approaching Misfortune, appaled him, being just at the point of losing in one
moment so great and sublime an Authority. However, at length having said to his
Friends, that whoever gained the Victory that day, would be the Commencement of
infinite Calamities to the Roman People, he began to draw up his Army in
Battle: from whence some making reflection on these words which on a sudden
heat escaped him, have believed that if he had been Victorious, he would have
made himself Master of the Commonwealth.

Caesar had about two and twenty thousand Men, of whom about a thousand were
Horse; and Pompey had half as many more, of whom about seven thousand were
Horse: So that most credible Authors say, that there were about seventy
thousand Italians in both Armies; those who are most modest say, sixty
thousand; and those who are boldest, four hundred thousand; of whom some say
Pompey's made more than half, others that Caesar's were but one third; so
difficult it is, exactly to know the truth. But however it were, both the one
and the other Party placed their chief Relyance on those of that Nation: Not
but that Caesar had good Auxiliary Forces; he had French Cavalry, and a great
number of Transalpine Gauls, and Grecian Light Armed Foot of the Acarnanians,
Etolians and Dolopes. But Pompey had a great multitude of all the Oriental
Nations, as well Horse as Foot; out of Greece, the Lacedaemonians with their
Kings, the other Peloponnesians and Boeotians; and even the Athenians came to
this War. Though both Parties had caused it to be proclaimed by the public
Crier, that all Persons were forbid touching them, being Priests to Ceres, the
Inventor of Laws; yet would they come to bear Arms, that they might have the
Honor to fight for the Roman Empire. After the Greeks, came Troops of almost
all Nations lying upon the Seacoasts of the Levant Seas; from Thrace, from the
Hellespont, from Bithynia, Phrygia, Ionia, Lydia, Pamphilia, Pisidia,
Paphlagonia, Cilicia, Syria, Phaenicia, Iudaea, Arabia, Cyprus, Rhodes; with
Slingers from Crete, and all the other Isles. There were likewife Kings and
Sovereigns with their Forces: Deiotarus, Tetrarch of Gallograecia; and
Ariarathes, King of Cappadocia; Taxiles lead the Armenians from this side the
Euphrates; and Megabates, Lieutenant of King Artabasus, those from beyond that
River; besides several little Sovereigns that brought what Forces they had.
They say likewife, that Cleopatra and her Brother, yet a Child, sent sixty
Galleys; whose Forces were not at the Fight no more than those of the rest of
the Fleet, who lay doing nothing at Corcyra. And most certain it is that Pompey
was not so prudent as he ought to have been, in not making good use of his
Naval Forces; in which he was so strong, that he might always have hindered the
bringing from any place Provisions to his Enemy; but choosing rather to fight on
Land against Men hardened to Labor, and accustomed to Victory: But it is
apparent that the Victory at Dyrrachium made him slacken his Care, and that
nothing could have been more advantageous to Caesar than that loss; for
Pompey's Soldiers, grown proud with that Success, would no longer obey; and
marched against their Enemies hand over head. But decreed it was* he should
commit this fault, to give Birth to that Empire which extends it self so far
over the Nations of the Earth.

The Armies being disposed and ready to fight, the two Generals by words Pompey
spoke to his in this manner.

The Oration of Pompey.
AT length, Soldiers, you are put in a posture to fight, rather by commanding
me, than doing what I command: For whereas I was resolved to destroy Caesar by
temporizing, you would needs fight him. Since you, therefore, are the Enactors
of this Battle, and the Arbiters of it, show what you are to those Enemies you
so far surpass in number: Despise them as young and vigorous Conquerors should
the Vanquished, surcharged with Age and tired with Labor. Besides, your
advantage over them lies not only in your Preparations and Forces, but in the
Testimony of your own Consciences, and in the Justice of your Cause; since we
fight for Liberty, for our Country, for the Laws, for Glory, for so many
Senators, and so many Roman Knights, against a Man who aims at Dominion by his
Thefts and Robberies. Let us go on then in good hopes whither your Courage
leads you, and remember the Day of Dyrrachium, when we put to flight the same
Enemy; and what a great number of Colors you in one day brought away your
Prize.

Caesar, in like manner, encouraged his Men in words to this purpose.

The Oration of Caesar.
THe most difficult part of our Labors is now at an end, Fellow Soldiers, we
are no more to fight with Hunger and Want, we have now only Men to deal with;
and this day will put an end to all, provided you do but remember the promise
you made me at Dyrrachium, and in what manner you swore to one another in my
presence, never to return from the Fight without Victory. These are the Men we
are come to seek from as far as the Pillars of Hercules; those who durst not
stand us, but fled before us out of Italy; these, who, after we had fought ten
Years together for the Glory of our Country, after that we had gained a
multitude of Victories, and added to the Roman Empire four hundred Nations in
Spain, Gaul and Brittany; would have deprived us of the Honors due to us, of
the Triumphs and other Recompenses our Services merited. In a word, these whom
I could never move, neither by the Justice of my Right, nor by the Favors I
have done them; for you know how many of them I have set free without doing
them the least injury, in hopes they would do things reasonable for me.
Remember then their Injustice; and if ever you did believe I had any kindness
or good will for you, if you, if you have ever experienced my Liberality or
received my Largesses, let this Day's Actions make good your Acknowledgments.
It is no hard matter for Old Soldiers to overcome Hotheaded Young sters,
unskilled in the Mystery; and who like Children, come to the business in
disorder, and despising their General: for I am certainly assured he himself
leads them trembling, and sore against his mind to this Battle; for seeing his
Fortune grow old, he is himself grown slothful and stupid, and does not so much
command as obey the Command of others. Hitherto I have yet spoke to you only
concerning the Italians; for the Strangers, I would not have you trouble your
selves, nor account them for any thing; nor would I have you go to charge the
Slaves of Syria, Lydia and Phrygia, only born for Flight and Servitude: I know
it certainly, and you shall see it, that Pompey will not give them any place in
his Battle. Engage therefore only the Italians; and if the Strangers come to
run after you like Dogs, when you have routed the Italians, spare them as your
Allies; but put all the Strangers to the Sword, to strike a terror in others.
But first of all, to persuade me that you remember your promise, and that you
desire to die or overcome, as you go out of the Camp I command you, that your
selves pull up the Palissade, and fill up the Trench, that we may have no hopes
left but in Victory: And that the Enemies seeing we have no more a Camp, may
understand that of necessity we must lodge in theirs.

Pompey by some who thought they prepared themselves for Flight; he knowing
their Confidence, began to sigh, that he must fight against fierce Beasts, whom
he might have defeated by Famine; which is the only way to reduce Beasts. But
now there was no going back; for as the Proverb says, The Knife was at his
Throat. Wherefore, leaving four thousand Legionary Soldiers for the Guard of
the Camp, he caused the rest to march in Battalia between Pharsalia and the
River Enipeus; where Caesar planted himself directly opposite to him: So that
the Front of both Battles was composed of the Legions, in three Bodies, at some
distance one from the other; whose Flanks were covered with two Wings of Horse,
among whom were mixed Archeres and Slingers. The Legions, in whom both Parties
placed their chief Hope, being ranged in this Order, they brought on the
Strangers, more for Show than Service. Pompey had a great number of diverse
Languages, out of which he drew apart the Macedonians, Peloponnesians,
Boeotians and Athenians, as more accustomed to keep their Ranks with silence,
and placed them near his Legions; and for the others, Caesar had conjectured he
drew them into a Body apart, with Orders to environ the Enemy as soon as the
Battle was begun, and to do what they could to break in and plunder Caesar's
Camp, whose Works he had seen thrown down. Scipio, Father in Law to Pompey, was
in the middle of the Battle, L. Domitius on the Left Wing, Lentulus on the
Right, and Affranius stayed for Guard of the Camp. In Caesar's Army Sylla,
Anthony and Cn. Domitius commanded; and he, according to his custom, chose his
place at the Head of the Tenth Legion: Which the Enemies having observed, they
opposed against him all their best Horse; that being the stronger in number,
they might enclose him. Caesar, on the contrary, knowing their design, drew off
a Body of three thousand Men of the best of his Foot to relieve him upon
occasion; and commanded, that as soon as they saw the Enemy come to invest him,
they should charge them with their Piles, aiming chiefly at the Face; for young
and unexperienced People who put value on their Beauty, would be fearful to
receive any Wound might render them deformed. And now the Generals went through
the Ranks to give necessary Orders, exhorting them to show their Courage, and
giving them the Word for that day; which on Caesar's side was, Venus the
Victorious; and on Pompey's, Hercules the Invincible. Thus standing in
Battalia, they for a long time kept silence on both sides; each Party keeping
his Ground, and expecting when the other should begin the Fight. For they were
moved with Compassion to see the greatest number of Forces that had ever before
been seen together of the Italian Nation, and all Chosen Men, about to expose
themselves to the Hazard and Uncertainty of a Battle, for the Interest and
Passion of two Romans, envious of each other: And as the Danger approached, the
Ambition wherewith they had hitherto been blinded, began to remit, and give
place to Fear. Reason having chased away the furious Appetite of Glory, began
to represent to them the greatness and the Cause of the Disgrace wherein they
might fall. That two Men disputed for the Pre-eminence with contempt of their
Lives, and yet neither could promise to himself the living in the meanest
Degree, unless he got the Victory: And that for their Difference such numbers
of brave Men were about to hazard their utter Destruction. It came likewife
into their Minds, that having so lately been Friends and Allies, and
endeavored to render each other mutual Service for the Support of their
Grandeur, they should now draw Swords one against another, and oblige to be
Followeres in their criminal Passion so many Generals and Officers, among whom
nothing but Concord ought to have been maintained, being of the same City, and
some of them Brethren; for so they were, having engaged themselves unawares, as
in two different Parties of so many thousand Men of the same Notion, many
extraordinary things must necessarily happen. Thus the two Generals making
these reflecrtions, were touched with remorse; and because this Day was to make
one of them the first or the last of all Men, they could not easily resolve to
begin a Fight, the Success whereof was so soubtful. Some report, that both of
them shed tears.

The Day was now well advanced, whilst both Parties thus stood viewing Pompey
perceiving that the Strangers, wearied with the delay, kept their Ranks but
ill; fearing lest by their Example the others might take the liberty to do the
same before the Battle began, commanded first to sound the Charge; which Caesar
on the other side immediately scconded. And now the Soldiers, heartned by the
sound of the Trumpets, and the presence of their Officers; who going through
the Ranks, encouraged them to do well, began to march one againsts the other
with an incredible Vehemence; yet with deep silence, like People who had often
been upon the same Occasions. When they came within a Dart's Flight the
Light-Armed Foot gave the first Discharge, and then the Horse fell on; where
after having given great Evidences of their Valor on both sides, Pompey's had
the Advantage, as being more numerous; and went about to invest the Tenth
Legion. Whereupon Caesar gave a Sign to his Reserve appointed for that purpose
to advance, which at an instant they did, throwing their Piles at the Faces of
the Horsemen; who, not able to bear the Brunt of these desperate Men, nor
endure that they should pierce their Cheeks and thrust out their Eyes, fled
away in disorder: Which gave Opportunity to Caesar's Horse, who before were
fearful to be environed, to charge Pompey's Legions in Flank, where they lay
naked, being deserted by the Horsemen. Pompey advised of it, gave Order to his
Foot not to advance farther, nor to assail the Enemy, nor to throw any Pile;
but presenting their Points to those came at them, to fight standing their
Ground. Some have praised this way of fighting invented by Pompey, as
advantageous to those that are like to be enclosed: But Caesar disapproves it
in his Commentaries; because, in casting the Pile the blow is more violent, and
the motion gives life to the Courage of the Soldier, which grows cold and faint
by standing still; besides, that it is more easy to overturn those are only
planted like Stakes, which now happened; for after Caesar's Horse had charged
upon the Flank, Pompey's Right Wing, which lay naked, and stood still whilst
they poured upon them at distance whole Showers of Darts: The tenth Legion came
up close to them in Front; and finding them in Disorder, made them give Ground;
which was the beginning of the Victory. In other places they fought with diverse
Success, and every where made a great Slaughter; yet in a Fight of so many
Legions there was not heard the least Cry, either of the Wounded, or of those
that fell, save only the last dying Gasps and Groans of them who gave up the
Ghost in the same place where they had fought. The Strangers, Spectators of so
many noble Actions, were astonished to see Soldiers so resolutely keep their
Ranks; in so much, that surprised with their height of Bravery as at a Miracle,
they durst not so much as attempt Caesar's Camp, defended only by a few Old
People; but stood like Stocks, or Men that had lost their Senses. But when they
saw Pompey's Right Wing, pressed hard by Caesar, begin to recoil, yet still
fighting in the same manner, they set a running all toward the Camp, crying
out, they had lost the Day; and after having pulled down and plundered the
Tents of their own Party, fled every Man which way they best could. The noise
of this Rout made the other Legions give Ground, first in good Order, an^
defending themselves the best they might; but at last, charged home by the
Enemy, who now found himself the stronger, they likewise betook themselves to
Flight. And now Caesar, to prevent their Rallying, and to make an end at once,
not only of this Battle, but of the whole War, did an Action of great Prudence
in causing it to be proclaimed throughout his whole Camp, that they should
spare the Citizen, and put the Stranger to the Sword; for at the same time the
Vanquishers pursuing the Vanquished, bid them stay there in safety: And the
Proclamation of those Orders having passed from hand to hand through both
Armies, that Saying, Stay there in Safety, served as a word to Pompey's Men, to
make themselves be known; and that the easier, because being all Italians, they
wore the same Habit, and spoke the same Language. Thus Caesar's Soldiers,
passing by their Countrymen, sell upon the Strangers; of whom they made a
mighty Slaughter, they not being in any posture of defense. Pompey beholding
his Men fly, lost his Courage, retreating by little and little into his Camp;
and being entered his Tent, sat still a great while without saying a word, like
to Ajax Telamon; to whom, as it is said, something like this happened at the
time of the Trojan War. But few of his Men returned into the Camp, because it
having been told them at the time of the Defeat, that they should stay there in
safety; and their Enemies having done them no violence, they were dispersed by
Companies on one side and on the other. Toward the Evening Caesar going
through all his Army, began to entreat the Soldiers not to think of any repose,
till they had taken Pompey's Camp; telling them, that if they suffered the
Enemy to rally, they were only victorious for a day; whereas by making
themselves Masters of the Camp, they made their Victory perfect, and gave the
last Stroke to the Work: Wherefore, stretching out his hands like those that
supplicate, he began himself to advance that way before them all. Though they
were extremely tired, yet Caesar's Discourse and Authority gave them new
strength, besides their present good Foutune, and the hopes they had to force
the Trenches, which they thought a thing very important; and there is no surer
Remedy against Weariness than Hope: So they stormed the Pallissade with scorn
of those that defended it. When Pompey was told of it, he at length broke his
profound Silence with these words; And how! Into our very Camp. And presently
changing Habit, mounted on Horseback; and accompanied by four of his Friends,
rid all Night full Speed, and at Break of Day came to Larissa. Caesar, as he
had foretold when he was drawing out his Army, lodged in Pompey's Camp, supped
with Meat they had made ready for him, and the whole Army was feasted at the
Enemy's Charge. As for the Dead on both sides, as well Romans as Allies, (for
the number of the Strangers was so great it was hard to count them; besides,
none took the pains) Caesar lost thirty Centurions, and two hundred Legionary
Soldiers; or according to the Account of others, twelve hundred: And on
Pompey's side theredyed ten Senators, among whom was L. Domitius who had been
sent into Gaul, Successor to Caesar; and about forty Roman Knights of the best
Families of the City; for the Soldiery, those who set down the greatest number
say five and twenty thousand: But Asinius Pollio one of Caesar's Captains who
commanded in this Battle, writes in his Commentaries, that there were not above
six thousand slain. Such was the success of the famous Battle of Pharsalia.
Among those who did best, they give the first place to Caesar, the second place
to the same Caesar, with the Tenth Legion, by the Consent of all the World; and
the third Honor is due to the Centurion Crastinus, whom Caesar, as he went out
of the Camp, having asken, what hopes he had of the Battle? replied with a loud
voice; We will over come, Caesar; and thou shall this day praise me, either
alive or dead. And indeed, all the Army bare witness, that they had seen him
run like a Fury through the Bottalions, and do Actions almost incredible. His
Body being found among the Dead, Caesar adorned it with Military Rewards; and
in that manner caused it to be be buried apart, with a Magnificent Tomb, near
the common Sepulture of others.

Pompey departing immediately from Larissa, came to the Sea; and going
Mitylene: where taking with him Cornelia, and lading his Equipage upon four
Galleys come to him from Rhodes and Tire, he would go neither to Corcira, nor
to Africa, where he had another Army and a Powerful Fleet; but chose rather the
way of the East toward the King of the Parthians, by whose Assistance he hoped
to recover all he had lost. He told his Design to no one, till being ready to
land in Cilicid, he discovered it to his Friends; but they advised him not to
trust the Parthian, against whom Crassus had so lately to very ill purpose made
War, and was still puffed up with Victory he had gained against the Romans:
Besides, it was not safe to carry among Barbarians a beautiful Woman like
Cornelia, who was moreover, Crassus Widow: They therefore proposed to him
either Egypt or King Iuba; the later they thought not of sufficient Reputation,
but all counseled his Retreat into Egypt. They alleged that it was not far
off, that it was a Powerful Kingdom, an Excellent Country, where he would want
neither Shipping nor Provisions, nor Money; and whose Kings, though yet but
Minors, were obliged to serve him, because of the good Offices he had done
their Father. So by those Reasons he was persuaded to bend his Course toward
Egypt. There was at present a Division in the Royal Family; Cleopatra, who
before reigned jointly with her Brother Ptolemy, being driven out, now raised
Forces about Syria; and Ptolemy her Brother was encamped near Mount Cassia, on
the Frontiers of Egypt, to hinder her Re-entry into the Kingdom. It happened
that the Wind drove Pompey into that place; who seeing so great an Army on the
Shore, stopped; and because he judged, as it proved true, that the King was
there, he sent one to give him advice of the Cause of his coming, and to
remember him of his Friendship with his Father. He was yet but thirteen Years
of Age; and had for Overseers Achillas in what concerned Affairs of War, and
Photinus the Eunuch for the Treasury: Those began to consult betwixt them what
they should do in this Conjuncture; and having called to counsel with them
Theodatus the Rhetorician, Schoolmaster to the Infant King. He proposed to
them an execrable Advice; which was, to cut off Pompey, to gain the favor of
Caesar: Which being resolved on, under pretense that in that place the Sea was
full of Shoals, so that greater Vessels could not approach, they sent him a
wretched Boat, in which there were some Officers of the Royal House, and with
them a certain Roman Soldier called Septimius in all other Authors
Sempronius, who now bore Arms in Egypt, but had formerly served under Pompey.
He presented him his hand on the Part of Ptolemy; inviting him to enter, and go
with him to his Friend, who waited for him. Mean while the Army was drawn up in
Battle on the Sea Shore; in the midst of which appeared the King, clad in his
Royal Robes, as if to do Honor to his Guest. Though Pompey had already some
cause to distrust, considering this Army in Battle, the pittifulness of the
Boat, that the King came not in Person to meet him, nor sent any Person of
Quality; yet he went into the Skiff, repeating to himself these Lines of
Sophocles. To Tyrants Courts, the Valiant and the Brave;
Though free they enter, soon become their Slave.


When he saw that after he was got some distance from his Ships no Person spoke
to him, his suspicion increased. Wherefore, either knowing Sempronius for a
Roman, or a Soldier that had served under him, or conjecturing it because he
only stood up, according to the Discipline of the Romans, which permits not
Soldiers to sit before their General; he said, turning toward him, Surely I
have known you, Fellow Soldier: Which Sempronius having acknowledged, as soon
as he turned away, he gave him the first blow, which was followed by many
others that took away his Life. His Wife and Friends seeing afar off this
Murder, began to cry out; and lifting up their hands to Heaven, imploring the
Gods Revengers of violated Hospitality, with all speed took their Flight.
Photinus's People cut off Pompey's Head, which he kept to present to Caesar
when he should arrive in Egypt, out of hopes of a great Reward; but he revenged
this Murder as became him. Some one having found the Trunk of his Body, buried
it upon the Seashore, raising over it a little Tomb; upon which some other
wrote this Inscription; Scarce should a Temple to hold that suffice,
Which huddled in a little Sand, here lies.


This Sepulcher being in process of time quite covered over with Sand, the
Emperor Adrian visiting that Country, caused it in these our times to be
sought for; and after having found it with the Copper Images which the
Inhabitants of these Coasts had dedicated to Pompey, which were fallen with age
in the ruins of a Temple, he caused the Rubbi^^ to be removed, made the
Sepulcher visible, and set up the Images. Thus ended this great Man his days,
after having fortunately put an end to many Wars of great Importance, and
augmented the Roman Empire, by which he got the Title of Great. Never before
had he been vanquished, and from his very youth began to be happy in all his
undertakings; for from the three and twentieth to the eight and fiftieth year
of his age, he had in effect the power of a King, though he took upon him only
the quality of a private Citizen, because of the dispute for pre-eminence
between him and Caesar.

Lucius Scipio his Father-in-law, and all the rest of the persons of Quality
Pharsalia, retired to Corcyra, where they had of purpose left Cato with other
Forces and three hundred Galleys. There having divided the Fleet among Pompey's
chief Friends, Cassius sailed toward Pontus to engage Pharnaces to take up
Arms against Caesar; Scipio and Cato went into Africa, relying upon those
Forces Varus had, and the assistance they hoped for from Iuba King of the
Moors. And Pompey's Eldest Son, with Labienus Scapula and another part of the
Army, went by great Journeys to Spain, with design to draw that Province to
their Party, to raise other Forces of Spaniards, Celtiberians, and even of
Slaves, and to make the greatest Preparations they possibly could; so great
were yet the Wrecks of Pompey's Power, which by a prodigious blindness he
deserted and fled. The Soldiers in Africa offered Cato the chief Command; but
he refused it, because there were there present Lieutenants of Consular
Quality, and he had never arrived to higher Dignity in the City than the Charge
of Praetor. Wherefore L. Scipio being chosen General of that Army, he labored
likewise in these Quarters to increase and exercise his Forces; so that there
were raised at the same time two powerful Armies against Caesar; one in Africa,
and the other in Spain. He for his part stayed at Pharsalia but two days after
the Victory, that he might sacrifice to the Gods in the Field of the Battle,
and suffer the Soldiers take some repose, tired with the Toil of that Great
Day. He likewise granted Liberty to the Thessalians, who had served him
faithfully upon this Occasion: And the Athenians coming to demand his Pardon,
he forgave them with these words; How often must the Glory of your Predecessors
withold you from falling down those Precipices whither your own faults lead
you? The third day he marched toward the East, whither he understood Pompey
was fled: As he passed the Hellespont upon little Boats for want of Ships, in
the middle of the Strait Cassius (in his way to Pharnaces) suddenly comes up
with a great number of Galleys; and though he might with so many Bottoms have
easily defeated his Enemy, who was infinitely the weaker; yet such was the
prodigious good Fortune of Caesar, that the other was so extremely surprised,
thinking he was come of purpose to meet him, that of his own accord he yielded
himself into his Hands, demanded Pardon, and delivered up to him the Fleet; so
powerful was the Opinion only of Caesar's continual Happiness, for I can find
out no other Cause; and am of Opinion, that in all the Dangers he ever
encountered, his good Fortune never served him to better purpose than now, when
Cassius, a Warlike Man, having seventy Galleys, meeting him by chance so ill
prepared, durst not attempt to fight him; and yet, after he had settled himself
in the Supreme Power in the City, he who out of a Cowardly faint-heartedness
yielded to him in his Passage, killed him in the height of his Prosperities;
which proves the more, that Cassius, terrifyed in that manner, yielded only to
the Fortune that advanced Caesar. Thus escaping beyond his Hopes, as soon as he
was landed, the Ionians, Etolians, and other Nations inhabiting that great
Peninsula, which is called Asia Minor, sent Deputies to him, to crave his
Pardon; which he granted: And understanding that Pompey was gone toward Egypt,
he sailed toward Rhodes; whence, without staying for his Army, whom he had
ordered to rendezvous in this Island, he embarked on Cassius his Galleys, and
those of Rhodes, with those Forces he had, and toward the Evening went to Sea:
He told no body whither he designed, but only gave Order to the Pylates to
follow the Admiral's Light by Night, and the Flag by Day. And when he was in
the Main Sea, he commanded the Master of his Galley to stear toward
Alexandria; where he arrived the third Day after. The King's Tutors, who were
still about Mount Cassia, came forthwith to receive him: And having at his
Arrival but few People about him, he remained for some time without doing any
thing. In the mean time he civilly received all such as visited him, walked
often about the City under pretense of being pleased to view it, went often to
Philosophy Schools; where standing, he would hear the Professors: and by this
manner of living, he gained the Favor and Esteem of all the People of
Alexandria: But when his Army was arrived he put to death Achillas and
Photinus, for their Villainy committed on the Person of Pompey; and Theodotus
then escaping him, Cassius after finding him in Asia, caused to be hanged. The
Alexandrians hereupon taking Arms, and the King's Army coming to oppose Caesar,
they fought in several Engagements with diverse Success, as well about the
Palace as the adjoining Shores; so that once Caesar, pressed hard upon by the
Enemy, threw himself into the Sea, and escaped them by swimming; and his
Coat Armor falling into the Egyptians hands, they hung it up in the place
appointed for Trophies. But in the end, in the last Battle, fought near the
Nile, where the King was in Person, Caesar remained Conqueror. He spent nine
Months in all these Affairs, till such time as he settled Cleopatra in the
Kingdom of Egypt instead of her Brother, and made a Progress with her upon the
Nile, followed by four hundred Vessels, to see the Country, or perhaps being in
love with that Woman; but we will speak of those things in writing the Affairs
of Egypt. When they would have presented to him Pompey's Head, he would not see
it; and commanded it should be interred in the Suburbs, where he consecrated a
Chapel to the Goddess Nemesis, which in our time, when the Emperor Trajan made
cruel War upon them, the Jews pulled down; the demolishing it being of
importance to them. Caesar having done these things in Egypt, caused his Army
to march with little noise through Syria, against Pharnaces, who had already
been successful in many Occasions; he had seized upon some places depending on
the Romans; he had defeated Domitius, Caesar's Lieutenant, in a Set Battle; and
puffed up with this Success, had sacked the City of Amisa in the Kingdom of
Pontus, and publicly sold one part of the Inhabitants, and made Eunuchs of all
who had not obtained the Age of Puberty: But frightened at Caesar's coming, and
repenting of what he had done; when he was come within two hundred Furlongs of
him, he sent to him Ambassadors to treat of Peace; with Orders to present him
with a Crown of Gold, and very impertinently to offer him the Daughter of their
King in Marriage. When he had heard the Occasion of their coming, he made his
Army march; and amusing the Ambassadors with words, advances up to Pharnaces
Camp; where beginning to cry out, Shall not Parricide now be immediately
punished, he leaped on Horseback, and with the first Shout put the Enemy to
Flight, and made a great Slaughter without any of his Army's drawing their
Swords, save only a thousand Horse that first followed him when he began the
Charge. Some Historians report that he should now say; O! how happy was Pompey,
to have gained such Reputation, with the Title of GREAT, for having to deal
with such People in the Mithridatick War. And concerning this Victory he wrote
to the City; I came, I saw, I overcame. As for Pharnaces, he was content to
retire into the Kingdom of Bosphorus, which Pompey left him; and Caesar had not
now leisure to pursue him, or lose time in these letter Affairs, being called
elsewhere by so many more important Wars; wherefore he directed his Course
toward Italy, taking up all along as he marched through Asia the
Tribute-Money, which much troubled the Commissioners, who had raised it upon
the People with a thousand Cruelties, as we have said in writing the Affairs of
Asia.

Understanding by Letters that he received from Rome, that the City was
Anthony, General of his Horse, had with the Army seized upon the Great Place;
he left the Affairs of Asia, to make all speed thither. His Presence forthwith
appeased the Tumult of the City, but there was another raised against himself:
The Soldiers required to be paid what was promised them at Pharsalia, for
having exposed their Lives; and that they might be dismissed, having served the
time appointed by the Laws. He caused them in Excuse to be told, that the
Victory of Pharsalia was not yet perfect, because War still continued in
Africa: but as soon as that was ended, he would perform his Promise, and give
them over and above a thousand Drams a Head. They with arrogance replied, that
they stood not in need of Promises, but of ready Money; so that Crispus
Salustus, who was sent to them, was fain to save his Life by Flight. Upon
report hereof made to Caesar, he drew Anthony's Legion, which had been left for
the Guard of the City, about his House, and to the Guard of the Gates, left the
Mutineers should in their fury begin to plunder Private Houses. And himself,
contrary to the Advice of all his Friends, who counseled him not to expose
himself to the fury of an Incensed Multitude; with a signal Audacity of Mind,
as they were in the Field of Mars, came suddenly upon them: And mounting on a
place where he might be seen by all the Mutining Companies, they ran to him,
not yet appeased, but without Arms; and saluting him, called him Emperor,
according to Custom. He commanding them to tell him what it was they desired,
they durst not speak of Money, because he surprised them with his Presence; but
out of the hopes they were in, that he yet standing in need of the Army to make
an end of the Remainder of the War, would (if they desired to be dismissed)
himself speak of the Gift he had promised them, contented themselves to cry out
all with one Voice, that they entreated him to discharge them: To which,
without any delay, he made answer, That he granted their Request; and seeing
them so much the more astonished at this Answer, as they least of any thing
expected it, and that they stood in a profound silence, he added; I will,
notwithstanding, give you all that I have promised you as soon as I have
triumphed with others. This word filled their very Soul with Shame and
Jealousy; considering what an Infamy it would be for them, if after having
deserted their General under pretense of being weary of the War, new Soldiers
should follow his Triumphant Chariot: Besides, they should deprive themselves
of the Booty they might get in the African War, and render themselves odious
both to Caesar and the contrary Party. And making these reflections, they a
long time kept silence, hoping Caesar would at last grant them something more,
and change his Mind, because of the pressing necessity. But he continuing
silent as well as they; and when his Friends besought him to say something more
to them, and not leave in suspense People that had served him so well, as he
began to speak to them, calling them Gentlemen, and not Fellow Soldiers, which
is a sign he looked upon them as discharged, they could not endure to be
treated in that manner, but interrupted him; and by their Cries testifying
their Repentance, besought him to permit them to stay still in his Service; and
because he refused them, and descended from the Tribunal, they redoubled their
Cries, entreating him to stay and punish their fault. Hereupon he stopped a
good while, as if he had been in pain what to resolve on; and at length
remounting the Tribunal, told them he would not punish a Man; but however, he
was sorely troubled that the tenth Legion, whom he had always preferred before
the others, had begun this Mutiny: And to them he added, I give you your
Discharge, and will pay you what I promised you as soon as I return from
Africa: And at the end of the War I will give you Lands, not as Sylla did;
taking them from others, or mixing the Usurpers among those are spoiled of
them, to nourish perpetual Enmity between them; but I will divide amongst you
the Public Lands, my own particular Inheritances; and if those be not enough,
I will buy more with my Money. Whereupon, all the rest with Shouts and
Acclamations applauded him, but the tenth Legion was quite cast down, believing
they should never regain Caesar's favor; wherefore they besought him to
decimate them, according to the Custom of their Ancestors. Till he, unwilling
to afflict them any farther, because he perceived their Repentance serious,
pardoned them as well as the rest; and shortly after departed to go for Africa.

Rhegium, passing over to Messina, he came to Lylibaeum; and unstanding that
Cato with the Fleet and part of the Land Forces had the Guard of Utica, where
lay all the stores of the contrary Party, and where fate a form of Senate,
composed of three hundred persons, who had for some time given orders in what
concerned the War, and that L. Scipio their General and the most considerable
of the Party were at Adrumetum with the rest of the Army, he went to land.
There he had advice that Scipio was gone to meet with King Iuba, wherefore he
took the opportunity of his absence, and drew up his Army before the Enemies
Camp. Labienus and Petreius Scipio's Lieutenants* accepted the defiance and
vigorously beat back Caesar's Men, driving them before them with contempt, till
Labienus's Horse wounded in the Belly, having reversed and thrown him down, his
Esquires carried him out of the Fight, and Petreius contenting himself with
having tried the courage of his Soldiers, believing he could overcome whenever
he pleased, caused the Retreat to be sounded, saying to those about him, We
must not deprive Scipio our General of the honor of beating them himself. Thus
fortune showed it self once more powerful for Caesar; for his Enemies cooling
in the midst of the Victory, let the whole fruit of it escape out of their
Hands. It Is said Caesar only stood his ground, all the rest fled, and that with
his own hand he was bringing back the Standard of a Legion to the Front of the
Battalia, when Petreius drew off into his Camp, in which Caesar willingly
imitated him. This was the success of the first Engagement Caesar met with in
Africa. Some time after a rumor was spread, that Scipio was coming with eight
Legions, twenty thousand Horse, of which the most part were Lybians, a great
number of Targetiers, and thirty Elephants, and together with him King Iuba at
the Head of thirty thousand Footmen, twenty thousand Numidian Horse, store of
Darters, and besides all, sixty Elephants. The Soldiers were still disheartened
with their late disgrace, and the Enemy now seemed to them very formidable,
both by reason of the number and valor of the Numidian Horse, besides they had
not been used to fight against Elephants, But when afterward they understood
that Bocchus another King of the Moors had seized upon Cirta, the Residence of
King Iuba, so that recalled by domestic Danger he had made a speedy return
into his Kingdom with his Army, leaving only with Scipio the thirty Elephants,
they took such heart, that the fifth Legion desired they might be placed before
the Elephants, and having obtained it, began the Victory by the defeat of those
Beasts, wherefore to this day they carry an Elephant painted in their Colors;
the Fight was for a long time stiffly maintained on both sides, till in the end
Caesar remained victorious. Scipio's Camp was taken and pillaged, Night
prevented the further pursuit of those that fled, of whom every one shifted for
himself as he best could, and Scipio quitting all went away with Afranius by
Sea in twelve open Boats. Thus this Army composed of fourscore thousand
fighting Men, the most part old Soldiers, encouraged by the success of the
first Fight were utterly defeated in this one Battle, which augmented much the
Glory of Caesar by the confession of his Enemies themselves, who attributed
this Defeat more to his good Fortune than their own remisness; but they
slattered themselves, for this misfortune arrived only by the fault of their
Commanders, who had not the prudence to spin out this war in length, whereby
they might have reduced Caesar (engaged in a strange Country) to want of
Provisions; and besides in not pursuing to the upshot their first Victory.

Three days after the defeat, news thereof coming to Utica, and Caesar
following Cato hindered no Man, nay, he gave Ships to all such persons of
quality as asked him, but for himself he stood firm; and when those of Utica
promised to entreat Caesar for him before they did for themselves, he told them
smiling he stood not in need of any Intercessors, and Caesar knew it well.
Afterward having put together what Money and Papers he had, he sealed them up,
and disposed them in the hands of the Magistrates of Utica, toward the Evening
he bathed and supped, sitting as he at other times used, since Pompey's death;
he altered not a jot of his manner of living, but was served after his
accustomed manner, and discoursed familiarly with his Servants. He talked of
those that were gone, if they had a good Wind, how far they might be off, and
if they believed that when Caesar came to morrow they would be got out of
sight. When he was going to Bed he let nothing extraordinary escape him, only
he embraced his Son with somewhat more tenderness, but not finding his Sword
near his Bed according to custom, he cried out he was betrayed by his own
Domestics, who had not left him wherewith to defend himself, if his Enemies
assailed him by night; and when they besought him not to make any attempt upon
his life, but to repose without his Sword, he told them to oblige them to
believe him: If I had a mind to die, could not I knock my Head against this
Wall, or strangle my self with the Clothes that I wear, or throw my self
headlong down, or stifle my self with stopping my Breath? With these words and
some others he persuaded them to lay his Sword in its place, that done, he
desired there might be brought him that Book Plato writ concerning the Soul,
which he read quite over, and when he thought those who kept Guard at his door
slept, he thrust his Sword into his Belly. His Entrails coming out at the
wound, some groan heard by those at the door, obliged them to run in with
Chyrurgions, who put his Entrails again still warm as they were into his Body,
sowed up the wound, and after having laid to it a Plaster, and rolled it up,
his Senses being come to him, he feigned to repent himself of the fault he had
committed, thanked them that they had helped him, and told them that now he
stood in need of some repose; but after they were gone, carrying with them his
Sword, and had shut the Door that nothing might disturb his rest, whilst they
thought he slept he got off by little and little the R^ller and Sewing of the
Wound, and pulling out his Entrails, tore them with his Fingers and Nails, and
so died in the fiftieth year of his age. He was esteemed the gravest and most
firm in his resolution of all men living, who judged not of what was just and
honest by what the people practiced, but by strong and generous reasons. He
espoused Martia the Daughter of Philip, who had never before been married, he
loved her dearly, and had Children by her, and yet in favor of the Friendship
he bore to Hortensius, who had no Children, and passionately desired to have
one, he resigned her over to him till such time as his Friend had a Son, and
then took her home again, as if he had only lent her: such was Cato. Those of
Utica celebrated for him Magnificent Funerals; and Caesar hearing the news of
his death, said, Cato envyed the Glory I might have got by doing a noble
Action. And yet when Cicero wrote a Book in praise of his death, and called it
Cato, Caesar wrote another, and called his Book Anticato. When Iuba and
Petreius had heard what had happened, and saw that they had neither hopes of
flight or safety, they slew each other with their Swords in a Chamber where
they had eat together. Caesar made the Kingdom of Mauritania tributary, and
gave the Government to Crispus Salustus. He pardoned those of Utica together
with Cato's Son, and finding in that City a Daughter of Pompey's with two
Children, he sent her to her Brother without doing her the least unkindness.
But he put to death all he could find of those three hundred which they called
a Senate. As for Lucius Scipio General of the defeated Army the Waves cast him
into the Enemies Fleet, from whence seeing no way to escape, he run his Sword
through his Body, and threw himself into the Sea. Thus Caesar ended the War in
Africa.

Pharnaces. The third over the Africans that had taken up Arms for Scipio,
wherein was led Captive the Son of King Iuba, yet a Child who afterward became
an Historian. And the fourth, of the Egyptians defeated in a Fight by Water on
the Nile, but this Triumph was placed between the Gaul and the Pontick. Though
he triumphed not over the Romans because they were his Fellow Citizens, which
had been no Glory to him, and a shame to the Roman People, yet in the pomp were
carried Pictures of all those Defeats, and the Pourtraictures of the Men, save
only Pompey's, which he durst not show because of the grief all men had for his
loss, yet fresh in memory: yet the people forbore not shedding tears for his
misfortune, especially when they knew L. Scipio General of a Roman Army, with
his Breast wounded with his own hand, precipitating himself into the Sea, and
saw Petreius perish in the Dining Room, and Cato tearing out his Bowels like a
fierce Beast; for Achillas and Photinus the sight of them was as pleasing as
the flight of Pharnaces, which made all the world laugh. It Is said that in
these Triumphs they carried sixty thousand Talents and a half of Silver Money,
with two thousand eight hundred twenty two Crowns of Gold, weighing twenty
thousand four hundred and fourteen Pounds. He distributed to every Soldier five
thousand Attick Drams, to every Captain double, to the Colonels and Captains of
Horse four times as much, and to all the people a Mina by the Head; besides he
exhibited diverse pleasant Spectacles, Horse-racing, Music, Combats on Foot of
a thousand against a thousand, on Horseback of two hundred against two hundred,
and another Fight of Horse and Foot together, he made likewise twenty Elephants
fight against twenty, he represented likewise a Sea Fight, wherein were four
thousand Rowers, and a thousand fighting Men on a side. He likewise caused a
Temple to be built to Venus, according to the vow he had made before the Battle
of Pharsalia, and near to that Temple built a public Hall for the Roman
People, not to use Traffic in, but for the pleading of Causes, and to render
justice, and learn how to render it, in like manner as there are many in
Persia, and by the Goddess side he caused to be set up the Statue of Cleopatra,
which is to be seen to this day. And lastly, having taken the number of the
people, he found them one half less than they were at the beginning of the War,
so much had the Differences which had happened between these two Men weakened
the Commonwealth.

For himself being made the fourth time Consul, he undertook the Expedition
Spain against the young Pompey, which was a Remain of the Civil War, he had not
reason to slight; for all those people of Quality that had escaped out of
Africa got thither, and the Wracks of the Pharsalian and African Defeats were
here assembled, besides the assistance of the most warlike Nations of Spain and
Celtiberia, and a great number of Slaves that followed Pompey's Army, who
having been four years exercised to the War, offered to serve him if he would
try the fortune of a Battle. This was the cause of Pompey's overthrow; for that
without delay he would go meet Caesar, though the old Captains whom the Battles
of Pharsalia and Africa had made wiser, counseled him to prolong the War,
being the only means to ruin his Enemy, who could not subsist in a Country
where he had no conveniences; for Caesar was come in seven and twenty days,
counting from the day he left the City, and with store of Baggage had performed
a wonderful Journey. Besides his Army never showed less resolution out of the
thoughts possessed them, that they were to deal with a multitude of Warlike
Enemies, and whom despair would make attempt any thing, which was the reason
Caesar made no haste to engage till Pompey provoking him to Battle, reproached
him with faintheartedness, which not able to endure, he drew up his Army in
Battle before Cordona, and that day he likewise gave Venus for his Word, as
Piety was that of Pompey's. When the Armies were going to close, Caesar seeing
his Men go on but coldly, and seem to be afraid, invoked all the Gods,
beseeching them with hands lifted up to Heaven, not to let the luster of so
many glorious Actions be darkened in one day, and running through the Ranks,
encouraged his Soldiers, taking off his Headpiece that he might be the better
known. But do what he could he could not raise their Spirits, till snatching a
Buckler out of a Soldiers hand, he said to the Tribunes were about him, This
shall be the last day of my life, and of your engagement to the War. And at the
same time made furiously toward the Enemy: he had scarce advanced ten foot but
he had above two hundred Darts thrown at him, some of which he avoided by
bending his Body, and others received on his Buckler, when the Tribunes run
with emulation to get about him, and the whole Army thereupon charging with all
their fury, they fought all day with diverse advantage, and at length toward
the Evening the Victory fell to Caesar, and it is reported, that hereupon he was
heard say these words, That he had often fought for Victory, but that now he
had fought for life. After the Defeat, Pompey's Men flying into Cordona,
Caesar, to prevent their escape thither, lest they should rally and renew the
Fight, caused the place to be invested by the Army, where his Soldiers being so
tired they could not work in the Circumvallation, heaped up together the Bodies
and Armor of the slain, which they kept piled up with their javelins stuck
into the ground, and lay all night under that kind of Rampire. Next Morning the
City was taken. Of Pompey's Captains Scapula getting up on a Pile of Wood burnt
himself; the Heads of Varus, Labienus, and other persons of Quality were
brought to Caesar. As for Pompey he fled from the Battle with a hundred and
fifty Horse, bending his course toward Cartea where his Fleet lay, he entered
the Port in a Litter, and in the habit of a private Man. But seeing the Seamen
had likewise lost all hopes, he threw himself into a little Boat, in which as
he was going out to Sea, his Foot tangling in the Cordage, one of his people
going to cut the Rope, by mischance cut his Heel, so that to cure his wound he
was forced to go ashore at a small Village, where hearing that Caesar's
Horsemen were coming, he took his flight through a Country covered with Thorns
and Briars, which added to his wound, so that being tired, and sitting down at
last under a Tree, he was found by those gave him chase* and slain, generously
defending himself, his Head was carried to Caesar, who caused it to be buried.
Thus was this War ended by one only Fight, contrary to the opinion of all the
world. Those who escaped from this Defeat, went to Pompey's younger Brother,
surnamed Sextus, but he only made War like a Rover, hiding himself, and flying
from place to place.

Caesar; having now put an end to all the Civil Wars, he returned to Rome more
powerful and glorious than ever any had been before him; wherefore all
imaginable Honors were done him to gain his favor. All the Tribes, all the
Nations and all the Kingdoms allied and Friends to the Roman People made
Sacrifices, Shows and Offerings in every Temple, and in every public place,
his Statues were every where to be seen set up in diverse fashions, some adorned
with Oaken Crowns, as having saved his Country, like those wherewith the
Citizens formerly honored those who saved their lives, likewise by public
Decree they gave him the Titles of Father of his Country, perpetual Dictator,
Consul for ten years, and of Holy and Sacred; and it was enacted, that he
should administer Justice seated on a Throne of Ivory, or of Gold, that he
should wear the Triumphal Robe at Sacrifices, that on those days whereon he had
gained his principal Victories public Feasts and Prayers should be made, and
that every five years the Priests and Vestals should offer up Vows for his
safety; that those who entered into office should swear not to oppose any of his
Orders, and in Honor of his Birthday they changed the name of the Month which
they called Quintilis, and named it July. It was decreed likewise by an Act of
the Senate, that Temples should be built to him as to a God, and among others
one in common to him and Clemency, where their Statues stood hand in hand. Thus
by public Vows they requested his Clemency, whose Dominion they stood in aw
of, some likewise there were who would have called him King, but he forbid it
with threats, signifying his aversion for a name which could not but be unhappy
after the execrations fulminated by the Ancients against that Dignity, he
likewise dismissed from about his person the Regiment of Guards.
Pretorian Cohorts, of which he had made use during the War, and contented
himself with the public Officers. As he gave audience, thus attended in the
place, the Senate led by the Consuls with the ordinary pomp came to present him
those Edicts before spoken of, he gave them every one his hand, but when they
came in a Body rose not from his Seat, and suffered them to stand, which gave
subject of discourse to them who accused him of aiming at the Royalty. After
having accepted all the other Honors, save only the Consulate for ten years,
he designed himself Consul for the next year with Anthony General of his Horse,
and gave Anthony for his Successor in the charge of his Horse, Lepidus, then
Governor of Spain who had his Lieutenants in that Province. He recalled all
Exiles except those who were banished for some great crime, and pardoned all
those of the contrary Faction, even many who had born Arms against him. At the
same time he gave to some Offices for a year, to others Governments of
Provinces, or Armies to command, which gave the people occasion to hope that he
would restore the Government of the Commonwealth as Sylla had done, who was
mounted to the same power; but those hopes appeared to be ill founded. After
all this, one of those who would confirm the rumor spread abroad concerning
the Royalty, having put upon the Head of one of his Statues a Wreath of Laurel,
interlaced with white Ribbands, and the Tribunes of the People Marull^s and
Casetius having informed themselves of, discovered and imprisoned the Author of
the Action, believing thereby to oblige Caesar, who seemed to take amiss the
speaking of the name of King, he approved their proceedings, and when in the
Assembly some saluting him gave him the Title of King, perceiving the people
shed tears, he pleasantly reproved them, by saying, I am not King, but Caesar,
as if they had mistaken one name for another; but when Marullus issued out
process against those had called him by that name, and caused them to be
brought before him by the Ushers as Criminals, he could not brook it, but
complained to the S^nate of Marullus and his Colleagues, who out of malice gave
him the reputation of affecting the Tyranny, adding they were worthy of death,
but he would be satisfied that they were deprived of their Offices, and the
quality of Senators. This action confirmed the opinion of all the world, that
he was glad to be called so, that he might prove by degrees the minds of the
people, and at last mount to the Monarchy; for it was a crime to have called
him a King, and besides the Office of the Tribunes was hallowed and inviolable,
by Oath of the Ancients, and by old Laws, and besides they stayed not till the
time of their Magistracy (which approached) was expired, which heightened the
indignation of all good Men. And as soon as he perceived it, he repented
himself to have exercised his power with too much rigor, as soon as he beheld
himself in peace, and as some say, gave orders to his Friends to govern
themselves with prudence, because his Enemies had already an occasion to do him
hurt; whereupon they asking him if he would not have the Spanish Cohorts
continually about his person, he answered that nothing could be more miserable
than to be perpetually guarded, nor any condition of life be more uneasy: yet
all this hindered not the endeavors of those who would have had him take the
Title of King. And as he was Spectator at the Lupercal Ceremonies seated upon a
Throne of Gold in the place for Orations, Anthony his Colleague in the
Consulate, running about the City naked, and anointed with Oil (as is the
custom for the Priests of those Ceremonies) ascended the place where he sat,
and planted a Diadem on his Head. He laid it down as soon as he saw how few
people applauded the Spectacle; Anthony put it on once more, and he took it off
the second time. The people looked upon this Debate with silence, impatient to
see what would be the issue; but when they at last perceived Caesar remained
Master, the place was filled with Acclamations and Prayers for his Prosperity.

Crassus, which they had committed contrary to their Treaties. He therefore
sent before sixteen Legions and ten thousand Horse which had passed the
Adriatic Gulf, and forthwith a rumor was spread, that there was an Oracle of
the Sibyls which declared that the Parthians could not be subdued by the
Romans, unless they were commanded by a King. This made some talk publicly
that in what concerned the Romans they might all call him Dictator or Emperor
or some other softer name than that of King, but in regard of other Nations
taxed under the Roman Empire, there needed no scruple be made at the giving him
that Title. He having still refused it, hastened all he could to get out of the
City where many envied him. But four days before the day appointed for his
departure he was slain by his Enemies in the Palace, either out of malice to
see him raised to such supreme felicity and height of Command, or else (as
themselves said) out of a desire to restore the Commonwealth to its first
Estate; for they feared after having overcome these other Nations nothing could
hinder him from making himself King: yet as it appears to me it was only for
the name sake they attempted all things; for in the thing it self there is no
difference between Dictator and King. There were two Chiefs of this Conspiracy,
the Son of that Brutus whom Sylla put to death, M. Brutus Cepio who came for
refuge to Caesar himself after the Battle of Pharsalia, and C. Cassius who
yielded to him the Galleys in the Hellespont, both of Pompey's Party, and with
them was joined one of Caesar's most intimate Friends Decimus Brutus Albinus.
He had always treated them honorably, and with great confidence, and when he
was going to the War in Africa, had given them Armies, and the Government of
the Gauls, to Decimus Brutus of the Transalpine, and to M. Brutus of the
Cisalpine: Brutus and Cassius were at this time designed Praetors, and were in
difference for a jurisdiction, which among the Citizens is accounted the most
honorable of all others, whether they contended out of ambition, or only
feigned to do it, lest their Conspiracy should be perceived: Caesar was
Arbitrator between them, and, as it is said, he acknowledged to his Friends that
Cassius had reason, but yet he would favor Brutus, so much he loved and
honored him, for all men believed he was his Son, because he visited Servilia
Cato's Sister at the time she grew with Child of Brutus, wherefore it is
likewise said, that in the Battle of Pharsalia he gave express order to his
Captains to have a great a care as possibly they could of Brutus's life.
However, whether he were ungrateful, or knew nothing of it, or did not believe
it, or that he thought his Mother's incontinence a dishonou^, whether love of
liberty made him prefer his Country before his own Father, or being of the
ancient race of the Bruti who had expelled the Kings, and now pricked forward
by the reproaches of the people, who on the Statues of the old Brutus, and on
this Praetor's Tribunal had secretly written such words as these, Brutus thou
suffer thy self to be corrupted with gifts. Brutus thou art dead, would to
God thou were now alive; either thy Successors degenerate, or thou have not
begot them. He, I say, young as he was, chafed by these and such like things,
engaged himself in this Enterprise as an Act worthy his Predecessors.

The Discourses concerning the Royalty were not then quite extinct, when just
as they were going to the Senate Cassius took Brutus by the hand, and said,
What shall we do if Caesar 's Flatterers propose to make him King? To which
Brutus answered, that He would not be at the Senate. Whereupon, the other again
demanded, What if they summon ^s as Pretors, what shall we do then, my Friend?
I will, said he, defend my Country, even till death. Whereupon, Cassius
embracing him, said; And what Persons of Quality will you take for Companions
in so brave an Attempt? Do you think there are none but Tavern-People and
Artificers that put Writings on your Tribunal? Know that they are the Prime Men
of the City, who expect from other Pretors only Plays and Shows; but require
their Liberty from you, as the Work of your Predecessors. Thus they discovered
to each other what they had long had in their thoughts; and began to try their
own Friends, and some of Caesar's, according as they knew them capable of good
things. They engaged in their Design the two Brothers, Cecilius and Bucolianus,
Rubrius Rex, Q. Ligarius, M. Spurius, Servilius Galba, Sextius Naso, Pontius
Aquila: And of Caesar's Friends they drew to their Conspiracy Decimus, of whom
I have already spoken; Caius Casca, Trebonius, Attilius Cimber, Minutius and
Basillus. When they thought they had Companions enough, for it was not
convenient to communicate this Design to all the World, they gave their Words
one to another without either Oath or Sacrifice, and yet no one changed his
mind, or ever discovered the Plot. There was nothing now wanting but choice of
time and place. The time urged, for within four days Caesar was to depart and
take Guards. For the place, they thought the Palace most convenient; for they
concluded that all the Senators, though they were not made privy to it, yet,
seeing the Action, would joyfully join with them; which, as it is said,
happened at the death of Romulus, after having changed the Regal Power into
Tyranny. Wherefore this Attempt would have the same Success with that;
especially, being not privily executed, but in the Palace, and for the Good of
the Commonwealth. That they needed not to fear any thing from Caesar's Army,
being all composed of Roman People; in conclusion, that the Authors of this
great Action doing it publicly, could expect nothing but Reward. Having all
decreed the Palace for the place of Execution, there were diverse Opinions
concerning the manner of doing it; some being of Opinion they should likewise
make away Anthony, Caesar's Colleague, the most powerful of his Friends, and
well beloved of the Soldiery. But Brutus opposed that; saying, That it was only
by killing Caesar, who was as a King, that they ought to seek for the Glory of
destroying Tyrants; and that if they killed his Friends too, Men would impute
the Action to private Enmity, and the Faction of Pompey. This Advice
prevailing, they only expected the assembling of the Senate. Now the day before
Caesar being invited to sup with Lepidus, carried along with him Decimus Brutus
Albinus: and during Supper the Question being proposed what Death was best for
Man; some desiring one kind, and some another, he alone preferred the
suddainest and most unexpected. Thus divining for himself, they fell to
discourse of the Morrows Affairs. In the Morning finding himself somewhat out
of Order with the Night's Debauch, and his Wife Calphurnia having been
frightened with dismal Dreams, she advised him not to go abroad; and in many
Sacrifices he made, there were none but affrightful Tokens: He therefore gave
order to Anthony to dismiss the Senate. But Decimus Brutus persuading him that
it was more convenient he went himself, to avoid the Opinion might be
conceived, he did it out of Pride or Scorn, he went to dismiss them himself,
coming to the Palace in his Litter. There were at present Plays in Pompey's
Theater, and almost all the Senators were at the Windows of the Neighboring
Houses, as is the Custom in the time of Spectacles. The same Morning the
Pretors, Brutus and Cassius, gave Audience to those made Suit for it, with
great tranquillity, in a Gallery before the Theater. But when they had heard
what happened to Caesar in the Sacrifices, and that therefore they deferred the
Senate, they were much troubled. One of those that stood there having taken
Casca by the hand, told him; You kept it close from me that am your Friend but
Brutus has told me all. Whereupon Casca pricked in Conscience, began to
tremble; but the other continuing with a smile; Where then will you raise the
Money to come to the Edility? Casca gave him an Account. Brutus and Cassius
themselves being talking together, one of the Senators, called Popilius Laena,
drawing them aside, said; I pray God what you have in your hearts may succeed
happily, but it is fit you make haste. At which they were so surprised, that
they gave him no Answer. At the same time that Caesar went to the Palace in his
Litter, one of his Domestics who had understood something of the Conspiracy,
came to find Calphurnia; but without saying any thing else to her but that he
must speak with Caesar about Affairs of importance, he stayed expecting his
Return from the Senate, because he did not know all the Particulars: His Host
of Gnidus called Artemidorus running to the Palace to give him notice of it,
came just at the moment of his being killed; another, as he sacrificed before
the Gate of the Senate House, gave him a Note of all the Conspiracy; but he
going in without reading it, it was after his death found in his hands. As he
came out of his Litter, Laena, the same who before had spoken to Cassius, came
to him, and entertained him a long time in private; which struck a Damp into
the Chiefs of the Conspiracy, the more because their Conference was long: They
already began to make signs to one another, that they must now kill him before
he arrested them; but in the Sequel of the Discourse, observing Laena to use
rather the Gesture of a Suppliant than an Accuser, they deferred it; till in
the end, seeing him return thanks to Caesar, they took Courage. It is the
Custom of the Chief Magistrates entering the Palace, first to consult the
Divines; and here as well as in the former Sacrifices, Caesar's first Victim
was found without a heart, or as some say without the Chief of the Entrails.
The Divine hereupon telling him it was a mortal Sign, he replied laughing, that
when he went to fight against Pompey in Spain he had seen the like: and the
other having replied, that then likewise he had run hazard of losing his Life;
but that at present the Entrails threatened him with greater danger. He
commanded they should sacrifice another Victim, which fore-boding nothing but
ill; he fearing to seem tedious to the Senate, and being pressed by his
Enemies, whom he thought to be his Friends, without considering the danger,
entered the Palace; for it was of necessity that the Misfortune to befall him,
should befall. They left Trebonius at the Gate to stop Anthony under pretense of
discoursing some Business with him; and as soon as Caesar was seated, the other
Conspirators surrounded him according to Custom, as Friends, having each his
Dagger concealed. At the same time Attilius Cimber standing before him, began
to entreat him to grant the Return of his Brother who was in Exile; and upon
his Refusal, under pretense of begging it with more humility, he took him by
the Robe; and drawing it to him, hung about his Neck, crying out, Why do you
delay, my Friends. Thereupon Casca first of all reaching over his Head, thought
to strike his Dagger into his Throat, but wounded him only in the Breast.
Caesar having disengaged himself from Cimber, and caught hold of Casca's hand,
leaped from his Seat, and threw himself upon Casca with a wonderful force; but
being at Handy Gripes with him, another struck his Dagger into his Side,
Cassius gave him a Wound in the Face, Brutus struck him quite through the
Thigh, Bucolianus wounded him behind the Head; and he like one enraged, and
roaring like a Savage Beast, turned sometimes to one and sometimes to another;
till strength failing him after the Wound received from Brutus, he threw the
Skirt of his Robe over his Face, and suffered himself gently to fall before
Pompey's Statue. They forbore not to give him many Stabs after he was down, so
that there were three and twenty Wounds found in his Body. And those that slew
him were so eager, that some of them through vehemence, without thinking of it,
wounded each other.

After this Murder committed in a Hallowed Place, and on a Sacred Person,
Anthony fortifyed himself in his House, judging they had a design upon his Life
as well as upon Caesar's: And Lepidus, General of the Horse, hearing upon the
place what had passed, made haste to the Island in the River, where he had a
Legion; which he drew into the Field of Mars, that he might be in readiness to
execute the Orders of Anthony; for he yielded to him, both in the Quality of
Caesar's Friend and Consul. The Soldiers would very willingly have revenged
Caesar's death so basely murdered, but that they feared the Senate, who
favored the Murderers, and expected the Issue of things. Caesar had no
Soldiery with him, for he loved not Guards; but contented himself with Ushers:
Besides, he was accompanied with a great number of People of the Robe, and
whole Troops of as well Citizens as Strangers, with Freed Men and Slaves,
followed him from his House to the Palace; but in a moment all these Crowds
were vanished, there remained with him only three unhappy Slaves; who putting
him in his Litter, and taking it upon their Shoulders, carried him, who but a
little before was Master both of Sea and Land. The Conspirators after the
Execution had a mind to have said something in the Senate; but no body staying
to hear them, they twisted their Robes about their left Arms instead of
Bucklers, and with their bloody Daggers in their Hands, ran through the
Streets, crying out, they had slain the King and the Tyrant; causing to march
before them a Man carrying a Cap on the Head of a Pike, which is the Badge of
Liberty: they exhorted likewise the People to the restoring the Commonwealth;
putting them in mind of the first Brutus, and the Oath wherein he had engaged
the Citizens, and with them their Posterity. There were several others who were
not of the Conspiracy, who took Daggers, and went with them through the City;
of the number of which were Lentulus Spinther, Favonius, Aquinius, Dolobella,
Murius and Petiscus; who, instead of the Honor they expected, received the
same Punishment with those had been guilty; but none of the People joined with
them, which begot in them both trouble and fear. As for the senate, though all
the Senators who knew not of the Plot had in the Tumult taken their Flight, yet
they hoped well from them, either because they were Kindred or Friends to most
of that Order, or because they knew they themselves had an aversion for the
Tyranny; but they had an ill Opinion of the People, and of Caesar's Soldiers,
of whom there were great numbers in the City; some newly dismissed, to whom he
had given Lands; others distributed by Colonies some time before, who were
returned to follow him: They were likewise fearful of Lepidus, because he was
Master of the Legion of the City; and doubted lest Anthony, against the
Authority of the Senate, should engage the People to destroy them. Things being
in this posture, they with the Gladiators seized the Capitol; where in their
first Consultation it was agreed that they should tempt the People with Gifts;
for they hoped that some of the People beginning to praise the Action, others
would follow their Example out of love to Liberty, and desire the restore the
Commonwealth; and they imagined that the Roman People were still the same as
they had heard tell they were in the time of first Brutus, who drove out the
Kings: but they considered not that they des^red two things contradictory, that
the same People should love Liberty, and (...) ^^^mselves be corrupted with
Gifts; the last of which was much easier to be hoped for in a Commonwealth long
since depraved, for the Multitude of the City was mixed with all sorts of
Strangers; the Freed Men lived equal to the other Citizens, the Slave was
habited like his Master, and except the Habit of the Senators, one Fashion was
used indifferently among all the rest. Moreover, because of the Corn
distributed to the Poor in the City only, all Loyterers, Beggars, and People
unskilful in their Professions throughout all Italy flocked the Rome: Besides,
there were great numbers of disbanded Soldiers who returned not as formerly
every one to his Country; but expecting to be sent to possess the Houses and
Lands of others, quartered together by Bands in Temples and Galleries, under
only one Colors and one Captain, who was to be their Conductor to their
Colony. These People, after having sold all that they had, to be the lighter to
march, were ready to do any thing for Money: So that the Conspirators had no
great difficulty to gather together a multitude in the place. But though they
were paid for it, they durst not praise the Action out of the respect they
bore to the Glory of Caesar, and the fear they stood in of the Contrary Party;
but as if they had in view the Public Good, they cried out for Peace, and
demanded it of the Magistrates; and by this means they labored for the
security of the Conspirators, Peace not being to be had without an Act of
Oblivion. Thereupon Cinna, allied to Caesar, and then Praetor, joins with them:
And advancing into the midst of them contrary to the expectation of all the
World, threw off his Praetor's Robe, despising it as being given him by a
Tyrant: After which he began to declaim against Caesar, calling him Tyrant, and
those who had slain him Tyrannicides; highly praising their Action, as parallel
to what their Predecessors had done; and at the same time commanding they
should bring from the Capitol those brave People who had so well served the
Commonwealth, to the end to give them those Rewards they had merited. But
whatever Command Cinna gave, this Troop seeing, the People who had not been
corrupted were not there, would not let them be brought, but contented
themselves to continue their Cries in demanding Peace. But when Dolobella, a
Young Man of great Reputation, whom Caesar ready to depart, had designed Consul
for the rest of the Year, being come with his Purple and the Badges of the
Consulate, and had spoke after Cinna violently and with indignation against the
Author of his Dignity, pleading hard for the Pardon of a Crime of which he said
he would himself have been Partaker of, and proposing (as some say) to
consecrate that Day as the Day of the Foundation of their City. Then this
Assembly of Mercenary People took Courage, seeing a Praetor and a Consul seemed
to Authorize them, and they sent to tell the Conspirators they should come down
from the Temple. They were glad to hear what Dolobella had done, believing they
had now at need found a Consul young, vigorous, and of a good Family, to oppose
against Anthony.

Yet only Cassius and Brutus came down, the Hand of the last all bloody Caesar.
Being come to the Assembly, neither one nor the other said any thing mean or
low; they praised each other for what they had done, as if it had been an
Action of Honor by consent of all the World: They declared that upon it
depended the Prosperity of the City, which was this day made happy; gave a
glorious Testimony of the Prudence of Decimus Brutus, who had very opportunely
called to them the Gladiators, exhorted the People to imitate their
Predecessors, who drove out their Kings that had not made themselves Kings by
force as Caesar had, but were lawfully elected; and advised them to send for
Pompey, the Son of the great Pompey, Defender of the Commonwealth, against whom
Caesar's Party yet made War in Spain; and that they should order the Return of
Caesetius and Marullus, Tribunes of the People, whom Caesar had interdicted
their Offices, and sent into Banishment, where they still remained. Having
spoken to this purpose, they again went up to the Capitol, for they durst not
confide in this Multitude. But their Servants and Relations being already
permitted to go and come to and from the Temple, they chose some whom they
deputed to Lepidus and Anthony, to entreat them to make Peace, to maintain
Liberty, and secure their Country from the Miseries attend on Discord. To
obtain this, the Deputies praised not the Action (for they durst not, speaking
to Caesar's Friends) but they said, that in their judgments it ought to be born
with; that those had done it were worthy of Pardon, having undertaken it not
out of any hate they bore him, but love to their Country. That the Condition of
the City was deplorable, if being almost depopulated by the Seditions wherewith
it had a long time been afflicted, they would not spare those few good Citizens
left. That it was extremely unjust to run the Commonwealth in hazard of utter
Ruin for particular Enmities; and that instead of laying hold of this Occasion
to gratify their Hatred, they ought to sacrifice to the good of the Estate all
the Offenses they might possibly have received. Anthony and Lepidus wanted not
Will to revenge Caesar's death, but they were fearful of the Kindred and
Friends of the Conspirators, and the Affection the Senate bore them; and above
all, of Decimus Brutus. who with an Army held the Neighboring Gaul, of which
Caesar had given him the Government: Wherefore they thought it more expedient
to wait for a more favorable Opportunity, and in the mean time try all ways
they could to draw Decimus Army, already well wearied, to their Party. So
Anthony answered them in these Terms.

The Oration of Anthony.
IT is no particular Hate makes us act, but only the blackness af the Action:
Besides, having promised to Caesar upon Oath we would guard him, or revenge all
Attempts should be made against his Person, Religion requires, that those who
are sullied with the Crime of his Death should be driven from among us; and
that we should rather live few and innocent, than draw upon our selves a Curse
by leaving this Attempt unpunished. Notwithstanding, since you desire it, let
us assemble in the Palace; and what shall be resolved by a common Deliberation
for the good of the City, let it be executed.

Having made them this Answer, they thanked them, and returned with great hopes
all things would succeed to their satisfaction, for they promised themselves
the Senate would heartily espouse their Interest. But Anthony commanded to
Magistrates to keep Watch by Night in the City, and to take by turns their Seat
in the Tribunal as in Broad Day; having to that purpose given Orders to kindle
Fires in all the Streets. The Friends of the Conspirators ran all Night from
House to House to solicit the Senators to be favorable to them, and to watch
for the Good of their Country. On the other side, the Chiefs of the Soldiers
destined for the Colonies ran up and down also, making strange threats if they
did not send them to the Lands already given them, and those that were farther
promised them. Moreover, the Citizens who would not be corrupted, hearing of
the small number of the Conspirators, took heart; and calling to mind the
excellent Qualities of Caesar, could not agree with the others. The same Night
Caesar's Treasure and Writings were brought to Anthony's, either at
Calphurnia's desire for their greater security, or that Anthony commanded it.
As soon as it was Day, the Senate was called by Order of the Consul in the
Temple of Tetra.
The Earth, which was near to his House; for the durst not go to the Palace
because it was under the Capitol, whither the Conspirator were retired with the
Gladiators; nor would trouble the City by making the Army enter, which yet
Lepidus brought in. At Break of Day came with the other Senators to the Temple
of The Earth Cinna, having resumed the same Habit which the Day before he had
cast away, as given him by a Tyrant: Some of the Citizens who had born Arms
under Caesar perceiving him, enraged that he who was his Kins-man had been the
first who had blemished his Reputation by a malicious Speech, began to throw
Stones at him; and having forced him to shelter himself in a certain House,
brought Wood round about it to burn him in it, if Lepidus, coming in with the
Army, had no^ hindered it; which raised the Spirits of Caesar's Party, and
appalled the Mercenaries and Conspirators.

Anthony did not oppose, knowing well there was no likelihood of their coming,
as indeed they did not. To try then the inclination of the Senate, some with
vehemence praised the Action, giving to those had done it the Title of
Tyrannicides, and voting them rewards; others without speaking of reward, which
indeed they themselves demanded not, were of advice only thanks should be given
them, as having done by it good service to the Commonwealth, and others quite
cutting off the Complements, said, that what they had done was pardonable. Thus
they argued, to see on which side the Senate leaned, that they might better
propose the rest. Thereupon the honestest and best men having detested the
Assassinate as an execrable crime, yet said, that they would not hinder, but in
consideration of the Families of the Guilty, which were of the best of the
City; they should be granted impunity, but they could never suffer them to be
honored, as having well served the State: others on the contrary said, they
ought to be granted all other things, with the security of their persons. Some
one having thereupon said, that the Honor done to them would defame Caesar:
another replied, that they should rather consider the living than the dead;
whereupon another resolutely affirming that they must declare Caesar Tyrant, or
give them their lives out of pure Grace, all the rest holding to this point
required the question to be put what judgment they were to make of Caesar.
After having first every man swore they would sincerely speak their thoughts,
without respect to former Oaths, which necessity had forced from them; for
since he became Master of the Commonwealth they had lost their liberty, and
only spoke in fear, lest they should perish like Pompey and a thousand others.
Anthony, who observed them conceived presently their imaginations, and judging
that in this matter many true things might be said that would cumber and
perplex him, thought it best to divert them from this design, by making them
believe they acted against themselves; wherefore knowing that the greatest part
of those who talked in this manner had received their Patents and Commissions
for Magistracies, and Government of Armies from Caesar himself; (for being
designed upon very long Expedition, he had disposed of all dignities for five
years) he commanded silence as Consul, and then spoke to this effect:

The Oration of Anthony.
It Is necessary those who purpose to advise any thing concerning Caesar, should
know, that if he have governed the Commonwealth as a lawful Magistrate, all he
has done ought to be approved: but if he have reigned as a Tyrant, his Body is
to be thrown into the common Sewer, and all he has done revoked. Now (to say
all in a word) the whole Universe is concerned in what he has enacted: nay,
some things he has done, which though we would, it were not possible for us to
disannul, which I will let you fully understand in the sequel of this
discourse. At present I will only in the first place put the question to you
concerning things that are in our power, and which concern our selves alone,
from whence you may give an easy conjecture what order is to be observed in
Affairs of more difficulty. Almost all of us here present have exercised or do
exercise Offices, to which we have been nominated by Caesar; and some there are
designed by himself to possess them for the future; for you know that he has
for five years disposed of all the annual Dignities of the City, the
Governments of Provinces, and Command of Armies, if you will all voluntarily
lay them down, that is in your power, therefore let us first of all consult of
that, and then I will speak what remains.

Having by these words let them know, that they ought rather to think of
themselves than of Caesar, he was silent, and at the same time they all began
to cry out with one voice, rising up from their Seats, That there was no
necessity of giving the people the trouble of calling new Assemblies, for the
nomination of Magistrates, and that it was much better, every one should hold
the Dignities they had already accepted. Many were the more vehement in this,
because they could promise themselves nothing from the Assembly, being under
age, among whom the Consul Dolobella himself was the principal, for being yet
but five and twenty years of age, he could not obtain the Consulate without
violating the Laws. So the precedent inclinations of the day were changed in a
moment, many crying out aloud that it would be a shameful thing, if to favor
Murderers, and render their impunity more glorious, Magistrates should be
deprived of their Dignities: others on the contrary endeavored to persuade
Dolobella and the rest, that they might hope for all things from the people,
who would name them to the same Dignities, and that there would be no change of
the persons designed, but only the form of Assemblies lawfully held, instead of
those overawed by the tyranny, besides it would be more honorable for them not
to be esteemed less worthy those Honors, after the restoring the
Commonwealth, than under the Monarchy. As soon as they heard these Discourses,
some Praetors deposed their Ornaments, and the marks of their Dignities on the
Benches of the Authors of this opinion, in hopes to receive them more
legitimately with the others, but the greater part being doubtful of the snare,
believed, if they once let go what they had in their hands, they should never
catch it again.

Anthony and Lipidus went out of the Senate into the place where some were
assembled, and demanded their presence; when they saw them coming from above,
they began to cry out in confusion, and after, with much trouble, they were
silenced, one of them, whether of his own motion, or suborned, cried out, that
they should prevent the Cities falling into the like calamities which they had
formerly suffered. Then Anthony opening his Robe, showed his Corslet underneath
to incense the multitude as if the life of the Consul himself were not secure
without Arms. Thereupon some crying out, that the crime ought to be punished,
and others demanding pardon for the guilty, and peace: he said to these, As for
peace, we will consider of the ways to make it so that it may last; for it is
very hard to find securities for it, since the Oaths made to Caesar, and those
with execrations against those that violated them, were in vain. Then turning
himself to those required vengeance for this Murder, having praised them as the
more religious observers of Faith and Piety, he added these words, I would put
my self at the head of you, and first of all my self cry the same thing if I
were not Consul, but my charge obliges me to do not so much what is just, as
what is advantageous to the Commonwealth; for so it is ordained by all those
in the Palace, though that has been the loss of Caesar, who pardoning those he
had overcome in favor of the public Good, has been murdered by themselves.
After these artificial Discourses made by Anthony to each Party, those who were
for revenging the Murder, would have Lepidus undertake to execute the
vengeance; and when he began to speak to them, the multitude who were too far
off, cried out, that he should come down unto the middle of the place, that the
people might more easily hear him; whereupon thinking there might be some
change in the minds of the people, he came to the Tribunal for Orations, where
with tears in his eyes, he before all the world deplored the misfortune arrived
to Caesar; and in the end added, I was yesterday with Caesar in this very
place, where today I am forced to demand your opinion of his death, what would
you have me do! To which many crying out, Let him be revenged. The Mercenaries
on the contrary cried out, Peace. To whom he answered, We would with all our
hearts; but what peace can we make? or upon what Oaths can it be secured, since
there are none so sacred by which we have not sworn to Caesar, and yet they
have all been violated by those whom we thought good Men? Then turning to the
others; Our Caesar (said he) is dead, that person truly sacred, that adorable
Man, and we are fearful his death will cause some great misfortune to the
Commonwealth, but the Fathers will consider of it, and the most part of them
are of advice to take order in it. Whereupon they began again to cry, Do you
alone do that. I would, said he, and can alone undertake it, but it is not
sufficient that you and I would or do undertake it alone. Upon these artificial
contests, the Mercenaries knowing him inflamed with ambition, praised him, and
offered him the High Priesthood of Caesar, which he listened to with much joy,
and told them, Remember what you offer me another time if you thing me worthy
of it. The hopes he conceived of this Priesthood having given him the boldness
to ask with more instance for peace, he told them, Though reason and Justice
forbid it, I will do what you desire. After which words he returned with speed
to the Palace, where in the interim Dolobella had shamefully consumed all that
time in endeavoring to have himself confirmed in the Consulate. Anthony who
expected what the people would do, beheld that with derision; and because there
was great difference of opinion, contented himself to be a Spectator; in the
end seeing the people were not heated with all these things, he resolved to
consent to the impunity of the Conspirators, because indeed he saw himself
constrained to it, yet dissembling the necessity, he let them understand, that
in sparing their lives he did them a great favor; and as to what concerned
Caesar, he undertook to cause all he had done to be ratified and confirmed by
Decree. So Commanding silence he began to speak in this manner:

The Oration of Anthony.
WHilst you debated, Gentlemen, about the crime committed by our Citizens, I
gave you nothing of my opinion, and when you put it to the question, and took
votes concerning Caesar, I proposed you but one thing of all he had done, which
extremely perplexed you, and not without reason, for if we lay down our
charges, we tacitly confess that we and so many great men are unworthy. Let us
now consider the other things, which it is not easy to express. In so great a
number of Cities, Provinces, Kings and Potentates (for almost all the people
which Caesar has subdued by his valor and his Forces from the East to the West
have received his Laws, and are obliged to his liberality and favor.) Can you
believe any of them will suffer what they possess to be taken away, at any less
rate than blowing up the Flames of War in all parts? you who think it it
convenient to save wicked men because the Commonwealth is weak and impotent. I
will not speak of people far distant, whom fear has hitherto kept within the
bounds of duty. Regard not only our Neighbors, but those who dwell among us in
Italy, those old Soldiers who have received from Caesar the reward of those
Victories for which they exposed their lives. They are still in Bodies, and
armed, and there are many thousands of them in the City: what think you they
would do, if what was given be taken from them? Will they wait for other
Colonies and other Lands? You may conjecture by what you saw last night; for as
you went through the City to solicit for the guilty, you know how they
threatened you: think you they will stand quietly, and see Caesar's Body
unworthily dragg^d, and thrown into the common Sewer (for the Laws enact that
Tyrants should be so treated) do you think it would not move them who have
fought under him? or that they can hope you will let them enjoy the rewards of
those Victories they have gained against the Gauls and Britains, whilst with
the extremest of infamy you treat him from whom they hold them? What will the
people of Rome? what will all the people of Italy do? will you not draw upon
your won heads the hatred and indignation of men and gods, if you condemn to
that punishment him who has extended the bounds of your Empire from the Ocean
to Nations before unknown? Will not all the world say we are unjust Judges, if
we decree rewards for those, who in the Palace, in a hallowed place, in full
Senate, being Senators themselves, murdered a Consul, a sacred person, and
defame him, who for his Virtue his very Enemies have in veneration: wherefore
let me counsel you not to think of these things, which are neither just nor
possible; and as my opinion I declare it, that we ought to ratify all that
Caesar has done and ordained, and not approve the action of those who slew him;
for that is neither just nor reasonable, and cannot be done with cancelling all
he had done; notwithstanding if you think good, let their lives be saved out of
pure grace for the sake of their Kindred and Friends, upon condition they
acknowledge the obligation.

After these words of Antonies, there was great contest in the Senate, and in
the end it was agreed by the consent of all the Senators, that there should be
no prosecution of Caesar's death, and that all that he had done should be
approved for the good of the Public, which words were added by the
Conspirators Friends for their greater security. Anthony himself not
contradicting it, as if he approved it, rather for the common Quiet than out of
Justice. Hereupon those possessed of Charges, began to demand mention should be
made of them as well as of the public interest, and they confirmed in their
Dignities, to which Anthony likewise consented, letting the Fathers know he did
it for fear, and to this Decree was added another, concerning the Colonies.

L. Piso in whose hands Caesar had deposited his last Will and Testament, to
desire him not to produce it, nor to make any public Funerals, lest that
should occasion new Tumults, which when they could not obtain, they threatened
to summon him to Judgment, because he thereby frustrated the Public of a great
estate which ought to be brought to the Treasury, and something they said
concerning Tyranny, whereupon Piso called out as loud as he could, beseeching
the Consuls to reassemble the Senate, who were not yet separated, and then he
told them:

The Oration of Piso.
THose who boast they have slain a Tyrant, treat us like Tyrants themselves,
and we have many instead of one,. They forbid us the burying of a High Priest,
they threaten those entrusted with his Will, they say his Goods ought to be
confiscated, as if he had been a Tyrant, they would have what he has done
ratified as far as it respects them; but where it concerns himself they would
disannul it; and it is not Brutus and Cassius who do this, but those who stirred
them up to commit this murder. Do you consult concerning his Funerals; and for
his Will I will take care, and never abuse the trust reposed in me, unless some
one kill me too.

These words raised a Tumult and Indignation, especially in the minds of those
who hoped to have some advantage to themselves by the Will. It was therefore
agreed the Will should be published, and public Funerals solemnized; and so
the Senate parted. Brutus and Cassius understanding what had passed, sent to
invite the people to come up to the Capitol, where a great multitude being
assembled, Brutus spoke in these terms:

The Oration of Brutus.
IF we speak to you now here, who spoke to you yesterday in the place, it is not
that we have taken refuge as in a Temple; for we are not Criminals, nor as in a
Fortress; we deliver our selves into your hands, but what unlooked for happened
to Cinna against all reason, has forced us to retire, and because our Enemies
calumniously accuse us, of having violated our Faith, and troubled the Peace. I
shall be well pleased to plead our cause before you: you I say with whom we
hope for the future to confer about all the affairs of the Commonwealth. After
that Caesar upon his return from Gaul entered armed into his Country, and Pompey
who loved the Commonwealth had been treated as you all know, and after a great
multitude of good Citizens retired into Africa and Spain were perished, the
tyranny being established, he would, and not without reason, for his own
security have us swear to forget what was passed, and if he would have
constrained us to promise upon oath not only to blot out of our remembrance the
injuries we had received, but likewise to live under him in perpetual
servitude, what would not then those have done who sought our destruction? But
I believe for my part there is not true Roman who would not choose rather to die
an hundred times than oblige himself by oath to servitude. If then Caesar
attempted nothing against our liberty, we are perjured; but if he has left to
us neither the disposition of Offices in the City, nor of Governments of
Provinces, nor Command of Armies, nor Colonies, nor any other Honors, but that
Caesar alone disposed all these things without so much as speaking a word to
the Senate, or asking the consent of the people, where is that liberty of which
we had not so much as the hopes left? for could we think he would be weary of
our servitude, or would imitate Sylla, who after being revenged of his Enemies,
restored to you the administration of the Commonwealth, he who undertaking so
long an Expedition, anticipated for five years the assembly for election of
Magistrates? What shall I say of the Tribunes of the people, Caesctius and
Marullus? did he not shamefully drive away those Magistrates holy and
inviolable? The Laws and Oath of our Fathers permit not the Tribunes of the
people to be brought to judgment so long as they are in Office, but Caesar has
judged them, has banished them; who then, he or we, have violated the reverence
due to persons holy and sacred? unless possibly Caesar was hallowed and
inviolable, he whom by violence, after the oppression of his Country and the
death of so many great Men, we honored with that Title, and the power of the
Tribunes be not hallowed and inviolable, after that our Fathers when the
Commonwealth was free, voluntarily swore them so, and pronounced execrations
against their posterity if they violated it. Whither was the wealth and riches
of the Empire brought? to whom did the Receivers give their Accounts? who broke
up the Treasury against our will? who laid hands on a Fond never any before
durst touch? and who threatened a Tribune with death that opposed it? But say
they upon what Oaths can we be assured the peace now to be made shall not be
violated? I will answer them, that if no person by a a Tyrant, there needs no
Oaths, and our Predecessors never took any. But if any one aspire to the
Tyranny the Romans ought not to observe either Faith or Religion with Tyrants.
We tell you all these things in the midst of our present danger, and will never
cease to speak them for the public Good; for when Caesar conferred on me all
imaginable Honors, I always preferred my Country before my own proper Glory.
They slander us about the Colonies to incense you; but if there be any here who
have taken possession of Lands already assigned to them, or are ready to go,
let them do me the favor to make themselves known to me.

Thereupon many having made a Sign.

You have done well, ( said he) to come hither with the other Citizens; and
surely it is but just that you do participate, and so are willing to
participate equally of the Honors of the City, you testify likewise the
affection you bear your Country. The Roman People gave you to Caesar to bear
Arms in Gaul and Britain, having served him well you have merited Honors and
Military Rewards; but he after having exacted an Oath from you, led you whether
you would or no, both against the City, and against the most eminent Citizens
in Africa; possibly you are ashamed to demand a salary for the services you
have done in these last Wars; but because neither envy, time, nor oblivion can
blot out those noble Actions you did in Gual and Britain, you are sure to
receive those rewards the people of Rome do customarily give their Soldiers.
But they for that end never robbed innocent people, nor divided others Goods to
those that served them; but when they had overcome their Enemies, seized not of
all their Country, but a part of their Lands, whither they sent the Veterans to
inhabit, and to keep the subdued people in awe; and if the conquered Country
were not sufficient, they added some of the Publicks Lands, or bought with the
public Money. Thus the People of Rome formerly gave Lands without doing injury
to any person. But Sylla and Caesar hawing seized the Sovereign Power by
violence and Arms, and standing in need of Guards and Armies against their
Country, have not sent you every one to his own dwelling, nor bought you Lands,
nor divided among you those they have conquered, nor given the ancient
possessors some Money to comfort them, though they had such store which they
either took out of the Treasury, or received for Confiscations. But they send
you into Italy it self, where they had received no offense, ravishing away from
the ancient Possessors (like Thieves, and not like Conquerours) their Lands,
their Houses, their Sepulchers, their Temples, of which we deprive not
vanquished Strangers, contenting our selves with the Tenth of their Fruits. But
they have divided among you the Lands of your own Nation, who have born Arms
with you under Caesar himself against the Gauls, and offered Vows for the happy
Success of the Expedition; and against these they have led you, marching in
Battle, with Ensigns displayed, as to a War: And indeed you cannot live in
Peace, nor abide in Safety with those who have been forced to give up their
Lands; for he that is driven out and despoiled of his Estate studies your
Destruction, and only waits an opportunity. So the Principal Designs of the
Tyrants was not that you should have Lands, for that they might have done by
other ways; but that having always Enemies ready to fall upon you, you might be
firm Props to their Power, to which your Fortunes were fast bound, since
Tyrants have no Guards more faithful than the Companions of of their Crimes and
their Fears; and to these, Good Gods! they have given the name of Colonies;
that is indeed, the Oppression of our Compatriots, and the Ruin of an insinite
of innocent Persons, whom with design they have made your Enemies for their
private Advantage. For our parts, to whom those that at present govern the
Commonwealth say, they will give us our Lives out of pure Grace, our intention
is, and always shall be, that you be confirmed in the Possession of your Lands.
We take God to witness, that as you do enjoy them you shall enjoy them, and
that no Person shall take them from you; neither Brutus nor Cassius, nor all
them have hazarded their Lives for your Liberty. There is yet in this business
one Difficulty, to which we will apply a Remedy which shall secure your Peace
with your Compatriots, and which you shall understand with joy. We will give
Order as soon as may be that the Ancient Possessors shall be paid the Purchase
of their Lands out of the Public Moneys, that you for the future may possess
them, not only without Contradiction, but likewise with Security of your
Persons.

All the World, both during the Assembly, and after they were all withdrawn,
Brutus said as perfectly just; and admired these Men, so undaunted and so
zealous for their Country. Thus having gained the Affection of the People, the
Affair was adjourned till the Morrow. As soon as ever it was Day the Consul
published the Assembly, where the Decre^ of the Senate was read; whereupon
Cicero made an Excellent Discourse in praise of the Amnesty, which the People
hearkened to with pleasure, and forthwith demanded that those retired to the
Capitol might come down; but they refused to come till they gave them Hostages:
so they sent Anthony's and Lepidus Children. Their Arrival raised a General
Acclamation and Applause: and when the Consuls would have spoke something, the
People would not hear them before they were reconciled, and had embraced each
other: which was done, but begot int he Consuls great fears and jealousies that
those Men would for the future have more Power in the City than they. After
this, Caesar's Will being brought, the People would have it immediately read:
Where they found that he had adopted for his Son Octavius, born of his Sisters
Daughter; given this Gardens to the People, and left to every Roman Citizen
seventy five Attick Drams. Hereupon the People entered into Fury, understanding
that he whom they had but now treated as a Tyrant, had an Affection for his
Country: But above all, they looked upon it as a thing worthy of Compassion to
consider that Decimus Brutus, one of his Murderers, was nominated his Heir by
Substitution; for it is the custom of the Romans to nominate a second Heir in
case the first cannot be. It struck all the World with horror, that Decimus,
the substituted Heir of Caesar, had attempted his life. But after that Piso had
caused the Body to be brought to the Place, there ran to guard it a great
number of Persons in Arms; who with an Extraordinary Magnificence, and General
Acclamation, placed it before the Tribunal. Then the Lamentations and Tears
were universal. The Soldiers made a great noise with their Arms, and by little
and little the whole World began to repent them of the Amnesty. Anthony
perceiving that, lost not the Opportunity: And because he was obliged by the
Duty of his Office to make his Funeral Oration as he was a Consul, being Consul
himself, and is Friend and Kins-man, (for there was an Alliance between them)
with his usual Artifices he spoke in this manner.

The Oration of Anthony.
IT is not just, Gentlemen, that I alone should undertake the Funeral-Praises
of this Great Man; it were fitter his Country did declare them: Therefore I
will only with the Voice of the Republic, and not my own, make Recital of
those Honors which whilst he was living the Senate and People of Rome
conferred upon him for his Virtue.

Having said these words, he began with a sad and sorrowful Countenance the
Recital of Caesar's Glorious Titles; pronouncing every thing distinctly, and
stopping more particularly at those whereby they had made him more than Man, by
the Qualities of Sacred and Inviolable, Father of his Country, Benefactor,
Prince, and many others which till that time had never been given to any
Person. At every word turning himself toward the Body, and animating his
Speech by his Gesture; and when he pronounced any one of those Titles, adding
some intermingled Terms of Grief and Indignation: as when he recited the Decree
of the Senate, calling him Father of his Country. See there, said he, the
Testimony of your Acknowledgments. And in pronouncing these words, Holy,
Sacred, Inviolable, and the Refuge of the Miserable, he added; Never any that
fled to him for Refuge, perished; but he himself is murdered, though made Holy
and Sacred by our Decrees, without having exacted those Qualities from us, or
even desired them; and surely we are in a shameful Slavery if we give those
Titles to unworthy Persons that never ask them from us. But, Oh, faithful
Citizens! you purge your selves well from this Reproach by the Honors you now
pay his Memory. After this, reciting the Act of the Oath, by which they were
all obliged to guard the Person of Caesar, and to employ all their Forces so,
that if any attempted his Person, whoever exposed not his Life for his Defense
should be execrable, he raised his Voice; and extending his Hands toward the
Capitol: Oh Jupiter! Protector of my Country! said he, behold me here ready to
revenge, as I have sworn: and since it is a thing resolved by the Judgment of
all good Men, I beseech thee, with all other Gods to be favorable to me. A
Tumult hereupon arising among the Senators, who believed these words to be
manifestly addressed to them. Anthony to appease them changed his Discourse,
and said: But Gentlemen, this Accident must rather be attributed to some God,
than to Men; and we ought rather to provide against the present Necessities
than speak of things past, since we are threatened with extreme Misery for the
future, and are upon the Point of falling again into our Ancient Seditions, and
the seeing all the Nobility of the City perish. Let us them conduct this Sacred
Person among the Gods, solemnly in mournful Elegies singing his Praises. After
having said these words, he tucked up his Robe as if he had been possessed with
some Spirit; and girding it about him that he might have his Hands more at
liberty, he went and placed himself near the Bed where the Corpse, lay, upon an
Eminent Place; and opening the Curtain, and looking in, he began to sing his
Praises, as of a Celestial Divinity: And the better to make him be believed to
be of that Race, he lifted his hands to Heaven; reciting even to the loss of
breath, his Wars, his Combats, his Victories, the Nations he had subdued, the
Spoils he had brought away; speaking of every thing as a Miracle; and crying
out many times, Thou alone art he who have returned Victorious from so many
Fights; Thou alone art he who have revenged the Country of the Injuries done
her for three hundred Years together; and constrained People till then
indomitable, who alone took and burnt the City, to ask Pardon on their Knees.
Having said these things and many more as of a Divine Person, he lored his
Voice; and in a mournful Tone, with Tears in his Eyes, lamented the unworthy
Death of his Friend, begging he might redeem his Life with his own; and at
length abandoning himself to Grief, he was so far transported as to discover
the Body of Caesar, and to show at the top of a Pike his Robe, pierced with the
stabs he had received, and all stained with his Blood. And now the People
joined their Lamentations with his, and Compassion was soon converted into
Choler; for when the Consul ceasing to speak, they began the mournful Airs,
after the manner of the Country singing his great Actions, and after that his
deplorable death, and as if Caesar himself had called by name those on whom he
had heaped his Favors after having been his Enemies, they heard these words
which seemed addressed to the Conspirators; Must I then Life unto my Murderers
give. The People hereupon entered into fury, considering that all the
Conspirators, except Decimus Brutus, had been of Pompey's Party; and that
Caesar, instead of revenging himself upon them, had given them Dignities,
Governments of Provinces, and Armies to command; and that after that they had
conspired against him, and with them Decimus Brutus, whom he had loved so well
to make him his Heir. The multitude being in this sort moved, and already
prepared for Violence, some one raised up from the Bed the Image of Caesar made
in Wax, for the Body could not be seen being laid within the Bed; but the
Image turning upon a Machine, was visible to all the World, and every Man might
observe three and twenty Wounds, as well on the Body as the Face. At this sad
Spectacle the People giving themselves over to tears, encompassed the place
where Caesar had been slain, and set it on fire; seeking every where for the
Murderers, who were retired. Anger and Grief so far transporting the Multitude,
that some meeting Cinna Tribune of the People, whom for name sake they took for
Cinna the Praetor, who had declaimed against Caesar, he in vain told them that
they were mistaken, for they tore him in so many pieces, that the least part of
him could not be found to give Sepulture to. After this they carried Fire to
burn the Houses of the Conspirators, but the Resistance of the Domestics and
the Prayers of the Neighbors prevented them; yet not without threats that they
would return again in Arms. On the Morrow the Conspirators privately departed
the City, and the People returned to the bed where Caesar lay, carrying it to
the Capitol to bury it in the Temple before the Gods, as already consecrated;
but the Priests opposing it, they brought it back to the place, and upon the
same Ground where formerly stood the Palace of the Kings, gathering together
all the Wood they could, and with the Seats of the place and of all the
neighboring places, raising a magnificent Pile, they thereon placed the Body;
and some one having cast upon it Crowns and other Military Presents, they set
fire to it, and about it the People spent all the Night: They forthwith erected
an Altar, and at present there is a Temple where Caesar is adored as a God; for
after that Octavius, his Adopted Son, who changed his Name into that of Caesar,
had (following his steps) taken upon him the Government of the State, he
mightily strengthened and augmented that Monarchy of which he had laid the
Foundations, which endures to this day; and to pay him all possible Honors,
ranked him in the number of the Gods. From this Example it is, that to this day
the People give the Title of Gods to their Emperors after their death (if they
have neither been Trants, nor manifestly guilty of great Crimes) they who
formerly would not suffer them to take the name of King whilst living.

Caesar on the Day which the Romans call the The Fifteenth.
Ides of March: an Augur had told him, that day would be fatal to him, but he
laughed at it, and the very same morning told him jesting, The Ides of March
are come: to which the other without surprise made answer, But not yet gone.
Yet the great Assurance of the Augur, nor many other Presages could not hinder
him from going to the Assembly; where he was murdered in the fifty sixth Year
of his Age: Happy in all things, Magnificent; and with just reason comparable
to Alexander; for they were both beyond measure Ambitious, Warlike, ready in
the Execution of what they had resolved* and hardy in Dangers: they spared not
their Bodies and in War relied not so much upon their Conduct, as upon their
Bravery and good Fortune. The one went a long journey in a Country without
Water to go to Hammon, happily crossed over the bottom of the Pamphilian Gulf,
the Sea being retired, as if his Genius had locked up the Waters: As another
time marching in the Champian, it caused it to cease from raining. Navigated an
unknown Sea: Being in the Indies, first scaled the Walls of a City, and leaped
down alone into the midst of his Enemies, receiving thirteen Wounds; was always
Victorious; and whatever War he was engaged in, he ended it in one or two
Battles. In Europe he subdued many Barbarous People, and reduced them under his
Obedience; together with the Grecians, a fierce People, and Lovers of Liberty,
who never before obeyed any Person but Philip; who commanded them for some time
under the Honorable Title of General of the Greeks. He carried his Arms almost
through all Asia with an incredible Celerity. And to comprize in a word the
Happiness and Power of Alexander, all the Countries he saw he conquered; and as
he was designing to conquer the rest, he died. As for Caesar, passing the
Ionian Sea in the midst of Winter, he found it calm as well as the British
Ocean, which he passed without any knowledge of it, in a time when his Pilots,
driven by Storm against the English Rocks, lost their Ships: Another time
embarking alone by Night in a little Boat, and rowing against the Waves, he
commanded the Pilot to hoist Sail, and rather to consider the Fortune of Caesar
than the Sea. He threw himself more than once all alone into the midst of his
Enemies, when his Men were all struck with Panick Fear: and is the only General
of the Romans that ever fought thirty times in Pitched Battle against the
Gauls, and subdued in Gaul forty Nations, before so dreadful to the Romans,
that in the Law dispensing with Priests and Old Men from going to the War, the
Wars against the Gauls are excepted, and the Priests and Old Men obliged to
bear Arms. Before Alexandria, seeing himself alone enclosed upon a Bridge, he
laid down his Purple, threw himself into the Sea; and pursued by his Enemies,
swam a long time under Water, only by Intervals lifting up his head to take
breath; till coming near his Ships, he held up his hands, was known, and so
saved. For the Civil Wars, which he either undertook out of Fear (as himself
says) or out of Ambition, he had to deal with the greatest Generals of the Age,
fighting at the Head of many great Armies; not Barbarians, but Romans,
encouraged by their former Actions, and by their good Fortune: yet he defeated
them all; and not one of them, but he ruined in a Fight or two. But we cannot
say of him as of Alexander, that he was never overcome; for he suffered once a
great loss against the Gauls, under the Conduct of Triturius and Cotta, his
Lieutenants: In Spain his Army was so near blocked up by Petreius and Afranius,
that he wanted but little of being besieged: At Dyrrhachium and in Africa they
turned their Backs; and in Spain, against the young Pompey, the fled. But for
Caesar himself, he was always undaunted; and whatever War he engaged in, came
off in the end Victorious: and the Roman Empire which now extends it self by
Sea and Land, from the Euphrates, to the Atlantic Ocean, was brought under his
Power; partly by his Valor, and partly by his Clemency. He settled himself much
better than Sylla, and governed himself with more moderation; for being King in
effect in spite of all the World, he took not that name. At last, making his
Preparations for other Wars, he was surprised by death as well as Alexander.
Their Armies were also alike; for the Soldiers of both were cheerful in Fight
and hardy, but stubborn and mutinous when overwrought with Labor. The Deaths
of both of them were equally mourned and lamented by their Armies, who
attributed to them Divine Honors. They were both well made in Body, and of
Noble Aspects: both descended from Jupiter; one by Eacus and Hercules, and the
other by Anchises and Venus. Though they were inflexible when resisted, they
were easle to pardon and be reconciled, and likewise to do good to such as they
had vanquished; contenting themselves with the Victory. Hitherto the Comparison
is just, save only that their Beginnings were not equal; for Alexander began
with the Quality of a King, in which he had been before instructed by his
Father Philip: but Caesar was only a Private Man; and though he were of an
Illustrious Race, yet his Fortunes were much encumbered. They both despised the
Presages that threatened them, without injuring those Divines foretold their
death: and almost the same Signs happened to them, and a like Event; for in the
Sacrifices made by one and the other twice, they found not the Chief of the
Entrails of the Victims; the first time they were only threatened with great
Danger: Alexander's happened when besieging the Oxidrakes, being mounted first
upon the Wall, and the too great weight breaking the Ladders behind him, he
beheld himself deserted by his Men, and threw himself into the midst of his
Enemies; where having received many Wounds on his Breast, and a great blow on
the Neck, he was ready to die; when the Macedonians touched with shame, broke
open the Gates, and relieved him. The like happened to Caesar in Spain, in the
Fight between him and young Pompey; where, seeing his Men went on trembling, he
advanced betwixt the two Armies, received two hundred Darts on his Buckler;
till such time as Fear having given place to Shame, all the Army ran in, and
secured him from the Danger. Thus the first Entrails without the Chief
threatened only Danger of Death, but the Second were a certain Presage of Death
it self. Pythagoras the Divine after having sacrificed, said to Appollodorus,
who feared Alexander and Ephestion, that he need fear nothing, for they both
should shortly die. Ephestion dying some time after, Appollodorus doubting lest
there might be some Conspiracy formed against the King, gave him notice of the
Prediction:: He only laughed at it; and informing himself of Pythagoras what
those Presages meant, he told him it was a Sign of Death; whereupon he again
laughed, praising Appollodorus's love, and the Divine's freedom. As for Caesar,
the last time he went to the Senate, as we have said a little before, the same
Presage presenting, he said smiling, he had seen the like in Spain: to which
the Augur answering, that he was then in danger, but now the Sign was mortal,
he yielded in some measure to that Advice, and offered another Sacrifice; but
tired with the length of the Ceremonies, entered the Palace, and perished. There
happened to Alexander the same thing; for when he returned from the Indies to
Babylon with his Army, being come nigh the City, the Chaldeans counseled him
to defer his Entry; to whom having given this Verse for Answer, Who promises
most Good's the best Divine, they besought him at least, that he would not let
his Army enter with their Faces to the West; but would fetch a Compass, that in
entering they might see the Rising Sun and the City. It is said, he would have
obeyed them in this; but in marching about he met with a Marshy Ground, which
made him slight the second as well as the first Advice, so that he entered the
City with his Face to the West. Some time after embarking upon the Euphrates,
and going down to the River Pallacota, which receives the Euphrates, and
carries its Waters into Marshes and Pools which might happen to drown all
Assyria, he resolved to make a Dam; and it is said, that going down the River
he laughed at the Chaldeans, because he had gone into Babylon and come out of
it again in a Boat without any harm: But Death attended him at his Return from
this Voyage. Caesar's Raillery with the Augur, who told him the Ides of March
were fatal to him, was much alike; he answered him jearing, the Ides were come,
and yet he was killed the same day. So that herein there was great agreement
between them, both in the Presages they received from the Divines without being
offended, their Raillery, and the Event of the Prediction. They were likewise
great Lovers of the Sciences, as well of their own Country as Strangers.
Alexander conferred with the Brachmen, who are esteemed the most subtle and
sagacious of the Indians, as the Magi are of the Persians. Caesar did the like
with the Egyptians when he re-established Cleopatra in her Kingdom, which
occasioned him when the Peace was made to reform many things amongst the
Romans; and that after the Example of the Egyptians, he regulated the Year by
the Course of the Sun, which before was governed by the Moon; and so till then
were unequal, by reason of the Intercalary Days. It happened to him likewise,
that not one of those who conspired his Death escaped, but were all punished as
they deserved by his Son, and as the Murderers of Philip were by Alexander; but
in what manner, we shall relate in the following Books.

The End of the Second Book of the Civil Wars of Rome.
APPIAN OF ALEXANDRIA, HIS HISTORY OF THE Civil Wars OF ROME.
PART II.
BOOK III.
The Argument of this Book.
I. ANthony causes Amatius who gave himself out to be the Son of Marius to be
s^ain, which begets him the ill will of the People; whereupon the Senate
appoint him Guards. II. Brutus and Cassius settle their Affairs, and leave the
City: Dolobella and Anthony get the Governments of Syria and Macedonia to their
prejudice. III. Octavius adopted by Caesar comes to Rome, and goes to visit
Anthony. IV. His Speech, and Anthony's Answer. V. Caesar finding Anthony not
well disposed to him, labors to gain the hearts of the People. Dolobella goes
into Syria, and puts to death Trebonius. VI. Caesar and Anthony reconciled by
the mediation of the Soldiery. VII. Anthony having in prejudice of the
reconciliation disobliged Caesar, the Officers of his Guards, declare their
resentment of it. VIII. Anthony's Answer to them, and the second reconciliation
between him and Caesar. IX. A third Breach between Caesar and Anthony: four
Macedonian Legions come to Brundusium for Anthony, and Caesar raises Forces. X.
Anthony's four Legions mutiny against him, and after being appeased, two of
them come over to Caesar. XI. Preparations on one side and the other. XII.
Anthony being tacitly declared Enemy, Cicero gives reasons for it. XIII. Piso
makes an Oration in favor of Anthony. XIV. Anthony declared Enemy, and an Army
decreed to Brutus and Cassius, which discontents Caesar, yet he lends a part of
his Forces to the Consuls to help them to raise the S^ege of Modena, where
Anthony had enclosed Decimus Brutus. XV. After several Engagements before
Modena, Anthony raises his Siege, and marches over the Alps. XVI. Caesar will
not see Decimus: and Pansa at the point of death discovers to Caesar the
Senates intention to ruin him. XVII. Cassius and Brutus grow powerful in Syria
and Macedon. XVIII. Caesar does all he can to oblige Anthony to a
reconciliation: and in the mean time the Senate nominates Commissioners to call
Anthony to account. XIX. Anthony joins with Lepidus, which terrifies the
Senate. XX. Caesar by his Soldiers demands the Consulate, which being refused,
he marches toward Rome, at which the Senate are so affrighted, that they grant
it him. XXI. The Senate repenting of their grant, and preparing for defense,
Caes^r comes to Rome, where he is well received, and obtains the Consulate.
XXII. Caesar being Consul condemns the Conspirators, reconciles himself with
Anthony; and Decimus Brutus is slain in Gaul, and his Head brought to Anthony.

Anthony having lost the good will of the Senate by ministering occasion to the
people to violate the indemnity at Caesar's Funeral Pomp, and being the cause
of their running to set on fire the Houses of the Conspirators, regained their
good esteem by an action which had respect to the public Good. There was one
Amasius who falsely giving himself out to be the Son of Marius, had taken his
name, and only in consideration of his reporting him to be his Father, was
beloved of the People; for by that supposition they thought him a Kinsman of
Caesar's; and indeed he appeared extremely afflicted for his death, erected an
Altar in the place where he was burnt, and attended by a Troop of Hectors
terrified the Conspirators, of whom the greatest part having left the City,
those to whom Caesar had given Governments retired likewise. Decimus Brutus to
that Gaul neighboring upon Italy; Trebonius into Asia, and Tullius Cimber into
Bithynia. As for Cassius and Brutus, to whom the Senate bore great affection,
they had been designed by Caesar to command the year following, Cassius in
Syria, and Brutus in Macedonia, and at present were Praetors in the City. In
the present juncture of Affairs they labored to gain the Soldiers designed for
the Colonies, by permitting them among other things to sell their shares, which
the Law prohibited them till after twenty years possession. It was reported
that Amatius had a design against their lives, and waited only for an
opportunity to execute it, which being told to Anthony, he according to the
authority he had by virtue of his charge caused him to be arrested, and with an
extraordinary boldness put him to death without any trial. The Senate were
amazed at it, as a violent action, not permitted by their Laws: however, they
suffered it, because they saw no other way of security for Cassius and Brutus;
but the companions of Amatius and the rest of the people affected with grief
for him, and enraged against Anthony, that he durst in that manner treat a
person whom they loved, thinking they ought not to dissemble it, but gathering
together in the place began to cry out, and rail against Anthony, requiring the
Magistrates to consecrate Amatius his Altar, and perform the first Sacrifices
to Caesar. And when Anthony's Soldiers would have driven them thence, they grew
more tumultuous, making greater noise than before; some of them showing the
Basis from whence they had taken Caesar's Statues, and one of them cried out he
could likewise show them the Shop where they were melting down, they presently
followed him, and finding it as he said, set fire to the House. Another Party
of Anthony's people coming to quench it, some of those Mutineers were slain,
and some taken, of whom the Slaves were hanged, and the rest thrown headlong
down the Rocks. The Tumult being appeased, that affection people bore to
Anthony converted into hatred. On the contrary the Senate were well satisfied;
for without this, the Conspirators had not been in security of their persons.
But when Anthony proposed to the Fathers the return of Sextus Pompey (Son of
that great Pompey lamented by all men, against whom Caesar's Party yet made War
in Spain) and to give him out of the Treasury fifty Millions of Attick Drams,
in recompense of the Goods of his Father which had been confiscate, and to make
him Admiral as his Father had been, with power to dispose of all the Roman
Fleet as he should think fit; all the Senators were astonished, approved his
proposition, and spent the rest of that day in praises of him; for no man had
ever appeared so affectionate to the public Good as the great Pompey, nor had
been so universally lamented, and `twas because Brutus and Cassius had followed
him, that all men still honored them. Wherefore Cicero without ceasing praised
Anthony, and the Senate who were not ignorant that he was hated by the people,
permitted him to choose as a Guard of his person as many as he pleased of the
old Soldiers then in the City. He, whether he had before provided for it, or
that he gladly made use of the presenting occasion, took such Guards as
amounted to six thousand persons; nor did he enlist private Soldiers; for he
thought at a pinch he could easily find them elsewhere, but all experienced
Officers, whose affection he had gained in the time they had served under
Caesar, and the most considerable of these he had made choice of for Tribunes,
to whom he showed Honor and Respect, making them partakers in all things fit
to be communicated. The Senate began to grow jealous of his Guards, whether
because of their great numbers, or because they were all chosen Men, and
advised him to reduce them to a certain number to avoid envy, which he promised
to do as soon as the Tumults of the people were appeased. Moreover the Senate
and people having approved all that Caesar had done and decreed of this,
Anthony had the Register, which when Caesar had thoughts of departing on his
designed Expedition he had left with him, with great numbers of Requests, on
which he had yet made no Order; so that Faberius, Caesar's Secretary, being
perfectly at his Devotion, he added many things in favor of several persons,
gave Gratuities to Cities, Potentates, and to his own Guards, as if done by
Caesar's Order, whereas they owed the obligation only to Anthony: he likewise
by the same means placed many persons in the degree of Senators, and performed
great quantity of other matters at the Senates request, that he might lessen
the aversion they had to his Guards: such was Anthony's Conduct.

Brutus and Cassius (seeing the people and the old Soldiers continued their
animosities against them, and imagining some other might be found to make an
attempt upon their lives, as well as Amatius, and being besides sensible of
Anthony's malice, who now having nothing to stand in fear of, being so well
guarded, hindered the re-establishment of the Commonwealth) they began to
provide for their own safety* besides the firm relyance they had in Decimus
Brutus who was at hand with three Legions, they wrote to Trebonius in Asia, and
to Tullius in Bithynia, to raise Money with as much secrecy as they could, and
gave order to secure the Soldiery to them, whilst they put themselves in a
readiness to take possession of those Governments Caesar had commissionated
them for. But because their due time for departure was not yet come, they
judging it indecent to go take possession of their Provinces before the time of
executing their Charges in the City was expired, and yet had rather spend the
rest of the year as private persons, than exercising the Office of Praetors,
whilst neither their persons were secure, nor they honored according to their
deserts. The Senate, knowing their thoughts, gave them Commission to cause Corn
to be brought from all parts into the City, till the time limited for their
going into their Provinces, which they did, that Brutus and Cassius might not
seem to fly, so great care had they of the reputation of those two Men, for
whose sake especially they favored the Party of the Conspirators. After that
the Praetors were gone out of the City to execute their Commission, Anthony
being thenceforth the only powerful Man, could heartily have wished the Command
of a Province with an Army, and especially cast his eyes upon Syria; but
understanding he should increase the jealousy conceived of him, if he demanded
it for himself, and that on the other side the Senate had gained Dolobella his
Colleague, with whom he had no fair understanding, to oppose all his designs,
he persuaded Dolobella, who was young and ambitious, to demand Syria, to the
prejudice of Cassius, together with the Army destined to War upon the
Parthians, and not address himself for the obtaining it to the Senate (for that
would prove to no purpose) but to the people by way of Decree. He gladly
embracing the motion, presently makes his proposition to the people: whereupon
the Senate complaining, that he attempted against what Caesar had decreed; he
answered, That Caesar had not decreed to any person the Commission of the War
against the Parthians; that Cassius to whom he had given Syria had first
thwarted his Decree, by permitting the Soldiers to whom he had given Lands to
dwell on, to sell them without staying the twenty years assigned by the Law,
that however it would be dishonorable for him if Dolobella should not be
preferred before Cassius in the Government of Syria. Hereupon the Senate
suborned Asprenas Tribune of the People to break up the Assembly, under
pretense of some evil Augury, hoping that Anthony, who was Consul and Augur,
and whom they believed yet an Enemy to Dolobella, would join with the Tribune:
but as soon as he declared that there were unhappy presages (which belonged to
another Office to do) Anthony said that he was a knave, and exhorted the
Tribes to give their Votes on Dolobella's proposition. Thus he obtained the
Government of Syria, with Commission to make War upon the Parthians with the
Legions designed by Caesar to that purpose, and those already marched into
Macedonia, and thus at last they came to know that Anthony and his Colleague
understood each other. Dolobella having obtained these things from the people,
Anthony demanded Macedon from the Senate, knowing well that after the grant of
Syria to the other, Macedon, where there was no Army, would not be refused him.
So he obtained it to the discontent of most, and general wonder of all the
Fathers, that he had suffered the Army which was in that Province to be given
to Dolobella, who however they were much better satisfied should have the
dispose of it than Anthony. Hereupon they took occasion to demand of Anthony
other Provinces for Brutus and Cassius, which he assented to, and gave them
Cyrene and Crete, or as some say both those were given to Cassius, and Bithynia
to Brutus. Thus went Affairs within the City.

Now Octavius Nephew of Caesar, as descended from his Sister, had been
Apollonia a City situate on the Coasts of the Ionian Sea, to study and learn
the Art of War, till such time as he should take him along with him against the
Parthians. In the mean time several Cornets of Horse that were in Macedon came
by turns to attend him, that he might be the better instructed by exercising
them, and there came likewise very often Tribunes and other Officers to pay
their respects to him in quality of Caesar's Kinsman, and he receiving all Men
with great kindness, respect and civility, gained to himself the hearts of the
whole Army. He had been now six Months at Apollonia, when one Evening news was
brought him that Coesar had been slain in full Senate by his most intimate
Friends, who had at that time great power in the City, and because there was
none that could give him any farther account, fear seized upon him, not knowing
whether the Senate had contributed to the action, or whether it were a
conspiracy of particular Men, whether those guilty of it were punished, or
whether they were yet living, or lastly, whether the people had declared for
them or no. Hereupon his Roman Friends gave him advice to retire to the Army in
Macedon for his security, where, if he understood it an attempt of particular
persons, he might take heart and revenge Caesar, and some Officers there were,
offered to be his Guides, and serve him as Guards in the way. But his Mother
and Philip his Father-in-law wrote to him not to be too presumptuous, that he
should undertake nothing rashly, but remember that Caesar after having overcome
all his Enemies was slain by those Friends he had most confidence in, that a
private condition, at least for some time would best secure him, but that
however he should return to Rome accompanied with some of his faithful Friends.
To them he gave credence, and without knowing what had happened since Caesar's
death, bid adieu to the Officers of the Army, and passed the Sea. He would not
land at Brundusium (because not being sure of that Garrison, he was wary of
falling into his Enemies hands) but at another little City not far distant from
Brundusium called Lupia, where he sojourned some time. There receiving Letters
which contained the particulars of the Assassinate, of the sorrow wherewith the
people had resented it, of his Will, and the Decree of the Senate, his Friends
were of opinion, that he would be obliged so much the more to stand in fear of
Caesar's Enemies being his Son and Heir, and therefore exhorted him to refuse
the Inheritance and Adoption, but he judging it would be an infamy for him not
to revenge Caesar, marched toward Brundusium, having sent some of his people
before to discover if any of the Assassines were there in Ambuscade. But when
the Garrison of the City coming forth to meet him, had received him as Caesar's
Son, he took heart, sacrificed to the Gods, and forthwith caused himself to be
called Caesar. `Tis the Roman custom to take with the name of their Family the
name of their adoptive Father, but he quite changed his, and instead of
Octavius the Son of Octavius, would be called Caesar the Son of Caesar. As soon
as he had taken this name, the people flocked in from all parts to complement
him, not only his Father's Friends, Freed Men and Slaves, but likewise the
Soldiers who convoyed Provisions and Money to the Army in Macedonia, or which
brought to Brundusium Tribute and other Moneys levied in the Provinces. Being
therefore encouraged by the concourse of so vast a Multitude, by the glorious
name of Caesar, and by the affection all Men professed to bear him, he took his
way toward the City with a considerable Train, which daily like a Torrent grew
greater. So that now he no more feared open force, but took so much the more
care to secure himself from secret ambushes, because he knew not the greatest
part of those that accompanied him. As for the Cities, there were some had no
great affection for him, but the Veterans or old Soldiers to whom Caesar had
lately given Lands ran from the Colonies to offer themselves to this young
Captain. They deplored the death of their Benefactor, declared against Anthony
who had let so horrid a crime go unpunished, and protested they would be the
revengers of it, if he would please to head them. He praised them, exhorted
them to preserve this good will of theirs to another Season, and so sent them
home. Being come near to Terracina about Fifty Miles.
four hundred Furlongs from Rome, news was brought him, that the Consuls had
taken from Brutus and Cassius the Governments of Syria and Macedon, instead of
which, and to comfort them they had given them two lesser, to wit, Cyrene and
the Island of Crete; that some Exiles were returned to the City; that they had
sent for Pompey, made some Senators according to Caesar's Memoirs, with many
other matters. When he was arrived at Rome he found his Mother and
Father-in-law and all those who had any care of his Affairs in great fear and
trouble, because of the Senates aversion for Caesar, the Decree past for
discharging the Murderers from crim^, and the pride of Anthony now grown
powerful in the City, who had neither gone himself nor sent out any to meet the
Son of Caesar. He quieted their trouble by telling them he would go himself to
Anthony as the younger to the elder, and as a private person to a Consul, that
he would pay his respects to the Senate as he was obliged in duty, that as for
the Decree it passed in a time when no Man opposed it, but now that one was
found to prosecute, the people would reach forth a strong hand, the Senate
would give life to the authority of the Laws, the immortal Gods would sustain
the justice of his cause, and perhaps Anthony himself would be concerned for
it. As for his part he could not refuse the Inheritance and Adoption, without
doing injury to Caesar's memory, and injustice to the Roman People, in not
paying what had been left them by his Will, that he had much rather not only
hazard himself, but suffer death it self, than after having been made choice of
by Caesar before all other persons in the World, show himself unworthy of that
Great Man's Choice. Then turning to his Mother, he pronounced those words of
Achilles to Thetis. Oh! let me die, or let my Vengeance yield
Some Satisfaction for my Friend thus killed.


He added, that this Discourse had given Immortality to Achilles, especially
being pursued to Effects; and that for his part Caesar had not only been his
Friend but his Father, his Comrade but his Captain; who had not been slain in
fair War, but wretchedly massacred in full Senate. Hereupon his Mother changing
her fear into joy, embraced him as alone worthy to be Son to Caesar; and with
many powerful expressions exhorted him to execute his Resolutions. However, she
advised him rather to employ Policy and Patience, than open Violence. Caesar
having praised her Counsel, and promised to follow it, toward the Evening
dismissed his Friends, giving them order to meet him next Morning early upon
the place with as much Company as they could bring. There he comes up to Caius,
Anthony's Brother, Praetor of the City, and declared to him that he accepted the
Adoption; for it was the Custom among the Romans to have Adoptions authorized
by the Pretors. After having caused his Declaration to be registered, he went
off from the place, to go seek out Anthony, who was then at Pompey's Gardens,
which Caesar had given to him. They let him wait a good while at the Gate,
which made him suspect that Anthony had no kindness for him; but at last being
entered, there passed nothing but civil and obliging words from one to the
other: And when Caesar was to discourse of the Business about which he came, he
spoke in this manner.

The Oration of Caesar.
MY Father (for the Affection Caesar had for you, and your Acknowledgments,
oblige me to call you so.) I applaud what you have done for him, and shall ever
own the Obligation: But pray give my Grief the liberty to tell you, that there
are some things I cannot approve. Whilst Caesar was murdered you was not there,
for his Murderers had stopped you at the Gate; otherwise you had either saved
his life, or perished with him: but if your loss were inevitable, I am glad
that you were not there. After this, when some endeavored to decree Rewards to
the Murderers, as if they had slain a Tyrant, you generously opposed it; for
which, likewise, I am infinitely obliged to you. Though certain it is they had
also resolved to make a Riddance of you; not as the future Revenger of Caesar's
death (which we believe) but (as they say) for fear there should remain after
him a Successor in the Tyranny. Though after the Action these People who said
they had slain a Tyrant, being sensible they were guilty of Murder, fled to the
Capitol; either as Criminals to seek for Refuge in a Sacred Place, or as
Enemies to seize upon the Fortress. How then could they obtain an Amnesty, and
a Decree forbidding any Prosecution of Justice for this Action, unless by
corrupting with Money some of the Senate and People? But being Consul, you
ought to have taken care on which Part was the Plurality of Voices; and
presiding in the Senate, had you voted against them, you had carried it, and
reduced to your Opinion those who had been deceived. On the Contrary, you
delivered to the Murderers some of your own House in Hostage, and sent them to
them into the Capitol; but I will think you were constrained to it by those
that were suborned. Then when after that Noble Funeral-Oration you made, the
Will being read, the People who yet had Caesar fresh in memory, carrying Fire
to burn his Murderers Houses, though then forbearing it in favor of their
Neighbors; when on the Morrow they twice returned to Arms, why did not you
assist them? Why did not you head them with Sword and Torch in your Hand? Why
did you not do Justice your self? Did you expect other Judgment against Public
Criminals? You the Friend of Caesar, you Consul, you Anthony, you who could
make use of the Power of your Office to put to death Amatius.
Marius, have let Murderers escape: Nay, have suffered some of them to retire
into the Provinces, whose Governments they must needs unjustly hold, having
massacred him from whom they held them. It is true, that being Consuls, you and
Dolobella, you have done well to take from them Syria and Macedon; and
certainly I had been much obliged to you for it, had you not at the same time
granted them Cyrene and Crete; giving Governments to Fugitives, to fortify
themselves against me. Is it not likewise by your consent that Decimus, one of
the Murderers of my Father, as well as the rest, holds the hither Gaul? You may
tell me perhaps it is by Decree of the Senate; but you have approved it, you
sat as President; you, who more than any Man else, ought to have opposed it,
even for your proper Interest. Well might you, in favor of them, assent to
their Indemnity and Impunity; but to give them Governments and Dignities is to
do an injury to Caesar, and make a scorn of your self. Grief makes me say
things disproportionate to my Age, and to the respect I bear you: But I speak
to the most assured of Caesar's Friends; to him whom he advanced in Honors and
Dignities, and who possibly had at this present been his adopted Son, had he
known you could have resolved with your self to pass from the Race of Hercules,
to that of Aeneas; that was his only doubt when he thought of making choice of
a Successor. I beseech you therefore, Anthony, by those Gods that preside over
Friendship, by Caesar's self, that you would yet change something of what you
have done, for you may do it if you will; or at least, that you will aid me in
revenging my Father's death, with the assistance of the People, and of all
those who yet persevere in the affection they once bore him. If you have any
fear of those people, or of the Senate, I only desire you would not oppose my
designs. As for any thing else, you know the state of my Affairs. That I am
obliged to pay the people what my Father left them, and that speedily, left the
benefit being delayed, remain without acknowledgment; and that I become the
occasion that those who ought to be sent to the Colonies stay longer in the
City. Wherefore I desire, that of all that was carried to your House, to be the
better secured after my Father's death, the richest and most precious things
may be yours; I only demand that Silver Money he had raised for those Wars he
was preparing to make, that I may pay those Legacies he left to the People; and
I shall content my self at present if you furnish me with so much as is
necessary to pay three hundred thousand Men what is due to them by the Head. I
would entreat you if I durst, to lend me wherewithal to pay the rest, or be my
Security for taking it up at Interest out of the Treasury, till such time as
the Goods left by this Succession are sold, in which I shall labor Might and
Main.

Anthony astonished at the freedom taken by this Young Man, and at that noble
confidence, which he did not expect from a person of his age: And being
offended that he had treated him with no more respect; but especially that he
had demanded back the Money; answered him in these terms.

The Oration of Anthony.
MY Son, if Caesar with his Succession and his Name had likewise left you the
Empire, you have reason to demand of me an Account of the Administration of
Public Affairs, and it is but just that I should give it you; but the Roman
People having never given the Sovereign Power to any Person by Succession, not
to the Kings themselves, whom they have expelled, and bound themselves by Oath
never more to suffer them (a thing which the Conspirators reproach your Father
with, saying, they have slain a King, and not a Magistrate) there is therefore
no necessity I should give you an Account of what concerns the Public, and I
likewise discharge you of all Obligations you are willing to be bound in to me,
for I have done nothing for your sake, and have only had in prospect the
Public Good in all my Actions, except only one, whereby I have rendered a
signal Service both to Caesar and to you: For if for my own security, and to
avoid Envy, I had permitted them to decree Rewards to the Conspirarators, as
having slain a Tyrant, Caesar had been declared a Tyrant, to whom neither
Respect nor Honor was due; for the Roman Laws require that Tyrant's Bodies be
cast into the Draught, their Memory abolished, and their Goods confiscate. Out
of a fear lest this might happen, I strove hard for Caesar, to preserve his
Glory immortal, and to cause his Funerals to be publicly solemnized. I feared
neither danger nor envy, though I had to deal with violent people, accustomed
to Murders, and who (as you know) had already conspired against me; and that
the Senate were inclined to mischief against your Father, because he had
usurped the Sovereign Authority over that Body. Yet I chose rather to run all
these hazards, and should rather have undergone all manner of misfortunes, than
have suffered that Caesar, the Greatest of Men, and the most happy in many
things, and whom I esteemed the most worthy of Glory of any Man of this Age,
should have been deprived of Honor and Sepulture. The Dangers to which I have
exposed my self have gained you all that Caesar possessed; his Family, his
Name, his Dignities, his Goods; and surely you ought rather to thank me, than
blame my Conduct, if I have yielded to some thing to content the Senate, or
given recompense to those to whom it was due, or done whatsoever it were for
any reason I thought necessary; old as I am, and you yet but a young Man. But
this shall suffice as to that matter. As for what you would object that I
aspire to the Dominion, I have no such thoughts, though I do not think my self
unworthy; nor is it any insupportable thing to me to be left out of Caesar's
Will, contenting my self to be descended of a Race that derives its Original
from Hercules. As for the Money you talk of borrowing out of the Treasury to
serve your own Occasions, I believe that you do but jest; unless, as it is
probable, you have not heard that your Father left the Treasury empty; and that
since he made himself Master of the Empire, all the public Moneys that were
before carried thither, were after carried to his House, where among his Goods
they will be found when we shall decree a Search to be made for them; which
will be done without giving any offense to the dead Caesar: Or were he living,
he would not refuse to give an Account of his Administration, as it is but just
he should. Be^ides, many private Persons pretend a Right to those Goods, and
will not quit them to you without Trial. Nor was there so much Silver brought
to my House as you imagine, nor have I any of it left; for it was all divided,
as being a Tyrant's Money, among the Magistrates and chief Men of the City,
except only Dolobella and my Brethren. And if you should chance to find out
any, you will not if you be wise, give it to the people; but employ it to
appease such as may damage you: and if they themselves be wise, they will send
away the people to the Colonies: For the People, as you may have lately learnt
out of Greek Books, are a thing of no stability, but ever floating to and fro
like Waves of the Sea, as it has often happened in our Republic; where the
People, after having raised up to the Skies those that courted their Favor,
afterward brought them on their Knees.

Caesar angered at these words, for the most part injurious, retired, invoking
often times his Father, and calling him by his name. Suddenly after he put to
Sale the Goods come to him by this Succession, and exhorted the People to
assist him in the good design he had for them against Anthony his Enemy, who
openly opposed him; and against the Senate, who had decreed Inquisition to be
made for Public Moneys. Many persons began to fear Caesar, as young as he was,
because of his Father's Liberality to the Soldiers and People, whose affections
he was now absolutely gaining by the Distribution he was about to make; so that
most judged he would not long continue in the Condition of a private Person:
But they feared much more lest Anthony coming to an Accommodation with this
Young Man, full of Glory and Riches, should seize on the Sovereign Power as
well as Caesar. In the mean time they were well satisfied to see them at this
discord, because one served now as an obstacle to another's designs; and by the
Inquisition after Public Moneys, of which they believed a great part would be
found in Caesar's Coffers, his Heir would become poor, and the Treasury rich.
Daily likewise were Processes formed about the Lands possessed by Caesar; some
demanding them as their particular Right, others pretending they belonged to
the Public, as being confiscated from proscribed or banished Persons. Anthony
or Dolobella, his Colleague, were Judges, of most part of these; and if some
happened to be tried before other Judges, Caesar was as hardly used out of
favor to Anthony, though he produced Authentic Contracts of the Purchase made
by his Father; and likewise pleaded the last Decree of the Senate, by which all
that Caesar had done was ratified. They affronted him likewise by a thousand
Insolences out of the presence of the Judges; from which Pedius and Pinarius,
to whom Caesar had likewise by Will left part of the Inheritance, were not
exempt. Upon complaint made to Anthony of the Outrages they, as well as Caesar,
suffered; showing him the Decree of the Senate; and telling him, that if there
were some Lands unjustly usurped by Caesar, they were ready to pay the value of
them; but that it was just all the rest Caesar had done should be allowed. He
answered, that possibly the Decree meant not any thing at present in question,
and that the very words in which it was expressed ought be interpreted
according to the Senate's intention, who having the Indemnity only in view,
would not touch upon what was past; not that they approved it, nor in
consideration of death; but because it was then expedient to act so, and
necessary to appease the people. That it was not equal to have more
consideration of the words of a Decree, than of the mind of the Judges; and to
deny Audience to so many Citizens whom the Civil Wars had spoiled of their
Goods, and those of their Predecessors; in favor of a young Man, who now
beholding himself richer than his condition could make him hope to be, employed
not his Riches in Liberalities; but in making of Creatures to bring to effect
his ambitious designs. Nevertheless, for what concerned them when they should
receive from Caesar what part of the Inheritance belonged to them, he would
maintain them in it. After this Answer of Anthony's, Caesar's Coheirs desired
their shares of the Inheritance, for fear of losing them by reason of the many
Suits commenced; not for their sakes, but Caesar's: However, soon after they
again restored it into his hands. After this, the time of the Plays wherewith
Brutus, as Praetor, ought to divert and delight the Citizens, drawing nigh,
Caius, Brother to Anthony, his Colleague, who administered that Charge in his
absence, had taken care of them; and to that purpose made magnificent
Preparations, out of hopes that the People charmed by those Spectacles, should
vote Brutus and his Companions Return. Caesar on his part, the better to gain
the multitude, still as he received any Moneys by the Sale of the Goods of the
Inheritance, put it into the hands of the chief Men of the Tribes, to
distribute to such as first demanded it: And going to all places where these
Sales were made, gave order to the public Cryers to appraise all at less than
it was worth, because of the uncertain success of the Lawsuits, and that he
might dispatch paying what he ought by his Father's Will. These courses
increased the People's affection to him, and they were moved to compassion for
the unjust Persecutions under which he suffered. But when they saw that besides
the Goods of this Succession, he likewise exposed to Sale his own Patrimony,
with all that he had elsewhere, and with that his Mother's Lands, those of
Philip, and Pedius and Pinarius shares too; and all this to furnish him for the
payment of Legacies; as if he could not raise Money enough by selling Caesar's
Goods, by reason of his Enemies Lets and Vexations. Then the People, persuaded
that this Liberality proceeded from himself, and not from the first Caesar,
adored this young Man; applauding his Patience and Generosity, and protesting
they would not much longer suffer Anthony's Insolence: And in truth they
evidenced it at those Spectacles that Brutus exhibited at such vast Expense;
for when some, bribed to that purpose, cried out that Brutus and Cassius should
be recalled, and that the rest of the Spectators seemed inclined to pity them,
a great number of the People running on in a Crowd, made the Plays to cease
till such time as those who demanded their Return were silent. So that Caesar
having made Brutus and Cassius lose the hopes of their Return by means of their
Plays, they resolved to seize by force of Syria and Macedon, to which they had
been appointed by the Senate, before Anthony and Dolobella. That young Consul
being hereof advertized, speedily advances toward Syria by the way of Asia,
through which he passed to gather in the Money of that Province. But Anthony
judging he should have occasion of Forces, and not being ignorant that the Army
of Macedon was composed of excellent Troops; that they were six Legions, store
of Archers and Light-armed Foot, besides the Horse, and all Provisions
necessary; and that this Army ought to be commanded by Dolobella, to whom the
Senate had given Commission for the Parthian War, to which Caesar had designed
it, he began to cast about how to make himself Master of it, the rather because
of the nearness of places; for it was but crossing the Ionian Sea, to bring it
forthwith into Italy. At the same time a report was raised, that the Getes
hearing of Caesar's death made Inroads into Macedon, and spoiled the Province,
which gave Anthony an opportunity of demanding the Army of the Senate, to
chastise the Getes against whom Caesar had intention to employ them before he
proceeded on his Expedition against Parthia, where at present all things were
quiet. The Senate slighted not the report, but sent People into the Province to
enquire into the truth; and Anthony, utterly to remove all fear and all
suspicion that might be had of him, made a Law whereby all persons were forbid,
be it upon what occasion soever it would, to propose the creating a Dictator,
or to accept of the Dictatorship, and that whoever acted contrary to this Law,
might freely and with impunity be by any one slain. Thus having deceived the
Fathers, and promised by a Treaty made with Dolobella's Friends, that he would
give him one Legion, he was chosen General of the Army of Macedon, and
forthwith gave Directions to his Brother Caius to make all speed to the Army
with the Ordinance of the Senate. Mean while, those who had been sent into
Macedon to inform themselves of the report spread abroad, being returned, said
they had seen no Getes, but added (whether it were so indeed, or that they were
suborned to it by Anthony) that there was reason to fear, that if the Army were
drawn out of the Province, that they would make Inroads. Whilst these things
passed at Rome, Brutus and Cassius made Levies of Men and Moneys, and Trebanius
who commanded in Asia fortified those Cities for them. He would not suffer
Dolobella to enter into Pergamus, nor into Smyrna, but only gave him a place
without the Walls of Smyrna as to a Consul. He, incensed at this refusal,
attempted to force the City, wherein not succeeding, Trebonius promised to give
him entrance into Ephesus, and commanded his people to follow the Consul at
some distance, but they seeing him depart toward the Dusk of the Evening,
thinking there was nothing more to fear, leaving a few of their companions to
follow him, returned to Smyrna. Dolobella laid an ambush for this small
company, cut them in pieces, and the same night finding Smyrna defenseless,
scaled the Walls, Trebonius surprised in his Bed, began to beg the Soldiers to
carry him before the Consul, to whom he said he would go without constraint.
But one of the Centurions mocking, told him; Thou may go, but thou must leave
thy Head; for we have no orders to carry thee to the Consul, but to bring him
thy Head: And so in good earnest cut off his Head, which Dolobella as soon as
it was day caused to be placed over the Tribunal, where the Praetor was wont to
give audience. The Soldiers and the Pedees mad against him, because he was a
Partner in the Conspiracy, and had entertained Anthony with discourse at the
Gate of the Palace, whilst they slew Caesar within, used a thousand indignities
to the rest of his Body, playing with his Head as with a Bowl, which they
trowled to one another upon the Pavement, till it was all in pieces. And this
was the first of the Conspirators that was punished.

Anthony had a design to bring the Army of Macedon into Italy, but not finding
a pretense to do it, he demanded of the Senate, that instead of Macedon they
would give him the Cisalpine Gaul, where at present Decimus Brutus Albinus
commanded, besides he remembered that Caesar parted from this Province when he
began that War wherein he vanquished Pompey. But now when they saw he would
march the Army into Gaul, and not into Italy, the Fathers judging he asked this
Province only to serve himself against them, began to make discovery of his ill
intentions, and to repent that they had granted Macedon: nay, some of them
wrote particularly to Decimus, that he should fortify himself in his Province,
and make new Levies of what Men and Money he could, left Anthony should do him
any violence, so much they feared and hated him together. Anthony therefore
refused by the Senate, resolved to carry the Province by a Decree of the
People, as formerly Caesar had done the same, and Dolobella lately Syria, and
the more to terrify the Senate, he sent order to his Brother Caius forthwith
to pass over the Army to Brundusium. Mean while the Aedile Crotonius making
preparation for the Plays, which he would give to delight the people, Caesar
caused a Chair of Gold and a Crown to be placed for his Father, a thing granted
by the Decree of the Senate, to be done in all Plays to perpetuity. Upon which
the Aedile having said that he would not permit that Honor to Caesar in Plays
he exhibited at his own charges, he summoned him before Anthony in quality of
Consul, and the Consul saying he would propose the business to the Senate, he
angrily answered, Propose it then, but in the mean time I will place the Chair
there as the Decree permits. Anthony incensed with this answer, not only forbid
him to do it at this time, but in some Plays afterward which Caesar himself
exhibited in Honor of Venus, according to his Father's Institution when he
dedicated to her a Temple in the place and the place it self. This action of
Anthony's begat him the public hate, as not proceeding so much from envy to
the young Caesar, as ingratitude to his Father: wherefore Caesar followed by a
multitude of people as his Guards, went through the City, stirring up against
Anthony all those who had received benefits from his Father, or born Arms under
him, beseeching them not to suffer him to be affronted in that manner, nor
permit Anthony to do so great an injury to their General and Benefactor, but
that they would at least labor for themselves, for could they be secure of
enjoying any thing Caesar had given them if himself were deprived of Honors
had been granted by Decree of the Se^^te? And when he came into any great place
of the City, he might be heard cry out with a loud voice; Why am not I the only
cause (Anthony) that thou declarest against Caesar, and in recompense of so
many Benefits received by thee, returnest on him such violent outrages.
Discharge, I beg thee, thy rage on me alone; but touch not his Goods till the
Citizens are paid what he by will left them. After that, take the rest; for as
for my part, though I be poor, I shall be but too well contented to be Heir to
the Glory of my Father, and of his liberality to his Citizens, provided it may
not be unprofitable to them. Upon this discourse the whole multitude drew
together, and cried out publicly against Anthony. Whereupon Anthony having
uttered some bitter threats against Caesar, and what he threatened coming to
public knowledge, Men's minds were the more inflamed against him; insomuch that
the very Officers of his Guards who had born Arms under Caesar, and who were at
present in great esteem with the Consul, besought him to be no more so
vigorous, both for their sakes and his own proper interest, he having himself
had command under Caesar, and being obliged to him for his fortune. Anthony
acknowledging that what they said was true, and besides considering that he
stood in need of Caesar's credit with the people to obtain the Government of
Gaul, yielded to their Remonstrance, swearing that he was not ungrateful
toward Caesar, and that he had manifested this change of affection to no other
end, but that a young Man a little too haughty for his age, and who bore no
respect either to Ancients or Magistrates should somewhat stand corrected; for
that in good truth he had need of correction, but yet for the Prayers sake they
had made him, he would lay aside all animosity and resume his former
inclinations, provided Caesar would for the future be more moderate. The
Tribunes satisfied with this answer, engaged them to an Enterview, where after
some complaints of of one another they were reconciled.

Anthony preferred the Decree touching the Government of Gaul. The Senate were
afraid, and took a resolution to hinder it, if the Consul demanded their
approbation, and to oppose it by means of the Tribunes, if without speaking to
the Senate he sought to have it ratifyed by the people. Nay, there were some
Senators of opinion to set that Province at liberty, so formidable seemed it to
them, because lying so near Rome. Anthony on the other side reproached them
that they had given that Province to Decimus one of Caesar's Murderers, and yet
made a difficulty of trusting him with it, because he had not murdered him that
conquered it, and brought it under their obedience, by which he accused them of
openly allowing the action. The day for approbation of the Decree being come,
the Senate had given orders that the Votes should be taken by the Tribes, but
those of Anthony's Party having assembled the people before day, called them of
purpose by Centuries* Though the multitude had an aversion for Anthony, yet
forbore they not now to favor him for Caesar's sake, who was present at the
assembly soliciting for him out of fear, left Decimus one of those who slew his
Father should command with an Army in so commodious a Province, and likewise to
gratify Anthony with whom he was newly reconciled, and from whom in his turn
he expected some favor. In short, the Tribunes of the People not at all
opposing it, for Anthony had gained them, the Decree was ratifyed, and the
Consul having now a plausible pretense caused the Army to pass over into Italy.
At length one of the Tribunes being dead, and Caesar soliciting for Flaminius
who made suit for this Dignity; the people imagining that he did indeed desire
it for himself, but durst not ask it because he was too young, would needs by
Vote declare him Tribune: on the other side, the Senate envyed him this
increase of Honor, as fearing left being made Tribune he should summon before
the people those who had slain his Father. Whereupon Anthony violating the
Friendship he had newly sworn to Caesar, or in favor of the Senate, whom he
would fain appease, because they were offended at the Decree of the People
concerning Gaul, issued a Decree of the Consul, whereby he prohibited Caesar
from conserring Liberalities upon any person contrary to Law, upon pain of
punishment. This Decree which made appear Anthony's ingratitude to Caesar, and
which was injurious both to the young Caesar and the people, stirred up the
minds of the multitude, and it was very likely, that at the Assembly to be
called, some tumult would happen, so that Anthony himself was afraid, and
contenting himself with the number of the Tribunes already in the City,
prevented the assembling of the People. As for Caesar, seeing that Anthony
declared openly against him, he dispatched people throughout the colonies that
he had established, to let them know the wrong he suffered, and to sound their
inclinations. He sent likewise some of his Confidents to Anthony's Army, mixed
among those who had the Convoy of Provisions, giving them orders to do their
utmost to draw the bravest to his side, and privily to drop Libels among the
Soldiers. Whilst Caesar was thus employed, the same Officers of Anthony's
Guards before mentioned laying hold on the occasion spoke to him in this manner:

The Oration of the Officers of Anthony's Guards.
We have a certain knowledge that Caesar's Murderers hate us as much as him, us
and all those who under his command have extended the bounds of the Roman
Empire, and yet daily employ all their power to extend them; that we are
exposed to their Ambushes, and that the Senate favors them. Nevertheless,
after their being chased hence by the People we have regained courage, seeing
Caesar was not destitute of Friends, who still remembered his Benefits, and
preserved their acknowledgments. But above all, we are assured of the
Friendship between you, and of your experience in War, being the greatest
Captain of the Age next him, and the most capable to command. But because our
Enemies springing up afresh, endeavor to seize upon Syria and Macedon, and
make Levies of Men and Money to wage War upon us, because the Senate causes
Decimus to prepare againsh you, and that in the mean all your thoughts and
cares are employed in the differences you have with the young Caesar we fear,
and not without reason, that in the War now threatening us, nay* which indeed
we have upon us, there happen not some division amongst us, which may cause our
Enemies to succeed in their Enterprises. Wherefore we entreat you, that in
acknowledgments of Caesar's Favors and Benefits, for the common security of
all us, against whom you have never yet had cause of complaint, and likewise
for your own interest, you assist Casar to take vengeance of the Murderers of
his Father, whilst it is in your power to do it, he will be therewith content,
and you will afterward live without trouble, and we discharged of our fears
for you, and for our selves.

To this Discourse Anthony made Answer.

Anthony's Answer to the Officers of his Guards.
You know with what passion I always loved Caesar as long as he lived, and that
there were no dangers to which I exposed not my self to Preserve his Authority.
You know it, I say, you who followed him every where, and were present at all
his Action: and I grant there is no need of Witness to prove that his Affection
and Esteem form lasted to his very end. His Murderers having perfect knowledge
of all this, had once resolved to have dispatched me at the same time,
believing whilst I remained alive they could never perfectly accomplish their
design; and he that diverted them from these thoughts did it not for my sake,
but to give a fairer Gloss to their crime, that it might be thought they
designed not so much to revenge themselves of many Enemies, as to kill one
Tyrant. Who then would think after so many obligations as I have received from
Caesar, I should range my self on his Enemies Party, or that I should willingly
pardon his death to those who attempted my own life, as the young Caesar
imagines? How then after Indemnity did they obtain Governments? for you impute
to me this fault which the Senate committed. Hearken a little how it happened:
Caesar being slain in full Senate, fear seized all the world, and my self more
than any one, because I was his Friend, and yet knew not exactly whether there
were a Conspiracy, or who were the Conspirators. The People were in tumult, the
Murderers had gained the Capitol with the Gladiators, and suffered no one to
enter, the Senate favored them, which to this day they do, and were ready to
decree them rewards, as having slain a Tyrant, which if it had come to pass, we
must have all resolved to perish as that Tyrants Friends. in the midst of all
this turmoil, fear and trouble, it is no wonder if I lost my Judgment: however,
if you weigh the extremity in which I was with what I have done, you will find
I neither wanted boldness in the midst of danger, nor policy when there was a
necessity to dissemble. The main thing in this Affair, and on which depended
all the rest, was the prevention of their decreeing rewards to the Murderers,
in which I so obstinately held out, that at last I carried it in despite of the
Senate and all the Conspirators, yet not without running the hazard of losing
my life; for I judged, that if I only obtained that Caesar were not declared
Tyrant, we were all in safety. But whereas our Enemies and the Senate feared on
their side, that if Caesar were not declared Tyrant, process might issue out
against those that slew him, and therefore would stand stiffly to the having it
done, I consented that the Amnesty might be granted to them, but not the
Rewards; nor had I done it, but that I might obtain on my part what I desired,
and which was of no small importance. That the name of Caesar, dearer to me
than all things in the world, might not be abolished; that his Goods might not
be confiscate: that that adoption which makes this young man so insolent, might
not be cancelled: that his Will might be ratified: that his Body might be
honored with Funerals worthy a King: that the Honors decreed him might endure
to perpetuity: that all that he had done might be approved; and that his Son,
and we his Friends, his Captains and his Soldiers might be secured in our
persons, and honored by all the World, instead of that infamy wherewith we
were threatened. Do you believe after all this, that in lieu of the Amnesty to
which I gave my hand, the Senate granted me a small matter; or do you think
they would have granted it if I had not consented to the Amnesty? And though
this exchange had been sincerely made, what had I lost by really granting the
Murderers a pardon of their crime, thereby to render Caesar's Glory immortal,
and put our lives in security: yet was not that my intention. I did but only
defer their punishment; for as soon as I obtained of the Senate what I desired,
and that the Murderers were freed from their inquietude, I took courage, and
abrogated the Amnesty, not by sentence of the Senate, nor by decree of the
People (for that could not be done) but by a popular blaze, which underhand I
kindled, by causing Caesar's Body to be brought into the place, under pretense
of celebrating his Funerals, and there by opening his wounds, and showing his
Robe pierced through, and bloody, to excite compassion in the multitude,
praising his Virtues, and particularly the love he had for his Country, and in
short, Mourning for him, as dead, yet invoking him as a God: for what I said,
and what I did, so incensed the multitude, that not considering the Amnesty,
they took fire, and carrying it to our Enemies Houses, drove them out of Rome.
This was done in spite of the Senate, and they testified their resentment of
it, by accusing me of courting the popular favor, by sending the Murderers
into the Provinces, Brutus and Cassius into Syria and Macedon, where they had
great Armies: nor did they let them stay out the time they ought to have done,
but advanced it by a feigned Commission they gave them of sending Corn to the
City. Hereupon I found my self surprised with a new fear, and not having any
Army whereof I could dispose, I was afraid lest we unarmed should be assailed
by so many armed Men, besides I had some suspicion of my Colleague, with whom I
had no right understanding, and whom I might very well believe an Accomplice in
the Conspiracy, being come to the City the day that it was executed. In this
troublesome Conjuncture I thought it a matter of importance to disarm our
Enemies, and to seize on their Arms, to which end I caused Amatius to be put to
death, and recalled Pompey, that by this means I might oblige the Senate to
take my part: yet not being thereby fully assured, I persuaded Dolobella to
demand Syria not from the Senate, but from the people, and I upheld him in this
Enterprise, that from a Friend to the Conspirators, as he now was, he might
become their Enemy; and that after my Colleague had obtained Syria, the Senate
might be ashamed to deny me Macedon, which however they had not granted me by
reason of the Army that was then in that Province, if they had not before given
that same Army to Dolobella, who besides the Government of Syria had got the
Commission to make War against the Parthians: nor had they consented to the
taking away Syria and Macedon from Cassius and Brutus, if for their security
other Governments had not been provided them, instead of those whereof they
were dispossessd. It was therefore necessary and must be done, but pray observe
what comparison there is between those Provinces taken from them, and those
wherewith they were recompensed. Cyrene and Crete were assigned them, so
unfurnished of Forces, that they themselves have despised them, and endeavored
to seize by force of those taken from them. Thus the Command of the Army is
passed from the Enemy to Dolobella by my policy, and by fair exchange; for no
person having yet taken up Arms, we must follow the Laws. After this, the
Enemies having set on foot another Army, I had occasion for the Legions of
Macedon, but to get them wanted opportunity, whereupon a report was spread,
that the Getes had in a hostile manner invaded the Province, which not being
altogether believed, some were sent to enquire the certainty. During which time
I caused an Ordinance to be published, by which it was forbid to speak of a
Dictator, to make any proposition tending to it, or so much as to accept of the
Dictatorship; whereby the Senate, persuaded of my good intentions, gave me the
Command of the Army; so that at present I find my self strong enough to defend
my self against my Enemies, not only against those already declared, as Caesar
imagines, but against a multitude of others more powerful, who will not yet
discover themselves. Having put my Affairs into this Kingdom, I had yet left
sticking (as I may say) in my very Ribs one of Caesar's Murderers, to wit,
Decimus Brutus, who commanded a great Army in a very commodious Province; and
because I knew him capable of Action, that I might remove him thence by some
fair pretense, I made an offer in the Senate to give him Macedon in recompense,
after having drawn thence the Legions. The Senate opposing it upon some
mistrust they had of my designs, and many of that Body having writ many things
as you know to Decimus, be sides that they were ready to stir up against me the
Consuls, for the next year I took a resolution to speak no more of it to the
Senate, but to demand this Province from the People, and to make the Macedonian
Army pass over to Brundusium, to employ them in things necessary, and I hope
yet by the assistance of the Gods to make use of them to the advantage of my
Affairs when occasion requires. Thus from the fear wherein we formerly were, we
have reached that security we desired, and a condition to strike terror into
our Enemies, though when we first took up Arms many declared for them; yet now
you see they repent of their sentences given in my favor, that they use all
their endeavors to deprive me of the Government of Gaul granted me by the
People. You know they continually write to Decimus, that they solicit the
Consuls to cancel by sentence the Decree which gives me that Province. But for
my part, resting assured on the assistance of the Gods, Protectors of my
Country, on the sincerity of my intentions, and on your valor which made
Caesar every where victorious, I will employ all my soul and all my strength to
revenge him. It was necessary, Fellow Soldiers, till now to keep these things
secret; but since you ought to have share in all my Actions, and all my
Designs, I am content to discover them to you, and you may communicate them to
all those tied by the same interest, except only to Caesar, whose ingratitude I
have already made proof of.

Anthony's officers become firmly persuaded by these words, that all the
artifices he had made use of to deceive the Senate, proceeded only from the
passion he had to destroy the Murderers. However, they prevailed with him to
reconcile himself with Caesar, which he did in the Capitol.

Anthony caused to be brought into an Assembly of his Friends some of his
Guards, as if Caesar would have treated with them to murder him, whether it
were a calumny, of whether he believed it indeed, or whether (having
intelligence that Caesar had sent some People amongst his Troops) he imagined
it was to make an attempt upon his life. The rumor of this attempt was spread
through the whole City, and raised a mighty Tumult, and the People were filled
with great indignation; for some persons sounding more deeply into the
business, saw well that Anthony, though he was an Enemy to Caesar, yet was
useful to him, because the Conspirators feared him, who, if he had been dead
had been capable of enterprising any thing, especially supported as they were
by the Senate, and this was the judgment of the wiser sort. But with the
greather part of the multitude who beheld Caesar every day suffering a thousand
wrongs it was no hard matter to believe the calumny, and they adjudged it an
execrable sign to make an attempt upon the person of a Consul. Upon the noise
of it Caesar ran through all the Streets like a mad man, crying out, that on
the contrary it was a plot laid by Anthony himself to rob him of the good
opinion of the People, by whose favor he had hitherto subsisted. He went to
Anthony's own Gates, crying the same thing, attesting the Gods, and making
imprecations on himself, and requiring them to issue out his Process: and when
no person came out of the House, I will, said he, make thy own Friends Judges.
And therewithal endeavored to enter, but repulsed, he began to complain,
revile, and grow angry against those who hindered his entrance, telling them
'twas for fear he should convince Anthony of calumny, and so retiring
immediately, he protested before all the People, that if any mischief happened
to him, it ought to be attributed to nothing else but the perfidiousness of
Anthony. These words pronounced with vehemence changed the minds of the
Multitude, and many began to repent themselves of the opinion they had
entertained of him. Though some were doubtful which of the two to credit; and
others affirmed 'twas all but a plot laid between themselves in the Temple
where they were reconciled, that by a seeming Feud they might better surprise
their Enemies: whilst others again said, that it was Anthony's invention only,
that under this pretense he might increase his Guards, and turn away the old
Soldiers hearts from Caesar. At the same time intelligence was privately given
to Caesar, that both the Army arrived at Brundusium and the old Soldiers
distributed into Colonies were incensed against Anthony, because he delayed the
revenging of Caesar's death, which they offered to employ all their power to
effect, and that upon this occasion the Consul was gone to Brundusium, which
obliged Caesar, who was fearful lest his Enemy returning to Rome which and Army
might oppress him defenseless as he was, to take store of Money, and go into
Campania to engage in his service those Colonies there settled by his Father.
First Galatia, and then Silia situate on both sides of Capua gave him their
word: and by advancing five hundred Drams to each Soldier he raised about ten
thousand Men, who were not so well furnished as was requisite for the War, nor
enrolled in Companies and Regiments, but marched all under one Standard as his
Guards. And whereas those in the City were frightened before with the thoughts
of Anthony's return with an Army, hearing of Ceasar's coming at the Head of
another; some were now afraid of both, others again were well satisfied with
the imagination they might employ Caesar to defend them against Anthony; and
others again who had been witnesses of their reconciliation in the Capitol,
believed all but a fiction, and that they were agreed together to join Forces,
to the end, Anthony might seize on the Sovereign Authority, and Caesar revenge
the death of his Father. In the heart of this Allarm, Carnutius Tribune of the
People, Enemy to Anthony, and friend to Caesar, went out to meet his Friend,
and understanding his intentions, came and assured the People that Caesar had
took up Arms against none but Anthony his declared Enemy, and that to secure
themselves from Anthony's Tyranny it was requisite to join with Caesar, the
rather because in that Conjuncture they had no other Army. After this
Remonstrance he caused Caesar, who had lodgd the night before in the Temple of
Mars, fifteen Furlongs from Rome, to advance into the City, where, as soon as
he was entered, he went and possessed himself of the Temple of Castor and
Pollux, about which all the old Soldiers gathered together with their Swords
under their Coats. There Carnutius having first made an invective againg
Anthony in full Assembly, Caesar proceeded to put them in remembrance of his
Father's Virtues, and the injuries which himself had received from Anthony, to
defend himself from which, and to secure his own person, he had been
necessitated to raise an Army, which he promised to employ for his Countries
service wherever there should be an occasion, and particularly against Anthony,
who was at present in Arms. After there Discourfes the People being retired,
the Soldiers, whose design of coming thither had been only the reconciliation
of Caesar and Anthony, or at utmost to defend Caesar, and revenge the death of
his Father, were amazed at his promising their service against Anthony, who had
formerly been their General, and was at present Consul; whereupon some desired
leave to return home, under pretense of fetching their Arms, because they could
ill do Service with other Arms than those they had been used to; others spoke
openly what they thought. Caesar seeing the matter succeeded quite contrary to
his expectation, was somewhat startled: Yet hoping to gain them rather by fair
means than force, he granted what they desired; sending some home to fetch
their Arms, and dismissing others without any condition. Though this Accident
infinitely troubled him, he kept all to himself; and instead of seeming
concerned at it, thanking them for the Assistance they had given him, made them
a Present of more Money, promising to be more liberal for the future; because
if any Accident happened which might oblige him to make use of an Army, he had
rather confide in them as his Father's Friends, than employ other Soldiers.
This Carriage might, one would think, have won them; and yet of ten thousand
that they were, only one thousand, or as others say, three thousand (for the
number is not certain) stayed with him, and all the rest went their way.
However, some, after considering the toil of the Plough, and the Profits they
had received, and what they hoped for the future, as Vulgar Spirits are subject
to Change, they repented themselves; and laying hold of the plausible pretense
of being only come home to fetch their Arms, of their own mere motion they all
returned armed to Caesar; who having taken more Money with him, was gone to
Ravenna and the neighboring places; where he incessantly listed Men, daily
increasing his Forces: whose Rendezvous he appointed at Aresia. Arezzo.


Macedon, four were come to the Consul, who angered that he had so long delayed
revenging Caesar's death, brought him without any Acclamations to the Tribunal,
as if before all other things they would be satisfied in the reasons of this
delay. He offended at their silence, could not forbear reproaching them of
ingratitude, in not considering how much more advantageous it was for them to
bear Arms in Italy, than against the Parthians. He complained likewise that
they had not brought him those Disturbers of the Peace which that young
Giddybrains (for so he called Caesar) had sent amongst them; whom, however, he
himself should find out: That as for his Army, he was going to lead them into
the happy Province of Gaul, the Government of which he had obtained, and would
give to every Soldier one hundred Drams. They all burst out a laughing at the
meanness of this promise; at which he appearing offended, the Tumult increased,
and all began to leave him. Whereupon, rising up himself, he only said these
words, You shall learn to obey. And hereupon he after gave Command to the
Tribunes to bring him the Roll of the Mutineers (for in the Roman Armies every
Soldier is enrolled in his Order) that he might decimate them according to
Military Discipline. However, he punished not every tenth Man, but only put a
part of them to death, thinking to terrify them a little; though by this
Action he raised more their anger than their fear. Caesar's people whom he had
sent to corrupt the Legions, observing this discontent in the Army, began
afresh to scatter abroad their Libels, by which they displayed to the Soldiers
the Cruelty and Avarice of Anthony; and withal, representing to them the
Clemency of the first Caesar, invited them to make trial of the Liberality of
the young Man. And though the Consul proposed great Rewards to those who
discovered them, and threatened with exemplary Punishment such as harbored them,
he could get no advice who they were; which infinitely troubled him, as
doubting the whole Army had intelligence with them. Soon after upon the report
brought him of Caesar's proceedings in the Colonies and at Rome, he was more
concerned, and came forth once more to speak to the Soldiers. He said, It
troubled him that he had been forced to punish some, though it had been fewer
than Military Discipline required, and that they knew well that Anthony was
neither covetous nor cruel. But, said he, let us talk no more of Aversions, or
Faults, or Punishments; we will forget all that is past. And as for the hundred
Drams a Head I promised you, I would not have you think I meant it as a
Donative, that were below the Fortune of Anthony; you shall receive that only
as an Earnest of my Favor at our first Meeting, but remember that both now and
hereafter I desire you would obey me according to the Roman Law of War. After
having made an end of speaking he gave them not any thing more, lest he should
seem to prejudice his Quality of General by yielding too much to his Army; And
they likewise acquiesced in the promises he made them, either as repenting of
what they had done, or out of fear; yet he changed their Officers, either
because they had encouraged the Mutiny, or out of some suspicion he had of
them: But as for the Soldiers, he treated them afterward more favorably in
all occasions they had to petition him. He caused them to march along the
Seacoasts toward Rimini one after another; but for himself, having chosen out
the properest and briskest Men he could find among all the Legions, and formed
them into a Pretorian Cohort.
Regiment of Guards; he took his way toward Rome, from thence intending to go
meet the Legions. Being come nigh to Rome he quartered his Horse in the
Suburbs, and with his Foot entered the City in a posture as if he had an Enemy
to engage; causing them to keep Guard about his House, and giving the Word, and
dividing the Watches as if he had been in the Field. Soon after having summoned
a Senate to make his Complaint of Caesar's Enterprises, News was brought him to
the Palace Gate that one of the four Legions, called the Legion of Mars, was
revolted to that young Captain. Whereupon, being at a stand, and perplexed in
mind, another Messenger came to tell him that the fourth Legion had followed
the Martial* Which tidings put him into such a fright, that only entering the
Palace as though he had called together the Fathers for some other reasons, he
said little to them, but speedily going out of the City, marched directly
toward Alba, to endeavor to regain those that had deserted his Party; but
seeing they shot at him from the Walls, he sent five hundred Drams a Man to the
rest; and brought those Forces he had, with all his Train of Munition
ordinarily used in War, to Tivoli, for the War was already declared, Decimus
having refused to part with Gaul.

He had not been long at Tivoli, but almost all the Senate, a great part of
Caesar. Thus Anthony magnificently accompanied, advanced toward Rimini, a City
situate on the Entrance into Gaul. Besides his new Levies, he had three
Macedonian Legions (for the fifth was now arrived) and a great number of
Veterans, whom he esteemed as much again as his new Soldiers. So that he found
his Strength to consist in four Legions, all tried Men, with their Horse and
Light-armed Foot; without reckoning the Regiment of Guards, and the Soldiers
newly entertained. Besides, Lepidus was in Spain with four Legions, Asinius
Pollio with two, and Plancus in the Transalpine Gaul with three; all which
would in all appearance side with Anthony. As for Caesar, his Force consisted
of those two Legions revolted from Anthony, one of the new Soldiers, and two of
Veterans, which would not have been complete, had he not filled them up with
New. Having rendezvouzed them at Alba, he gave advice thereof to the Senate,
who extremely rejoiced at it; so that now again it was hard to find out the Men
that had accompanied Anthony. Not but that they were troubled that these
Legions had not rather yielded to themselves than to Caesar. However, after
having applauded their Good Will, and that of the other Legions, they promised
that as soon as the new Magistrates were entered upon their Charge they would
employ them in such things as should be effectually for the Good of the
Republic. Now it was apparent their hopes were to employ these Forces against
Anthony, having no other particular Army, nor having power to raise one without
the Authority of the Consuls; wherefore they temporized till such time as the
new Officers were entered upon the Management of Affairs. Mean time Caesar's
Soldiers offered him Axes and Lictors; beseeching him to take the Title of
Propretor, and command them in that Quality, because they were accustomed to
pay their Obedience to Magistrates. He much applauded them for the Honor they
would have conferred on him, but remitted the matter to the Senate's
discretion. Nor could all the Entreaties they made him prevail with him to
consent, but so far as that they might send Deputies to Rome about it; telling
them, The Senate will of themselves the more willingly confer upon me this
Dignity when they shall hear that you offered it me, and I would not accept it.
At length, though with much difficulty, he prevailed over them. And when the
Officers complained to him that it was a kind of despising them, he gave them
these reasons for his Conduct. The Senate declares on my side, not out of any
kindness to me, but because they are afraid of Anthony, and have at present no
Army; they only wait till Anthony be defeated, and that the Murderers of my
Father, who are Kindred and Friends to most of the Senate, have drawn together
their Forces; which being so easy to be perceived, I dissemble a Submission to
them, and it is requisite they should preserve that Opinion of me: But should I
usurp the Title of Magistrate, they would accuse me of Treason and Violence,
whilst governing my self with modesty, they will perhaps of their own motion
give it me for fear lest I should accept it from you. Having spoken in this
manner, he went to see the two revolted Legions exercise; who performed one
against the other all that could be practiced in a Fight, except killing, in
such an excellent manner, that Caesar was infinitely pleased with the sight of
it; and taking thence occasion to exercise his Liberality, he gave once more to
every Soldier five hundred Drams, with promise that in case there was a
necessity of their engaging in Fight, and he gained the Victory, he would give
them each five thousand; by which Bounty he engaged them to attempt any thing
for his Service.

Anthony being marched into Gaul, had sent his Commands to Decimus to go for
Macedon, according to the Decree of the People, and for his own safety.
Whereupon Decimus sent him the Senate's Letters, and Word withal, that Decimus
ought no less obedience to the Orders of the Senate, than did Anthony to the
Decrees of the People. And when Anthony had fixed a day, on which if he
departed not the Province he would treat him as an Enemy, Decimus desired him
to prolong that time, for fear lest before that himself might be declared Enemy
of his Country. After this, though Anthony might easily have defeated Decimus
his Army, which now kept the Field, yet he chose rather to go about to the
Cities, not any of which refused him their Gates. Whereupon Decimus, afraid
lest he should find none to give him entrance, feigned to have received Orders
from the Senate to return with his Army to Rome, and took his March toward
Italy. All the Cities in his way received him as only pretending to pass
through; but when he came to Modena, a Noble City, he shut the Gates, seized on
the Stores of the Inhabitants for Provisions for his Army, killed and salted up
all the Baggage Horse for the same use in case the length of the Siege
oppressed him: And now become Master of a great number of Gladiators, and three
Legions; one of which were New Levied Men, and the other two having served
formerly under him, very affectionate to him, he in that Post expected Anthony;
who presently came in great rage before the place, and began to work in the
Circumvallation of it. Decimus being in this manner besieged, the very first
day of the next Year the new Consuls, Hirtius and Pansa, after the usual
Sacrifices, assembled the Senate in the same Temple, to consult about the
Affairs with Anthony. There Cicero and those of his Cabal advised the declaring
him an Enemy to his Country, for that he had seized by force, and in despite
of the Senate, of Gaul, to the end he might fortify himself against his
Country; and for having drawn into Italy that Army they had given him Command
of against the Thracians. They added, that he aspired to Supreme Dominion after
Caesar; having been publicly attended through the City by Soldiers as Guards of
his Body, having fortifyed his House like a Citadel; and in sum, behaved
himself in many things with more Pride and Insolence than became a Magistrate,
whose Power was to continue but a Year. But L. Piso, one of the most
considerable Citizens of Rome, who had Charge of Anthony's Affairs in his
absence, with others, Friends to him or Anthony, or else seriously thinking
what they spoke; said, That they ought first to Cite him to stand to a Trial,
and not condemn a Roman Citizen without a Hearing. Besides, that it would be a
shameful thing to declare that Man Enemy to his Country to day, who had
yesterday been Consul; especially after such public Applauses of so many
several Persons, and even of Cicero himself. Thus the Senate spent that day in
debate, without concluding any thing. The next Morning the Fathers assembled
very early in the Palace, where Ciecro's Party proved the stronger; so that
Anthony was upon the point of being declared Enemy by Decree, if Salvius,
Tribune of the People, had not hindered, and put a stop to the Affair; for among
these Officers, he whose Voice opposes carries it. Cicero's Party fretted at
these Proceedings, bitterly reviled him; and running to the place to stir up
the Multitude against him, assigned him to give in the Reasons of his
Opposition before the People. He went without any fear; but the Senate hindered
him out of a doubt left he should pervert the People by putting them in mind of
Anthony. For the Fathers knew well they condemned an Illustrious Person without
bringing him to a Trial; and that the Province, for the Usurpation of which
they condemned him, had been given him by the People: Only their fear for the
Conspirators made them bear ill Will to Anthony, who had frustrated the
Indemnity granted them by the Senate; and for this reason they had joined with
the young Caesar against him: To which Caesar, who perceived their intentions,
had easily consented, being willing first to get rid of Anthony. But though the
Senate were thus animated against him, they delayed giving Judgment because of
the Opposition of the Tribune. Notwithstanding, a Sentence passed by which they
approved the Action of Decimus, in not delivering up Gaul to Anthony: To which
they added, that jointly with Hirtius and Pansa, Caesar should command the
Forces he already had; that a Statue of Gold should be erected for him; that
for the future he should have a Voice among Persons of Consular Degree, and
have Right to demand the Consulate ten Years before the time prescribed by the
Laws; and that the Donative Caesar had promised to the two Legions revolted
from Anthony if they gained the Victory, should be paid out of the public
Treasury. These things thus agreed on, the Senate broke up as if Anthony had in
effect been declared Enemy, and that the Tribune could find nothing more to say
on the morrow. But Anthony's Mother, Wife and Son (yet very young) with their
Friends and Domestics, run about all night to the Houses of the Senators, to
solicit them in his behalf. And Day being come, they plucked them by the Robe
as they passed along to the Senate; and all together in mourning Habit, as the
Fathers entered the Palace, cast themselves at their Feet before the Gate,
weeping and lamenting like despairing Persons. So that these sad Objects and
this sudden Change had already stirred up a Sense of Pity in the Breasts of
most of the Judges; when Cicero fearing the Success of the Affair, spoke to
them in this manner.

The Oration of Cicero.
We passed yesterday what we had to decree in the Case of Anthony; for by
declaring his Enemies worthy of Honor and Recompense, we have tacitly
declared him Enemy to his Country. As for Salvius, who alone opposes, it
follows, that either he is wiser than us all, or that he does it out of
Friendship, or else understands not the present state of Affairs. Now it were a
shameful thing to have all of us together thought to have less Wisdom than one
single Man, and it would prove dishonorable to Salvius to prefer a private
Friendship before public Good; we are then to believe that he knows not the
state of Affairs: but he ought not to give credit to his own Judgment before
that of so many Consuls, Pretors, Tribunes, his Colleagues, and all the rest of
the Senators; who being so numerous, and so great Men both for Age and
Experience, known Anthony better than Salvius can do; for in all Judgments,
that Sentence that is carried by most Voices ought to be esteemed most just.
However, if he still have a desire to hear now the Reasons of our Judgment, I
will repeat the principal of them in few words. Anthony has seized himself of
our Treasure after the death of Caesar: Having obtained from us the Government
of Macedon, he is marched into Gaul without the Senate's Order: We gave him an
Army to oppose the Thracians, and he, instead of employing it against them, has
brought it into Italy against our selves: And has done things by his own
Authority after having, to put a Cheat upon us, asked our consent, and been
denied it by the Judgment of all the World. Being at Brundusium he took a
Regiment of Guards like a King, and has been publicly attended by his Soldiers
through the City, placed Guards about his House, and given them the Word, as in
time of War: He had likewise ordered the rest of his Forces hither; and was
putting himself in a posture of doing with more vehemence than the first Caesar
the same things that he had done. But being prevented by the young Caesar, who
had another Army, he was afraid, and went to possess himself of Gaul, as on a
Province convenient for his designs; from whence Caesar fell into Italy, and
made himself Master of us and the Republic. To these ends it is he terrifies
the Soldiers with his Cruelty, to make them obedient to whatever he has a mind
to; to this end he decimated not Mutineers nor Run-a-ways, on whom only the Law
admits that Punishment to be inflicted, and which few Commanders have done but
in dangerous Wars and in extreme necessity; whilst he for a fit of laughter
puts Citizens to death, not the Guilty, but the Unfortunate. This Cruelty has
occasioned those who could escape to leave him (and yesterday you decreed them
Recompense as for a good Action) and those who are yet stayed with him do it
for fear, and now by his Orders plunder your Province, and besiege your Army
and your Praetor, to whom you have written that he should stay in the Province;
and Anthony will have him thence. Why do we not then with Alacrity declare
Anthony our Enemy, who already makes War upon us? But this is what the Tribune
will not know, till such time as he has defeated Decimus, and made himself
Master, together with that great Province which lies so near us, of Decimus his
Army; with hopes thereby more easily to oppress us. Then perhaps the Tribune
will consent that he should be declared Enemy; but he would have us stay till
he be too powerful for us.

Cicero having spoken in this manner, his Friends began to make such a noise,
that it was impossible for any to be heard that would answer him, till Piso
rose up; out of respect to whom, not only the rest of the Senators, but even
Cicero's Party kept silence, and then he declared himself in these terms.

The Oration of Piso.
THe Laws (Conscript Fathers) require that the Accused should hear his
Accusation Cicero, that mighty Accuser, cannot deny me. Wherefore, since he has
not accused Anthony of any thing while he was present, but would now value
himself upon this opportunity of his absence to blacken him with a multitude of
Crimes, I present my self to make appear the falsity of his Accusations; which
I hope to do in few words. In the first place he says that after Caesar's
death, Anthony seized upon the public Moneys; but the Laws have ordained
particular Punishments for Thieves, but never declared them Enemies to their
Country. Besides, Brutus having slain Caesar accused him in a public Assembly
of the People of having wasted the Public Treasure, and drained dry the
Exchequer. Some time after Anthony ordered an Inquisition to be made; you
approved his Ordinance, and promised the tenth Penny to the Discoverers; and we
submit our selves to pay double if any one can convict Anthony of having been a
Partner in that Crime. So much for what concerns the Public Moneys. As for the
Government of Gaul, it is true you did not give it to Anthony; but he obtained
it by Decree of the People in the presence of Cicero, as others obtained other
Provinces, and as Caesar himself obtained the same. It is ordered by the same
Decree, that if Decimus refuse to part with Gaul, Anthony may have liberty to
constrain him by force; and to employ to that end the Army designed against the
Thracians, provided they made no attempt on Macedon. But Cicero accounts not
Decimus an Enemy, who is in Arms against the Ordinance of the People; and yet
would have Anthony be so, whom the People ordered to make this War. So that
blaming the Decree, he blames the Authors; but he ought rather then to have
dissuaded them, than now revile them having given his consent to it; he ought
rather to have prevented the giving that Government to Decimus whom the People
had chased hence as a Murderer, than deprive Anthony whom they had gratified.
In sum, it is some imprudence to oppose the Ordinances of the People in such a
perilous time, without remembering that in the beginning of the Commonwealth
they were Judges of these things, and declared Friends of Enemies whom they
thought worthy; for by the Ancient Laws the People were the sole Arbiters of
Peace and War. And there is no doubt but had they a Head, they would reassume
this Authority, and absolutely deprive us of it. But Anthony has put to death
his Soldiers; he has acted according to the Power given him by your Commission:
Nor did there ever General give account of such matters to any Man; for the
Legislators never thought it for the Commonwealth's Advantage, that a General
should own his Soldiers for Judges of his Actions: Besides, nothing is more
dangerous in an Army than Soldiers Contempt of their Commander, which has
proved the destruction of many in the midst of Victory. Besides, none of the
Kindred of the decimated either have or do yet complain, and yet Cicero accuses
him of Manslaughter; and not content with the usual Punishment of that Crime,
treats him as a public Enemy: Yet constantly affirms he has undergone strange
affronts from his Soldiers, in that two Legions whom you commanded to obey him,
deserted him contrary to the Law of War; not to yield themselves to you, but to
Caesar. Notwithstanding all which, Cicero thinks their Action good, and
yesterday advised they might be rewarded at the Expense of the Public. God
grant the Example may not one day prove dreadful: but however it be, Cicero's
Heat and Animosity has carried him to a manifest Contradiction; for he at once
accuses Anthony of aspiring to the Tyranny, and of ill treating his Soldiers:
And certain it is, that those who pretend to usurp the Sovereign Power, instead
of ill treating Military Men, do all they can to gain their favor. However,
since he has had the confidence to impose this Calumny upon Anthony, that
following Caesar's steps, he aimed at the Tyranny, let us examine all his
Actions particularly. Has he put any one to death without due Process, as
Tyrants use to do; he, who is himself in danger of being condemned without
being heard? Has he chased out of the City, or calumniously accused any Person
before you? And is there any appearance he that has done no private Wrong,
should attempt Public? But pray Cicero, when was this done? Was it when he
published the Indemnity; or when he proposed the recalling the Son of your
Pompey, and making good to him his Father's Estate out of the Public Moneys?
or when he caused to be arrested and put to death the false Marius, who
troubled our Peace; for which he was praised by all the Senate? (and, my Lords
of the Senate, this is the only Action Cicero durst not blame, because you
applauded it.) Or, in fine, was it when he passed that Decree, by which it is
prohibited to make Dictators? For this is the Sum of all his Management of
Public Affairs during the two Months which after Caesar's death he stayed in
the City; during which the People sometimes sought for the Murderers to put
them to death, and you your selves were often in fear and trouble of what might
arrive; had he then been an ill Citizen, could he ever expect a Conjuncture
more favorable to his Designs? But he never abused that Power and Charge of
the Consulship: How so? Has not he Dolobella being gone for Syria? Kept he not
armed Men about him for his security, which you your selves appointed? Kept he
not a Guard by Night in the City, even about his own House; which yet was only
done to warrant him from the Ambushes of his Enemies? Had he not a fair
apportunity upon the death of Caesar his Friend, his Benefactor, beloved by all
the People? And did there not one yet fairer present it self when he
entertained Guards to defend his life against those Murderers that attempted
his, though he never put to death or banished one of them; yet still he
pardoned them so far as in civility he could, nor ever hindered the giving of
them Governments. These (Conscript Fathers) are the great Crimes, the manifest
Crimes wherewith Cicero accuses him. Nor is he content to make Anthony's
Actions only pass for Crimes. He divines, and says, he had designed to bring
his Army into the City, but that he was afraid of Caesar, who had already with
another Army possessed it. How comes he then who had only designed it to be an
Enemy to his Country, whilst he that had really done it, and does in a manner
still hold us besieged, is none? Or why did not he come if he had designed it,
unless being at the Head of thirty thousand well disciplined Men, he were
afraid of three thousand disordered an disarmed, which were then with Caesar;
and who were only come to reconcile them together, and left him as soon as they
knew he would employ them in a War? Or if he durst not come with thirty
thousand Men, how happened he to come afterward accompanied only with a
thousand; With whom, when he went from Rome to Tivoli, how many of us did
attend him? How many swore Fidelity to him without being required? And what
Applause did Cicero himself give him? In short, had he designed any thing
against his Country, why left he with us those Hostages yet at this Palace
Gate, his Mother, his Wife, and his Son; who are at present weeping for fear,
not of the Accusations brought against him, but of the power of his Enemies?
Thus much I thought convenient, to make you understand the Innocence of
Anthony, and the Inconstancy of Cicero: and have now nothing more to say, but
to exhort all good Men not to offend the People, nor do Injustice to Anthony,
for fear of such trouble as may ensue to the City, the Commonwealth being yet
so weakly established, that it is ready to relapse into its first disorders, if
not timely relieved. However, it is my opinion, that we secure to our selves
Forces for the Defense of the City before any Attempt be made upon us from
abroad. Then you may take order for such things as are necessary, and decree
what you judge convenient, when it shall be in your power to put those Decrees
in Execution. But how is this to be done? You need only leave to Anthony the
Province given him by the People; and after having recalled Decimus with his
three Legions hither, send him to Maccdon, and keep his Army. And if those two
Legions revolted from Anthony, have submitted to us, as Cicero affirms, let us
withdraw them from Caesar, and order their Return to the City. Thus having five
Legions at our dispose, we may issue what Orders we think requisite without
courting the grace or favor of any Man. This I speak to those who listen to me
without envy or hatred. As for those who suffer themselves to be transported by
their Passions and particular Animosities, I exhort them not to give too rash
Judgment against Great Men, and Commanders of great Armies, lest we force them
to make War upon us: Let them remember Marcus Coriolanus, or rather what so
lately happened to us in the Person of Caesar, who likewise commanded an Army.
He offered us reasonable Conditions; yet we by rashly declaring him Enemy,
forced him indeed to become his Country's Foe. Let them likewise consider the
interest of the People; who having been so lately enraged against Caesar's
Murderers, may well think themselves despised when we give those their
Provinces; and praising Decimus, who would not submit to their Decree, declare
Anthony Enemy, because he from them required the Government of Gaul. In short,
I exhort all honest minded Men to reduce others to reason, and do beseech the
Consuls and Tribunes to appear more affectionate in providing against those
Evils wherewith the Commonwealth is threatened.

Thus spoke Piso for Anthony; and doubtless, his reproaching of Cicero Gaul,
for the Kindred and Friends of the Conspirators prevented it. They feared left
Anthony being at Peace, might reconcile himself with Caesar, to revenge the
death of his Father; and therefore did all they could to foment their Division.
It was therefore decreed to offer him Macedon instead of Gaul; and as for the
other Orders of the Senate, the Fathers either overreached or designing it,
gave Commission to Cicero to put them in writing, and send them to him. He drew
them up after his own fancy in these Terms: That Anthony should forthwith raise
his Siege before Modena, foregoing Gaul to Decimus, at a limited day repass the
Rubicon, which divides Gaul from Italy, and submit himself to the Authority of
the Senate. Cicero sent these Commands in this spiteful manner to Anthony,
contrary to the Senate's intention: Yet did he it not out of any particular
hate, but seemed dictated by Fortune, which had determined to change the Face
of the Republic, and to ruin Cicero. And this happened at the same time that
the Remains of Trebonius Body were brought to the City; and that the Senate
understanding how infamously he had been treated, forthwith declared Dolobella
Enemy to his Country. The Commissioners sent to Anthony, ashamed to have
brought him so insolent a Command, delivered it into his hands without saying a
word. At sight of it he fell into a rage, and uttered many violent expressions
against the Senate, but especially aginst Cicero: That it amazed him that
Caesar, who had done such mighty Services for the Roman Empire, should be
esteemed a Tyrant and a King; and that Men should not have the same opinion of
Cicero, who having been made Prisoner of War by Caesar, and by him released
without any damage or affront, preferred now his Murderers before his Friends.
He who hated Decimus whilst he was Caesar's Friend; now he is become his
Murderer, favors the same Decimus who had received the Government of Gaul from
the same Caesar, and declares him Enemy who held it of the People.

The Oration of Anthony.
THe Senate having given me some Legions ( said he) Cicero decrees Rewards to
the Revolters, and corrupts those stand firm in their duty; whereby he wrongs
not me so much as he does Military Discipline. He granted the Amnesty to
Murderer, to which I consented for the sake of two Men I respected, and
declares Anthony and Dolobella Enemies for holding what has been granted them;
for no other reason is there: And if I would quite Gaul, I should no longer be
either Enemy to my Country, or Affector of Tyranny. But I protest to overthrow
that Indemnity, with which they will not rest content.

Anthony having vented many such passionate things, wrote in Answer to the
Senate, that he submitted to their Authority for the Affection he bore his
Country: But as for Cicero, who had himself composed the Order sent him, he
answered him in these Terms: The People having by their Decree given me the
Government of Gaul, have likewise given me leave if Decimus would not yield it
up, to force him to it; and in his Person to punish all the rest of the
Murderers; and by his death purge the Senate of a Crime of which they are
partakers because Cicero abets it. Upon report made to the Senate of what
Anthony had said and writ, they at that very instant not only declared him
Enemy, but his Army likewise, if they immediately left him not: And to Marcus
Brutus they gave Macedonia and Illyria, with the Forces yet remaining in those
Provinces, till such time as the Commonwealth were settled. He had already a
particular Army, besides some Forces he had received from Apuleius: He had
likewise some Shipping, as well Galleys as Vessels of Burden; about sixteen
thousand Talents of Silver, and a great quantity of Arms found at Demetriade,
where Caesar had long before laid up his Stores: of which the Senate had by
Decree given him the Disposition, with power to employ what he judged necessary
for the good of his Country. They likewise conferred on Cassius the Government
of Syria, with Commission to make War upon Dolobella, and Command to all the
Provinces depending on the Roman Empire, from the Ionian Sea to the East, to
obey the Orders of Brutus and Cassius. Thus in a short time without much labor
their Party grew prodigiously powerful. This News coming to Caesar's ear
strangely perplexed him: He thought the Amnesty granted by the Fathers had some
color of humanity and compassion to their Relations and Peers in Dignity; that
those lesser Governments given them were only for their security: And he
observed that only to maintain Decimus in Gaul, they accused Anthony of
aspiring to the Tyranny, and by the same invention engaged himself to take the
contrary Party. But when he saw they had declared Dolobella Enemy for
destroying one of those who had slain his Father; that they had given Brutus
and Cassius absolute power in many great Provinces, and several Armies, with
vast Sums of Money, and power to raise more among all they commanded beyond
the Ionian Sea, he no longer doubted but it was their design to ruin Caesar's
Party, and re-^stablish that of Pompey. He likewise now plainly perceived, that
by their Cunning they had made the Young Man of him; that they had given him a
Statue, with the Right of Precedence, and Quality of a Pro-Pretor, but that
indeed they had stripped him of his Army; for where the Consuls command
together, the Praetor is nothing. In short, that having only given Rewards to
the Legions that deserted Anthony, it was a scorn of the rest of his Army; and
in the conclusion the War must needs turn to his dishonor, the Senate only
serving their own ends upon him till they were rid of Anthony. Upon these
thoughts which he discovered to none, he sacrificed as it is usual to do upon
the Entrance into any Charge; and that done, spoke thus to his Army. I believe
(Fellow Soldiers) that it is from you I hold that Office which I this day
receive, and as the Effects of your former Offer; for the Senate had not given
it me but that you desired it: Wherefore know, that to you I owe the whole
Obligation, and will testify it abundantly if the Gods favor my designs.
These obliging words he spoke to gain the Hearts of the Soldiery. As for the
Consuls, Pansa went to raise Forces in some Corners of Italy, and Hirtius came
to Caesar to make Division of their Forces. He had received private Orders from
the Senate to demand for his Portion those two Legions that had deserted
Anthony, knowing them to be the most considerable part of the Army; which
Caesar yielding to, after the Division made they went to take up their Winter
Quarters together. Toward the end of Winter Decimus being sorely oppressed
with Famine, Hirtius and Caesar marched suddenly to Modena, to raise the
Siege; but finding Anthony too well entrenched, they durst not attempt forcing
the Lines till Pansa were come up to them. There happened mean while some
Horse-Skirmishes, in which Anthony, though much stronger in Cavalry, got not
much advantage by reason of the many Brooks that crossed the Country. Affairs
being in this posture at Modena, Cicero, because of the Consul's absence,
strove to gain the people of the City by frequent Assemblies, making provision
of Arms, which the Artificers furnished gratis, and raising Moneys, in the
levying which, he made Anthony's Friends pay excessive Contributions; yet they
paid them without grumbling, for fear of exposing themselves to Calumny, till
such time as Pub. Ventidius, who had been an Officer under Caesar, and was now
Anthony's Friend, no longer able to endure the persecution, went to Caesar's
Colonies, where he was known, and raised two Legions for Anthony, with which he
marched toward the City, designing to seize upon Cicero. He put all into such
a fright, that many sent away their Wives and Children, as if they had been in
utter despair, and Cicero himself retired; which Ventidius having notice of,
advanced toward Modena to join with Anthony, but his way being cut off by
Hirtius and Caesar, he turned into the Country of Marches of Ancona.
Picenum, where he raised another Legion, waiting to see which way Affairs
would go.

Pansa drawing nigh to Modena, Hirtius and Caesar sent Carsuleius to meet him
with Caesar's Regiment of Guards, and the Legions of Mars, to secure his
passage through the Straits. Anthony had forbore to seize on them, lest thereby
he might put a stop to his great design, which was to come to a Battle;
wherefore not expecting any great effects from his Horse in a Marshy Plain full
of Ditches; as soon as he had notice of Carsuleiu's March, he placed two of his
best Legions in ambush in the Marshes, on each side of a narrow Causway, over
which the Enemies were to pass, Carsuleius having crossed the Straits by night,
and in the Morning early the Legion of Mars with five Cohorts being entered upon
the Causway, on which there was not a Man stirring, looking upon the Marshes
on both sides of them, they perceived the Bushes to wag, which gave them some
suspicion, and soon after the brightness of the Shields and Helmets dazzling
their eyes, they forthwith beheld Anthony's Regiment of Guards coming to charge
them. The Legionary Soldiers perceiving themselves surrounded, so that they
could not make their retreat, obliged the new Soldiers to stand Spectators of
the Fight, without engaging, lest their want of experience should breed
disorder in the Bustle; and to Anthony's Guards they opposed Caesar's, for
themselves they divided into two Bodies, one commanded by Pansa, the other by
Carsuleius, and thus parted, went each into his side of the Marish: so that in
the two Marshes were fought two Battles, so near, that nothing but the Causway
hindered the one from seeing what the other did, besides the third which was
fought by the Guards on the Causway it self. Anthony's Soldiers burnt with a
desire of revenging themselves on the Legions as Traitors and Runaways; and the
Martials were no less eager to have satisfaction for the injury they had done
them in suffering their Companions to be put to death at Brundusium, and
knowing well that in them consisted the principal force of both Armies, they
hoped by this one Fight to put an end to the War. The one Party were incited by
the shame it would prove to them, being two Legions, to be worsted by one; and
the other spurred on by the hopes of the Glory they should obtain, if, being
but one Legion, they defeated two. Thus pressed forward by mutual hate, and
considering more their own Honor than their Generals Interest, they fought for
themselves: and being all old Soldiers they began not the Fight with a shout to
frighten their Enemy, nor in the heat of the Fight did any let drop a word,
whether he fell or overcame, and not having by reason of the Ditches in the
Marish any room either to wheel or gain ground, they kept firm footing without
making any retreat, so that griping one the other like Wrestlers, they struck
not a blow but did it is execution, the ground was covered with wounded and
dying persons, not crying out, or groaning for grief of their wounds, but
sighing that they could do no more: as soon as one fell, another supplied his
place: there was no need of advising or encouraging them, for by reason of
their long experience every man was his own Captain; and when they found
themselves quite tired like Wrestlers in the Gymnick Games they stood staring
on each other to gain a little Breath, and then fell on afresh, to the great
astonishment of the young Soldiers, to see them do such brave things, and with
so much stedfastness keep their Ranks, in so profound a silence. At length
having done on all parts Acts more than humane, Caesar's Guards were all cut in
pieces, as for the Legion of Mars, that part commanded by Carsuleius, gave some
ground to the Legion that opposed them, yet not with dishonor, but by little
and little, making a fair retreat. Those who fought under Pansa were in like
manner oppressed by their Opponents, yet so as they courageously defended
themselves, till such time as the Consul receiving a wound with a Pile in the
Thigh, was carried off the Field to Bolonia. Then they began to retire by
little and little, and after that somewhat faster, almost flying outright;
which as soon as the young Soldiers observed, they took their flight in
disorder toward an Entrenchment which the Quaestor Torquatus had caused to be
raised to serve in case of necessity. Here whilst the rest were yet fighting,
these young Soldiers shut up themselves in a strange fright and confusion,
though they were Italians as well as the Martialists; so much does Exercise and
Discipline more than Birth contribute to the making Men valiant. The
Martialists would not enter the Intrenchment for fear of blasting their Glory,
but went and planted themselves at some distance thence, where, wearied as they
were, they stood expecting a fresh Charge, resolved to defend themselves to the
last gasp; whereupon Anthony judging it would be too hard a task to vanquish
them, turned upon the new raised Forces, of whom he made a horrible Slaughter.
Hirtius, who was in the Confines of Modena, about sixty Furlongs from the place
where this Battle was fought, hearing the news, made all the speed he could
thither with the other revolted Legion, and as toward Evening Anthony's Men
were returning singing for the Victory, he surprised them in disorder, with his
Legion fresh, and in a posture of fighting; they drew into the best order of
Battle they could, and again acted wonders, but at length quite tired they gave
ground, yet the greatest part of them were left upon the place. Hirtius would
not pursue the others, for fear of engaging himself in the Marshes, besides,
night came on, so he caused the Retreat to be sounded. The whole Marish was
covered with Arms, dead, dying and wounded Men, and some that were fallen among
the rest only out of pure weariness, wherefore Anthony's Cavalry spent the
night in gathering up the Wracks of their Party, causing some to mount on their
led Horses, others to get up behind them, and persuading others to take hold of
their Horse tail to help them in marching, that they might the sooner get off.
And Anthony being after so brave a Fight defeated by Hirtius, went and lodged
at a Village near the Field of Battle, called the Market of the Gauls, whore
there was no Intrenchment: on either side near half the Army was lost, with all
Caesar's Regiment of Guards. Hirtius lost few, and on the morrow they all
retired into their Camps before Modena. Anthony after this loss resolved not to
fight, though the Enemy should provoke him, but to weary them with frequent
Skirmishes, till such time as Decimus oppressed with Famine should be
constrained to yield. Hirtius and Caesar on the contrary were the more eager to
engage, and because they could not draw Anthony to a Battle, they raised their
Camp to go on the other side of Modena, where the Trenches were weaker by
reason of the situation of the place, resolving to force the Lines, and so gain
an entrance into the City. Anthony sent forth his Horse only, against which
likewise they sent only theirs, and held on the March with the rest of the
Army: insomuch that Anthony fearing to lose Modena, drew out against them two
Legions whom they made a halt for, and so had a Battle as they desired.
Thereupon Anthony sent for his other Forces, but by reason they expected not
this Allarm, and were quartered at some distance from the place of Battle, they
could not come so suddenly but that the Enemy had first gained a Victory.
Hirtius in person entered Anthony's Camp, and bravely fighting before the
Generals Tent, was slain, Caesar coming in brought off his Body, and made
himself Master of the Camp; but being soon beat out again by Anthony, they each
stood all night in Arms. Anthony having now again received this Defeat, held at
the same time a Council of his Friends, who were of opinion that he should
continue the Siege, without fighting, the loss being almost equal, Hirtius
being slain, and Pansa being wounded, himself the stronger in Horse, and Modena
in such want of all things, that it could not long subsist without surrendering;
and surely this counsel he ought to have followed, but Fate hindered it. He was
fearful lest Caesar should throw himself into the City, as he had attempted to
do the day before; or else having convenience for all Engines thereabout,
should besiege himself, and so make his Horse useless. Then, said he, Lepidus
and Plancus will despise me, as a man lost beyond repair; but if I raise my
Siege, Ventidius will forthwith bring us three Legions from the Country of
Picenum, and Lepidus and Plancus will come join with us numerous Forces. And in
short, after having thus spoken, this Man, hitherto fearless in all dangers,
presently departs from before Modena, and takes his March toward the Alps.

Decimus began to fear Caesar, for the Army being no longer commanded by the
Consuls, he thought him his Enemy, wherefore before it was day he caused to
break down the Bridge, and dispatched some to Caesar, to acknowledge the
obligation he had to him for his deliverance, and to entreat him to come on the
other side the River, where in the presence of all the Inhabitants, he would
convince him that he was engaged in the Conspiracy more by misfortune than by
fault. Caesar having hearkened to those who brought this message, answered in
anger: That he desired him not to own any obligation to him; for he came not to
serve him, but to make War upon Anthony the Enemy of his Country: that nature
forbad his seeing or speaking to him; however, he was safe so long as he
pleased them who commanded at Rome. This answer being brought to Decimus, he
went to the River side; and after having called Caesar by his name, he read
with a loud voice the Decree of the Senate which gave him the Government of
Gaul, forbidding him to pass the River, or enter into his Province without the
Consuls, nor so much as to pursue Anthony any farther; for that himself was
strong enough to defeat him. Though Caesar saw well that Decimus durst not have
talked to boldly to him, had he not been inspired by the Senate, since that he
could with one sole command of his reduce him under his power, which yet he
would not do, but going to Bolonia where Pansa was, he wrote to the Senate how
all things passed, as Pansa also particularly did. Cicero read Pansa's Letters
in a full Assembly of the People; and those from Caesar in the Senate only,
where he caused to be ordained fifty days Feast for Anthony's Defeat, though so
many were never ordained in any War, no not for any Victory gained from the
Gauls. He farther advised, that since Pansa was thought irrecoverable; though
he were yet living, they should give Decimus command of the Consul's Army, with
Commission himself alone to prosecute the War against Anthony; and that public
Prayers should be made for the prosperity of his Arms, so much was Cicero
transported against Anthony; besides which they confirmed the gift of five
thousand Drams a Head, promised to the Legions that had quitted Anthony,
payable out of the Moneys of the Treasury, after the Victory, (as if it had
been already gained) and permitted them hereafter upon Holy Days to wear Crowns
of Olive-branches. In this Decree not so much as mention was made of Caesar's
name, so much they already contemned him, out of a belief they had Anthony
could never make Head again, having to this purpose writ to Lepidus, Plancus
and Asinius, who were at no great distance to complete his ruin. Whilst those
things passed at Rome, Pansa ready to die of his wound at Bolonia, calling for
Caesar, spoke to him in this manner:

The Speech of Pansa, being ready to die, to Caesar.
I Loved your Father as my self, but after his death could not possibly revenge
him, nor oppose my self to the judgment of the most, to whose authority you
have likewise prudently submitted your self, though you had an Army. As at
first they feared nothing more than you and Anthony, who had so great an
affection to your Father, so they were well satisfied with your Division,
hoping you would destroy one the other; and when they saw you Master of an
Army, they flattered you as a young Man, with specious Honors, which had
nothing in them but show; but after they had examples of your Gallantry and
Moderation, by the refusal of those Honors offered you by your Army, they were
startled, and gave you a power equal to us, that they might by this means draw
out of your disposal two excellent Legions, out of hopes that one of you being
defeated, the other which remained would not be^ considerable: and thus
Caesar's Party being ruined, Pompey's might be re-established. This was the
substance of their thoughts. As for Hirtius and my self we had followed their
order till we could have abated the pride of Anthony; but after having overcome
him, designed to reconcile him with you, that we might pay to Caesar's memory
this testimony of our Friendship and Acknowledgments, by acting what might be
most advantageous to his Party. It was not convenient till now to impart this
design to you; but now since Anthony is defeated, Hirtius dead, and I a dying,
I thought at time to discover it to you. I demand not that after my death you
should think your self obliged to me; but since your Actions make it known that
you are born under fortunate Stars, I tell it you, that you may bethink your
self what you have to do, and that you may know what Hirtius and I designed to
do for you, and what we have been constrained to do against you. It is
therefore just to restore to you that Army you gave up to us; and I now restore
it to you. As for the new raised Forces, if you can gain them to serve you, I
will give them to you: but if either the Soldiers are too fearful of the
Senate, because their Officers have in charge to observe us; or that you think
you either may be blamed, or stand in no need of them, Torquatus our Treasurer
shall take them in charge.

After having said these words, and delivered over the new Forces to the
Treasurer or Quaestor, he died. The Quaestor by the Senates order delivered
them over to Decimus, Caesar solemnized magnificent Funerals for Hirtius and
Pansa, and sent their Bodies with pomp to Rome to be buried.

Italy, things passed thus in Syria and Macedon, C. Caesar passing through
Syria, and having already in his thoughts the War against Parthia, had left in
this Province a Legion which he had given in charge to Cecilius Bassus, as
Lieutenant to Sextus Julius his Kinsman, yet very young, and who going to take
his pleasure in the Country, made his Soldiers accompany him against all
decency and order, Bassus having one day reproved him, he reviled him; and at
another time having sent for Bassus, because he came not so soon as he
expected, he gave order to bring him by force. This Command having raised a
Tumult, Blows ensued, and the Soldiers no longer able to endure Julius his
Insolence, slew him with their Javelins. They at that very moment repented the
act, being afraid of Caesar; wherefore they immediately swore one to another,
that if pardon and security for their persons were denied them, they would
defend each other to the death; they likewise forced Bassus to be of the
Conspiracy; and having raised another Legion, exercised them according to the
Roman Discipline. Thus write some concerning Bassus. But Libo says, that
having born Arms under Pompey, after his death he retired into Tire, where he
remained some time as a private Man, and where at last by his Money gaining
some Legionary Soldiers, he prevailed with them after they had slain Sextus to
choose him for their Captain. However it were, Sextus Murcus haing been sent by
Caesar against them, was repulsed, till such time as he called to his
assistance Minutius Crispus with three Legions brought by him out of Bithynia,
where he commanded. These had now blocked up those two Legions, when Cassius
coming unexpectedly received them forthwith into his Service; and at the same
time those six Legions that besieged them, voluntarily submitting to him,
acknowledged him for Proconsul; for, as we have said before, the Senate had
ordained by Decree that all the Soldiers of those Provinces should obey Cassius
and Brutus, some time before Dolobella had sent Allienus into Egypt, from
whence he was leading back four Legions, the Remains of the Defeats of Pompey
and Crassus, or of those which remained in the Service of Cleopatra when Caesar
left Egypt. Cassius surprising him in Palestine, forced him to take his Party;
for he durst not resist eight Legions with four; so that Cassius beheld
himself, beyond all imagination, Master of twelve Legions, besieged and forced
Dolobella, who returning out of Asia with two Legions, was received as a Friend
into the City of Laodicea; news, which the Senate received with joy. As for
what concerned Macedon, Caius, Brother to Anthony, disputed that Government
against Brutus with one only Legion; and because he was not equal in numbers to
Brutus, he laid an ambush for him, which Brutus escaping, laid another in his
turn, wherein Caius falling with all his People, he did them no displeasure;
but on the contrary, commanded his Soldiers to salute them, and though they
would neither return nor accept the Salute, yet he let them go without any
farther injury. After which, taking a turn with his Army by other ways, he
surprised them again among the Straits, where instead of falling on, he a
second time saluted them: whereupon admiring this Man's goodness and clemency
to his Fellow Citizens, they returned the Salute, and joined with him, Caius
likewise embraced his Party, and Brutus treated him with much Honor, till
after being convicted of having several times solicited the Army to revolt, he
put him to death. Thus Brutus had raised his Forces to six Legions, besides two
that by praising the Macedonians he raised in Macedon, whom he learned to
exercise according to the Discipline of the Romans.

Thus went Affairs in Syria and Macedon. Mean while in Italy, Caesar being
Anthony was given to Decimus, dissembling his discontent, demanded the Honor
of Triumph, and being disdainfully refused by the Senate, as a thing
disconsonant with his age, and fearing, that after Anthony were absolutely
defeated, they would treat him more scornfully, he designed a reconciliation
with him, according to the advice given him by the dying Pansa. To bring this
about he treated favorably all the Prisoners he had in his Army, as well
Officers as Soldiers, received into his service such as were willing to be
entertained, and sent away the rest, that he might not appear to have an
irreconcilable hatred. After which encamping near Ventidius, Anthony's Friend,
who had only three Legions, he was content to fright him; but making no hostile
attempt, gave him either free leave to join with him, or go in safety to find
out his General, on condition that he would tell him from him, that he knew not
what was good both for the one and the other, which Ventidius accepting, marched
forward to find out Anthony. Another of his Captains called Decius, who had
been taken Prisoner before Modena, remaining still with Caesar, who held him in
good esteem he was permitted to return to Anthony if he desired it, and the
Captain asking him what thoughts he had of Anthony; he made answer, he had
already given sufficient testimonies of them to persons capable to judge of
Affairs, and for others 'twas in vain to give any more. After having done these
things which might easily make appear his inclinations to Anthony, he writ to
Lepidus and Asinius, directly complaining against the affronts he had received
from the Senate, by what they had done in strengthening against him the
Murderers of his Father, that they for their parts might have reason to fear,
lest in favor of Pompey's Faction they should one after another persecute
them, as now they did Anthony, who through imprudence and want of foresight was
fallen into misfortune: wherefore he counseled them to seem in appearance to
submit to the Senate, but really to unite themselves one to the other for their
common security, whilst yet it was in their power, and to reprove Anthony for
the fault by him committed in not doing it. In short, that they ought to
imitate the Legionary Soldiers, who disband not as soon as the War is done, for
fear of exposing themselves to the Ambushes of their Enemies, and had rather be
all together led to some Colony, than return every Man to his own Country. Mean
while* Sickness seized on the Army which had been shut up with Decimus in
Modena, the most part of the Soldiers glutting themselves too much after so
long a Famine, surfeited, and the new raised Men for want of Exercise were not
fit for service: yet Plancus being joined to them with what force he had,
Decimus wrote to the Senate, that Anthony not well digesting what he had
already tasted of the War, hid himself, but that at length he would fall into
his hands. It Is incredible how Pompey's Party were rejoiced at this news: they
made loud outcryes that now their Country had indeed recovered their Liberty,
and every one offered Sacrifices, and ten Commissioners were nominated to take
account of Anthony's Administration, which was only a pretense to cancel all
that Caesar had ordained; for Anthony had done nothing, or very little of
himself, acting always according to Caesar's Memoirs. The Fathers knew it well
enough, but having already in some occasion given judgment without any respect
to Caesar's doings, they thought at this time absolutely to annul all that ever
he had done or decreed, to which end the ten Commissioners presently published
an Ordinance, by which all persons that had received any thing from Anthony,
were enjoined to bring it in, in writing, under pain of exemplary punishment.
At length some of Pompey's Party demanded the Consulate for the rest of the
year, in the places of Hirtius and Pansa. And Caesar had a great desire to it,
he solicited not the Senate about it, but wrote to Cicero, praying him to
endeavor that they might be Colleagues in the Dignity, and that he would leave
to him the Administration of all Affairs, as being most capable, by reason of
his long experience, and would content himself with the Quality, that he might
with more Honor lay down Arms, having before to that end demanded Triumph.
Cicero who loved Command, was tickled with this proposition. He therefore told
the Fathers, that having understood they consulted an Accommodation between the
Governors of the Province, his advice was, that they should by some good
Office appease a Man they had offended, and who was at the Head of a powerful
Army, that for his part he thought it better, that before the age allowed by
the Laws, they should nominate him to a charge to be exercised in the City,
than behold him in the Field at the Head of an Army, capable to revenge
himself: nevertheless, that he might act nothing contrary to the authority of
the Senate, he exhorted them to give him for Colleague some aged and prudent
person to serve as a Guide to his youth. The whole Senate laughed at Cicero's
ambition, but above all, the Kindred of the Conspirators opposed him, out of
the fear they had, lest if Caesar obtained the Consulate, he should study
revenge; insomuch that the Assembly was no more summoned, because a lawful one
could not be called for sundry reasons.

Anthony having crossed the Alps by consent of Culeo, who guarded the passage
by order of Lepidus, came and lodged his Army on a River side by him, without
fortifying his Camp; but as one Friend sits down by another there several times
their People went and came from one to the other, Anthony put Lepidus in mind
of their Friendship, of what he had done for him, and advised to beware lest
all those who had been of Caesar's Party were not oppressed one after another,
and Lepidus excused himself upon the Orders of the Senate, which commanded him
to make War, though it would trouble him to come to extremities with him. But
Lepidus his Soldiers, whether they had a respect for Anthony, or else perceived
some Negotiations, or otherwise took delight to see that unfortified Camp,
mixed with those of Anthony, at first privately, and at last publicly, as
going to see their Countrymen, and sometime Comrades: in vain did their
Officers forbid it. And to the end they might more easily converse together,
they made a Bridge of Boats over the River; and the tenth Legion which had
formerly been commanded by Anthony; carried him from Lepidus his Camp all
things necessary. Laterensis one of the most considerable Senators perceiving
it, gave notice to Lepidus, and when he would believe nothing of it, desired
him to divide his Army, and send one part ot any place where he might feign
employment for them, and others elsewhere, thereby to try the faith or
perfidiousness of his Soldiers. Thereupon he drew his Forces into three Bodies,
and commanded them to depart by night to go and convoy the Quaestors, who were
not far off. But they about the third Watch arming themselves as for a March,
seized on the Trenches, and went and opened the Gates to Anthony. He run
directly to the Generals Tent, led by Lepidus's Soldiers, crying out, that he
should make peace, and pardon his miserable Fellow Citizens. Upon the noise
hereof he leaps out of Bed, and quite unready runs to meet them, promising to
do what they would have him, and embracing Anthony, craved pardon for what he
had been forced to do. Nay, some say he fell on his Knees to Anthony: but that
he was so base and cowardly, all Authors do not affirm: and in my opinion it
seems scarce credible, for he had as yet committed no act of Hostility against
Anthony, which might occasion him to be so fearful. Thus Anthony became more
powerful and more formidable to his Enemies than ever he had been before; for
besides the Forces brought from Modena, among which he had exeellent Horse,
Ventidius had by the way joined with him with other three Legions, and now
Lepidus with seven more, furnished with light armed Foot, Horse, and a
considerable train, all which went in Lepidus's name; but indeed Anthony was
Master of them. This news having reached the City, wrought in a moment a
wonderful change. Those who despised him before now feared him, and they who
feared before, began now to take heart, with scorn they tore down the
Ordinances of the Commissaries, fixed in the public places, and prorogued to a
farther time the Assembly for election of Consuls. The Senate most heavily
perplexed with fear, lest Caesar should make an Accommodation with Anthony,
deputed two of their Body, Lucius and Pansa to Brutus and Cassius, to assist
them in what they could, under pretense of overlooking the Estate of Greece: of
the three Legions Sextus had in Africa they sent for two over, and gave the
other to Cornificius, who commanded in a part of that Province, and was firm to
the Senates interests, though the Senate were jealous of these Forces, which
they knew well had served under Caesar: but necessity forced the Fathers to
this, as well as most shamefully to give Caesar joint Command with Decimus of
the War against Anthony, because they were afraid he should join with Anthony.

But Caesar did all he could to incense his Soldiers against the Senate, as
Rome to demand that Money, they gave Commission to their Centurions. The Senate
knew well he had set them on, and therefore said they would give an answer by
other Commissioners of their own. And indeed they sent them with orders to
address themselves to Anthony's two Legions, without speaking to Caesar, and to
advise them not to place their hopes upon one man alone, but rather rely on the
power of the Senate, which was immortal, and to march over to Decimus, where
they should find the rest of their Money; for to the end they might the more
easily speak to them, they had brought half the Money, and deputed ten
Commissioners to distribute it, without so much as naming Caesar for the
Eleventh: but the Legions refusing to hear the Deputies, unless Caesar were
present, they went away without doing any thing. Hereupon Caesar thinking it no
longer fit to delay, or to declare his mind by others, assembled the Army to
speak to them himself, where after having related all the injustices of the
Senate, he told them that all was done tended only to the ruin of Caesar's
Party one after another, that they should beware of fighting for their Enemies,
or suffering themselves to be engaged in endless Wars, wherein they employed
them only, that they might perish in Fight, or be ruined by Seditions, which
was the reason why after they had all served together at Modena, they offered
reward only to two Legions, that they might raise a jealousoe and division
amongst them.

The Oration of Caesar to his Army.
YOu know, ( said he) why they have of late made War upon Anthony, in what
manner those of Pompey's Faction have in the city treated such as have received
kindnesses from my Father; and pray judge after that whether they will let you
enjoy the Lands and Money he gave you, or can there be any security for my
person, so long as the Kindred of the Murderers are so powerful in the Senate.
As for my part I will endure with patience whatever can happen to me; for it is
a Glory for me to suffer for my Father; but I am troubled for your concerns,
you that for my interest and my Father's Honor daily expose your selves to so
many dangers: you had an evidence I had then no ambition, when I refused the
Office of Praetor offered by you; but now there is but one only way to preserve
us all. It is by your means I may obtain the Consulate, then will be confirmed
to you the benefits received from my Father, then will be given you Colonies
and other rewards due to you; and I will proceed in judgment against the
Murderers, and dispense with you from going to any other Wars.

These Words were attended with a general Acclamation of the whole Army, who
presently deputed their Centurions to Rome, to demand the Consulate for Caesar.
The Senate objecting that he was not of age, required by Law, they answered (as
they were prepared) that Corvinus was formerly created Consul as young as he,
and Scipio after him, who as young as they were had both done signal service
for their Country. They alleged likewise the fresher examples of Pompey and
Dolobella; besides that a Decree had already passed permitting the same Caesar
to demand the Consulate ten years before the appointed age. Whilst the
Centurions resolutely offered these reasons, some of the Senators offended at
the freedom of their speech, interrupted them, by saying they talked too high
for People of their Quality, which being reported to the Army, so highly
incensed the Soldiers, that they desired to be led directly to the City, where
themselves holding the Assembly they would make Caesar's Son Consul, to whom at
the same instant they gave a thousand praises. Caesar seeing them thus
disposed, presently drawing together his Army, raises the Camp with eight
Legions, good Horse, and all other things necessary, passes the Rubicon that
divides Gaul from Italy, from whence formerly his Father had begun the Civil
War. There he divides his Army into two Bodies, leaving one in the Rear to
follow him at leisure, and at the Head of the other who were all chosen Men,
marching by great journies directly toward Rome, that he might surprise his
Enemies before they could be prepared. Having advice by the way, that upon the
same Road Commissioners sent by the Senate with the Soldiers Money were coming
to meet him, he was jealous lest any of his Men might be tempted by this
reward, wherefore he privately sent Scouts toward them, who so terrified them,
that away they fled with their Money. The news of his approach filled all the
City with Tumult and Terror; some run through the Streets in disorder, others
carried away their Wives, Children, and choicest Goods into the Country, or to
the strongest places of the City. For it not being certainly known if he only
demanded the Consulate, upon the rumor that he came in a hostile manner at the
Head of an angry Army, every thing appeared dreadful to them. Especially in the
Senate the consternation was great, because they had not at present any Army to
defend them. Some (as it happens ever in like Allarms) accused others, either
that they had injuriously taken from him the Legions they had given him to make
War upon Anthony, or that they had denied him the Triumph due to him, or that
out of envy to him, when they sent the ten Commissioners to pay the Army, they
had not so much as named him for the eleventh, or that they had not paid the
Money promised the Soldiers, either not in time, or at least not in full, and
thereby had given them cause to revolt. But that which they most of all blamed,
was the disobliging Caesar in an ill Conjuncture, Brutus and Cassius being at a
great distance, and as yet but meanly prepared, and Anthony and Lepidus both at
hand, and ready to fall upon the City, who, if they entertained but the
thoughts of making an Accommodation with Caesar, might complete its ruin.
Cicero himself, who appeared most officious in all other matters, now showed
not his Head: insomuch that in a moment the face of all things was so utterly
changed, that instead of two thousand five hundred Drams offered to every
Soldier, it was ordered by Decree of the Senate, that five thousand should be
paid them, not for two Legions only, but for eight, of which Caesar himself
should have the distribution, and the ten Commissioners. As for Caesar, though
he were absent, they gave him the Consulate, and dispatched away Commissioners
post to carry him the news of it.

But scarcely were they got out of the City when the Senate repented, Plancus
and Decimus to relieve the City, and in the mean time fight to the last gasp,
rather than submit to servitude without defending themselves. They alleged
hereupon example of things which their Predecessors had undertaken, executed,
and suffered, to maintain their Liberty; and when they saw the two Legions they
had sent for out of Africa arrive at the Port that very day, they thought the
Gods concerned themselves in their defense; insomuch that they confirmed
themselves in their repentance, and Cicero beginning to appear, the Decree was
absolutely changed. They made a Roll of all the youth capable to bear Arms, to
join with the two Legions newly come from Africa, a thousand Horse, and another
Legion which Pansa had left them, they gave Quarters to all these Troops, one
part guarded the Ianiculum with the Riches there stored up, another the Bridge
over Tiber, under the Command of the Pretors of the City, and others kept
within the Port Boats and Vessels laden with Money, ready, if necessity
required, to fly toward the River, and gain the Sea, making these
preparations with a countenance of defending themselves, they hoped Caesar
might take his turn to be in fear, or that they should persuade him to come,
and demand the Consulate without bringing his Army, or that at last they should
repulse him by force, and that the question being the preservation of common
liberty, all contrary Parties might unite. But when after having made a long
search both publicly and privately for Caesar's Mother and Sister, and not
finding them, their fears returned, beholding themselves robbed of such mighty
Hostages, it being unlikely that those of Caesar's Party would join with them
in the common defense, who had so well concealed his best Friends. Whilst
C^esar was yet in conference with the Deputies, came other to tell him, that
the Senate had changed their resolution; so that the first returned laden with
shame and confusion, and he with an Army incensed at these proceedings, marched
toward the City, troubled for his Mother and his Sister, and fearful lest any
mischief should befall them. He sent before some Horsemen to assure the People,
who trembled for fear; and to the great astonishment of all the world came and
encamped over against Mount Quirinal, whilst none durst either oppose or hinder
him. At his arrival likewise a sudden change arose in the minds of Men, the
Nobility went in throngs to do him reverence, and the People ran by whole
companies to welcome the Soldiers, who for their parts committed no more
disorders, than in time of the profoundest peace. On the morrow leaving his
Army in that place, he set forward toward Rome with an indifferent Train,
which increased infinitely as he went, by the concourse of multitudes of
persons, who came from all parts to complement him, and to pay him all the
testimonies of respect and submission possible. His Mother and Sister who had
taken Sanctuary among the Vestals, received him with extreme joy in the Temple
of that Goddess; and the three Legions that were in the City, without taking
notice of their Officers, sent their Deputies, and submitted themselves to him,
and after them the Officers themselves made their composition, and swore
fidelity to them, save only Cornutus, who slew himself. Cicero understanding
how things went by the intermission of Caesar's Friends, had leave to see him,
who made an Oration to him, praising him that he demanded the Consulate,
concerning which he had before made a proposition to the Fathers, to all which
he in Raillery answered, That he was the last of his Friends that came to see
him. The night following a rumor was raised, that the Legion of Mars, together
with the fourth were coming toward the City to seize it by suprise, which the
Pretors and Senate too easily believed: and though Caesar's Army was all at
hand, they imagined that they alone with the principal Citizens could for some
time make resistance till other Forces from elsewhere might come to their
relief: so that very night they sent away Acilius Crassus to go and raise Men
in the Country of Picenum, and gave order to Apuleius one of the Tribunes to go
through the City, and declare this news to the People; and at the same instant
assembled themselves in the Palace, where Cicero received them at the Gate; but
when the report proved false, fled away in his Litter out of the City: Caesar
laughed at their weakness, and caused his Army to advance into the Campus
Martius, yet offered no affront to the Pretors, not so much as to Crassus, who
was going to raise Men against him, though brought to him disguised in the
Habit of a Slave, but freely pardoned all, that he might beget in the Citizens
an opinion of his Clemency. In the mean time he caused to be brought to him all
the public Treasure that was in the Ianiculum, or elsewhere, of which
according to Decree of the Senate passed before by the advice of Cicero, he
distributed to each Soldier two thousand five hundred Drams, promising to be
accountable for the rest, and that done he went out of the City, expecting till
the day for election of Consuls.

In conclusion, he was nominated to that Dignity, and with him (according to
his desire) Quintus Pedius, who had given him his part of the Inheritance left
by Caesar. He entered Rome as Consul, and offered the Sacrifices accustomary
upon such occasions, during which there appeared over the City twelve Vultures,
in like manner, as it is said, there appeared to Romulus when he founded it.
After having performed these Sacrifices, he declared himself Son of Caesar in
the Assembly of the Tribes, that he might confirm his Adoption by the People;
for the People are divided into Tribes in Rome, in the same manner as the
Phratrians among the Greeks. Now this formality observed in the Adoptions of
those who have no Father, gives them the same advantages and the same right
that natural Children have in respect to the Kindred and The Patron and Son of
the Patron was Heir to the Freed Man.
Freed Men of their Fathers; wherefore because Caesar besides the great Wealth
he left, had many Freed Men very rich, I am of the mind, that the Son not
content with his first Adoption, thought the second necessary. He revoked
likewise the Decree by which Dolobella was declared Enemy, and permitted all
persons whatsoever to become parties against those who were guilty of his
Father's Murder. There presently appeared great numbers of Caesar's Friends,
who formed their accusations not only against those who had an immediate hand
in the Action, but likewise against many who were privy to the plot, but were
not in Rome when it was executed, nor were otherwise guilty, than in not
discovering it. Having all been publicly summoned to appear on the same day,
they were condemned by default, Caesar sitting in Judgment, and not one of the
Judges arguing for their Discharge, except one of the most considerable, to
whom nothing was said at present, but not long after he was proscribed with
many others. About the same time one of the Pretors of the City named Quintus
Gallius, Brother of Marcus Gallius, who was with Anthony, having obtained from
Caesar the Government of Africa, and after standing convict of an Attempt
against the life of his Benefactor, was deposed from his Charge, by his
Brethren in Office, the People plundered his House, and the Senate condemned
him to death. However, Caesar commanded him to go and find out his Brother, and
he embarquing himself to that purpose, was never seen more. After these
Exploits Caesar's whole thoughts were employed in reconciling himself with
Anthony, because he certainly knew that Brutus and Cassius had twenty Legions,
so that standing in need of him, he went out of the City, and by small Journies
marched toward the Ionian Sea, that he might find out how the Senate stood
affected. For in the absence of Caesar, Pedius advised the Fathers to an
Accommodation with Anthony and Lepidus before the Animosities that were between
the Parties became irreconcilable. They saw well such an Accommodation was
neither for theirs, nor their Countries Advantage, and that by it Caesar only
aimed at strengthening himself against Cassius and Brutus: yet they beheld
themselves in a necessity to consent; wherefore they repealed the Decrees by
which Anthony and Lepidus with their Armies had been declared Enemies, and sent
them assurances of their good will. Caesar wrote Letters of Congratulation to
the Senate, and sent to Anthony, that if he stood in need of his Arms against
Decimus, he was ready to serve him: and Anthony returned Answer, tha^ he made
War against Decimus as a Traitor to Caesar, and against Plancus as an Enemy to
Anthony; and therefore if he pleased, he would join Forces with him. After the
mutual sending and reception of the Letters, as Anthony pursued Decimus,
Asinius Pollio came and joined with him with two Legions, and by his
intercession Plancus reconciled with Anthony brought him three more; so that he
became mighty powerful. As for Decimus he still had ten Legions, four whereof
composed of experienced Soldiers, were yet sick after the Famine they had
undergone in Modena, and six were newly levied, neither trained, nor inured to
hardship; wherefore thinking it imprudence to bring them to action, he resolved
to retreat to Brutus in Macedon, and took his March not by the Cisalpine Gaul,
but by Ravenna or Aquileia, and yet at last because Caesar was to come into
those Quarters, he attempted a longer and more incommodious March by going over
the Rhine to cross a Country inhabited by Barbarians. The difficulty of this
unknown way at first sight so affrighted his new Forces, that they left him,
and submitted to Caesar, and not long after the four old Legions went over to
Anthony, with all the rest of his Forces, except only the French Horse designed
for his Life Guard. Reduced to this small number, he gave license to all that
had yet a mind to depart, making them some present of Money, and with three
hundred Horse only came to the Banks of the Rhine, but by reason of the
difficulty of passing the River, they by little and little forsook him, except
only ten, with whom, habited after the fashion of the Gauls, and speaking their
language, he began again to travel, and without fetching so great a compass,
took the Road to Aquileia, where he thought he might pass unknown, because of
his slender Train. In the way being taken by Thieves, and bound, he asked them
how they called the Lord of that Country; and when he understood it was
Camillus, for whom he had done some services, he entreated them to carry him
before him. When Camillus saw him, he received him with much civility before
the People, sharply reproving those that brought him bound, that through
ignorance they had affronted so great a Man, but in private he gave advice to
Anthony, who had so much compassion of his fortune, that he would not see him.
However, he sent to Camillus for his Head, which after having viewed, he gave
to some of his People to be buried. Thus ended Decimus, who had been General of
the Horse to Caesar, Governor of the Transalpine Gaul under him, designed by
him for Consul the year following, and with it provided of the Government of
the Cisalpine Gaul. He was the second that perished for murdering Caesar. And
about the same time Minutius Basilius, who was likewise of the Conspiracy, was
slain by his Slaves for making some of them Eunuchs by way of punishment.

The End of the Third Book of the Civil Wars of Rome.
APPIAN OF ALEXANDRIA, HIS HISTORY OF THE Civil Wars OF ROME.
PART II.
BOOK IV.
The Argument of this Book.
I. THe Author's Design in this Book: The Accommodation of Caesar, Anthony and
Lepidus. II. Dismal Presages of future Miseri^^: Pedius begins the
Proscriptions; and Caesar, Anthony and Lepidus are named Triumvirs. III. A Copy
of the Edict of Proscription. IV. The general Cruelties committed in the
Execution of it. V. Many Particularities of such as suffered. VI. The Triumph
of Lepidus: Proscription of the Women, and Hortensia's Oration for her Sex.
VII. Particulars of several escaped the Proscription. VIII. Defeat of
Cornificius, Lelius and Ventidius in Lybia, by Sextus Caesar's Lieutenants. IX.
Cassius besieges and takes Dolobella in Laodicea, and does many other things in
Syria. X. Cassius about to besiege Rhodes, Archelaus endeavors to dissuade
him. XI. Cassius answers him, and besieges and takes Rhodes. XII. Brutus
besieges the Xantiens, and takes the City. XIII. After which Patara yields to
him; and Murcus, who sides with him, is besieged by Anthony near Brundusium.
XIV. Sex. Pompey coming into Sicily, fights at Sea against Salvidienus with
equal Advantage. XV. Murcus and Domitius AEnobarbus sieze on the Passage of the
Ionian Sea; and Ciditius and Norbanus, Lieutenants to Caesar and Anthony, march
by Land against Cassius and Brutus. XVI. Brutus and Cassius having drawn
together their Army; Cassius makes an Oration to them. XVII. Brutus and Cassius
go and encamp near Philippi. XVIII. Anthony and Caesar encamp hard by them;
they engage; Brutus gets the better, but Cassius is worsted. XIX. The Death of
Cassius: Murcus and Aenobarbus defeat Domitius Calvinus. XX. Brutus Speech to
his Army, to oblige them to temporize; and Anthony's, to encourage his to the
Battle. XXI. Brutus's Army force him to fight. XXII. The Battle: Brutus
defeated. XXIII. The Death of Brutus: Praises of Brutus and Cassius; and End of
this Book.

HAving in the former Book declared how two of Caesar's Murderers Trebonius in
Asia, and Decimus in Gaul; in this we shall set forth how Brutus and Cassius,
the principal Authors of the Conspiracy, were punished. Men, that were Masters
of all the Provinces from Syria to Macedon, who commanded mighty Armies both by
Sea and Land; having more than twenty Legions, great number of Shipping, and
abundance of Money. And this was done at a time when Proscriptiptions were
dreadful at Rome; and that as many proscribed Persons as could be found were
miserably put to death. So that the like had never been seen or known among all
the Tumults and Wars of the Grecians, nor yet among those of the Romans, if you
except the time of Sylla, who was the first proscribed his Enemies: for Marius
only slew such as fell into his Hands; whereas Sylla not only permitted any
that would to slay those he had proscribed, but proposed Rewards to the
Murderers, and decreed Punishments against any durst give succor to a
proscribed Person. But of all those things we have discoursed in writing what
passed in the time of Marius and Sylla; let us proceed to our order of History.

Caesar being reconciled to Anthony, it was determined to have a Conference
together. The place designed for it was near Modena, in a little flat Island of
the River Labinia: whither they came with each five Legions; which taking their
Stands on each side the River, the two Generals, accompanied only by three
hundred Men each, advanced to the Bridges that went over the Streams. Lepidus,
who was before gone into the Island to see that there were no Ambuscade, having
made them the Signal by showing his Coat-Armor, they left all their Train at
the Bridges; and advancing on to the highest part of the Island, they three sat
down; Caesar in the middle, because of his Quality of Consul. After two whole
Days Conference they came to this Result: That Caesar should for the rest of
the Year quit the Consulate to Ventidius: That to put a stop to the Civil Wars
there should be created a new Office, which Anthony, Lepidus and Caesar should
exercise jointly for five Years, with the same Power as the Consuls (for they
would not make use of the name of Dictator, perhaps because of the Law Anthony
had so lately made to abolish the Dictatorship.) That as soon as they had taken
Possession of this new Dignity, they should design for five Years the Annual
Officers of the City. That the Provinces should be parted among them: Anthony
should have all the Gauls, except only that confining upon the Pyrenean
Mountains, called Ancient Gaul; which, together with Spain, should remain to
Lepidus; and that Caesar should take Africa, with Sicily, Sardinia, and all the
other adjacent Isles. In this Division of the Roman Empire among themselves,
they forbore sharing the other Provinces, because Brutus and Cassius yet held
them. They agreed therefore together, that Anthony and Caesar should make War
upon them: That Lepidus, designed Consul for the Year following, should remain
in the City, that he might provide them of all things necessary; and should
govern Spain by his Lieutenants: That of the ten Legions that composed his
Army, he should keep three for the Defense of the City, and give three to
Caesar and four to Anthony; by which means each of them would have twenty
Legions. And that they might encourage the Soldiers, besides the Recompense
usually referred till after the Victory, and other Donatives; they assigned
them for Colonies eighteen of the best Cities of Italy, as well for the beauty
of the Buildings, as Fertility and Riches of the adjacent Soil, whose Houses
and Fields they set out amongst them, as it is usual to divide a conquered
Country. The chief of these were Capua, Rhegium, Venosa, Beneventum, Luceria,
Rimini. Thus was the best part of Italy destined a Recompense to the Soldiers.
They resolved likewise that before all things else they would rid themselves of
their particular Enemies, lest they should be a hindrance to their Designs when
they were gone out of the City. These things being all agreed to, and put in
writing, Caesar as Consul, read them publicly before all the Forces (except
only that concerning the Proscriptions, which he kept secret) who received them
all with a general Acclamation; and forthwith both Armies saluted each other in
token of Reconciliation.

Rome. All the Dogs of the City howled like Wolves, which is accounted an
unhappy Presage. The Wolves, which do not usually come into Cities, came now
into the Great Place. An Ox spoke with a Man's voice. A Child spoke as soon as
it was born. The Statues of the Gods sweated, some Water, and some Blood. The
cries of Men, clattering of Arms, and running of Horses were heard; yet not
seen. Many frightful Signs appeared about the Sun. It rained Stones. Thunder
fell upon several Temples, and some of the very images of the Gods were
stricken. Hereupon the Senate sent for Divines out of Tuscany; the eldest of
which told them, that the Royalty should be re-established, and they all Slaves
but only He: and therewith stopping his Mouth, held his Breath so long, till he
fell down dead in the place. This Triumvirate then after their Agreement made,
began to contrive among themselves the Roll of the Proscribed; wherein they
inserted all those whose too great power they were jealous of, and all their
particular Enemies; abandoning their own Friends and Relations to one another,
so they might by that means be revenged on those they hated. And this they did,
not only at present, but even afterward; for they proscribed an infinite
number one after another, either out of some old Grudge, or some light^
Offense, or for being Friends* to their Enemies, or Enemies to their Friends or
because they were rich. And indeed they stood in need of store of Money for the
War, Brutus and Cassius having received abundance from the T^ibutes of Asia,
besides what those Kings and Potentates furnished them with; whereas these had
none to receive, but only out of Europe and Italy, already drained dry by
Exactions and Wars. In so much, that to raise Money, there was no Person to the
most miserable of the People, without excepting the very Women, who suffered
not a thousand Violences from the Tax-Gatherers, if they were but informed they
had any thing. There were some likewise proscribed for the beauty of their
Houses or Gardens. In short, the Roll of the Proscribed, with Confiscation of
Goods, amounted to three hundred Senators, and two thousand Roman Knights;
among whom some were Brethren and Uncles to the Triumvirs, and Officers that
had served in their Armies for having displeased the Generals or their
Lieutenants. They deferred the rest of the Proscription till such time as they
came to the City; and in the mean time resolved to begin the Execution by
twelve (or as some say) by seventeen of the Principal, among whom was Cicero.
To this purpose they sent some of their People, who forthwith slew four whom
they found either at their Tables or in the Streets. The others were sought for
in Temples and Houses; in so much, that all that Night there was a great
Tumult: People running up and down the City with such cryings and howlings, as
if the Enemy had been in the midst of them; for hearing of some being taken,
and not knowing of any Person yet proscribed, every Man thought the next he met
sought for him. So that in a general Despair some disposed themselves to set
fire, either to their own Houses, or the Public Buildings, that before they
died they might do something worthy of Memory: And they had done it if the
Consul Pedius, running about to all parts, had not exhorted them to be in good
hopes, and to expect till Day gave better knowledge of the Cause of the
Disorder. Morning being come, without staying for the Triumvirs Orders, he
proscribed those seventeen Men as the only Authors of Intestine Mischiefs, and
the only Men condemned; promising Security to all others, because he knew not
what had been agreed upon; and after dyed of a Distemper caused by the too much
labor undergone that Night. Three days following arrived one after another,
Caesar, Anthony and Lepidus, each with his Regiment of Guards and one Legion;
and immediately the City was filled with armed Men, and Courts of Guards placed
in the most convenient Stations. Then were the People assembled, and Publius
Titius the Tribune proposed the Law for Creation of the Triumvirate; to which
he nominated Lepidus, Anthony and Caesar to govern the Commonwealth for five
Years, with the same Power the Consuls had (this is what the Greeks call
Harmostates, and the Lacedaemonians Reformers) and without giving the People
time to deliberate, or to appoint a Day for holding another Assembly, the Law
was at that instant ratified. The Night following besides the seventeen before
there were found one hundred and thirty more, whose Names were fixed up in
diverse places of the City; soon after one hundred and fifty others were added;
and at last the Roll was daily augmented with names of newly condemned People,
or of those who had been slain by mistake, that they might not be thought to be
killed without Cause. Those likewise who killed any proscribed Persons were
commanded to bring their Heads to the Triumvirs; and to this purpose Rewards
were decreed them, to the Free Men Money, and to Slaves Freedom and Money.
Nothing was barred against those that sought for them, because it was forbid
under the like pain, either to receive them, or conceal them, or deny entrance
into the House to any that sought after them, with a like Reward to any gave
Information of all these things.

The Ordinance for Proscription was conceived in these Terms.

MARCUS LEPIDUS, MARCUS ANTONIUS AND OCTAVIUS AUGUSTUS Deputed for the
Reformation and Re-Establishent Of the COMMONWEALTH, To the PEOPLE of ROME.
IF by an extraordinary Infidelity wicked Men who had received Caesar; who
after having reduced them under his Power, saved them, honored them with his
Friendship, and loaded them with Honors, Favors and Dignities; we had not
been forced to come to Extremities to revenge our selves of the Injuries they
have done us, in declaring us Enemies to our Country. But now that after so
many Ambushes laid for us, and the Murder committed on the Person of Caesar, we
are bound to believe that their Malice cannot be overcome by fair means, we
have chose rather to prevent our Enemies, than to wait till they destroy us.
Wherefore, whoever shall consider in what manner they have treated Caesar, with
the Injuries that we have suffered, will not find in our proceeding either
Passion, Injustice or Cruelty. Since Caesar their General, their High Priest,
who had subdued Nations ever before formidable to the Roman People: Had first
of all crossed an unknown Sea beyond the Columns of Hercules, and opened to the
Romans away to a New World; has been murdered in a Sacred Place, in the midst
of the Palace, in the sight of the Gods, basely stabbed with three and twenty
Wounds of Daggers, by people whose lives he had saved after having made them
Prisoners at War: Nay, some of which he had by Testament made his Heirs. Whilst
instead of punishing this Attempt, others transported by the same hatred, have
made them Governors of Provinces; or else abusing their Power, have seized upon
the Revenues of the Commonwealth, raised Arms against us; calling to their
Assistance Barbarians, perpetual Enemies to this Empire; and burning, sacking
and rasing some Cities under our Obedience, that would not submit to theirs;
and forcing others by threats and terror to take Arms against us and their
Country. Some of these we have already punished, and by God's Assistance you
shall see us punish others. But because after those great things we have done
for the security of Spain, Gaul, and the Heart of the Republic, there yet
remains a troublesome Affair, which is the Expedition against Caesar's
Murderers: To effect which we must cross the Sea; being ready, for the Service
of the Public, to carry our Arms into a remote Country, we cannot think it
either secure or advantageous for us to leave behind us our Enemies, who will
not fail to make their best use of our absence, and of the uncertain Success of
War. There may likewise be danger in delay; wherefore we have resolved to
destroy them, since they have begun to persecute us by declaring us Enemies of
our Country. And though neither respect to Gods, nor fear of Men restrained
them from endeavoring to destroy with us so many thousand Citizens, yet will
we not imitate them, nor offend any of the people; nay, nor so much as hold all
those for Enemies who have took part against us, or have disobliged us. We will
assault no person because of his Riches and Dignities, nor put so many to death
as did another who had the same power before us; and who having, as well as we,
undertaken to remedy the Mischiefs caused by Civil War, deserved the Title of
HAPPY, for the happy success of his Enterprises; though it cannot be imagined
he could have so many Enemies as we three. We will therefore only punish such
as are the most criminal, and most guilty of those Mischiefs the Commonwealth
groans under; which will be no less advantageous to you than to our selves: for
as long as our Dissentions last, it will be impossible for you, whilst things
hang between two, not to suffer extraordinarily. Besides, it is convenient to
satisfy the Soldiery offended, that without reason you have declared them
Enemies. And though we could without notice punish those we think worthy of it,
yet we think fit rather to proscribe than to surprise them; which indeed we do
for your sakes, lest the Soldier's anger might transport him against those are
uncondemned, or to destroy others with those whose Names are fixed up in
public places. For these reasons we forbid all persons the receiving into
their Houses any of those whose Names are inserted in the Roll of the
Proscribed, or to conceal or send them to any place of security, or to furnish
them with Money, under pain that all that shall be found convicted of having
secured or relieved them, shall be put themselves into the number of the
Proscribed, without hopes of Pardon. We ordain likewise those who have slain
any of the Proscribed to bring to us their Heads; for each of which he shall be
paid Eight hundred and sev^nty Pounds Sterling.
five and twenty thousand Attick Drams if he be a Free Person brings it; and if
he be a Slave he shall receive Three hundred and twelve Pounds Sterling*
ten thousand, with the same Liberty and Right of Burgessship his Master
enjoyed. We promise likewise the same Reward to all Informers; nor shall the
Name of any receives it be recorded in our Registers, that is may remain secret.

Such was the Ordinance of Proscription made by the Triumvirs. Lepidus Paulus
was the first Proscript. Anthony proscribed the second, and his Uncle Lucius
was the second Proscript; because they had first given their Opinions when they
were declared Enemies of their Country. The third and fourth Proscripts, whose
Names were put in another Table, were the two Consuls designed for the
following Year, Plotius, Brother of Plancus, and Quintus, Father in Law to
Asinus; who were not named with the first only because of their Pre-eminence,
but to strike terror, and make Men lose all hopes of escaping. And indeed,
Thoranius was found among the Proscribed; he who, as it is said, had been
Caesar's Tutor. The Proscription being published, Guards were forthwith placed
at the Gates; and all the Avenues of the City, at the Seaports, and in the
Marshes, and in all places where there was any likelihood an unhappy Man might
shelter himself: Besides, Centurions were commanded abroad, to make search in
the Country, which was done all at an instant; so that both within and without
the City many persons dyed suddenly of several kinds of Deaths. The Streets
were filled with the sad Spectacle of Heads carrying to the Triumvirs, to
receive the Reward; and every step some Person of Quality endeavoring to save
himself, was met shamefully disguised; some running down into Wells, and others
into Privies; some hiding themselves in the tops of the Chimneys, or under the
Tiles, where they durst not utter a sigh or groan; for they stood in more fear
of their Wives, or Children, or Freed Men, or Slaves, or Debtors, or Neighbors
that coveted some of their Goods, than of the Murderers themselves. All private
Grudges were now discovered; and it was a strange change to see the prime Men
of the Senate, Consulars, Pretors, Tribunes, or Pretenders to these Dignities
cast themselves at the feet of their Slaves with tears in their eyes, begging
and caressing them, calling them their Saviors and Patrons; and which is most
deplorable, not be able with all these submissions to obtain the least favor.
The most pernicious Seditions and cruellest of Wars never had any thing in them
so terrible as the Calamities wherewith the City was now affrighted; for in War
and Tumult none but Enemies were feared, and Domestics were confided in;
whereas now Domestics were more dreadful than Enemies, because having no cause
to fear for themselves, as in War or Tumult, from Familiars they became of a
sudden Persecutors; either out of a dissembled hate, or out of hope of
Recompense publicly proposed, or because of some Silver or Gold hid in the
House: So that no person found himself secure in his House, Servants being
ordinarily more sensible of Profit than of the Affection they owe to their
Masters; and though some might be found faithful and kind, yet they durst not
assist a Proscript, nor conceal him, nor so much as stay with him, for fear of
falling into the same misfortune. There was now much more danger than when the
seventeen first proscribed were fallen upon; for then no person being publicly
proscribed, when on a sudden they saw some killed, one Man defended another,
for fear lest the same should happen to him. But after the Proscription was
published, those comprised in it were presently forsaken by all the World; some
that thought themselves secure, having their minds bent on Profit, sought them
to deliver them to the Murderers, that they might have the Reward; others
pillaged the Houses of those that had been killed, and with the present gain
comforted themselves against the Public Misery. The most Prudent and Moderate
surprised at a thing so extraordinary, stood like Men astonished, considering
that, other Cities turmoiled with Divisions were re-established by the Concord
of their Citizens: Whereas the Romans, already afflicted with Civil
Dissentions, completed their Ruin by this Reconciliation. Some were killed
defending themselves; others, who thought themselves not condemned, without any
defense: Some let themselves die with hunger, or hanged, or drowned themselves,
or threw themselves headlong from the tops of Houses, or cast themselves into
the Fire, or run to meet their Murderers: Others again sought to protract the
time; and either hid themselves, or begged shamefully, or fled, or offered
Money to save their Lives. Many likewise were slain contrary to the intention
of the Triumvirs, either by mistake, or out of some particular grudge; but the
Bodies of the Proscripts might be known from the others, because they wanted
the Head, which was cut off, and carried before the Tribunal for Orations,
where they paid the Reward. On the other side, wonderful Examples were to be
seen of the Affection of Wives, Children, Brethren and Slaves; who found out a
thousand inventions to save their Husbands, Fathers, Brethren or Masters; dyed
with them when they were discovered, or killed themselves upon those Bodies
they were not able to defend. Of those that escaped the Proscription, some,
pursued by their ill fortune, perished by Shipwreck; others saved beyond all
probability, came afterward to exercise Dignities in the City, to have Command
of Armies, and arrive at the Honor of Triumph. Such wonderful things were to
be seen in those days which do not happen in an ordinary City, or in a small
Kingdom; but in the Mistress of the world, as well by Sea as Land: Providence
disposing it so to reduce things to that excellent order wherein you now see
them. Not but that Rome felt the same miseries under Sylla, and before him
under Marius; and we have in writing of them reported many Actions of Cruelty,
even to the depriving their Enemies of Burial: But what passed under the
Triumvirs made much more noise, because of the height of their Reputation; and
particularly the Valor and Good Fortune of him, who having fixed the
Foundations of this Empire, has left it to those of his Race and Name, even to
this present. I will therefore relate what was now done most remarkable, and
most cruel; which I can the easier do, because the length of time has not yet
quite effaced the memory of these Actions. Yet I will not write all; for a
common death, or the flight of some private Men, who after obtaining Pardon of
the Triumvirs, returned and spent the rest of their Lives without appearing,
seems not to me worthy being recorded: But I will relate some extraordinary
Examples, that the Reader may be persuaded of the truth of what I have before
said. Many Roman Authors have hereof wrote particular Books; out of which I
have extracted what appeared most credible, to compose a Summary, which may
well make the happiness of our Times be admired.

Salvius, Tribune of the People; though by the Laws the Tribunes were holy and
inviolable; and so powerful, that sometimes they have imprisoned Consuls. This
Man when they were about to declare Anthony Enemy opposed it, but afterward he
took part with Cicero. Therefore when he knew the Triumvirs were agreed, and
marched toward the City, he made a Feast for his Domestics, as having now but
a short time to live with them. The Soldiers entering the place where they were
eating, all the people affrighted, began to rise up; but the Centurion
commanding them to keep their places, took Salvius by the Hair, drew him over
The Table, cut off his Head, and forbid the others from stirring; for if they
made the least noise he would serve them in the same manner: At which they were
so affrighted, that after the Centurion was gone they spent most part of the
Night by the Body, without speaking a word.

After Salvius, was slain the Praetor Minutius. Upon notice brought him as he
gave Audience in the place, that the Soldiers were coming toward him, he rose
suddenly to seek out some place to shelter himself in: and having changed
Clothes, went to hide himself in a Shop; but his People, and those that carried
the Marks of his Dignity, whom he commanded to leave him, staying there some
time out of a fear and affection they had for him, were the occasion, without
designing it, that the Murderers did the more easily find him.

Annalis the other Praetor, as he solicited the People for his Son, who demanded
the Questors Office; his Friends and Lictors understanding that he was in the
Roll of the Proscripts, all of a sudden left him: Whereupon he fled, and
retired into a wretched House that one of his Creatures had in the Subburbs;
where, because the place was utterly contemptible, he was for a while secure;
till such time as his own Son, having some doubt he was gone thither, showed
the way to the Executioners of the Proscription: In reward whereof the
Triumvirs gave him his Father's Estate, and the Office of Aedile, but he
enjoyed not either long; for returning drunk from a Debauch, upon some reviling
words given to the Soldiers who had killed his Father, they killed him too.

For Thoranius, who was not Praetor, but had been; he was Father to a wretchless
Youth, who yet had a great deal of power over Anthony. He therefore entreated
the Centurions to delay his death but so long till his Son had begged him of
the Triumvir. To which they laughing, answered; He has already begged you, but
it is in another manner. Which the Old Man hearing, prayed them but to give him
so much time as to see his Daughter; and having seen her, forbad her from
pretending any thing to his Estate, le^t her Brother should beg her likewise of
Anthony. The end of this wicked Son was no better than the others; for after
having consumed his Patrimony in all sorts of Debauchery, he was accused of
Theft, and condemned to Banishment.

As for Cicero, who had ruled in the Assemblies of the People after Caesar's
death; he was proscribed, with his Son, his Brother, and all their Servants,
Clients and Friends. He was embarked on a small Boat to make his Escape by Sea;
but not able to endure the tossing of the Waves, he returned to a Meadow that
belonged to him near Capua; which upon occasion of writing this History, I
would needs see. As he reposed himself, and that those that sought him were not
far off (for of all the Proscripts, Anthony caused him to be sought with most
diligence) a Flock of Crows flying over the place where he slept, waked him
with their Cries, and began with their Beaks to pull the Covering from off him;
till his Slaves thinking it an Advertisement of the Gods, returned him into his
Litter, and took their way toward the Sea, through the thickest of the Forest.
Presently after several Soldiers coming to that place one after another, and
demanding of those they met if they had not seen Cicero, they all, out of the
compassion they had for him, answered, that he was embarked, and was already a
good way off at Sea: But a Shoo-maker called Cerdo, a Creature to Clodius,
formerly a mortal Enemy to Cicero; having showed the Centurion Laena, followed
but by a few Soldiers, the way he had taken, he presently pursued him: Cicero
was accompanied with more people disposed to defend him, than Laena had with
him to assault him. Wherefore having overtaken him, he made use of policy; and
began to cry out as if he had called to other Centurions behind him; Come on,
Gentlemen, come on. Whereupon the people of the Proscript imagining that they
were about to be over-pressed by numbers, grew fearful, and deserted him. Then
Laena, though Cicero had formerly pleaded for him in a Cause wherein he
overcame, drew his Head out of the Litter, and cut it, or rather hewed it off,
at three blows; so unhardy he was. He likewise cut off the Hand wherewith he
had writ the Orations, accusing Anthony of Tyranny; which after the example of
Demosthenes, he called the Philippicks: And at the same instant dispatching
away Expresses both by Sea and Land to carry, this pleasing News to Anthony, he
himself followed them to Rome; where finding Anthony in the place, seated in
the Tribunal, he showed him at a distance the Head and Hand of Cicero. And he
ravished with joy, put a Crown upon the Centurion's Head, and gave him for a
Reward Almost eight thousand Pound.
two hundred and fifty thousand Attick Drams; as having freed him of the
greatest of all his Enemies, and from whom he had received the highest
injuries. His Head and Hand stood a long time for a Spectacle before the
Tribunal, where he used to make his Orations: And more flocked now thither to
see him, than did before to hear him. It is said likewise, that Anthony at a
Collation caused the Head to be set upon the Table that he might contemplate it
more at leisure, and satiate himself (as we may so say) with the view of it.
Thus was Cicero slain; to this day in great Esteem for his Eloquence: And who,
when he acted in the Quality of Consul, had done signal Services to his
Country; yet after his death he was thus unworthily treated by his Enemies.

His Son was already escaped to Brutus in Greece, but his Brother and Nephew
were unhappily taken by the Soldiers. The Father begged he might die before his
Son, and the Son requested he might die before his Father; and they having
promised to satisfy them both, took them apart, and slew them at the same
instant.

But Egnatius and his Son embracing each other, died together; and their Heads
being both struck off at one blow, the two Bodies kept still their hold of each
other.

Balbus designing to escape with his Son by Sea, sent him before, thinking that
by not going together they would not so easily be known; and himself soon after
set forward to follow him at a distance: but some one, either out of malice or
mistake, having told him that his Son was taken, he returned of his own accord
to offer himself to the Excutioners, and his Son perished by Shipwreck: So
much did fortune contribute to the Calamities of these times.

Aruntius had a Son that could not resolve to fly without him; yet at length he
prevailed so far as to persuade him, that being young, he ought to survive him.
The Mother having been his Guide as far as the City Gates, returned speedily to
give Burial to her Husband whom they had slain. And some days after hearing her
Son was starved to death at Sea, she slew her self.

Hitherto we have proposed Examples of good and evil Children.

As for Brothers. Those two called Ligarii, proscribed together, lay hid in an
Oven, till such time as being betrayed by their Slaves, one was slain at the
same time; and the other who slipped from the Executioners, knowing his Brother
was dead, cast himself from the Bridge into the River. Some Fishermen that
thought he fell in by mischance, and not designedly, came in to save him; from
which he defended himself some time by plunging himself to the bottom of the
Water: till such time as they pulling him out, do what he could, he told them;
You do not save me, but lose your selves with a Proscript. Yet, say what he
could, they were resolved to save his Life. But the Soldiers who had the Guard
of the Bridge understanding he was a Proscript, came in and cut off his Head.

Of two other Brothers, one having cast himself headlong into the River, his
Slave, after having sought the Body five days, at length found it; and in the
condition he was, being hardly to be known, cut off his Head, and carried it to
the Tribune to have the Reward. The other being hid in a Privy, was betrayed by
another Slave; and because the Soldiers vouchsafed not to go down, they slew
him with Javelins, drew him out; and in the condition he was cut off his Head
without washing it.

Another seeing his Brother stopped, ran in; and without knowing that he
likewise was proscribed, cried out, Kill me first. Whereupon the Centurion, who
knew the order of the Roll, made answer; You ask but reason, for your Name does
indeed stand in the Roll before his: And therewith slew one after the other.

These are Examples of Brothers.

As for Wives. Ligarius his Wife had hid him; and went from time to time to see
him, attended only by one Maid; who betraying him, she followed those who
carried away her Husband's Head, crying out; It is I that hid him, the
Concealers are condemned to the same Punishment. And because no one would
either kill or accuse her, she went and discovered her self to the Magistrates:
who not judging her guilty for loving her Husband, she starved her self to
death.

I have spoke of her in this place, because, having in vain endeavored to save
her Husbands Life, she would not survive him: for as for those whose Conjugal
Affection had better success, we will reserve them to another place, when we
are to speak of those escaped.

Here therefore we shall now only relate Examples of such as made wretched
Attempts upon the Lives of their Husbands; among whom Septimius Wife shall have
the first place. It was a long time before that one of Anthony's Friends had
abused her Husband's Bed: But she desiring rather to be his Wife than his
Mistress, he prevailed so far by the Credit he had with Anthony, that Septimius
was found among the number of the Proscripts. He was advertized of it by her
own self: And knowing nothing of the ^^^^onour of his House, disposed himself
to Flight. But she, like a kind Wife, shut the Doors; and kept him very
diligently, till the Executioners came to rid her of him; and the same day of
her Husband's death espoused the other.

Salassius had escaped; but out of a belief the danger diminished, was so
imprudent as to return by Night into the City. In the mean time his House was
sold, and there remained in it of all his People none but the Porter, who was
comprised in the Sale: So that he alone knowing him, made him come into his
Lodge, promised to keep him close, and to feed him the best he could. He was no
sooner entered but he sent for his Wife, who was lodged elsewhere: who professed
a great passion to see her Husband; but excusing her self upon the fear of the
Night, and the suspicion she had of the fidelity of her Servants, she said, she
would not come till the Morrow. As soon as it was Day she went to seek for
Executioners, and the Porter went to find her to desire her to come: which was
the occasion that Salassius missing the Porter, began to fear some treachery;
and got up to the top of the House to expect the event: whence beholding not
the Porter, but Soldiers coming under his Wife's Conduct, he precipitated
himself from top to bottom.

In like manner Fulvius having sought for refuge in the House of a certain
Woman, who having been his Slave and Concubine, he made free and married: for
so many good turns she betrayed him, jealous that he had espoused another
woman. But I have said enough of wicked Women.

Statius the Samnite, who had performed many great Services for his Country in
the War with the Allies: After which, by his worthy Actions, Riches and Birth,
he was arrived to the Dignity of Roman Senator: being proscribed at the age of
fourscore Years only for his Riches, caused his House to be ransacked by the
People and his Slaves, who carried away what they could, the rest he himself
threw into the Street; and barring his Doors, set fire to his House, wherein he
was burnt with a good part of the City.

Capito having half opened the Door of his House, so that but one at a time
could enter, slew with his own hands many of the Soldiers; till at last,
over-powred by numbers, he was himself slain.

Vitulinus assembled about the Country of Regium great Forces, composed of
proscribed Persons, and others who came to take Sanctuary under him, together
with the Inhabitants of those eighteen Cities destined for the Soldiers Reward
after the Victory; which made them desperate: And with these took the Field;
where he cut in pieces all the Centurions he could meet with that were
searching for Proscripts. But the Triumvirs having sent greater Forces against
them, he, without losing heart, crossed over into Sicily, where Pompey then
commanded, the Refuge of all such Proscripts as could escape out of Italy.
After which generously returning to renew this sort of War, being defeated in
several Engagements, he embarked his Son, with other Proscripts, to send them
before him to Messina; but his own Boat scarce reaching the middle of the
Straits, till he was surrounded by Enemies, he there honorably dyed.

Naso having been betrayed by a Freed-man, by whom he had been abused, snatched
the Sword out of one of the Soldiers hand; and after having slain the Traitor,
offered them his own Throat.

A certain faithful Slave had left his Master hid in a Sepulcher, while he went
to the Sea to hire a Boat. His Return happened to be just at the instant that
the Soldiers were murdering his Master; to whom, ^^^ing him ready to die, he
cried out, Stay a little, my dear Master: and at the same minute falling upon a
Centurion, slew him first, and then himself; saying, Now Master, you have some
cause of Comfort.

Lucius having two Freed-men, upon whose fidelity he relied, gave them his
Money to carry to the Sea, where he designed to embark: but they running away
with what they were entrusted with, he returns; and condemning himself to
death, delivers himself up to the Murderers.

Labienus, who in the Proscription of Sylla had taken and destroyed many, had
been a Coward if he had not bravely born what he had made others suffer.
Wherefore, coming out before the Gates of his House, he sat him down in a
Chair, expecting some who would come and cut off his Head.

Cestius, who lay concealed in a Country House with faithful Slaves, seeing
armed Centurions daily pass by carrying of Heads, could not longer endure to
live in that continual fear; but having commanded his Slaves to raise a Pile of
Wood, and set fire to it, that they might tell those that passed they burnt the
Body of Cestius, threw himself into it in good earnest.

Apomius was in a place of Security: But not able to accustom himself to such
course Provisions as were brought him, went out to seek his death.

Another publicly waiting for the Executioners; because they came not soon
enough, strangled himself before all the People.

Lucius, Father in Law of Asinius now Consul, having escaped by Sea; not able
to endure the tossing of the Waves, threw himself overboard.

Sisinius being pursued by Soldiers; and crying out he was not proscribed, but
they had a mind to destroy him for his Riches, was led to a place where the
Names of the Proscripts were affixed, thrt he might see his own; which having
read, they cut off his Head.

Aemilius not knowing himself was of the number of the Proscribed, and seeing
another that fled, asked the Centurion who that Proscript was: Upon which the
Centurion knowing him, replied; Thou art one as well as he: and so slew them
both.

Cilon and Decius being informed as they came out of the Palace, that their
Names were in the Roll of the Proscripts; before any one set upon them, took
their way toward the Gate so affrighted, that their Flight alone made them
known to the Centurions, had the Guard of the Avenues.

Icilius, the same that in the Judgment of Brutus and Cassius, when Caesar sat
President, when all the other Judges gave privately their Votes to condemn
them, alone durst publicly argue for their Discharge, remembered not himself in
this occasions of that great Generosity; for seeing a dead Body carrying out of
the City, he set to his Shoulder with the rest, that so he might gain a passage
in favor of the Bier: But the Guards at the Gate perceiving there more people
than were usually employed in that Office; yet without doubting of them, would
only know if they did not carry a live Body instead of a dead: Which occasioned
that Icilius being disowned by the rest, was known, and at the same time slain.

Varus being betrayed by one of his Freed-men, fled; and taking the way of the
Mountains, got to the Marshes of Minturnum, where he hid himself to take a
little repose. Mean time those of Minturnum coming by chance to seek for
Thieves who often run thither for Shelter, seeing the Leaves of the Bushes
shake, discovered him. So that being taken, and confessing himself to be a
Thief, they condemned him to death: But seeing that they went to put him upon
the Rack, to make him confess his Companions, he told them; I give you notice,
my Masters, that I have been Consul, and am proscribed: in which Quality I am
more considerable to those that now govern* that you ought not have the
boldness either to torment or put me to death; for since my death is
inevitable, I had rather die by my Equals. The Judges had much ado to believe
him, and thought it only a Fiction, when a Centurion arriving, knew him, cut
off his Head, and left the rest of his Body to the People of Minturnum.

Largus found in the Country by Soldiers that sought for another, they had pity
of a Man fallen into their Hands unlooked for, and let him escape into the
Woods; where being met and pursued by others, he run again to the first; crying
out, Kill me, you that would have saved me; for I had rather you than others
should have the Rewards. Thus dying, he made his acknowledgments of their good
will.

Rufus, who was Neighbor to Fulvia, Anthony's Wife, having a very fine House
which formerly he had refused to sell her, though now he would gladly have
given it her, was found among the number of the Proscripts. His Head being
brought to Anthony, he said, it belonged not to him; and sent it to his Wife:
who caused it not to be nailed up in the Public Place, but before the same
House.

Another having a House of Pleasure in the Country with a magnificent Garden,
wherein was a deep and beautiful Grotto, which had been the cause of his
Proscription. One day, as he was refreshing himself in his Grotto, one of his
Slaves espying the Soldiers afar off, hid him in the obscurest part of the
Cave; and taking his Clothes, presented himself to the Soldiers in such a
frightful posture as if he indeed had been his Master: And certainly he might
have passed for him, had not another of his Slaves discovered the Deceit. Thus
the Master being slain, the people incensed against the Traitor, never left
importuning the Magistrates till he was hanged, and that the other had obtained
his Liberty.

Aterius being likewise hid, one of his Slaves discovered him; and for it had
his Liberty. But not content therewith when the Goods of the Proscript were
publicly sold, and that the Children would have bought them, he not only
out-bid them, but reviled them with words; which they seemed not at all to
resent, but still followed him every where with tears in their eyes, till such
time as the people were so much incensed, that the Triumvirs condemning his
Avarice, revoked his Liberty, and remitted him under the power of the Children
of the Proscript.

One would have thought this Cruelty should have been exercised only upon
persons grown, at least to full years; it extended it self even to Orphan
Children, with intent to spoil them of their Riches. And one was killed as he
went to School with his Master; who held the Child so strongly embraced, they
could not pull him out of his arms.

Another, called Attilius, had the same day taken the Robe Virile; and his
Friends conducted him to the Temple, to offer Sacrifices, ordinary upon those
occasions: when he was inserted in the Roll of the Proscripts, his Slaves and
Friends all presently fled every one his way; and he remaining alone, forsaken
of all his great Train, retired to his Mother; who was so frighted, that she
refused him her House. So that not daring to apply himself to any other person
after being so treated by a Mother, he fled to the top of a Mountain: whence
Hunger forcing him to descend, he fell into the hands of one of those Thieves
who steal Free Persons to make them Slaves. This Young Man, tenderly bred, and
not able to undergo Labor and Hardship, escaped chained as he was, and
recovered the public Road; where presenting himself to the first Centurion
passed by, he ended his life.

Lepidus triumphed over the Spaniards; and to that purpose published an
Ordinance drawn up to this effect. All Persons of what Degree soever are
enjoined to employ this day in Feasts, Sacrificing and Rejoicing, under pain of
Proscription. After that he mounted in Triumph to the Capitol, accompanied by
all the most remarkable Persons of the City; cheerful in appearance, but with
Souls oppressed with Hate and Anger. As for the Goods of the Proscribed, they
plundered their Houses, but they found few Purchasers of their Lands; for most
Men were ashamed to add to their Misfortunes, and believed ill luck would
attend themselves should they deal in such Goods. Besides, there was no
security for such as were known to have Money; and it was so dangerous to make
new Acquisitions, that no Man was secure of what he held from his Ancestors.
There were therefore none but very bold men that bought: and because they were
but few, they had them for a small matter. So that the Triumvirs, who thought
that the Moneys hereby raised would serve for the Expense of the War; found it
to fall short Of Dram*
two hundred Millions. They thereupon in the Assembly acquainted the People
with their Wants, and proscribed fourteen hundred of the richest Women of the
City; to whom they commanded to come and declare what Riches they had, to be
employed in the Necessities of the State, as the Triumvirs thought convenient:
and strictly forbidding, all Concealments whatsoever, or valuing things below
their true Value, under pain of Punishment; with promise of a Reward to any
that should inform of such an Omission, whether Free Man or Slave. The Women,
as soon as they had notice of it, having resolved to become Suitors to the
Kindred of the Triumvirs, to solicit them in their behalf, were favorably
received by Caesar's Sister, and Anthony's Mother; but Fulvia, his Wife, shut
the Gate against them. They were so concerned at the Affront, that they came in
a Body to the Place; and the People and Guards making way for them, they
advanced to the Tribunal of the Triumvirs: where Hortensia, before prepared to
that purpose, spoke to them in this manner, in the name of all the rest.

The Oration of Hortensia.
BEing obliged to make to you our Remonstrances, as we are Women, we had
recourse to your Women; which surely was no more than what was decent: But
having received from Fulvia an affront which even Decency and Good Manners
forbid her to put upon us, we are forced to come hither to speak for our
selves. You have deprived us of our Fathers, our Children, our Husbands, and
our Brothers, accused of the Crime of having offended you; if after that you
spoil us of our Goods, you will reduce us to Extremities unbecoming our Birth,
our Quality, and our Sex. If you perhaps say we have offended you as well as
the Men, proscribe us in the same manner: But if none of you have been declared
Enemy by the Women; if we have neither demolished your Houses, nor defeated
your Armies, nor given your Dignities to others, nor hindered you from being
preferred to Honors and Magistracies, why are we equally punished? Why do you
exact Contributions from us, who pretend nothing to Dignities, nor Honors, nor
Command of Armies, nor Government of the State, nor all those things for which
you dispute among your selves with so much Heat and Obstinacy? But it is
because you have War you inflict this on us: Was the World ever without War?
And were Women ever made contribute to it, whom Nature dispenses with by the
general Consent of all Nations upon Earth? I know well that in the time of our
Ancestors, our Mothers derogating from the Privileges of their Sex, contributed
to the Expense of the War; b^t it was but once, and in a time when the Roman
Empire and the City it self were in hazard of becoming a Prey to the
Carthaginians. This too they did voluntarily, and sold not for it either their
Lands, or their Houses, or their Ioyntures; without which free Women cannot
subsist. They were content to contribute those Movables which only served for
Ornament, not to be employed for any certain Use; nor after Rewards promised to
those that accused them, nor by constraint, but as much as they pleased. Should
the Gauls or Parthians invade Italy, and we be demanded to defend our Country,
we shall not be less generous than our Mothers; but think not that we will
contribute our Estates for Civil Wars, and to maintain one against another. In
the War of Pompey nothing was demanded, neither did Marius nor Cinna exact any
thing from us: no, nor Sylla himself though he had oppressed that Commonwealth
which you pretend to be the reestablishers of.

The Triumvirs were nettled at these words of Hortensia's, and thinking it
strange, that where Men were silent, Women should dare to speak, and be so bold
as to demand of the Magistrates an account of their Actions, and refuse to
contribute Money to a War, to which Men paid their persons, commanded the
Ushers to make them withdraw from the Tribunal; but the multitude beginning to
cry out, the Ushers stopped, and the Triumvirs adjourned the business till the
morrow. As soon as it was day, of fourteen hundred Proscripts they retrenched a
thousand, and only taxed four hundred; and for the Men it was decreed, that
whoever had more than one hundred thousand Drams effective; whether he was
Citizen or Sojourner, Freed Man or Priest, of what Nation soever he was,
without excepting person, should give in a Declaration of it, of which the
fifteenth penny should be taken at interest, and one years Revenue toward the
charge of the War, under pain of punishment to the Transgressors, and promise
of reward to the Informers. Whilst these Ordinances were published at Rome, the
Soldiers contemning their Officers, committed greater disorders in the Country,
for the power and security of the Triumvirs depending upon them, they demanded
either the Houses, Lands, or confiscated Goods of the Proscripts; others would
have rich persons to adopt them, others of their own Motion slew Men
uncondemned, or plundered the Houses of private men, insomuch that the
Triumvirs deputed one of the Consuls to chastise them, but he durst not touch
the Soldiers, for fear of incensing them against himself, only took occasion to
hang a few Slaves, who in Soldiers habit committed the same Violences.

Italy made their retreat to Brutus and Cassius, and some to Cornificius, who
likewise stood for the People in Africa, but the greatest part escaped into
Sicily, which is nigh unto Italy, where Pompey took care to receive them, and
did in this unhappy occasion great services to these miserable People; for in
the first place he caused it to be published, that whoever would make their
retreat to him, should be welcome, and that he would give to those who saved a
Proscript, whether he were Freeman or Slave, double the reward which the
Triumvirs promised to the Murderers. Then he appointed great numbers of Barques
and other Vessels to go out and meet such as might be escaped to Sea, and his
Gallys continually cruised along the Coasts, making Signals to all that passed,
and receiving all such as would embarque on them, whom at their landing he in
person received, furnished them with Clothes and Necessaries, and to such as
were worthy gave Command in his Army by Sea or Land, and declared he would
never come to an Accommodation with the Triumvirs, unless those who had fled
for refuge to him were comprised in it. Thus he beneficially served his
Country, and besides the Glory derived from his Father, made himself
illustrious by his own Virtue. Others that fled or hid themselves in Country
Houses, or in Sepulchers, or in the City it self, lived miserably, and in
perpetual fear, till the persecution was overpassed, which lasted a good time,
during which were found wonderful examples of Friendship, of Wives for their
Husbands, of Children for their Parents, and even of Slaves to their Masters,
of which we will relate the most memorable.

Paulus Brother to Lepidus being proscribed by himself, the Centurions had yet
respect for him as he was their General's Brother, so that he retreated in
safety to Brutus, and after Brutus's death to Miletum, from whence, though
after the peace he were recalled, he vouchsafed not to come.

Lucius, Anthony's Uncle, was received into his Sister's House, who kept him a
long time without concealing him, because the Centurions respected her as
Mother to their General; yet at last when they would have entered, she run to
the place, and Anthony with his Colleagues being seated on the Tribunal, I
accuse my self, Sir, (said she) that I have received and will receive Lucius
into my House till such time as you put us both to death together, since the
Proscripts and those that receive them are equally guilty. Anthony answered
her, that she was a good Sister, but an ill Mother, and that she either ought
not now to save Lucius, or have hindered him before from declaring her Son
Enemy; yet he took such order, that the Consul Plancus exempted him from
punishment by a Decree of the People.

Messala, a young Man of noblest Birth, having made his escape to Brutus, the
Triumvirs, who feared him because of his Generosity, revoked his Proscription
in these terms: Since the Kindred of Messala have attested to us that he was
not in the City when Caesar was killed, we have decreed that he be erazed out
of the Roll of the Proscripts. But he would not accept their kindness: and yet
after Brutus and Cassius were killed in Thrace, when the Army being yet in a
good condition, and wanted neither Ships nor Money nor hopes, had chosen him
General, he refused it; nay, on the contrary, persuaded the Soldiers to yield
to fortune, and take part with Anthony. After which he was one of his
particular Friends, till such time as affronted by Cleopatra. he withdrew to
Caesar, who made him Consul in the room of Anthony after he was declared Enemy
the second time. After which he served under Caesar at the Battle of Actium;
and in conclusion Caesar having sent him against the revolted Gauls he defeated
them, and deserved the Honor of Triumph.

Bibulus, who gained Anthony's favor at the same time with Messala, and was
some time Admiral of his Fleet against Caesar, got at last the Government of
Syria, where he died.

Acilius, who was dragged out of the City, having been delivered to the
Soldiers by one of his Slaves, persuaded them by hopes of great gain to send
some of their company to his Wife with the tokens he gave them. They going, she
showed them her Jewels, and told them she would give them all, on condition
they would release him, which they promised to do, and though she doubted of
their promise, yet her friendship to her Husband was worthy not to be deceived,
and the Soldiers hired a Boat for Acilius, and sent him for Sicily.

Lentulus being watched by his Wife, for fear he should fly without her, and he
was unwilling she should hazard her self in the danger with him, escaped
secretly into Sicily, where being made Praetor, he wrote to her the happy
success of his flight, and the Honor he had received from Pompey. When she
knew where her Husband was, she stole from her vigilant Mother, and only with
two Slaves and her self in the habit of a Servant came with much trouble and
labor to Rhegium, from whence toward Evening she got passage to Messina;
where having easily found the Pretor's House, she found Lentulus, not in the
Equipage of a Praetor, but lying on the ground upon a Mattress, with untrimmed
Hair and a slender Supper, all out of grief and impatience to see his Wife.

Apul^^us's Wife threatened to have him taken if he fled away alone; so that he
was constrained to carry her along with him, which made none be suspicious of
his flight, seeing him march publicly with his Wife, Men, and Maidservants.
And Antius his Wife wrapped him in Coverlids, and made him be carried like a
Pack to the Sea side, from whence he escaped into Sicily.

Reginus his Wife made her Husband by night go down the Privy, of which he
smelt so strong next Morning, that the Soldiers loath to come near him, the
next day she clothed him like a Collier, giving him an Ass laden with
Charcoal to drive before him, and she at a final distance went before in her
Litter. One of the Soldiers that had the Guard of the Gate had some suspicion
of the Litter, and would needs see what was in it. Reginus, who was in fear for
his Wife, came up praying the Soldier (as in passing) not to affront Women: and
the Soldier having at first given him a surly answer as to a Collier, at last
knowing him, for he had born Arms under him in Syria, said to him, Save your
self without fearing any thing, my General, for it is yet reasonable that I
call you so.

Copponius by means of his Wife, who had been chaste hitherto, got his pardon
of Anthony; but she remedied one mischief by another.

Geta's Son made a Funeral Pile for his Father's Body, as if he had strangled
himself, and sent to hide him at a Town he had lately purchased in the Country,
where the old man, the better to disguise himself, clapped a Plaster on one
eye: and after the Peace was concluded, found that for want of making use of
his eye, he was indeed blind of it.

Oppius refusing to fly, because he was already old and infirm, his Son took
him upon his Shoulders, carried him out of the City, and labored so long, that
sometimes leading, and sometimes carrying him, he brought him at last to
Sicily, without any ones having the least suspicion, or doing them the least
injury. Thus we paint Aeneas, respected by his Enemies themselves, for carrying
his Father. The people afterward gave the Aedility to this young Man, out of
respect to his Piety, and because his Father's estate being confiscate, he had
nothing to defray the expense of those Plays, the Artizans with one accord
supplied him gratis with whatever he wanted from each several Trade, and every
Spectator cast what Money he pleased on the Stage, so that he became rich.

Arrianus likewise by Will ordered this Epitaph to be engraven on his
Sepulcher: Here lie the Ashes of a Proscript, whose Son not proscribed,
concealed, accompanied in his flight, and saved from the Proscription.

There lived in these times two Metellus's, the Father and the Son, whereof the
Father having command under Anthony at the Battle of Actium, was taken without
being known, the Son siding with Caesar had Command under him in the same
Battle. When Caesar being at Samos would needs see the Prisoners; this old Man
was brought among the rest, his Hair long, and so filthy, that he was not to be
known; but when they called him in his order of the Roll, the Son who was
seated near Caesar, hearing the name of Metellus, leaped from his place, and
ran with rears in his eyes to embrace his Father, whom he scarcely knew* and
then restraining his tears, spoke thus to Caesar: He bore Arms against you; I
have served you: he deserves punishment, I reward, I beseech you then either
pardon my Father in consideration of the services I have done you; or let me
die with him for the offenses he has committed against you. This Discourse
moving all the Assembly to compassion, Caesar promised to give life to
Metellus, though he had been his greatest Enemy, and that he could never by any
offers he made, oblige him to serve against Anthony.

The Slaves of Maricius were so faithful, and so fortunate as to keep him in
the House all the time of the Proscription, insomuch that when the danger was
over, he came out of his House, as if he came out of Banishment.

Hirtius being escaped out of the City with his Slaves, went throughout Italy,
releasing Prisoners, gathering together Fugitives, and at first plundering
small Towns, afterward greater, till such time as he beheld himself at the
Head of considerable Forces, and subdued the Brutians, but the Triumvirate
sending against him a potent Army, he retreated with all his People to Pompey.

Restion thinking to fly alone, was privately followed by one of his Slaves
born in his House, whom formerly he had used kindly, but since branded in his
Face with a hot Iron for his Roguery. His Master as he was lying down in the
Marches, seeing him come, was much affrighted, which the Slave observing, told
him the Brand he had set in his Face touched him not so much as the memory of
his former Benefits: and at the same time hiding him in a Cave, fed him by his
labor in the best manner he could; and afterward perceiving the Soldiers who
were not far from the Cave, and were coming thither upon suspicion some one
might be there hid, he fell upon an old Man that passed by, slew him, and cut
off his Head; whereupon the Soldiers wondering at the action. and laying hold on
him as a Murderer, he told him: It is Restion my Master whom I have thus slain,
to revenge these marks of Infamy; whereupon they presently took from him the
Head, that they might have the reward, which, whilst they in vain went to seek
at the City, he removed his Master thence, and got him a passage into Sicily.

Appius being in Bed in a small Country House, whither the Soldiers came to
seek him, one of his Slaves pulled off his Clothes, which making him put on, he
lay down in the Bed as if he had been the Master, and was willingly slain for
him, Appius standing by in the Habit of a Slave.

In the same manner Menemius being besieged by the Soldiers in his House, one
of the Slaves went into his Litter, and caused himself to be carried out by
some of his Comrades, who contributed to his design, and so was killed for his
Master, who by that means escaped for Sicily.

A Freed Man of Iunius, called Philemon, who dwelt in a magnificent House, hid
him in a public Room in a strong Chest made to keep Writings or Plate, and fed
him by night till the time of peace.

Another Freed Man to whom was committed the keeping of his Master's Sepulcher,
whose Son was likewise proscribed, kept there both Father and Son.

Lucretius having wandered some time up and down the Fields with two faithful
Slaves, was at last by hunger forced to return and see his Wife, causing
himself to that end to be carried by the Slaves in his Litter as a sick Man,
one of those that carried him having broke his Leg, he pursued his way,
supporting himself upon the other. But when he came near to that Gate where his
Father, proscribed by Sylla, was taken, and saw a company of Soldiers coming
toward him, his heart upon the omen of the place misgave him, and he went and
hid himself in a Sepulcher. Certain Thieves used to rob Sepulchers, coming
thither, he let himself be stripped. The Slave while his Master lay close was
gone toward the Gate, where he waited for him, and when he came, covering him
with some part of his Clothes, carried him in that manner to his Wife. There
was in his House a Room double floored, where she hid him, till by the
intercession of his Friends he got pardon from the Triumvirs, and after peace
was made, obtained the Consulate.

Sergius remained some time hid in Anthony's own House, who at last managed
Affairs so, by the means of the Consul Plancus, that his return was assented
to; wherefore when Caesar and Anthony after fell at odds, when the Senate
declared Anthony Enemy, Sergius was the only man that openly opposed it.

As for Pomponius, he took the Habit and Ensign of a Praetor, and having
clothed his Slaves like Ushers, went as a Praetor all the length of the City
with his Litters, his Officers crowding close about him for fear he should be
known by others; being got out of the Gates he mounted in one of the public
Coaches, and marching in this Equipage through Italy, was every where received
as a Praetor deputed from the Triumvirs to make peace with Pompey, till such
time as he passed into Sicily upon one of the public Galleys.

Apuleius and Aruntius acted the Centurions, armed their Slaves like Soldiers,
and run about the City as if they had pursued some Proscripts. At length
separating, they began to release Prisoners, and to gather together Fugitives,
till having levied some Troops, each beheld himself with Ensigns, Arms, and a
certain kind of Army; both one and the other strove to get the Sea side, and
therefore came to encamp on certain eminencies in view of each other, one
mightily afraid of the other. Morning coming on they took one the other for
Enemies, came down from the Hills, and engaged each other, till at length,
knowing their error, they threw down their Arms, and with tears embraced,
casting this accident on fortune which had been cross to them in all things.
After that they embarked and made their retreat, Aruntius to Pompey, with whom
he returned to the City, and Apulei^s to Brutus, whose Lieutenant he was in the
Government of Bithynia, which after Brutus's death falling to Anthony, he
permitted him to return to his House.

As soon as Ventidius was proscribed, one of his Freed Men bound him, as if it
were to deliver him to the Executioners, the Night following he armed all his
Slaves like Soldiers, and as if he had been Centurion brought forth his Patron,
and managed his business with so much cunning, that crossing in this manner all
Italy as far as Sicily, they lodged often in the same Inn with other
Centurions, under pretense of searching for Ventidius.

Another whom his Freed Man had hid in a Sepulcher, being struck with horror
at such a Lodging, went and hired a wretched Chamber next to one hired by a
Soldier, where not able to endure to live in continual fear, he passed from
infinite terror to prodigious boldness, and causing himself to be shaved, went
and kept a School in Rome it self, till such time as peace was made.

Volusius being proscribed whilst he was Aedile, had a Friend, Priest to the
Goddess Isis, who lent him a Linen Robe that covered him to the very Heels, so
that passing through the Country in the habit of a Priest to that Goddess, and
every where performing the usual Ceremonies, he escaped to Pompey.

Sittius a Native of Cales, as he was very rich, so he had been at great
expense in the service of his Countrymen, in acknowledging of which they took
Arms in his defense, threatened his Slaves with death, if any ill happened to
him, and permitted not the Soldiers to approach their Walls, till such time as
the mischief diminishing, they sent to the Triumvirs, and obtained from them
that he might stay in his own Country, banished from any part of Italy. So
Sittius became the only person of all mankind that ever was in exile in his own
Country.

Varro a Philosopher, Historian, Soldier, and General of great Reputation, was
also proscribed, possibly for being so, as an Enemy to Monarchy. All his
Friends were at strife who should have the Honor to secure him, Calenus
carried it, and kept him in a Country House of his, where Anthony often
divertised himself as he passed by; yet none, either of Varro's or Calenus's
Slaves discovered him.

Virginius a fair spoken Man persuaded his Domestics, that if they slew him
for a small gain, which yet they were not sure of, they would be afflicted with
eternal remorse of conscience; whereas on the contrary by saving his life they
might expect immortal Glory, and hope for rewards greater and more certain;
wherefore, as if they had been one of his companions, they followed him in his
flight, wherein being known by the Soldiers, he talked to them in the same
manner, he told them that there was no hate between them for which they should
kill him, and that doing it only for Money, they might get more and more
honestly if they would go with him to the Sea side, whither his Wife was to
bring all he had. They believed him, and went along, and indeed his Wife had
been there according to agreement betwixt them, but Virginius staying too long,
she believed, that coming there before her he was embarked, and therefore
embarked to follow him, yet leaving a Slave on the Shore to give Virginius
notice, if he were yet behind. The Slave seeing Virginius coming, ran to meet
him, and showed him the Vessel wherein his Wife was, not yet out of sight, and
withal talked to him of his Wife, his Money, and the reason why she left him.
The Soldiers were so absolutely persuaded, that when Virginius entreated them
either to stay till he could make his Wife return, or to embarque with him to
go after her, and receive their Money, they entered with him into the Vessel,
and themselves setting hand to the Oars brought him into Sicily, where after
having received what he had promised them, they continued in his service till
the time of the Peace.

Rebulus being in a Vessel that was to carry him for Sicily, the Pilot began to
demand Money of him, threatening to discover him if he gave it him not, to whom
Rebulus made a like answer, as Themistocles had done in his flight that he
would have saved a Proscript for Money, insomuch that the Pilot affrighted with
the answer, brought him speedily to Pompey.

Murcus was likewise proscribed because he had Command in Brutus's Army, and
being taken after Brutus was defeated, he feigned himself a Slave: Barbula
bought him, and because he saw him active, gave him the Government of all his
other Slaves, and withal made him his Cash-keeper. Murcus behaved himself in
this Employment with more prudence than nature ordinarily gives to Slaves, his
Master hereupon had some suspicion of him, and exhorting him to courage,
promised to secure him, though he were one of the Proscripts, which he
constantly denied, telling him out of his own invention his Name, his Family,
and his former Masters. Barbula thereupon carried him to Rome, thinking if he
were one of the Proscripts he would be loath to go: however he followed him;
but some time after as Barbula was before one of the Consul's Gates, one of his
Friends knowing Murcus in his Train in the Habit of a Slave gave him notice of
it, and he by the intercession of Agrippa desired his pardon of Caesar, who
caused him to be crazed out of the Roll of the Proscripts, esteemed him
afterward as his Friend, and employed him not long after in the Battle of
Actium against Anthony. Barbula served under Anthony, and fortune had ordered
each of them his turn; for Barbula after Anthony's Defeat was taken prisoner,
feigning himself a Slave, Murcus bought him as if he had not known him, and
gave advice of it to Caesar, from whom he obtained power to return him like for
like; and this conformity of fortune between them continued ever; for they were
afterward Colleagues in one of the highest Dignities of the City.

Some time after Lepidus reduced by Caesar to the condition of a private Man
from a Sovereign, that he was constrained by a like necessity to submit to
Balbinus, who escaping the Proscription returned with Pompey, and was now
Consul, and thus it happened, Maecenas had accused Lepidus the Son, of a
Conspiracy against Caesar, together with the Mother as an Accomplice; for
Lepidus himself he de^pised as weak. The Son being sent to Caesar then at
Actium, Maecenas caused it to be ordered, that if the Mother would be dispensed
with from the toil of the Journey, she should give in such security as the
Consul should approve, but none being found would be bound for her: Lepidus
having often in vain presented himself before Balbinus's Gate, and sometimes
too before the Tribunal, from whence the Officers had forced him to retire, had
scarce the liberty at last to say these words: The accusers themselves are
testimonies of my innocence, by saying I am no Abettor with my Wife and Son.
'Twas not I proscribed you, and at this day I am my self under the power of
Proscribers; wherefore let me beg you to consider the instability of humane
things, and to accept my security for my Wife, or send me prisoner along with
her. Lepidus having thus spoke, Balbinus moved at this great change, discharged
his Wife from the security demanded.

Cicero the Son of the Orator being sent into Greece by his Father, who foresaw
the miseries that afterward happened, retired first to Brutus, and afterward
to Pompey, and had both under one and the other very honorable Employments in
the War. At last Caesar to make it appear he had not consented to his Father's
death, made his Son first Pontifex or High Priest, some time after Consul, and
in the end Proconsul of Syria: and then when Caesar after having defeated
Anthony at Actium, wrote news of it to Rome: Cicero as Consul read it in full
Assembly, and fixed a Copy before the Tribunal for Orations, where formerly his
Father's Head had been exposed.

Appi^s after having deposited what Goods he had in the hands of his Slaves,
embarked himself to go with them into Sicily. A Tempest arising, the Slaves
who were desirous to enrich themselves with his Money, persuaded him there was
more security in the Boat, and prevailed with him to go into her. But fortune
would that against all probability he was saved, and the Slaves all perished.

Publius, Treasurer.
Questor to Brutus, who had been solicited by Anthony's People to betray his
General, and was proscribed by the Triumvirate for not consenting, returned at
last to Rome, and was beloved by Caesar to that degree, that when Publius
showed him Pictures of Brutus in his House, he yet esteemed him the more. These
are the most memorable accidents happened to some Proscripts who escaped the
danger.

Whilst these things passed at Rome, all the rest of the Empire concerned
Africa, between Sextus and Cornificius, in Syria between Cassius and Dolobella,
and in Sicily against Pompey, in which Actions many Cities were forced, as
Laodicea, Tharsus, Rhodes, Patara and Xant, not to speak of others less
considerable; the particulars whereof we will relate in the briefest method
possible. The Romans divide Africa into two Provinces, of which, they call that
the old which they conquered from the Carthaginians, and that whereof Caesar
had newly despoiled King Iuba they call the new, that is Numidia. Sextius sent
into this last in quality of Caesar's Lieutenant, gave Commands to Cornificius
to surrender to him the old, because by the division made among the Triumvirate
all Africa belonged to Caesar: Cornificius made answer, that he knew nothing of
any such Division, and could not without orders of the Senate quit the
Government of a Province they had given him in charge, whereupon they declared
War: Cornificius had an Army both better disciplined, and stronger in Men than
Sextius, who having only light armed Foot made incursions into Cornificius's
Government, and daily drew some to his Party, till such time as Ventidius
Lieutenant to Cornificius coming against him with more Forces than he had,
besieged him, and Lelius the other Lieutenant of the same Cornificius entered
into Sextius his Province, and besieged Cirta. Mean time both Parties sent to
demand alliance of King Arabion, and those they call Sittiens, for the reason
we are going to relate. Sittius accused of crimes at Rome, not daring stand a
trial, fled, and gathering together some Forces as well in Italy as Spain, went
over into Africa. There happened then to be War between the African Kings,
wherein Sittius taking sometimes one part, and sometimes another, and still
carrying Victory to that side he joined with, soon gained a fair reputation,
and by exercising his Army made it capable of great Attempts. He served
likewise C. Caesar when he came to make War upon those who took part with
Pompey, and slew Saburra Lieutenant to King Iuba, in acknowledgment of which
services Caesar gave him the confiscation of Manasses's Estate, yet not all of
it, but the better part. Manasses was Father of this Arabion, and for having
assisted King Iuba, Caesar divided his Country between Sittius and Bocchus King
of the Moors. Sittius distributed his part to his Soldiers, and Arabion went
over into Spain to Pompey's Sons. After Caesar's death he returned into Africa,
from whence he continually sent fresh Troops of Africans to Sextus the Son of
Pompey, who being returned from Spain well experienced, he drove out Bocchus,
and got rid of Sittius by treason, and though he had an inclination for
Pompey's Children, because of the good Offices he had received, yet would he no
longer oblige himself to that Party which he saw forsaken by fortune, but chose
rather to declare for Sextius, by whose means he hoped to gain Caesar's favor,
and the Sittians in consideration of his Father's kindness to them, did the
same: Sextius encouraged by such a reinforcement went and charged Ventidius,
routs his People, cuts the most part in pieces, and takes a great many
Prisoners. News whereof being brought to Lelius, he raises the Siege of Cirta,
and returns to join with Cornificius. Sextius puffed up with this success,
marches against Cornificius, who lay near Utica with much greater Forces; and
encamps close by him. There Lelius being commanded out with his Horse, to make
discovery of the Posture of the Enemy, Sextius gives Order to Arabion to go
charge him in Front with his Horse; and he with his Light-armed Foot gains the
Flank, whilst he thought to have to deal only with Horse. He charges him so
home, that Lelius, before he received farther disgrace, fearing to be
surrounded, and his Retreat cut off, goes and seizes upon an Eminence in the
midst of the Campain; where Arabion in his Rear having slain many of his
Horsemen, invests him. Cornificius seeing that, fallies out of the Camp with
his best Troops: Sextius falls in his Rear: He faces about; and during the
Fight, wherein he is hard put it, Arabion sends privately to his Camp people
used to clamber up Rocks; who make themselves Masters of it. Roscius, who had
the Guard of it, makes one of his people kill him. Cornificius tired out with
fighting, not knowing his Camp was taken, hastes toward the Eminence to make
good his Retreat to Lelius; but Arabion getting between him and his mark, he
was cut in pieces. Lelius, who beheld all this from the place where he was,
kills himself. The Army seeing their Commanders dead, made every Man the best
way he could. The Proscripts that were with Cornificius fled, some to Sicily,
others where best they might. Sextius gave to Arabion and the Sittians great
quantity of Spoils; and pardoning the Cities, received them under the Obedience
of Caesar. Thus ended the War in Lybia between Sextius and Cornificius; which
was thus short, as it seems, by reason of the heat of the Commanders.

Brutus and Cassius, after having made some short Repetition of what has been
said before, for the better understanding the whole. Caesar being slain, the
Conspirators seized the Capitol; from whence they descended after the Senate
had proclaimed the Indemnity. Afterward, the people moved for Caesar's death,
took Firebrands from his Funeral-pile, and clapped them to the Houses of the
Conspirators; which defending themselves from above, repulsed the multitude,
and soon after every one of them retired into the Governments which Caesar had
given them. Cassius and Brutus exercised still the Office of Pretors in the
City, and had been designed Pro-Pretors by Caesar; Cassius of Syria, and Brutus
of Macedon. But because the time appointed for their going to their Provinces
was not yet come, and that without fear they could not stay in the City. The
Senate sent them out honorably, under pretense of giving them the
Superintendence of Provision, lest otherwise they should seem to have fled.
After they were gone the Governments of Syria and Macedon were given by Decree
to the Consuls, Anthony and Dolobella, against the mind of most of the Senate;
and yet in some manner to recompense Brutus and Cassius, they granted them
Crete and Cyrene: But they despising these Governments because they were too
small, began by Money to assure themselves of Forces, with intent to sieze upon
Syria and Macedon. To this end they were laboring, when Trebonius being slain
by Dolobella, and Decimus besieged in Gaul by Anthony, the Senate offended,
declared Anthony and Dolobella Enemies, confirmed Brutus and Cassius in their
first Governments, added Illyria to that of Brutus; and gave Command to all
Governors, and all Soldiers of the Oriental provinces, to receive the Orders of
Cassius and Brutus. After which Cassius, without considering Dolobella,
advances to possess himself of Syria, with the Ensigns of Command, together
with twelve complete Legions of Old Soldiers, who had served their
Apprenticeship under Caesar. For Caesar having already in his thoughts the War
against the Parthians, had left one in Syria under the Charge of Cecilius
Bassus, as Lieutenant to Sextus Julius, his Kinsman, yet very young: who roving
about the Country to take his pleasure, used to carry his Legion along with
him, contrary to all Decency: which when Bassus represented unto him, he
reviled him. And another time when he sent for Bassus, because he came not
immediately, he commanded to bring him by force: This Command raised a Tumult,
and the Tumult a Scuffle, wherein the Soldiers no longer able to bear with
Julius insolence, slew him with their Javelins: But at the same instant they
repented themselves, for they feared Caesar; wherefore they swore mutually to
one another, that if he granted them not a Pardon for this Action, they would
defend themselves to the death. They likewise forced Bassus to be of the
Conspiracy; and raised another Legion, whom they exercised after the Roman way
of Discipline. Sextus Marcus, sent by Caesar against them with three Legions,
was repulsed; till such time as having called to his Assistance Minutius
Crispus, with three other Legions out of Bithynia, Bassus found himself
besieged by six Legions, when Cassius coming that way, Bassus Army voluntarily
submitted to him, and soon after the six Legions commanded by Marcus and
Minutius; whether they had an inclination for him, or else were willing to obey
him in compliance with the Senate's Decree. Allienus sent some time before by
Dolobella into Egypt, now brought thence four Legions of the Remains of
Pompey's and Crassus Defeats; or of those which Caesar, at his departure from
Egypt, had left in Cleopatra's Service. Cassius surprised him in Palestine, and
forced to take part with him; for he durst not resist eight Legions, having but
four. Thus, beyond all expectation, he found himself Master of twelve Legions,
besides a great number of Parthian Archers on Horseback, who were come to
offer themselves to him out of the great Esteem he had gained among them, when
being Questor to Crassus, they judged him more prudent than his General.
Dolobella, since Trebonius death, had stayed in Ionia; where he exacted great
store of Money from the Cities, and prepared a Fleet of Ships which Livius
Figulus hired from the Rhodians, Lycians, Pamphilians and Cilicians. So that
having made these Preparations, he attempted to seize upon Syria; and to that
purpose took his March by Land with two Legions, and gave order to Figulus to
follow him by Sea: But when he understood the State of Cassius his Power, he
turned into Laodicea, a City affectionate to his Interests, and situate on a
Peninsula fortified to the Land; and whereof the Port was very commodious to
enter with Provisions, or to go out again when ever they had a mind to set
Sail. As soon as Cassius had notice hereof, that Dolobella might not escape
him, he caused to be raised at the Neck of the Peninsula, which was two
Furlongs over, a Bulwark of the same length, raised with Stones and other sorts
of Materials, which he took from the Houses and Sepulchers that were in the
Suburbs. He sent likewise to require Shipping from the Phenicians, Lycians and
Rhodians; who all refused him: But though only the Sidonians sent theirs to
him, he forbore not with them to assault Dolobella's Navy. There was in this
Fight a great many Ships sunk of one side and the other; nevertheless, at last
Dolobella got five, with all the Seamen and Soldiers in them. Cassius sent
afresh to demand Aid of those had refused him at first; and besides them, to
Cleopatra, Queen of Egypt* and to Serapion, who commanded for her in Cyprus.
The Tyrians, the Aradians and S^rapion (without the Queen's Order) sent him all
they had: But the Queen pretended that Egypt was afficted with Famine and
Plague to excuse her self; though indeed, for the first Caesar's sake, she was
concerned for Dolobella, had already sent him four Legions by Allienus, and had
likewise at that present a Fleet in readiness to relieve him, which only stayed
till the foul Weather Season was past. As for the Rhodians and Lycians, they
made Answer, that they would serve neither Brutus nor Cassius in a Civil War;
and that they had lent their Ships to Dolobella for passage only, not believing
he would make use of them in War. After this Answer, Cassius, with those Forces
he had, returned to give an Assault to Dolobella's Fleet; where the advantage
was very doubtful at first, but at last Dolobella suffered some loss. At the
same time the Bulwark being finished, they planted Batteries; and whilst they
played at the Wall, Cassius labored to corrupt the Guards: And not being able
to gain Marsus, who commanded the Guard by Night, he prevailed with the
Centurions that did it by Day; who, when Marsus was gone to his Repose, let in
Cassius at many little Posterns. The City being taken, Dolobella commanded one
of his People to cut off his Head, and carry it to Cassius, to save his own: He
obeyed in the first point, but after killed himself upon his Master's Body:
Marsus likewise slew himself. Cassius took an Oath from Dolobella's Army,
plundered the Temples and Treasuries of Laodicea, put to death the principal
Inhabitants, and taxed the rest in vast Sums; so that he reduced the City to
extreme necessity. From Laodicea, he took his March toward Egypt, upon the
News that Cleopatra was going with a great Fleet to meet Caesar and Anthony. He
hoped to hinder that Queen's Voyage, and to revenge himself of her: and indeed,
he was very desirous to have siezed upon Egypt, then oppressed with Famine, and
disfurnished of Men of War, Alienus having lately drawn thence the four
Legions. And it is probable something might have been done, but Brutus sent for
Cassius in haste, because Caesar and Anthony had passed the Ionian Sea. Thus
Cassius diverted from the Expedition of Egypt, of which he had great hopes,
dismissed the Parthians with Rewards, and sent Ambassadors to their King, to
demand a greater Succor; which arriving after the Defeat, overrun Syria and
the Neighboring Provinces, as far as Ionia, and so returned. After this,
having left his Nephew in Syria with one Legion, he sent his Horse before into
Cappadocia; surprised Ariobarzanes, under pretense that he had deserted
Cassius, and defeated him; and brought to the General all his Treasures and
Provisions which he had made ready for the War. Those of Tarsus being divided
into two Factions, the one had first received Cassius, and made him a Present
of a Crown; the other some time after paid the same Honors to Dolobella; and
both acted in the Name of the Community: So that by having received sometimes
one and sometimes the other, they exposed their City to be punished by both for
their Inconstancy; and at last Cassius, after Dolobella's death, taxed them in
fifteen hundred Talents. They were already so poor, that they had not
wherewithal to pay this Sum; but the Soldiers tormented them with a thousand
Cruelties to make them find it: They sold first all the Public Goods; then
things consecrated, even to the Ornaments of the Temples, and the Offerings had
been made: Which yet amounting not to the least part of the Sum, the
Magistrates sold the Free Persons; first the Maids and Children, then the Women
and Old Men, who yielded but little; and after all, the Young Men, many of
which slew themselves. At last Cassi^s returning from Sy^ia, had compassion on
their misery, and remitted the Remainder of the Tax. These were the Calamities
wherewith Tarsus and Laodicea were afflicted.

Cassi^s and Brutus consulting together what they were best to do; Brutus
Macedon, and give Battle to the Enemies, who had forty Legions; eight of which
had already passed the Ionian Sea. Cassius judged on the contrary; that the
Enemy being so numerous were not to be dreaded, seeing they would scatter of
themselves for want of Provisions; and therefore, that it were better to begin
the War with the Rhodians and Lycians, who held for the Enemies, and were very
strong in Shipping, lest they should fall into their Rear whilst they were
engaged with Caesar and Anthony. This Opinion was followed; Brutus undertook
the Lycians, and Cassius those of Rhodes, where he had been educated, and had
studied those Sciences taught in Greece. And because he had to deal with People
very expert in Sea Fights, he fitted up all the Ships he had, manned them both
with Seamen and Soldiers, and exercised them at Mynda. As for the Rhodians,
the most prudent of them were fearful to come to Extremities with the Romans;
but the People made insolent with those Victories, which they remembered to have
gained against People, to whom the Romans were no ways comparable, were very
glad of it; and began to set in order three and thirty of the best Vessels they
had. However, they sent Deputies to Cassius to desire him not to contemn
Rhodes, which had always revenged it self on those that had despised them: Nor
to violate the Treaties between the Romans and the Rhodians, by which they had
promised not to bear Arms one against the other. That if he found fault with
them for refusing their Ships, they would send Deputies to the Senate; and if
the Senate ordered it, they would assist him with all their Forces. To this
Cassius made Answer, that now it was no more time to make use of Words, but
Arms: That as for those Treaties which obliged them not to bear Arms one
against another, they had first violated them by assisting Dolob^lla against
him: That the same Treaties contained likewise a Promise of assisting one the
other; and that when Cassius demanded theirs, they mocked him with a pretense
of sending Deputies to the Senate, now dispersed into all parts in their flight
from those Tyrants had made themselves Lords of the City; Tyrants which he
would punish as well as the Rhodians their Abettors, if they did not suddenly
submit themselves. This Answer increased the fear of the Wise Men: But the
People suffered themselves to be led by Alexander and Mnaseus; who encouraged
them by putting them in mind how Mithridates, and before him Demetrius, had in
vain attempted Rhodes with far greater numbers of Shipping. Wherefore they made
Alexander Prytane, which is the chief and most powerful Magistrate of the City;
and Mnaseus they made Admiral. However, they again deputed to Cassius,
Archelaus, under whom he had studied the Greek Learning; who, as one that had
lived familiarly with him, taking him by the hand, spoke thus.

The Speech of Archelaus to Cassius.
WIll you that love the Greeks, ruin a Greek City; and that fight for Liberty,
take it from Rhodes that is a Free City? Are you envious of the Glory of the
Dorick Nation, which never yet was overcome; or have you forgot those Noble
Stories you learnt at Rhodes, and at Rome it self? At Rhodes the mighty Actions
the Rhodians, when assaulted in their City, have done against a number of
Kings; and above all, against those were thought invincible, Demetrius and
Mithridates, for the Defense of that Liberty for which you say you are now in
Arms? At Rome, the important Services we have done the Romans, especially
against King Antiochus; the Monuments of which you may there behold engraven in
Copper? This I say to oblige you to consider our Nation, the Honor of our
City, its good Fortune which never yet abandoned it, its Affection to the
Romans, and the Assistance it has offered them. But as to what may concern your
self, Cassius; you ought particularly to bear some respect to a City wherein
you have been educated, taught, cured of your Sickness, and where you have a
long time sojourned, and that even in my School; which makes me hope that the
pains I have formerly took in instructing you, will not prove unprofitable to
my Country, in dispensing her from engaging in a War with her Nursling and
Scholar; wherein of two things, one must be inevitable; all the Rhodians must
perish, or Cassius must be overcome. I will add a little Counsel to the Request
I make you. In the important Affair wherein you are engaged for the Public
Good, take the Gods for the Guide of all your Actions; those Gods by which you
swore, when by Caesar's intermission we last renewed the Alliance between
(...); and after we had sworn mutually, gave hands in token of that Faith which
ought to be kept, even to Enemies; but with much more reason to Friends, and
those from whom we have received our Education. Besides, we ought not only to
consider the Gods, but also take care to preserve our Reputation for the sake
of Men; for those who violate Treaties are abhorred of all the World; and after
having once broke it, neither Friends nor Enemies have any more Relyance on
their Word.

Cassius could not see without blushing: and yet at last he made this Answer.

Cassius's Answer to Archelaus.
IF you dissuaded not the Rhodians from affronting me, you have affronted me
your self; and if you told them your thoughts, because they did not believe
you, I will revenge you. Now, it is manifest they have affronted me, first in
refusing that Assistance I demanded, in which they have despised me; Me that
have been bred and educated in their City. Secondly, In preferring Dolobella
before me, who was neither fed nor bred there: And what is yet more odious;
whilst Brutus, and I, and all the rest of the Senators that fly from Tyranny,
labor as you see to restore our Country to Liberty; and that Dolobella and
others, whose Party you favor, oppress it. You, Gentlemen of Rhodes, that are
such mighty Lovers of Liberty, you make a pretense that you will not concern
your selves in our Civil Wars; though this be no Civil War, since we pretend
not to the Sovereignty. It is a declared War against Tyrants, and the Republic
demands your Assistance; you decline it by desiring to be left in Liberty,
under color that you have Alliance with the Romans, and yet have no compassion
for so many Romans unjustly condemned to death, and proscribed, with
Confiscation of their Goods; feigning that you expect the Orders of the Senate,
now so oppressed, that it is in no power of defending it self: Yet it is a long
time since you received those Orders by Decree, commanding all the Oriental
Provinces to obey Brutus and I. As for you, Archelaus, you set a great value
upon the Services the Rhodians have done us in the increase of our Empire, and
of which you have received ample Recompense: But you say nothing to what you
owe to our Assistance, now that we fight for Liberty and the Safety of our
Country; though the Dorians, had we never had any Commerce together, ought to
gain the Romans Friendship, defend from Oppression the Roman Commonwealth. If
without considering any of these Reasons, you stand upon the terms of Alliance
made between us by Julius Caesar, the Founder of the Tyranny; it expressly says
that the People of Rome and the People of Rhodes shall assist one the other in
necessity. Assist therefore the Romans in the Extremity wherein they now are;
Cassius summons you to it according to the terms of the Treaty: He is a Roman,
and Commander over the Romans, authorized by Decree, which commands all the
People of the East to receive his Orders: Brutus requires the Execution of the
same Decree; and Pompey too, appointed by the Senate to the Superintendence of
Sea Affairs. Add to these the Prayers of all the Senators who are escaped, part
to Brutus and me, and part to Pompey; though by the Treaty the Rhodians are to
help any single Roman that calls to them for Aid. But if you take not us either
for Pretors, or so much as for Romans; but treat us like Strangers or
Fugitives, or as the Tyrants call us, for condemned Men; you have indeed no
Alliance with us, but with the People of Rome: But we Strangers that are not
comprehended in this Treaty, will make War upon you till you pay us an absolute
Submission.

After this Answer Cassius dismissed Archelaus with much Civility: And after
his Return Alexander and Mnaseus, the Commanders of the Rhodians went to Myndus
with their three and thirty Ships, to out-brave Cassius; and it may be too,
they had some hopes of Victory, the remembrance how they dealt with Mithridates
near this place begetting thoughts in them that they might now likewise come
off with success. The first day they were satisfied with showing their skill at
the Oar, and so returned to Gnidus: The next day they came again resolved to
fall upon Cassius Fleet: The Romans wondering at their boldness, weighed, and
went to meet them; and now they fought bravely on both sides. The Rhodians by
nimble rowing hither and thither, with their lighter Vessels charged the Romans
sometimes in the Bow, and sometimes on the Broadside; but when the Romans
^ould grapple with them, they fought with them hand to hand, as if upon firm
Ground. At last, Cassius having a greater number of Ships than the Enemy,
surrounded them in that manner, that they could no more turn about in that
nimble manner as before; but if charging the Romans a Head, they went presently
off again, they must needs come to damage, being closely blocked up: And the
Rhodian Prows not being able to pierce the strong built Roman Ships, whereas
the Roman gave shrewd shocks whenever they joined Board and Board to the
lighter Rhodians. So that at last they had three Ships taken with all their
Gang, and two sunk; the rest escaped to Rhodes, but in an ill condition; and
the Romans retreated to Myndus, where they refitted several of their Ships that
had come to damage. Such was the Success of the Sea Fight between the Romans
and Rhodians near Myndus; where Cassius was not in person, but beheld it from
the top of a Hill. After he had refitted his Ships, he came to Loryma, a Fort
standing upon the Continent, but by the Sea side, and belonging to the
Rhodians. From hence he transported his Land Army, commanded by Fanius and
Lentulus, upon Ships of Burden into the Island; and himself with fourscore
Galleys, went and anchored near the City, besieged now by Sea and Land; where
he for some time remained without doing any thing, in hopes the Enemy would
submit: But they charged him as fiercely as at first; and again with the loss
of two Ships, found themselves invested on all sides. The Walls were
immediately lined round with Soldiers, to defend themselves from Fanius, who at
the same time stormed the City by Land; and from Cassius, who approached with
his Fleet and all things necessry for an Attack. For foreseeing he should stand
in need of them, he had brought along Towers of Wood ready framed; which were
soon set together and mounted. Thus Rhodes, after the ill success of two
Fights, was beleagured by Sea and Land; unprepared to sustain a Storm, as is
usual in unexpected Surprises; so that in all likelihood the Enemy would in a
short time become Master of it, either by Force or Famine. The most prudent of
the Inhabitants had no doubt of it; and were already capitulating with Fanius
and Lentulus, when they were all astonished to see Cassius with the choicest of
his Forces in the midst of the City, without perceiving any Violence, or that
he had made use of any Scaling Ladders. Many thought, and not without reason,
that some of his Friends in the City had opened him the Wickets to save it from
Plunder, or before it should be forced yield for want of Provisions. Rhodes
being thus taken, Cassius seated himself in a Tribunal, upon which was fixed a
Spear, as if he had taken the City by Force: and having drawn up his Army to a
stand, he published a Proclamation forbidding the Soldiers to plunder or commit
any violence upon pain of death. After which he called by name about fifty of
the Inhabitants of Rhodes, whom he put to death; and five and twenty others
which absented themselves, he condemned to Banishment. In conclusion, he
spoiled all the Temples, and all the Public Places of all the Riches, and of
all the Gold and Silver which he could find; and moreover, commanded every
particular Person to bring in all he had at a prefixed day; with threats to put
to death those that concealed any thing, and promise to reward the Informer
with the tenth Penny if he were Free, and with Liberty if he were a Slave. At
first many ventured upon Concealments, imagining the threats would not be
executed with severity; but when they saw the Reward given to the Informers,
they grew fearful, and requested that the time might be prolonged; which being
granted, some dug up their Money from under Ground, others drew it up out of
Wells, others out of Sepulchers; so that they brought much greater quantities
than before. To such calamity was the City of Rhodes reduced, in which Lucius
Varus was left Governor. Cassius extraordinarily well satisfied to have taken
it in so short a time, and to get withal so much Money, gave Command to all the
other Provinces to pay him in ten Years Tribute; which was readily performed.
Mean time a report was brought that Cleopatra with a mighty Fleet, and great
Warlike Preparations were at Sea to go join Caesar and Anthony: for having
formerly underhand favored their Party for old Caesar's sake, she now openly
declared her self for the fear she stood in of Cassius. Wherefore he caused
M^rcus to embark with the best Legion he had, and some Archers; and in sixty
Ships sent him to Peloponnesus, giving him Order to post himself about Tenarus;
from whence himself had taken off all the Cattle and other Provisions in the
Peninsula.

We will now relate the Exploits of Brutus in Lycia: But here it will likewise
Apuleius those Forces he had, with sixteen thousand Talents; and gathered in
the Tributes of Asia, he came to Baeotia: Where the Senate having given him
order to employ this Money for his present Necessities, with the Command of the
Armies in Macedon and Illyria; Ventidius, his Predecessor in the Government of
this last Province, delivered up to him three Legions, whereof the Illyrian
Army was composed. He took at the same time one from Caius, Anthony's Brother,
whom he found in his Government; and after raised four Legions more of new
Troops. All which together, made eight Legions; among which were many of
Caesar's Veterans, and great numbers of Macedonians, whom he caused to be
exercised in the Roman Discipline: And all this without comprizing his Horse,
which were in no small numbers; and his Light-armed Foot, and Archers. Whilst
he was endeavoring to raise Men, and gather up Money, there appeared an
Adventure to him from part of Thrace. A King of that Country being slain by his
Enemies, Polemocratia his Widow, who was fearful for her Son, came to Brutus;
recommending her Infant to him, and delivering into his hands the Treasures of
her dead Husband. He sent the Infant to the Cyzicenians, to take care of him
till he had leisure to go and restore him to his Kingdom: But finding in those
Treasures a prodigious quantity of Gold and Silver, he caused it to be coined
into Money. When at the Conference with Cassius they had agreed together, that
before all other things they would make War upon the Lycians and the Rhodians;
he undertook to fall upon the Lycians, by the Siege of the City of Xanthus. The
Inhabitants pulled down their Suburbs, lest Brutus should lodge in them, or out
of them furnish themselves with Materials for the Seige: And fortifying their
City, defended themselves by the favor of a Ditch fifty Foot deep, and
proportionably broad; in so much that those on either side could do each other
no hurt, unless with Slings or Arrows; for they stood as if parted by a deep
River. Brutus resolving to fill this Ditch, caused Mantelets to be made to
secure his Men's Approach, and divided the Work by night and day amongst the
whole Army; beginning to labor in good earnest, causing Materials to be with
all speed brought from far, and omitting no care or diligence necessary on such
an occasion. In short, though at first it seemed likely that either the Enemies
would hinder the Work; or, at least, that it would take up some Months time;
yet it was finished in few days, and Brutus found himself at the Foot of the
Wall; where he caused his Machines to be raised, and the Gates stormed by his
Foot, continually releived by fresh Companies sent one after another. Yet for
all this did the Besieged, though almost all tired out, and the most wounded,
defend themselves as long as their Walls stood. There was already some Breaches
made, and their Towers were all shattered; when Brutus* well foreseeing what
would happen, gave over the Storm at the Gates, and caused his Men to retreat
from the Assault. Whereupon, the Inhabitants imagining this Retreat proceeded
from the Negligence or Cowardice of the Besiegers, made a Sally by night upon
their Enemies with Torches in their hands. The Romans, who expected them,
running in upon them, they took their flight toward the Gates, which those
that had the Guard of shut, for fear lest their Enemies should enter with them;
so that there happened a great Slaughter. Some time after those that remained
in the City sallyed out at Noon day; and having beaten off the Guards, fired
all the Machines. The Gates being left open because of the misfortune that
happened before, there entered with the Inhabitants about two thousand Romans;
and as the rest were thronging in after them, the Portcullis all on a sudden
fell upon them; whether by order of the Xanthians, or that the Ropes that held
them broke. Thus of the Romans that had engaged themselves too far, some were
lost, and the rest found themselves enclosed, not being able to lift up the
Portcullis for want of Cordage: so that knocked down from above by the
Xanthians in those narrow Streets, they with much difficulty gained the Public
Place, which was not far off; where still extremely tormented with the Arrows
shot at them: and having neither Bows nor Arrows, they retreated into the
Temple of Sarpedon, for fear of being at last over-pressed by the multitude.
Mean while the Romans troubled, and fearful for those shut within the City,
attempted all ways possible to relieve them: And Brutus went from Quarter to
Quarter, to encourage his Soldiers; but they could not break open the Gates,
almost covered over with Bars of Iron; and their Ladders and Towers of Wood
were burnt. Notwithstanding, some applied themselves to make new Ladders;
others raised Perches, Forks and other pieces of Timber against the Walls to
serve instead of Ladders; others fastened Iron Hooks upon Ropes, cast them over
the Battlements; and when they catched hold, climbed up by help of the Rope.
The Oenandes, Neighbors and Enemies to the Xanthians; and therefore now
serving under Brutus, began to scramble up the Rocks and Precipices, where the
Romans with much pain followed them; and though many tumbled back, yet some
gained the Wall, and opened a little Gate, before which was a Palisade of very
sharp Stakes; over which some of the bravest, assisted by those already within,
passed: So that now being a considerable number, they attempted to break open a
great Gate, which was not on the inside lined with Bars of Iron; to which
effect those without labored likewise. The Xanthians were at the same time
fighting with those shut up in the Temple of Sarpedon, who made a great noise;
which made those who both within and without were endeavoring to break open
the Gate to make one great push for all; which effecting their business, they
about Sunset entered pell mell into the Town, shouting out as loud as they
could, that those in the Temple might hear them. The City being taken, the
Inhabitants retreated to their Houses; where they slew all those they loved
best, who of themselves came to offer themselves up to death. Brutus hearing
the cries and groans which this fury caused throughout the City, thought the
Soldiers had been plundering; and by Proclamation forbad it: Bnt when he
understood the true cause, he had compassion of People so fond of their
Liberty, and sent to offer them Composition: but they with Darts and Arrows
drove back those that came to speak with them; and after having slain all their
Domestics, and laid their Bodies upon Piles, they set them on fire; and then
slaying themselves, they burnt with the rest. Brutus preserved from the flame
all the Temples he could, and took Prisoners only a few Slaves, and about one
hundred and fifty^ Virgins and Women who had no Men to kill them. And this was
the third time the Xanthians were destroyed for defense of their Liberty: for
being being besieged by Harpalus the Median, Lieutenant to Cyrus, they chose
rather to die than yield, and their City served them for a common Tomb; which
Harpalus put not himself to the trouble to hinder. And under Alexander, the Son
of Philip, they fell under the like misfortune; refusing to submit to that
Conqueror of so many Nations.

From Panthus, Brutus went down to Patara, which seemed to be the Xanthus; who
making a Recital of their Misery, exhorted them to be wiser. The Patarans
making no Answer, Brutus gave them the rest of that day to consider of it, and
retreated. The next morning he returned before the place; when the Inhabitants
cried out from the Walls, that they were ready to follow his Orders, and opened
to him the Gates. Being entered, he neither put to death nor banished Person,
but caused be brought to him all the Public Money of the City; and commanded
likewise every particular person to bring in what he had, under the same
Penalties and the same Rewards as Cassius, after the taking of Rhodes, had
decreed to the Concealers and Informers: which was exercised so punctually,
that there was not a Concealer, save one who was accused by his Slave. After
this Traitor had showed to the Centurion that was sent, the place where the
Money was hid, as they carried away all the Family before Brutus, the Master
said not a word; but his Mother followed crying out, to save his life, that it
was she that had hid it. Upon which the Slave, without being asked, saying,
that the Mother lied, for that it was her Son himself had hid it* Brutus
praising the Son's silence and the Mother's affection to her Son, sent them
away with their Money without any Punishment; but for the Slave that would have
destroyed both Master and Mistress, he caused him to be hanged. At the same
time Lentulus sent to Andriac, which is a Port of the Myrians, broke the Chain
which crossed over the Port; went up to Mira, which was surrendered to him by
the Inhabitants; and after having taken their Money, as was done at Patara,
returned to Brutus: whither came the Lycian Deputies, promising him to serve
him and assist him to the utmost of their power. He imposed on them a certain
Tribute, sent back to Xanthus all the Free People, gave order to the Lycian
People to meet him at Abydos; whither having sent his own Ships, he marched
himself by Land, there to wait for Cassius, who was to come from Ionia, that
they might together pass over to Sestos. Mean while Murcus, who had posted
himself about Peloponnesus, with design to engage Queen Cleopatra's Fleet if
she passed that way; understanding that she had been driven by Storms upon the
Coasts of Lybia* and that some of her Wracks were brought as far as Lacedemon;
she her self being surprised by Sickness, being forced to make her Retreat into
Egypt; he, that he might not lose time, and do nothing with so great a number
of Ships, crossed over to Brundusium; where he seized upon the Island that
makes a part of the Harbor; from whence he hindered the Remainder of the Enemy's
from being transported over into Macedon, or Provisions to be carried to those
were there. But Anthony besieged him with those few long Ships he had; raising
to this purpose Towers upon Rafts of Timber, whilst he made his Companies, one
after another, go aboard the Ships of Burden, and taking the opportunity of
the Wind off Shore (for fear of being surprised in their passage by Murcus
Fleet) put out to Sea. Yet he found that this Seige would prove very painful;
wherefore he called Caesar to his Assistance, who was now fighting with Pompey,
on the Sicilian Sea for Sicily it self. But it is necessary that I say
something of this Pompey, the youngest of the Children of the great Pompey.

Spain, Caesar despised him as a young Man, unexperienced and incapable of
attempting any great matter: and indeed, he was retreated toward the Ocean, at
the Head of a few Highway-Men, with whom he rambled the Country, not known to
be Pompey. But at last a greater number of Vagabonds joining with him, seeing
himself Commander of pretty considerable Forces; and declaring himself for
Pompey's Son, all the Soldiers who had served under his Father or under his
Brother, and had neither Employ nor certain Residence, came to him as to their
General. Arabion likewise came from Africa after having been expelled his
Father's Estates, as we have heretofore said. The name of Pompey soon spread it
self through all Spain, the greatest of the Roman Provinces: And he showed
himself sometimes in one place, sometimes in another; yet not daring to
adventure a Battle with Caesar's Lieutenants. When all these things were known
at Rome, C. Caesar sent Carinas and greater Forces to defeat Pompey: But he
with his flying Army fell upon Carinas when least looked for, and then made his
Retreat to places of Security; for he had already got some Towns, both small
and great. Wherefore Caesar sent to succed Carinas, Asinius Pollio; who made no
farther Advances than his Predecessor had done: And Caesar being dead, the
Senate recalled Pompey; who came thereupon to Marsilia, to attend what course
the Affairs of the City would take. Afterward the Superintendence of
Sea-Affairs being given to him, with the same Power that formerly his Father
had; instead of returning to the City, he went and gathered together such
Shipping as he found in several Ports; and with a considerable Fleet set Sail
from Spain. At the beginning of the Triumvate he landed in Sicily; where
Bithynicus, who was Governor, refusing to surrender to him the Government, he
besieged him in the Isle; till such time as Hirtius and Phanius, Proscripts,
who escaped, persuaded Bithynicus to yield to Pompey. Thus he soon beheld
himself extremely powerful in Sicily; Master of a great number of Ships, of an
Island commodious for Italy, and of a mighty Army; composed as well of the
People he had at first, as those which the Proscripts brought him, Free Men and
Slaves, or which came to him from those Cities of Italy decreed by the
Triumvirs for a Reward of their Soldiers after the Victory; for the Inhabitants
of those Cities abhorred nothing more than the name of that Victory. Wherefore,
they secretly opposed it all they could possible; forsaking their Country,
which they now held no more for their Country; and retreating to Pompey, who
was their Neighbor, and now in the esteem of all the World. Besides, he had
Seamen, Africans and Spaniards, very expert Men; so that he wanted neither
Officers, nor Soldiers, nor Ships, nor Money. Caesar having notice of these
things, sent away Salvidienus with his Fleet, to go drive Pompey out of Sicily,
as if it had been an easy thing; and himself followed with his Land-Army
through Italy, to Rhegium, where he had ordered the Navy to meet him. But
Pompey met Salvidienus with a great Fleet, and engaged him in the Entrance of
the Streights, near Scylla. Pompey's Ships were the nimblest, and his Seamen
the most skilful; whereas the Roman Vessels were heavy, and therefore not so
yare in working: Besides, the Sea, which was very boisterous in the place where
they fought, was less troublesome to Pompey's Seamen, who were used to it,
than to Salvidienus's, who perhaps had never past that Strait; and therefore
were not able to keep any steady course, for they could neither row nor stere.
Toward Evening Salvidienus first retreated, and Pompey drew off soon after.
The loss of Ships was equal: Salvidienus refitted his Ships in a Port called
Balara, nigh unto the place where they fought, and whither he at first retired;
and Caesar being arrived in those Quarters, gave his promise to those of
Rhegium and Vibone, that he would except their Cities from the number of those
which were to be given in reward to his Soldiers; which they were forely afraid
of, because they lay so nigh the Strait of Sicily.

Thereupon, Anthony having sent in haste for him, he embarked for Brundusium;
Sicily on the Right Hand, and referring to another Season the reducing of that
Island, and the War against Pompey. Murcus having intelligence of his coming,
that he might not be surrounded by Caesar's and Anthony's Powers, at once
quitted Brundusium, to go and watch in their passage for those Ships of Burden
that carried the Enemy's Army to Macedon. They were convoyed by Galleys; but
the fair Wind contributed more to their Security than their Convoy. Murcus
troubled to see his hopes frustrated, watched once more to surprise them as
they returned empty; but both then, and afterward, when they were laden again
with more Forces, they escaped him with full Sails, till the whole Army,
together with Caesar and Anthony, were got over. Though Murcus believed Fortune
opposite to his designs, yet he stayed still in his Post to hinder, as much as
in him lay, the transportation of Ammunitions, Provisions, or the new raised
Forces. Thither, as to a convenient place, came to join Forces with him
Domitius Aenobarbus, sent by Cassius and Brutus with fifty other Ships, one
Legion, and some Archers: For because the Enemy could have but small store of
Provisions elsewhere, they thought it a matter of importance to hinder the
transportation of any out of Italy: And indeed, Murcus and Aenobarbus with one
hundred and thirty long Ships or Galleys, a great number of smaller Vessels,
and a considerable Army, did very much annoy Caesar and Anthony by guarding
this Passage. Mean while Ceditius and Norbanus, whom the Triumvirs had sent
before into Macedon with eight Legions; having from Macedon, advanced by way of
the Mountains, toward Thrace; after fifteen hundred Furlongs March, were got
beyond the Philippi's, and went and seized upon the Strait of Torpides and
Salapaees, in the Estates of Rascupolis, which were then the only known
Passages from Europe to Asia. And this was the first stop that presented it
self to Brutus and Cassius, who were crossed over from Abidos to Sestos. This
Rascupolis and Rascus, his Brother, Princes of the Blood Royal of Thrace, and
Sovereigns of a certain Country, were of different Parties; and with a thousand
Horse each, Rascus held for Anthony, and Rascupolis for Brutus and Cassius.
When therefore Cassius and Brutus informed themselves of the Ways, Rascupolis
told them that the Ways of Aena and Maronia were the greatest Road, and the
shortest and most ordinary Way to go to the Straits of Salapees, the possessed
by the Enemies; and that to fetch a turn about the March would be thrice as
long, and very difficult. Upon this Advice, they judging that the Enemy had not
seized upon the Post, so much to cut off their passage, as that thereby they
might have the greater convenience of forraging and fetching Provisions out of
Thrace than Macedon, they set forward on the way of Aena and Maronia, and from
thence went to Lysimachia and Cardia, which serve as Gates to the Neck of the
Thracian Chersonesus, from whence the next day they came to the Black Gulf.
Here they mustered their Armies, and found they had nineteen Legions, nine for
Cassius, and eight for Brutus, which were not quite full, and two which they
distributed into the others to make them complete, so that the whole amounted
to about fourscore thousand Foot; as for Cavalry Brutus had four thousand Gaul
and Portugals.
Lusitanian Horse, and two thousand Thracians, Illyrians, Parthians and
Thessalians, and Cassius had two thousand Spaniards and Gauls, and four
thousand Archers on Horseback, Arabians, Medes and Parthians, besides the Kings
and Tetrarchs of the Galatians in Asia, who brought with them good store of
Foot, and five thousand Horse. These were the Forces Brutus and Cassius had at
the Black Gulf, and with which they fought the Battle, the remainder of their
Forces being employed upon other Affairs. The Army being here purged with the
usual Ceremonies, they paid what they had promised to those who had not yet
received it; for they had taken a course not to want Money, because indeed they
stood in need of it, to gain by force of gifts the hearts of the Soldiers, and
especially of the Veterans who had born Arms under C. Caesar, for fear left at
the fight or name of his Son they should change their minds. Besides they
thought it convenient the Army should be spoke too; and at the same time caused
to be erected a great Tribunal, whereon the Generals with the Senators only
being mounted, and all the Army as well their own Forces as the Auxiliaries,
drawn round about them, they took great delight to view one another. The
Commanders began to take heart, and to hope well in the great number of their
Soldiers, and the Soldiers began to grow in love with their Commanders; for
there is nothing unites hearts so much as common hopes. Now because there was a
great noise made by so vast a multitude, silence was commanded by sound of the
Trumpet, and then Cassius, who was the elder of the two, advancing somewhat out
of his place, spoke in this manner:

The Oration of Cassius.
Caesar in many Wars, in some of which we likewise commanded, we contributed to
his Greatness, and therefore were always his Friends, that no Man may think we
attempted his life out of any particular grudge. Peace being made, as he was
Criminal, he ought to have been accused, not by us who were his Friends, and
whom he had raised to Honors in the City, but by the Laws, and by the
Commonwealth; but because neither the Laws, nor the Determinations of the
Senate, nor the Decrees of the People were now any more of any account, but he
had thrown down all those things instituted by our Forefathers, when they
expelled Kings, and swore never again to suffer the Regal Power, we being their
Successors have prevented the violation of their Oath, we have diverted from
our selves, and cast off from our own Heads those imprecations they pronounced,
by not suffering one Man, though so much our Friend and Benefactor, to be
longer Master of the Treasures and Forces of the Republic, or have the dispose
of all Dignities and Governments, to the shame of the Senate and Roman People:
or in short, change the Laws according to his fancy, usurping over the People
and Senate and absolute power and Sovereign Authority; possibly in those times
you did not make sufficient reflections on these things, but regarded only in
him the quality of Generalissimo. But now you may better understand what I say,
by what particularly concerns you; you are of the People, during War you obey
your General, and in Peace have the right of giving your vote. The Senate first
deliberates all matters, that you may not be deceived, but it is you, who in
your Assemblies, either by Tribes or Centuries create Consuls, Tribunes of the
People, Pretors, who give Sovereign Sentences, and decree to us either Rewards
or Punishments, according as we have well or ill behaved our selves in our
Charges. Thus for giving to every Man according to his desert, our Empire owes
to you its felicity; and when you distribute honors to those deserve them,
they have likewise to you a particular obligation. 'Twas by this very power you
made Scipio Consul, to whom in testimony of his valor you gave the surname of
African, by this you created annual Tribunes of the People, who had power to
oppose the Senate, when it was necessary for your advantage. But what need I
relate things, your selves so well know. Since Caesar made himself Master of
the Commonwealth, you have not by your Votes nominated any Magistrate, neither
Praetor, nor Consul, nor Tribune of the People, you have given no person a
testimonial of his Virtue, nor have had the power to grant him any reward. In
short, no person is obliged to you, neither for his Government, nor for
Judgment given in his behalf; and what is yet more worthy of compassion, you
have not been able to secure from outrage the Tribunes of the People, who are
your particular Magistrates, and whom by your Decree you have declared sacred
and inviolable. But those inviolable persons you have beheld infamously
degraded from a sacred Dignity, divested of a sacred Habit, without any legal
trial, by the command of a single person, and that for maintaining your rights,
and declaring their indignation against those who would have given him the
Title of King. The Senate suffered it with regret for your sakes only; for the
Office of Tribune belongs to the People, and not to the Senate. But not having
the power to accuse, or bring to judgment this Man, because of the great Armies
whereof he made himself Master, to the prejudice of the Roman People, to whom
they belonged, we applied the only remedy left for the chasing away the
Tyranny, by conspiring all together against his person; for it was requisite
this Affair should be assented to by all honest Men, though it were executed
but by a few. And immediately after the Action the Senate declared it done by
common deliberation, when they forthwith proposed us rewards as for having
slain a Tyrant. But Anthony opposing it under pretense of appeasing the tumult,
and we our selves not desiring any greater reward than the service of our
Country, they were not ordered because they would not defame Caesar, being
content to have thrown down the Tyranny. However, they decreed a general
Indemnity, with prohibitions to all persons of prosecuting in form of Justice
for the action done; and a small time after, because Anthony incensed the
multitude against us by his Orations, the same Senate gave to us the greatest
Provinces of the Empire, with the command of Armies, and an absolute power over
all their Territories from the Ionian Sea to Syria; was it to punish us as
Villains and Murderers, that they thus honored us with the sacred Purple, with
Rods and Axes? 'Twas for the same reasons they recalled from Banishment the
young Pompey, who had no hand in the Conspiracy, but only was the Son of that
great Pompey who first took up Arms for the Commonwealth, and did in some
measure oppose the Tyranny, by concealing himself in Spain. That they ordered
the value of his Father's Estate should be paid him out of the public Moneys:
that they made him Admiral over all Seas, to the end, that having a love for
the Commonwealth he might not be without command. After all these, can you
desire more ample testimonies to incline you to a belief, that the Senate knew
and approved our Action, unless possibly you expect they themselves should tell
you so; but they will tell it you, and with telling it you reward your
services, as soon as they shall have again attained the power of speaking, and
giving rewards. For you know in what condition the Senators Affairs stand at
present, they are proscribed without any form of Justice, their Goods are
confiscated, and without hearing them speak they are slain in their Houses, in
the Streets, in the Temples, by the Soldiers, by their Slaves, by their
Enemies; they are dragged out of their Coverts, and hunted from place to place,
that they may have no way to escape. We never were used to bring our Enemies
Heads into the place, but only their Arms, and the Prows of their Ships: now
they expose there the Heads of the Consuls, Pretors, Tribunes of the People,
Roman Knights, and reward those commit such Villainies. For it is a dreadful
disorder. The enmities which have a long time layn hid, now declare themselves
openly, and many of the Proscripts perish by the private hatred of their Wives,
Children, Freed Men and Slaves, so many cruelties has this Plague occasioned in
the City, to which the Triumvirs gave the first examples, by proscribing their
Brothers, their Uncles and their Tutors. It Is said, that Rome formerly became a
Prize to the most Barbarous Nations upon earth; but the Gauls cut off no Heads,
nor abused not dead Bodies, nor were troubled that their Enemies fled, or hid
themselves: and we our selves in all the Cities we have taken, have neither
acted, nor heard that ever were acted the least of those cruelties which are
now acted, not in a vulgar City, but in the Mistress of the World, by
Magistrates created to reform and restore the Commonwealth. Was ever the like
committed by Tarquin, who only for acting a violence upon a Woman he loved, was
driven out of Rome by our Forefathers, and for that sole Action the Royalty
abolished? yet after all this, Citizens, we are treated as execrable persons by
the Triumvirs, who say they revenge the death of Caesar, by proscribing persons
who were not in the City when he was slain, several of whom you see here, who
were only proscribed for their Riches, or Birth, or affection to the
Commonwealth. Why was Pompey proscribed with us, he who was in Spain at the
time of the action, unless it be because he is a Son to a Father that loved the
Commonwealth; because the Senate recalled him and gave him the Admiralty,
therefore the Triumvirs judged him worthy of Proscription? Were the Women
confederate in the Conspiracy, those whom they have taxed with such immense
Contributions? Had the People committed any crime, for the punishment of which
they had reason to command every Man that was worth above a hundred thousand
Drams to make Declaration of it, under a penalty, if he failed. And yet with
all these cruelties, all these exactions, they have not been able to raise
Money to pay that Donative they promised to those Soldiers that serve them;
whilst we that have done nothing but what is reasonable, have satisfied you the
rewards we promised you, and have greater prepared for you. The truth is
because we have respect to Justice in all our actions, the Gods favor our
Designs. The Gods (I say) after whose example you outht to consider humane
Affairs, look upon your Fellow Citizens, under whose Command you have often
fought, and who have with applause administered the Consulate, you see as well
as we whither they have been forced to fly for Refuge, because they have been
good Men, and Lovers of their Country. They embrace our Party, offer up Vows
for the prosperity of our Arms, and will never decline our interests. Therefore
have we proposed a greater and juster reward to those shall save them, then our
Enemies promise to their Murderers. On the other side the Triumvirs imagine,
that after having slain C. Caesar, because he alone usurped the Sovereign
Power, we will suffer them to divide it amongst them, instead of restoring the
Government of the Commonwealth to the People, according to the establishment
of our Predecessors. But as our intentions are different in this War, theirs
tending only to Dominion and Tyranny, as their Proscriptions have already made
appear, and we having no other aim but the liberty of our Country, in which we
shall content our selves to live equal with other Citizens, under the authority
of the Laws, there is no doubt but Gods and Men will esteem our Party the most
just; and there is nothing in War gives better hopes than the justice of the
cause. Nor let any one make a scruple that he has formerly served under Caesar;
for he served not him but his Country: nor was it he gave you rewards, but the
Commonwealth, in the same manner as you are not now the Army of Cassius or of
Brutus, but the Army of the Romans: we are only your companions, and if we
command you, it is only in the name of the Senate and People of Rome. Had our
Enemies the same intentions with us, how easily might we all disarm with
security, and surrender up to the Commonwealth their Armies, to be employed
for the public Good, we would our selves become suppliants for it, if we
thought they would accept of these conditions. but because they have no heart
to do it, nor can hope to find security for themselves, after their
Proscriptions and other crimes they have commi^ted; Let us go, Fellow Soldiers,
let us go fight with courage and ^heerfulness for the Senate and People of
Rome, and having no other end but Liberty.

Here all the Soldiers cried with one voice;

Let us go whither you think fit to lead us.

And Cassius glad to see them so well disposed, as soon as silence was made,
continued to speak in this manner:

May the Gods, who preside over just Wars, reward my Fellow Soldiers your Faith
and Affection. As for that foresight your Generals, as they are Men, ought to
have, observe but how much we are at this present stronger than our Enemies: we
are equal in number of Legions, though we have left Men in many places where we
judged it necessary: we have far the greater number of Horse, Ships and
Auxiliary Forces sent us from Kings and Nations, extending as far as the Medes
and Parthians. Our Enemies can only assault us before, whereas we can likewise
fall upon them behind, for we have Pompey in Sicily, and Murcus in the Ionian
Sea, besides Aenobarbus has his Fleet well fleshed with Seamen, with two
Legions, and good store of Archers, who do sorely annoy them, whereas behind
us, all is peaceable, both on Sea and Shore. As for Money, which some call
Nerves of War, they have none at all, not being able to pay what they promised
their Army, that brought in by Proscriptions not answering their expectations,
for no honest Man would buy those Lands, the purchase of which would render him
odious to all the world: and they can have none elsewhere, Italy being drained
dry by Seditions, Exactions, and Proscriptions, whereas we have taken such
effectual care, that we have it in such abundance, that we are able to give you
another Donative; and the Provinces we have left behind us will sufficiently
supply us. As for Provision which occasions all the difficulty for the
subsistence of great Armies, they can be supplied only from Macedon, a
Mountainous Country, or Thessaly, a Province of small extent, and that by Land
with incredible labor, and if they pretend to have it brought from Africa,
Lucania or Povilia, Pompey, Murcus or Aenobarbus will cut off their passage.
For our parts we have already plenty, and more will daily be brought by Sea
from all the Islands, and all the Provinces between Thrace and the Euphrates
easily, without the opposition of any person, we having no Enemy behind us.
These are, Fellow Soldiers, the works of humane foresight, we expect the rest
from you, and the Gods. For our parts, besides what you have already received,
we will pay you what we have promised, and as we have already rewarded your
fidelity with a Donative; so by God's assistance, after having gained the
Victory, we will recompense you with something worthy your services. And in the
mean time, the more to encourage you, and because I see the whole Assembly
disposed to do well, as soon as I descend from this Tribunal, we will give
every Soldier fifteen hundred Italian Drams, to every Centurion five times as
much, and to every Tribune proportionable.

Brutus and Cassius with promises of good service, immediately they dist^ibuted
in ready Money what they had promised, gratifying with somewhat more, such as
had signalized themselves upon any other occasions, and as they received their
Money they sent them forward on their march toward Dorisca, whither in few
days the General followed them. At the same time two living Eagles came and
pearched upon the Siver Eagles of the Standard-bearers, and pecking at them (as
some say) and covering them with their Wings, there stayed. The Generals caused
Food to be given them till the day before the Battle, when they fled away.
After two days March on the Banks of the Black Gulf, the Army came to Aena, and
from thence to Dorisca, and other Maritime Cities, as far as Mount Serria,
which advances it self into the Sea, from thence the Army turned into the Land;
and Tullius Cimber was commanded, with the Fleet, one Legion, and some Archers*
to proceed on the way along the Coast. Now this Coast was formerly uninhabited,
though the Land were excellent good, because the Thracians made no advantage of
the convenience of the Sea, nor so much as came near the Shore, for fear of
Ships that passed by. Afterward the Chalcidians and other Greeks using the Sea,
inhabited, tilled it, and settled a Trade, besides that many Thracians were
well satisfied to change the Mountains for such a Residence, till such time as
Philip the Son of Amyntas chasing away the Chalcidians and others, there
remained no other marks of its ever being inhabited, save the pavements of some
Temples. Tullius then coasting along this desert Shore, according to his
Orders; when he came near the Straits of Salapeas he began to set out the Lines
of a Camp, and to choose out certain Caves in the Shore might serve to harbor
his Ships, that Norbanus thinking it needless to guard both Passes, might quit
them. And indeed part of what he had projected, happened; for as soon as
Norbanus saw the Ships, fearful left he alone should not be able to defend the
passage of Salapeas, he sent presently to Ceditius to quit that of Torpides,
and come to his assistance, which he did, and thus Brutus and Cassius finding
the strait of Torpides deserted, passed it. But the deceit being discovered,
Norbanus, and Ceditius so well defended that of Salapeas, that Brutus's People
not being able to force it were disheartened, growing fearful lest at last they
should be fo^ced to go that great way about, which at first they had declined,
and withal return back all the ground they had gone; besides that Summer was
far spent. Whilst they were in this trouble, Rascupolis to them, that he would
find out a way be which in three days they should cross all the Mountains of
Salapeas, which never any before had passed, by reason of the cragginess of the
Rocks, want of Water, and the thickness of the Woods, but if they would resolve
to carry Water with them, and cut a way through the Wood large enough for them
to pass, they should march under covert without being seen by any Man, nay, not
so much as by the very Birds, and on the fourth day should arrive at the River
Arpessa, which falls into the Heber, from whence in one day they might reach
Philippi, and so enclose their Enemies, that it would be impossible for them to
escape. Though no advice could be proposed, in the execution whereof there
could be more difficulty, yet this was followed, the Soldiers being chiefly
encouraged to it, by the hopes they had in so short a time, to behold so great
a number of Enemies in their power. Lucius Bibulus having then together with
Rascupolis taken upon him the charge of preparing the way, they caused one half
of the Army to move, who, though it were with much labor and difficulty,
marched on briskly and cheerfully, especially after those who were sent before
to discover, brought word, that from the tops of the Hill they might see the
River; but the fourth day the Soldiers spent with travel, and tormented with
thirst, because the water brought with them failed, began to make reflection
upon what had been told them (that it was but three days march ere they should
find water) and to suspect some treason: not but they believed those who
assured them they had seen the River, but they imagined they were led out of
the way, and therefore afflicted themselves, as thinking they were betrayed;
and when Rascupolis came to encourage them, they railed and threw stones at
him. At length Bibulus entreating them in the name of the Gods, to wait with
patience the close of that day, toward the Evening those that were in the
Front perceived the River, whereupon with shouts of joy giving the word back,
it soon reached those in the rear. Brutus and Cassius having advice that a part
of their Army was happily passed, caused the rest to file off the same way, yet
they could not conceal their march from the Enemy, nor did they enclose them as
Rascupolis had made them hope. For Rascus his Brother having heard some shouts,
grew suspicious, and going himself upon the scout, made a perfect discovery,
with wonder that such mighty Forces had passed through a Country so dry, and
where the Wood was so thick, that he scarce believed the very Beasts could have
found a passage; and immediately giving notice hereof to Norbanus, he the same
night deserted Salapeas, and with what People he had fled toward Amphipolis,
insomuch, that in all the Armies nothing was so much spoke of as these two
Thracians, of the one for having been Guide to the Army through such an unknown
way; and of the other for discovering it. Thus Brutus and Cassius's Forces by a
wonderful Adventure came to Philippi, whither Cimber being likewise arrived,
they had a general Rendezvous. This City was formerly called Data, and before
that (...) signifies a fountain or spring.
Crenides, because of the many Springs about the Hill on which it is seated.
Philip, who found this place convenient to make War upon the Thracians,
fortified it, and called it by his name. On the North lie Woods, through which
Rascupolis brought the Army: on the East are the Straits of Salapeas and
Torpides: and on the West vast places which reach as far as the Cities of
Murcina, Dorabisca, and the Strymon, which is about Near twenty Miles.
one hundred and fifty Furlongs distant. The Soil is good, and the Country
pleasant, and it is said that heretofore a young Damsel, as she was gathering
Flowers, was ravished by a God, and that in passing a River hard by, the Yoke
of his Chariot broke; whence the Greeks called that River Zygasbes: from
Philippi to Amphipolis is an easy descent, so that Men go up hill from
Amphipolis, and down from Philippi. At some distance from Philippi is another
eminence, said to be consecrated to Bacchus, where are Mines of Gold, called
Asyles, thence advancing ten Fulongs are found two other Eminencies distant
from Philippi eighteen Furlongs, and eight one from the other, upon which
Brutus and Cassius pitched their Camps; Cassius on the Southern, and Brutus on
the Northern. They pursued not Norbanus in this flight, because word was
brought that Anthony came on apace, having left Caesar sick at Epidamnum. The
Plain was very proper for a set Battle, and the Eminencies commodious to encamp
on; for on one side were Marshes and Pools of Water as far as the Strymon; on
the other inaccessible Straits. The space between both of eight Furlongs was as
it were the Passage or Gate out of Europe into Asia, they caused Walls to be
built from one Camp to another, and left a Gate in the middle to join together
when they pleased. Hard by they had a River called Gang^a or Gangira, and on
their Backs they had the Sea, by which they brought their Provisions from
Thassa, not above one hundred Furlongs distant, where they kept their Stores,
and for their Galleys they left them at Nea, not above seventy Furlongs
distant, insomuch that they were extremely satisfied with having found a place
so commodious, and where they could with so great advantage post themselves.

Mean while Anthony advanced by great Marches to possess himself of Amphipolis,
which he had designed to make the Seat of the War. And because he found
Norbanus had fortified it to receive him, wherewith he was extremely well
pleased: He left there all his Stores, with a Legion commanded by Pinnarius, to
keep the Guard of them; and with an astonishing boldness advancing still
forward, went and encamped in the Plain, eight furlongs distant from the Enemy.
Now was plainly to be seen the advantage that Brutus and Cassius had over
Anthony in the Seat of their Camps: For they were encamped upon Hills, he on
the even Plain; they fetched Wood from the Mountains, he from a Marish; they
watered at a River, he at a Well which himself dug; their Stores were at
Thassa, not far distant; his at Amphipolis, Above forty Miles.^
three hundred and fifty Furlongs from the Camp: So that in all appearance
Anthony seemed to have encamped there out of pure necessity, all the high
Ground being seized upon, and the rest of the Plain so low, that sometimes the
River overflowed it. And indeed, in sinking Wells, they found abundance of
fresh Water. However, though this boldness were an effect of necessity, yet it
stroke some kind of terror in the Enemy; who were amazed to see him, after so
long a March, as soon as he arrived, come, and with so much scorn encamp so
nigh them. Wherefore they raised a great number of Forts, with Ditches,
Palissadoes and Walls, whilst he only wrought upon the Lines of his Camp.
Cassius, for his part seeing this raving fury of Anthony's, caused a little
space of Ground that lay betwixt his Camp and the Marish, which before he had
neglected, to be now fortified, that he might omit nothing for the security of
the Camps; for the outmost side of Brutus's was defended by Rocks, and that of
Cassius's by the Marish; and the space between both shut up with Ditches,
Pallissadoes, Walls and Gates. Whilst the one and the other were busy at their
Intrenchments, their Horse and Light armed Foot made trial against each other
in some Skirmishes: But after that their Works were brought to perfection, and
Caesar was come (though he had not yet recovered so much health as to be able
to fight in Person, and was fain to be carried about the Ranks in his Litter)
all their Forces drew out in order of Battle. On the other side, Brutus
likewise drew out his Army upon the Hill, but offered not to come down, for he
had no desire to fight, being in hopes the Enemy would soon be in want of
Provisions. There were on each side nineteen Legions; of which, those on Brutus
side were not complete, whereas in those of Caesar's there were
Supernumeraries. As for the Horse, accounting the Thracian Auxiliaries on both
sides; Anthony and Caesar had thirteen thousand Horse, and Brutus and Cassius
had twenty thousand: So that both for the number of Men, the bravery and valor
of the Commanders, the Arms and Artillery, it was a glorious sight to see these
two Armies. Yet they lay several days without doing any thing; for Brutus and
Cassius would not fight, but rather starve their Enemies; they having for
themselves Asia and all the Countries adjacent to furnish them with all things
necessary, which were brought to them by Sea; whereas the Enemy neither had
Provisions, nor any place whence to fetch them; for the Merchants could not
bring any from Egypt, at present afflicted with Famine: Pompey, Murcus and
Aenobarbus stopped their coming from Africa, Italy and Spain; and Macedon and
Thessaly, who only fed the Army, were not long able to maintain it. Cassius and
Brutus knew all this very well, and were therefore in no haste to give Battle;
but Anthony, who was apprehensive of Famine, resolved to force them to it. He
imagined that if secretly he could contrive the making of a way cross the
Marish, he might cut off the Enemy's Passage for their Provisions brought them
from Thassa, Having therefore several times caused the Army, with all their
Ensigns, to draw out into Battle, as if all his Force had been there; wrought
night and day with a Party he had drawn out of the Gross, to make a little way
through the Marish; cutting of Bushes, and raising a Causway; supported with
Walls on both sides, lest it should tumble down; and driving in Piles on those
places he could not fill up, on which he placed Bridges of Wood with such a
profound silence, that the Enemy perceived nothing; for the Bushes they left on
both sides the Causway hindered their Prospect. The Work being finished in ten
days, he sent by night a great number of Cohorts to the other side; who seizing
on some advantageous Posts, raised Forts which they soon brought into a
condition of defense. Cassius was astonished at this Undertaking, and at the
secrecy of its Execution: And to put the change upon Anthony, by hindering his
Communication with his Forts: He undertook likewise a like Work quite cross the
Marish, from his Camp to the Sea. They therefore began to raise Terrasses, and
to place Bridges of Wood on Piles in the deepest places, as had been done by
Anthony; and already the Causway which he had made was broken, so that those
which were passed over had no way of Return, nor could he, though he knew it,
relieve them. This put him in such a rage, that, though it was already Noon, he
immediately made his Army which was on the other side march to the Intrenchment
which first Cassius had made between his Camp and the Marish; making them bring
with them Spades, Pick axes and Ladders; resolving after he had carried it, to
storm Cassius his Camp. Mean while, as Caesar's Men made their Bravadoes in
that Space which was between the two Camps, Brutus's Men thinking it a shame
for them, if, armed as they were, they suffered their Enemies, unpunished, to
affront them to their very Beards; without any other Orders than that of a
Tribune, sallyed out; and charging them in Flank, killed as many as they could
reach: and having once begun the Fight, turned upon the Gross of Caesar's Army,
which was marching toward them; put them to flight, and pursued them to the
very Camp, and at last became Masters of the Camp it self, which was in common
between Caesar and Anthony. Caesar was not there because of a Dream, by which
he was advertized to absent himself that day, as himself has writ in his
Commentaries. But Anthony seeing the Fight grow hot, was very glad to see the
Enemy engaged, for he was mighty fearful of wanting Provisions; yet he would
not return into the Plain for fear of disordering his Ranks in countermarching
his Army, but continued his March toward the Hill; which, in spite of the
Darts lanced at him from above by the Enemy, he mounted, and came to handy
strokes with Cassius's Army, which was there drawn up, and stood amazed at an
Attempt so little judicious. Having presently broken them, and put them into
disorder, he assaulted the Trench between the Camp and the Marsh; and with an
incredible briskness pulled out the Pallissadoes, filled up the Ditch, beat
down the Rampart, cut in pieces the greatest part of those that defended the
Gate, passed over the Bellies of the rest, and threw himself into the place.
Many of his People entered by the Breaches of the Rampart, some clambered over
heaps of dead Bodies: And all this was done in such a moment of time, that
those who were at work in the Marish came not to the Assistance of their
Companions till their Trench was gained; and then Anthony and those that entered
with him charging them with fury, drove them back into the Marish; and returned
to assault Cassius his Camp, whilst the rest of the Army were still fighting
with Cassius's People without the Trench. The Camp, because it was strong of it
self, was very slenderly guarded, and therefore soon forced; whereupon, those
who defended themselves without, and were before hard put to it, seeing now
their Camp in the power of the Enemies, betook themselves to a shameful flight.
Thus the Advantage became equal on both sides; Brutus beat the Enemy on the
left Wing, and took their Camp; and Anthony on the other side, by a wonderful
boldness took Cassius's Camp, after having slain great numbers of his Men. The
dust flew so thick in the Field of the Battle, that one Party knew not what had
happened to the other. And when the Soldiers came to know the place where they
were, they called to them their Fellows, who looked rather like Day-labourers
than Soldiers; being so besmeared with dust, they could scarce be known; and
certainly had one Party of them met another laden with Booty, they had again
fought for their Spoil. It is thought that on Cassius's side there might be
slain about eight thousand besides Lacquies, and on Caesar's side twice as many
more.

Cassius having lost his Camp, and all hopes of regaining it, retreated to
Philippi to see what passed; but because the dust was so thick that he could
see nothing but that his Camp was taken, he commanded Pindarus his Esquire to
kill him. As Pindarus was excusing himself from doing it, there came a Man from
Brutus, to tell him that Brutus on his side had the better, and was Master of
the Enemy's Camp: To which he made only this short Answer; Tell him I wish him
an entire Victory. And turning at the same time toward Pindarus; Why delay
you, said he, dispatch and free me from this Infamy. Pindarus thereupon ran him
with his Sword into the throat, and so died Cassius, according to the opinion
of some. Others say, that some Horsemen coming to bring him the News of
Brutus's Victory, he imagined they were Enemies, and sent to Titinius to know
the certainty; and that those Horsemen having received Titinius as Cassius his
Friend, with Caresses and Shouts of joy, he believed Titinius was fallen into
the hands of the Enemy; and saying, We have stayed to see them take away our
Friend, retired with Pindarus into his Tent, and was no more seen: wherefore,
some think he slew his Master without having any Command to do it. However it
were, Cassius died on his Birthday after this Battle, which passed as we have
described. Titinius likewise slew himself for grief that he was not come
sooner, to give him an Answer: and Brutus, weeping over Cassius's Body, called
him the last of the Romans, whose Virtue would never find its Equal; lamented
his haste and precipitation, and yet esteemed him happy in being delivered from
those cares and troubles in which he was engaged, and of which he knew not the
Success. At length, having delivered the Body to his Friends to be privately
disposed, lest the sight of it might sadden the Army; without taking any food,
or sleeping, he spent the night in rallying Cassius's Troops. On the Morrow the
Enemies appeared in Battle, that they might make it be thought they had no
disadvantage: but knowing their thoughts, Let us arm too, said he, and by a
like Fiction conceal our loss. But the Enemy retreating at the same time that
he drew up his Army in Battle, he jestingly said to his Friend; These people
who came out to fight us, thinking us wearied, durst not make the Experiment.
The same day of this Battle of Philippi, there happened on the Ionian Sea a
memorable Defeat. Domitius Calvinus was bringing over to Caesar upon Ships of
Burden, two Legions; one of which was for its valor honored with the Title
of Martial; with a Pretorian Cohort, or Regiment of two thousand Men, four
Troops of Horse, and other choice Foot, which were convoyed by some Galleys.
Murcus and Aenobarbus engaging them with one hundred and thirty long Ships,
part of the Ships of Burden escaped at first with a fresh Gale; but the Wind
ceasing all on a sudden, the rest were surprised with a Calm, and were not
able to stir; as if God had delivered them up to their Enemies; who began to
assault them one after another, and to send them to the bottom; for the
Galleys, which were but few in number, could not relieve them, being kept off
by the long Ships: Not but that, in the danger wherein they were, they did all
that was possible for Men to do; they at first lashed their Ships fast together
with Booms and Cables, that the Enemy might not separate them. But when this
succeeded well for a while, Murcus at length cast into them great numbers of
flaming Darts, which forced them to cast off as fast as they had got together,
and strive to get clear of one another, lest they should all burn together. So
that they again saw themselves exposed to the shock of Murcus Prows, or else
were soon encompassed each one by a great number. The Soldiers were in despair,
especially those of the Martial Legion; that, brave as they were, they must die
unrevenged. Some slew themselves for fear of being burnt; others leaped into
the Enemies Ships, and were cut in pieces fighting: Some Ships half burnt rowed
a long time upon the Water, with the Men wherewith they were laden; some
whereof perished by the Fire, others by Hunger and Thirst. Others grasping
Masts or Planks, were cast either upon Rocks or desert Shores. Some were saved
beyond all hopes; and some there were remained five days upon the Sea, licking
the Pitch, or eating Sails and Cordage; till at last the Waves cast them on
Shore. Many overpressed with so many misfortunes, yielded themselves with their
Vessels; among which were seventeen Galleys, whose Seamen and Soldiers turned
to Murcus's Party, and swore Fidelity to him. Calvinus their Captain, whom all
Men thought lost, returned the fifth day to Brundusium with his Ship. And this,
that may be called Shipwreck or Sea Fight, happened on the Ionian Sea, the
same day that the Battle of Philippi was fought, to the wonder of all the World
that knew it.

Brutus, having drawn together his Army, he spoke to them in this manner.

The Oration of Brutus.
IN what passed yesterday, Fellow Soldiers, we gained the advantage of our
Enemies in all points; for you begun the Fight cheerfully, though you had no
Command to do it; cut in pieces the fourth Legion, drawn up of purpose in that
Station because of its Valor; and pursued them into their Camp, which you took
and plundered: So that this Victory very much exceeds the Loss we suffered on
the Left Wing. You might have made it perfect, had you not thought it better to
rifle the Enemies Carriages, than utterly to ruin them; for most of you let the
Men escape, to fall upon the Baggage. In which, yet we had the better; for of
two Camps we had, they took but one; whereas, we became Masters of all they
had: so that in that point their loss was twice as great as ours. Hitherto
then, we have had all the advantage of the Fight. And now, to know the whole of
our Strength, you need only ask the Prisoners; they will tell you how scarce
Victuals are in their Army, how dear they cost, with what difficulty they are
brought to them, and that they can scarce find any more to bring: For Pompey,
Murcus and Aenobarbus, who keep the Sea with two hundred and sixty Ships,
prevent the bringing any from Sicily, Sardinia, Africa and Spain: They have
already drained Macedon, and now only Thessaly affords them a Subsistence; and
pray judge you if that can last any long time. Wherefore, when you behold them
urging you to fight; know that, ready to perish with hunger, they seek an
honorable death: Therefore our endeavors ought to be to fight them first with
Famine, and when we see it convenient for our purpose we may fall on; and shall
then find them so weak and feeble, they will not be able to defend themselves;
but let not us permit our Courage to transport us before it be time. If any one
say this is retreating instead of advancing, let him look upon the Sea behind
us; which brings us abundance of all Conveniences, offers us an opportunity of
overcoming without danger, provided you can but have patience, and not grow hot
when they come to make a Bravado, and defy you to the Battle: For it is not
Generosity in them, as yesterday's Fight made appear; but that they may deliver
themselves of another fear. But though I now desire you to moderate your
Courage, yet pray remember to act with the same warmth and vigor when I shall
demand the effects of it. And I promise you, when it shall please God to give
us a perfect Victory, to pay you punctually the Rewards we have promised; in
the mean time, for those brave things you did yesterday, I will this day give
every Soldier a thousand Drams, and the Officers proportionably.

These words were followed by the distribution of the Donative to each Legion;
to which some say, he added the Promise of giving them the Plunder of Lacedemon
and Thessalonica. On the other side, Caesar and Anthony foreseeing well that
Brutus had no design to fight, drew together their Army; to whom Anthony spoke
in this manner.

The Oration of Anthony.
THough when our Enemies talk of yesterday's Action, they may say, that in part
they gained the Victory, because they put some of ours to flight, and took our
Camp; yet in reality they confess you to be absolutely victorious; for I dare
assure you that neither to morrow nor in a long time after it, they will not
dare to engage you again unless they are forced to it; which is an indubitable
proof of your yesterday's victory, and their present fear. As Wrestlers in the
Gymnick Games, when they decline the strife, acknowledge themselves the weaker.
They have indeed assembled all this mighty Army only to come and encamp in the
passages into Thrace, and there continue: for the same fear that made them
fortify themselves at our first coming; hinders them from drawing out after
the disgrace they yesterday received, which was such as obliged the most
ancient and most experienced of their Generals to kill himself, a most ample
Testimony of their disorder. These are the reasons why they come not down when
we defy them, but trust more in their Rocks than their Arms. Now brave Romans
make your gallantry appear, and force them to fight as yesterday you forced
them, and certainly it would be dishonorable for you not to dare to assault
Cowards trembling with fear, or to suffer it to be said that men like you were
of less strength than Walls. For we are not come hither to remain all our
lifetime in the Field, where we cannot subsist, for all provisions will soon
fail us, and if that were not, yet every wise Man will put an end to War with
the soonest, and enjoy the sweets of peace the longest he can possibly: we will
therefore give orders to lay hold on time and occasion. We I say whose courage
and conduct you repent not to have yesterday followed, and you for your parts
let your Generals ^ee your bravery, now that they demand the effects of it, and
trouble not your selves for the baggage you yesterday lost; for our riches
consist not in that, but in the victory, which if we gain will not only restore
what our Enemies took from us, but make all they have ours; if therefore you
are in have to recover them, make haste to fight. Not but that yesterday we
recovered a great deal, it may be more than we lost; for they had in their Camp
all the riches of which they had robbed Asia; and you, when you came from home,
left behind you whatever was precious, and brought nothing but what was
necessary. So that if there were anything valuable in our Camp, it was your
Generals Equipage, a loss they are so far from considering they are ready to
venture all that they have left to make you perfectly victorious: nor shall
that hinder us from giving as a reward of your Victory five thousand Drams to
every Soldier, five and twenty thousand to every Centurion, and to every
Tribune fifty thousand.

Brutus on his side always kept one part of his Army at their Arms, in case he
should be forced to fight, and planted the other upon the way by which the
Victuallers brought their Provisions to favor their passage: there was a
little Hill near Cassi^s his Camp, of which the Enemies could not possess
themselves but with difficulty, because from the Camp they might be galled with
Darts and Arrows; yet Cassius had placed a Guard there for fear lest some might
be so bold as to come and lodge there. Brutus having flighted it, Caesar's
People one night seized upon it, bringing with them great quantities of Hides
and Hurdles to defend them from the Darts. This Hill being taken, ten other
Legions went and encamped five Furlongs off, near the Sea, and two Legions
advancing four Furlongs further, posted themselves so, that they might reach to
the very shore. Their design was to make an attempt either upon the Shore, or
cross the Marish, or by some other invention to cut off the passage of
Provisions to Brutus, but he took care to prevent them by building Forts
directly opposite to the Enemies Camp, which gave them no small vexation; for
they were manifestly afflicted with Famine, which daily more and more growing
upon them, as much increased their fears. Thessaly was not able to supply them
with Provisions enough, and by Sea they could not hope to have any, Brutus
being Master, besides the news of the Sea Fight on the Ionian Sea was come to
both Armies, which gave them fresh occasions of fear, and Winter approaching,
it would be an unsufferable annoyance if they should be forced to endure it,
encamped in the Marshes. To make the best provision in these straits they
could, they sent a Legion into Achaia to get in what provision they could, and
send it away speedily to the Army, but that could not all warrant them from the
dangers wherewith they were threatened. Wherefore seeing all their endeavors
could not oblige the Enemy to a Fight, and that in vain they every day drew out
into the Plain, they advanced up to the very Trenches with shouts and revilings
to incense Brutus's Men, who they resolved not to besiege, but to force to
fight at what rate soever. But Brutus continued firm in his first resolution,
the rather, because he knew they were ready to perish with hunger, and because
his Fleet had got the better in the Sea Fight, so that perceiving the despair
the Enemies want had brought them to, he chose rather to see himself besieged,
or endure any thing than fight with hunger-starved and desperate Men, who
expected no other relief than from their Arms. But to this the Soldiers could
not consent, nor endure to be thus shut up like Women, without doing any thing.
The Officers themselves complained not that they disapproved Brutus's design,
but that ascertaining themselves upon the disposition they beheld in the
Soldiers, they believed they should advance the Victory. The mildness and
courteous temper of Brutus to all Men occasioned much of this; for Cassius was
severe and imperious, the Officers of his Army executed his Orders without
asking a reason of them; and though they did not approve them, durst not
contradict them. But Brutus was willing to do all things with the approbation
and consent of those commanded in the Army. At last the Soldiers began to
gather in Companies, and to ask one another, Why has our General so ill an
opinion of us? what fault have we committed? have we not beaten and put to
flight our Enemies, cut in pieces their best Companies, and forced their Camp?
Yet he still dissembled it, and would not speak to them for fear of doing any
thing might reflect on his Honor, by suffering himself to be led by a blind
multitude, especially the Strangers, who as unconstant as Slaves would every
day be changing Masters, and on the first occasion would desert him. But when
he saw himself importuned by the Tribunes and the Centurions, who advised him
to take that opportunity, whilst the Soldiers burning with a desire to fight,
would possibly do something great, (besides, if any misfortune happened, they
could retreat within their Trenches, and defend themselves) he grew angry that
his Officers should give him such counsel, and suffer themselves to be so
easily carried away by the impatience of his Soldiers, who chose rather to
hazard the loss of all, than to overcome without danger. However, he consented,
though to theirs, and his own ruin; saying only this short sentence, I see I
am reduced to make War as Pompey did, and rather to be commanded than to
command. For my part I believe he said no more for fear of discovering what he
most of all feared, lest the Army which had formerly served under Caesar should
upon discontent go over to the Enemy. For this was what both Cassius and he had
from the beginning some suspicion of, and therefore took care not to give the
Soldiers any cause of dissatisfaction.

Thus Brutus drew his Men out of the Camp much against his will, and Brutus
going on Horseback from Quarter to Quarter with a severe look, put them in mind
of it, and the better to imprint it in their thoughts, as time gave leave,
spoke these words, You would needs fight, and have forced me to conquer in
another manner than I desired. But have a care you do not deceive both your own
hopes and mine: you have the advantage of the Hill, which fights for you^ all
behind you is on your side, whereas the Enemy are to defend themselves both
against you and Famine. To which discourse which he made as he went up and down
the Army, they answered him with shouts of joy and promises of well doing.
Caesar and Anthony in the mean time went each on their side through the Ranks,
encouraging their Soldiers with hand and voice, without flattering them, or
dissembling the condition wherein they were, being certain to die by Famine if
they got not the Victory, which was a powerful motive to spur them on: We have
found our Enemy, said they, and have got him now, Fellow Soldiers, out of his
Trenches* from whence we have taken so much pains to draw him; but after having
provoked him by so many defiances, have a care of your Honor, and let your
Actions make good the threats you have ^ttered. Choose now either to fight
against hunger an invincible Enemy which gives no Quarter, or against Men who
cannot stand before you, if you employ but your Arms, your Courage, nay, your
very Despair, as you ought to do. For our Affairs are in such a condition, they
admit of no delay, this day must put an end to the War, either by an entire
Victory, or a glorious death. If you come off victorious, you will in one sole
day and one only Fight get Provision, Treasure, Fleets, Arms, and besides all
the Donative we have promised you for the Victory, which will surely be ours,
if in giving the onset we remember the necessity to which we are reduced; and
after having put them in disorder, seize the Gates of their Camp, and drive
them either among the Precipices, or into the Plain, so that they can no more
rally, or shut themselves up in those Trenches, where, by a cowardice unheard
yet in any Enemy, they place their hopes not in fighting, but in not fighting
at all. By these words Caesar and Anthony so encouraged their Soldiers, that
they would have blushed not to have answered their Generals expectation,
besides there being no other way to remedy their want of Provisions, which was
augmented by what had happened on the Ionian Sea; they chose rather to undergo
the worst that could befall them in Fight, than to perish by a misery
inevitable, Upon these Motives the two Armies were inflamed with an incredible
ardour. The Soldiers no more remembered they were Fellow Citizens, but
threatened each other as if they had been two Nations that had been at a
perpetual enmity. Such power now had anger got over them above either reason or
nature. And in short, both Parties divined that this Battle would decide the
destiny of the Roman Empire, as indeed it did. After having employed one part
of the day in preparing themselves, about nine of the Clock two Eagles began to
fight between the two Armies, who observed them with a profound silence, till
such time as that on Brutus's side turning tail, gave occasion to the contrary
Party with great shouts to run on upon their Enemies. The Charge was fierce and
cruel, for they threw away, as useless, their Piles and all other Weapons
ordinarily used in Fight, to come to the Swords point; they gave neither blow
nor thrust in vain, and each side endeavored to break through, and disorder
the opposite Ranks, the one Party fighting for safety more than for Victory;
and the other for Victory only, remembering that by their importunity they had
forced their General to engage. Nothing was to be seen but slaughter, nor heard
but groans: as soon as any one fell, those of his Party drew him off, and
another fresh Man stepped in out of the next Rank to supply his place. Mean
while the Generals acted wonders, they run from place to place, and showed
themselves every where, encouraging those whom they saw had the advantage, and
exhorting others whom they perceived overpressed, yet to hold out a little till
they could send fresh Men to disengage them. Thus the Front of the Battle was
always full: yet at last Caesar's People either pressed forward by their fear
of Famine, or spurred on by his good fortune (for Brutus's Men were no way
faulty) made the first Line of the Enemies a little recoil, who gave ground
without any trouble or disorder, as if it had been a great Machine removed at
once; but at last the first Rank being broken, those who fought in it retreated
more nimbly into the second, and those of the second into the third, that it
begat some confusion, for they were both pressed upon by the Enemies and those
of their own Party, so that they betook themselves to a disorderly flight. And
now Caesar's Men, according to the command they had received, seized upon the
Gate, though with a great deal of danger; for they were sorely galled by Darts
from the Rampart, and by those who yet stood their ground without, till such
time as the Enemy, utterly defeated, and put to the Rout, not being able to
gain entrance, fled some toward the Sea, others to the Mountains by the Valley
of the River Sygastus. The Generals parted betwixt the Remainder of the Work;
and Caesar staying to oppose those who made offer to fally out of Brutus's
Camp, and to guard their own; Anthony took upon him the whole Function of
General: he pursued the Fugitives, cut in pieces those who yet made any
resistance, and fearful lest the chief Commanders escaping from this Defeat
should get on Foot another Army, he sent his Horse to all the Avenues, some to
one side, and some to another: one Party under the Command of Rascus the
Thracian, who knew the Country, fetched a turn about the Mountains, so that the
Trenches and Precipices of the Camp were surrounded on all sides by Guards
placed by Anthony, to hinder any person from retreating, and if any did come
out, they hunted them like Beasts: others followed Brutus upon full speed, and
were not far from him when Lucilius Lucinus seeing them come, stopped, and as
if he had been Brutus, prayed them to carry him to Anthony, and not to Caesar,
which confirmed their opinion that it was Brutus indeed, because he would not
fall into the hands of his mortal Enemy: Anthony having notice that they were
bringing him, went forthwith to meet them, making reflection upon the Fortune,
Dignity, and Virtue of the Man, and consulting with himself how he should
receive him. When he was near, Lucinus advancing, fiercely told him, Brutus is
not taken, nor shall basen^ss ever make a Prisoner of Virtue: for my part, I
only deceived those that would have taken him, and behold me now in your power.
Whereupon Anthony seeing the Horsemen that brought him ashamed at their
mistake, comforted them with these words: The Prize you have taken is not of
less value then that you thought to have made; nay, it is rather of much
greater, as a Friend is worth more than an Enemy. And at the same instant
delivering Lucinus into the hands of some of his Friends to have a care of him,
he afterward treated him like a person in whom he had confidence.

As for Brucus he escaped into the Mountains, where rallying some considerable
Thou know, O Jupiter, who causes all these woes. Meaning it by Anthony: and
indeed as (...) relate, Anthony himself, when in his own misfortune he was
touched ^ith repentance, acknowledged, that whereas he might have made an
accommodation with Brutus and Cassius, he made himself Sergeant to Octavius.
That same night Anthony encamped directly opposite to Brutus, without other
intrenchment than heaps of Arms and dead Bodies, which served him instead of
Ramparts; and Caesar having watched till Midnight, being sick withdrew, and
left the Guard of the Camp to Norbanus. On the morrow, Brutus seeing that the
Enemy quitted not their Post, and that he had with him but four Legions, and
those too not complete, he believed it not secure for him to speak to them
himself, but sent the Tribunes, ashamed of the fault they had committed, to
sound the minds of the Soldiers, and know of them whether they would undertake
to open themselves a way through their Enemies to regain their Camp where their
Companions still guarded their Equipage: but these People went so cheerfully to
the Fight, and had so long and so generously sustained the Enemy, as if God had
now forsaken them, returned answer to their General, that the counsel he gave
them was worthy of him but that for their parts they had so often tempted
fortune, that they would not now quite lose all hopes of making conditions for
themselves. Then said Brutus to his Friends; I can do my Country no farther
service, if they have taken such resolutions. And at the same time he called
Strato the Epirot his Friend, whom he entreated to kill him; Strato advising
him to think more seriously upon it, he called to one of his Domestics, upon
which Strato said, Brutus, since you are resolved, you have a Friend more ready
to execute your last command than all your Slaves. And saying so, thrust his
Sword betwixt his Ribs, which he received without moving. Thus ended Brutus and
Cassius the most generous and illustrious of the Romans, whose Virtue had never
been equalled, had it not been sullied with Caesar's Blood, who though they
were of Pompey's Party, from Enemies had made them Friends, and afterward
loved them like his Children. The Senate had always a great inclination for
them, and after their death did much compassionate their misfortune; for their
sakes only they had passed the general Amnesty, and when they left the City
gave them Government for fear they should pass for banished Men. Not that all
that composed this noble Body hated Caesar, or were satisfied with what was
done; for living they had been admirers of his Virtuee and Fortune; and dead,
they had solemnized his Funeral at the public Charge, confirmed all that he
had done, and granted places and trusts in the City according to the
Memorandums by him left, not thinking it possible for themselves to dispose of
it more prudently: and yet the affection they bore these great Men, and the
care they took of their safety, gave occasion to suspicions and scandals, so
mightily they were favored by the Senate. And the greater part of the Exiles
preferred them before Pompey himself; for Pompey being near the City might
incline to an Accommodation, whereas they were far off and implacable.
Moreover, when they saw themselves forced to take up Arms, they had in less
then two years got together more than twenty Legions, almost twenty thousand
Horse, more than two hundred long Ships, and considerable Stores of all warlike
Provisions. They had raised likewise vast Sums in Asia, either by good will, or
by force: and in those Wars they waged with diverse Cities who held on the
adverse Party, they almost continually came off victorious, till they became
Masters of all that Country extending from Macedon to the Euphrates: and all
those with whom they had mad War ranged themselves on their Party, and
continued faithful to them. They likewise made use of many Kings and Prices;
nay, of the Parthians themselves, though Enemies to the Romans; but this was
only in matters of small consequence, for in the great Affairs when all was
disputed, they stayed not their coming for fear of teaching a Barbarous Nation,
and always an Enemy, how to fight with the Romans. But what most of all ought
to be admired at, is, that the greatest part of their Army was composed of
Soldiers that had served under Caesar, and that after his being slain, the
affection of the Soldiery was unhappily transported to these his Murderers so
firmly, that they afterward were more steadfast in observing their faith to
them against his Son, than to Anthony himself who had commanded them under
Caesar, for none of them deserted Brutus or Cassius, even in their utmost
misfortune, whereas all of them revolted from Anthony at Brundusium in the very
beginning of the War he had with Octavius. They made their pretense of taking
Arms, both now and in Pompey's time not private advantage, but the name of the
Commonwealth; specious indeed, but usually of little effect, and when they
thought themselves no longer serviceable to their Country, they equally
despised their lives. As for their particular conduct, Cassius like the
Gladiators which mind only their Enemies, had fixed his thoughts upon War, and
thought of nothing else. But Brutus who in all times and occasions was a
Philosopher, was pleased to look into, and understand many things; yet when all
is said that possibly can be to assure them great Men, the assault they made
upon Caeser's person was the only cause none of their designs prospered: and
certainly it was no ordinary crime, nor of little consequence, for they had
unhappily murdered their Friend, their Benefactor, one who by right of War
might have disposed of their lives, and yet had saved them, their General in
the Senate, in a sacred place, clothed in his holy Robes, the most powerful of
all the Romans; and which is most of all, the Man of all the world most
serviceable to the Empire and his Country. And Heaven accordingly sent tokens
of its anger, and presages of their ruin; for when Cassius offered Sacrifices
to purge his Army, one of the Lictors put a Crown reversed upon his Head; a
Golden Image of Victory, which he then offered, fell down of it self, many
Flocks of Birds of Prey came and set about his Camp without making any noise,
and almost daily they saw Swarms of Bees. They saw likewise that Brutus
celebrating at Samos, in the midst of their Jollity and Feasting, wherein he
was not used to be out of temper, with a sudden passion uttered these Verses:
But 'twas Latona's Son, and angry Fate
Advanced my death --
And that when he was designing to pass out of Asia into Europe with his Army,
as he watched by night, and his Candle almost spent, there appeared to him a
Ghost with a strange kind of countenance, at which not moved, he asked what it
was, God or Man, to which the Ghost answered; Brutus, I am thy evil Genius,
thou shall see me again at Philippi. And in truth, it is said, it appeared to
him the day before the last Battle, and that when he drew his Army out of the
Camp an Ethiopian met him, whom presently the enraged Soldiers cut in pieces.
This was likewise a token of their misfortune, that Cassius after a Fight,
wherein the loss had been almost equal, fell so easily into despair; and that
Brutus, forced to violate the prudent resolution he had taken, to temporize,
yet engaged with starved People, whilst he had abundance of Provisions, and the
convenience of the Sea. Though these two Men had often been in many perilous
occasions, yet they were never wounded, but they murdered themselves as they
had murdered Caesar, and so received punishment for the crime they had
committed. Anthony finding Brutus's Body, covered it with a Purple ^obe, and
after having burned it, sent the Ashes to Servilia his Mother; his Army which
yet consisted of fourteen thousand Men, as soon as they knew of his death sent
Deputies to Caesar and Anthony, who having pardoned them, divided them betwixt
them. Soon after, those that were in the Forts yielded likewise, but on
condition that the Plunder both of the Forts and the Camp should be the Prize
of Caesar's and Anthony's Soldiers. As for the persons of Note and Quality who
had sided with Brutus, some fell in the Fight, others like their Generals slew
themselves, and others forced their deaths from their Enemies hand, of which
number were L. Cassius Nephew to the General, and the Son of the famous Cato of
the same name, who several times threw himself into the midst of his Enemies,
and at last took off his Headpiece, either that he might be the easier known,
or the easier killed, or both: Labeo known for his wisdom, and for being Father
to that Labeo to this day holding a prime degree among the famous Doctors of
Law, caused a hole to be dug in his Tent, to the proportion of his Body, and
after having given his Orders to his Servants, and writ to his Wife and
Children Letters, which he gave to his Slaves to carry, took by the Right Hand
one of the faithfulest of them, and having made him walk round about him,
according to the Roman custom when they enfranchise a Slave, commanded him to
take a Sword, and presented him his Throat, and so made his Tent his Grave. The
Thracian Rascus brought back many People from the Mountains; and for all the
service he had done Anthony and Caesar, asked only the pardon of his Brother
Rascupolis, and obtained it; which was enough to signify, that at the
beginning of the War these Thracians had no private difference, but seeing two
great Armies coming into their Country to make War, not knowing which would
have the better, one took one part, and the other the other, that happen what
would he on the conquering side might make his Brother's composition. As for
Portia Brutus's Wife and young Cato's Sister, when she heard they were both in
this manner lost, in spite of all her Servants care to prevent her death, she
swallowed burning Coals, and died. Many persons of Quality being escaped to
Thassa, some of them embarked to retire elsewhere, others with the remainder
of the Army chose Messala Corvinus and Lucius Bibulus for their Chiefs, to whom
they promised to do what they pleased; and the rest treating with Anthony's
Men, as soon as they came to Thassa delivered into their Hands all the Money,
Provisions, and store of other warlike Preparations. Thus by a hazardous
boldness Caesar and Anthony in two Fights won the greatest Victory that ever
till now was gained; for never did two such Roman Armies fight together. Nor
were their Forces raised in haste out of the Citizens, but all chosen Men, not
Apprentices, but old Soldiers, experienced both in Foreign and Civil Wars, all
speaking the same Language, all exercised in the same Military Discipline,
equal in experience and valor, which made it not easy for them to vanquish
each other: besides never in any War did so many Citizens once Friends and
Comrades fight with so much heat and courage, which is sufficiently proved in
that, considering both Battles, the Vanquisher lost not less than the
Vanquished. However, Caesar's and Anthony's Men found the prediction of their
Generals true; for in one day, and one Battle ^hey were not only delivered from
the danger of Famine, and the fear they were in of perishing, but this glorious
Victory gave them likewise all things in abundance, and the conceptions of many
Men's minds when they went to fight, that this day would decide the state of the
Empire, were accomplished; for the Commonwealth was never more restored, nor
was there any more need for the Citizens to come to these extremities, except
in the quarrel between Caesar and Anthony, which was the last of the Civil
Wars; for as to what happened in the mean time, when after the death of Brutus,
Pompey and all those who escaped from the Defeat, having yet considerable
Forces renewed the War, there was nothing parallel to it, either for Gallantry,
or affection of Cities, or Soldiers toward their Generals, besides no persons
of Quality were concerned, neither did the Senate declare for them, nor had
they ever such Reputation and Glory as Cassius and Brutus.

The End of the Fourth Book of the Civil Wars of Rome.
APPIAN OF ALEXANDRIA, HIS HISTORY OF THE Civil Wars OF ROME.
PART II.
BOOK V.
The Argument of this Book.
I. AFter Cassius and Brutus's death Caesar comes into Italy, and Anthony goes
into Asia. II. The Actions of Anthony in Asia. III. Cleopatra comes to visit
him in Asia, with whom he falls so deeply in love, he goes and spends the
Winter with her in Alexandria. IV. Caesar endeavors to settle the Colonies,
but finds it a matter of much difficulty. V. The Soldiers insolence, with the
causes of it. VI. Lucius Anthony's Brother, Fulvia his Wife, and Manius fall at
variance with Caesar. VII. An Accommodation vainly endeavored, they take up
Arms. VIII. The beginning of the War with the Siege of Perusia by Caesar. IX.
Lucius loses all hopes of defending himself, and capitulates. X. Lucius's
Speech to Caesar, yielding himself at discretion. XI. The taking and burning of
Perusia. XII. The end of this War. XIII. Anthony and Caesar distrusting each
other, make preparations. XIV. Brundusium besieged by Anthony. XV. Agreement
between them by Cocceius's intermission. XVI. Mutiny of the People against
Caesar, suppressed by Anthony. XVII. Accommodation between Caesar and Pompey.
XVIII. Anthony's Preparations against the Parthians. XIX. The Accommodation
between Caesar and Pompey broken, and Caesar prepares for War. XX. Sea Fight
between Caesar and Pompey's Lieutenants. XXI. Another Sea Fight between Caesar
and Pompey, wherein Caesar has the worst. XXII. Caesar loses most of his Ships
by storm. XXIII. Difference happens between Caesar and Anthony, which is
accommodated by Octavia's intermission. XXIV. Caesar invades Sicily with three
Armies. His Fleet again scattered by Tempests, so that he is forced to put off
the War till the next year. XXV. Pompey thinking himself freed from the War by
Caesar's misfortunes at Sea, calls himself the Son of Neptune: and Menodorus
his Admiral goes the second time and submits to Caesar. XXVI. Caesar again
invades Sicily, and Agrippa his Admiral engaging Pompey's near Miles, gains the
Victory. XXVII. Caesar going in person into Sicily to besiege Tauromenia is
assaulted by Pompey by Sea and Land, leaves Cornificius encamped, and about to
repass with his Ships, is defeated by Pompey, himself hardly escaping. XXVIII.
Cornificius with much loss rejoyns with Agrippa. XXIX. Caesar lands all his
Forces in Sicily, and cuts off Pompey from Provisions. XXX. The last Sea Battle
between Caesar and Pompey where Pompey is defeated. XXXI. Pompey flies toward
Anthony: and Lepidus endeavoring to seize Sicily, is by Caesar reduced to the
condition of a private Man, and sent to Rome. XXXII. Caesar's Soldiers mutiny,
who disbands one Party, and contents the other. XXXIII. He settles Sicily,
returns to Rome, where he is received with general applause. XXXIV. Pompey
would deceive Anthony, but is discovered. XXXV. He makes War upon Anthony's
Lieutenants in Asia. XXXVI. He is at length taken and slain.

AFter the death of Brutus and Cassius, Caesar went into Italy, and Anthony
into Asia, where meeting with Cleopatra Queen of Egypt, he no sooner beheld her
but he became inflamed with a love proved ruinous to them both, and occasioned
multitudes of miseries to all Egypt, wherefore the Egyptian Affairs will make a
part of this Story, yet without bearing that Title; for I have yet much to
treat of the Civil Wars, which continued long after the death of Brutus and
Cassius, though without any Head or General obeyed like them, till Sextus the
youngest Son of Pompey the Great, who had got together the Remains of Brutus
and Cassius's Party, being dead, and Lepidus despoiled of that part of the
Empire he pretended to, all the Sovereign Power remained divided between Caesar
and Anthony: which things passed in this manner; Cassius surnamed the Parmesan
was left in Asia by Cassius and Brutus, with a Fleet and an Army to officiate
there as Superintendent of the Revenues. After Cassius's death, in hopes that
the like would not happen to Brutus, he made choice of thirty of the Rhodian
Ships, which he thought himself able to manage with Seamen and Soldiers, and
burning all the rest except the Sacred Galley, that he might deprive the
Rhodians of attemptting any thing, took the Sea with this Fleet. Clodius whom
Brutus had sent into that Island with thirteen Ships, finding it revolted (for
Brutus was slain at the time of his arrival) drew off three thousand Men that
were there in Garrison, and went to join with the Parmesian. Toxilus came
likewise to them with many other Ships, and all the Tribute Money he could
gather at Rhodes. To this Fleet, grown already in some measure powerful,
flocked all those dispersed throughout Asia to exercise any Office, bringing
with them all the Soldiers they could, and to that end making Levies of Slaves,
Captives, and the Inhabitants of the Islands where they touched, Cicero the
Orator came thither likewise, and with him all the Persons of Quality escaped
from Thassa; so that in a short time great multitudes were assembled of
considerable Forces, both by Sea and Land, with Officers to command them. At
length taking with them one Lepidus, whom Brutus had left in Crete with some
Forces for Guard of that Island, they steered their course toward Murcus and
Aenobarbus, who had a powerful Fleet on the Ionian Seas: there dividing
themselves, one part joined with Murcus, and went toward Sicily, which was a
considerable recruit to Pompey; and the other stayed with Aenobarbus, who
designed to form a party by himself: thus out of the ruins of Brutus and
Cassius sprung up two new Armies. Mean while Caesar and Anthony made
magnificent Sacrifices to the Gods for the Victory at Philippi, testifying
their acknowledgments to the Soldiers by praises, till they could be able to
give them the promised Rewards. To this end Caesar took his way forthwith into
Italy, undertaking the charge of distributing Land to them, and giving them
Houses, a charge which he thought the least toilsome, and fittest for him, not
being well in health, whilst Anthony went into the beyond Sea Provinces, to get
together money to discharge their promises. After this they made a new division
of the Empire, and besides those Provinces they already had, parted between
them those which were Lepidus his share: for Caesar designed to make the
Transalpine Gauls free, according to the intention of his Father, and Lepidus
was accused of holding intelligence with Pompey. However Caesar had resolved to
give him other Provinces, if the information made against him proved not true.
They dismissed likewise all the Veterans, save only eight thousand Men, who
desiring to continue in the service, were shared betwixt them, and added to the
Pretorian Cohorts. Their Forces comprising likewise those which had quitted
Brutus's Party, still consisted of eleven Legions, and fourteen thousand Horse,
of which Anthony, because of his Expedition, took six Legions and ten thousand
Horse; so that Caesar had left him only five Legions and four thousand Horse,
with some Troops Anthony had left in Italy under the Command of Calenus, to
whom he gave order to deliver them to Caesar, instead of those taken from him,
and this done, Caesar began his March toward the Ionian Sea.

Anthony arriving at Ephesus, offered most magnificent Sacrifices to the
Goddess, and pardoned all those of Cassius and Brutus's Party that had taken
Sanctuary in the Temple, save only Petronius, one of the Conspirators against
Caesar, and Quintus who had delivered Dolobella to Cassius at Laodicea. After
which the Greeks and all the other Nations inhabiting Asia on the Confines of
Pergamus, having sent Deputies to him to treat their composition, he assembled
them together, and spoke to them in this manner:

The Oration of Anthony.
YOu know, Gentlemen, that Attalus your King having by testament given you to
the People of Rome, you soon found our Government more easy and more
advantageous than his: for we remitted you all those Tributes you were used to
pay him, till there rising up among us some disturbers of the public Peace, we
were forced to lay some Contributions upon you: we imposed them upon you, not
according to your Estates, or to continue the payment of them after the danger
was past, but we taxed you only in some part of your Revenues, to the end we
might participate together in the public charge. After which, when the
Commissioners sent by the Senate to collect them oppressed you, making you pay
more than demanded by us, C. Caesar discharged you of a third of all the
impositions, and settled orders, that no more injustice should be done you by
committing to your selves the collecting of the Moneys from the Country.
Notwithstanding which, that great Man to whom you were obliged being slain as a
Tyrant by our By way of Irony.
good Citizens, you have supplied with vast Sums the Murderers of your
Benefactor against us who did all we could to revenge him. Wherefore Fortune
favoring the juster cause, and having decided it, not as you would have had
it, but according to reason, we should have punished you more rigorously if you
had assisted them with your Arms; but because we are willing to believe that
you have done nothing but what you were forced to, we shall deal the more
gently with you. We stand now in need of Money, of Lands, and of Cities, to
discharge our selves of the promises made to our Soldiers to reward them after
the Victory. Our Army is composed of twenty eight Legions, which, accounting
the light armed Foot, amount to one hundred and seventy thousand Men, besides
the Horse and some other Companies: you may therefore judge what Money we are
obliged to raise for so great a number of Men. As for the Lands and Cities,
Caesar is gone into Italy, to distribute them, and to speak it in a word to
change all the habitations of that people; so that to the end you be not forced
to quit your Lands, your Cities, your Houses, your Temples, and your
Sepulchers: you must furnish us with Money, but yet not all (for you cannot do
that) but a part, and the least part too: and I believe when you know our
Demands, you will go away satisfied. You have in two years paid our Enemies
ten years Tribute, we ask no more of you; but it must be paid in a year, for
necessity presses us, besides we favor you, and you cannot but confess the
penalty is less than the crime.

Thus spoke Anthony with design to raise Money to pay eight and twenty Legions,
though at the time of their Accommodation at Modena they had promised rewards
to three and forty complete Legions, but the War had reduced them to that
number. Scarcely had he pronounced his last words, but the Greeks prostrating
themselves upon the ground, humbly represented to him, that after the violences
they had suffered from Brutas and Cassius, they were not worthy of punishment
but pity, that they would willingly have given to their Benefactors all their
Goods, if they had not been robbed of them by their Enemies, whom they had not
only been forced to furnish with all their stamped Money, but likewise to
deliver up all their Plate and Goldsmiths Work to be by them coined. At length
they prevailed with him that they should only pay nine years Tribute in two
years; and besides this Taxes were laid upon the Kings, Potentates and free
Cities according ^o their Estates. As he went from Province to Province, Lucius
Brother to Cassius, and all who were afra^d of him hearing of his clemency at
Ephesus, came to ask pardon. He forgave all save only those who had a hand in
the Conspiracy against Caesar, for to them he remained implacable He comforted
those Cities had sustained the greatest losses, exempted the Lycians from
Tribute, exhorted the Xanthians to rebuild their City, gave the Rhodians
Andros, Tino, Naxos and Mynda, which soon after he again took from them because
they used them hardly, he declared those of Laodicea and Tharsus free and
exempt from all Impositions, and by Ordinance which he caused to be proclaimed,
discharged from servitude all the Thracians had been sold. The Athenians coming
to wait upon him, he gave them first Tino, then Egina, Icono, Zea, Sciatha and
Pararetha. After which passing through Phrygia, Mysia, Galatia, Cappadocia,
Cilicia, the Lower Syria and Palestine, he charged them with great Impositions.
To whatever place he came he took cognizance of all differences between the
Cities and the Kings. As in Cappadocia between Sysinnus and Ariarathes, where
he adjudged the Kingdom to Sysinnus for his Mother Glaphyra's sake, who was
very beautiful. And in Syria, whence he expelled all the Tyrants who had set
themselves up in every City.

Cilicia, Cleopatra came to him, to whom having complained, that she had not
assisted Caesar, she made no other excuse, but that at the beginning of the War
she had sent four Legions to Dolobella, that afterward having fitted out a
Fleet, she was prevented by Tempests, and the sudden death of that young
Consul. That though Cassius had twice with threats demanded her assistance, she
had refused it. That when they were upon the Ionian Sea, she was her self
embarked upon a magnificent Fleet, to come and join with them, without any
consideration either of Cassius or Murcus's Naval Power, but that bad weather
and other losses with her own sickness had made her return into Egypt, where
she received news of the Victory. Here Anthony, wounded in the very soul by the
charms of this Queen, became as foolishly in love as if he had been a young
Man, though he were now above forty years of age. True it is, he is reported to
have always had a natural inclination for this passion, and that formerly when
she was but a child he conceived a love for her, having seen her at Alexandria,
when he served under Gabinius as General of the Horse. Anthony therefore all
upon a sudden neglecting the care of his Affairs, Cleopatra disposed of all
things at her pleasure, without considering either reason or justice, insomuch
that Arsinoe her Sister having taken Sanctuary at Miletum in the Temple of
Diana Leucophryna, Anthony sent some thither who slew her, and commanded the
Tyrians to deliver up to Cleopatra, Serapion Governor of Cyprus, who was fled
into the Sanctuary at Tire, because he had taken part with Cassius; and gave
the same order to the Aradians, touching another who had fled for refuge into
their City, because the Brother of Cleopatra, overcome by Caesar in a Naval
Engagement on the Nile, being seen no more, this unhappy Man had told the
Aradians, that he was Ptolemy; and at last ordered the Ephesians to bring
before him Megabyzes the High Priest of Diana, because he had received Arsinoe
as a Queen; but the Ephesians having besought Cleopatra in his behalf, pardoned
him. Thus in a short time might a strange change be perceived in Anthony's
spirit, caused by that passion which was the beginning and end of all those
miseries afterward befell him: for after Cleopatra's return to Egypt he sent
his Horse to Palmyra a City near the Euphrates, to sack it; his pretense for
doing it being very slight, for he could accuse the Inhabitants of nothing, but
that being situated between the Dominion of the Romans and that of the
Parthians, they strove to accommodate themselves the best they could with one
and the other; and indeed it was a City of Trade, through which were transported
from Persia to Rome all the commodities of India and Arabia, but his main
design was to enrich his Cavalry. The Palmyrians foreseeing it, had caused all
they had of value to be carried to the other side of the River, on the Banks of
which they planted good Archers to defend the approach, (for there are the best
Archers of the world) so the Cavalry finding not a person in the City, returned
without drawing their Swords, or making any purchase. The Parthian War which
happened soon after, seems from hence to have taken its brith, many of the
Tyrants of Syria being retired with them: for Syri^ till the time of Antiochus
the Pious, and his Son of the same name, had been governed by Kings of the race
of Seleucus Nicator (as we have already said, writing the Affairs of Syria) but
this Province being reduced by Pompey's Arms, he placed therein Scaurus for
Governonr, to whom the Senate sent others for Successors, among whom was
Gabinius who went to make War against the People of Alexandria: to Gabinius
succeeded Crassus, who was slain by the Parthians, and after him Bibulus. At
length after the death of C. Caesar, during these troubles which were almost
universal, there rose up in every City Tyrants, supported by the Parthians; for
after Crassus's misfortune they had spread themselves into Syria, and had
intelligence with the Tyrants, which Anthony now forced to retire to them, whom
after he had expelled, charged the People with Imposts, and made this
impertinent attempt upon the Palmyrians, he took ^o farther care how to appease
the troubles wherein he beheld the Province, and put his Army in Garrison, and
went to find out Cleopatra in Egypt, where being magnificently received, he
spent the Winter, without any mark of Command, both habited and living like a
private Man, whether because he was in a Country dependant on another, and in
the Royal City, or that he might the more pleasantly pass away the time whilst
Winter lasted: for he banished all manner of care, and dispensed with the
Officers, put off his usual habit to wear a square Robe after the Greek
Fashion, with white Attick Hose, such as are worn by the Priest's of Athens and
of Alexandria, which they call Phaecasion, and only visited the Temples,
Schools, and Philosophy Assemblies, holding conversation with none but the
Greeks in service of Cleopatra, for whose sake alone he had undertook this
Journey.

Mean while, Caesar going to Rome was very much distempered in Body,
Brundusium, where the danger was so great, that a report was raised of his
being dead: but at length by degrees the Distemper diminishing, he entered the
City, where showing Anthony's orders to those who had charge of his Affairs,
they presently signified to Calenus, that he should deliver to him the two
Legions, and wrote to Sextus in Africa to surrender up the Province, which was
performed. After which Caesar finding that Lepidus was not guilty of what he
had been charged with, quitted to him Africa, instead of those Provinces that
had been taken from him, and exposed to sale what were left of the Goods of the
Proscribed. But when it came to the point of sending Soldiers to Colonies, and
giving them Lands, many difficulties presented themselves. The Soldiers
pretended they ought to give them the best Cities of all Italy, according to
the promise made them before the War. And the Cities demanded that all Italy
should contribute to this charge, or that others should draw lots with them,
and that for the Lands the Generals should pay the purchase; but there was no
Money in the Treasure. There were daily to be seen coming to Rome young and
old, Women and Children, who assembling in the great place, or in the Temples,
with tears in their eyes cried out: That being Italians, without having
committed any fault, they were driven from their Lands, and their Houses, as if
it had been a conquered Country. The Romans had compassion on them, and their
deplorable condition drew tears from a multitude of People, especially when
they considered that this War had not been undertaken for the public good, but
to satisfy the ambition of the Chiefs, who had no other aim than the seizing
of the Empire. Besides, they were sensible, that they gave not the Soldiers the
recompense promised after the Victory, nor sent them into Colonies with any
other intent, but that the Commonwealth should never more get Head again, the
Usurpers of the Government having so many People, obliged by their good turns,
ready to take up Arms at their first command. Caesar made excuse to the Cities
from the necessity constraining these things, telling them withal he was much
afraid the Soldiers would not be so content neither. And indeed they were not
content; for they oppressed their Neighbors, and took not only more than the
Lands set out to them, but likewise the best they could pick out. And in vain
did Caesar reprove them, or gave them other things to hinder them from these
violences; for their Generals standing in need of them to secure their
Dominions, they stood but in little awe. Moreover, the five years of the
Triumvirate drawing to an end, they stood in each others assistance for their
common security, the Generals, that by the Soldiers means they might keep their
Command, and the Soldiers, that by their means they might keep possession of
what had been given them; for all their hopes being that the grant would stand
good so long as the Donors were Masters of the Empire, they were concerned to
attempt any thing for the maintenance of their power: wherefore Caesar gave
many other gifts to the maimed Soldiers, borrowing for this purpose Money from
the Temples, which increased the affection of the Soldiery to him, who found
themselves obliged by his having gratified them with Cities, Land, Money and
Houses. Those who were despoiled of all these things made great clamours, and
continual railed against him, but however they affronted him, he bore all to
content the Soldiery.

Lucius Brother to Anthony now Consul, Fulvia his Wife, and Manius, who had the
charge of his Affairs in his absence, observing Caesar's Conduct, and to the
end that all might not seem to be his doings, or the whole obligation be owned
to him alone, and consequently he have all the thanks, to Anthony's prejudice,
used all the artifices possible, to delay the sending the Soldiers to the
Colonies, till his return out of Asia: but when they could not succeed in that
design, because of the earnestness of the Army, they required of Caesar liberty
to be themselves the Conductors of Anthony's Forces. By the agreement made with
Caesar he had quitted to him the employment, but they denied it, and Fulvia
going her self to the Head of the Legions with Anthony's Children, besought
them not to suffer their General to be deprived of the Glory and satisfaction
to testify his good will to them: besides, Anthony's reputation was very great
among the Soldiery, and high in esteem with all the world; for Caesar being
sick at the time of the Battle at Philippi, all the honor of that Victory
seemed due only to Anthony. Though Caesar saw well this was a violation of
their agreement, yet in favor to his Associate in the Empire, he consented,
and so they conducted the Legions to their Colonies, where they committed
strange disorders; for that Caesar might not seem more indulgent than those who
conducted them, they gave them all manner of License. Many Cities neighboring
on those where they had Lands set out, having received much injury, came to
complain to Caesar, telling him, that the Colonies were much more injust than
the Proscriptions; for they proscribed only their Enemies, whereas by means of
the Colonies multitudes of innocent persons were ruined, Caesar was not
ignorant of the injuries done, but he could not remedy them, for he had no
Money to pay the old Proprietors the purchase of their Lands, and he would not
delay the recompense promised to their Forces, because of the Wars they were
still engaged in: Pompey was powerful at Sea, and able to strave the City by
cutting off Provisions: Aenobarbus and Murcus were fitting out another Fleet,
and another Army; so that if Caesar and Anthony performed not their promise,
they had reason to fear they should be but ill served by their Soldiers. Add to
which that the five years of the Triumvirate was near expired, and they had
therefore still more reason to gain the good will of the Army; wherefore they
passed by many things patiently, and seemed as if they did not see their
insolences; till such time that one day as Caesar was at the Theater, a
Soldier who could get no room in the place appointed for them, had the
impudence to go seat himself with the Roman Knights. The People having observed
it, Caesar caused him to be taken away, whereat the rest were so enraged, that
when the Plays were done, gathering about Caesar they demanded their companion,
because not having seen him afterward they thought him dead. The Soldier
coming in at the same time they imagined him brought out of Prison, and though
he denied it, and told them the matter as it passed, they told him he lied, had
been suborned, and was a Traitor to betray his Comrades. Such was their
insolence in the Theater, as a consequence to which, he having appointed them a
day for their meeting in the Field of Mars, for the division of Lands, they
were so hasty that they came thither long before daylight. And fretting at
Caesar that he came not so soon as they thought fit, Nonius a Centurion freely
reproving them, and representing to them the respect they oughtto their
General, who made them not wait out of any pride or scorn, but because he was
sick, they began to rail at him, and call him flatterer, and by degrees their
fury increasing, proceeded to affront and throw stones as him. He thereupon
fled, they pursued him, he threw himself into the River to make his escape, but
there they killed him, and drawing his Body out of the Water, brought it and
laid it in the way by which Caesar was to pass. His Friends hereupon counseled
him not to go and expose himself to these Bedlams, but lest absence might more
increase their fury, he went, and seeing Nonius's Body, turned off by another
way. There as if this had been the crime only of some particular Men, he
exhorted them for the future to spare one another, made division of their
Lands, permitted those had done good service to demand the usual rewards, and
gave them likewise even against his own judgment, to many that were unworthy,
insomuch that the multitude admiring his gravity, began to repent and be
ashamed, and withal to demand that those guilty of Nonius's death might be
punished, upon which he told them he knew them well, but that he was content
with their confession and repentance, and would remit the punishment. Thus
having obtained not only pardon for their fault, but likewise gifts and
rewards, they all upon a sudden changed their anger into applause and
acclamations. These two examples chosen among many others make it evidently
appear how difficult it is, to govern in such times as those the spirits of the
Soldiery, which is occasioned when Generals are not commissioned to the Command
of their Armies by lawful Authority and Nomination as ordinarily happens in
Civil Wats, and when Armies are not raised according to ancient custom, for the
service of their Country. And in reality all those People bore not Arms for the
Roman People, b^t for those that had set them on foot, not by order of War, but
by private promises, not against the Enemies of the State, but to satisfy
particular animosities, not against Strangers, but against Citizens their
Equals in Birth and Dignity: all these things ruined Military Discipline. The
Soldiers conceited not they made War, but did service to particular persons
that would oblige them, and from whom they hoped for acknowledgments, and the
Commanders made use of them as they had occasion for their own advantage. And
whereas the ancient Romans never pardoned any Runaways, they now gave them
rewards; for the Pleas were equally specious, each party deeming the other
Enemy to the State, the Leaders themselves making the same pretense, and all
saying they had no other end than the service of their Country. Thus the
Soldiers were his, gave most; as well as whole Armies and many illustrious
persons, thought they did not deserve the name of Runaways, which things caused
often shifting of sides; for on what ever party they ranged themselves, they
still served their Country: wherefore the Generals that were sensible of this,
were fain to wink at many things, and confided not so much in the fidelty of
their Soldiers, or the authority of the Laws, as in the power of their
Largesses, so ordinary were tumults and mutinies now in Armies.

Rome was distressed for want of Provisions; for Pompey hindered the bringing
any by Sea, and in Italy they had almost given over Husbandry, because of the
continual Wars, and that little Corn there was the Armies consumed. There were
likewise committed in the Cities many Robberies and Violences by night, after
which no inquest was made, because they laid all upon the Soldiers; wherefore
the People shut up their Shops, and drove away the Magistrates, as standing no
more in need of Officers or Artificers in a miserable City, where all things
were exposed to Robbery and Plunder: Lucius a Lover of the public welfare,
and Enemy to the power of the Triumvirate, which seemed to last beyond the time
prescribed by its establishment, had often sharp words with Caesar; and when
the old Proprietors of Lands came to complain to the Magistrates of the
oppression of the Soldiery, he alone would hear their complaints, and promise
them his protection, and they on the other side engaged themselves to serve him
in what ever he would employ them. This gave occasion to Anthony's Soldiers,
and to Caesar himself, to reproach him that he busied himself against his
Brother, and to give advice to Fulvia to have a care of kindling an
unseasonable War. Notwithstanding which Manius maliciously cunning, having
buzzed in her ears, that as long as Italy was in peace her Husband would stay
with Cleopatra, but if once there were War would presently come away, she
suffered her self to be persuaded, and out of her womanly passion obliged
Lucius to seek some occasion of a Rupture. To which effect Caesar being gone to
settle the rest of the Colonies, she sent along Anthony's Children together
with Lucius, that it might not be thought he alone had the authority. And he
happening to command some part of his Cavalry to march speedily to the Sea
Coast of the Brutians, lest Pompey should plunder them, Lucius either fearing
or dissembling that he was afraid these Horse were drawn off against him and
his Nephews, fled forthwith to Anthony's Colonies, desiring of them Guards for
his security, accusing Caesar of infidelity toward their General: Caesar on
the contrary sent to tell them that there was no shadow of change in the
Friendship betwixt them and Anthony, but that Lucius sought a pretense to make
them arm against each other, because he was an Enemy to the Triumvirate in the
maintenance of whose power the Soldiery were to be concerned, if they would not
be driven from their Colonies, and that for his Horse they were still in the
Country of the Brutians executing his orders. The principal Officers of
Anthony's Army understanding well all these things met together at Theana with
Caesar, where a Treaty was made on these conditions: That the Triumvirs should
not disturb the Consuls in the Government of the Commonwealth; that they
should give Lands only to those had served at Philippi: that Anthony's Forces
in Italy should as well as Caesar's have a share of the Proscripts Money, and
in the produce of the sale lately made of their Goods: that for the future no
one should constrain them to serve out of Italy, except two Legions which
Caesar might employ in the Expedition against Pompey: that those Caesar should
send to Spain might pass the Alps without being impeded by Asinius Pollio, and
that Lucius satisfied with these conditions should dismiss his Guards, and
follow the functions of his authority with all security. These Articles being
agreed upon by the Officers of Anthony's Army, there were but two of them
executed, and Salvidienus passed the Alps in spite of those would have hindered
him: insomuch that the performance of the rest being delayed, Lucius retired to
Praeneste, saying, that having no Guards, he was afraid of Caesar, who was
always accompanied with Soldiers, because of his quality of Triumvir. Fulvia
likewise fled for refuge to Lepidus, out of fear, as she said, for her
Children, and she had a better opinion of him than of Caesar. However it were,
both one and the other wrote to Anthony, and some of their Friends who could
lay open all the Affair carried the Letters, of which I could not find the
Copies, though I have made a curious search. Things standing in this posture,
the principal Officers of both Armies met together to terminate the differences
yet between their Generals by an equitable judgment, resolved to force to a
compliance those that would not submit, and they invited Lucius his Friends to
join with them; upon their refusal, Caesar to render them odious, began to vent
his complaints in all places as well to the Officers of the Armies, as the
principal Citizens, which occasioned a great many persons to go from the City
to Lucius, to beseech him to have compassion of Italy, almost ruined by Civil
Wars, and to make choice of some, who, with them, or with the Officers might
endeavor an accommodation. Lucius had both a respect for them and the matter
whereof they spoke. But Manius answered fiercely, that whilst Anthony amused
himself to raise Money among Strangers, Caesar by his cringing and flexibility
secured to himself all the Militia, and all the strong places of Italy. That to
this purpose, to the damage of Anthony, to whom Gaul appertained, he had
enfranchised it, and that instead of ^ighteen Cities designed to reward the
Veterans, he had granted them almost all Italy, and that whereas Lands were due
only to twenty eight Legions that had served, he had given to four and thirty;
that he had taken Money out of the Temples, which had never before been done
whatever Famine were in the City, and that on pretense of a War against Pompey,
but indeed to gain himself Soldiers to employ against Anthony: besides he had
appraised the Proscripts Goods at such low rates, that it was rather giving
than selling them: wherefore if he really desired peace, he ought first to give
an account of what he had done, and do nothing for the future but what should
be resolved upon common deliberation. Thus Manius by this arrogant answer would
have had Caesar no more to have the arbitrament of any thing, but that the
agreement made between him and Anthony (by which each had an absolute power in
things whereof he took charge, and what one did the other was to approve)
should be utterly void. Wherefore Caesar seeing they were absolutely determined
for War, began to prepare likewise. Two Legions that were in the City of Ancona
having advice hereof, they having formerly belonged to Caesar, and since to
Anthony, and having still respect for both, sent Deputies to Rome to entreat
them to consent to an Accommodation: whereupon Caesar answering that he had no
design against Anthony, but that Lucius would make War upon him, the Deputies
and Officers of Anthony's Forces joined together, deputed some to Lucius, to
persuade him to admit of a determination of the Differences between Caesar and
him, by the way of Justice, letting him know, that if he would not submit, they
would take the matter into their own hands. After having obtained of Lucius
what they desired, the City of Ga^es was made choice of for the meeting, being
the half way betwixt Rome and Praeneste, where Benches were set up for the
Judges, and two Tribunals, from whence to plead Causes: Caesar who came first
had sent some Horse on the way which Lucius was to come, to discover if there
were no Ambush; these met with some of Anthony's Horse which Lucius had
likewise sent to scout before, and flew some of them: Lucius retreated
thereupon for fear (as he said) of Ambushes, and never afterward
notwithstanding all the prayers of Anthony's Officers, and all their assurances
to be his safe conduct, would return, so that those who labored for Peace, not
succeeding, it came to an open War, and they began already to tear one another
in pieces by bloody Declarations. Lucius's Forces were composed of four Legions
he had raised when he entered into the Consulate, besides the eleven Legions of
Anthony's commanded by Calenus, and all those were in Italy: and Caesar had
four Legions at Capua and his Pretorian Cohorts with six Legions Salvidienus
brought him from Spain. For Money, Anthony's Provinces where there was no War,
furnished Lucius; and Caesar drew from all his except Sardinia, at present
engaged in War, and borrowed from all the Temples with promise to pay the
interest, till he restored it to the Temple of the Capitol in Rome, at Antium,
at Lavinia, at the Of Arycia, where was the Nymph Aegeria.
Forest, and at Tibur, in all which Temples there are to this day store of
consecrated Treasure.

Italy, for Pompey's Force and Reputation was much increased by the Procripts,
the old Inhabitants of the Colonies, and even by this breach with Lucius; for
all those who either feared their own safety, or were despoiled of their goods,
or had any dislike to the present state of Affairs, flocked in to him; besides
a great number of Youth, who sought their Fortune by War, and thought it
indifferent to engage under one or another General, since they were all Romans
came in to him, as judging his cause the more just: Besides he was grown rich
with Prizes taken at Sea, and had store of Shipping with all things necessary;
Murcus likewise had brought him two Legions with fourscore Ships, and there was
coming to him another Army from Cephalonia, which makes some think that if he
had now invaded Italy, he might easily have become Master of it, oppressed, as
it was, with Famine, and rent in pieces with Intestine Divisions: but Pompey by
an inexcusable imprudence chose rather to defend himself, than assail others,
which proved in the end his own loss. As for what happened in Africa, Sextus,
Lieutenant to Anthony, according to Lucius Command, had delivered up his Army
to Fagio, Caesar's Lieutenant, afterward having received Orders again to
withdraw it; upon Fagio's refusal to return it, he declared War against him,
and having raised considerable Forces of disbanded Soldiers and Africans, with
such assistance as he had from the Kings of that Country, goes to charge the
Enemy, cuts in pieces the two Wings of his Army, and makes himself Master of
his Camp; so that Fagio despairing, and thinking he was betrayed, slew himself.
Thus Sextus repossessed himself of both the Provinces of Africa, and Bocchus,
King of the Moors, by Lucius persuasion went to make War against Carinas, who
commanded in Spain for Caesar. On the other side Aenobarbus, with seventy
Ships, two Legions, a great number of Archers and Slingers, some light armed
Infantry, and Gladiators, cruising on the Ionian Sea, wasted all those Coasts
that acknowledged the Triumvirate; and coming nigh to Brundusium, took part of
Caesar's Galley's, burnt others, and having forced the Inhabitants to shut
themselves up within their Wall, spoiled their Country. Caesar sent thither one
Legion, and commanded Salvidienus to hasten out of Spain, whilst both persons
labored to raise men in Italy, where there happened some fights, some
skirmishes, and many surprises. The people had a far greater inclination for
Lucius's, then for the adverse party, because they made War against the new
Colonies, and not only the Cities, whose Lands they had divided to the
Soldiers, declared for him; but likewise all Italy, who feared the like
oppression; so those that Caesar had sent to borrow the consecrated Money, being
driven out of the Cities, and some of them slain, the Inhabitants became
Masters of their Walls, and declared for Lucius. But if these took his part,
the new Possessors of Lands sided with Caesar, as if both one and the other had
only regarded their proper interests. Affairs standing thus, Caesar assembled
in the Palace the Senate and Roman Knights, and thus spoke to them.

The Oration of Caesar.
I Know I am contemned by Lucius party, as weak and infirm; and I know that
contempt will increase upon this my conventing you; but I am yet assured I have
a strong and powerful Army, as well that which Lucius wrongs by detaining from
them their due rewards, as the other which fights under my Command; nor is
there any thing wanting to me, but good will, for I cannot easily resolve on a
Civil War, unless constrained, or desire to engage those Citizens, remaining to
destroy each other; but especially, I delight not in a War like this, which is
not to be in Thrace or Macedon, but in the very heart of Italy, and which must
occasion infinite miseries, though no man were to be slain, wherefore I have
hitherto temporized, and do now protest, that I neither complain of Anthony,
nor have given him cause to complain of me: It Is your interest, and you ought
to let Lucius and his Counselors know they are in the wrong, and let me
entreat you to reconcile us together. If they will not believe you, but
continue obstinate, they shall soon find my delay was an effect of my prudence,
and not of my fear, and you may bear witness for me to Anthony, that I am
forced to what I do, by the insolence of Lucius.

Caesar having said these words, they sent forthwith to Lucius to Preneste, who
made them no answer, but that blows had already been struck on both sides, and
that Caesar deceived them, having already sent a Legion to Brundusium, to
hinder Anthony's landing, besides Manius showed them a Letter from Anthony,
whether true or forged is uncertain, commanding them to defend his Authority by
Arms, whereupon the Deputies of the Senate demanding, if any had invaded
Anthony's; for if so they would make them do reason by ways of Justice. Manius
thereupon proposed many other things, so they went away without doing any
thing; yet they went not together to return Caesar any answer of their
Legation, whether they had given him an account of it privately, or that they
were ashamed, or for some other reason.

Caesar took the Field, leaving Lepidus with two Legions for guard of the City,
at which time many persons of quality declared their dislike of the Triumvirs,
by going over to Lucius. Now what passed most considerable in this War was
thus: Two of Lucius his Legions quartered at Alba mutined, and having turned
away their Officers, were upon the very point of revolting, when both Lucius
and Caesar were upon their way thither; Lucius got there first, and by the
force of Money and Promises, kept them in their Duty. After which, as Firmius
brought him another Army, Caesar fell upon his Rear-guard, and forced Firmius
to an Eminence; from whence escaping the next night into a City of his faction,
called Sentia; Caesar would not pursue him, for fear of an Ambush, but on the
morrow besieged the place and the Army. On the other side Lucius having a
design upon Rome, sent before three Regiments, who with wonderful diligence
entered the City privately by night, himself followed with the flower of his
Horse and the Gladiators, and was received by Nonius, who having that day the
guard of the Gate, with all his Soldiers submitted to him, and Lepidus went out
to meet with Caesar; Lucius thus entered the City, assembled the people, and
told them that Anthony and Lepidus should in few days give an account of the
violences committed in their Magistracy, and that Anthony was disposed to quit
that unlawful power, to accept of the Consulate, that is to say, a Dignity
established by their Ancestors, instead of a tyrannical Dominion. These words
were received with the universal joy of the people, who already imaginging the
Triumvirate abolished, made acclamations to Lucius, giving him the Title of
Emperor. Soon after he left the City to march against Caesar, passing by his
Brother's Colonies, where he raised another Body of an Army, and fortified all
the Cities he found affectionate to his Party: but Barbarius* Questor to
Anthony being returned upon some difference he had with his General, told all
Men, that he was mightily incensed against those made War upon Caesar, to the
ruin of their common power, which made many that discovered not Barbarius's
deceit, desert Lucius, and join with Caesar. Lucius then marched to meet with
Salvidienus, who was coming with an Army of Gauls to Caesar, followed in the
rear by Asinius and Ventidius, two of Anthony's Lieutenants; so that he could
not well pass farther, when Agrippa, one of Caesar's best Friends, fearing lest
Salvidienus should be enclosed, went and seized upon Duchy of Milan.
Insubria, from whence Lucius drew great Succors, thinking thereby to oblige
Lucius to turn his Arms upon him, and quit his design upon Salvidienus, who
would not fail to follow him in the rear, nor was he deceived in his
imagination: Lucius therefore frustrated in his hopes, would willingly have
joined with Asinius and Ventidius, but Agrippa and Salvidienus lying on each
side him, sorely annoyed him, and had given good order for guarding the
Straits; when he saw himself engaged in this manner, not daring to venture a
Battle, he retired night to Perugia a strong City, where he encamped, staying
for Ventidius* Agrippa, Salvidienus and Caesar himself coming in at the same
time, with the three Armies there besieged him, Caesar having speedily drawn
together all his Forces, that Lucius who was the Head of the War might not
escape him. He sent likewise some Forces toward Asinius and Ventidius to
retard their march, though they made no great haste, for they approved not of
this War, and did not well know Anthony's mind; besides there was jealousy
between them, and being of equal Dignity each was ambitious of the sole Command
of the Army. Mean while, Lucius thus besieged durst not hazard a Battle, being
the weaker both in number and quality of Soldiers, his Army consisting for the
most part of new raised Forces, nor durst he take the Field, or adventure a
Retreat, being on all sides so belayd; wherefore he sent Manius to Ventidius
and Asinius to hasten them to come to his relief, and gave order to Titinnius
to go with four thousand Horse to waste the Country under Caesar's protection,
that he might oblige him to raise his Siege, whilst he shut himself up in
Perugia, resolved if he were forced to it to spend the Winter there, or at
least so much time till Ventidius came up to him with the other Army, but
Caesar presently set his Men to work on the Circumvallation, which he was
forced to make six and fifty Furlongs in circuit, because of the Hills, among
which the City is seated, from whence he drew two Lines down to the Tiber to
hinder any thing from being brought to the City. Lucius on his part caused the
foot of the Hills to be fortified with Trench and Palisado like to the
Circumvallation, whilst Fulvia sent fresh dispatches to Ventidius, Asinius,
Ateius and Calenus to hasten them with all speed to his relief, and withal
raised a new Army, which she sent to him under the Command of Plancus, who
meeting with one of Caesar's Legions on their March to the City, cut them in
pieces. As for Ventidius and Asinius doubtful of Anthony's mind they
temporized, and yet pressed to it by Fulvia, they began to march on and to come
to disengage Lucius, Caesar together with Agrippa presently set forward to meet
them, after having placed a very good Guard before Perugia, but they not being
able to join Plancus, or put themselves into a condition to ^ight, retired one
to Ravenna, the other to Rimini, and Plancus to Spoleto; and Caesar having left
a part of his Forces to hinder their conjunction, returned to the Siege at
Perugia. There he with all possible diligence caused to be made a double Ditch
of thirty Foot wide, and as many deep, on which he raised a Rampire, with
fifteen hundred Towers of Wood, sixty Feet distant one from the other, with
store of Redoubts, and all things necessary for defense as well against the
Besieged, as those that would force his Lines; this was not done without
frequent Sallies, and many Engagements, wherein Caesar's Light-armed Foot did
wonders in lancing their Javelings; but when Lucius's Gladiators could come to
a close Fight with them, they made a great slaughter. The work being brought to
perfection, the Besieged began to be afflicted with Famine, which augmented
from day to day, for neither Lucius nor the Inhabitants had made any Provision
of Victuals, which coming to Caesar's knowledge, he caused the Lines to be
guarded with double care and diligence. Now on the Eve of New-years-day, being
a solemn Festival, Lucius, imagining they would not have so much care of the
Watch as ordinarily, went and stormed the Gate of their Trenches, believing,
that by opening this passage, he might gain an entrance into the City for those
other Forces he had in diverse Quarters, But the Legion then upon the Guard
presently running in, and Caesar himself with the Pretorian Cohorts, Lucius
after a long Fight resolutely maintained, was forced to a Retreat: and this
happened at the same time that at Rome, where they had laid in stores of Corn
for Provision for the Soldiers, the People detesting both the Wars and the
Victories, ran to all the Magazines, and pillaged them of all the Corn. After
this Ventidius and those with him judging it shameful for them not to relieve
Lucius, perishing with Famine, set forward to their assistance, and at first
overrun those Forces which Caesar had left to oppose their Designs, but
Agrippa and Salvidienus coming in with a greater power, they were fearful of
being surrounded, and so turned off to Fulcinia, a little City about one
hundred and sixty Furlongs from Perugia, where Agrippa having besieged them,
they gave Lucius notice of there being there, by great Fires which they kindled
in the Night time, Ventidius and Asinius were of the mind to sally out and
fight: Plancus on the contrary said they had better stay a while, for fear of
engaging themselves between Agrippa and Caesar; so the Besieged in Perugia, who
had rejoiced at the first sight of the Fires, seeing their Companions came not,
imagined they had met with some obstacle, but when the Fires were quite
extinct, then they believed them absolutely defeated; whereupon Lucius
oppressed with Famine, would once more attempt an Assault by night, and from
the first Watch till it was light did all he could to force the Lines, but
being every where repulsed, he retreated into Perugia, where having taken an
exact account of the Provision remaining, he forbade giving any to the Slaves,
whom yet he set Guards over; lest flying to the Enemy they should betray the
extremities of the Garrison; so that whole Troops of those poor wretches might
be seen walk staggering through the City, and as far as the Rampire, eating
Grass, or green Leaves, or whatsoever they could find; and when they were dead,
Lucius caused them to be interred very deep, lest if he should have burnt them,
the Enemy should have knowledge of it, or letting them lie, they should
putresie, and by their corrupt stench engender the Plague. But when there
appeared no end either of Famine of Funerals, the Soldiers quite wearied out,
desired Lucius they might once more attempt the Enemies Trenches, promising
themselves this time to carry them, he approved their resolution, and told
them: In our last Assault we fought not so stoutly as the present occasion and
our n^^ssity did require: now we have no other way but either to yield, or if
that seem worse then dying, to sight it out to the death. All of them
courageously accepting of these conditions, they besought him to lead them on
in open day, that if there were any Cowards among them the night might not keep
them from being known. Lucius made his Sally about break of day with a great
quantity of Iron Instruments, many kind of Ladders, Tools of all sorts to fill
up the Trenches, with portable Towers to lay Bridges over to the Walls, all
kind of missile Arms, with Stones and Bundles of Osiers or Wattles to throw
upon the Stakes. They then began the Assault with such fury, that they
presently filled up the Ditch, passed the Palisade, and gained the Foot of the
Wall, which some labored to undermine, and others brought Ladders to scale,
others drew close up their Towers with a wonderful contempt of their lives,
though there fell upon them Showers of Stones, of Darts, and of Leaden Bullets.
They assaulted the Lines in several places at once, so that the Enemy
distracted, could not so vigorously apply themselves to the defense of all:
whereby it happened in one Place Lucius's Men having brought up a Tower, had
cast their Planks upon the Wall, where, though fighting in extreme danger, as
being galled both in Front and Flank by the Enemies missile Arms, they at
length forced their way, and some of them gained the Wall, followed pell mell
by others; and possibly their despair had met with a happy success, if the
Enemy, knowing there were not many of these Machines, had not opposed the most
valiant of Caesar's Soldiers, to these weak and tired Men, who soon tumbled
them down the Walls, and having broken in pieces their Machine with contempt,
wounded them from above* yet with broken Arms and wounded Bodies, their very
voices almost failing them, they still resolutely stood to it; but when they
saw the Bodies of those who had been slain upon the Wall stripped and thrown
after them, the contumely seemed unsufferable, and they stood like Men struck
dumb, or like Wrestlers at the Gymnick Games that would breath themselves a
while: so that Lucius seeing them in this condition, took compassion on them,
and sounded a Retreat. However, when Caesar's Soldiers, joyful for their
success, made a great noise with their Arms as a mark of Victory, they reentred
with fury, and bringing out Ladders (for they had no more Towers) in a
desperate mood attempted to scale the Wall, but all in vain, and indeed it was
impossible; wherefore Lucius running about to all places, besought them not to
cast themselves away, and brought them off weeping, and much against their
wills. After this fierce Assault, Caesar, to prevent the Enemies from making
the like upon his Trenches, lined his Walls with Courts of Guard, giving order
that at the first signal they should mount the Rampire, some in one place, and
some in others: and this they did continually, though none assailed them, with
design to exercise the Soldiers, and strike terror into the Enemy.

Mean while Lucius's Soldiers began to be quite out of heart, and to neglect
Caesar. Lucius himself, touched with pity to see so many Men so miserably
ending their lives, would willingly have consented to an Accommodation, if he
had not had with him some particular Enemies of Caesar's, who were fearful to
fall into his hands; but when it was known that he kindly received the very
Runaways, all Men's minds grew more inclinable to peace, so that Lucius fearing,
left if he alone resisted, they would deliver him to Caesar; wherefore, seeing
some appearance of hopes, he thus spoke to his Army:

The Oration of Lucius to his Army.
I Had a design, Fellow Soldiers, to restore my Country to liberty, seeing the
Triumvirate changed into a Tyranny, and that this Authority thought to be only
established against Brutus and Cassius, continued yet after their deaths; for
Lepidus being deprived of his part of the Empire, whilst Anthony is gathering
up Money in the remote Provinces, this Man who besieges us disposes all things
at pleasure, and the Roman Laws, which he makes a mock of, serve him but for a
pretense: but when to remedy this disorder, and redeem the Commonwealth from
Slavery, I requested that after having given the promised Recompenses to the
Soldiery he should lay down the Sovereign Authority, not obtaining it by
request, I sought to constrain it according to the power invested in me by the
quality of Consul, but he raised a report among the Soldiers that I opposed the
Colonies in favor of the ancient possessors: it was a long time ere I knew he
slandered me in this manner; and when it was told me, I could not believe it,
since I had my self appointed Commissioners to divide the Lands among you:
nevertheless the greater part giving ear to this Calumny, joined themselves
with Caesar's Faction to make War upon us; but have made War against
themselves, as time will make it appear. For your part I am your witness, that
having adhered to the juster cause you have suffered infinitely, and at last we
are not overcome by our Enemies, but by Famine, which has forced our Officers
to desert us. True it is, it would be much for my Glory to fight for my
Country, even to the last extremities, and my good will would be recompensed
with immortal praises, but I cannot resolve it, out of my affection to you
whose safety I prefer before my own Glory. I will therefore send Deputies to
the Conqueror to desire him to deal as he please with me, so he will but
pardon you who are his Fellow Citizens, and have been his Soldiers, who have
committed no fault in fighting for a cause so apparently just, and who have not
been overcome by Arms, but by want of Provisions.

After these words, he chose three out of the principal Men of his Army, and
sent them to Caesar, which drew tears from the eyes of all the rest, deploring
either their own, or their Generals condition, who having such noble and
generous thoughts for his Country was yet reduced to that shameful necessity.
The three Deputies represented to Caesar, that they were all of the same
Country, had formerly fought under the same Colors, that the Chief of both
Parties had been good Friends, and that he ought to imitate the Generosity of
the Ancients, who were haters of deadly dissentions, with many other things
tending to the same purpose. Caesar who well knew the Army was composed of
Veterans and new raised Soldiers, cunningly answered, that he would pardon
Anthony's Men for their General's sake, but for the rest they should yield upon
discretion. This he spoke publicly, but drawing apart Furnius one of the three
Deputies, he gave him hopes of a general pardon, excepting only his particular
Enemies, but those who thought themselves of that number, suspecting this
private conference between Furnius and Caesar was to their prejudice, reviled
him at his return, and besought Lucius either to obtain a general Peace, or to
continue the War without Quarter, since it had not been undertaken for any
particular animosities, but for the Commonwealth. Lucius moved to compassion
for persons of equal quality with himself, praised their resolution, and
promised to send other Deputies; but after saying he could find no Man fitter
for that Negotiation than himself, he went without a Herald, only some running
before to give Caesar notice Lucius was coming. Caesar presently came forth to
meet him, and when they were in sight of each other, attended by their Friends,
and in the habit of Generals: Lucius stopped his Train, and taking with him
only two Lictors came forward, thereby making known his intention: Caesar
having observed it, imitated his Modesty, the better to give him assurance of
his future good will; and when he saw Lucius advanced to the Trenches in token
he yielded to discretion, he came out himself, that Lucius might still be at
freedom to dispose of his Affairs: these signs of their good inclinations they
by turns gave each other at their approach: but when they were met near the
Trench, after mutual salutations, Lucius thus began:

The Speech of Lucius to Caesar.
CAesar, had I made this War with Strangers, I should have thought it Brutus
and Cassius, with whom you could make no peace, subsisted. After the Heads of
that Dissension were dead, the Remains of their Party (if yet there be any
Remains) being still in Arms, not against the Commonwealth, but because they
feared you, and the five years of the Triumvirate being expired, I demanded the
restoration of the Magistrates power, according to the ancient order,
preferring the good of my Country before mine own Brother, because I hoped for
his consent at his return, and in the mean time to finish the work whilst I was
in authority; which had it proceeded from you, you alone had had the Glory of
it; but not being able to persuade you, I went to the City where I thought I
might by force effect it, being a Citizen of considerable Birth, and withal
Consul. This is the sole cause of this War, which ought neither to be
attributed to my Brother, nor to Manius, nor to Fulvia, nor to the distribution
made of Lands to those Soldiers had served at Philippi, nor to the compassion I
might have conceived for those turned out of their Beings, since I my self sent
Commissioners on the places to settle my Brother's Legions in their Colonies,
and to drive out the old Proprietors: but it was your invention to throw upon
me and the Colonies the cause of the War, and an artifice by which gaining the
hearts of the Veterans you have got the Victory; for being persuaded I was
their Enemy, they have done all they could against me, and you had reason to
make use of this policy, being in open War with me. Now you have got the
Victory, if you are an Enemy to your Country treat me likewise as an Enemy; for
I had a design to serve it, if I had not been hindered by want of Provision.
These things I speak yielding my self (as I have said) freely up, to use at
your discretion, and coming alone to you, that you may perceive what thoughts I
have heretofore had of you, and what I still preserve. Thus far touching my
self: for what concerns my Friends, and all the rest of the Army (if my advice
may not be suspected by you) I will give you what shall be for your advantage.
Let me counsel you not to use them hardly for any difference between us, lest,
being still a Man exposed to the reach of Fortune, you make those serve under
you backward in hazarding themselves to danger, when by your example they shall
have learned there is no hopes of safety but in Victory. But if the counsels of
an Enemy are not to be listened to, I beseech you not to punish my Friends for
my fault, or misfortune; but rather lay all the Load on me, who am the only
cause of all that has happened. I have on purpose left them behind me, for fear
lest if I had spoke in their presence it might have looked like an Artifice to
gain favor for my self.

To which Caesar answered:

The Answer of Caesar to Lucius.
WHen I saw you, Lucius, coming to me without a Herald, I presently came out of
my Trenches to meet you; that you being still Master of your self might still
be at liberty to resolve, say and do what you judged most advantageous for you;
but since acknowledging your fault you yield to discretion, there is no need of
a reply to what you impute to me with a great deal of cunning, and little
truth. From the beginning you have had a desire to vanquish me, and you now
have done it: for had you desired to capitulate, you had deservedly met with a
severe Conqueror, but now without any conditions you come to yield up your
self, your Friends and Army, you have taken away all anger, taken away all
advantage I had over you; for I am now to consider not so much what you deserve
as what becomes me, which I am glad to have the opportunity of doing, out of
respect to the Gods, for my own interest, and for your sake, Lucius, who shall
not be deceived in that opinion of me which brought you hither.

These are near upon the very same words as I found them in the Commentaries of
those times.

Caesar admired the generous and unshaken mind of Lucius so well biassed with
prudence; and Lucius the great clemency and expeditious brevity of Caesar, and
others read in both their Faces the tenure of what they had spoke: Lucius
presently sent his Tribunes to receive orders from Caesar, who brought him the
Muster-Rolls of the whole Army, according to the custom to this day when a
Tribune comes for Orders, he presents the General with a Counter-roll of those
serve under him. After having received Orders, they set the Watch as before, it
being Caesar's pleasure that for that night each Army should lodge in their own
Camp: on the morrow he offered Sacrifices, and Lucius sent him all his Forces
in Arms, and ready to march upon service. As soon as they came in sight of
Caesar they saluted him, calling him Emperor, and that done, drew up by
Legions the Veterans apart from the new raised Men in a place by him appointed.
After having performed the Ceremonies of the Sacrifices, Caesar seated himself
upon a Tribunal with a Wreath of Laurel on his Head, which is the Badge of
Victory, and commanded them all to lay down their Arms, then he gave order for
the Veterans to draw near, that he might terrify them with reproaches of
ingratitude; but his mind being known, all Caesar's Soldiers, whether suborned,
or moved with affection toward their Fellow Citizens in distress, stepped out
of their Ranks, and advancing toward Lucius's Men, who had formerly been their
Comrades, began to embrace them, weeping and emploring Caesar for them,
continuing their cries and their embraces, till such time as the new raised Men
being touched with a like compassion, the whole place became the object of
universal ^orrow; wherefore Caesar changing his design, having with much
difficulty silenced their cries, thus spoke to his own Men:

The Oration of Caesar.
YOu have always, Fellow Soldiers, so behaved your selves to me, that you can
ask nothing I can deny: I believe the new Soldiers may have been forced to
serve Lucius; but for those there who have so often born Arms with you, and
with whom you now petition me, I would fain ask them what injury I have done
them, or what they ever requested of me that I refused them, or what advantage
they could hope from others might oblige them to take up Arms against me,
against you, and against themselves; for there is no labor to which I have not
exposed my self for settling of the Colonies, in which they are to be sharers;
but take it not amiss if their insolency make me be no further concerned for
them.

But they instantly entreating him not to give over his care of them, and
renewing their entreaties for their pardon.

I grant you, said he, whatever you desire, let them be pardoned, provided for
the future they be of one mind with you.

Which after they had all promised, they with acclamations gave thanks to
Caesar, who permitted some of his to entertain the others as their Guests, and
ordered the multitude to encamp apart in the same place where they had first
drawn up, till such time as he appointed Cities for their Winter Quarters, with
Commissioners to conduct them. After which, before he rose from the Tribunal,
he caused to come to him Lucius, and all the persons of Quality with him, among
whom there were many Senators and Roman Knights, all cast down, and sorrowful
for this sudden and extraordinary change, who were no sooner come out of
Perugia, but a Garrison entered the City: when they were come before Caesar, he
caused Lucius to be set down by him, and his Friends and Centurions took charge
of the rest, after being advertised to treat them honorably, but yet to have a
care to secure their persons. He sent likewise to the People of Perugia, who
begged pardon from their Walls, to come to him without their Senators, and he
pardoned them, but their Senators were all imprisoned, and not long after
slain, except only Lucius Emulus, who being at Rome one of the Judges of
Caesar's Murderers, openly gave sentence against them, and persuaded others to
do the like, to purge the City from that abominable villainy. Caesar had
resolved to give the plunder of Perugia to his Soldiers. But Caestius one of
the Inhabitants, a crack-brained Fellow, who because he had bore Arms in
Macedon styled himself Macedonicus, set fire to his House, and threw himself
into the Flames, which the wind driving throughout the whole City, it was in a
moment reduced to ashes, all but the Temple of Vulcan, such was the end of
Perugia, a City famous for its antiquity; for it is said to be one of those
twelve Cities built by the ancient Tuscans.
Etruscans, at their first coming into Italy, wherefore they formerly adored
Juno after the manner of the Etruscans, but now those who divided among
themselves the ruins of the City, took Vulcan instead of Juno for their
Tutelar Deity. The day following, Caesar passed a general pardon; but the Army
still grumbling and growing tumultuous against some, forbore not till they were
slain, who were all mighty Enemies to Caesar, such were Canutius, C. Flavius,
Clodius Bythinicus and others.

Perugia, together with the War against Lucius, most certainly a very perilous
one, and which in all likelihood might a long time have tormented Italy. For
Asinius, Plancus, Ventidius, Crassus, Ateius, and others of this Party, who had
in all considerable Forces, amounting to thirteen Legions, and six thousnad
five hundred Horse, reputing Lucius the Head of this War, retired every one a
several way toward the Sea, part to Brundusium, part to Ravenna, part to
Tarentum, some of which went to seek out Murcus and Aenobarbus, others Anthony,
still followed in the rere by Caesar's Men, who offered them peace, which they
refusing, were by them much infested in their March; but two of these Legions
left by Plancus at Cameria, Agrippa gained by fair promises. Fulvia likewise
with her Children fled to Puzzoli, and from thence to Brundusium, convoyed by
three thousand Horse, sent her by her Husband's Lieutenants. At Brundusium she
embarked on five long Ships, sent for out of Macedon, and departed with
Plancus the future companion of her Voyage, who through cowardice deserted the
rest of the Army, of which Ventidius after took the Conduct. Asinius drew
Aenobarbus to Anthony's Party, which they both gave him assurance of by
Letters, and because he was to come into Italy, they secured convenient places
for his landing, and laid in stores of Provision. On the other side, Anthony
having still other Forces near the Alps commanded by Calenus, Caesar designed
to make himself Master of them, out of a jealousy he had of Anthony, to keep
them for him if he proved his Friend, or to strengthen himself against him if
it were true that he was not; but whilst he was seeking a plausible occasion to
do it, Calenus died; so that Caesar laying hold of the opportunity, goes with
all celerity and seises upon the Army, and with it of Gaul and Spain two of
Anthony's Provinces, Fulvius Son to Calenus out of fear yielding up all without
opposition. Thus Caesar being at one push strengthened with eleven Legions, and
these great Provinces, after having removed the Commanders, and put his own
Creatures in their places, returned to Rome.

But Anthony detained the Deputies of the Colonies sent to him, either
Alexandria he came to Tire, from thence passing to Cyprus, Rhodes, and the
Province of Asia, he heard of the success of the Siege of Perugia, for which he
blamed his Brother, his Wife, but especially Manius. At Athens he met with
Fulvia, flying from Brundusium, and Iulia his Mother, whom Pompey (to whom she
was fled for refuge) sent upon long Ships, accompanied with the chief Men of
Quality in his Party, L. Libo his Father-in-law, Saturninus and others, who
beholding Anthony's Magnificence, would have persuaded him to an alliance with
Pompey against Caesar: to which he answered; That indeed he was obliged to
Pompey for sending to him his Mother, which he would acknowledge in due season;
and if he must make War with Caesar, would embrace his alliance; but if the
friendship betwixt them stood firm, he would do his endeavors to reconcile
Pompey to Caesar. Thus Anthony then answered: but when Caesar returned to the
City out of Gaul, understanding that some had sailed from Pompey to Athens, but
not hearing what answer they brought back, he began to make the old Soldiers
and new Inhabitants of the Colonies jealous of Anthony, as if Pompey were ready
by his allowance to come and driven them out, and place in their ancient
possessions the old Proprietors, of whom many indeed had fled to him for
refuge, which though easily believed, yet could not the affection of the
Veterans to Anthony be so easily withdrawn, so much credit had the Battle of
Philippi got him in the hearts of the Soldiers. Caesar, though he thought that
he should be stronger than Anthony, Pompey and Aenobarbus all together in the
number of Legions, for he had already above forty; yet neither having Shipping
nor time to build any, he was much afraid that if they with five hundred Sail
should come and cruise about all the Coasts of Italy, they would in a short
time starve him; wherefore though many Virgins were offered him in Marriage he
wrote to Maecenas that he should treat for him with Scribonia Sister to Libo
Father-in-law of Pompey, that by this means if it were necessary he might make
peace with Pompey: this was no sooner known to Libo, but by Letters he gave
order that the Marriage should forthwith be concluded. Henceforwards Caesar
when at any time he conceived a jealousy of any of Anthony's Friends or Forces
under his Command, he sent them to several places out of the way, and Lepidus
he dispatched with six of Anthony's Legions he had in some suspicion, into
Africa the Province designed for him. He sent likewise for Lucius, whom after
he praised for his piety to his Brother, that what by his orders he had done,
he would take the fault off upon himself; he yet accused him of ingratitude,
that after so great an obligation he would not confess to him what every one
talked publicly; that Anthony had entered into League with Pompey against him.

The Speech of Caesar to Lucius.
CErtainly, said he, trusting to your words, after Calenus's death I ^reserved
for Anthony by the means of my Friends those Legions and Provinces that he
might not beleft without command; but now perceiving his designs against me, I
take them all as my own; but you, if you please, may securely go to your
Brother.

Caesar spoke thus either to try Lucius, or that what he said might be told to
Anthony: but Lucius answered him as he had done before.

The Answer of Lucius to Caesar.
I Knew, said he, I must confess, the mind of Fulvia aspiring to Dominion, and
I made use of my Brother's Forces with hopes to suppress the power of you all;
and if now my Brother comes to subvert Monarchy openly or privately, I will go
to him, once more to make War for my Country against you, though so highly
obliged to you; but if he seeks Associates to maintain his tyranny, I will
serve you against him so long as I shall believe you affect not the Monarchy;
for I shall always prefer my affection to my Country before either Friend or
Relation.

Caesar now again admiring Lucius, told him, that whatever offers he made, he
should not accept of his service against his Brother; but that he thought such
a Man as he fit to be entrusted with the whole Province and Army of Spain, in
which he should have Peduceius and Luceius for his Lieutenants. Thus he sent
Lucius out of the way with Honor, having given private orders to his
Lieutenants to watch him narrowly.

Anthony having left Fulvia sick at Sycione, set fail from Corcyra to pass the
Ionian Sea with two hundred Ships he had built in Asia, wherein he had but very
slender Forces. Upon advice that Aenobarbus came to meet him with a great Fleet
and a mighty Army, some were jealous that he would not prove faithful to the
new made peace, because he had been condemned as an Abettor of Caesar's death,
and therefore put in the number of the Proscribed, and had taken part against
Caesar and Anthony in the Battle of Philippi. But Anthony, that he might not
seem to distrust any thing, held on his course with five of his best Ships,
commanding the rest to follow at a distance; when Aenobarbus with all his Fleet
and Army were come in sight, Plancus, who was on board of Anthony, began to be
afraid, and advised him to stop and send some before to make trial of the Faith
of this doubted Man. But Anthony made answer; That he had rather perish by the
violation of a peace, than save himself by betraying the least fear. They were
now come so nigh, that they knew easily each other, and the Admiral's Ships
stood Stem to Stem with their Flags aloft, when Anthony's chief Lictor standing
on the Prow, according to custom, whether he had forgot that they were making
toward a Man, whose Faith was in some question, and who had under his Command
an Army of his own, or moved by the customary duty of Subjects and inferiors
to their Superiors, he commanded them aloud to strike their Flag, which they
obeyed, and brought up their Ship along Anthony's side; then the Commanders
having saluted each other, Aenobarbus's Soldiers called Anthony Emperor, and
Plancus with much ado recovered out of his fright. Anthony having received
Aenobarbus into his Ship, they sailed to Paleonta where Aenobarbus's Land
Forces lay, where he resigned up his Tent to Anthony as his General. From
thence embarquing they sailed to Brundusium, kept with five Cohorts for Caesar,
where the Inhabitants shut their Gates against them, against Aenobarbus as
their ancient Enemy, and against Anthony for being in their Enemies company:
Anthony enraged at this refusal, and thinking it only a pretense, and that
indeed Caesar's Men by his orders hindered his entrance, went and seized upon
the Neck of the Peninsula, drew a line cross, and fortified it; for the City
stands in a Peninsula in form of a Crescent: so that now there was no coming to
the City by Land, the Line being drawn from one Sea to the other: he likewise
raised Forts round the Port, which is very spacious, and in the Islands
wherewith it is encompassed, and sent along the Coasts of Italy to seize of all
commodious places, and dispatched withal at the same time to Pompey to oblige
him as much as possibly he could with his Fleet to infest Italy. He very gladly
sent Menodorus with a strong Fleet and four Legions into Sardinia, which then
held for Caesar, where he drew two Legions to his Party, scared with the
agreement between Anthony and Pompey. In the mean time Anthony's Men took
Saguntum in Ausonia, and Pompey besieged Thuria and Consentia, and sent his
Horsemen into their their Territories. Caesar assailed in so many places at
once, sent Agrippa to relieve those in Ausonia, who, passing by the Colonies,
commanded the Veterans to follow him, as if he were to lead them against
Pompey; but when they were told he acted by Anthony's orders, they stole away
every Man to their Houses, which most of all terrified Caesar. However, he went
in person to Brundusium with another Army, and by seasonable Caresses drew the
Veterans to their duty; they now following him out of a real respect and
reverence to his person, and yet holding among themselves secret conferences of
reconciling him with Anthony, whom if they found obstinate, to make War, they
would then defend their General's honor, who was now some days detained at
Canusium: in Men he much outnumbred Anthony; but when he saw Brundusium so
beleaguered, that he could no way force the Lines, he contented himself to
encamp near it, to view the Enemy, and wait a favorable occasion. Though
Anthony was so well fortified in his Trenches, that he could well have defended
himself against much greater Forces than Caesar's, yet he sent with all speed
for his Army out of Macedon: and in the mean time by this stratagem amused
Caesar, he sent by night on board the long Ships and Vessels of Burden great
numbers of Countrymen and Servants, and in the day time landed them again one
after another all armed in the sight of Caesar, as if they had been armed out
of Macedon. And now his Machines being in a readiness, he began his Batteries
upon Brundusium, to Caesar's great grief, who could no way relieve the place,
when toward the Evening news was brought to both Parties that Agrippa had
retaken Tiguntum, and that Pompey repulsed from Thur^n, continued the Siege of
Consentia, which much troubled Anthony; but when he heard that Servilius with
twelve hundred Horse was gone over to Caesar, he could not contain himself, but
rising from Supper he mounted with such of his Friends as were in a readiness,
and accompanied only by four hundred Horse with a singular boldness beat up the
Quarters of fifteen hundred near Uria, and so surprised them, that they
yielding, he brought them the same day before Brundusium, such an opinion of
his being invincible had the Battle of Philippi got him. The Pretorian Soldiers
heightened by this success, went afterward one after another up to Caesar's
Trenches, upbraiding their ancient Comrades for bearing Arms against Anthony,
who had saved their lives at Philippi. Whereupon the others answering, that on
the contrary they made War upon them, they came at length to Conferences,
wherein they began their reciprocal complaints; on one side that they had
refused them entrance into Brundusium, and corrupted Calenus's Army; and the
other, that they had besieged Brundusium, made inroads into Ausonia, treated
with Aenobarbus one of Caesar's Murderers, and with Pompey their common Enemy.
At length Caesar's Men discovered their inclinations to the other, that they
followed Caesar without having forgot the Virtues of Anthony, and that their
design was to procure a reconciliation between their Generals, to which, if
Anthony would by no other means be inclined, then they must repel force with
force; all which they went and published even before Anthony's Trenches.

Fulvia, who not able to bear her Husband's reproofs, was fallen sick with
discontent that he was angry with her, for he had left her sick, and at his
departure not vouchsafed to visit her, which hastened her end* All Men believed
her death commodious for both Parties; for she was a Woman of a turbulent
spirit, and who only out of her jealousy of Cleopatra had kindled this War.
However, Anthony seemed much grieved at the accident, as believing himself the
cause. There was one Lucius Cocceius intimately a Friend to both Generals, whom
the Summer before Caesar had sent with Cecinna as his Envoy to Anthony then in
Phaenicia, Cecinna forthwith returning, he had till now stayed with Anthony.
Thus Cocceius laying hold on the occasion, feigned that he was recalled by
Caesar, and desired audience to take his leave, and Anthony permitting him to
depart, he trying him farther, asked whether he would not write to Caesar,
having received Letters from him by the same Cocceius, to which Anthony
replied: What can we now write to one another being Enemies, unless it be
mutual reproaches; besides I then returned him answer by Cecinna, the Copies of
which you may take if you please. To this cavil Cocceius made retort that
Caesar was not to be called an Enemy, who had so favorably treated Lucius and
other Friends of his. But me, said Anthony, he has shut out of Brundusium,
seized upon my Provinces, and Calenus's Army. As for his favor showed only to
my Friends, that has not so much preserved their Friendship to me, as made them
my Enemies by his kindness. Cocceius hearing him enter upon complaints, would
no farther move an angry Man, but went to Caesar, who seeing him, and wondered
he was returned no sooner, Is it (said he to him) because I saved your
Brother's life that you are become my Enemy? C^cceius answered; Is it so you
call your Friends Enemies, and take away their Provinces and Armies? Caesar
hereto replied; After Calenus 's death should I have left in the hand of such a
young Man Forces of such consequence, Anthony being absent, Lucius discontent,
Asinius and Aenobarbus hard by, and ready to employ them against us? 'Twas the
same reason made me hasten to get Plancus 's Legions into my hands, lest they
should have joined with Pompey, as the Horse did who went over into Sicily. To
which Cocceius made answer, that things had been otherwise represented to
Anthony, yet he did not believe them, till as an Enemy he was shut out of
Brundusium. That was not done by any command of mine, replied Caesar, nor could
I divine that he was coming to land there, or dream that he should come along
with Enemies. The Inhabitants of Brundusium, and the Officers left there in
Garrison to oppose the attempts of Aenobarbus, did without orders from me shut
their Gates against Anthony, newly confederated with Pompey our common Enemy,
and bringing along with him Aenobarbus a Parricide, condemned by public
sentence, proscribed, and who after the Battle of Philippi besieged Brundusium,
and to this day wastes all the Coasts of the Ionian Sea, who burnt my Ships,
and plunders all Italy. To which Cocceius made reply: You reserved to one
another the liberty to treat with whom you pleased; Anthony has no more made
peace with any Murderer of your Father than your self, he has too great an
honor for his memory, Aenobarbus was none of the Parricides, but condemned by
malicious Judges, when not conscious of the conspiracy. And if we think him
unworthy of favor for being a Friend to Brutus, we must have a care lest we
make all Men our Enemies. The peace was made too with Pompey not with design to
quarrel with you, but that if you made War upon Anthony, he might have him for
an Associate, and if you did not, to reconcile you together, as being a Man you
can impeach with no crime. In this too, you are in the fault; for had there
been no motion of War in Italy, they durst not have sent Deputies to Anthony.
Thereupon Caesar pursuing his complaints, said, 'Twas Manius, Fulvia and Lucius
made War upon me and Italy, and never durst Pompey before with his Forces
attempt the Coasts till he was encouraged to it by Anthony. Not only
encouraged, said Cocceius, but commanded, for I will hide nothing from you: he
will with his Fleet invade the rest of Italy, now destitute as it is of
Shipping, unless you make peace. Whereto Caesar, who had not without
reflections listened to this discourse of Cocceius: said, However, Pompey has
but little to brag of, being repulsed from Thuria. Hereupon Cocceius hav^^g now
a full insight of their controversies, made mention of Fulvia's death, how not
enduring her Husband's displeasure, she fell sick, and her Distemper increasing
by a continual melancholy, that Anthony was so unkind as not to visit her in
her sickness, it had hastened her end. And now she is dead, said he, there
needs nothing more than that you explain your mutual suspicions to one another.
Caesar mollified by this discourse of Cocceius, made him his Guest for that
day, who entreated him as the younger to write to Anthony his elder: he denied
writing to his Enemy, from whence he had received no Letters, but complained
that his Mother whom he had always so perfectly honored, as his Kinswoman, had
fle^ out of Italy, as if she could not have commanded him as if he had been her
own Son; so under this pretense Caesar wrote to Iulia. As Cocceius was going
out of the Camp many Centurions discovered to him the mind of the Army, who
with all the rest told this likewise to Anthony, that he might understand what
a War he was about to engage himself in if he made not peace with Caesar.
Wherefore he advised him to remand Pompey, who wasted Italy, into Sicily, and
to send Aenobarbus into some other part, till new Leagues were made. To this
Iulia his Mother joining her prayers and entreaties; there was nothing stood in
the way but the shame Anthony feared he should be exposed to, if the Peace not
succeeding he should again be forced to have recourse to Pompey's assistance;
but his Mother putting him in hopes, confirmed by Cocceius partaker of Caesar's
privacies, Anthony consented, caused Pompey to return to Sicily, promising to
take care of all matters agreed on between them, and sending Aenobarbus
Governor into Bithynia; which as soon as Caesar's Army knew, they chose
Deputies to go to both Generals, whom they besought to refrain from accusing
each other; for they were not made choice of to judge, but to reconcile them;
so that making Cocceius Friend to both for Arbitrator, and nominating Pollio
for Anthony, and Maecenas for Caesar, they decreed a mutual oblivion for all
past offenses, and perfect friendship for the future. And because Marcellus,
Husband to Octavia Caesar's Sister, was lately dead, the authors of the peace
desired Caesar to give his Sister in marriage to Anthony: she was soon
promised, with happy auguries, for these accommodations were atttended with
universal acclamation of both Armies, with vows for their prosperity, and
continued rejoycings, which held all that day and the next night.

Caesar and Anthony made a new division of the Roman Empire, settling for the
bounds of eithers Dominion Scodran a Town in Illyria, which seemed seated in
the Center of the Adriatic Gulf; from whence Eastward as far as the Euphrates
all the Provinces and Islands were to be under the command of Anthony; and
Caesar was to have all Westward as far as the Ocean, except Africa which was
left to Lepidus under the same conditions he had received it from Caesar. They
agreed likewise that Caesar should make War with Pompey, if some change
happened not, and Anthony against the Parthians to revenge Crassus's death;
that Aenobarbus should be received into league by Caesar, on the same
conditions Anthony had before granted him. And that both Generals might have
equal power to raise Soldiers in Italy. In these Heads consisted the last
league between Caesar and Pompey: soon after which they sent away their Friends
to dispatch urgent Affairs, Anthony sent Ventidius into Asia to oppose the
attempts of the Parthians and the young Labienus, who being joined with them,
infested Syria as far as Ionia, taking the advantage of the Civil Wars. But how
Labienus and the Parthians were punished, we have ^it in the Book of the
Parthians War. About the same time, Menodorus Pompey's Admiral again drew out
of Sardinia Helenus one of Caesar's Lieutenants, which was the main reason of
Caesar's being so incensed, that he would not admit of Anthony's intermission
to reconcile him with Pompey. Afterward being returned to the City, the
Nuptials were solemnised, and Anthony put Manius to death for exasperating
Fulvia against Cleopatra, and making her the author of so many mischiefs. He
likewise discovered to Caesar how Salvidienus, who commanded the Army in Gallia
Narbonensis, would have revolted to him, and to that purpose had sent an
express to him at the Siege of Brundusium: all Men did not much applaud him for
it, but he revealed this secret to show his frankness and the reality of his
reconciliation: Caesar forthwith sent command to Salvidienus to make haste to
him, as if he had something of importance to communicate, after which he would
send him back to the Army; but at his arrival reproaching him with his
treachery, he put him to death, and gave his Army, being jealous of it, to
Anthony. Mean while, the People were much oppressed with Famine; for the
Merchants could bring nothing from the East, for fear of Pompey and Sicily, nor
from the West, because Sardinia and Corsica were in the possession of Pompey
too. Nor out of Africa, because of the Enemies Ships cruising in the open Sea;
wherefore the People attributing the cause of their want of Bread to the
division of those who commanded, continually reviled them, urged them to make
peace with Pompey. But when thus neither they could not incline Caesar to it,
Anthony counseled him to hasten the War to remedy the present distress: but
because there was no Money to make the preparation, they made an Edict by which
Masters were taxed in twenty five Sesterces for every Slave they had (the like
whereof had been before in the War with Cassius) and withal a certain part to
be paid out of new Inheritances. The People enraged, tore down this Edict
wherever it was fixed up, growing furious, that after the treasury was
exhausted, the Provinces drained dry, and Italy ruined by continual Imposts and
Confiscations, the Citizens should be taxed for what they had yet left, and
that not to employ in foreign Wars, where the Honor of the Empire might lie at
stake, but to revenge particular Men's quarrels, and increase their power, to
which they were mounted by Proscriptions and Murders, and for which the People
were fain to suffer Famine and Misery. They gathered together by Troops,
railing in the Streets, throwing Stones at those who would not join with them,
and threatening to plunder and set fire on their Houses, till at length the
whole multitude was got into a Body. Caesar going with his Guards and some
Friends to appease them, and give them reasons for what he had done, as soon as
they saw him they let fly their Stones, and though he stirred not, but stood
their Blows, yet they had no reverence nor respect to him; of which Anthony
having notice, ran speedily to his relief, as he came up the Via Sacra none
threw Stones at him, because he was disposed to make Peace with Pompey, they
only warned him to be gone; but when that prevailed not, the Stones flew
likewise about his Ears. Whereupon he sent for the Soldiers who were without
the City, and when the People forbore not their violences, the Soldiers having
encompassed them on both sides came up the cross Streets upon them in the
place, and in the great Street, charging the first he met with, who not able to
fly because of the Crowd, and not being in a posture of defense, the Streets
were soon filled with dead and wounded Men, and the Windows with cries and
lamentations. Thus Anthony hardly escaping himself, withdrew Caesar from
manifest danger, and brought him to his House. The multitude being put to
flight, they commanded the Soldiers to cast the Corpse into Tiber, not to expose
the sad spectacle to the Citizens view, but this caused a far greater
affliction, when they beheld them carried away with the stream, or stripped by
the Soldiers, among whom were mingled several Brokers, who carried away those
were best clad, as if they had belonged to their Family. However, this mischief
at length had an end, but not the multitudes hate and malice to these Men, nor
yet the Famine which the miserable People underwent with groans and tears.

Anthony hereupon gave advice to Libo's Friends to invite him out of Sicily,
Pompey at all detain him. In his Voyage he landed in an Island formerly called
Pithicusa, and at present Aenario, which as soon as the People heard of, they
again assembled, beseeching Caesar with tears in their eyes to send a Passport
to Libo who came with Proposals of Peace, which though with seeming
unwillingness he granted. That done the multitude ran to Mutia, Pompey's
Mother, threatening to burn her if she did not go to her Son, and dispose him
to a Peace. Libo perceiving their Enemies not so hot against them as formerly,
desired a conference between the Generals, to the end they might compose all
matters between themselves, which after the Peoples earnest prayers had
obtained, Caesar and Anthony went to Baiae. Pompey's Friends all with one voice
advised him to Peace, except only Menodorus, who wrote to him from Sardinia,
that he ought rather now to make War, or at least temporize, whilst Famine
fought for them, that when they judged it fit to conclude a Peace, they might
do it on more advantageous conditions, he likewise warned him to have a care of
Murcus, who counseled him to make Peace only for the advancement of his
particular fortune; wherefore Pompey, who was before jealous of Murcus's
experience and authority broke now utterly with him, and no longer took his
counsel in any thing: so Murcus in discontent retired to Syracusa, where
perceiving some of Pompey's Guards that followed him by his orders, he in their
presence railed at and reviled him, this hastened his end; for Pompey having
corrupted one of his Tribunes, and one of his Centurions, sent People to slay
him, giving out that he was murdered by his Slaves, whom they hanged, to give
the more credit to the cheat. However, after what had happened to Bithynicus,
Men easily believed this second attempt committed on the person of a Man famous
for his experience in War, a constant Friend to Pompey's Faction from the very
beginning, who had done him signal service in Spain, and of his own accord came
to him in Sicily. After his death all Pompey's Friends exhorted him to Peace,
accusing Menodorus of being in love with Command, considering more his own than
his Masters interest, finding it profitable to govern a Province with an Army;
so Pompey embarked for Aenaria with many choice Ships, and himself on a most
beautiful Galley of six Banks; and thus in great state came sailing toward the
Evening by Puteoli, in view of the Enemy. As soon as day next Morning appeared,
they drove Piles into the Sea, at some distance one from the other, and thereon
laid two Bridges, upon one of which to the Land-side mounted Caesar and
Anthony, and Pompey and Libo on the other, which was separate on the first by a
small interval of water; so that without speaking aloud they could hardly hear
each other, Pompey pretended to be Associate in the Empire, in the room of
Lepidus; and the others would only grant him the liberty to return to Rome, so
they parted without doing any thing: yet their Friends kept on foot the
Negotiation, making diverse Propositions on the one part and the other; Pompey
in behalf of the Proscripts had fled to him for refuge, demanded that such as
were culpable, or Abettors of Caesar's Murder might be in security in their
Exile, and that the others might with Honor be recalled into the City, and put
into possession of their Estates: upon this demand Famine, and the People
urging for Peace, Anthony and Caesar agreed that they might redeem from the new
Possessors a fourth part of their Estates only, and they wrote to them about
it, as supposing they would be therewith contented, and indeed so they were,
for they began now to stand in fear of Pompey, instructed by Murcus his
misfortune, going therefore to him, and persuading him to Peace, he rent his
Robe, saying, he was betrayed by those for whom he had exposed himself, and
calling by name Menodorus as the sole Man worthy of Command, and the only
Friend he had. At length by the instigation of Mutia his Mother, and Iulia his
Wife, they met again only they three on a little Eminence, encompassed on all
sides by the Sea, about which they had placed Guards with Ships for their
common security. Here they agreed to these Conditions; That all War should
cease between them, both by Sea and Land, that there should be a free trade and
commerce in all places, that Pompey should withdraw all his Garrisons out of
Italy, that he should harbor no more Fugitives, that his Ships should cruise
no more on the Italian Coasts; that he should have the command of Sicily,
Sardinia and Corsica, with the other adjacent Isles for so long as Anthony and
Caesar held the Sovereign Power, but with condition of sending to Rome what
Corn those Islands ought to the Citizens, and that besides all this he should
have the Peloponnesus; that being absent he might exercise the charge of Consul
by one of his Friends, and should be received into the College of the High
Priests; that all persons of Quality might return to the City except the
Conspirators who had been condemned by public sentence; that the Goods of all
those fled to Pompey without being proscribed should be restored, except the
Movables; and for the Proscripts that they should have a sourth part; that all
who had served under Pompey should be rewarded, if Slaves with Freedom, and if
Freemen, when they had served the time appointed by Law, with the same
recompenses as the Veterans of Caesar and Anthony received. These were the
Articles, which after being engrossed and signed, were sent to Rome to be
deposited in the hands of the Vestals. This done, they by lot feasted each
other* Pompey began, who laying his Galley side to the Rock therein received
his Guests; the days following Anthony and Caesar treated him, pitching Tents
on the same Rock, with pretense that the Feast might be distributed better to
the Shore, but perhaps that their mirth might be more secure; for there was
nothing remitted of the useal care, both the Ships were in their stations, and
the Guards at their Posts, and the Guests themselves had Daggers under their
Robes. It Is reported, that Menodorus, when they feasted in the Galley, sent to
advise Pompey, that taking this advantage of his Enemies, he should revenge the
wrongs his Father and Brother had suffered, and recover the authority they had
taken from his Father, and he would be answerable that not one should escape
out of the Ships. But Pompey made him an answer wo^shy his Birth and the
present Affair: Would to God, said he, Menodorus ^ould have done this without
me; for perjury may become him, but never Pompey. At this Supper ^ompey's
Daughter, Neice to Libo, was contracted to Marcellus, Nephew to Anthony,
Caesar's Sister's Son. The day following Consuls were designed for four years;
first of all Anthony and Libo, but to Anthony with leave to make a Substitute,
then Caesar and Pompey, then Aenobarbus and Sosius, and lastly Caesar and
Anthony again, who being now to be Consuls together the third time, it was
hoped they would restore the ancient Administration of the Commonwealth.

Things thus concluded on, they departed, Pompey by Sea to Sicily, and Caesar
and Anthony by land to Rome. Upon the news of the Peace an universal joy was
spread through the City and all Italy, Men were transported to see themselves
delivered from an intestine War, from being often picked out, and forced to go,
from the insolency of the Garrisoris, from the ^^ight of Slaves, from the
wasting of their Lands, and lying fallow of their Fields, but above all from
Famine, which began to grow insupportable: wherefore wherever the Generals
passed, Sacrifices were made to them as to the Savlours of their Country. And
the City had prepared a magnificent entry, had they not rather chose to go in
by night, that they might not put the Citizens to charge. All shared in this
general joy, save only those who were possessed of any Lands of the banished,
which, by the Treaty were to be restored, for they believed they should have
but ill Neighbors of them, and that upon all occasions they would seek their
destruction. And indeed all the Fugitives who had hitherto followed Pompey,
except^^only a very few, after having taken their leave of him at Puteoli,
embarked and came for Rome, at whose arrival the People conceived a new joy,
which tey made appear by those Acclamations wherewith they entertained so many
illustrious persons, beyond all hopes returned to their Country. After this
Caesar marched into Gaul, where there were happened some Commotions; and
Anthony disposed his Affairs to go against the Parthians. In the first place he
caused the Senate to approve not only what he had done, but whatever he should
do for the future, sent away his Lieutenants into all parts, and disposed what
else he thought fit at pleasure. Then he gave Kingdoms to several, upon
condition of paying Tribute. To Darius Son of Pharnaces and Grandson to
Mithridates the Kingdom of Pontus: to Herod Idumea and Samaria: to Amyntas
Pisidia: to Polemon part of Cilicia: and in short, to many others other Nations
which he erected into Kingdoms. As for the Army that was to winter with him,
that he might accustom them both to the profits and exercises of War, he sent
one part of them into the Country of the Parthians a Nation of Illyria,
neighboring upon Epidamnum, formerly very affectionate to Brutus: and another
Party into the Country of the Dardanians, who are another People of Illyria
used to make Inroads into Macedon, and gave orders to the rest to tarry for him
in Epire, that he might have them all about him, being resolved himself to
winter at Athens. He likewife sent Furnius into Africa to cause Sextius's four
Legions to march against the Parthians; for as yet he understood not that
Lepidus had taken them from Sextius. Things thus ordered, he spent this Winter
at Athens with Octavia, in the same manner as he had done the former with
Cleopatra at Alexandria, all his business being only to look upon the Letters
brought him from the Army, he laid aside his Imperial Robe, clothing himself
again in the Attick Cloak and Hose, having no Guards at his Gate, and walking
through the City like a private person, without any Ensigns of his Dignity, and
accompanied only with two Friends and two servants, with whom he went to the
Schools to hear Disputes and Orations; he likewise supped the Winter after the
Greek manner, having always Greeks in his company, and assisting at their
Ceremonies, to the great content of Octavia, of whom he was very fond; for he
was naturally inclined to the love of Women. But Winter being past, he seemed
no more the same Man, he resumed the Imperial Habit, and took the Ensigns of
his authority, his Gates seemed now as it were besieged with Lictors, Officers
and Guards, to beget an awe of his power, he gave audience to Ambassadors, whom
before he would not admit, administered justice to private persons, and sent for
Ships from all parts, and made a mighty noise with his preparations.

Caesar and Pompey, for what certain causes not known, but those that publicly
appeared were these, Anthony had quitted the Peloponnesus to Pompey on
condition he should pay what the Peloponnesians ought, or promise to pay it, or
else give some time for the recovery of it; but Pompey would not receive it in
on these terms, thinking the Province quitted to him with all its debts;
wherewith, through discontent, (as Caesar said) or through infidelity, or out
of envy to others who had great Armies, or because he trusted Menodorus, who
said they had not made a Peace but a Truce, he prepared again and fitted out a
Fleet, and in a speech to his Army told them, there was more need than ever of
new preparations. He likewise encouraged Pirates underhand to infest the Seas,
so that little or no remedy was brought to the Famine in the City, and the
comfortless People cried out, that by this Peace they had not redressed any of
their miseries, but only added a fourth person to the Tyranny. Hereupon some
Pirates being taken, Caesar caused them to be brought to the wrack, where they
confessed they were set on by Pompey, which Caesar made known to the People; he
wrote about it likewise to Pompey, who stoutly denying it, made his complaints
about the Peloponnesus. But some Noble Men that were about Pompey perceiving
that he always followed the the counsel of his Freed Men, corrupted some of
them, either of their own free motion, or for Caesar's sake, to incense Pompey
against Menodorus as a Man commanding his Master. They were easily drawn to do
this, out of the envy they bore this powerful Favorite, so they soon begot in
Pompey an aversion to Menodorus. It happened that at the same time Philadelphus
Caesar's Freed Man came to Menodorus to buy Corn, and Mycilius; Menodorus
confident went to Rome to treat with Caesar about his revolt, to whom he
offered Sardinia, Corsica, three Legions and many of his Friends: whether
Philadelphus had procured Caesar this good fortune, or else it proceeded from
Pompey's disgusts of Menodorus, he made difficulty of accepting it, yet did it,
judging the Peace already broken. He dispatched forthwith to Anthony at Athens
to desire him to come by an appointed day to Brundusium, to confe^ with him
about this War, he caused long Ships to be brought from Ravenna, and sent in
all haste for his Army out of Gaul with all its stores of warlike Furniture,
one part of which he sent to Brundusium, and the other to Puteoli, resolved to
invade Sicily on both sides, if Anthony approved it: Anthony came at the same
time prefixed with a slender Train, but not finding Caesar there, would not
stay, whether he approved not this War undertaken agaisnt solemn Leagues,
whether he were not pleased to see the great preparations of Caesar, (for being
Competitors for Empire, they were always jealous of each other) or whether he
was frightened by a prodigy, for one of those who were upon the Guard about his
Quarters, was found eaten up by Beasts, all but the Face, as if that had been
left to know him by, without ever so much as crying out, or the least knowledge
of those that slept by him. All that could be discovered, was, that they of
Brundusium said, that in the Morning they saw a Wolf come out from among the
Tents. However, Anthony wrote to Caesar he ought not to break the peace, and
threatened to clap Menodorus in Irons as his Fugitive Slave, for he had been
Slave to Pompey the Great, whose Goods Anthony bought under the Spear by right
of War. Yet Caesar sent Men into the Islands of Sardinia and Corsica to take
possession of them from Menodorus, and caused Forts to be built upon all the
Coasts of Italy to hinder Pompey from making any spoil, giving orders for
building other Ships at Ravenna, and sending for a powerful Army that was in
Illyria, and when Menodorus came to him, from one enfranchised made him
absolutely free, by giving him the Command of the Fleet he brought with him,
yet but in quality of Lieutenant to Calvisius his Admiral. Though things were
thus well disposed, yet he would make greater preparations before he began the
War, complaining of Anthony, that he had not staid for him: however, he gave
order to Cornisicius to bring what Ships he had in readiness from Ravenna to
Tarentum; in his passage there arose a furious Tempest, in which there yet
perished only the Admiral, built on purpose for Caesar himself, which was made
an Omen of what was to happen, for most men thought this War renewed by the
violation of the Treaty; to remove which suspicion, Caesar wrote to the Roman
People, and spoke in person to the Army, telling them Pompey had broke the
League, by infesting the Sea with Pirates, which was evident, both by
confession of the Pirates themselves, and of Menodorus, of which Antonius was
not yet ignorant, and thefore delivered not up to him the Peloponnesus.

Tarentum to go and invade Sicily on one side, whilst Calvisius, Sabinus and
Menodorus, who set sail from Etruria, invested it on the other; and the Land
Army marched toward Rhegium with wonderful diligence. Pompey perceived not
that Menodorus had revolted from him to Caesar, till he came before Sicily.
However, seeing himself assailed on both sides, he resolved to expect Caesar at
Messina, and opposed against Calvisius and Menodorus a great Fleet under the
Command of Menecrates his Freed Man, who out of mutual emulation was a mortal
Enemy to Menodorus. Menecrates comes out to Sea, presenting himself about
Evening to the Enemy, who retired into a Gulf above Cuma, where they anchored
that night, and he steered his course toward the Island of Aenaria. As soon as
it was day, the Enemy coasting about the Bay, drawn up in form of a Crescent,
for fear of being broken, Menecrates appeared in sight, and made toward them;
but seeing they would not be drawn off from the Shore-side, and that he could
not do what he designed, with a fierce charge he drove them a ground; so with
their sterns ashore, and their Prows to Seaward, they lay upon their defense in
such manner, that it was easy for the Enemy to come and give them a shock, and
then tacking about to stand off to Sea, and so return again upon them with
fresh and fresh Ships, they had likewise the Rocks to struggle with, on which
many stuck so fast, that neither moving Head nor Stern, it seemed like a kind
of Sea Fight against a Land Force, one of which could neither fly, nor the
other pursue. Mean while Menodorus and Menecrates having discovered each other,
leaving the rest of the Fight with mutual shouts and fury begin an assault, and
in all appearance which of these two got the better would carry the Victory for
his Party. In the charge they met so fiercely, that both Ships were disabled,
Menodorus lost his Rostrum.
Beak-head, and Menecrates Oars were broken. At length, having cast their
Graplings on Board, they lashed their Ships fast together, and began a Fight,
as if on dry ground, and nothing was wanting, either of alacrity or dexterity
to gain the Victory, they made use of all sorts of Arms, Arrows, Stones, Darts,
and cast Planks from Ship to Ship to board each other; but because Menodorus's
Ship was the tallest, it was much easier for his Men to board the other, and
the Darts they threw fell with more violence and execution. At last many being
slain, and almost all the rest wounded, Menodorus had his Arm pierced through
with a Dart, which was soon drawn out; but Menecrates being struck into the
Thigh with a Barbed Iron Javelin, made after the Spanish Fashion, which could
not easily be drawn out, he became unable to do more, yet still with his voice
he encouraged his Men, till his Ship being taken, he threw himself overboard;
Menodorus fastening his Prize to his Poop towed it into the Road, and was all
he could do that day. This was done on the Left Wing. On the Right Wing which
fought against the Enemies Left, Calvisius cut off some of Menecrates's Ships
from the rest of the Squadron, and pursued them out to Sea: but Democrates
another of Pompey's Freed Men charging the rest of Calvisius's Ships, put some
of them to flight, and drove the rest upon the Rocks where they were beat to
pieces, and the Men forced to cast themselves into the Sea, and those which
remained whole he had burnt, had not Calvisius returning from the Chase of the
Enemy, and bringing along with him some of his Ships that had fled, saved one
of them. Night coming on, each party retreated to the same places where they
rode the Night before, and so ended this Sea Fight wherein Pompey had much the
better. Yet Demochares was so much concerned for Menecrates's death, which he
esteemed a mighty loss (for Menedorus and Menecrates were two of Pompey's
principal Officers at Sea) that he left all, and steered his course directly
toward Sicily, as if he had not only lost Menecrates and one Vessel, but the
whole Fleet. As for Calvisius, as long as he thought Demochares would return to
him he kept his station, being in no condition to fight, for his best Ships
were sunk, and the rest disabled; but when he heard his Enemy was gone for
Sicily, he refitted his Ships, and held on his course, keeping the Shore close
aboard, and not so much as crossing over any Bay.

On the other side, Caesar being come from Tarentum to Rhegium with a Pompey
near Messina, who had but forty Ships; wherefore his Friends advised him not to
let slip this opportunity, but to assault these few with his whole Navy, now in
such good order, before more Ships came to Pompey, but he would not hearken to
their counsel, expecting Calvisius, and not thinking it prudence to expose
himself to danger, whilst he expected greater Forces. Mean while, Demochares
coming to Messina, Pompey gave him and Apollophanes, another of his Freed Men,
the Command of the Fleet instead of Menecrates and Menedorus; and Caesar
understanding the loss he had suffered near Cuma, set forward through the
Strait to go meet Calvisius, having got through the better part, as he was
passing by the place called Stylida to turn about the Rock of Sylla, Pompey
coming out of Messina first fell upon his Rear, and after came up with the rest
of the Fleet to provoke Caesar to give him Battle; and though Caesar's Ships
were sorely infested, yet they stirred not from about the Admiral, he having
forbid it, whether he durst not fight in the Strait, or whether he was firm to
the resolution of not fighting without Calvisius, he only gave them orders to
get close under Shore, and there coming to an Anchor defend themselves from the
Forecastles, if any came to assault them. But Demochares coming with two Ships
to charge each Ship of Caesar's, put them all into trouble and disorder, so
that some were split against the Rocks others falling foul of each other, sunk;
and in short, many perished most cowardly, for in the same manner as at the
Battle at Cuma they stuck fast, whilst the Enemies charging, and then falling
off, oppressed them in a strange manner, nor was fortune wanting to assist the
Enemy: Caesar himself in this confusion leaped out upon the Rocks, where he
received those that saved themselves by swimming, and led them himself to the
next Mountains. But Cornificius and the rest of the Captains encouraging one
another, without their General's order, cut their Cables, and went out to Sea
to charge the Enemy, judging it better to die fighting, than thus to be exposed
to Blows without any defense. Cornisicius first of all with a dangerous
boldness clapped on board the Admiral Ship of Demochares, and took her, forcing
him to leap into another. Whilst in this Fight a world of Men perished,
Calvisius and Menodorus appeared, coming with full Sails, not toward Caesar's
People, who were either cast on shore, or engaged at Sea, but toward Pompey's,
who being far off from Land, as soon as they saw them, retreated, for tired,
they durst not engage fresh Men, and besides, 'twas almost night; yet the
chance was happy for those yet in danger. Night coming on, many deserted their
Ships, and fled to the Mountains, where they kindled many Fires for Signals to
those yet at Sea, so they spent the night without meat, without sleep, and in
want of all things, yet they comforted themselves with the presence of Caesar,
who no better supplied than they, went from place to place, exhorting them to
have patience till Morning. They knew not yet Calvisius was so nigh, and had no
hopes in their own Ships, forsaken because of the Wrack; but by good fortune
the thirteenth Legion, which had taken their March over the Mountains, and was
not far off, having heard of the disaster, by craggy ways making toward the
Fires, found their General and those with him hungry and weary. The Soldiers
took what care they could of their companions, and the Officers forthwith
brought their General (left without any of his Household Servants dispersed in
the tumult of the Night) to a Tent there pitched, whence sending all about to
give notice he was safe, news was brought him that Calvisius was arrived, and
so unexpectedly refreshed with this second good tidings, he took some repose.
As soon as it was day, casting his eyes upon the Sea, he saw Ships flaming,
others burnt, and others half burnt, others floating upon the Sea in the midst
of pieces of Wracks, Masts, Sails and Yards, and many that remained, sorely
shattered near the Shore; wherefore ordering Calvisius's Fleet to come near, he
took care for necessaries to patch up such Ships as yet might be made
serviceable, while the Enemy gave them leisure, who were retreated, either out
of fear of Calvisius, or because they had rather fight him in open Sea.

Pompey was now safe in the Harbor of Messina; but Caesar's Ships on a Lee
shore, craggy Rocks, and without any Port, were either dashed against the
Rocks, or against one another, besides wanting many necessary Tacklings, they
were not easy to govern. Menodorus therefore fearing lest the wind should yet
every hour grow fresher, got out at first into the open Sea, and came to an
Anchor, because in deep water the Waves broke less, and not so violently, and
with the force of Oars he eased his Cables, lest his Anchors should give way:
some others imitated him, but the greater part imagining the Storm would soon
be over, as is usual in the Spring, moored their Ships with an Anchor to Sea,
and another to the Shore, and with Booms kept them off from falling foul of
each other: but the wind raging more and more, all fell into confusion and
disorder, for their Cables breaking, they either fell foul or run ashore one
after another; several cries and lamentations and howlings were mixed with
Commands and Exhortations, which were only uttered to deaf people, there was
now no difference between the Pilot and the Sailer, neither for industry,
skill, nor obedience. They perished all alike, whether they stayed in their
Ships, or leaped overboard, they were killed by the pieces of Timber which the
Waves beat against the Ships; for all the Sea was floating with the Wrack of
the Ships, and with Bodies some dead, and some living, of which, if any swum to
Shore, they were miserably beat in pieces among the Rocks, but when the Sea
began to swell with a contrary wind, as it ordinarily happens in this Strait,
new terrors seized these people who were not accustomed to it, and their Ships
tossed now this way, and then the other, fell foul, do all they could; besides
toward the Evening, the wind doubled its violence, to double their grief by
making them perish in the dark; so that all Night long the air was filled with
dreadful Shouts and Cries. Those upon the Shore ran up and down calling their
Friends they thought engaged in the Shipwreck by name, and when they answered
them not, believed them lost, and wept: others lifting their Heads above the
Waves, called to their Friends on Shore to help them, but there was no manner
of way to assist them; for as it was dangerous for those staid in the Ship, or
leaped into the Sea, so it was no less upon the Shore side, because of the
Waves driven up by the Winds, which all that came near were fearful to be
carried away with. Thus by an extraordinary effect of the Tempest those who
were near Land, feared the Land, and yet durst no^ go farther off to Sea, than
to secure themselves from beating in pieces against the Rocks; for the place
narrow by nature, the difficulty of the passage, the tumbling of the Waves, the
Whirlwinds caused by the circumjacent Hills, and the swallowing Whirlpool by
the fierceness of the Current suffered them not to stay in one place, nor yet
to retire back, besides the horror of an extreme dark night added still to
their affliction. Thus they perished without seeing (...) another, some crying
out, others silently expecting death, and others through despair hastening it,
for the expectation is but an addition of pain; and now they were all out of
hopes of any safety, when on a sudden toward break of day the wind began to
duller, and about Sunrising there was little or none, yet the Sea still
continued in a rage. The Inhabitants of the Country remembered not to have even
seen so furious a Tempest. Thus the greatest part of Caesar's Ships and Men
perished, and he besides the loss sustained in the first Sea Fight, having
received these two afflictions one in the neck of the other, retreated the same
night with all haste to Now Monteleon.
Vibone, by the Mountain Way, not enduring longer to look on that misfortune to
which he could apply no remedy.

From thence he wrote to all his Friends, and all his Commanders to repair
Italy, for fear lest Pompey puffed up with this success should make some
attempt; but he thought nothing of it, no, nor so much, as when the Sea was
still, of falling upon the remainder of the Shipwreck, neither while they lay
there, nor when they were upon departure. On the contrary, he suffered them to
gather together whatever they could save of Ships or Rigging, and make a safe
retreat before the wind to Vibone, whether he thought he had beat them
sufficiently, or that he knew not how to make use of his advantage; or else, as
we have said el^ewhere, was cow-hearted upon an Assault, and content only to
defend himself, Caesar had not above half his Ships left, and those but in ill
condition, yet leaving Forces to guard them, he went much troubled in mind into
Campania, for he had no more Ships, nor time to build any, though he stood in
great need of them, the Famine growing sharp, and the people crying out
incessantly for peace, and detesting this War, as undertaken contrary to a
solemn League; besides, he wanted Money, which was scarce at Rome. The Citizens
would pay nothing, nor permit any to be raised on them. At length, being very
politic in the conduct of his own Affairs, he dispatched Maecenas to Anthony,
well instructed to clear all new differences might have happened between them,
and to draw him to be his Associate in the War, which, if it succeeded not, he
resolved to transport his Legions into Sicily upon Ships of Burden, and there
fight Pompey by Land, without any more hazarding a Sea Fight. Whilst he was
perplexing himself with these cares, news was brought him that Anthony had
passed his word to serve him; that Agrippa, his Lieutenant in Gaul had gained a
great Victory against the Aquitains, and that his Friends and some Cities
promised him Ships, which were already building; whereupon taking heart, he
began to make greater preparations than before. About the beginning of the
Spring Anthony set Sail from Athens, and arrived at Tarentum with three hundred
Sail, to assist Caesar according to his promise; but Caesar having now changed
his mind, would now stay till the Ships, building for him were in a readiness.
And when he was urged to employ Anthony's Fleet, which was sufficient to put an
end to this War, he excused himself that he was engaged in other Affairs: which
made it apparent, he either had some new cause of quarrel with Anthony, or else
scorned his assistance, contenting himself with his own Forces. Though Anthony
was offended at this proceeding, yet he staid still in the same place, and sent
to him once more; for whereas his Fleet lay at a great charge, and he stood in
more need of Italian Soldiers for the Parthian War, he had thoughts of changing
his Fleet for Legions. Though by the League each had power of raising Men in
Italy; but because it was fallen to the others division, he imagined it would
be more difficult for him. Wherefore Octavia her self came to Caesar to be as
it were Arbitress between them. He told her, that being deserted by Anthony, he
had been in danger of losing his life in the Sicilian Strait. She answered,
that had been already discoursed and declared to Maecenas. He then objected
that Anthony had sent Callias his Freed Man to Lepidus to make a League
together against him. To which she answered, that to her knowledge, Callias was
sent to Lepidus to treat a Match; for Anthony being about to go to the Parthian
War, would before his departure have his Daughter married to Lepidus's Son,
according to his promise. Octavia affirming this, and Anthony sending Callias
to Caesar to torment him, if he pleased, and know the truth from his own mouth:
he would not receive him, but sent word he would meet Anthony between Tore de
Mare.
Metapontum and Tarentum, and discourse with him himself. Through the place
appointed runs a River, called likewise Metapontum: and they both by chance
arriving at the same time, Anthony lighting out of his Chariot, leaps alone
into a little Skiff he found there, to go meet Caesar, confiding in him as his
Friend; Caesar emulating that Generosity, did the same; so meeting in the
middle of the River, they disputed a long time who should go to the other side;
at length Caesar prevailed, having resolved to go to Tarentum to see Octavia;
he therefore mounts with Anthony in his Chariot, lights at his Lodgings, and
without any Guards, lies there all night. Anthony on the morrow repays him with
the same confidence, so sudden were their changes, ambition of Empire raising
reciprocal Jealousies, and the necessity of their Affairs obliging them to
confide in each other. Caesar then put off the War against Pompey to the next
year; but Anthony not thinking fit longer to delay the War against the
Parthians, they made an exchange, Anthony gave Caesar sixscore Ships, which he
forthwith delivered him, and Caesar promised to send him twenty thousand
Legionary Soldiers: Octavia likewise gratified her Brother with ten Galliots (a
sort of Vessel between a Galley and a Ship of Burden) which she begged of
Anthony, and he in return gave a thousand chosen Men for Guards, which Anthony
himself picked out. And because the time of the Triumvirate was near expired,
they prolonged it for five other years, without staying for the suffrage of the
People, so they parted, Anthony making with all diligence toward Syria,
leaving Octavia, and a little Daughter they had, with her Brother.

In the mean time, whether that Menodorus were naturally perfidious, Anthony,
who had threatened him with Shakles as his Fugitive Slave, or were not rewarded
to his expectation, or else moved with reproaches of his infidelity, which
Pompey's other Freed Men (after the death of Menecrates) continually loaded him
with, exhorting him to return to his duty, he demanded safe conduct, which
being granted him, he returned into Pompey's service with seven Vessels, whilst
Calvisius, Caesar's Admiral perceived nothing of it; wherefore Caesar took away
his Command, and gave it to Agrippa. After that Caesar's Fleet was finished, he
purged it in this manner, Altars were erected in the Sea a little off the
Shore, the Ships with all their Crews aloft in a profound silence* ranked in
order before them, the Priests sacrificed standing in the water, then placed
the Victimes in a Pinnace, with which they rowed thrice round the Fleet,
accompanied in other Boats by all the principal Commanders, all together
praying, that if the Fleet were threatened with any misfortune, it might fall
upon the Victimes, which after dividing in two, they cast one part into the
Sea, and burnt the other on the Altars, whilst all the multitude made their
Prayers. And this is the form the Romans use in the purgation of their Fleets.
It had been resolved, that Caesar parting from Puteoli, Lepidus from Africa,
and Taurus from Tarentum* should invade Sicily with three several Fleets, to
encompass the Enemy on three sides of the Island, East, West and South; and
that to this end, Caesar should give notice to the others what day he would
embarque, which was appointted on the tenth of the Summer Solstice, which the
Romans call the Calends of the Month formerly called Quintilis, and since named
July in the Honor of the first Caesar, which day he pitched upon, judging it
would prove fortunate, because his Father had thereon been always victorious.
As for Pompey, he opposed to Lepidus Before with one Legion, and store of
other Infantry at the point of Lilybaeum, fortified the Sea Coasts of the
Island to the East and West, and more particularly the Islands of Lipari and
Pantalarea:
Cossyra, lest they should prove Ports of Retreat, Cossyra to Lepidus, and
Lipari to Caesar, from whence they might at all times assault Sicily. All his
best Forces he rendezvouzed at Messina, that they might be in a readiness to
march wherever there should be occasion. The two Chieftains being in this
manner provided, and the first day of July come, Caesar's Party all embarked
about break of day. Lepidus set sail out of Africa with a thousand Vessels of
Burden, and seventy Galleys, twelve Legions, five thousand Numidian Horse, and
all things necessary for their subsistence. Taurus from Tarentum with one
hundred and two Ships, of the hundred and thirty Anthony had left Caesar the
Rowers of the rest being dead of the Plague the last Winter. And Caesar, from
Puteoli, having first sacrificed in the Admiral, and thrown the Entrails into
the Sea, that the winds might be fair, Neptune propitious, the Sea calm, and
all favorable to him against his Father's Murderers. Some Ships went before to
^ound the depth of Water, and Appius with good Forces brought up the Rear. The
third day after their embarquing it blew very hard at South, and several of
Lepidus's Vessels of Burden foundred, yet he reached Sicily, where he besieged
Before in Lilybaeum, and took several places, some by force, and some by
surrender. Taurus as soon as it began to blow returned back to Tarentum. Appius
as he doubled the Cape of Minerva lost one part of his Squadron, another part
were driven upon the Flats, and the rest dispersed here and there with great
loss. Caesar at the beginning of the Storm got to Anchor with all his Ships in
the Gulf of Elaea in safety, all but only one Galley of six Oars to a Bank,
which was cast away near the adjoining Promontory, but the Wind on a sudden
clapping about to the West, to which this Gulf lies open, they were sorely
battered with the Tempest, for the Wind blowing right in, they could neither
get-out, nor ride there. In vain they plied their Oars, and in vain let drop
their Anchors, they were driven upon the Rocks, or fell foul of one another,
besides night coming on, made the danger much more dreadful. At length the
storm being blown over, Caesar caused the dead to be buried, the wounded
dressed, and clothed those who had cast themselves into the Sea to save their
lives, giving them other Arms, and immediately issued orders to refit his
Fleet, as well as he could for the present, he had lost six great Ships, two
and twenty lesser, and a great number of Brigantines.
Liburnicks. Thirty days it required besides to repair the damage this storm
had done, and Summet was far advanced; wherefore he found it convenient to put
off the War till the next year. Mean while, because the People were put to hard
shifts for want of Provisions, he presently caused his Ships to be drawn ashore
to refit, sent those Seamen had escaped the storm to Taurus, who wanted them,
and fearful lest this disaster should work some change in the minds of those
who had not yet lost the memory of the great Pompey, he sent Maecenas to Rome,
whilst himself went through all Italy from Colony to Colony, assuring the
Veterans there was no fear of any thing, and then passed to Tarentum, to see in
what condition Taurus's Fleet was, and thence to Vibone, where he encouraged
his Legions, and hastened with such diligence his Naval Preparations, that in a
short time he was ready to make a second attempt upon Sicily.

Pompey not yet thinking fit to make any advantage of so many Shipwracks, was
contented only to sacrifice to Neptune and Salacia, whose Son he suffered
himself to be called, as persuaded the Enemy had not been thus twice battered
by Tempest in Summer time, without divine assistance. It Is likewise reported,
that puffed up with this success, he changed his Coat of Arms, which was of
Purple, and took Blew, as the adopted Son of Neptune. He hoped after so many
losses Caesar would lie quiet; but when he heard he had refitted his Fleet, and
was ready to come into Sicily that very Summer, his heart failed him, thinking
he had to deal with a Man whose courage was invincible, and whose treasure
inexhaustible, yet he sent Menodorus with the seven Ships that he had brought
him to discover in what readiness Caesar's Fleet were, and do what else he
could. But he angry that he was not restored to the Command of the Fleet, and
perceiving they trusted him with no more than his own seven Ships, because they
had a jealousy of him, resolved once more to change sides. To this purpose
imagining, that whatever happened, it would be for his advantage to do some
brave and valiant action, he distributed all the Money he had among his
companions, and having in three days come seventy five Furlongs, he falls like
a Thunderbolt among the Guard-ships of Caesar's Fleet, where they were at work,
then going off, and upon a sudden falling on again, he carried away sometimes
two, and sometimes three, he engaged likewise either in their Ports, or upon
the Sea, with several Ships laden with Corn, some of which he sunk, others
burnt, and took others, and in short, filled all the Coast with terror and
tumult, both Caesar and Agrippa being absent, the last gone into the Forest to
provide Timber. So bold he grew* that he came to an Anchor in a Shoal Bay,
where he lay as if he had been fast in the Ouz, till the Enemies running down
from the Mountains as to an assured Prey; tacking about, he rowed off, laughing
at, and deriding them, to the grief and astonishment of the whole Army. After
he had thus made known of what importance it was to Caesar to have him for a
Friend or Enemy, he gave liberty to a Senator, called Rebilus, who he had
before taken, that he might go before and prepare matters, raising a report
among his People, that they should ere long have a Fugitive of consequence,
which was Vinidius Marcellus, an intimate Friend of Caesar's, whose affection
he himself had gained, when he before quitted Pompey's service, and after that
drawing near to the Enemy, and desiring to have some conference with Vinidius,
in a certain Island, touching an Affair of Importance to both Parties. Having
obtained it, when they were alone he told him, that when he left Caesar's Party
to go to Pompey, he had been forced to it by the injuries he daily received
from Calvisius then Admiral; but that now Agrippa had the Command of the Navy,
he was ready to return to Caesar's service, of which he could not complain,
provided Vinidius would bring him a safe conduct from Messala, who in Agrippa's
absence commanded the Fleet, promising by some signal Action to repair his
fault. However, till he had his safe Conduct, he must, to avoid suspicion, make
War upon Caesar's Party as before. Messala at first scrupled the doing it, as
dishonorable, yet at length he granted it, whether yielding to the necessities
of the War, or before well informed of Caesar's mind, or that he foresaw he
could not be displeased at it. So Menodorus once more changed Parties, and
going to Caesar cast himself at his Feet, begging pardon for his fault, without
telling what obliged him to commit it. Caesar pardoned him because of Messala's
word passed to him, but gave orders narrowly to watch him, and permitted the
Officers of his Galleys to go whither they pleased.

Caesar's Fleet being now ready he came to Vibona, where he gave order Messala
to pass over into Sicily with two Legions to join Lepidus's Army, and that he
should land in the Gulf against Tauromenia: he sent three likewise to Stylida,
which is the very extremity of the Strait, to wait a fair opportunity, and
commanded Taurus to sail about with his Fleet from Tarentum to the Promontory
of Scyllace, which is directly opposite to Tauromenia. He came prepared to
fight both on Sea and Land; for his Land Army followed him, before whom marched
his Horse, with orders to make discoveries from the Land, as the Liburnick
Brigantines did at Sea. As he was advancing in this manner, Caesar came; and
after having seen him near Scyllace, and approved the order he kept, returned
to Vibona: Pompey, as we have said, had placed good Garrisons in all places of
the Island where any Forces might land, and kept his Fleet at Messina, ready to
go and relieve who stood in need. Whilst these Preparations were made on both
sides, Lepidus having sent for out of Africa for the remainder of his Forces,
which consisted in four Legions, Papia, one of Pompey's Lieutenants met them in
open Sea; and whilst they staid for him as a Friend, gave them chase, they took
them for the Ships Lepidus was to send to meet them; and indeed he did send,
but coming out too late, when the Ships of Burden saw them, they took them for
Enemies, and would not approach them, whereas now staying for Papia, some were
taken, some burnt, some sunk, and others recovered Africa, of the four Legions
two perished in the Sea, and if any Soldiers saved themselves by swimming,
Tisienus, another of Pompey Lieutenants, caused them to be massacred as fast as
they came on shore. The rest of the Army came either now or afterward to
Lepidus, and Papia returned to Pompey. Caesar with all his Fleet passed from
Vibone to Strongyle, one of the five Aeolian Isles, and seeing on the Coast of
Sicily great store of Forces at Pelora, Miles, and Tyndari, he believed Pompey
was there in person, wherefore leaving Agrippa his Admiral in the Post, he
returned to Vibone, and soon after joined with Messala, with design to lay hold
of the opportunity of Pompey's absence to surprise Tauromenia, and so fall upon
him two several ways. Agrippa therefore, goes from Strongyle to Hiera, and
driving out the Garrison takes the place, resolving next day to attempt Melazzo
Miles, and Demochares the Admiral who lay there with forty Ships; wherefore
Pompey fearing Agrippa's success, sent other forty Ships from Messina to
Demochares, under the Command of Apollophanes another of his Freed Men, who was
followed by Papia with seventy others. Agrippa before day weighed with half his
Ships, as if he were only to fight with Papia, whom he had some intelligence he
might meet; but when he saw Apollophanes's Fleet followed by another of seventy
Sail, he sent presently to give notice to Caesar that Pompey was at Miles with
the greatest part of his Naval Force, and placing himself in the middle of his
great Ships, sent to the rest at Hiera with all speed to follow him. These two
Ships thus magnificently equipped, and having Towers in Poop and Prow, being
come up with each other, after with Signals given, and their Men encouraged to
do well, charged with great violence, some stem and stem, and others standing
off to gain their Enemies Broadside, and fall on with greater terror, great
was the noise made by the Ships shocking against each other, and greater the
Shouts of the Men. Pompey's Ships were middle sized, light, and easy to go
about, and so much more active against the Enemy, and by their swiftness fit to
take all advantages in boarding; but Caesar's being greater and heavy, were of
consequence much less nimble, but on the contrary, stronger, both to give the
Shock, and abler to receive it. Caesar had the best Soldiers, and Pompey the
most skilful Mariners; wherefore these charged not right forwards upon Caesar's
great Ships, but shearing by them, sometimes broke a whole Gang of Oars, and
sometimes carried away their Rudders, and sometimes likewise suddenly bringing
about, they charged them with their Beak Heads, giving no less a Shock than
they received: but when Caesar's Ships could reach any of these light timbered
Vessels, they pressed upon them so furiously with their Beak Heads, that they
either staved them, or bored them through and through; and if they came at any
time to fight Board and Board, the great Ships miserably knocked them down with
missile Arms thrown from aloft, and casting in their Grapnels, easily stopped
them, so that the service being too hard to be born, the Adversary had no way
to save themselves, but by leaping into the Sea, where Skiffs appointed for
that purpose took them up. Mean while, Agrippa, whose main design was upon
Papia's Ship, gave him so cruel a Shock in the Bow, that he sunk him, for he
opened all his Kell, and those in his Fore-Castle presently fell, and the Water
entering, all the lower Bank of Rowers were drowned, the rest upon Planks saved
themselves by swimming: Papia, received into the next Ship, again renews the
Fight. When Pompey, who from the top of a Mountain saw that his People could
very hardly defend themselves, and that they never came near any of Caesar's
Ships, but they lost Men, and that the rest in Agrippa's Fleet whom he left at
Hiera were coming to his assistance, made a Signal for them to retreat, which
by little and little they did, still fighting, but being close pressed upon,
they fled, not into the Ports, but the Rivers Mouths, where the Mud and Sand
brought down by the constant stream makes Shoal Water, wherefore Agrippa's
Pilots advising him not to hazard his great Ships upon those Flats, he came to
an Anchor in sight of them in the open Sea, as if he designed to attack them in
the Night; but his Friends admonishing him not to be ruled more by anger than
reason, nor to over-harass the Soldiers by too great Labor and Watchings, nor
yet to be too confident of the calmness of the Sea, he retreated toward the
Evening, and Pompey's Ships got into Harbor. They lost in this Battle thirty
of their Ships, and sunk five of Caesar's, besides many other losses which they
as well as the Enemy sustained. Pompey commended them for having so well
defended themselves, having to fight not against Ships but Walls, nor were his
rewards less than if they had been victorious: he gave them hopes, that
fighting in the Strait as their Light Ships would easier stem the Current, so
they would certainly be victorious, promising withal to add somewhat to the
height of their Ships. Such was the success of the Battle between Agrippa and
Papia near Melazzo.

After which Pompey judging what indeed was* that Caesar was gone to Taurus's
Camp, because he had a design upon Tauromenia, as soon as he had supped he set
Sail for Messina, leaving at Melazzo a part of his Ships, to make Agrippa
believe he was still there. Agrippa on the other side having given a little
repose to his Men, sailed toward Tyndari, which had promised to surrender;
where he was received by the Inhabitants, but the Garrison defended it so
generously, that they drove him thence, yet some other Towns revolting to him,
received his Garrisons, and toward Evening he returned to the Fleet. Mean
while, Caesar being well assured that Pompey was gone from Messina to Melazzo
because of Agrippa, came from Scyllace to Leucopetra, from whence he resolved
to pass by Night to Tauromenia; but after he heard the success of the
Sea Fight, he changed his mind, believing he need not conceal his embarquing,
but boldly go on in broad day, for he imagined Pompey would not come far from
Agrippa. Day then beginning to appear, he took a view from the Mountains as far
as his sight could reach into the Sea, and spying none of the Enemies Ships he
went on Board, loading his Ship with all the Soldiers he could stow; and
leaving the rest with Messala till the Ships returned to fetch them: being come
near Tauromenia, he summoned the place, but the Garrison refusing to surrender,
he passed beyond the River Onobola, and the Temple of Venus, and landed near
Archigetes, where having made his prayers to the Gods, he encamped to besiege
Tauromenia; now Archigetes is a small Statue of Apollo, which the Naxians, when
first sent a Colony into Sicily, dedicated. There as Caesar set foot on ground
he fell, but soon got up again; he was beginning to work upon the
Circumvallation of the Camp when they saw Pompey coming with a great Fleet, to
the astonishment of all the Army, who thought him quite ruined by Agrippa:
along the Shore likewise came Horsemen, riding, striving in swiftness to
out-pass the Fleet; and in several parts were seen great Bodies of Foot.
Caesar's People seeing themselves thus surrounded by three Armies, were utterly
dismayed, Caesar himself was afraid, because he could not now have the
assistance of Messala. The Horse first fell among Caesar's Men still employed
in their Trenches. And if the Fleet and the Foot had come on at the same time,
perhaps Pompey had gained an important Victory, but being unskilful in military
Affairs, and ignorant of the fear their Enemies were in, loath to come to a
Battle in the Evening, they retreated, the Fleet to the Promontory of Coccyna,
and the Foot, who durst not lodge near Caesar's Camp, to the Town of Phoenissa,
whilst the night following the lay quiet, the Caesarians fortified their Camp,
but with extreme labor and watching had made themselves utterly unfit to
fight; they were three Legions, five hundred Horsemen without Horses, about a
thousand light armed Foot, and two thousand Veteran Volunteers, besides the
Sea-Forces. Caesar's left with Cornificius all the Land Forces, with order to
defend himself as well as he could, and before day himself embarked, left he
should likewise be shut in by Sea. He placed Titinius on the Right, and Cancius
on the Left, and himself in a Brigantine went from one part of the Fleet to the
other, exhorting all Men to do their best; and after that (as being in
extremity of danger) struck his Flag. Pompey presently coming to assault him,
they charged though twice, and the Fight lasted till Night. But Caesar's Ships
were many burnt and sunk, and many of them setting their small Sails, fled
toward the Coast of Italy contrary to, and in contempt of Orders, some of
Pompeys Ships pursued them, and soon putting them in disorder, took or burnt
them as well as the rest, those that swum ashore were either slain or taken by
Pompey's Horsemen, some few escaping to Cornificius's Camp, who sent only his
light armed Foot to receive them; for he did not think it convenient to go out
with his Legions, in that ill posture wherein they were, whilst a Land Army of
the Enemies lay so nigh, whom the success at Sea had pussed up, as is ordinary
after Victory. Caesar rowed a great way in the night in a small Galley,
deliberating with himself, whether he should endeavor to pass through the
midst of his Enemies, and get again to Cornificius, or go to Messala. At length
by good fortune he reached the Port of Abala, where he landed with one Esquire,
destitute of Friends, Servants or Guards, whom some that were come up to the
Mountains to see how things stood, found afflicted both in Body and Mind, whom
changing from Boat to Boat that they might the better deceive the Enemy, they
at length brought to Messala's Camp, which was not far distant. As soon as he
got thither, before he would take any food, he dispatched a Brigantine to
Cornificius, and sent to all parts of the Mountains to let those they found
there know he was in safety, advertizing them to prepare to relieve
Cornificius; and he wrote to Cornificius that he would suddenly be with him,
and bring him relief. After he had eat a little, and taken some small repose,
he went by night to Stylida, convoyed by Messala to find out Carinas, who being
ready to sail with three Legions, he gave him order to pass over to Lipari, and
there stay for him; and writ likewise to Agrippa, that considering the danger
Cornificius was in, he should with all speed send to him Laronius with the best
of his Forces. He likewise sent Mecaenas the second time to the City, upon
intelligence they were contriving some Novelty, the Authors of which were
publicly punished: and Messala he sent to Puteoli, where the first Legion lay
to bring them to Vibone. This was that Messala who was proscribed at Rome by
the Triumvirs, with promise of rewards both of Money and Liberty to those
should slay him; and who escaping to Brutus and Cassius, after their death
delivered up on Composition their Fleet to Anthony: which I the rather mention
in this place as a great example of Roman Virtue, since Messala having now in
his power him who proscribed him, without attendance, and in a deplorable
condition, received him as his General, and saved his life.

As for Cornificius, though he could have defended himself in his Pompey would
not hazard the fortune of a Battle against People had nothing but their Arms to
trust to, and whom he hoped to reduce by Famine; yet Cornisicius having placed
those escaped from the Sea Fight, and who were without Arms in the midst of the
Legions, marches on, sorely infested in the Plain by the Horsemens missile
Arms, and by the African Foot in places inaccessible for the Horse, who being
lightly armed, though he sent off several Parties to engage them, he could do
no good against them. The fourth day of his March he came upon a dry ground,
which the Inhabitants thereabout call The Torrent of Fire, reaching quite to
the Sea, all waters falling on it being evaporated with the very heat of the
ground, so that the People thereabouts never travel over it but by night to
avoid the heat and dust. Cornificius's Men not knowing the Country durst not,
especially in a dark Moon, adventure to pass by night, for fear of an ambush;
and by day they could not defend themselves from their Enemies, heat and dust
suffocated them, and the s^orching ground (being now in the heat of Summer)
tormented the soles of their Feet, especially those were naked; thirst no less
afflicted them, not suffering them to retard their March to go charge those
light armed Foot who continually infested them; so that they were exposed to
wounds, without making any defense. At last, when they drew near to a Strait at
the end of this burning ground, they met with other Enemies; wherefore leaving
behind their sick, and such as could not fight, they advanced furiously to the
Charge, and gained the Pass; but when they saw before them other Straits which
the Enemy was likewise possessed of, they lost all heart, and made a stop,
being quite spent with thirst, heat and labor; yet when Cornificius persuaded
them to take courage, by telling them there was a Fountain close by, they
renewed the Fight, and with considerable loss of theirs drove the Enemy from
the Post, but other Enemies were still Masters of the Fountain, so that now
they gave themselves over to grief and despair. In this extremity Laronius
appeared afar off with three Legions which Agrippa had sent to their relief,
they were not fully assured he was their Friend; however, the sight put them in
some hopes, especially when they saw the Enemy desert the Fountain, for fear of
being enclosed on both sides, then they began to set up Shouts of Joy, which
Laronius having answered, they ran all to the Fountain, where notwithstanding
all the good counsel of their Officers to make them more temperate, they drank
so excessively, that some of them died upon the place.

Thus Cornificius when he was quite past hopes saved himself and the rest
Agrippa, who in the mean time had taken Tyndari, furnished with good store of
Provisions, and so commodious for this War, that Caesar landed there all his
Horse and Foot, which were no small number, for he brought into Sicily one and
twenty Legions, twenty thousand Horse, and more than five thousand light armed
Foot. Pompey still held Melazzo, Maulochus, Pelora, and all that Seacoast with
good Garrisons, who out of the fear they were in of Agrippa, kept continually
Fires, as if they would burn the Ships that approached them. He was likewise
seized of the Passages from Tauromenia to Melazzo, and had fortified all the
Avenues of the Mountains; so that he kept Caesar at a Bay (who had a design to
enlarge his Quarters beyond Tyndari) and yet adventured not a Battle. But
having advice that Agrippa was about to land at Pelora, he hastened thither,
deserting the Passes of Melazzo, of which Caesar seized, and of Melazzo it
self, together with Artemisia, a little City, famous for the Oxen of the Sun,
taken away by Ulysses's companions whilst he slept. But when the news of
Agrippa's coming proved false, and Pompey heard of the Passes being lost, he
sent for Tisienus with his Army, whom Caesar going to meet, strayed out of his
way about Mycono, where he staid all night without any Tents, in a violent
rain; as is usual in Autumn* with no other covering save a Gallick Shield which
the Soldiers held over his Head. Here they heard the horrible noise and
dreadful roarings of Mount Aetna, and beheld the mighty Flames, which sorely
affrighted the whole Army, especially the Germans, who starting from the places
where they were laid down, were no longer scrupulous of believing the wonders
told of Mount Aetna, especially of the Torrents of Fire. After this Caesar went
and spoiled the Country of the Palestins, where meeting with Lepidus, and being
supplied with Corn, they went both, and set down near about Messina. But when
there happened only light Skirmishes through all Sicily, and no memorable
Fight, Caesar weary of it, sent Taurus to cut off Pompey from Provisions, by
seizing upon those Cities that supplied them, which made him resolve to give
Battle; but because he was afraid of Caesar's Land Forces, and thought himself
secure in his Ships, he sent a Herald to offer him a Sea Fight. Though Caesar
of all things abhorred to have do with Salt Water, where he had ever been
unfortunate; yet thinking it dishonorable to refuse any thing, he accepted the
Challenge, and a day was appointed, when they were to meet with three hundred
Ships each, armed with all sorts of missile Arms, Towers and Maohines that
could be imagined. `Twas now Agrippa invented the Harpagon, which is a piece of
Timber of five Cubits long, bound about with Iron, at each end having two
Rings, at one of which is the Harpago, or Hook of Iron, and at the other many
Cords fastened in Pulleys to draw it back, with a Catapulta or Sling to dart it
forcibly into the Enemies Ships.

force of Oars to strive to get loose from it, but then the Enemy pulled up
too, both striving one way, the Harpagon still did its office; wherefore coming
to a close Fight, they leaped into one another Ships, and were often so mixed
together, that it was hard to know which party any were of, for they wore all
one kind of Habit, and most spoke the Latin Tongue; and the Word for that day
was known by both Parties. And in this confusion when no person trusting to
another giving him the Word, if he did not know him, there was a horrible
Slaughter, and the Sea was presently covered with Bodies, Arms, and Wracks of
Vessels; for they left nothing unattempted besides Fire, which after the first
shock, and that they came to fight Board and Board, they made no more use of.
Both Armies from the Shore beheld this dreadful Fight not without fear and
passion, as thinking them engaged for every one of their particular safeties;
but how intentive soever they were they could discern nothing; for it was
impossible in a long Train of six hundred Ships, from whom they heard shouts
and acclamations, sometimes from one side, and sometimes from the other, to
discover any thing distinctly. At length Agrippa judging by the Colors upon
their Towers, which was the only mark of difference between them, that there
were more of Pompey's Ships perished than theirs, encouraged those about him,
as if already victorious, to renew the Charge, and not give over pressi^g upon
the Enemy, which they did, till those opposite to him were first forced to give
way; and beating down their Towers, showed him their Poops, and fled toward
the Strait, to the number only of seventeen Ships, most of the rest cut off by
Agrippa, who got between them and the Flyers from going the same way, run
violently on Shore, where sticking fast, they were either got off by the Enemy,
or there burnt, which those that were yet fighting in open Sea seeing, yielded.
The Caesarian Sea Forces soon proclaimed their Victory by their Shouts and
Acclammations, which were answered by the Land Army on Shore: whilst Pompey's
Men groaned out of grief and despair. As for Pompey himself, he departed in
haste from Naulochus to go to Messina, so astonished, that he had no thoughts
at all of his Land Army, which made them led by Tisienus surrender to Caesar
upon good conditions, which example was likewise followed by the Horse
persuaded by their Officers. There were in this Battle three of Caesar's Ships
sunk, and twenty eight of Pompey's, and all the rest burnt, taken, or split
upon the Rocks, save only those seventeen that fled.

Pompey, as upon the way he heard of the defection of his Army, laid Messina,
to load what they could upon his Ships, for he was prepared for this a long
time before, and sending to Before who was at Lilybaeum with eight Legions to
come presently to him, Before forthwith set forward, but all his Friends, and
all his Garrisons having yielded to the Conqueror, and his Enemies being
already in the Strait to come to Messina, he did not think it convenient to
stay for Before in the City, though it were a very strong place, but
embarquing upon those seventeen Ships he had, made Sail toward Anthony, whose
Mother he had favorably received in a like misfortune, and Before arriving at
Messina after Pompey's departure* he there shut himself up, resolving to stand
upon his defense. Now after the Victory Caesar staying in his Camp near
Naulochus, had given order to Agrippa to go and besiege Messina, which together
with Lepidus he did. Before having sent out to them Deputies to capitulate,
Agrippa was of the mind to defer the business till next day that Caesar came
thither; but Lepidus himself received them upon composition, and to get the
Army of Before into his own possession, gave them share in the plunder of the
City equal with his own; so that besides pardon which they only asked for, they
had found a Booty they did not expect, they that very night plundered the City
with Lepidus's Men, and delivered themselves up to be his. So that Lepidus by
this recruit beholding himself Master of two and twenty Legions, and a brave
Body of Horse, raised his hopes, and laid a design upon seizing upon Sicily.
This project he founded upon his first having landed in the Island, and having
taken more Cities than Caesar; wherefore he gave Command to his Garrisons not
to receive any Forces but his own, and seized upon all the Passages. On the
morrow Caesar being arrived at Messina, sends some of his Friends to Lepidus,
to make his complaint of these proceedings, and to represent to him that he was
come into Sicily only to serve Caesar, and not to conquer for himself. To which
he answered by a reciprocal complaint: That they had taken from him his part of
the Empire, which Caesar had usurped all to himself, and if he would restore
that, he would willingly part with Africa and Sicily. Caesar, angry at this
answer, goes to him himself, reproaches him with ingratitude, and after some
mutual threats they part, and from that instant begin to keep Guard apart, and
the Ships went and anchored at some distance from the Port, because, as was
reported, Lepidus had a design to burn them; and the Soldiers detesting these
Dissentions; believed they were again falling into another Civil War. Not that
they made any comparison of Lepidus with Caesar; Lepidus's own Soldiers did not
do that, they admired Caesar's Virtue, and blamed Lepidus's baseness, thinking
it a high injustice done them, to equal the Vanquisher and the Vanquished in
the plunder of M^ssina. Caesar having notice of their thoughts sent underhand
to solicit them by his Agents, who gained many, especially of those who had
served under Pompey, for they thought the pardon granted them ineffectual,
unless Caesar confirmed it. Lepidus knew nothing of this Negotiation, so that
before he perceived any thing, Caesar comes unlooked for to his Camp, with a
strong party of Horse, which he left before the Trenches, and entered with a
slender Train, and advancing toward the middle, calls all the world to witness
that he was forced to make War against his Will. The nearest to him having
saluted him, calling him Emperor, all Pompey's Men who were made to the
purpose ran to him, and begged his pardon. To which he answered, that he
wondered they should ask pardon before they had done what they ought: they
understood what he meant, and presently some took their Colors, and carried
them to Caesar's Camp, whilst the others made up the Tents. Lepidus hearing the
Tumult, comes out of his Tent armed, and falls on, so that one of Caesar's
Esquires being slain, and Caesar himself shot with an Arrow in the Corslet,
though it went not to the quick, he got by running to the place where he had
left his Horse. As he ran, some of those who were upon the Guard in one of the
Forts at Lepidus's Camp made a mock of him; whereon he immediately fell upon
that Fort, and took it with his Horse. Those who commanded in the rest yielded,
some at the same time, others the night following, some without being summoned,
and others after a slight assault made by the Cavalry to serve for a pretense
of their Surrender: but some there were who bravely stood to it before they
would submit; for Lepidus continually sent relief to all parts; but at last
these reliefs deserted him likewise; may, even those who had an inclination for
him at first changed their minds. First, all those of Pompey's Party, who had
till then stood firm for him, left him by whole Bands, and when Lepidus caused
others to take Arms to stop them, those thus commanded took their Colors, and
carried them to Caesar's Camp with the others. Lepidus threatened, entreated,
stopped the Ensigns, and said he would not suffer them to depart, till one of
the Ensigns telling him plainly, that he should suffer it either alive or dead,
he was so terrifed that he let them go. The Horse left him last: but before
they parted, they sent to ask Caesar whether he would have them kill Lepidus,
whom they acknowledged no longer for General; but he would by no means permit
it. Thus Lepidus seeing himself unexpectedly, and in so short a time deserted
by so great an Army, and fallen from so mighty a Fortune; changed Habit, and
went to Caesar whither all the world run as to a Spectacle. Caesar rose up to
receive him, and would not suffer him to fall on his Knees before him, but he
sent him to Rome in the same Habit, reduced to that of a private Man, without
any power or quality, save that of High Priest. So that this Man who had so
often been General of Armies, had reigned in the Triumvirate, made so many
Magistrates, proscribed so many of his Equals in Dignity, returned into the
degree of a simple Citizen, and spent the rest of his life submitted to
authority, and to the power of many of those he had proscribed.

As for Pompey, Caesar would not pursue him, nor permit it to be done,
Anthony's Dominion, or whether he had a mind to see what Anthony would do; for
if he did not as he ought, he had just occasion to break with him (for both
pretending to Sovereign Power, either had a long time thought that when all
other were overcome they should fall upon one another) or else, as Caesar said
afterward, because Pompey was none of his Father's Murderers. All the Forces
being now joined together, there were five and forty Legions, five and twenty
thousand Horse, thirty seven thousand five hundred light armed Foot, six
hundred Ships of War, and a prodigious number of Merchants Ships, all which he
sent to their owners. He gave likewise to the Soldiers the reward due to them
for Victory, with promise of greater Liberalities for the future, distributed
Crowns, and other honorable Recompenses to those he thought worthy, and
pardoned the Officers had served under Pompey. This great Prosperity was worthy
of Envy, and Fortune was not wanting to be jealous of it, and to intermix it
with trouble: for the Army, and particularly his own mutinied, the Soldiers
demanded their Discharge, and to have the same Recompenses they had received
after the Victory at Philippi; whereupon, though the service they had done
against Pompey seemed not in his opinion comparable to the other, yet he
promised them to reward them honorably, and equal with those now served under
Anthony at his return, and yet according to Military Discipline he represented
to them with some threats the fault they committed against the Laws of War, and
against the Oath they had sworn to. At length, seeing that instead of
submitting they grew more insolent, he forbore threatening, lest those who were
newly come to his Party should raise some Tumult: only he told them he would
discharge them with Anthony as soon as he could, assuring them in the mean time
he would no more employ them in Civil Wars, since they by God's Grace were
quite extinct; but that he would lead them against the Illyrians, and other
Barbarous Nations who had broke the Peace with them, from whom they would all
return rich. To which they told him plainly, that they would serve no longer,
unless he presently gave them those Rewards and Honors their past labors
deserved. He answered them, that as to the Honors there should be no delay in
them; for besides the Crowns he had already distributed, he had others to
bestow among every Legion, and to the Centurions and Tribunes Robes of Purple,
with the Quality of Senator, every Man in his Country. Whilst he was offering
these things and many others, fit a Tribune named Ofilius began to cry out that
Crowns and Robes were to quiet Children, but that must have Soldiers Money and
Lands. The multitude by their Acclammations signifying they approved this
discourse, Caesar in a rage went down from the Tribunal; but for the Tribune
those about him praised him, and reviled the others for not joining with him,
he told them that he alone was sufficient to defend so just a cause, yet these
words cost him dear, for the next day he disappeared, and was never more seen.
After which accident no particular person durst utter a word, but the whole
Army went together to demand their Discharge, and Caesar for his part did all
he could to appease them by caressing their Officers. At length he dismissed
those had served him at Modena and Philippi, who amounted to twenty thousand,
for indeed they had served longer than the time appointed by the Laws of War;
but for fear lest those should corrupt others, he sent them presently out of
the Island, after having told apart to those had served him at Modena, that
though he had discharged them, he would not fail to satisfy what he had
promised. As soon as they were shipped, he drew the rest together to speak to
them, where he took them for witnesses of the perjury of the others, whom he
called Runaways, because they had forced a Discharge from him, praised those
present for their sidelity, made them hope that ere long they should be
discharged, and that so rich, no one person should repent his having continued
in the service, and with all this he gave them five hundred Drams a Man.

Sicily, and settled there Pretors as well as in Africa, left an Army divided
betwixt those two Provinces, sent Anthony's Ships to Tarentum, and sending part
of the rest of his Forces before him into Italy, followed himself with the
other. When his return was known in the City, the Senate gave him by Decree all
the Honors imaginable, referring to his discretion the accepting all, or as
many of them as he pleased. All the Senators, and likewise the People, crowned
with Flowers, went a great way to meet him, brought him first to the Temple,
and then to his House. The next day he recited in full Senate, and before the
People, two Orations which he had composed, and which he afterward made
public, wherein he orderly declared what things he had done, and his Conduct
in the Government of the Commonwealth, from his first undertaking the Charge
till now, caused the Peace to be published, the Civil Wars being now quite
extinct, remitted what was remaining due upon Impositions, discharged the
Receivers of what they ought, and released the Farmers of what they had not yet
paid in of their public Farms. Of all the Honors the Senate offered him he
accepted the noblest, that on all those days whereon he had been victorious,
there should be Anniversary Festivals. That there should be placed before the
Tribunal for Orations his Statue in Gold, representing the life, with this
Inscription, For Peace after tedious War, restored both by Sea and Land.
Besides all this, the People would have taken away Lepidus's High Priesthood,
and obliged him to accept it; but he refused it, because the Laws forbid the
depriving a man of that Dignity, as long he lived; whereupon the People would
have Lepidus put to death, as his Enemy, but he would not permit it. Afterward
he sent to all his Armies sealed Letters, with Directions they should be all
broken up in one day, and the Orders they found in them observed, which were
concerning the Slaves, who, during the Tumult and Disorders, had run away from
their Masters, and lifted themselves in the Army. The Senate had granted them
all Freedom by the Peace made with Pompey; but they being now taken all in one
day, and sent to the Cities, Caesar returned them into the hands of their
Masters, or their Masters Heirs, and if none came to claim them, they were put
to death in the same Cities from whence they had fled: the like he did in
Sicily. All Men now thought the Civil Wars quite at an end, and that they owed
the obligation of it to Caesar, then twenty eight years of age; wherefore the
Cities consecrated him, and placed him in the number of their Gods. Mean time,
not only Rome, but likewise Sicily was infested with numbers of Vagabond
Rascals who robbed with so much insolence, that Caesar was forced to give a
Commission to Sabinus to suppress them, many he took and hanged; but it
required a whole years time to purge all the Countries clear of them. At this
time, as it is said, were established those Cohorts of Watch and Ward which
continue to this day. This timely and speedy remedy got Caesar much reputation,
who now began likewise to appoint many annual Magistrates in things that
concerned the Administration of the Commonwealth, according to the custom of
their Ancestors, he likewise caused to be burnt all Letters writ in the time of
the War, lest they might kindle new Troubles, and promised to restore the
Government to the People, as soon as Anthony returned, because he knew well
that he had designed to lay down his Authority as soon as the Civil Wars were
ended. Upon these promises, the Citizens persuaded of Caesar's good intentions,
made him perpetual Tribune of the People, as if by this new Dignity they would
invite him to lay down the former: about which he privately wrote to Anthony,
giving his Letters in charge to Bibulus, who was upon his return to him, to
deliver; he sent likewise Governors into the Provinces, and made Preparations
for the Illyrian War, whither he designed to go in person.

As for Pompey, having left Sicily to seek a refuge from Anthony, he landed on
the Promontory of Lacinia, where he took out of Juno's Temple all the Offerings
of an inestimable value. Thence getting to Mitylene, he sojourned some time in
that City, where his Father in the War with Caesar and left him then a Child
with his Mother, and whither after his Defeat he retreated. Anthony being at
this time in Media fighting against the Medes and Parthians, Pompey resolved to
throw himself into his Arms at his return, but hearing he was defeated, and
that news passing for a truth in the opinion of all the world, he began to
fancy new hopes, that either he might succeed Anthony, if he were dead, or
share power with him if he returned, besides he was encouraged by Labienus's
example, who but a little before had made strange Incursions and Spoils
throughout all Asia. Whilst these things run in his Head, news was brought him
that Anthony was returned to Alexandria; wherefore pursuing the resolution he
had taken, he sent Deputies to offer him his Friendship and Alliance; but this
was but a Trick, for indeed they went only to pry into his Affairs. In the mean
time he privately dispatched others toward the Princes of Thrace and Pontus,
resolved to retire toward the Kingdom of Pontus into Armenia, if he obtained
not what he pretended to from Anthony, for he had likewise sent to the
Parthians, out of hopes that in the War which was not yet terminated, they
would be glad to accept him for his General against Anthony, being a Roman, and
more, the Son of the great Pompey. Besides he fitted up great store of
Shipping, and kept in Exercise his Sea-Forces, under pretense of being afraid
of Caesar, or of making these preparations for Anthonies service; But Anthony,
who soon perceived his designs, and sent Titius with all the Fleet and Army of
Syria, to oppose him with open Force, if he would make War, or to conduct him
Honorably, if he had any intention to come to him as a Friend. Now Pompey's
Deputies spoke to Anthony in this manner.

The Oration of Pompey's Deputies to Anthony
THough if Pompey had designed to continue the War, he might have gone into
Spain, a Province where he is beloved for his Fathers sake, of which he had
good Testimony in his Youth, and who still offered him their Assistance. Yet
because he had rather live in Peace with you; or if there be necessity to make
War, fight under your Colors, he has sent us hither to offer you his
Friendship and Alliance. It Is not a desire of a days standing, you know that
when he was Master of Sicily, and made Inroads into Italy, when he sent your
Mother to you, he made you the same offers; And certainly had you accepted
them, neither had Pompey been driven out of Sicily. For you had not assisted
Caesar with your Fleet, nor you had not come off with such disadvantage against
the Parthians, because Caesar sent you not those Forces he promised you; Nay,
you might have reduced Italy to your Obedience. However, though you refused
them in a time when they might have been useful to you, he begs you yet to have
a care lest Caesar who has so often deceived you, do not do it at last beyond
repair. Remember but how contrary to a solemn League, he made War upon Pompey,
who was likewise his Aly, though he had not the same pretense. How he has
deprived Lepidus of his part of the Empire, without in the least making you
partaker of his Victories. You are now the only obstacle stands in his way to
that Monarchy to which he has so long aspired; and already, if Pompey had not
stood between, you had been engaged one against the other. It Is more your
concer^ than any man's to look into these things, yet Pompey out of his love to
you would not refrain his advice. Besides knowing you good and genero^^ he ^as
more esteem for your friendship than for all could be promised him by a man he
knows for a cheat and a deceiver. He thinks it not strange you lent your Ships
to Caesar, because he knows you were urged to it by the want you stood in need
of Forces for the Parthian War, but he would willingly have you remember how
much the not sending that Army did you prejudice. In a word, Pompey yields
himself up to you with that Fleet he has left, and a faithful Army never
deserted him in distress. If you have peace, it will be no small Glory for you
to have protected the Son of the great Pompey; and if you engage in that War
which in all likelihood you dispose your self to, the Forces he delivers up to
you will not be useless.

The Deputies having done speaking, Anthony let them understand the Orders he
had given to Titius, and for a full answer told them, that if Pompey made these
Offers sincerely, he would come along with Titius. In the mean time, Pompey's
Envoys to the Parthians were taken by Anthony's Captains, and brought to
Alexandria, where having confessed all, Anthony sent for the Deputies had spoke
to him on Pompey's behalf, and showed them whom he had arrested. They were
extremely surprised; yet they besought him to pardon a young Man reduced to the
last extremities, and who out of a fear of being refused, had been forced to
seek a Retreat among Nations always Enemies to the Roman Name; for had he been
well assured of Anthony's mind, there had been no need to have had recourse to
others, or to use other arts and solicitations, Anthony believed them, being by
nature free from Malice, and of a clear and magnanimous temper.

In the mean time, Furnius, Anthony's Lieutenant in Asia, made at Pompey, who
was come over thither in a peaceable manner, whether he were not strong enough
to hinder him, or that he knew not Anthony's mind; but when he saw he exercised
his Soldiers, he levied what Force he could himself in that Province, and sent
to Aenobarbus, who was not far off with an Army, and to Amyntas to come to his
assistance. They being presently drawn together, Pompey began to complain they
treated him like an Enemy, whilst he was waiting what answer Anthony gave his
Deputies, yet all this while he was plotting to make AEnobarbus his Prisoner,
whom one of his Familiars called Curious, was to deliver up to him, hoping he
might stand him in good stead, if an Exchange of Prisoners should happen; but
the Treason being discovered, and Curious convicted, he was executed by sentence
of the Council of War, and Pompey put to death Theodorus, one of his Freed Men,
who alone he made privy to this Plot, suspecting he had discovered it. This
design not succeeding, he lost all hopes of deceiving Furnius, but he took by
treason Lampsacus, where C. Caesar had planted a Colony of Italians, whom by
force of Money he got to engage in his Party; so that seeing himself two
hundred Horse, and three Legions strong, he went and assaulted Cyzica by Sea
and Land, but was both ways repulsed by some of Anthony's Forces, who had the
Guard of the Gladiators, kept there for the Peoples Divertisement. He therefore
returned to the Port of the Achaeans, to make Provision of Corn, whither
Furnius following, without offering to fight him, encamped always as near him
as he could with store of Horse, and thus hindered him from soraging the
Country, or besieging Towns. Pompey, who had not Horse enough to take the
Fields, went and assaulted his Camp in Front with one part of his Forces,
against whom Furnius coming to the Charge, the others whohad taken a great
compass not to be discovered, fell in behind, forced the Camp, and put them all
to the Rout. All Furnius's Men fled through the Plains of Scamandria, and not
being able to run very fast, because the ground was moistened with the Rain,
there was made a great Slaughter. Those who saved themselves escaped into
places of security, being too weak to stand Pompey, till such time as new
Recruits were come from Mysia, Propontis, and other places. Mean while, the
Country People ruined with Taxes, took Arms, and joined with Pompey, now grown
famous by the Victory, gained at the Port of the Achaeans. But still wanting
Horse, he often came by the worst in going to gather in Corn and Forage.
Wherefore upon intelligence that a Body of Italian Horse were coming to
Anthony, which Octavia, who wintered at Athens, sent him, he dispatched away
some of his Agents with Money to corrupt them; but the Governor of Macedon
taking these Suborners, distributed their Money to the Horsemen: yet Pompey
took Nicea and Nicomedia, where he got store of Wine, besides many other happy
successes he had beyond his own hopes: but Furnius always encamping at some
distance from him. About the beginning of Spring there came to him from Sicily
seventy Ships, the Remainder of the Fleet Anthony had lent to Caesar against
Pompey; for the Sicilian War being ended, Caesar returned them. At the same
time Titius arrived out of Syria with sixscore other Ships, and a great Army,
and all together landed at Proconesus. Thereupon Pompey somewhat daunted, burnt
his Ships, and armed his Rowers and Seamen, whom he thought would do him better
service on shore. But Cassius of Parma, Nasidius, Saturninus, Thermus,
Antistius, and all the most considerable of Pompey's Friends, and even Fannius
himself, for whom he had the greatest value, and Libo his Father-in-law, seeing
that after the coming of Titius, to whom Anthony had given commission either to
make War or Peace, he was still obstinate to continue the War against one more
powerful than himself, left him, and making their own composition submitted to
Anthony: being deserted by his Friends, he advanced through the mid-land of
Bithynia, with design, as it is said, to get into Armenia: Furnius, Titius, and
Amyntas having notice that to this intent he had quitted his Camp by night,
followed him, and made such haste, that before day was shut in, they overtook
him near a certain Eminence, above which they encamped separately without
entrenching, because it grew late, and their Men were over tired. Pompey seeing
them in this posture, drew off three thousand Men, who went and charged them in
the dark night so briskly, that they slew a great number, some in Bed, and
others rising, and the rest for the most part naked, shamefully took their
flight: so that if Pompey had fallen on with all his Forces, or had but given
them chase, he might have completed his Victory, but his adverse fortune put it
out of his thoughts, and he reaped no more fruit of this Victory, save the
continuing his March into the Uplands.

The Enemies being rallied, followed him close at the Heels, and Furnius,
Friend to the great Pompey, and besides that, the most considerable of all the
other Commanders, and the honestest Man. Being in order thereunto come to the
Bank of a River that run between them, Pompey told them, that having sent
deputies to Anthony, and having in the mean time no Provisions, no^ no person
that would furnish him with any, he had been forced to do what he had done.

The ORATION of POMPSEY to FVRNIVS.
BUt for your part, added he, if it be by Anthony's Orders you make War upon
me, he is ill advised, not foreseeing a considerable* War hanging over his
Head; but if it be of your own motion, I beseech you to expect the return of my
Deputies, or to carry me to Anthony, after having past your word for my
security; for Furnius, it is you only I confide in, and put my self into your
hands, provided you promised me upon your Honor to deliver me in safety to
Anthony.

This he said as confident of Anthony's good nature, and fearing only some
misfortune might happen to him in the Journey, Furnius made answer:

The ANSWER of FURNIUS to POMPEY.
IF you had any intention to yield your self to Anthony, you ought in person to
have gone to him at first, or have staid his Answer at Mitylene; but you
designed War, and have done all you could; for why should you deny things we
certainly know? Yet if you now repent, we are three that command here for
Anthony, do not create any jealousy among us, but deliver your self up to
Titius, who only has Commission concerning you: you may require of him the same
security you do of me; for his Orders are, if you obstinately hold out, to kill
you; but if you submit, to send you honorably to Anthony.

Pompey was angry at Titius, as an ungrateful Man, to undertake this War
against him whom he had so kindly treated when he was his Prisoner; besides, he
thought it dishonorable for Pompey to yield himself into the hands of Titius,
a man of mean extract, and whom he was jealous of, either distrusting his
Principles, or conscious of some injury he had done him before the last
kindness; wherefore he offered himself once more to Furnius, and begged him to
receive him; and when that could not be obtained, he desired that at least he
might yield himself into Amyntas's Hands. But Furnius telling him that Amyntas
would not do that which would prove injurious to him who had Anthony's
Commission for this purpose, the Conference ended. Anthony's Lieutenants
believed that Pompey would next morning for very want be forced to yield
himself to Titius; but as soon as it was night he caused Fires to be kindled,
and gave orders to the Trumpets to sound at every Watch of the Night, according
to custom, and he without any noise went out of his Camp with the Flower of his
Forces, not telling any one of them his design, which was to return to the Sea,
and set fire on Titus's Fleet, and possibly he might have done it, if Scaurus,
who deserted him, and run to the Enemy had not given him notice of his
departure, and the way he had taken, without being able to say more. Amyntas
presently followed him with fifteen hundred Horse, for whom, Pompey's being all
Foot, it was no hard matter to overtake. As soon as he appeared, all Pompey's
Men forsook him, some privily, others openly; so that almost desperate, and
fearing his own Domestics, he yielded himself to Amyntas without conditions,
who had refused the Composition offered by Titius. Thus was the last Son of the
great Pompey taken. He had lost his Father when he was a Child, and when he
grew somewhat elder, his Brother, after whose death he lay concealed a long
time, living like a Bandito in Spain, till such time as a multitude of loose
People understanding he was Pompey's Son, slocked to him, and then he began to
overrun and plunder the Country. After the death of C. Caesar having got a
good Army, Ships and Money, he made a War, and became Master of some Islands,
after which he was created Admiral of the Western Sea, and then sorely annoyed
Italy, almost famishing his Enemies, and forcing them to peace on his own
Conditions: but what is most considerable, in that dreadful time of
Proscriptions at Rome, he was the only Refuge of the Miserable, and saved many
persons of Quality, who were obliged to him for their return to their Country:
but as if Fortune had deprived him of Judgment, he never would give the onset
upon any Enemy, but lost many fair opportunities, content only to defend
himself. Such was the Pompey now taken. Titius received an Oath from his Army
in Anthony's name, and sent him to Miletum, where at forty years of age he put
him to death, either because the old injury had more power over him than
Gratitude for a later kindness, or because he had Anthony's Orders for it.
Though some say Anthony gave no such Order, but it was done by Plancus
Governor of Syria, who in Affairs of great Importance was wont to set
Anthony's Hand and Seal. Others believe that Plancus indeed might write it, but
by private Orders from Anthony, who would not do it himself, because of the
name of Pompey; or for fear to displease Cleapatra, who esteemed Pompey for his
Father's sake: others say again Plan^ns did it of his own accord, fearing
Pompey might raise some new difference between Caesar and Anthony, or that
Cleopatra might fall in love with him. Let it be how it will, after his death
Anthony took another Expedition into Armenia; and Caesar went to make War
against the Illyrians, who wasted the Coasts of Italy, some of whom were never
subject to the Roman Empire, others cast off their Yoke in the time of the
Civil Wars. But because the Illyrian Affairs are not so well known to me as to
compose thereof a perfect Volume; and that likewise I cannot speak of them more
properly, than when writing of the time that Province was absolutely reduced
under the Roman Power; I have designed to refer it till I write what passed
under Augustus, and now only make a Summary to be annexed to the History of
Macedon, those Provinces being contiguous.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and sold by* John Amery, at the Peacock against S.
Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street.
1 COllection of Law Entries, etc. by William Rastal. Printed 1670. fol.

2. Cokes Commentary on Littleton. Printed 1670. fol.

3. The whole Office of a Sheriff, by Michael Dalton, with very large Additio^^
Printed 1670. fol.

4. Formul^bene placit andi, by W. Brown. fol.

5. Tables to most of the Printed Presidents of Pleadings, Writs and Returns of
all the Common Law, collected by G. Townsend. fol.

7. The Law of Common Assurances, touching Deeds in general, viz. Feoffments,
Gifts, Grants, Leases, with two Alphabetical Tables; by William Sheppard
Esquire. Printed 1669. fol.

7. The Country Justice, containing the Practice of the Justices of Peace, as
well in, as out of Sessions, etc. with Additions, by Michael Dalton: to the
year 1677. fol.

8. The History of the most Victorious and Renowned Princess Elizabeth, late
Queen of England, containing all the most important and remarkable Passages of
State, both at home and abroad (so far as they were linked with English
Affairs) during her long and prosperous Reign. The third Edition very much
corrected and amended by William Camden Clarenceux King at Arms. Printed 1675.
fol.

9. Lord Coke's eleven Reports in French. fol. Printed 1672.

10. Lord Coke's Book of Entries. fol.

11. Lord Dyar's Reports, with a new Table. fol. Printed 1672.

12. The Complete Clark containing the best forms of all sorts of Presidents.
quarto. Printed 1671.

13. Placita Latin Rediviva. quart.

14. An Abridgment of all the Statutes in force and use from Magna Charta to
the year 1676. by Edmond Wrigate. octavo.

15. Fitzherbert's Natura Brevium corrected and amended. octav.

16. The Terms of the Law with Additions. octav. Printed 1670.

17. Advice to Grand J^rors in cases of Blood, asserting from Law and Reason,
that at the King's Suit in all cases (where a person by Law is to be indicted
for killing of another person) that the Indictment ought to be drawn for
Murder, and that the Grand Jury ought to find it murder, where their evidence
is, that the party intended to be indicted had his hands in Blood, and did kill
the other person. By Zachary Babington, Esquire. octav. Printed 1677.

18. Man without passion, or the wise Stoic, according to the sentiments of
Seneca, written in French by that Great and Learned Philosopher Anthony le
Grand. Englis^^d by G. R. octav. Printed 1675.

19. An Introduction to the History of England, comprising the principal
Affairs of this Land, from its first planting to the coming of the English
Saxons, together with a Catalogue of the British and Pictish Kings, by Daniel
Langhorn. octav. 1676.

20. Transactions or Reports in Chancery, by William Tothill Esquire. oct.

21. The Complete Lawyer by William N^y Attorney General to King Charles the
First. oct.

22. Tenants Law, a very useful Treatise. duod.

23. Dying and dead men's living words, or fair warnings to a careless World,
being a Collection of most excellent sayings, by the greatest and wisest men
that ever were, by D D. Lloyd. duod.

25. Littleton's Tenures French and English. duod.

25. Conjugium conjurgium, or some serious considerations on Marriage (wherein
by way of caution and advice to a friend) its nature, ends, events,
concomitant, accidents, etc. are examined by William Seymar Esquire. octav.


