THE Apprentice's faithful Monitor.
AS ever you hope to have that Favor of God, which is better than Life, in
your Apprenticeship, and his Blessing on your Labors, when you come into the
World for your self; be very careful to discharge those Duties which you owe to
your Master or Mistress.

In order to which,

Let this great Truth be impressed upon your Mind, That you are continually uner
the All-seeing Eye of God, who is the Searcher of Hearts, and Trier of Reins,
and knows your very Thoughts afar off; and then you will obey your Master, not
with Eye-Service, but in Singleness of Heart, fearing God.

Be careful to observe those Directions which you may receive from your Master
for the Learning of your Trade; be diligent to improve them, faithful in the
Discharge of any Trust reposed in you, that you may justly obtain that valuable
Title of a Profitable Servant.

Absent not your self at any Time, upon any Pretense whatsoever, from the
Service of your Master or Mistress, without their Leave.

Whenever you are sent upon any Errand, stay no longer than the Business does
require, remembering that the Time is not your own, but his to whom you are
Bound. Carefully avoid all wicked Company, (that Snare of the Devil) whereby
young Men are often drawn to the Commission of expensive Sins; to maintain
which, they defraud their Masters, and take such Courses that they are cut off
by the Hand of Public Justice.

Whenever you are guilty of a Fault, let not the Devil prevail on you to
conceal it, by telling a Lie; which will pave the way to the greatest Faults
you can be guilty of: But much rather choose, by ingenuous Confession, and
sincere Promise of Amendment, to obtain Pardon. A Caution against this Sin is
well expressed by Mr. Herbert, Dare to be true, nothing can need a Lie,
The Fault which needs it most, grows two thereby.


Still keep up a dutiful Regard to your Parents, if alive, remembering the
Danger of forfeiting their Blessing, and what you owe them for their Endeavors
to help you out into the World. Your doing well will be their Comfort as well
as your own. If they are gone, forget not what you owe to those that take Care
of you in their stead, and let them have the Comfort of seeing that their
Concern for you, for your Parents Sake, has a good Effect.

Above all, neglect not the Duties you owe to God. Begin and end every Day with
him by Prayer; and if at any Time you want the Convenience of a private
Retirement, yet omit not to lift up your Heart to God, begging the Pardon of
your Sins, and the Sanctification of your Nature.

In the Morning, pray that you may be kept that Day from all Evil, especially
from the Evil of Sin. Be in the Fear of the Lord all the Day long; and before
you lie down at Night, be thankful for the Mercies of the Day past, and beg of
your heavenly Father that He would watch over you for good, etc. You may easily
purchase various Helps to assist you in this Duty.

Endeavor every Day to read some Portion of God's Word, always remembering to
beg a Blessing on what you shall read; when you are alone, meditate upon what
you have at any Time heard, or read, and beg of God, that he would by his
Spirit so impress those Truths upon your Heart, that the Fruit and the Power of
them may appear in your Life and Coversation.

When you have faithfully served your Master Six Days in the Week, remember to
keep holy the Seventh Day, which, both by divine and humane Authority, is set
apart for the Service of God. Before you go to attend upon the public Worship
of God, beg a prepared Heart, with whatever else is needful for the saving and
profitable Hearing of his Word. Presume not to mispend any part of that Day,
which so many have complained of as the Foundation of their Ruin, when they
have come to an untimely End; but make Conscience of spending the Evening in
recollecting of what you have heard, in Prayer, Meditation, etc. You have the
greater Reason to take Care how you behave your selves in your Apprenticeship,
because it is an Age of Life wherein many have miscarried, and laid the
Foundation of their future Ruin.

Your Prospect of many Advantages in the World, if you come to set up for your
selves, must depend much upon Reputation; endeavor therefore to deserve the
Character of a Good and Faithful Servant, and you will reap the Fruit thereof.

Religion and Virtue will promote rather than hinder your well-being in the
World; it will fortify you against those Vices that will soon reduce you to a
Morsel of Bread. By being faithful to your Master, and to your own Soul, you
will become a Blessing to the Family where the Providence of God has placed
you, and the Blessing of God will abide upon you here, and you will be
eternally happy hereafter; these things having not only the Promise of this
Life, but of that which is to come.


