An Account of the Proceedings AT THE GUILD HALL OF THE CITY of LONDON, On
Saturday, September 12. 1679. With the Substance of Sir Thomas Player's Speech,
AND THE Lord Mayor's Answer Thereunto.
UPon Saturday, September the Thirteenth last past, several Hundreds of the
Principal Citizens of London, accompanied Sir Thomas Player, to wait upon the
LORD MAYOR, and the Court of Aldermen sitting at Guild Hall, where Sir Thomas
Player, in the Name of himself, and all the Inhabitants of this City, Addressed
himself to his Lordship, to this purpose:

THat it was apparent, what Advantage and Encouragement the Duke of YORK's
being a PAPIST, gave to the Rise and Progress of this Horrid and Damnable PLOT,
Which the Parliament had already declared to be one of the greatest
Encouragements that the Papists had for the carrying of it on: And that what
they have already Voted against the Duke, we all ought to take special notice
of; for though it came not up quite to a Law, yet it came very nigh it, as
being the Voice of all the Commons of England. And that Both Houses of
Parliament had Unanimously Declared this PLOT, to have been Contrived, and
still Carrying on by PAPISTS, against the Life of His SACRED MAJESTY, the
PROTESTANT RELIGION, and the GOVERNMENT of this Kingdom.

That therefore all PROTESTANTS are fully satisfied, the Papists do still
design the Murder of His MAJESTY; but that they should find the English Nation
would value His MAJESTY'S Life at a higher Rate than ever any Princes Life in
Europe has been va^ued at: And that for his part he was not afraid of his own
Life, especially upon so good an Account; for that he was very well assured,
that though his Enemies should kill him, they would but thereby hasten his
departure to a greater Glory.

That there was a Popish Priest lately come in, who had made a further and more
clear Discovery of the Horrid Design of Murdering His MAJESTY; That the whole
Contrivance was managed at ROME, and was to have been suddenly Executed here,
an Account of which he did not doubt but would be published to the World in a
short time;

That therefore they the Citizens of LONDON, Addressed themselves to his
LORDSHIP, as their Head and Chief Magistrate in the City, and did therefore
desire his LORDSHIP, That their GUARDS might be Doubled; and that instead of
Two Companies, Four might go Out every Night, They not coming upon DUTY, but
Once in Twelve Nights, which would be very easy, and which Charge the Citizens
were very willing to bear; especially since they apprehend that there is as
great a necessity to strengthen our hands now, as when there went out Eight
Companies in a night, their present Danger being rather greater.

He offered also one Politic Reason to his LORDSHIP, which was this, That the
late Long Parliament, and also the Last Parliament, took so much Notice of the
great Charge, Care and Diligence of the City, for the Preservation of His
MAJESTY'S Person, and the PROTESTANT Interest, which had so much influence
toward the preserving of the whole Kingdom that they were extremely inclined to
show their good Affection and Kindness to the City, by all ways imaginable; And
that therefore the Slackning their CARE and GUARDS at such a time as this,
(when Danger seems as apparent as ever, and the Fears and Jealousies of the
People are so very great, as the like were hardly ever known) might possibly it
may in some measure lessen that Kindness to the City in the Next Parliament,
which was so Remarkable in the Last; since it is no way to be doubted, but the
Popish Faction will endeavor, by all means imaginable, to make the Councels and
Advices of the Next Parliament Ineffectual;

That it cannot be forgot, That Thirteen Years ago this City was a sad Monument
of the Papists Cruelty, being brought into a most Deplorable Condition, by
their Cursed Designs: I^ being now out of all Doubt, That it was they that
Burnt the City; And if they had not been Disappointed, would have Cut our
Throats too at the same time, while we were endeavoring to save the small
Remainder of our Goods which the FIRE had left Unconsumed;

That though Men may seem to be regardless of their own Lives, yet when the
Lives of their Wives, Children, and their Estates also, are like to be
Destroyed in the general Ruin, it calls for pity from the most careless. And
that therefore it was high Time for us to seek the Preservation of the Whole,
by all ways in our Power; Concluding, That he would desire his LORDSHIP to
proceed in this Great and Necessary Affair, as GOD should direct him.

With several other excellent Expressions to this purpose, which we should have
been very glad, if it had been possible for us, to have repeated.

At the End hereof the People gave a very Great SHOUT, and his LORDSHIP desired
them to Withdraw.

After a short time the Citizens were called in, and his Lordship gave them an
Answer to this purpose.
THat he had considered of their desires, and was very willing to gratify
them: and thanked them for their Care and Zeal for the preservation of the
Kings life, and of the Protestant Religion. And then told them that he could
not answer their desires of himself, without calling the Lieutenancy, and
therefore he would cause the Lieutenancy to meet on Thursday next; that being
the first day that would be at liberty from other business already assigned; or
else they should have been called sooner, for his Lordship told them that he
would lose no time in it; His Lordship also further assuring them, That as he
had both a Life and an Estate, so he should readily and frankly hazard the loss
of both, in defense of the Protestant Religion: His Lordship was also pleased
to declare, That he was very well satisfied, that there was no person who
served the City of London in the Quality of an Alderman, but would be ready to
spend his Blood for the preservation of the Protestant Cause. His Lordship also
desired, that for the time to come, they would not be so numerous in their
Addresses, since they might as well make known their minds by few, as by many;
especially having so worthy a person to speak for them, as Sir Thomas Player;
and therefore desired that Sir Thomas Player with half a dozen of the most
eminent Citizens would meet the Lieutenancy on Thursday next; for that by so
numerous an Assembly as was then present, they might possibly give some
occasion of offense. His Lordship also told them, that he hoped before Thursday
next there might something fall out, that might very much conduce to take away
the Cause of their present fears, for that he was very well assured the Duke of
York was making Preparations for his departure on Tuesday or Wednesday next.

His Lordship having ended his Speech, Sir Thomas Player spoke to this effect.
THat he did not doubt but that his Lordship would take all the care that was
possible for the security of this City and the Protestant Religion, and the
safety and preservation of the Kings Life in the first place, upon which not
only the Happiness of this City, but of the whole Nation depended; and that he
took the more liberty so to speak, because it was very well known, though to
the grief of all good Protestants, that there are a certain sort of men who
make it their business to lessen the Plot, and some would make it no Plot at
all, others say that it was a Plot made by the Protestants, and then cast upon
the Papists; others would have it to be altogether a Protestant Plot; and that
this sort of Persons were the most dangerous, and had been deservedly styled
PROTESTANTS IN MASQUERADE, adding, That he had rather have to do with an open
professed Papist, than with one of these disguised Protestants: for that an open
Enemy was much more eligible than a false Friend: But he hoped that in a little
time such kind of persons would be taken notice of, and receive the reward due
to their merits.

After this the Court adjourned into the Common hall, in order to the choosing
a Sheriff for the year ensuing: where several being nominated, the choice
seemed to be between Mr. Lewis and Mr. Jenks; and because it appeared somewhat
doubtful, a Poll was desired, which being made, the choice fell upon Mr. Lewis,
who was chosen accordingly.

Postscript.
IT cannot reasonably be expected that the Speech of this Worthy and Deserving
Knight, nor the Lord Mayor's generous Reply thereunto, should be published
exactly, since in so great a Concourse it was hardly possible to be taken;
however least so considerable a Transaction should be altogether buried in
silence, we have endeavored to give as full an Account thereof, as could be
done by strength of Memory, which we hope will therefore be kindly accepted
instead of a more Correct Copy.


