AN APPENDIX TO THE PROPOSAL For Raising the Price of Tin: CONTAINING Reasons
for Raising the Price, Quality and Quantity, of Tin; in the Counties of
Cornwall, and Devon.
1. BECAUSE the Public Use of Silver-Plate is so much abated in the Nation.

2. BECAUSE Tin, improved by Art, is next, in Nature, to pure Gold, and Silver.
And it is the Interest, and Honor of the Nation to Refine Tin, it being our
own Commodity, rather than to use Allayed and Course Silver, for Common Plate.

3. THE higher the Price and Quality of Tin shall be, the more it will be in
Fashion: The more it is in Fashion; the more it will be Refined: The more it is
Refined, the more fitter it will be for Plate: The more Tin there is in Plate,
the more Silver we sall have in Money: The more Silver there is in Money, the
more Money we shall have to lay out on the most Refined and Fashionable Pewter:
The finer the Pewter is in Quality and Fashion, the higher will be the Price of
Tin: The higher the Price and Quality of Tin shall be, the greater quantity
will be Consumed: The greater the Consumption is, the better it will be, both
for the Rich and Poor: The Poor will get more Wages, and the Rich more Wealth;
For All Markets are governed by the first Market-Price. And as the Quantity,
Quality and Price of Tin shall rise, the more it will be for the Honor and
Interest of the Nation in general; And the Counties of Cornwall and Devon in
particular, will be the better enabled thereby to serve their King and Country,
in Mind, Body and Estate.

NOW, The better to prevent the Cornish Factors underbuying one another, and
bringing down the Price of Tin, to the Prejudice of the Public; as our
Merchants do often Limit their Factors, to prevent the rising Prizes of Foreign
Commodities; so a Law may be made here, That no one shall buy, or sell Tin,
under 3 l. 3 l. 10 s. or 4 l. per Hundred. I have already shown, in the first
Proposal, that the Price of Tin abroad, will bear that Price at home. And it is
as much Policy to keep the Price of Tin from falling, as it would have been to
have kept the Price of Silver from rising, and its Quality from being debased.

There was more Work done for the Roman Penny, (which was pure Silver) than can
be done now for an English Pound; For, as we have Allayed and Corrupted our
Coin, we have lost much of our Constitution with the ancient Standard; And as
our English Constitution has been corrupted with our Coin, so the Strength and
Courage of the Cornish Men, has much declined with the Prince of their Tin.

I will take away all their Tin, Isa. 1.25.
was once said to a degenerating and, then, unthinking People, because they did
not Improve the Talent: But it is better that God should take the Tin from us,
than that we should be ruined by so Rich a Commodity as Tin may be made.

I have see at Venice and elsewhere, Plate made of Refined Tin, which have
exceeded some made of Allayed Silver.

And Mr. Joseph Benmer of Panzance in Cornwall, having been a Scholar and a
great Traveller, and an honest and ingenious Pewterer, and having ou done all
others of his Profession here, in making Tin-Plate for such as esteemed it, and
paid him a Price according to the Excellency of the refined Metal, and
Curiosity of the Workmanship; There was a great Wager laid, That one of the
Pewterers of London should exceed him in the Art of Refineing Tin, and making a
Plate thereof: But Mr. Benmar's Plate exceeded the others, both in Lightness
and Fineness; and the Wager being won, Mr. Benmer (to show a farther excellency
in the Improvement of Nature by his Art) made a fierce Fire; And putting his
Plate thereon, and the other Pewterers Plate into his, his melted down the
other Plate, and remained in its former Excellency and Perfection.

And certainly, if our Tin had not an exceeding Quality in Nature, to employ
the Arts of ingenious and industrious Men, so many Nations of the World (and
even those that have Tin in it) would not have taken so much from our Merchants
Agents abroad, at 10 l. 20 l. and 30 l. Sterling a Hundred; nor could our
Merchants at home (as heretofore they did) give the Tinners above 6 l. a
Hundred first Price for it. And the higher the Price has been, the better the
Commodity has gone off.

AND farther, to show the Nature of our Tin, I shall inform my Reader, (and I
could give many such Instances) That about 20 Years ago, some engineers, or
rather Men of Cunning Art, came down into Cornwall: And often Visiting the
blowing, or melting Houses, of the Tin, and as often making the Blowers Drink;
Whilst the Blowers were busy Drinking, those cunning Men were as busy dipping
their Rods in the Flote, or Mould, where the Tin was melting hot; And by that
means, using both ends of their Rods, Considering our Proportion, of Gold and
Silver, from the Indies; If no small quantity of both had not been Extracted
from the Metals of England, we could never have endured the late overballance
of Trade, nor have so long carried on such a War.
they extracted a great deal of Gold and Silver. And, if they had not been
mistrusted, and forced to fly the Country, uon the discovered want of that
Virtue, which, by that means, was gone out of the Tin, they would have gotten
many Thousand Pounds, in a little time, and spoiled all the Tin which they
should so touch.

The Pewterers, and Merchants, upon the Discovery, complaining to the Tinners;
the Tinners brought their Action against the Blowers: And (after a Stannery
Lawsuit as long as from hence to the Lands-End) they had more Satisfaction,
then (I think) should have been given them.

And, some time since, one of those cunning Men confessed the Matter of Fact to
me, and some others, and how they were forced to fly the Country for Committing
it.

NOW the Nature of Tin, in its refined Purity, being so nearly related to Gold
and Silver, We should use all possible Art and Policy, to refine and esteem its
Quality, and thereby also to raise the Price thereof.

AND, if We do so, now in the time of the Tinners necessity, it cannot but
increase the Tin-Trade; and be an Act of Charity and Justice, very acceptable
and well-pleasing, both to God and the Nation.

Because the Improvement of this Rich Talent will much Increase our Coin, which
is so much wanting to carry on a Vigorous War against our greatest Adversary.

AND as all Kingdoms and Commonwealths, have Risen by Trade and Justice, so we
may now begin to Aggrandize this Great Land and Nation, by one of the Capital
Commodities thereof.

Vast Quantities whereof may be risen and consumed, by Refining and Esteeming
the Quality, and by Raising and Advancing the Price, to the greater Interest
and Honor both of the King and Country.

And when the Great Wisdom and Policy of the King and Parliament, shall think
fit to Sit upon so Great and Advantageous a Work, even an English Kitching hung
(as it were) with Refined Pewter-Plate, will be one of the Finest and Noblest
Sights in the World.

AND, as we Understand the good Nature of this Noble and Generous Nation, and
have regard to the Interest of the Poor, and the Public, We may find out Means
enough to overcome our greatest Adversaries withal; And to make KING WILLIAM a
Greater Friend than Queen Elizabeth was to the World, when She was so near (in
Strength, but not in Time) to that Universal Empire, which the King of Spain
then aimed at, and the French King has since set up for.

AND Whereas Britain had its Name from the Tin, which was first found in the
County of Cornwall, We cannot begin to regulate Trade, and to raise the Nation
better, than by trying all Experiments upon that useful Commodity.

And therefore, I should here show some other Means to redress the Tinners
Greviances: But this being not the proper Time for that purpose, (but the most
proper Time to keep the Price of Tin from falling, at least under 3 l. per
Hundred;) I shall draw these Reasons to a Conclusion, with the two following
Letters, the one from a Cornish Gentleman, and the other from a Gentleman of
Devon.

Cornwall, Feb. 18. 1696. SIR,
I Received your Proposal for Raising the Price of Tin, together with a
Manuscript containing some other Means to redress the Tinners Greviances; all
which indeed, and several Things more, seen absolutely necessary to be done,
for the good of the King and his poor Subjects (the laboring Tinners
especially) in the County of Cornwall.


Devon, Feb. 22. 1696. SIR,
WE have gotten our Petition Signed by the Tinners. We could have a great many
Names more to it, but the Time being short, we made all the haste we could
possibly, for we are doubtful the Parliament may break up before the Thing may
be effected. We have shown, and read your Book of Proposals to many Gentlemen,
and to a great many Tinners; and all that read it, or heard it, do say, That it
is the truest and reasonablest Thing (to be granted) that ever was. It will do
good to many, and hurt to none.


BY which it does appear, That the Tinners (who know what they have had, and
believe what the may have again for their Tin) are very desirous to have a Law,
this Session of Parliament, according to the Proposal, and the Prayer of their
Petition, That no one shall buy or sell Tin under 3 or 3 l. per Hundred. As to
the great Wisdom of the King and Parliament shall seem most meet.

AND as the Price of Tin rises by degrees, the Tinners will rise in Reputation
and Estate; And what shall be done for them by the Kings Most Excellent
Majesty, and the High Court of Parliament, will put may others upon promoting
those Trades, which England, now, above all other Nations, is capable of
Improving.

AND as we weather this Point of War, and come to wage Trade with the World (as
in point of Wisdom and true Policy we should do) we may turn the Wheel of our
Fortune.

AND, as God and Nature has done more for this Nation, than for any other; so,
by Trade and Justice, and a necessity of some Regulations, we may raise Great
Britain to that degree of Riches, Honor and Excellency, for which God, Nature,
and the Present Necessity, seem to have designed it.

POSTCRIPT.
THE Proposal of the Pewterers, would now do considerable Good to the King, the
Country, and Themselves.

And though it is the Interest of the Factors, the Pewterers, and the Merchants,
to buy cheap, and sell dear; yet, where the Private Gain does not accompany the
Public Good, there will be little Commonwealth to carry on a Vigorus War.

And (I think) the Commonwealth of the Tinners cannot be better founded at
present, than on a Law, to keep the Price from falling under 3 l.

ERRATA.
IN Page 32 of the Proposal, for 16000; read 160000 Chequens, and Page 16. of
the Proposal, or 61413 Hundred, read 614 Tun and 14 Hundred Weight.


