AN APOLOGY FOR THE PARLIAMENT, Humbly Representing To Mr. JOHN GAILHARD SOME
REASONS why they did not at his Request enact Sanguinary Laws against
PROTESTANTS in their last Session. In two Letters by different Hands.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, MDCXCVII.

An Apology for the Parliament.
Mr. Gailhard,
SINCE your Zeal for the Glory of God was so fervent, that in your Prefatory
Epistle to the Honorable Houses of Parliament you could not forbear
instructing them in their Duty of enacting new Sanguinary Laws against
Protestants; and since you were also pleased to assist them with the Precedent
of Bartholomew Legate, who was burnt in Smithfield, A. D. 1611. for Socinianism,
I expected that the Honorable Houses would have returned you their Address of
Thanks for the Honor you designed 'em; especially since you are pleased to
tell them, that in this your Advice, you had offered 'em a Field of Honor.
Smithfield has indeed been a Field of Honor to many who have suffered
Martyrdom in it under the Character of Heretics; but what Honor the
Parliament would gain by reviving the Writ upon which they were burnt, I leave
to their Consideration: My Study shall be to pay you the Thanks which is due to
you from all good English Freeholders, for the pious Instructions you were
pleased to bestow upon their Body Representative, and to excuse that Honorable
Assembly, who seem to have neglected both you and your Instructions.

First I acknowledge, that in an especial manner you have merited from the
Honorable House of Commons and whole Nation, that you were pleased so far to
bridle your Zeal, as to postpone the Glory of God to the Capitation, Land Tax,
Tunnage, and Excises. You say that you would not interrupt these Affairs; and
therefore you would not publish your Book till they were dispatched: But if
after this they should have sat till Midsummer to have qualified themselves for
fighting your Battles in your Field of Honor, it is generally thought they
might not have added to the Honor they have already obtained by the necessary
Funds they have given; the Reason is, because those Funds were designed by them
to preserve England from Spiritual Tyranny, which your Project does actually
introduce: and therefore I most humbly beg that some small Portion of that
sweet good Nature which overflows your Dedication and Preface, may be spent in
pardoning his Majesty for dismissing the Parliament from Westminster, and
preferring their Service in the Country before their further Attendance upon
your gracious Motions.

In the next place I return you Thanks in behalf of your Brethren the Roman
Catholics, (who have always showed the same burning Zeal with your self for
the Glory of God) that tho you frown a little upon them, yet you do not join
them who worship so many Idols in the same perilous Circumstances with the
Unitarians who worship but one God. It must be owned to your free Grace also,
that the Jews come off with a chiding, but are not designed for a
Burnt-Offering, tho they blaspheme the Name of the Lord Jesus, by whose
Mediation alone the Unitarians expect to be recommended to the Mercy of God:
and I beg your Pardon that I make a small Excursion to congratulate the Turks
who acknowledge but one Person to be God, that they take care to encamp
themselves at a convenient Distance from your Field of Honor.

Having thus with due Respect bespoke your gracious Favor, it is convenient to
offer some Reasons toward giving you Satisfaction in the grand Point, viz. why
the Parliament at your Request did not in their last Session enact Sanguinary
Laws against the Unitarians.

And truly, Sir, the first Reason came into my Thoughts with a Fear lest the
Honorable Members should not have so much as read over your Book: I have
dipped into it here and there, and by what I have staged over, I think it an
extraordinary large Treatise, considering the Quantity of Matter contained in
it; so that he must be a Man of great Leisure and extraordinary Patience, who
will go through with it: But if any worthy Member should have had the
Application to have read and considered your Book, he must thereby be convinced
that there could be no need to make Penal Laws to suppress that Heresy, since
it cannot be supposed that any Man should be so obstinate as to continue an
Unitarian, after that the Depth of your Learning, the Height of your Fancy, the
Closeness of your Reasonings, the Brightness of your Eloquence, the Clearness
of your Style, and the numerous Citations of Scripture-phrases have been so
strenuously exerted for their Conviction. I dare prophesy, that he who reads
your Book, will be convinced of Mysteries, viz. such things as are not
intelligible to Men of Sense and Reason; nay, by the very Preface a Man may be
convinced that you your self are no small Mystery, who pretend to be a
Protestant Persecutor.

And this very Mystery, if well considered, will suggest to you another Reason
why this Parliament, consisting of Protestant Members, could not so well comply
with your Desires, as a House packed by K. James might have done; and
therefore, Sir (since things are as they are) it had not been amiss for you to
have considered the Difference between the Popish and Protestant Principle
before you had addressed your late Dedication to the Parliament.

The Papists say, that since the Word of God is so obscure and mysterious, that
great Controversies have arisen, and are still increasing, concerning the very
fundamental Articles of our Faith, it is necessary there should be an Infallible
Judge to determine finally all such doubtful Cases, in whose Sentence all
Christians are bound to acquiesce. They assert the Pope in Council to be this
Judge appointed by God, and from thence conclude that they who refuse his
infallible Sentence are obstinate Heretics, and deserve to be put to Death. On
the contrary the Protestants cannot find that God appointed any such Infallible
Judge, nor can they see any need of such a one, because the Scriptures are plain
enough, so plain, that any honest-minded Man of common Sense may understand all
things there which are needful for him to his Soul's health. Now, Sir, our
Right Honorable and Honorable Houses of Parliament consisting of Protestants,
you could not easily suppose that they would vary so far from the Principles of
the Reformation, as to think that God had given us an obscure Rule of Faith, or
to think themselves the Infallible Interpreters of that Rule, if it were
obscure; and hereupon 'twas unlikely that they should impose their Sense of
God's Word upon the Nation under those severe Penalties which you require: and
since you were not pleased to show them any Judge more infallible than your
self, whose Sense they should enact, methinks in modesty at least you might
excuse the Parliament for permitting poor Protestants, who are dutiful Subjects
to our Rightful King William, who are Lovers of their Country, and live well
with their Neighbors, to interpret the Scriptures as well as they can for
their own Use, without sending them to your Field of Honor. Upon what pretense
do you claim the Christian Privilege of marking Men out to destruction?

I suppose you will justify your self by saying that the Doctrine which you
would have Penally established is contained in the Articles of the Church of
England; but to make good this Point, 'twill be necessary for you to show that
the Convocation which drew up the 39 Articles were privileged from Error, and
had a just Authority over the Faith of all Englishmen in their succeeding
Generations. But on the contrary it is evident even to you (as appears by your
Complaint of the Increase of Arminianism) that the present Clergy do very much
vary from some Doctrines contained in the 39 Articles. And have not the present
Clergy in Convocation as much right to repeal, as the former to declare
Articles? and may not a future Clergy declare contrary to the present? so that
were we as well built as the Antediluvian Patriarchs, we were not like to reach
their Years, but must be forced to breath our last in your Field of Honor,
should the Parliament of every Age penally establish the Clergy-Opinions,
unless we could conform to their successive contrary Sentiments.

The Protestants agree with the Papists, that the Word of God is the Rule of
Faith, the Difference is about the Interpreter of this Rule: The Papists depend
upon the Interpretation of Authority, whilst the Protestants rely upon their
own Reason, with all the helps it can get, for the Interpretation of Holy
Scripture, but do not submit to any Ancient Writers (besides the Inspired) as
Masters of their Faith; And why should we do otherwise? The Fathers had no more
Right to interpret Scripture for themselves, or future Generations, than we
have to interpret it for our selves or Successors, or future Ages for
themselves, and those who shall come after them. Upon these Principles I cannot
see what Obligation lies upon the present Parliament in 1697, from the
Authority of the Convocation held Anno 1562, to establish the Articles so long
since agreed upon, under the penalty of Sanguinary Laws.

But suppose the Article of the Trinity (the first of the 39) were established
upon pain of Death, I do not see any certain danger that will from thence arise
to the Unitarians: The Article is this, There is but one Living and True God,
Everlasting, without Body, Parts or Passions, of infinite Power, Wisdom and
Goodness, the Maker and Preserver of all things both visible and invisible; and
in Unity of this Godhead there be three Persons of one Substance, Power and
Eternity, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Now the Unity and Nature of
God, with all his Attributes declared in the former part of this Article, they
are known to believe, the Belief of the three Persons is the only thing they
can be questioned upon: And if their Trial should proceed upon the words
contained in the latter part of the Article, they are safe; for by some of
their late Prints, I perceive that they for peace sake submit to the Phrase of
the Church, and expressly own three Persons, etc. tho they think the word Person
not so proper as another word might be. But if their Trial must proceed upon
the Sense of this latter part of the Article, the Event will be doubtful,
because 'twill depend on the Judge his desining the word Person. If the three
Persons should be defined by three distinct Minds, Spirits or Substances, the
Unitarian will be cast; but if Person be defined by Mode, Manifestation, or
outward Relation, he will be acquitted: and where is the Blasphemy in disowning
three infinite distinct Minds and Spirits?

I pray consider who are those you call blasphemous Socinians, whom you would
put to death; they believe all the Articles of the Apostles Creed, which was
heretofore thought a full and sufficient Summary of Faith; they believe the Law
of Christ contained in the 4 Gospels, to be the only and everlasting Rule by
which they ought to live here, and by which they shall be judged hereafter.
It Is the Principle of these Men to fear the Lord of Heaven and Earth, and to
walk humbly before him; as likewise thankfully to lay hold on the Message of
Redemption by Christ Jesus: and they strive to express their Thankfulness by
the Sincerity of their Obedience to the Law of Christ, upon which account they
are heartily sorry when they come short of their Duty, and walk more watchfully
in the denial of themselves, holding no Correspondency with any Lust or known
Sin. It Is their Principle to be just in their Actions, charitable to all Men,
and sincere in their Devotions, and to have their Hope and Conversation in
Heaven. Now suppose these Men after serious Consideration should not be
convinced of a Trinity of Infinite Minds and Spirits, each of which is a God;
and suppose they could believe nothing whereof they have no Idea, it is hard to
revive the Writ de Haeretico comburendo for their sakes, when they believe all
things contained in the first Article of the Church of England, and all the
Articles contained in the Apostles Creed, and sincerely endeavor to lead quiet
and peaceable Lives in all godly Conversation and Honesty.

It may be after all you will say that the Socinians do not believe what is
declared in the Gospel concerning the Trinity, and Incarnation, but rather
oppose it, and therefore their Doctrine is blasphemous, and they deserve Death.
I confess this is the Pretense, under which every Party of Christians (when in
Power) destroys one another by turns. Bonner said, the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation was plainly revealed in Scripture; this Opinion of Bonner,
Latimer opposed, and was therefore sent to the Field of Honor; for what? for
denying Scripture, (says Bonner) which expressly declares, This is my Body. Now
in this particular Case every Protestant sees that Bonner's Accusation of
Latimer for denying Scripture was but a mere Pretense to uphold his Power, and
cover his Malice. Latimer owned the Scripture as much as Bonner, and believed
the Divine Authority of that particular Expression (This is my Body) as much as
he; the Matter in difference was not the Text, but the Interpretation, which
the one held to be literal, the other figurative: so that Latimer was not burnt
for disbelieving the Scripture, but for disbelieving, and in words opposing
that Interpretation of it which Bonner and the Roman Clergy gave out.

So Mr. Gailhard under the Banner of the Church of England may cite Texts of
Scripture to prove his own Notion of the Trinity, Incarnation, etc. and upon
this he will charge the Unitarians with Blasphemy, and an heretical Opposition
to Holy Scriptures; whereas the Unitarians are convinced of the Truth and
Authority of the Scriptures, as much as he is: The Matter in difference is only
this, the Unitarians do not interpret the Scripture as he does, nor do they
therefore infer from the Text so as he does. He will interpret these words of
St. John, (...), so as from thence to infer that the only one Great God was
incarnate: the Unitarian interprets the word (...) by ratio, rather than
verbum, because it signifies Reason more primarily than Word or Speech, (for it
signifies a Word or Speech only as that Word or Speech proceeds from reasonable
Creatures) and then all he infers from that Text, (the Word was made Flesh) is
that the Reason or Wisdom of God was communicated to Jesus Christ, and we all
know that Divine Wisdom may be communicated to Men without the Incarnation of
God. So that if the Unitarians must be sent to Smithfield, it is not for
blaspheming God, or his holy Word, but because they (according to the best of
their Judgment) interpret and infer otherwise than Mr. Gailhard does.

But Bonner had this Advantage, that the Roman Clergy of his Days were agreed
together with him in the Point upon which he condemned Latimer. But you
complain that the present Clergy of the Church of England are not agreed in
their Defense of the Trinitarian Doctrine, by reason that most of them maintain
it upon Arminian Principles: and you think it cannot well be defended but upon
the Calvinian Hypothesis. And it must indeed be granted, that the Divines of
this Age are not agreed either in explaining or maintaining this Doctrine;
which shows how wild a thing it was of you (when there are such Differences
amongst Learned Clergymen) to solicit the Parliament that your Lay-Sense should
be by Law established, especially when you stand almost single in your way of
defending your Doctrine; for you say there is but one Reverend Person who
takes that way.

It Is a dangerous thing to pitch your Camp by your self with a small Party,
when a Numerous Army is near. If Dr. Parker late Bp. of Oxford were living, he
would tell you that you and your Predestinarians are Blasphemers of God: For I
well remember that in one of his Prints, he said that the Calvinistical
Hypothesis represented God as an Omnipotent Devil. Now tho the Doctor needed
not have used such hard words to express his Sense of that Horrible Decree,
which some Men think to have been of God's making; yet when a Man shall
consider how contrary the Reprobation-System is to the best Idea we can form of
God, he will think it little less than blaspheming the Divine Goodness; and if
the Arminians of this Age had the same furious Zeal for the Glory of God which
you have shown, the blasphemous Calvinists might be in danger of following
Bartholomew Legate to the Field of Honor; and Mr. Gailhard could have no other
Election, but to choose whether like Haman he would hang under a Gallows of his
own erecting, or like Perillus, would roar in his own Bull.

Truly, Sir, it was never well with Christians since any one Party of them,
calling themselves the Church, took upon 'em an Authority to impose their
Interpretations of, and Inferences from Scripture upon others; nor can it ever
be well among Protestants till they permit one another a free liberty to make
Interpretations and Inferences for themselves. If we deny this Authority to the
Church of Rome, and take it to our selves, we love the Treason tho we hate the
Traitor; we plunder the Robber, but we restore not the lost Goods to their
proper Owner. Every Man who is endued with Reason, has thereby an original
natural Right of using that Reason for the direction of his Soul, as much as he
has a right to use his own Eyes to direct his Feet. Besides, God gave his Word
originally into the Hands of the People, not the Priesthood; to all Israel God
spoke from Mount Sinai, and Christ spoke his Law to all Persons who
promiscuously followed him: so that both the Word of God, and the best Means of
understanding it are originally and uncontroulably given to every Man; and
whoever shall under any Penalties endeavor to abridg Mankind of the use of
these Means, is an Enemy to the common Rights and Liberties of Human Nature.
Upon this Principle our Ancestors grounded their Reformation from Popery; they
would not be led aside by the Authority of the Church against their own Sense
and Reason, but by the use of their own Reason in the Interpretation of Holy
Writ, they saw the Roman Church not only to be obnoxious to Error, but also
actually erroneous; and upon this Foot of Reason was it, that they cast off the
Authority of that Church, which then called it self Catholic and Apostolic.

But how do you answer for setting one Party of Protestants, who disclaim
Infallibility, to persecute their Brethren who interpret differently from them?
You alledg the Glory of God in your behalf. But did God tell you it was for his
Glory that your Interpretation should be the Standard of other Men's Faith? or
that it is for his Glory that the Interpretation of this or that Doctor or
Convocation must be imposed upon the Realm? Have not all Doctors, and all
Convocations equal Power? and are not Mankind of differing Minds? and are they
not all equally engaged to promote the Glory of God? And what is the
Consequence of all this? Whilst every Party by Impositions and Persecutions are
forcing their own Opinions upon others for the Glory of God, there can never be
Peace upon Earth, nor good Will amongst Men.

'Twould be a happy World, Mr. Gailhard, if you, and every one else who cry
down Human Reason, would but seriously consider, what your selves say upon that
Subject, viz. that our Understandings are darkened through natural Corruption;
whereupon we are all subject to Error, and very prone to be misled by the
Prejudices of our Education, by Interest, by evil Inclination, by Example,
Passion, Inadvertency, by Pride, or any other Immorality; nay, the very natural
Constitution and Temperament of Men's Bodies dispose them to contrary Opinions,
as the Melancholy are apt to receive and retain differing Impressions from the
Sanguine: Methinks this one Consideration of the Infirmity our Intellectuals
are subject to, should restrain us from imposing our Opinions upon others. But
yet since Human Reason (such as it is) is the only Guide which God has given
us whereby to judge, 1st. Whether there be any such thing as a Revelation from
God or not; 2ly. In what Books that Revelation is contained; and 3ly. What is
the Sense contained in those Books: Since our Reason (I say) is the only Guide
in these momentous Matters, every Man has a natural Right to use it for his
own Direction in any or all of these Points; and herein no Man whatsoever has
any Right to impose his Opinion upon another, tho common Humanity requires
every Man to use his Reason for the Instruction and Assistance of others.

What then shall we say touching the Authority of the Fathers and Ancient
Writers? Truly if in their Writings we find a Spirit of Probity, unbiassed with
Passion, Pride, or Self-Interest, we must allow them to be good Witnesses of
those Matters of Fact which happened in their Times; as, that such Doctrines
were then generally received, such Books then written, such Discipline then in
use: but it will not follow that I must receive those Doctrines as true,
because the Fathers thought they were so, since those very Fathers were subject
to Error; and therefore their Belief of such Propositions can under no pretense
be looked upon as an Authority over us: but when the ancient Christian Writers
give their Reasons why they received such Opinions, we have a natural Right of
examining the Reasons they alledg; and if we will act like Men, we ought so to
do before we receive their Opinions. Now by what I perceive in the late
Unitarian Prints, they are sensible of the Weakness of Human Reason, and
therefore they submit their Opinions, and the Reasons upon which they are
grounded, to the Examination of Mankind; and yet being sensible that their
Reason (such as it is) is the only Guide God has given them as to the three
great Points before mentioned, they think it their Duty to examine the Opinions
of others thereby, not pretending to any Authority over others, nor conceiving
in their Minds any Displeasure against those who differ from them. And upon
this Foot all Controversies may and ought to be managed betwixt differing
Parties, without the least breach of Peace, for the benesit of each other in
the discovery of Truth.

But hence comes the breach of Peace in Christian Churches, that tho they own
themselves fallible, yet their Convocations, and even their private Doctors
will considently alledg that they are in the Right, and will therefore impose
their Sense of Scripture upon others; so that a Man must not write or speak any
thing contrary to their Determinations under severe Penalties. Let any Man judge
whether this be to instruct us in the Faith of Christ, or to make themfelves
Masters of our Faith, since our Understandings and Belief must be wholly
submitted to their Interpretations.

After this manner the Dean of St. Paul's has lately insinuated his newfangled
Notion of a Real Trinity to the Ld Mayor, the Judges, and Citizens of London:
in that Sermon he shows the Danger of corrupting the Faith by Philosophy; and
then taking it for granted that his Interpretation of Scripture is the Faith,
he concludes (in his own favor) that we must not use our Reason or Philosophy
(as Dr. S -- th has learnedly done) to let the World see that the Dean's
Notion of three distinct insinite Minds and Spirits is Tritheistical and
Idolatrous. This way of arguing (if Assuming may be called so) is grounded only
in the Self-confidence Men have in their own Abilities. Thus the Dean speaks,
p. 8. of his Sermon, As for the Doctrine of the Incarnation, nothing can be
plainer in Scripture than that the Son of God was made Man, that the Word was
made Flesh and dwelt among us, that God was manifest in the Elesh: And yet
since the Incarnation of God is no where expressed in Scripture, it can be no
more than merely a Deduction from thence; but yet the Doctor will impose it
upon all Christians as if it were express Scripture it self. Suppose a Papist
should say, As for Transubstantiation, nothing can be plainer in Scripture than
that Christ when he held the Bread in his Hand, said, This is my Body, and
hereupon conclude that you must distinguish Philosophy from Faith, and casting
away your vain Philosophy, hold fast to the Faith of Transubstantiation: 'Twere
a parallel Argument to that in the Doctor's Sermon, both of them being founded
in the Considence Men have of the Truth of their own Interpretations and
Inferences. But after all this, a Protestant would not forgo the use of his
Philosophy to show that the Popish Doctrine is not only obscure but false; and
an Unitarian will still use his Reason to show that the Doctor's Inference is
not only obscure but unconcluding. As to the Doctor's first Text, The Son of
God was made Man; were those very Words in Scripture, [as they are not] the
Unitarian will say the Son of God does not always or necessarily signify God.
So to the second Text, he will say that Expression, viz. the Word, does not
plainly signify God: and in like manner to the third Text alleged by the
Doctor, he will say, that God may be manifest in the Flesh, or by Flesh, (as
his Power, Wisdom and Goodness are made manifest by all Flesh, or in all Flesh)
without being Incarnate: So that the Unitarian cannot discern that Inference or
Doctrine, which the Doctor says is so plain in or from Scripture, that nothing
can be plainer. What must be done in this Case then? let the Doctor enjoy his
Opinion, but not impose it, nor stir up any Strife about it, nor should the
Unitarian Notion be imposed on him; but as the Doctor may have free leave to
use his Philosophy of Self-consciousness and mutual Consciousness to support
his own Opinion, or attack the Unitarian Notions, so it is humbly desired that
the use of Reason may be permitted to other Men for their examination of his
Real Trinity, and particularly that the use of Arithmetic may be indulged so
far as to cast up whether a God and a God and a God do not amount to more than
one God.

Now (Mr. Gailhard) if one of the great Doctors and Dignitaries of the Church
may be mistaken in his Interpretations of Scripture, and Inferences from it,
how shall you, who are but a mere Layman, hope to gain a Parliamentary Sanction
to establish your Interpretations of Holy Writ, and Inferences from thence?
Perhaps you will say it is the Doctrine of the Church of England you would have
penally established; by the Church you mean the Convocation which made the
Articles, Service Book, and Homilies: now this Convocation was no more than an
Assembly of Doctors and Clergymen, each of whom were subject to Error; and tho
they enacted their own Opinions into Articles and Homilies, and obliged their
own Clergy to subscribe them in order to their admittance into Benesices, I
cannot from thence see why we Laymen should put the Yoke of the Clergy upon our
own Necks, and be so zealous as you are to establish the Opinions of the
Ecclesiastics under the penalty of Fire and Faggot. I should think it more
desirable that a Gentleman may receive his Rents, or a Tradesman his Prosits,
or even a laboring Man his Wages, without subscribing the Articles or
Homilies. It once seemed good to the Holy Ghost and the Apostles to impose no
Burdens but what were necessary, and those necessary Truths were inspired too.

Besides, Men cannot help the altering of their Minds; all the Subscriptions of
the Clergy to the Predestinarian Doctrine contained in the Articles and
Homilies, has not preserved them from contrary Sentiments, such as, when Van
Harman first broached them, were universally judged to be contrary to the
Doctrine of the Church of England. Besides this too, a Man cannot foresee what
will come to pass, and so a Doctrine which at one time may be convenient, may
be otherwise when Circumstances of Times shall alter: As suppose all the
Laymen of England had subscribed only the 35th Article of our Church, which
is, The two Books of Homilies contain godly and wholesome Doctrine necessary for
these Times; and suppose in these Books of Homilies we shall read these
Doctrines, viz. The High Power and Authority of Kings, with their making of
Laws, Judgments and Offices, are the Ordinances not of Man but of God; that all
Persons owe even in Conscience, Obedience, Submission and Subjection to them,
as being God's Lieutenants, God's Presidents, God's Officers, God's
Commissioners, God's Judges; 1st part of the Sermon of Obedience: And suppose
in the second part of the same Sermon we should read these Words, Christ taught
us plainly that even the wicked Rulers have their Power and Authority from God,
and therefore it is not lawful for the Subjects to withstand them, although they
abuse their Power. Suppose, I say, we Laymen had subscribed to these Doctrines
as necessary for these Times, had we not consented to the total Subversion of
our Laws and Liberties, to the Slavery of Europe, and the Destruction of the
Protestant Interest throughout the World? Howbeit, since General Councils, for
as much as they be an Assembly of Men (whereof all be not governed by the
Spirit and Word of God) may err, and sometimes have erred even in things
pertaining unto God, as is declared in the 21st Article of our Church, it is no
Heresy for us Laymen to believe that Convocations have erred in Doctrines
necessary for these Times, and may err in Doctrines necessary for any Times;
and from hence it will be no Heresy to conclude that a Parliament may err,
should they establish the Convocation-Doctrines upon the Foot of Sanguinary
Laws.

There is one Reason yet remaining, why there is no need of making new Penal
Laws even against blasphemous Socinians, which is because there are Laws
already in force against Blasphemers of all Sorts or Sects whatsoever, without
any Proviso that the blasphemous Socinians (as your Title Page speaks) shall be
exempted from the Penalty: And it is only your Title Page and Preface which I
have in this Letter considered, not at all designing to dispute with you in
behalf of the Socinian or of the Unitarian Doctrines; my only Aim herein being
to show some Reasons why it was not necessary for the Parliament to enact
Sanguinary Laws against those who differ from you in Opinion.

The ill-natured Turn of your Title Page, and the malicious and persecuting
Design of your Preface convinced me that (if we may believe our Savior Christ)
you know neither the Father nor his Son. Thus our Lord Jesus taught his
Disciples ( John 16. 2d, 3d Verses) That they should be put out of the
Synagogues, and that the Time should come, that whosoever kills them should
think that he does God service; and these things will they do unto you, because
they have not known the Father nor me. Now, Sir, if he who would stir up a
Persecution against those who sincerely endeavor to know and do the Will of
God, as it is revealed by Jesus Christ, knows neither the Father nor the Son;
I did from thence conclude that the Holy Ghost (who proceeds from the Father
and the Son) was also unknown to him; and for this Reason I thought you an
unsit Writer in behalf of the Trinity, and therefore did not so much as read
over your Book.

A Second Letter to Mr. Gailhard.
SIR,
I Am thinking whether ought more to be reverenced, the Noble Names of Vere and
Sidney, whose martial Skill and well-tried Valor made havoc of their
Country's Enemies abroad, when the Good and Gracious Elizabeth ruled and loved
her loving People; or of Bonner and Gardner, whose slaming Zeal made Bonfires
of Heretics at home, under the dire Auspices of her persecuting Sister. Indeed
once I was of opinion, that the Memory of the bloody Bishops had been justly
hated and cursed, and did deserve to be, and was like to be hated and cursed
for ever; but I am now tempted to despise the Conquering Heroes with all their
Civic Crowns, and proud triumphant Wreaths of Laurel, as Men that fought only
their Country's, not the Lord's Battles: But that Man has a Heart, illi Robur
and Aes triplex, that can without weak Remorse of Conscience murder his
dislenting Fellow-Citizen, and bravely burn his misbelieving Brother at a Stake.

With a world of School-Cant, which now a days goes for deep Learning, and
ill-applied Fragments of Scripture, after the Example of no very good Master,
[but Fas est and ab Host doceri] the thrice Orthodox Mr. J. Gailhard Gent.
labors to kindle this religious merciless Fire in the Breasts of the
Parliament of England; to that end therefore he offers them for a Field of
Honor, not Flanders, but Smithfield: for making good the former, they have,
it is true, happily provided Capitation and Land Tax, Tunnage and Excises; but
as Fate would have it, they are rose without the least Care of but so much as
Brush-wood for the latter: Mr. Gailhard had rather they had been blown up. It
is a Fault to do the Work of the Lord negligently; but not to do it at all, to
leave the good, necessary, and great Work of burning Heretics wholly on the
Hands of Providence, is a great Disappointment; for Fire does not fall from
Heaven every day, and it troubles Mr. Gailhard's righteous Soul the more,
because he does not know but God may forgive the Heretics; for his part, he
will forgive, nor them, nor the Parliament. But by his favor, are not the
Parliament of England to be excused, tho they have taken no care about sending
Mr. Gailhard's Enemies to the Devil? for they were prorogued by his Majesty's
Order as soon as they had done their King and Country every other needful
Service. Why then, let the King look to it, from whom [to say Truth] no better
could be expected, as having declared when he accepted the Crown, that He would
not be obliged to be a Persecutor. He thinks himself too good to do the
persecuting Drudgery of any Body of bloody-minded (right or wrong) Believers;
if He can but defend the Liberties of Europe from the Tyrant of France, and
teach his own Subjects of different Persuasions to live amicably together,
that is all he cares for. Nay, it is long of the King too that Parliaments are
summoned, and sit annually without Convocations. A Convocation would have
considered, as Mr. Gailhard observes, that time is short and uncertain; and if
not well improved for the burning of Heretics, the Opportunity may happen to
be irrecoverably lost: for Mr. Gailhard judiciously notes, That to time things
well is one of the best parts of Prudence; and he acutely adds, one of the most
essential Circumstances of our Actions. Whence I learn these four things: 1.
That Human Actions have their Circumstances. 2. That some Circumstances of
Action are but circumstantial. 3. That there are essential Circumstances of
Action. 4. That some essential Circumstances are more essential than other. A
Person of good Learning, Wit, and Leisure would wonderfully improve four such
Notices as these. I shall make one obvious Inference, which is this: Human
Actions cannot but be always very prudent, and always well-tim'd; for
Well-timing is one of the best parts of Prudence, and Prudence one of the most
essential Circumstances of Human Actions. I strengthen my Inference thus; Human
Actions cannot be at all, without one and all their most essential
Circumstances, [whatever perchance they might without some less essential
Circumstances] therefore they cannot want Prudence; and because they cannot
want Prudence, they cannot but be well timed: thence it undeniably follows,
that the Parliament of England, tho they rose without preferring one Sanguinary
Bill, have acted like prudent Senators, and timed every thing most exactly; and
that the King who prorogued them, before Mr. Gailhard's pious Motion for Fire
and Faggot could be made, had also timed his Prorogation well, and acted with
all the Prudence which became him. Thus by the help of Mr. Gailhard's
Philosophy, the King and Parliament are secure of doing all things well, and
the Exceptions which he moves against them, as I shall farther manifest, will
only evince that good Sense is no essential Circumstance of writing; therefore
I would advise him to keep his word, and write no more: but it is fit he do
Penance for that ill-natured malicious Stuff which he has wrote already. I
will examine it under these 4 Heads. 1. What that blasphemous Impiety is which
inflames his merciless Zeal. 2. How wide it is spread. 3. What Opposition it
has met. 4. What Treatment it deserves.

After a Flourish of wild Rhetoric ungovernably sallying into sundry Metaphors,
borrowed from things that have no affinity, all within the same Period, he
declares what that Impiety is, which inflames his merciless Zeal. viz. Page 3.
Ep. Dod. Blasphemous Socinianism attended by Atheism, Deism, Profaneness,
Immorality, Idolatry, etc. Not one of a hundred among the Pretenders to
Learning knows any thing of Socinus from an impartial Historian, or has read
any of his Works; but great Numbers strive who shall speak worst of him, as if
that were the only way to prove that themselves were sound and orthodox in the
Faith: For my part I am fully persuaded that Socinus was in several of his
Opinions grossly mistaken, also he lies under the suspicion of having
contributed to the Persecution of Fran, Davidis, who differed from him; but yet
I may venture to say, that he was descended of an ancient Family, endowed with
a piercing Wit, and accomplished with no mean Learning. Mr. Bidle, in his
Preface to the Panegyric of the Polonian Knight, affirms, that none since the
Apostles has deserved better of the Christian Religion; so that a Man may more
avail himself by reading his Works, than by perusing all the Fathers, together
with the Writings of more modern Authors. It is true, this of Bidle's is the
Testimony of a Friend, but then it is strangely corroborated by Accident; for
it is plain that the most polite and rational modern Sermons, and other moral
Discourses are extremely beholden to Socinus his Works; tho no Man of late,
that I have met, has had the Ingenuity to make him the least Acknowledgment,
excepting that learned and calm Tritheist Mr. How, who says, That his Book De
Deo was wrote non sine nervis. Indeed the Enemies of Socinus, tho they mean no
good to his Memory, yet frequently do him special service, and in great measure
supply to him the want of a professed Hyperaspist: but none more than Mr. J.
Gailhard, who gives such a long, disagreeing, false, and incredible Retinue to
Socinianism, that all which it is possible for an easy Reader to believe, is,
that Socinianism is something which Mr. J. Gailhard mortally hates; which it
may be, and never the worse on that account: for he has declared his mortal
hatred not only against Socinians, and Jews, Deists, and Papists, but also
against all the Church of England Clergy, that are of the Arminian Persuasion,
and all others, whether Laymen or Clergy, of what Religious Persuasion soever,
that will not bring fuel to the Fire for burning those whom he shall damn for
Heretics. But let us call over the Retinue, with which Mr. Gailhard says, that
Socinianism is attended: 1. By Atheism and Deism. 2. By Profaneness and
Immorality. 3. By Idolatry, and and caetera. But in the first place it is
strange, that Socinianism should be attended by Atheism and Deism too, i.e.
both by the Belief of a God, and by the Disbelief of a God; Notions so directly
opposite, one would think they could not be both together entertained in the
same Mind. But now I think on it, these two Charges are wisely laid together;
for the Design of the Accuser is, to prove Socinianism a Monstrous Heresy,
which it must needs be, if at the same time it affirms and denies the same
Proposition. Methinks Mr. Gailhard attacks the Socinians as the Wolf did the
Lamb; Sirrah! said the Wolf to the Lamb, how dare you trouble the Water that I
am drinking? Cry your Mercy, quoth the Lamb, I did not think that my lapping
below could foul your Water above. Saucy Creature, replied the Wolf, trouble
it, or not trouble it, I will eat you. Thus Mr. Gailhard is for burning the
Socinians right or wrong; it is all one to him, whether they believe in God or
no: for if they will not be burned for denying his Existence, they shall be
burned for believing it.

But perhaps this fiery Gentleman may pretend, that he does not use the word
Deism as it signisies the belief of God's Existence, but as it implies a denial
of all revealed Religion; and so it is an Attendant of Socinianism. Now I
confess this sort of Charge is not so perfect Nonsense as the other; but then
it is a Calumny so silly, and so easy to be refuted, that it is good for
nothing but to tempt Men, who are entirely in the Interests of the Church, to
suspect that they who are called Heretics, are not so black as they are
painted, and that they who throw the San-benito over the persecuted Man's
Shoulders, have more Devils about 'em than they that wear it: For the Racovian
Catechism is allowed to be a just Summary of Socinianism; and the first Chap.
of that Catechism treats of the Certainty of Holy Scriptures, and justifies the
Authority of those Books by the most cogent Arguments that can be brought,
proves the Christian Religion to be a Divine Institution, and the Author of it
a Divine Person. There may be in Socinianism more Errors than I know of, and I
know some, but Atheism, and mere Deism are none of the number.

The 2d Division of the Retinue, which Mr. Gailhard would have the World
believe to attend Socinianism, is made up of Profaneness and Immorality; and
yet in the Racovian Catechism and Socinian Writings, there is nothing of that
nature, but on the contrary, the absolute necessity of Holiness plainly and
fully declared. When Machiavel took notice of the Villain's Aphorism,
Calumniate boldly, something will be believed, he took it for granted that the
Villain had Wit to varnish his false Calumnies with specious Colors, and to
select such Instances to which he could give some air of Probability. But in
the Case before us, the Persecuting Accuser has not that Wit; for he is not
able to produce those Socinian Writers who give any countenance to Profaneness
and Immorality: and as for those Opinions which he enumerates, and calls the
chief Opinions of Socinianism, ( p. 5, 6. of his Book) they are the most of
them, at this day, the common Opinions of the most eminent Writers of the
Church of England, excepting that he has a little disfigured them by an
untoward Rehearsal: nor can it be made appear, that any of the rest do tend to
Profaneness and Immorality, but by Consequences far more remote and strained,
than those which upbraid these Calvinistical Doctrines, Fatal Necessity,
inconditionate Reprobation, irresistible Grace, partial Redemption, and
Impossibility of Apostasy, with speaking evil of God, tempting some Men to
presumption, urging others to despair. To excuse the rigid Calvinists [who of
all Sects of Christians ought to be excused last] some moderate and charitable
Persons are wont to plead, that they do not apprehend the evil Consequences of
their false Doctrines; and one of our Learned Bishops has lately with the same
ingenuous, reasonable, and Christian Charity allowed, that the Socinians would
not advance a Doctrine injurious to the Honor of Jesus Christ, but that they
think, the equalling him to his Father does derogate from the Honor of God the
Father Almighty.

Ancient Ecclesiastical Writers, who give us the History of Heretics that
infected the Church with strange Doctrines, do generally take notice that one
of the Arts whereby they used to spread their Heresies, and win Proselytes, was
by high Pretenses to extraordinary Fervency in Devotion, self-denying Rigours
of Life, and beneficent Excesses of Charity. The followers of Montanus, and
Novatianus are reported to have been at all these pains, to put off their false
Wares. But Mr. Gailhard would have the World believe, that Socinianism is a
blasphemous Heresy, the Patrons whereof endeavor to promote that their Heresy,
by taking into its Retinue Profaneness and Immorality, to make it look as ugly,
as offensive, and odious as may be. This is altogether a new way of promoting
Heresy, and not like to be very successful. Methinks if the Socinians know no
better, there should be no great danger of their perverting the Orthodox from
their Faith. But what cares Mr. Gailhard whether his Accusations be consistent?
He describes Socinianism as a Heresy very ill made to gain Proselytes, and at
the same time is extremely concerned, fearful, and apprehensive that it will
overrun the Church, being got into her very Bowels already. I hope Socinianism
is not of the nature of the Gout, for if it be, the Church is in an ill case;
but I would be glad to know of Mr. Gailhard, whether he means that the
speculative Errors, or Immorality, or Idolatry of Socinianism, is the Poison
which is got into the Bowels of the Church. He cannot mean the first of these,
for I am apt to believe, that would the Socinians but depart from their
Speculative Errors, they should be forgiven all their Immorality, with their
Idolatry into the bargain; for Orthodoxy of Faith has many a time compounded
for Heterodoxy of Practice, and brought off unpunished, scandalous
Irregularities of Life and Conversation.

The last Division of the Retinue attending on Socinianism, he makes to be
Idolatry, and and caetera. As to what concerns Idolatry, it must be confessed
that Socinus's System of Divinity is not absolutely free from it, for he
maintains that Divine Worship is to be given to Jesus Christ, tho He be not
the True, Almighty, and Eternal God, but only something, I know not what, more
than a mere Man, and born in time: but I question much whether we have any of
these Socinians in England; as for those late English Writers sometimes called
Unitarians, and very injuriously termed Socinians, they seem desirous to wash
their hands of it: and their disputing some of the Articles of our Church has
proceeded chiefly from their Apprehensions, that it would be Idolatry to admit
them; and upon the prudent Explication which has been given of some obnoxious
Terms, they wave the dispute, and come in as Brethren; in which Compliance if
there be no Idolatry, I do not see how Idolatry can be laid to their charge. I
hope Mr. Gailhard will not in anger against them, impute Idolatry to our Church
by Law established. It is certainly no Idolatry to worship only the One, True,
Eternal, and Almighty God: and if the One, True, Eternal, and Almighty God be
repeated, not multiplied, distinguished, not separated in three Persons,
where is the Idolatry of that? If the Socinians, Mr. Gailhard speaks of, must be
Idolaters, because they have been at some pains to make some advances toward
this Metaphysical Orthodoxy, they have in their pursuit after Peace, the worst
luck in the World. God forbid that our Church should take up the Principles of
Mr. Gailhard, and the Popish Inquisitors, who when they have brought a Heretic
to something of a Recantation, presently burn his Body, in kindness to his
Soul, for fear he should relapse and be damned in Body and Soul both; poor
Proselyte! he must have no Joy in his Orthodoxy, and cannot like that way of
being sent to Heaven in a fiery Chariot.

Well then! by Mr. Gailhard's favor, it is not unlikely, but that Socinianism
may get clear of the Charge of Idolatry, either by the help of her own Logic,
or by virtue of the Authority of the Church: but what shall we say to and
caetera? The Dissenters of the last Age baited this word unmercifully, some
thought the Devil was in it, at least it was flat conjuring, that they were
sure of: but they that shall take Mr. Gailhard for a Conjurer, will be very
much in the wrong; because it is plain he designs no more by arraigning
Socinianism for being attended with and caetera, but to save himself a liberty
to swear any thing else against it, as time and occasion shall prompt him.

Should the late King James ever be brought back again to plague us, [of which
the danger, God be thanked, is pretty well over] Mr. G. by the help of and
caetera might pretend that it was Socinianism which turned him out. I think our
Church is not willing to own that Act yet; to be sure she would not own it upon
the Re-establishment of the Tyrant, and therefore in such case, Mr. G. might
well urge it as a proper Instance of and caetera against Socinianism.

Et caetera laid to the charge of Socinianism, is like an Appeal prepared
beforehand upon suspicion that the Jury will find but Manslaughter. If
Socinianism should have no Atheism, nor mere Deism, no Profaneness, Immorality,
nor Idolatry in it; yet and caetera will not let it live. Who can say he is not
guilty of and caetera? for my part therefore I will never stint my Prayers, but
my Latitudinarian Litany shall run thus: From the Devil, and the Pope, from Mr.
G. and caetera, Good Lord deliver us.

The 2d thing to be examined in Mr. G's ill-natured and malicious Paper, is,
How wide Socinianism is spread. If Atheism and Deism, Profaneness and
Immorality, Idolatry, and and caetera, be Parcels and Portions of that Heresy,
of my Conscience the Heresy is spread over the whole World, and may require an
extraordinary Remedy! to suppose that an extraordinary one will do; and if
these Parcels of Socinianism are so universal, I do not wonder that the Church
has her share: but let us not argue, but observe Mr. G's particular Account of
the growth of Deism.

1. He says that the Jews are not wanting in their Endeavors to promote the
Blasphemy. Now what a Blaze would it make, if only these Socinian Jews were to
be burnt? for they are a numerous People, and for what they have done already
against the Messiah, scattered over the face of the Earth; but whether the
burning of them be the way by which the dark Corners of the Earth are to be
illuminated, I make a question.

2. He tells us that the Mahometans, and the Socinian Generation of Vipers are
ever ready to join Heads to promote their common Cause. Now these Mahometans
are far more numerous than the whole Body of Christians, by what Appellation
soever dignified or disgraced, wherefore I cannot imagine how the burning of
them is feasible; whether it would not be a glorious and great Work, that I
don't dispute: but I cannot imagine, I say, how the burning of so many Millions
is feasible, unless perhaps by praying for Fire to come down from Heaven, and
destroy them: indeed our Savior would not oblige his Disciples James and John
in that particular against the Samaritans, tho he might have vindicated his own
Honor by executing their Wrath; but what he may do for Mr. G. and his
Calvinists, is another matter.

3. He intimates that the French Refugees among us dogmatize after the Socinian
manner, which they durst not do in France for fear of Fire and Faggot. Now if
this be true, I know not why these Refugees should be suffered to live any more
than the Jews and Mahometans; only I would humbly move, that they might be sent
home to be burnt there, for why should we do the King of France's drudgery for
him? let him burn his own Heretics if he will, now the War's ending, he will
have nothing else to do: besides, the Rogues would not know how to take their
burning in England, but appeal to Heaven and Earth against us for breaking the
Laws of Hospitality; but they still retain so great a Veneration for their
Grand Monarch, that for ought I know upon second thoughts they may be proud of
the Honor of being burnt by his Orders.

4. He arraigns all the Arminians as joined in Confederacy with the Socinians.
Arminius himself, Mr. G. notes, tho contemporary with Socinus, would never
write against him, therefore, etc. which Argument is good in this particular
case, but in no other; for tho Mr. G. would never write against his
Contemporary George Fox deceased, nor William Pen now living, yet Mr. G. is no
Quaker, but a Calvinist; nor could he possibly be otherwise, being
predestined to be a Calvinist, and not a Quaker, and that not for any Merit
that God foresaw in him, for that were to make God foresee what will never
happen, but merely and purely [as an Arminian would guess] because his Nature
was capable of no other Christian Impression. Mr. G. also tells us, he often
meets with Vorstius, Episcopius, Bertius, Curcellaeus, who favor the
Socinians, nay go hand in hand with them in many things, and mince the matter
with them. And p. 7. of his Book, he ingeniously expresses himself upon the
whole matter, thus: As one Depth calls to another, so an Arminian can easily
become a rank Pelagian, or Socinian. Here a wicked Pelagian, or rank Socinian
would reply; As one Shallowness calls to another, so a Calvinist can easily
become as wise as the Dominican Inquisitor at Lisbon, who at a late Act of
Faith burnt an English Mare, that could tell what of the Clock it was by the
Watch, for a Heretic. But to our purpose, here we have on the Socinian side
[as Mr. G. tells us, and he knows] all the Arminians, i.e. almost all the
Church of England, a Moiety of the Presbyterians, nine parts in ten of the
Quakers. Indeed I was afraid that when Socinianism was once got into the Bowels
of the Church, it would not be long before it reached her Heart, and thence
diffused its Venom over all the mystical Body. As for the Dissenters, it would
never grieve a Man, that they should be infected with this pestilent Heresy,
since they deserved to be burned before for Schism: For, tho the Supreme
Authority of the Nation has at present indulged their Consciences, yet no
Authority upon Earth can alter the nature of Schism. As much socinianiz'd as
our Arminian Clergy are, they yet hold fast their Orthodoxy in condemning the
Dissenters for Schismatics, and doubtless will do it, in spite of King and
Parliament: but it is very unfortunate, and infinitely to be lamented, that they
should be Heterodox in any Article with so bad Company as the Socinians; tho
it is very certain they are so, if there be any truth in Mr. G. nay he tells us,
p. 6. of his Book, That as to most of the Matters of Grace, and Providence, the
Socinians are agreed with the Arminians, and then by consequence the Arminians
with the Socinians; so that it will be a hard case to burn the one without the
other.

It is true, several of these Arminians are Men of Learning, nay and they have
wrote against Socinianism too; but as Mr. G. tells us, No good is to be
expected from them, upon account of some Principles of theirs [Socinian
Principles] and in plain words, they are unfit to write against the Socinians:
Which Declaration of his puts me in mind of what another Calvinist told me to
other day. Sir, says he, Arminianism, take my word for it, is the Parent of
Socinianism, the Brat is very like in many Features; but pray mind this one,
The Arminians teach that God might have forgiven the Sin of Adam without
exacting any Satisfaction; upon this the Socinians raise a dispute, whether it
can be plainly proved from Scripture that Christ died to make a Satisfaction,
and then they assign I know not what other Reasons of his Death, which they
could never have found out but for the Arminians. Ah! take my word for it, says
he, As to Arminian and Socinian, the old Saw fits them both, never a Barrel
better Herring; only I could wish that my Brother Gailhard had let the
Arminians alone a while, for without their help we shall never set sire to the
A -- of the Socinians; but that being once happily effected, they must change
their note, as to the Matters of Grace and Providence, or smoke in their turns.

But what do I talk of a Stranger? Mr. G. is the Gentleman I have to deal with;
and upon a nearer consideration of him, I may well suspect, that after all his
Outcries against Socinianism, he himself is a Socinian. I dare swear the
Socinians in England [if there be any in England, which is more than I know]
never thought themselves near so numerous as Mr. G. makes them; and to what
purpose should he let them know their Numbers, but to weaken the Interest of
the Church? Nay, what sly Malice is it in him, rather than not make the Numbers
of the Socinians formidable, to hook in so great a Majority of the Church into
a downright participation of Heresy with them? Good God! why, if he had had any
real kindness for his Mother the Church, he would have excused all the Arminian
Churchmen from the Scandal of Socinianism, after the artful Example of a late
very learned Vindicator of the Trinity, pleading that the Arminian Churchmen
are very sound in the necessary Article of Faith, tho they are a little
Socinian in the Explication: if a Churchman suffers himself to be carried
beyond the ancient Methods [either to the right or left] which the Church has
used to express her sense by, yet a wise Brother will allow him still to retain
the fundamental Article. It is true, this Plea may be stretched to excuse the
Socinians, and save their Bacon also; for they can admit of a Trinity, if they
may have the explaining what shall be meant by it; but the Father never invented
it for them, nor have they any right to be saved by the Expedients of the
Church, especially by such a particular one as this, The Difference between a
necessary Article of Faith, and the manner of expressing it. A dull Heretic
would be apt to conclude, that if the necessary Article of Faith was not
signified in the words that express it, then it was a necessary Nothing.

Farther, If Mr. G. had not been a Socinian, if he had not deliberately
designed to save those Heretics from the Stake, by involving the Arminian
Churchmen in the same Scandal with them, he would have pleaded, [as the above
mentioned very learned Father teaches] That there may be Propositions which
tend to Heresy, or savor of it, [as for instance several in his Vindication]
which cannot be condemned for Heretical. By this admirable Device, the Arminian
Churchmen may favor the Socinians, go hand in hand with the Socinians, mince
the matter with the Socinians, and at the last leave them in the lurch, as the
Duke of York did Coleman.

I have examined Mr. G's Account how wide Socinianism is spread: I will now
enquire what Opposition it has met.

1. He tells us, not indeed in plain Words, but in very intelligible squinting
Glances; that the Watchmen whose immediate Duty it was to give warning, have
through Sluggishness or other cause neglected to blow the Trumpet at the approach
of the Enemy. But but by his favor, this is a mere Story, his own pure
Invention, and a notorious Slander: for tho it is ordinary for Watchmen to sleep
when they should be upon Duty, yet our Watchmen were vigilant, upon their
guard, and gave warning, tho in the Event it appeared, they were more afraid
than hurt; Beware of Socinianism, was the great Cry, and the Church took the
Alarm. Profaneness, Immorality, and Idolatry had something of a Truce by the
means; every Orthodox Champion ran to his Arms, and the mounted Artillery
thundered against Socinianism: of a sudden a prodigious Noise was made, but no
Execution done; for the Orthodox were under no Command, and kept no Order, but
scuffled tumultuously with they knew not whom, nor what: This zealous Leader
would scower through the dark Vales of Ancient Fathers and General Councils, that
learned Author would bustle in the thorny Thickets of the Schoolmen; one or
two, now and then, with wondrous Considence, and manly Resolution, would bolt
out upon the open Plains of natural Reason, but they were quickly forced to
shelter, not being able to bear the Brightness and Warmth of the Meridian Sun,
which illuminates and gives life to those Plains: but when all this was done,
and they had time to consider whence proceeded all this Diversion which was
given them, there was no Socinian in the case, only an obscure, sober,
studious, bookish Man took offense at some of our old Schoolterms, of which we
had no great opinion our selves, and kept 'em only because we could get no
better; but then the wisest of our Doctors explained 'em to a very honest
Sense; and the good Man aforesaid not being willing to stand with us for small
things, the Contention ceased. I confess there are some angry People, who would
make the Nation believe, the difference is still where it was; but whosoever
considers impartially what has been wrote on both sides, will plainly see that
we must let the suspected Book-worm be Orthodox with us, who are the Majority
of the Church, now termed Nominalists, or else we must be content to be thought
Heterodox with him, and let Mr. G. burn us both. But yet since never any
Majority that is to be read of in History, submitted to let a lesser Number
burn them, it is pity that Mr. G's Orthodox Zeal should overlook an old
Heathenish, Antichristian Heresy accidentally discovered in the very Bowels of
the Church, I mean the Tritheistic Heresy, the Heresy of three Gods. For my
part I would very fain excuse some Great Names from this Scandal; but alas! the
matter is but too plainly proved in a Book called Tritheism charged, etc. the
Author of which, sound and orthodox in the Points he there treats of, might
pass for a real Christian, if he had taken that care of his Language which
Michael did, when he disputed with the Devil, and not used such virulent words
as it is likely the Devil gave the Archangel. But some excuse may be made for
him in this odious particular; for it is likely his liberal Railing, and
throwing his Wit and his Foam about, did not proceed, at least not altogether
from that evil Nature which many others are troubled with, as well as he; but
rather, and mostly from that proud sour Calvinism which he holds in common with
Mr. Gailhard. But to prevent being misunderstood, I declare that I do not
believe Calvinism, mere Calvinism a damnable Heresy, no more than I believe,
(tho it is possible for a Calvinist to be saved so as by Fire) that that by Fire
is to be understood of the burning of Heretics. I have read of Royal Heroes,
Deliverers of their Country, whose thrice Excellent, truly Human, truly
Christian Natures so tempered their Calvinism, that 'twas an inoffensive
harmless Speculation: if ever I have more Gods than one, I do not say more
personal Gods, but more essentially distinct Gods, a Hero so formed shall be my
second: but tho I have an inquisitive Mind, I think I am in no danger of
multiplying Gods; no, I am resolved I will never do it, unless it should be
declared [which I think next to impossible] that no Heresy shall be connived at
but Tritheism.

2. Mr. G. complains, not indeed directly and in express words, but by a
side-wind thus: Whether or not the Ecclesiastical Court has in this occasion
of Socinianism, acted its part according to Laws, I must not take upon me, but
leave it to the World to judge. But notwithstanding all this, he does not leave
it to the World to judge, but takes it upon himself; nay, he not only gives his
Judgment upon the Case, but also passes Sentence upon them that concur not in
the same Judgment with him, as appears by the Citations which he produces, and
the Reflections which he makes upon them. Now in doing this, which he thinks he
ought not to do, and promised that he would not, he acts against the Light of
Conscience, which is a damnable Sin; whether or no it be Heresy, I will not
dispute, but without dispute it is damnable; it may perchance escape from Fire
and Faggot, but not from Fire and Brimstone, unless it be expiated by a timely
and hearty Repentance.

But what are his Citations of Law against Socinianism? First a Passage or two
out of a Book called The Reformation of the Ecclesiastical Laws, began in the
days of H. the 8th, and continued in the time of Edw. the 6th. That Book then
was wrote before Faustus Socinus was born, and before England could know any
thing of his Uncle Laelius, who was about twenty one Years old when Edw. the
6th died. Again, does Mr. Gailhard think, that the Book which he quotes, was
wrote against Socinianism by inspired Writers in way of prophetic
anticipation? I am afraid the Contents thereof, as to many particulars, will
plainly evince the contrary: I know not what might appear, admitting him to be
an inspired Interpreter. He may interpret Passages out of that Book, if he so
please, against Quakerism as well as Socinianism, or against the Scheme of any
Party, which may perchance arise, reviving old and long buried, true or false
Speculations. As for the Notions which I dislike in Socinianism [for I am no
Socinian, but a Member of the Church of England by Law establish'd] if I could
not bring against them more pertinent and solid Arguments than Mr. Gailhard
offers, I would never dislike them; therefore again I suspect, that Mr.
Gailhard, after all his loud Outcries against blasphemous Socinianism, [as he
phrases it] is a subtle but real Socinian, and writes booty.

Mr. G. to go on with his Citations, and his booty writing, presents the
Parliament with a Fragment of a Letter from Edw. the 6th to to A. B. Cranmer;
Cum vos triginta, etc. Upon which he makes this booty Reflection: So that there
is something of a Parliament's Authority [against Socinianism.] I may well call
this a booty Reflection; for in the next words he grants, that that something
wants a Parliamentary Stamp; which is as much as to say, it is a something
that is just as good as nothing. We are not yet come to the end of Mr. G's
Citations; he presents us with a long Story from the Canons and Ecclesiastical
Constitutions agreed upon in the Convocations of both Provinces, Canterbury and
York, 1640. And lest the Authority of these Canons should in scornful manner be
set aside for want of Parliamentary Sanction, because it cannot be pretended,
that Jesus Christ gave Authority to the Preachers of his Gospel to impose Laws
on the Subjects of the Civil Magistrate, Mr. G. argumentatively notes, That
King Charles the First has by virtue of his Prerogative Royal, and Supreme
Authority in Ecclesiastical Causes, straightly enjoined and commanded those
Canons and Constitutions to be diligently observed and executed. But after all
this [with Mr. G's leave be it spoken] our Lawyers know not of any such
Prerogative Royal and Supreme Authority in Ecclesiastical Causes, by which the
King alone, without the Advice and Consent of his Lords and Commons in
Parliament assembled, is enabled to ratify and enforce the Ceremonial or
Sanguinary Rules and Orders [Canons and Constitutions I should have said] of
the Convocational Clergy. Our Just, and Lawful, and Gracious King William
pretends not to this Power, nor is inclined to let any persecuting Priests
loose upon his People; and perhaps this is the true Reason, and not his being
chose by the People, why he has no Defenders of his Title among such Priests:
here and there perhaps a moderate and sober Churchman owns him for his Rightful
and Lawful Sovereign; but Priests of persecuting Principles every Man of 'em
spare not to revile him as a Conquering Usurper. Let a Prince claim and exert a
Prerogative Royal and Supreme Authority to enforce Canons and Constitutions
Ecclesiastical, I question not but his obliged Clergy shall gratify him with a
Right Divine, tho he came in by a Foreign Power, without and against the
Consent of his People; but Marriage-Right, Proximity of Blood, and Consent of
the People together shall signify nothing, if his Majesty out of a Fatherly
Affection to all his loving Subjects, will not execute the Vengeance of a
Convocation, or not call a Convocation to be taught his Duty.

3. Mr. G. is troubled that Socinianism has met so little Opposition from the
Bishops, who, as he intimates, have not acted their parts: and here he most
andaciously, and sliely slurs the Honor of my Lords the Bishops; for tho
several of them have wrote learnedly and angrily against Socinianism, some in
the Real, some in the Nominal Trinitarian way, yet Mr. G. takes no notice at
all of this, looking upon them as Men of the Arminian Persuasion, who, he tells
us, favor the Socinians, go hand in hand with them, mince the matter with
them: Hence he takes occassion to wish, that, after what several have written
heretofore, some Persons of Learning, sound in the Doctrinal part of the 39
Articles, [i.e. Calvinists] would appear, as a very learned and able Prelat
has in some Points effectually done. Now nothing could be more sly and
malicious than this particular Commendation of a single Prelat, as if all the
rest favored the Socinians, went hand in hand with them, and mine'd the matter
with them. He often declares his Aversion from the Arminians, of which
Persuasion most of the Bishops in their Sermons and Prints have shown
themselves; and as for the Calvinists, the only Persons sound in the doctrinal
part of the 39 Articles, he says they have not appeared, i.e. they have been
wanting to their Duty against Socinianism, for which they were sitted by their
Principles. How unjust this Complaint of Mr. G. against the Bishops is, I need
not stand to prove; but I appeal to the Reader whether my Censure is not just.
If he had not been a rank Socinian, or worse, he would not, when he pretended
to write against the Socinians, have so sliely and desperately wounded the
Honor of the chief Defenders of the Orthodox Faith. Indeed it looks a little
odly that they should explain one and the same Article contradictory ways, both
of which can hardly be true; but then since a way is discovered, whereby
contradictory Expositors may both firmly hold the Orthodox Article, tho they
have different Notions of it, I could wish that Mr. G. would not involve no not
the Arminian Party in the same Condemnation with the Socinians: for tho the
Socinians also will agree to the Article, if they may explain it; yet they mu t
be deemed not to agree to the Article, unless they will take up with one of the
contradictory Explications, which our Church can endure: for I trow the Church
may choose what contradictory Explications she will endure, and is not obliged
to endure all that may be offered; that were not only to restrain her from
imposing on backward Believers, but subjecting her to be imposed on by others,
which is prodigiously unreasonable. But Mr. G. not only sliely intimates that
the Bishops do not act their parts against Heresy, having an Arminian Touch
thereof themselves, but that they actually stop the Course of Justice; which he
can never prove, unless by the Argument of his own Impunity, who so boldly
calumniates and slanders them: but however he intimates it, and then pronounces
that upon the failure of the Bishops, the Magistrate is to look into it. The
Roman Clergy take upon themselves all the Labor of convicting and condemning
Heretics, and leave the Magistrate no trouble but to burn them: but Mr. G.
devolves the whole upon the Magistrate; that is the meaning of those words, The
Magistrate is to look into it: and he proves it to be their Duty, because it is
very just that every Man's hand should be against those Infidels, whose hand is
against every Man. Which Argument is so happily formed, that it not only
evinces it to be the Magistrate's Duty to burn Heretics, but it also proves
that every Man is a Magistrate, i.e. every Man that contributes to the burning
of Heretics; his contributing to the burning of Heretics, constitutes him a
Magistrate: but I suppose he means, that every Man who is constituted a
Magistrate by his own Authority, in taking upon himself to persecute Heretics,
is a Magistrate only quoad hoc; when the Heretic is burnt, there is an end of
the Magistrate, he becomes a private Man again. Mr. G. would not do so
extravagant a thing, as to make every Man a Magistrate, any longer than he had
need of him to kill, and burn. But what if the lawful Magistrate does not, and
Mr. G's private Magistrate, empowered by his own Malice and ill Nature, dares
not defy the Toleration, and push on the burning of Heretics? What then? What
then! why then let them both look to it, he bombs them with Denunciations of
Curses, and Judgments from Scripture; but the same not being levelled against
Patience and Long-suffering, against brotherly Love and Charity, against
Toleration of Opinions, which neither blaspheme God, nor trouble the State, it
is reasonably presumed that those minatory Bombs will neither in this World,
nor the next, endamage the King or the Parliament, who have enacted no
Sanguinary Laws this last Session, neither against Jews, Turks, nor infidels;
no, nor against Church-Nominalists, Socinian Unitarians, nor real Tritheistick
Trinitarians. Thus I have examined the third Head, and it appears that Heresy
has not met the Opposition which Mr. G. could wish. In the last place, I will
examine what Treatment he judges it to deserve.

Now here he comes in with a sage Aphorism or two, There ought to be a
Proportion betwixt the Distemper, and the Remedy: extreme Distempers require
extreme Remedies. And to prove the Extremity of the Distemper whereof he
complains, He tells us, That to deny the Holy Trinity, and our Savior's
Divinity, is as much as in a Man lies to pull our Religion up by the very
Root, and quite to overthrow it. Which, that the Socinians do, he takes for
granted, tho those who are [yet injuriously] called Socinians, declare that
they only dispute some unscriptural Terms with us, but are well satisfied with
the sense put upon those Terms and Explications which a considerable Majority
of the Church seem to be agreed in, and together with them abhor the
Tritheistick Doctrine, abhor it as much as if it were Convocationally
condemned, only they would not give their consent for burning the Persons of
the Tritheists, whose Heresy, tho very absurd and of unhappy Influence, yet is
not worse than uncharitable and ill-natured Calvinism. Farther to prove the
extremity of the Distemper whereof he complains, Mr. G. affirms, that Idolatry
and Blasphemy [by which latter he will mean Socinianism] are the two greatest
Abominations in the sight of God; and then with impudent Reflection on the King
and Parliament, he gives it us as his Judgment, That to the Toleration of those
two transcendent Wickednesses we may chiefly attribute the Cause of the heavy
Chastisements which make the Nation uneasy; i.e. expressing it in plain Words,
The King and Parliament have tolerated Popery and Socinianism, and the
Toleration of those two transcendent Wickednesses, is the Cause of the War with
the French, and all the foul Miscarriages attending it; of the debasing and
clipping the Old, and the scarcity of the New Money; of the unseasonableness of
the Weather; of the rot among Sheep, and the dearness of Mackeril. One may be
tempted to think, that the Gentlemen of Mr. G's Kidney entertain the Opinion,
that the settled Course of Nature is sometimes changed by particular and
special Providence, for no other reason, but that they may have the
opportunity to charge this, and that, and the other evil Accident on the
Doctrines and Persons, which for their Doctrines sake they mortally hate.

We are told that the Primitive Christians, [who, for ought I know, had as much
Socinianism in them, as the very Considerer himself] were injuriously used,
just as they are now [who are injuriously termed Socinians:] If any evil
Accident afflicted the Public, if Tiber overflowed and damaged the Country,
Christianos ad Leones, throw the Christians to the Lions, it is long of their
being tolerated, that the Gods are so angry with the Romans. Well! but Mr. G.
reckons that he has fully shown the extremity of the Distemper. Now let us see
how he will proportion the Remedy. In one place he declines the invidious
Office, and professes that he leaves it to the Piety and Christian Wisdom of
the Parliament, to find out and apply the true and proper Remedy: but this is
only a Copy of his Countenance, and a Protestation against Fact; for he will not
trust the Parliament with a matter of such importance; wherefore in the first
place he warns them against dawbing with untemper'd Mortar: Alas! the Cement
will not be strong and durable unless it be thoroughly wetted with human Blood.
Next he quotes Solomon for this Saying, Fools make a mock at Sin; thence he
raises this Observation, That Sin is a great Distemper, and by Sin he
understands, not Wickedness of Life, but Error of Opinion, Heresy, Socinianism;
for the cure of this Distemper, he quotes these other Words of Solomon, A Rod
for the Fools back. And now he looks upon it as a thing most manifest, that the
Socinian Sinner ought to be punished, and that it is the Magistrate's Duty to
punish him. But what shall we do now? for a Man is punished if only his Back
suffers, and Solomon meddles no farther; but then that is no extreme Remedy,
it is pity that Solomon left the matter so loosly; wherefore we must, one way or
other, make his Rod; what? a Serpent? a good Improvement that; but a better and
more suitable it will be, to make it a Faggot. See now how artificially this
Change is wrought, There is no greater Sin, says Mr. G. than Blasphemy, and no
greater Blasphemy than Socinianism, that he always intimates, Wherefore it
deserves the heaviest Punishment, to make the Pain hold proportion with the
Offense: and what heavier Punishment, and what more cruel Pain, I pray, than
Fire and Faggot? When Aaron changed his Rod into a Serpent, we read that the
Egyptian Sorcerers did the very same, only their Serpents were not a Match for
Aaron's. But give me the Sorcerer that outdoes the old Egyptian Dealers with
the Devil, and by the Magic of his Zeal turns Solomon's Rod made for the back
of Fools, into a Faggot made for the back of Heretics: there is the true
materia Medica prepared against the Distemper of Heresy: if the Magistrate
would but apply it according to the Sorcerer's Direction, and set fire to it,
Heresy would quickly be burnt up, only perhaps a little Hypocrisy might spring
from the Ashes; but that is a harmless humble Weed, which never gives Offense,
no not to zealous Powers, with Calvinistical fiery Qualifications. Mr. G. is so
positive, that the heaviest Punishment is the true and proper Remedy against
what he calls Socinianism, that, suspecting his clumsy Rhetoric, and inept
Applications of Scripture, might not prove effectual to obtain sanguinary Laws
against Heretics, he breaks out into this Ejaculation, and vents his
Calvinistical Impatience in a wrylookt Prayer, -- God grant none of this Land,
for want of performing their Duty in their Stations, do provoke God in the way
of Judgments, to make them know that he is the Lord, who both acts and speaks
with a strong hand. If he were serious in this Prayer, the most that could be
made of it, were, that tho he is angry with the King and Parliament for not
enacting sanguinary Laws against Heresy, yet he hopes they may not be struck
too, down to Hell with Thunder for that sinful neglect. But the real Design of
the Prayer is, to cover the Impudence of charging the King and Parliament with
favoring Heresy, and intimating that they deserve to feel the severest
Judgments of God, and can expect no other. Such is the Mercy of a zealous
Calvinist, his very Prayers are Libels. Just so that sly malicious Rogue in
Horace, Me Capitolinus convictore est usus Amecoque I always had a Kindness for
Capitolinus my dear Friend and Companion; Sed tamen admiror qo pacto judicium
illud fugerit; But being tried for a horrid Crime, I wonder how he escaped
hanging. To authorize the use of the extreme Remedy, Fire and Faggot, Mr. G.
tells us, The Emperor Theodosius decreed, That after death, an Action might
lawfully be commenced against a Maniche, or a Donatist, to render the Heretics
Memory infamous. I wonder at this Quotation from Mr. G. because his Master
Calvin borrowed his denial of Free Will from the Founder of the Manichean Sect;
but I commend his Wisdom, he is for commencing his Action against living
Socinians, Theodosius against dead Heretics; he will do what he can to brand
their Memory; but his first care is to be the death of them. Had Mr. Gailhard
but the power of the Magistrate, or the Magistrate the burning Zeal of Mr.
Gailhard, what a Country should we have, so free from Heretics, that the
Orthodox would have no Enemies to trouble them, nor no need to fall out among
themselves for want of room.

But here, that Mr. G's Zeal may be thoroughly understood, I must take notice,
he would have the extreme Remedy used, not only against Atheists and Deists,
Papists and Armininians, French Refugees, Jews and Turks, but also against all
heretical Tritheists of what Order or Degree soever: for in his Pref. p. 2 and
3. he commends the Oxf. Decree, Nov. 25. 1695. for condemning, as false,
impious, and heretical, the Notions and Expressions of Three insinite distinct
Minds and Substances in the Trinity. This Censure the Translator of the History
of Val. Gentilis expressly applies to Dr. Sherlock, but Mr. G. only in general
says of such Tritheists, that they affect Singularity, are wise in their own
Conceit, follow Bypath in their Defense of the Trinity, and thereby declare
that they are Enemies to the Cause, and have a mind to betray it. No Soldier,
says he, in an Enemies Country ought to straggle out of the way under pain of
Death, etc. he that does so, ought to be knocked of the head; for it may
reasonably be supposed he straggles with a design to desert. This he applies to
Stragglers in the Cause of the Trinity: and in his Judgment, the Maintainers of
Three distinct infinite Minds in the Trinity, are such Stragglers. I grant that
Mr. G. has no particular spite against Dr. Sherlock, as another Calvinistical
Nominal Trinitarian has; but then he is for sparing no Body that explains the
Trinity, as Dr. Sherlock does. The Translator of the History of Gentilis goes a
step farther; for he boldly affirms that the Tritheism of Dr. Sherlock is worse
and more reproachful to Christianity, not only than Sabellianism, but even than
Socinianism it self; and having related how the Senate of Bern caused Val.
Gentilis to be beheaded for this Tritheism of Three distinct infinite Minds, he
concludes his Advertisment, concerning his Publication of that Story, thus: I
cannot but wish that all Christian Governors and Governments would show the
same magnanimous Zeal and Courage in defense of the Faith, tho I confess, I
wish not that they should do the same way; i.e. this good Calvinist Translator
wishes the Government would, not behead his Tritheistical Adversary Dr.
Sherlock, but [I suppose] burn him. The putting him to death, for that he
heartily wishes, and had rather his Head were taken off, as Val. Gentilis his
Head was, than lifted up as high as Paul's: this he intimates [tho it is the
Consequence also of his pious wish] in a marginal note affixed, p. 134. He
breathes the same Calvinistical zealous Affection at the end of his worthy
Translation, commending the University of Oxford, because she had unkennel'd
the Wolf, had him in full Chase, and would not give over, as he hoped, till she
had run him down. And what is done with Wolves when they are ran down, is very
well known.

Now tho I agree to the Explication which this good Doctor gives of the
Trinity, [bating one or two small Contradictions which shall not break squares
between us;] yet by his and Mr. Gailhard's leave, I will give Reasons why Dr.
Sherlock ought not to be beheaded, ran down, or burned for his Tritheism; and
then I will refer to an Author whose Arguments will save all the Tritheists
from being put to death. The first Reason that I shall offer why Dr. Sherlock
ought not to be beheaded as Val. Gentilis was; nor ran down, and knocked of the
head, as Wolves are; nor burned as Heretics have been, is, because tho he be a
Tritheist, i.e. an Heretic, and that an obstinate one; yet he is farther
removed from the Socinian Heresy than Mr. Gailhard, or the Translator, his
Brother-Calvinist, and Fellow-Nominal-Trininarian. The English Unitarians (by
Mr. Gailhard deemed Socinians) are at perfect agreement with Mr. Gailhard
himself, the Translator, and the Catholic Church, in the Explication of the
Doctrine of the Trinity. The Unitarians believe, [as their chief Writer
professes] that there is one insinite spiritual Substance with three
Properties, unbegotten, begotten, and proceeding, one eternal Spirit under the
triple distinction of Original Mind, Reflex Wisdom, and Divine Love, etc. There
is no difference at all in this matter, between that Unitarian and Mr.
Gailhard, the Translator, and the Catholic Church, saving that the Unitarian
says, the Terms Trinity, and Person are unscriptural, but he [being a Man, that
does no more love to be persecuted, than to persecute, having a strong natural
Inclination against doing and suffering Injuries both] easily gets over the
unscriptural Terms, and accepts them according to the Explication of the
Church, as may be seen p. the 21st of his Treatise, called, The Agreement of
the Unitarians with the Catholic Church. If now the Explication of the
Catholic Church, and of the Church of England, which the Unitarians and Mr.
Gailhard both accept, be Socinianism, [as it must be, or the Unitarians are
guilty of none] what has Mr. Gailhard been doing all this while, but making a
Rod for a foolish back of his own; or to speak home, a Faggot to roast his own
Ribbs? But now no Man upon English ground is more free from the Church-of-
England-Explication, which the Unitarians accept, [and which Mr. Gailhard
approves, tho he calls it Socinianism] than Dr. Sh. therefore Dr. Sh. ought not
to be beheaded, ran down, or burnt, whatever [in the judgment of Mr. Gailhard]
himself, our Churchmen, and the worthy Translatour ought. Let Dr. Sh. be ever
safe from all Eccclesiastical Censures: for he, out of fear of Socinianism, is
ran from the Church-of- England-Explication of the Trinity; he determines that
the Trinity is nothing if it denote not three distinct insinite Minds, and that
every other Sense thereof is Heresy and perfect Nonsense. Dr. Sh. plainly sees,
and ingenuously acknowledges, that the Unitarians are not afraid of our Church
Nominal Trinity, but only of such a real Trinity as his, which is perfect
Tritheism; and he well observes, that the Trinity of Three distinct infinite
Minds, is the only Trinity, which Socinus, Crellius, Schlictingius, and others
of that Party have hitherto disputed against. Upon this account I am amazed at
the extravagant Zeal of Mr. Gailhard; he would have the Socinians burnt for
their Compliance and Agreement with the Church of England and Dr. Sh. burnt for
his Disagreement with the Socinians. But I have another Argument to save the
Doctor, [the Church is able to save her self, and them that comply with her]
and that is this; Dr. Sh. ought not to be burnt, as Mr. G. would have it, nor
beheaded, nor run down, and knocked of the head, nor any other forcible way
translated out of this Life, as a good natured sort of a Translator piously
wishes; because he does not like it, and will not submit to it; but stands his
ground, maintains his Doctrine, and keeps his Honors and Prosits in spite of
all his Adversaries teeth. First a melancholy Stander-by attacks him with a
compassionate Suit, to forbear the Controversy; him he slights as a silly
spiteful Creature, and after a plentiful Effusion of ill Languge, bids him
begone for a Madman.

Then comes up with him a witty veterane Disputant, and pours in upon him whole
Vollies of reviling Animadversions, and follows him with a furious charge of
Tritheism: to him he returns, not Wit for Wit, [for his M^gazines were
destitute of those Provisions] but Railing for Railing with equal malice, and
will not allow him the Honor of being a Madman, but obliquely names him some
other, I know not what, grinning Creature. At last the University of Oxford,
[as far as they can be represented by the Vice Chancellor and some Heads of
Houses] fire a Decree at him, condemning his Tritheistic Explication of the
Trinity, as false, impious and heretical; nay, and to make sure work of it, as
contrary to the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, and particularly to the
received Doctrine of the Church of England. But amidst all this dreadful
Thunder and Lightning, the Doctor, a Man of a clear Spirit and Courage, stands
unafrighted, and, (as if he had been dipped in some poetical case-hardning Lake)
unhurt; he tramples the Oxford Decree under his Feet as extrajudicial, and
damns it for the private Opinion of some Heads, not so wise, but he could match
them any day in the Year with twice their Number, to censure their pretended
Decree. He proves there is no medium between his Notion of the Trinity and
Sabellianism: He maintains against the whole Body of his Confederate
Adversaries, that they not only overthrow the Christian Doctrine of the
Trinity, but also the very Being of a God; that they ridicule the Divine
Generation, and make Sport for Atheists and Heretics; and as for the Person,
whom he supposes to have solicited the Decree against him, he will allow him
to be no better than a Blasphemer. By Mr. Gailhard and the Translator's leave
now, if this Doctor be an Heretic, he is too mighty for their Malice, and will
make them know that they have as just a Pretense to Martyrdom, and are in as
fair a way for it as he. I promised to refer to a Book, which would save all
the well-meaning erroneous Christian Tritheists from fatal Fire and Faggot, it
is called An Essay concerning the Power of the Magistrate, and the Rights of
Mankind in Matters of Religion. Of which Book I shall not here give any
account, because I heartily wish that my Reader would drink from the Fountain,
being strongly persuaded, that if it be thoughtfully read, and impartially
considered by a well-meaning Christian, it will make him for ever ashamed of
Persecution: I dare not say it will make an angry Calvinist so; for, it is, I
am afraid, impossible that such a fated Zealot should fall from the Grace of
implacable Anger, against all that reject the Geneva Platform of Christianity.

I have now finished the Remarks, which I thought proper upon Mr. G's Epistle
Dedicatory to the Parliament, and upon the Preface to his Book, of which I made
a shift to read six or seven Pages. The reason which moved me to this, was a
just Indignation; that this siery Gentleman should pretend that no man was fit
to write against the Socinians but a Calvinist; and that the chief Doctors of
the Church of England, who are of the Arminian Persuasion, favor the
Socinians, go hand in hand with them, and mince the matter with them: For is it
not the highest Impudence in him, after he had condemned the Socinians to the
Fire, [which perhaps might be born with] to go about to prove, that the
Arminian Clergy and Laity are little better than Socinians?

In the beginning of this running Century, we had few or no Calvinists, but
among the Puritans: they governed all during the Civil War; yet at the
Restoration were set aside again, and discountenanced; that we have some of
them crept into the Church now, is, I much fear, for no other reason, but to
betray it.

I am confirmed in this fear by the very Title of another Book just come to my
hands; it is inscribed, The Growth of Error; being an Exercitation concerning
the Rise and Progress of Arminianism, and more especially Socinianism, etc. The
first part of the Title is pointed against the Growth of Deism; which Pamphlet,
I believe, was wrote by a sincere Christian, with a real Design [however he is
mistaken] to prevent the Growth of Deism. The Author of this Growth of Error
[now I have a little looked into him] designs to prevent the spreading of
Arminian and Socinian Doctrines, both which he takes to be much the same, and
equally erroneous: In his Preface he says, that there are sundry Principles
advanced by Men of Reputation among the sound in Faith, that do, in their
tendency, lead to what these drive at, who are of the worst sort, i.e. the
English Socinians; and in the Introduction to his Book he tells us, Many of
them, who cannot see how they differ from their Brethren, but in the way and
method of explaining the same Doctrine, [which they both hold] slide into
Arminianism, and from thence pass over unto the Tents of Socinus. A little
after he says, Tho they set up for a middle way between the extremes of Calvin
and the Excesses of Van Harman [commonly called Arminius,] yet, on their turn
from the former, they fall in so far with the latter, that it is impossible for
them to make a just defense of what they hold contrary to the Arminian System;
and therefore they fall in with them, and run their Length. As much as say,
deviate but one Hair's Breadth from the System of John Calvin, and you are
presently over head and ears in Arminianism. Again he says, That the Arminians,
who pretend a middle way between the Orthodox and the Socinian, are in the
twinkling of an eye fallen under Socinus his Banner. His Book produces some
sort of Instances to make good this Charge; which tempts me to compare Mr.
Gailhard and this Author to Brutus and Cassius, of whom the Historian,
Vbicunque ipsi essent, ibi praetexebant esse Rempublicam; Wheresoever they
were, there they gloried was the Commonwealth of Rome: So these bonny
Calvinists, exclusively to all others, especially the Arminians, will be the
Church of England. I would old Peter Heylin were alive to tell 'em their own;
in truth, I think, he was over-modest [which was but rarely his fault] to
esteem a Presbyterian, i.e. a Calvinist, [for so it was in his days] worse than
a Papist. For my part, I esteem a Christian, from whatsoever Sect denominated,
not excepting the Socinians, more honorable than a persecuting Calvinist: and
this is my comfort, that tho the Courage of this zealous Sect is great, yet
their Number is small; they have but half the Retinue which Mr. G. allows the
Socinians; there are no real Deists nor Arminians among them, and but few
Papists, not more than there are Dominicans; some handfuls of concealed
Hugonots in France, a pugil of ungrateful Refugees in England: Their main
Strength lies among Mahometans and Atheists, of which Confederates they have so
few within call, that I may venture to apply to them, dat Deus immiti Cornua
curta Bovi; In English we say, Cursed Cows have short Horns. Let me by the way
commend the discerning Spirit of the Church of Rome, who commits the management
of her flaming Inquisition to the Order of St. Dominic, a Race of bloody
Calvinists, as wisely knowing what Priests are by their Principles best fitted
to do the work of Devils. But I wonder in my Heart how the Author of the Growth
of Error, having condemned the English Socinians as the worst of Men, that so
they might be given up to his and Mr. Gailhard's Mercy, and taken a great deal
of pains to lay the Arminians under the same Condemnation, should yet have the
confidence to tell his Readers, that many who knew him, think his Charity
toward Men of very different Principles, of a Latitude to a Fault; whenas all
that I can find by his Book, is, that his Soul is never so disturbed with
tormenting Regret, as when an Orthodox Brother is not able to make good his
false Accusation against an Arminian. Festus Hommius had played the knave a
little, and put the change on Episcopius his Words, tho for no other reason in
the world, but to fasten the Imputation of Socinianism upon him: this foul play
the honest Author of the Growth of Error takes notice of, and makes this
charitable Reflection upon it; I must confess, that in an instance or two, the
report made of Episcopius was not so well grounded as might be wished. p. 72.

When I consider St. Paul's Character of Charity in the 13th Chapter of the 1st
Epistle to the Corinthians, I cannot but conclude, that our Author's Friends
banter'd him, when they found fault with the Latitude of his Charity: for my
part I cannot see how any Charity at all can be honestly laid to his charge;
for he desies Long-suffering and Kindness, is full of Envy and Pride, behaves
himself unseemly, seeks to serve the Cause of his own Party, is easily
provoked, thinks evil in his Heart, rejoiceth in Iniquity, and not in the
Truth, bears nothing, but believes as ill as he can of his Neighbor, and
still hopes and wishes the worst. What would this Gentleman have given, that
the Report made of Episcopius had been true! why, what would he have got by it?
Why then the poor Man might have been ran down like a Wolf, hanged like a Dog,
or burnt for an Heretic, whereas he was only banished: a small satisfaction
that, in respect of what our Author might have received, had the States of
Holland treated Episcopius with Mr. Gailhard's extreme Remedy.

I am sorry I have not Health and Leisure to do this Author farther Justice,
but must break off without so much as commending his Learning, Wit, and
Reasoning, which are of a Latitude equal to his Charity; I beg his Excuse. But
the Debt which I cannot pay him, I have some Temptation to hope, that a
courageous Master among the Tritheists will, because some pages are
particularly aimed at him; in one of which, p. 161. there are these words: If
the contradictory Affirmation of three individual Essences being but one
individual Essence, will clear the Notion from being Heresy; then Val.
Gentilis, Lismaninus, Blandrata, and the many other Propagators of the Socinian
Abominations, must be also, for the same reason, cleared from Heresy.

Upon this Passage I have but one Observation, and the Reader is at an end of
his trouble.

If Dr. Sh -- ck be cleared from Heresy, so also must the Socinians, in the
judgment, not of this Author only, but of Dr. S -- th also, with whom are a
Moiety, if not a Majority of the Church. If Dr. S -- th be cleared from Heresy,
so also must the Socinians, in the judgment of Dr. Sherlock, who concludes all
the Opposers of his real Tritheistic Trinity under Sabellianism, and with him
are some great Names, and no contemptible Numbers. What to do with these
Socinians, if I know, never trust me; if I brand them for Heretics, let me
assign what merit I please, I shall be thought [as Growth of Error phrases it]
to bereticate one or other Division of the Church: If I pass them without
censure, Mr. Gailhard will vouch that I mince the matter with them
[notwithstanding the Protestation which I make, that I am an obedient Son of
the Church of England] I think I had best, after the example of the Areopagites
engaged in a Difficulty which puzzled them as much as this does me, bid the
Cause come before me a hundred Years hence.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
Lately printed,

An Essay concerning the Power of the Magistrate, and the Rights of Mankind in
Matters of Religion. With some Reasons in particular for the Dissenters not
being obliged to take the Sacramental Test but in their own Churches; and for a
General Naturalization. Together with a Postscript in answer to the Letter to a
Convocation-man.

The Art of Memory: A Treatise useful for all, especially such as are to speak
in public. By Marius D' Assigny, B. D.

Both sold at the Cross-keys and Bible in Cornhil.


