THE Dean of Chesters SPEECH TO His MAJESTY.
August the 27th. 1687.
ALLOW Us Great SIR, to express our Loyal Joy, in beholding here the Face of
Your Sacred MAJESTY. Our Eyes are now Blessed, while We see amongst us that
Mighty and Wonderful KING, who equals in Clemency His late Royal Brother, in
the sincerity of His Religious purpose; His Father the Glorious Martyr; in
other Princely Virtues, both His Grandfathers, the Great HENRY of France, in
Courage and Conduct of Wars: And King JAMES the I. of England, in Wisdom, and
Defense of this National Church: And what more recommends this Generous
Patronage, He preserves that ALTAR from being overthrown, at which He does not
Worship.

'Twere to be wished True, that all who enjoy this Protection, had returned
suitably their Thankful ADDRESSES: However it be, We humbly hope, that Your
MAJESTY, like God, (whom in Governing-power, You Represent upon Earth; and in
Pardoning-mercy, You do imitate,) will be kind to the unthankful, and according
to Your accustomed Goodness, will spare the Place for the smaller visible
number of good Men therein.

So great Grace certainly heals their Infidelity and Revolt, especially, when
they are thus invited to believe, and adhere to a Prince, of whom we have had
the Experience, that He will no sooner recede from His Promise, than He would
fly from an Enemy in the Field.

As for what concerns Us of this Royal Foundation, with all Humility, I
undertake for my self, and several of my Brethren, that We will continue to
advance amongst Your Subjects the strict Principles of a mannerly, peaceful,
and active Loyalty, making earnest Prayers to Almighty God, that He would in
this World grant Your MAJESTY length of Days, and hereafter Eternal Life and
Glory.

LONDON, Printed for M. T. 1687.


