THE Argument AGAINST A Standing Army. RECTIFIED.

THE ARGUMENT AGAINST A Standing Army Rectified, AND THE Reflections and
Remarks upon it IN Several Pamphlets, Considered. In a Letter to a Friend. The
Lords and Commons Assembled at Westminster, January, 22. 1688. in order to such
an Establishment, as that our Religion, Laws and Liberties might not again be
in Danger of being subverted, declared, That the Raising or Keeping a Standing
Army within the Kingdom in time of Peace, unless it be by Consent of
Parliament, is against Law.

Pro Rege, and Patria. LONDON: Printed in the Year 1697.

THE ARGUMENT AGAINST A Standing Army, etc.
SIR,
IN Answer to your Desire, to send you my own Thoughts, and those of our
Friends here concerning the Arguments Pro and Con about a Standing Army, I have
sent you them as follows, but must tell you that we are not Opinionative, and
shall be glad, as al good Subjects ought to be, to acquiesce in whatever the
Wisdom of the Nation, now Assembled in Parliament, shall think fit to determine
in these Matters.

The Author of the Argument has in my Opinion discovered a great deal of
Reason and Wit, and no less Affection to his Prince and Country, however he may
be traduced by some who are very much inferior to him in alll those good
Qualifications.

Yet I must beg his Leave to think that his Commendable Zeal for the Welfare
and Security of his Country, has carried him a little too far. So that instead
of saying positively that a Standing Army is inconsistent with a Free
Government, and absolutely destructive to the English Monarchy, he ought to
have qualified it thus, That a Standing Army in time of Peace, unless it be by
Consent of Parliament, is Inconsistent with a Free Government, and absolutely
destructive to the English Monarchy, or which is all one, against Law; and for
this We have the Authority of the Convention signed with that of Their
Majesty's King WILLIAM and Queen MARY, who accepted of the Crown upon Agreeing
to this and other things relating to the Liberty of the Subject, as is to be
seen in the Claim of Right.

But in the Threshold, I finding my self obliged to do the Author so much
Justice as to say, that the Writers of the Reflections and Remarks upon him
have showed a great deal more of Malice and Rashness than of Reason and
Argument, when they brand him as a Jacobite, or a Republican: In my Opinion the
Gentleman has sufficiently provided against such Imputations, by pleading all
along against those things that he thinks destructive to the English Monarchy:
but it has been the Constant Practice of a Certain Party in the Nation, to
blast all endeavors for the Liberty of their Country, with the Calumny of
setting up for a Republic, in order to make the best Patriots hateful to the
Court, and that they might either procure or be continued in places themselves,
or at least to serve a Faction that are for Arbitrary Government; which of
these, or whether all or any of them be the Motives of those Writers that have
so rudely treated the Author of the Argument, I shall not so much as presume to
Conjecture, because I am altogether unacquainted with their Persons and
Characters, as I am indeed with his.

But to come to the matter, The Case is now altered from what it was when
either of them wrote, His Majesty, who is part of the Legislative Power, having
declared His Opinion to the Parliament, that the Circumstances of Affairs
abroad are such, That for the present, England cannot be safe without a
Land-force. I his coming from the Mouth of the King, who sits at the Helm of
the Government, and of such a King as has always demonstrated a fatherly care
of his Subjects, and an inmitable Courage and Conduct in his Administration,
sets the matter in quite another Light. Then seeing His Majesty is undoubtedly
able to satisfy the Nation as to the Truth of his Assertion, The Question is
about the necessity of a standing Army, how numerous that Army must be, of what
Troops Composed, for how long they must be kept up, and what are the most
proper methods to prevent the dangers which the Argument insists upon, to be
the Natural Consequences of a standing Army, in case of His Majesty's Death,
and a Successor, who may perhaps be Acted by other Councils, and not endowed
with the Royal Qualifications that all Men allow His Majesty to be blessed
With. Now that this is necessary to be considered will be denied by no Man that
wishes well to our Religion and Liberties, seeing it must be granted, that His
Majesty is liable to a Violent or Natural Death as well as other Men, and more
Obnoxious to the former, because of the Malicious Plots of his execrable
Enemies.

What methods are most proper to reach those desirable Ends, must be left to
the Wisdom of the King and Parliament to determine, but that there is a danger
in keeping a standing Army, as well as in being without one, is so obvious that
it cannot well be denied, and therefore there is a necessity of making
provision in both respects, which no doubt may be effected without such Heat
and Clamor, as the Pamphletears against the Arguments are full of, The Letter
for Ballancing excepted, which is indeed modest and to the point.

That we are in danger without a Standing Army is reasonably enough insisted on
from the Power of the French King; his Levity in observing former Treaties,
which the Answers to the Argument make a mighty noise about, and to this may be
added, that the Principles of that Religion, whereof the French King is the
professed Champion, allows the Breach of the most Solemn Ties, and the
Perpetration of the most horrid Crimes to advance the Roman Church. So that all
those things considered, there is an absolute Necessity that we should be on
our Guard: and as Matters are at present, how we can any way be reputed to be
so without a Standing Force, is to me unconceivable.

I know that to alleviate those just Causes of Apprehension it is argued that
he is now grown ancient; that his Country is exhausted of Men, as are his
Treasuries of Money, that his gaining so little by breach of former Treaties,
has convinced him that 'twill be his Interest to observe this, and that in
short his Country stands in need of a time of breathing, so that there is
nothing now to be feared from that Head.

To this it may be replied, that Marius Caius, the Roman Consul, recovered
himself, though an Exile, sentenced to Death, and abandoned by all Men, when
well stricken in Years, and avenged himself sufficiently on those that had
reduced him to those Straits; that though France be exhausted of Men, yet the
last Campaigne is enough to demonstrate that he is still able to match the
Allies for Numbers; and though it must be granted that his Treasures are pretty
well emptied, yet if it be well considered what an Ingenious Author of that
Country did lately write in the Ruin and Desolation of France, demonstrated his
Clergy, who possess one half of all the Estates Real and Personal in that
Kingdom, are still in a manner untouched, though possessed of Immense Riches;
so that if he should take the same Measures with his Popish Clergy, as Gustavus
Erickson, King of Sweden, did with his, or as our Henry VIII. did with ours;
that is to say, turn them out of their Monasteries, Abbeys and Riches, which is
easy for him to do with his Standing Army, who by the sacking of Churches and
Religious Houses in Germany and Flanders, have given proof enough to the World
that they have no Scruple of Conscience to be so employed: I say, If he should
take this Course, he would quickly abound with Men and Money, and as easily
overflow his Neighboring Countries, if they had no Standing Armies to resist
him, as the Sea driven by a strong Wind, would overflow West-Friezland and
Holland, if they should demolish their Banks and Dikes.

Then, as to the Desolation of his Country, it is rather an Argument that he is
to be dreaded than despised, considering what vast Numbers of Disciplined
Troops he has on foot; who to be sure, if they had their choice, had rather be
plundering their rich Neighbors, live in Plenty, and enjoy all the Liberty
that is commonly allowed Soldiers in an Enemy's Country, than be exposed at home
to mannure Desolate Lands, and cultivate Ruined Vineyards, without the Prospect
of any higher Reward than Wooden-Shooes or Canvas-Shirts, and at the same time
to be liable to all manner of Exorbitant Taxes. And as a Military Life, must
needs be more Eligible to them after so many Years being accustomed to it,
there is no doubt but it would likewise be more agreeable to his Aspiring
Genius, if he did not find himself in danger of being overmatch'd; and if we
consult the Histories of the Goths, Vandals, Alans, Huns, etc. who like an
Inundation, did overspread Europe successively, we shall find that their want
of a comfortable Subsistence at home was one of the main Causes of those
Eruptions they made upon their Neighbors abroad, and there is no Body
acquainted with the present Condition of France, but knows that the Soldiers
lived much better in the Armies than the Peasants and ordinary Tradesmen did at
home, and that was one great Reason why his Armies were always so Numerous.

As to his being convinced by his gaining so little by the Breach of other
Treaties, that 'twill be his Interest to observe this, I shall be very willing
to allow that he is possessed with so Generous and Magnanimous a Soul, that he
abhors to do any thing that is base; but seeing he is so unhappy as to be of a
Church which pretends to hallow the ungodliest Means, so they be but effectual
to attain their end, they transform Vice in Virtue, and make him to think it
his greatest Glory to perpetrate such things; which without that Biass he would
think highly dishonorable. Then as to his Gains by former Breaches, tho it is
true he has had a secret Vomit, which has made him to disgorge many Towns and
Countries, yet he is still a great Gainer by the Bargain, and retains
considerable Conquests both from Spain and the Empire.

It is also further to be observed, that tho the French King cannot so easily
invade us as he can do his Neighbors on the Continent, yet by this Peace he
has in some measure dissolved the League, that 'twill not be easy to assemble
again so many Troops belonging to so many different Princes to oppose him, and
he has moreover thrown in a Bone of Contention betwixt the Protestant Princes
of the Empire, and the Emperor who has consented to the Robbing of the
Protestants of so many of their Churches, which no doubt will highten those
mis-understandings, that have been observable enough betwixt the Protestants
and Papists in Germany during the War, and whilst they are divided amongst
themselves upon a Religious Account, there is little appearance that either
Branch of the House of Austria will give any assistance to us, and for the
Protestants of Germany, they are likely to have work enough to defend
themselves, if any Rupture happen on the Account of Religion, so that we seem
to be under an absolute necessity of putting our selves in such a Condition, as
we may be able to stand on our own bottom.

There Is another thing still, which is of very great Consequence, tho some
perhaps may think it remote, and that is the fair Prospect which the House of
Bourbon has, of having the Crown of Spain United to that of Etance -- Their
hopes in this matter seem not ill founded nor remote, considering that weak
State of the King of Spains Health, their being no likelihood of his having any
Issue, the strong Faction which the French King has in Spain, the weakness of
that Kingdom to resist him in case of an Invasion, and then being cut off from
all Prospect of help (if they make any Efforts to preserve their Liberties) but
what they may probably have from us. This Consideration alone shows the
necessity of our having a Land-Force in readiness, either to defend. Flanders,
our Natural Barrier from being swallowed up by the French King, who will then
have a better Title to it than ever, or to be Transported to the assistance of
the Spaniards in their own Country; for if the Crown of France become once
possessed of Spain in Flanders, we are, humanely speaking, blockt up on all
sides, our Trade must every where be at their Mercy, and we are liable to their
Invasions, without any Prospect of relief; for as I have observed already, they
have Created a diversion for the German Protestants, the United Provinces are
in the very Mouth of the Lion, and the French will take care to dash the
Northern Crowns one against another. All these things being considered, do in
my Opinion demonstrates an unavoidable danger from the Circumstances of Affairs
abroad, if we be left without a Land Force at home, and therefore tho the Court
insist upon it, there is no Reason to suspect that they have any Design upon the
Liberties of their own Subjects, when there is so much cause to provide against
Foreign Enemies.

But now on the other Hand, that there is danger from a standing Army at home,
is equally demonstrable; as will appear from the following Reasons.

1. The Country has always looked upon them as a Grievance in time of Peace,
could never digest their Rude behavior and slow pay, and were much disgusted
by their ill Morals.

2. The renewed attempts of the Court in the Late Reigns, to enslave the
Country by standing Armies, has made their aversion to them Natural and in a
manner Hereditary, so that the Jealousy on that Head is almost incurable.

3. So long as there is a Party in the Kingdom that is not sufficiently purged
of the old Leaven of Passive Obedience, and the Army not reformed in Morals;
the present Government, which is founded upon Principles diametrically opposite
to the former, and has always, declared it self against Debauchery, can never
be safe, if ever the late King or his pretended Son should land with a French
Power, except the Army be othtrwise modeled than at present; for if the
debauched Soldiers be once possessed by these Passive Obedience-Men, and the
Jacobite Gentry in the Country, who have always declared a greater good Liking
to Popery than to Dissenters; that the present Government is not thoroughly well
affected to the Church, which is the common Topic of the disaffected Party,
because of the King's being bred in Holland, his granting Liberty of Conscience
in England, and establishing Presbytry in Scotland; I say, that if once the
Army be poisoned with those Suggestions, that to gether with the continual
Exclamations of the Jacobite Party against the Dutch, may very much endanger
the present government, by the revolt of such a Standing Army, in case of any
such Invasion as above mentioned.

So long as a standing Army continues on the present footing, not only the
Dissenters, but all the moderate Church of England men, and those called Whiggs
in general, will continue uneasy and be afraid of Invasions, in case of his
Majesty's Death, upon their Liberty and Property, as it happened in the late
Reign, so that there is cause to fear that the Jealousies of the two Parties
may throw the Nation into new Convulsions, and the Army, as in all probability
it will, joining with the Court, Liberty and Property will be again in danger
of being swallowed up, the Nation engaged in a Civil War, and exposed to a
Foreign Conquest after the two Parties have weakened themselves by mutual
Slaughter and Bloodshed.

The Case then being thus, and the dangers Great and Eminent in both respects,
it follows of course, that the nearest ought to be provided against first, and
that is to be done by a Land Force, till such time as the K. and Parliament are
satisfied that the danger from abroad is over.

But then, considering on the other hand that we have no Lease of the Kings
Life, provision ought to be made against the other as speedily as may be; but
the methods of doing this must be chosen and determined by the King and
Parliament.

The Argument proposes as a defense against Foreign Invasion, the Regulating
the Militia, so as to make them serviceable: The training up of all the
Subjects in the use of Arms, and keeping a good Fleet, so disposed in
Convenient Ports as to prevent an Invasion.

This in my opinion is highly reasonable, and were it brought to pass, would
prove a very effectual Remedy both against Invaders from abroad and Tyrants at
home; but the mischief on it is, that it is neither done nor like to be done
time enough to answer the Ends; and seeing it is so, no reasonable Man can
think that the Nation should be laid naked without a defense in the mean time;
and this I confess is the main thing wherein I dissent from that Ingenious
Paper: I am far from the opinion of his Adversaries, who reproach him as a
Republican, Apostate Whigg, Jacobite, sour Tempered, Whimsical and Melancholy
Fellow, nor do I think they discover much Judgment in ridiculing his proposal
as to the Militia and Navy. It is ceretain that formerly this Nation did as
Remarkable Exploits against the French and Scotch when they had no standing
Army, as ever they have done since, and that the Battles betwixt the two Houses
of Lancaster and York, and betwixt the Barons and the King were fought with as
much bravery and order, though the Armies consisted only of the Country Men and
Retainers of either Party, as ever have been done since standing Armies came in
fashion. Nor can there be any reason assigned why the Militia should not equal
the Regular Forces, as they are now called, either for Valor or Discipline,
provided they were equally Trained as all the people of the Nation were in
those times; but the true reason why the Militia come so far short of the
Regular Troops now is that the Court having in the late Reigns framed to
themselves a distinct Interest from the Country, they durst not entrust them
with Arms, nor encourage their being trained up in the use of them; but blessed
be God the case is otherwise now, his Majesty is sensible, and has from time
to time expressed his sense of the Affections of his people, and declared That
he neither has nor can have any Interest distinct from theirs. It was their
affecton settled him on the Throne, and has ever since kept him in it, so that
the better his Subjects are trained up in martial Discipline, the more firmly
is his Crown fixed.

It is equally certain that there are fewer Mercenary Soldiers and Officers in
the Militia; as Originally constituted, and more of the Freeholders and
Substantial Men of the Nation, than in a standing Army, and no man can doubt
but the Master of a Family, his Son or trusty Servant, will fight with another
sort of Zeal for their own Property and Possessions, than a Mercenary Soldier,
who, as the Argument says too true, makes a Profession to be a Butcher of Men
for 6 d. per. day without considering what Cause he engages in, and that there
are too many such in our Army, cannot be denied by any Person that has not
bankrupt all his modesty; and as for those silly instances which his
Advarsaries insist upon of the Militia's not having acted their parts, the
reason is plain they were not Disciplined, which was the fault of the
Government and not of the people; it is moreover a very false way of
Argumentation to conclude, because the Militia as neglected in the late Reigns,
were not to be compared to the Regular Troop can never be brought to be as
useful in the defense other Country as a standing Army in other Reigns, but
the truth of the matter is, those Authors are not willing to have it put to the
Experiment.

The Argument owns that the Militia is not so proper for Conpuests indeed as
for Defense, and for Conquests we have no occasion to make any, nor were we
ever very happy in preserving them. Yet if all the Males of the Nation were
brought up to the use of Arms on Holy Days, etc. which were a more commendable
way of spending their time than has of late been practiced. We should not need
to fear our King's wanting disciplined Men to go abroad with him on occasion,
without putting the 10000 l. Men as one of the Pamphlets calls them to the
trouble of doing so; nor is it very decent in any person to cast such an
unbecomeing reflection upon that Royal Regiment of Citizens, whom his Majesty
honored to be their Colonel himself, but persons of those Authors kidney had
rather belike see Arms in the hands of a Dammee, than in the hands of a Sober
Citizen: Vice is always afraid of Virtue, but specially when in a Capacity to
suppress it. Some of the Gang remember the blows still they received from the
hands of the Citizens, in the late Parliament Wars, and don't care to
rencounter with such Adversaries any more, they had rather contribute to
debauch them in Taverns and Play Houses, as being indeed the readier way to
have their Wives and Daughters, nay and their Purses too at their Devotion.

The Argument does also propose a mixing of the Standing Army, or part of 'em
at least with the Militia, in order to train them, and to provide for
themselves, which his Adversaries do mightily ridicule and allege that all the
dangers he fancies from a Standing Army would continue in that case, but I must
beg leave to dissent from those Gentlemen, they know well enough that the
frequent exchange of Garrisons on the Frontiers of Kingdoms is practiced as an
effectual means to prevent traitorous Corrispondences in those Garrisons, and
that the mixing of numerous Deserters among other Troops, is looked on as a good
way to prevent any ill designs they may have in deserting; then why should not
the mixing of the Regular Troops amongst the whole Militia of the Kingdom,
where the Soldiers have neither the same Officers, Comrades nor the like
opportunities to do mischief were they so inclined, as they had when in a
separate standing Army: And moreover the Officers of the Militia are or ought
all to be Men of Estate or Note, and of good Report and Credit where they live,
and the Militia Men themselves not making War their Trade, but being only
called out upon an Exigent for the Defense of their Country, they can never be
supposed to be so rude and destructive to the places where they are quartered,
as the Soldiers of a Standing Army generally are, many of whose Officers,
especially since buying and selling of Commissions came in fashion, are known
to be Men of no Estate nor Reputation, but preferred either for their Money or
because perhaps they have been Valet de Chambres, or otherwise ferviceable to a
Superior Officer, and so have neither Honor nor Probity to restrain them from
ill practices themselves, or to oblige them to punish them in others, as
Gentlemen of Note in their respective Counties have or ought to have, or
otherwise are not fit to be entrusted with Command.

These Gentlemen do likewise ridicule the Arguments proposal of a Good Fleet at
Sea, as not sufficient to prevent an Invasion, because his present Majesty made
his Descent notwithstanding K. James's Fleet; and that the French landed Men in
Ireland, and have gone out and into their own Ports, when our Squadrons have
been lying before them, and chiefly because they suppose that the same Wind
which brings the French from their Coasts, may keep our fleet Wind-bound upon
our own.

In this part as in all the rest, they deal very unfairly with our Ingenious
Author, he does not propose the relying upon a Fleet only, but would have the
whole Nation trained in the Exercise of Arms, to oppose any Invader: Nor do
they at all take notice of his Project, of having ur Fleet so disposed into
Squadrons, as at the Lands End, Plymouth, etc. That it would be impracticable
for the French to Invade us, let the Wind lie how it will, without exposing
their Transport Ships at least to one or other of those Squadrons. As to their
Instances of the King's making his Descent notwithstanding King James's Fleet,
it is nothing to the purpose, had the said Fleet been so disposed as our Author
proposes the Dutch Fleet could not so easily have escaped them; but we are
moreover to believe that the Prince of Orange had his Friends in the Fleet as
well as in the Army, which does perfectly alter the Case.

Then as to the French having landed Men in Ireland, and gone out and into
their own Ports, notwithstanding our Squadrons lying before them, the Authors
know that in most or all of those Cases, there have been shrewd suspicions of
Treachery, or a real or pretended want of Orders, Provisions, or somewhat: Nay,
as I remember, the escape of the Thoulon Fleet through the Straits once, and
their getting into Breast at another time, have been questioned in Parliament,
and there past a Vote in the House, that there was a notorious Treachery in
some of our Miscarriages of that nature, so that the Answerers of the Argument
can conclude nothing from this, for that Author always supposes our Fleet to be
honest; and the King's Ships to be Commanded either by Gentlemen of known
Integrity, or such true Tarrs as the Captain called Honor and Glory, and not
by Lap dogs as one of our Lampoons represented them after Torrington's Defeat,
who have spent more of their time in the School of Venus, than in that of Mars.
Then as to the equal danger that those Authors suggest from a standing Fleet as
from a standing Army, it is very easy to show them their mistake. In the first
place, they can give us no instance of it, that ever our Fleet pillaged or
plundered their own Country, whatever some few Ships may have done either under
Charles II. when Prince of Wales, or at other times, whereas it is very well
known that the Army under Charles the I, treated the Subjects in as barbarous a
manner as a foreign Enemy would almost have done -- and the Country does still
remember what horrid disorders were committed by those of Charles and James II.
In the next place, it is plain that if the Fleet should revolt against the
nation, they forfeit all those pledges they have on shore which are much more
considerable in proportion than the those of the Land Army, for though we
should grant that many of the Land Officers have Estates and Families, yet few
of the Soldiers have, whereas the far greater part of the Marine Officers have
Estates and Families and but few of the Seamen are without the latter; and to
give them their due, they seem to have a better sense of the true Interest of
the Nation than the Land Soldiers generally have, and hence it came to pass
that the Wappeners were so much exposed to Reflections in the late Reign, and
that they have appeared so Zealous for this, and from the same Cause it must
needs proceed, that not one Ship of the Navy Revolted from the present
Government though Dumbarton's and other Regiments of the standing Army did. But
to give those Gentlemen all the scope they can desire, we will suppose what no
man in his right Wits will ever suppose to be practicable, that the whole Navy
should Revolt, and bring in a French Army upon us; that could not hinder the
Nation from calling in the assistance of the Dutch, Danish, and Swedish Men of
War to oppose them, which their own Interest would soon prompt them to do, nor
yet prevent the people's Arming like one Man to make head against the Foreign
Invader, whereas if a standing Army should by the Authority of any succeeding
Prince join with him to swallow up the Liberties of the people, they can effect
it speedily, as being in the midst of us, where they have opportunity to cut
off the whole Parliament at a blow, as Christiern of Denmark did that of
Sweden, or to Lop of the opposite Nobility and Gentry by degrees, and so the
people having none to Conduct them must submit like Sheep without a Shepherd,
and I wonder at those Gentlemen who think this impracticable, when Charles I.
came into the Parliament House with an Armed Force and demanded the five
Members, and Oliver by Military Force modelled the House as he himself pleased,
so that in either of those Cases the King and the Usurper had not God
restrained them, might have done the same thing as Christiern of Denmark did --

There Is another pleasant Fancy which one of those Authors has broached, viz.
That there is no slavery to be feared but in Conjunction with Popery, when the
whole Nation remembers to this day how near we were enslaved by Charles II. and
many of them do still remember that had it not been for the Scotch, Charles I.
had swallowed up their Libertys after the defeat of the Parliaments Forces in
the West, if not before ever the Parliament struck one stroke; and yet Father
and Son and Oliver the Usurper too, were all three Protestants. And for those
Gentlemen's further Conviction, let them look abroad into Denmark and Sweden,
and tell us whether those Nations did not lose their Liberty under Protestant
Princes.

I shall agree with those Authors, that his present Majesty is incapable of any
such thing, that the whole Tenor of his Life, both before and since his coming
to the Crown, secures us against any such fears from himself; it is evident to
the world that instead of his seeking after a Crown, there were three Crowns
that sought after him, else we had never been troubled with such long and
learned debates, whither there was an Abdication and Vacaney of the Throne or
not. I shall moreover be as willing as any of them to suppose that none of
those named in the Succession as now limited will attempt any such thing: But
we must grant what Solomon says to be true, That none knowns who shall succeed
him, whether a Wise Man or a Fool. We cannot always promise our selves a Queen
Elizabeth, or such an one as our late Queen Mary, nor yet, that every young
Prince will prove an Edward VI. or that every Foreign Prince that may happen to
be matched with our Heiresses, shall have so near a Relation to the Crown as
the Prince of Orange, or have so much Zeal, Courage and Power as he to rescue
us out of the Jaws of Oppressors; and therefore seeing it is the practice of
all Wise Men to provide in a Calm against a Storm; I see no reason why the
Author of the Argument should be treated as one disaffected to his Majesty's
Person or Government. Charity, which is almost lost in this Age, would rather
think that he has the highest Opinion of his Majesty that can be, when he takes
it for granted that he will agree to such Methods in his own Reign, as will
secure us from Tyranny in those of others, which any Man with half an Eye may
see to be unavoidable, if the Maxim of the Reflections be true, viz. No Army,
no King, when all the World knows there have been and may be, great Kings
without standing Armies.

I have exceeded the bounds that I intended at first, and shall now hasten to a
Conclusion. It has been said already that it would seem now no more to be the
debate, a standing Army or no standing Army, but how great an Army, of what
Troops Composed, how long they must continue, and what Methods are proper to
prevent those ill Consequences that the Argument suggests. It Is certain the
Parliament is the fittest Judges of all those things, yet seeing every one of
the Answerers has proposed his own Methods, its hoped they will not be angry if
I tell them what I have heard proposed by others,

It has been a long time the opinion of some Men, that had his Majesty been
advised to have kept that Volunteer Army on foot, which rose for him on their
own account, we had prevented the Rebellion in Ireland and Sctoland, and
brought France to reason much sooner; but some Men out of a pretended Zeal to
the Church, prevailed to have the contrary method taken, to the no small danger
of the State. But if reason may take place, now that the Church is secured as
much as Law can secure her, and that she has a Test to assure her Discipline,
or rather Government.

I say seeing she has a Test to secure her Government, its but reasonable the
people should have a Test too, to preserve their Property: And their's a Friend
of mine says that were he to have a Test of his making, it should be some such
one as this, viz. That, whereas all men in the late Reigns, that came into
places of Power and Trust, were obliged to abhore that Traterous position of
taking up Arms by the Kings Authority against his Person, and that they
declared there was no obligation upon themselves or any others by that
Treasoinable Oath, called the League and Covenant. So now none should be
admitted into any place of Power and Trust, without declaring their abhorrence
of the Tyranny of the late Reigns, complained of in the Claim of Right, and
that they account themselves and others under no obligation to believe the
Tyrannical Doctrine of Passive Obedience and Non-resistance, as explained and
understood in the late Reign: But I know my Friend is hot Headed, and that this
Pill is not well enough gilded to go down: Yet there are others who are more
moderate, that are of opinion, if the Government think fit to allow of a
standing Army, the Country would be the more satisfied if all or most of the
Officers be Men of Estates and Interest in the Nation, and known to be such as
think they may go to Heaven without believing the Doctrine of Passive
Obedience, in the sense above mentioned; and that the said Army be composed as
much as may be of those that have been raised, or are now well mixed by such
Gentlemen as always opposed the Tyranny of the late Reigns, and that at the
same time the Militia and Fleet be also put into such hands, and the former
disciplined with as much speed as may be, now that we have plenty of
experienced Officers and Soldiers to do it.

My Friends are also of opinion, that it is our Interest to Cultivate a Good
Correspondence with Scotland, in order to which an Union of the Nations would
be much more effectual than the Union of the Crowns; for that leaves room for
Princes of Arbitrary Tempers to dash us one against another, and to make us the
Instruments of their Tyranny by turns. Thus King Charles the I. threatened to
Invade Scotland, and actually did it with an Army from England; and King
Charles the II. procured an Act of Parliament in Scotland for 20000 Horse and
Foot, with so many days Provisions, to march to any part of his Dominions that
he pleased, which considering the party in this Nation that would have joined
them, might have been fatal to all the three Kingdoms, had not that Prince been
more given to his pleasures than to his Sword. Such an Union, as no doubt it
might be effected, to the Honor and Advantage of both Nations, would also
secure this Nation very much in case of any future War with France, or others;
whereas if the Scotch be alays treated with Contempt, or governed by the
Councils of a Party, this Nation that hates them, on the account of their Civil
and Religious Principles, it may have ill Consequences at sometime or other.
The Royal Line which Cements them at present, is not very numerous in
Offspring, and that failing, they have Princes of their own Blood at home, who
if they strengthen themselves by powerful foreign Alliances may prove
troublesome Neighbors, when we are engaged in a foreign War, especially
considering the great plantation of their Countrymen of the same Principles
with themselves in Ireland.

Which Kingdom my Friends are also of opinion ought to be treated so as they
may look upon themselves as fellow Subjects, and that some stronger efforts
should be made, and more Christian methods taken to Civilize and Convert the
Popish Natives than have hitherto been practiced, and then we shall be in no
danger of having our Brethrens Throats cut by them in their Country, nor of
being Invaded by them in our own, as in the time of Charles I. and James II. If
Scotland and Ireland were both united to this Kingdom, upon terms Honorable
and Advantageous to us and them, we might sit as Queen in the Seas, retain our
Sovereignty undisputed, keep the Balance of Europe, nay, of the Universe in
our hands, be secure against Tyranny at home, and Invasion from abroad, and
England would be the unenvi'd Head of the Union. I have also heard some
Gentlemen give their opinion that 'twere the Interest of this Nation, to have
methods laid down for entertaining a perpetual Amity with Holland, lest future
Princes may dash us against one another as formerly, to the endangering of the
Protestant Religion, and the Civil Liberties of Europe. The only thing that we
can have any occasion to quarrel about, is our rivalling one another in point
of Trade, and as Providence did formerly put an opportunity into the hands of
this Nation, of taking away the Hereditary Enmity that had been for some
Centuries betwixt us and Scotland, by uniting the Crowns, kind Heaven has now
also put an opportunity into our hands of fixing a perpetual Friendship with
Holland, our King and their Stadholder being one and the same person, and
equally the darling of both People; so that there is no reason to doubt, but in
such an auspicious Conjuncture, matters may be so concerted by the Government
of both Nations, as to prevent any such competition in time to come, as may
occasion a Rupture. There Is certainly room enough in the World for both of us
to Trade, and if we entertain a good Correspondence, we may in a manner divide
the Trade of the Universe betwixt us; but if by the implacable malice of a
certain Faction in this Kingdom against that Industrious and brave People,
because of their Government being founded upon Principles contrary to Passive
Obedience, we be kept off from settling a parpetual Friendship with them, it
will certainly argue our infatuation, for there is no Allies we can have that
are in any capacity to assist us against France, in case that already
overgrown Monarchy should be yet further aggrandiz'd by addition of the
Dominions of Spain, of which as I have said already, they have so fair and near
a Prospect.

These are the hasty thoughts, Sir, of our Friends here in Town, as to the
Arguments pro and con about a standing Army, which are all at present the
Common Subject of Conversation. I am

Sir, Your humble Servant.

FINIS.

