Secrets Disclosed, OF CONSUMPTIONS Showing, How to distinguish between Scurvy
and Venereal Disease ALSO How to prevent and Cure the Fistula by Chemical
Drops, without Cutting; Also Piles, Haemorrhoids, and other DISEASES.

By JOHN ARCHER, Author of the Book called, Every Man his own Doctor; to be
Sold by the Booksellers, and also to be had from the Authors House at
Knightsbridge, or at the Sadlers against the Mews by Charingcross.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1684.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Kind Reader,
I Having about fourteen years since writ a small Treatise, Entitled, Every
Man his own Doctor, with an Herbal, showing every ones Constitution, the nature
of all food, and to whom agreeable, and of the most common Diseases how to
Cure. Which little Book was so accepted and well esteemed, that few Booksellers
Shops are now without it; and no Foreign place, where English inhabit, but it
is in use, and Considering that Consnmptions have been of late years so mortal,
that they too much furnish the Bills of Mortality; and the very name of a
Consumption is grown so formidable, that few hope for Cure, if once sure they
are in it; the cause being evident, the neglect of means proper in the
beginning, and not divulging to a skillful Physician the original Cause, so the
Physic and means is used in a blindfold way; it is possible a private
Distemper undiscovered, may make a good Doctor give bad Physic: Very often
discontent of Mind is the cause that Bodily helps avail nothing; it being
easier to Cure the Body than Mind: Sometimes a person is afflicted with a
Venereal Distemper, that for want of a skillful Doctor, takes Physic from the
ignorant, who poisons the Body with Mercury; thence I frequently find bad and
dangerous symptoms following, as pain in the Head, Neck, Back, Teeth, Deafness
Dimness of Sight, Distillations, at length ^ Consumption; and without proper
Medicines Anti-venereal and Anti-mercurial, the noble parts are assaulted and
overcome, and so the do make the number of them in the Weekl^ Bills of
Mortality dead of a Consumption therefore to prevent Death before the
accomplishment of our allowed time, is chiefly designed, in this third part of
Every man his own Doctor, showing the chief cause of Consumptions arises from
Melancholy, Scurvy, or the Venereal Disease, and the original cause being
thoroughly known, the Disease is the better and speedier cured; the want of
which knowledge (I mean the procuring cause) has been the reason so many good
Physicians have had so bad success in cure of Consumptive people; therefore it
is my advice to all sick, or inclinable to a Consumption, to take timely
advice, Principiis obsta, and be careful to live in good Air, use Temperance,
and Exercise of Body, and with good advice and proper Physic, you may with
Gods blessing, be healthy and brisk in old Age; for I may aver, that most
persons living intemperately, and dying before they have lived thirty, forty,
or fifty years, might as well have lived to fourscore, a hundred, or more
years, if they had used (chiefly) Temperance and Exercise, as in my Book you
may further find directed; Verbum sapienti sat. A way then with that necessity
of dying at such a time, when a man is cut off for his wickedness, or by his
foolish intemperance; for the wise man said, Be not wicked or foolish
overmuch, why will thou die before thy time?

From my House at Knightsbridge, a little Mile from Charing Cross, Aug. 1.
1684. J. A.

CHAP. I. Of prevention, and Cure of Diseases.
IT is matter of lamentation to see the great distress poor mortals are in by
the common Enemy of Mankind, languishing sickness, with grief of Mind, wandering
from one Doctor to another, and from this Receipt to another Experiment, for
Cure of some churlish accident which unfortunate people lie under the pressure
of, till the vital and noble parts are penetrated; and chiefly by despising or
neglecting small beginnings, till the Enemy of nature gets ground, and by
wandering in errors path the cure is more difficult; to avoid which, let us
proceed methodically, to the understanding and benefit of the meanest Capacity.
First, Know that all Diseases ought to be prevented, or Cured, and that the
health of humane Bodies do mainly rest upon these two great Pillars, viz. the
Prophylactical, and Therapeutical; the Prophylactical part shows how Diseases
may be prevented, the Therapeutical shows how Diseases may be Cured, when the
Body has contracted them: the way and means to prevent Diseases, is rightly to
understand every ones Constitution and Complexion, and to keep your self in a
right temperament, and you must observe those six things, called by Physicians,
non-naturals, as Air, Diet, Exercise, Sleep, Passions of the Mind, Excretion;
all which you are taught in my Book, Every Man his own Doctor. These things
being rightly ordered to every ones Constitution, and fitted in proportion to
our Bodies, and so continued in use, as ought to be done by him that treads,
Via recta, ad vitam longam, though I commend not such rigid Staticks as to eat
and drink but just to such a weight, because nature may at some time or other
be overcharged or lessened, therefore a moderate evenness, without exact
severity, is the best Rule; for if you do not (especially if Diseased) the
Enemy of nature gets ground, and the Cure becomes more difficult, because the
blood is vitiated; so a Scorbute, a Cachexia, evil habit of the Body acquired,
which weakens the Senses, terrifies the mind, and diverse symptoms may arise, as
decay of strength, weariness, spots, pains, dimness of sight, cum multis aliis;
for the Body being diseased adds grief to the mind, the mind being distracted
increases the Disease, so both being oppressed, the Patient too often
despondeth, and before sufficient cause, instead of using good means and
advice, do wholly neglect means of recovery, till the noble parts are
infeebled, that they cannot perform their office for digestion, fermentation,
nor due Circulation of the Blood and Spirits; thus begins a Cachectical
Scorbute, Consumptive decays, many ill symptoms, Hectic Fevers, complicate
Distempers, and falling, a minori ad majus, till at length you must die; and
this is the cause of lamentation, it might have been prevented for many a year
longer, to whom Solomon says, Quare morereris ante tempus tuum? and that you
may not die too soon, I will endeavor to set down the chief sign of
Consumptions, Scurvy, Melancholy, and the French Disease, that so you may
prevent them, and knowing the signs and degrees of danger, with the more
satisfaction, Cure them.

CHAP. II.
BEfore I enter upon the Discourse of Consumptions in Cure, it is convenient to
Advertise you of some of the chiefest Causes which ordinarily lead Men and
Women into it, which firmly observed, you may with ease prevent the approaching
Enemy, we say, Venienti occurrite morbo, for it is much better to prevent than
Cure; which that you may do, take good heed to these six Harbingers or in-lets
to a Consumption; as,

First, The Scurvy.

Secondly, The Catarrh, or tickling distillation.

Thirdly, The Phthisick Cough.

Fourthly, The Hectic Fever.

Fifthly, The Venereal Disease, not well Cured, or Mercury femaining in the
Body.

Sixthly, Is Melancholy or Discontent of Mind, which breeds flatus
Hypochondriacus, or Hypochondraick Melancholy; and lest you should not rightly
distinguish the forementioned Diseases in coming on you, take care to observe
if any of these following Symptoms are upon you, viz.

First, If you have a continual burning in the palms of your hands, or soles of
your feet.

Secondly, If you are weaker than before.

Thirdly, If you have pain between the Breast and Belly.

Fourthly, If you have a continual looseness or purging.

Fifthly, If you spit corrupt matter.

Sixthly, If you have fainty Sweats.

Seventhly, If you have a short breath, ill savoured, or a Grave-like scent
from the whole Body; these or some of these Symptoms, speak it high time to
look for remedy, and according as the Symptoms are, it shows whether the
Consumption comes from the Lungs, Liver or other Cause.

CHAP. III. Of a Consumption, Atrophy, or Tabes;
WHich signifies a leanness, decay, or diminution from former strength and
vigor, whereby the vital faculties do senescere and tabescere, wither and
decay without visible means through want of nutrition.

This dreadful Disease which is the fatal consequence usually of other
Diseases, hereditary, or personally acquired; I think necessary to show some
differences of its kinds as in respect of cause it proceeds from, or the
Disease that inducted it; the definition most received is, Tabes partium
ingreditur Corporis soliditatem, and solvit, a Consumption so called, because
the Disease and Corrosive humors enter into the noble parts of the Body, and
does consume them as fire does Metals, by melting them. The Lungs being a soft
spongious part, are most easily corrupted by sharp distillations and Catarrhs,
yet in this Disease the Liver is principally hurt by a sharp humor in the mass
of blood, which humors continue such for want of fermentation, and by
additional Acrimony; from which sharpness of humors, a Catarrh or
Distillation, with a tickling defluxion, especially by Night, falling upon the
Lungs, which by Ulcerating, putrefying, and spreading, waste and consume the
Lungs, although there may be a waste and general Consumption of the Body and
strength without an Ulcer of the Lungs; yet if it once make an approach, by any
Disease, it is the most dangerous of Diseases; because it speedily attacques
the noble parts, and without good Remedies proves mortal; and now that we may
avoid the danger of a Consumption, it is best to lay open some Diseases that do
most frequently and naturally bring it upon us, that so by resisting the
beginnings, we may be free from the ill consequence and effects: Now I have in
my practice observed, that one of these three Diseases have been the cause of
Consumption in the most part of people, viz. Melancholy, Scurvy, or the French
Disease, to which may be added Mercury as an Appendix; I say one of these are
usually the Forerunner and cause of the Consumption in the greatest part of
people, whether personally acquired, or hereditary descended: And now that
every one may be his own Doctor, that is, to judge by Symptoms, whether it be a
Consumption, from what cause it came, and if Curable; I shall endeavor as
clearly as I can to solve all doubts, by showing the signs of Consumption,
Scurvy, Melancholy, and the French Disease; the want of which knowledge have
caused many to perish irrecoverably, by using a wrong method, so endeavoring
the Cure of another Disease by mistake, or keeping that private which ought to
be considered, till despairing of Cure have yielded their Weapons (the means
for recovery) and through inward discontent, shame and infirmity, have fallen
into deep Consumption, and quickly made their Exit: thus many dying before
their full accomplished time, through want of timely means, and true knowledge
of the prognostic part of Symptoms, which through fear and shame do keep to
their own heart till their Disease becomes formidable and deadly; and finding
the World defective to the sick, in Consumptions especially, in not giving them
some light and guide how to be acquainted with their condition of danger with
directions how to get out of that toil, without the usual ill success; and few
Doctors do in all points satisfy their Patients Queries: Therefore I thought it
useful, acceptable and charitable, to give some light in so dark a Distemper;
therefore I advise, first find out and be sure of the cause that first ushered
it in; for the Venereal Consumption is to be Cured one way, and the Scorbutic
another, and the Melancholy another; that which is most likely to be your bane
and death is most considerable, therefore hide nothing from your Physician of
the Disease, or Cause, lest you lead him into a wrong method; and be sure to
have regard in the Cure of a Consumption, to those six things we call not
natural, as Air, Food, Sleep, Passions of Mind, Exercise of Body, Venery,
Excretions, Retentions; all which are fully set forth in that little Book,
Every Man his own Doctor, therefore needless here to direct you in; but now I
shall give you the signs; First, of a Consumption, then of a Scurvy,
Melancholy, and the Venereal Disease, and to judge of the danger of your
Disease, or recovery, termed the prognostic part, being especially useful,
because many are affrighted almost out of life and hope of Recovery, by that
too common received opinion, that once have a Consumption, or the Pox, you can
never be well again; which saying or doubts ought to be refuted, because many
have been, and daily are recovered out of Consumptions and the Venereal
Disease, the fear and doubt of which have caused many to despair, and by
neglecting means have consumed and died. The usual question a sick person asks,
is, How long will it be before I am Cured; therefore know the more urging and
greater Symptoms are most dangerous, and require most time for Cure, and the
less the soonest and easiest cured; and for satisfying your doubts, if
afflicted, you are instructed by the signs in the several Diseases as
following; it is likely some may be your case and condition, and that you may
not be deceived, consider circumstances, and consult your Doctor; or if you
please to take my Experience, by word of mouth, at my House, I shall in
particulars advise you.

CHAP. IV. Further signs of a Consumption, and different Disease it came from,
and the part first assaulted, most worthy to be known by all.
AS I take sharp acid acrimonious humors to be the chief cause of vitiating
the blood, and corroding the Lungs, etc. and this sharp acrid humor does
sometimes arise from ill digestion of food, by a bad temperament, disordered
constitution, by irregular living, hurting nature in its actings, whereby comes
a decay of ferments nutritive, causing ruin to the Microcosm. I say though by
vicious debauched living an ill habit and Consumption may be acquired, yet a
Consumption creeps upon some with a Hectic Fever in regular living, showing a
febrile heat in the palms of the hands, and soals of the feet, especially to be
found after meat; it is called hectic or habitual, because it is radicated
more in the solid parts than other Fevers, for other Fevers come in
Paroxysms, this more continual, wasting the Body, as it were by melting it, and
this not easily remedied, if not timely considered, and the principal efficient
cause understood, for want of which many in juventute pereunt, do perish in the
prime of their youthful days, for until the Radix of the Disease be overcome
the food does no good, but it may be said, Optima fiunt pessima, and the common
cause of this Fever and Consumption to orderly virtuous people, is the
Scorbute or Scurvy, by corrupting the Blood and vitiating the humors,
therefore not to be cured but by Antiscorbutick Medicines: you may know a
Hectic Consumption by being continually Feavourish, without any Paroxysms or
remissions, only the heat something greater after meat, and the Pulse quicker
than after, about two hours returns to its constant usual heat, besides this
Hectic Consumption and Signs, you ought to be acquainted with other sure and
common Symptoms of Consumptions, for it sometimes assaults us in one kind of
Disease, or part, sometimes in another, and by overcoming one part first, the
whole Body after falls into decay. The common way of Consumptive inclination is
first insensible; but to a judicious person, it comes on slowly, lento pede,
but having got sure hold will not long be hid, but by making a change in your
Constitution, it is best to take good advice and timely, lest the Proverb be
verified, cum sero Medicina paratur, when too late the means is used. Various
ways and with diverse Symptoms the Consumption first assaults with; in some hard
to find the cause from, or what it tends to, except the Patients be so wise and
ingenious, freely and openly to declare what they know of themselves; but
generally the spiritual vivacity of the Eyes and Countenance first discovers a
defect in the vital Spirits, they finding an indisposition after sleep, an ill
digestion of food, their strength lessened, mirth declining, not so brisk and
airy as usual; Melancholy in some, with vapors to the Heart and Head, pains of
the Hypochonder, and sides, a Looseness of the solid parts, from the Bones, as
the Calves of the Legs, Thighs, Arms, etc. Some have a bleeding at the Nose,
which shows sharp hot humors to exceed the Balsamic Virtue; some falls into a
Looseness or Diarrhoea, with flux of the Belly, which may come from the
weakness of the Liver, having lost its temperament and fermental Virtue, the
Body often falls into a Scorbute, or Cachectical Hydropick, Consumptive decay,
faint Sweats, oftentimes a Catarrh or Distillation, especially by Night, with a
tickling stimulation to Cough, or a rotten corrupt spitting, or a short
Phthisicky dry Cough, or spitting of Blood; or salt Spittle, or viscous or
lumpy knots, stimulated with a sharp humor, the breath short and difficult;
Earthy smell, the Pulse either weak and dull, or frequent and unequal; the Body
in general is weak, indisposed to recreations or lively actions, and no better
can be expected, when the Blood and Spirits are vitiated, though I have set
down all these Signs, and might many more, yet some few of what I have writ,
may be too sure signs of a Consumption, and according as they are urgent, great
or small, complicate or single, they are to be weighed, and that by an able
Physician; for people in this Disease are most apt to flatter themselves more
than in any other, so that many when they are dying believe not themselves to
be in danger of Death, because insensible of their present weakness and decay.
Unless a Looseness or Flux of the Belly debilitates them.

Many are in a Consumption by a Venereal Cause for want of discovering the
Radix, the Doctor shoots beside the mark till the Disease marches on to the
noble parts, and some of those sad symptoms aforementioned come upon them, or
worse, as internal Ulcers, etc. Which I shall not here mention, referring that
to the prognostic signs of the Lues Venerea.

CHAP. V. Of the Scurvy, and manifest Symptoms.
THE Scorbute or Scurvy being a Corruption of the Blood, produces innumerable
Symptoms, as may be easily judged; from putrid blood may arise, putrefaction in
the Gums, redness in the Face, vapors from the Spleen, Flatus Hypochondriacus,
sudden Flushings, obstructions, difficult Breathing, stinking Breath, Tooth
Ach, looseness of Teeth, straitness of the Breast, the Body dull and heavy, and
many spots, red, yellow or blue, especially in Legs or Arms; violent pains in
the Head, Arms, Neck, Shoulders, Legs, Thighs, Sweats and faintness,
troublesome Dreams, a watriness in the Stomach, and wambling in the Bowels; it
often causes Barrenness, wandering pains like a Rheumatismus or Running Gout;
in some a pricking in the flesh as if stung with Nettles, Itching in the Blood,
in some like Tetters, Ring-Worms, or dry Scabs in Head or Face, some think it
the Pox, and indeed it is near akin, and where they both meet, as often I have
found in my practice, it must be more carefully Cured, that the noble parts may
be strengthened and the blood purified; for a complicated distemper requires
more skill to Cure than some ignorant young Practitioners are aware off.

The Scurvy by corrupting the Blood, usually and quickly weakens the vitals,
especially the Liver, being the Coagulum of the Body, which causes
fermentation, the want of which causes obstructions; for those Particles in
the Blood which are not by fermentation alternated, must needs obstruct,
excoriate, and purify; from whence it is easy to judge what diversity of
Symptoms and Diseases may be produced in our natural Bodies from one and the
same original cause, viz. want of fermentation in the mass of Blood, so the
Body quickly falls into an ill habit, Cachexia, or Consumption, if not timely
prevented, by good Physic, proper Food, the best Air, but especially Exercise.
For were the Virtue and Excellency of Exercise truly understood, many that are
Diseased would not, nay thousands might be happy in the enjoyment of health,
who by softness, delicacy, effeminacy and idleness, want it; so that they that
moderately use it, need but little other Physic.

CHAP. VI. Of Melancholy.
TRistitia omnia mala parit, Melancholy or Discontent of mind is a certain
Distemper which may be termed the Mother of all Miseries and Diseases, it may
arise from internal or external cause, viz. from Mind or Body; a grieved or
discontented mind may affect the Head, Heart and Blood, and thence many
Diseases, till Consumption and Death; but that you may judge whether the party
be much or little afflicted, it is necessary to set down some signs to judge
by, and to know what degree they are in.

Signs, If Melancholy be predominant, many doubts and needless fears, with
sadness and discontent, and usually very frightful Dreams, evil Cogitations,
without manifest cause, frequently speaking by themselves, confusedly sometimes
breaking out into tears; they delight in solitariness, they are mistrusting of
all to mischief them; their sleep but short and troublesome: Some again are as
if they always laughed, some seem to Prophecy and think themselves Prophets,
some desire Death, some fear it; some think themselves transformed into another
Form or Creature, etc. some think they have no Head or Arms, etc. some think
all they see, come to apprehend them and take them to Prison, but most are
terrified with thoughts of wanting necessaries for this Life, or grieve to see
others in more prosperity than themselves; some do over-busy themselves in
studying, or in praying, or in what they have been Exercised; the different
effects show the different causes, and vice versa, and must be cured
accordingly, therefore good to resist the beginnings, lest it come to the worst
of these Symptoms mentioned, and worse might be writ, as Despair or Madness;
but while Life there is hope: therefore I will conclude my advice with that old
Verse;

Rebus in adversis animum submittere noli,
Spem retine, spes una hominem nec morte relinquit.
To adverse things do not submit thy mind,
For man in Death leaves not his hope behind.
CHAP. VII. Of the Lues Venerea, or French Pox.
I Having now discoursed of the Scurvy, Melancholy, and Consumptions, come next
to the other part, viz. to show what the Pox is, and how to know it and
distinguish it from the Scurvy; also to set down the chief Signs, that every
one may be able to judge of their danger, Cure, and event of their Disease,
whether long, or short, curable or not, the want of which knowledge have caused
many sick to wander from one Doctor to another, to their great damage of Purse,
Persons, and Reputation; and though I show not the materials for Cure, I mean
the Physic, yet the sick have sufficient benefit, if they understand how to be
cured safely, which is to be understood by those Physicians which by long and
daily practice know how; for we say truly, Nullum Medicamentum est idem
omnibus, therefore it is safest to keep Knives out of Childrens hands lest they
endanger their Lives; but the knowledge of the Disease, and how to judge of
your condition, I think absolute necessary for every Patient and Physician, the
want of which knowledge in Patients oftentimes makes them doubt of the skill
and sincerity of their Doctors, and by inconstancy hinder their Cure, and often
by despair of success and grief of mind do sink under the Disease: for want of
hope and assurance the heart grows sick by discontent, gets a habit of
Melancholy joining with the distemper, so falling into a Consumption they die.
That this may be prevented, therefore use the best means as directed; now I
will tell you what the Disease is, that is called Venereal or Pox, viz. it is
an occult and venenate Disease, corrupting the radical humors of the Body,
chiefly taken by contact in those porous parts of the Body in the act of
Copulation, so passing through the seminal Vessels and Veins, the Liver
especially, also the Brain and Reins are hurt; and that you may know what
danger you are in, if you please to consult my knowledge and experience by word
of mouth, I will give you further and particular satisfaction.

CHAP. VIII. Signs of Infection by the Pox, being the surest Rules from my Book
aforementioned.
PResently after a man has lain with an infectious Woman, he shall find a
faintness or indisposition, a lassitude over the whole Body, without other
cause, which is occasioned by the infection of the natural Spirits, which are
the instruments of Life and Motion; then the next symptom commonly is pain in
the Head, with a vagrant wandering pain which goes into the Shoulders from one
to the other, also very frequently pain in the Groins, and Buboes there,
sometimes in less than a Weeks time; also heat of Urine, inflammation of the
Yard, Pustules, and with many, a Running of the Reins; with some an itching
over all the Body, and in some angry Pustules and Scabs, breaking out in Head,
Face, and other parts; with some there breaks out a great heat in the Palms of
the Hands and Soals of the Feet, also some have an interruption or sudden
starting when they begin to sleep, and great drowsiness, which is caused from
the fiery Vapors: oftentimes there happens red or yellow spots upon the Body,
and sore Pustules like the Scurvey; and though there be few of the former
Signs, yet if there be a corrupt matter, though but a weeping or gleeting from
the Privy Parts, you may be assured this is the French Disease; and I do
declare I have cured those that have had it many years, as many can testify to
their Comfort.

CHAP. IX. How to distinguish the Scurvy from the French Disease, and to know
which is your Disease.
FIrst, Know, though the Pox be chiefly taken in Copulation with an infected
Lover, yet there are many other ways that honest and innocent persons of both
Sexes are and may be infected, as sometimes by the corrupt seed of the Parents
to the Child, and so the Disease becomes hereditary, and after they are born it
shows it self, first or last upon the Child, according to the strength of the
Disease in the Parents; and although this Disease be taken by Contagion as well
as Copulation, and so others may be infected diverse ways, as by sweating with
an infected Body in Bed, being wet with sweat, and the pores of the Body being
open in the warm Bed, and sleep, he may be infected; also by the filth of
Ulcers, or Drinking with any that have it in Mouth or Throat; or kissing, a
Child sucking an unsound Nurse; or an unsound Child may infect a sound Nurse,
etc. by such means many innocent people think they have but the Scurvy when
it is the Pox: so sometimes they that are suspicious of the constancy of their
Bedfellow, may suppose they have the Pox, when happily it is but the Scorbute
or Scurvy: now to distinguish, and be certain, I believe there are some would
willingly give an hundred Guinnies, which I shall here endeavor to satisfy
gratis; then know and consider, whether your self and Bedfellow, or those with
whom you converse, whether they or you have been sometime before, or have given
cause for suspicion, or now are troubled with heat of Urine, or any Spots,
Ulcers, heat or Pustules about those passages, or gleetings, if so, conclude a
Venereal Infection, if there is any pains especially in Shins, Arms, Back, etc.
or Ring-Worms, or red spots about the region of the Liver, Stomach, Face or
Privities; or if any Skins or Feather-like Atoms swim in your Urine; and if
you find any of those Symptoms, having a precedent cause of fear, or formerly
infected, and nocturnal pains, be sure it is Venereal; but if you have no
preceding cause of Disease, you cannot have that cursed fear which generally
possesses the mind of guilty persons; if only a corruption of the Blood, the
Disease will not be so terrible in afflicting your Mind or Body, neither will
those nocturnal night pains torment you, nor any Spots, Pustules, gleetings, or
Issuings be about the Privities; if free from those Symptoms fear it not, but
if afflicted in Body and Mind, if you acquaint me with your Symptoms, it is
possible my Experience may contribute to your satisfaction.

CHAP. X. Of Fistula's.
I Having for some Years have had more Experience in the Disease of Fistula's
and Piles than most Physicians, it being desired that I should publish my
knowledge therein, I have both briefly and faithfully set down their Causes,
and how to know their difference and Cure, which has been often performed by
Chemical Drops, not Cutting. Therefore know,

A Fistula in Ano, being the worst of Fistula's, and always held to be most
difficultly cured by Surgery, according to an old Proverb, Fistula in Ano
semper insano; but to the praise of God, and comfort of several, I have by my
Drops cured diverse, and some by once dressing. Therefore first we will define
what a Fistula is, Secondly, How it is bred. For definition, Fistula est ulcus
putridum plerumque Nervosum cum variis orificiis, unde Fistula dicitur: For it
has several Orifices either Internal or External.

This Disease is bred from diverse Causes, as from Blood inflamed, or Tumors,
Boils, sometimes from Piles and Hemorrhoids, not discharging the corrupt blood
falling into those parts of the Fundament, and Ulcers of the Anus or Piles, not
well Cured, but most dangerous when a Venereal Disease lies lurking in the
Blood and Reins, which I have known too often the cause of Ulcers and Fistula's
in Ano, and therefore whoever attempts the Cure without taking away the
original Cause, is like another Ixion, condemned ever to turn the Wheel up the
Hill, which always runs back again. For by reason of Excrements always passing
that way, the blood and humors having once found a Cavous Receptacle admits
not a Remedy, but by proper and powerful Medicines, especially where the
Patient is of an ill habit of Body, irregular; and the worse if of a costive
Constitution. Of Fistula's some are easily Cured, some more difficultly; as
those that have newly had it, are easier cured than of long continuance: those
that penetrate into the Intestinum Rectum, where the Excrements are voided
through the Orifice, and liquor injected, comes through the Gut out of the
Anus; or if it pass into the Bladder, for then the Water will come through the
Fistula, therefore conclude, if the Fistula penetrates through the Intestinum
Rectum, or into the Bladder, or into both; or if it be in the Sphincter Muscle,
it is most difficultly Cured. It sometimes happens that a Tumor and
Inflammation is between the Scrotum and Anus, by bruises in hard riding, which
turn to Fistula's if not Cured. Fistula's in the solid parts of the Body may be
easier means be Cured, taking away the inward cause which feeds it; Fistula
Lacrymalis, and all Fistula's near the Eyes must be cautiously dealt with, by
reason of the vicinity to so noble a part as the Eye; in most of these Cases I
have by long Experience found the most successful means, of which some of my
Patients have acquainted his Majesty, who was pleased thereupon to Command me
to help some Noble Persons afflicted with a Fistula; which Disease if not
prevented, corrupts the blood and humors, vitiates the radical moisture,
offends the Heart and Brain, decays the Senses, weakens the memory, and by
several ways hasteneth Death, if not Cured.

CHAP. XI. Of the Piles, etc. or Verucae Any, Ragades, etc. and Haemorrhoids.
HAving now done with the Fistula, it is necessary to speak, and the rather,
because this Disease is least handled by Authors, though a most common
affliction to both Men and Women; therefore what I write must be more from my
Experience in practice than prescription: it is therefore I say an evil not to
be flighted by any, though not a-like dangerous in all; for where it is very
painful or troublesome, as is usual to Childbearing Women, it forces to look
for help; yet in others, if neglected, may turn to a Fistula, etc. therefore
better Cured being recent than inveterate; therefore take notice there are
chiefly four kinds, viz.

I. Condylomata. COndylomata being very hard and of a callous substance like
Nuts, bunching out about the Anus, but not very painful; this sort proceeds
from a Melancholy Acrimonious Juice, and generally from a costive Constitution.

II. Thymi.NExt kind to these we shall treat of, is Thymi, a sort of Pile rough
at top, narrower in the bottom, and large upwards; if you rub these with a
course linen cloth, they easily bleed, which serves for ease a little time,
but soon fill again.

III. Crista. THE third sort is called Crista, Excressences of flesh which
generally are caused from too much Venery, attracting heat to the part.

IV. Ficus. THE fourth sort is called Ficus or Fig, being a flat sort, growing
like a Mushroom, or Fig, of a narrow foundation, and a broad Superficies. Now
as to the prognostic part or danger of them, as I find by the Judgment of
Authors, and my own Experience, the Condylomata Pile is more troublesome than
dangerous, yet it is obstinate to remove, because of a hard and deep rooting.
Thymi are easier cured than the former, if they degenerate not into worse
Symptoms: Crista have a malignancy, and as Authors say, hard to Cure, yet by my
Drops I have Cured them at one application. Ficus is a dangerous Pile, or
Excressence, because sometimes they prove Cancerous; they are most dangerous if
subject to bleed, as bad as any of these Piles.

Ragades.I Have found in my practice the Disease called Ragades or Clefts of
the Fundament, especially if they have been of long continuance, being subject
to turn into Fistula's they are the worse, if they happen in old Age, in a
Melancholy Constitution, where natural heat is wanting; if Women with Child are
troubled with this infirmity, they are very subject to miscarry; and in men,
where they have been of long continuance, and nature has disburthened it self
that way, it will be difficult in curing by common Artists.

Haemorrhoids. LAstly, The Haemorrhoids being a Flux of blood by the Fundament,
occasioned by an Acrimonious humor, which generates internal Piles, called
blind Piles, which by going to Stool do send out blood sometimes with pain: if
this Disease be of long continuance, it sometimes keeps a Lunar Motion like the
Feminine Sex, and proves dangerous if neglected; it often degenerates into a
Fistula; a worse Disease cannot happen. I have been the more careful to declare
in all plainness the several sorts of Fistula's, Piles, Haemorrhoids, and other
infirmities belonging to the back parts and Fundament, which for the most part
Physicians are negligent to Cure, although they are grievous, and the most
troublesome; and I might add, the most dangerous Maladies (if neglected)
belonging to the Body of Men or Women, especially if we include the Disease
incident to the secret parts, Reins and Bladder, all which being so nigh to
each other they do often communicate the evil effects to their Neighbour-parts
if not prevented, as a Fistula in Ano in time, often by its malign Quality
perforates and eats through the Fundament, or Intestinum Rectum, Bladder or
Sphincter Muscle, then it becomes most dangerous, and chiefly by neglect, not
meeting your Malady in convenient time with good advice and powerful Medicine;
so many good people that might have lived many years are cut off by languishing
Consumptions, decays and Death. Now I say, as the Diseases of the Fundament are
often sent to the Bladder, Reins, etc. So likewise the Disease of the private
parts are more often sent to the Reins, Bladder, Fundament, yea to the Liver,
Heart and Brain, all which in time might by safe Medicines easily have been
Cured, if the Patient had been so fortunate or wise as to lay open their cause
of grief to an experienced and skilful honest Physician, and in these Maladies
I much insist upon Experience for, dies diem docet; and I cannot but
acknowledge what some years past I could not effect; I now can (Deo juvante) My
Experience and Success in these private Diseases has been eminently known
(Laus Deo) for several Years, it being about fourteen Years since I published
the Book called, Every man his own Doctor, with an Herbal, which was so
acceptable, that few Booksellers in England but sold it; that treating chiefly
of the French Disease; but my Fistula and Pile Drops, many Physicians and
Chirurgions have desired to buy from me at a good price, which I parted with
but to very few, except my own Patients. Now considering the great benefit
which many afflicted people may have by the use of them. I have now first set
down in this Treatise the several afflictions of the back parts, whereby every
one may judge of their danger, and what their Disease is, and then they may
send or come to me for those Drops and Medicines which every day I use so
successfully; for as the Disease differs, so do our Medicines; for we have a
Maxim, Nullum Medicamentum est idem omnibus. The Pile Drops are sold at five
shillings a Vial Glass, the Fistula Drops are at ten shillings a Vial, that the
World may not longer want them; and as to the other Cure of the private parts,
by any distemper by Venery, bad Cure, old or new, you may freely consult me the
Author of this Treatise, who will give you advice how you may be quickly well,
if not quite too late.

I shall now advise all persons afflicted with Fistula's, Piles, Haemorrhoids,
etc. that they forbear things hurtful, such are all salt Meats, Spice Meats,
and sharp things; as Vinegar, Lemons, French Wine, Stale Beer, crude Fruit,
etc. be careful of taking Cold, and sit not long upon the Close-stool, by which
only error many have had the Piles, sooner got than cured. The manner of using
the Pile Drops, is to warm about half a spoonful, and dip a fine Rag or Lint,
apply it to the Piles, and bind it to the part with a double Rag upon it, for
they do cure the Piles and prevent a Fistula, by making sound the part applied
to: For the Fistula we ought to put the Drops into it with Lint, or Syringe,
and bind it to with a Plate of thin Lead, till well; and if one Glass will not
do, it is an Argument you ought to use more, and some inward means, as a
Fistula Drink and gentle purging; which is prepared by the Author hereof, who
wishes all health, and has procured it, by means, (with Gods Blessing) to
many afflicted; to God alone be praise.

CHAP. XII. Of the great East India Cordial Stone, by some called Antonio.
THis Universal Cordial, brought from the Indies, being now in great use and
esteem, by all that have experimented it in health and sickness, being a
preserver of health, and a remedy in Sickness, and so generally approved, that
I wonder none has writ of its worth and use, giving some Directions for the
most profitable and proper way to take it; therefore I have designed in this
small Treatise, to Advertise the World of its most beneficial way of taking, it
being pity so admirable a Cordial should be abused. First, for its Composition
is mostly of Bezoar, Ambergreece, Pearl, Unicorns-Horn, Coral, and such other
of the greatest Cordial Preservatives, Corroboraters, and Renewers of strength
and youth, and of that lively efficacy to the Vitals, that nature is soon
sensible of its Friendliness, so long as there is any sense or life to act
upon; for it preserves nature by procuring due fermentation and concoction,
expelling (per poros) in a moist breathing sweat, the vicious humors and enemy
of nature, which hinder nature in her actings, and turns to a Scorbute in the
blood; it hinders and helps those declinings of strength and feavourish heats
in palms of the Hands, or soals of the Feet, which commonly lead people into
Consumptions, Hectic Fevers, Hypochondriack, Melancholy, Rheumatisms, and
pains that many complain of, and think or fear it may be a worse Distemper; it
is a most powerful Antidote against all infection of small Pox, Plague, and
other Malignant Fevers, and a very successful Cure in the New Fever and Ague,
whether Tertian, Quartan, or Quotidian, especially if the Stomach is a little
cleansed before by a safe Vomiting Pill for that purpose, which I have by me,
and with great success give it; which does most commonly Cure at first taking,
which saves the dangerous use of the Jesuits Powder; but that I may profitably
direct for the benefit of all the most general uses of this Stone, I will
mention some of those Diseases it is useful in, and those ways it is best to
take it, this being but a brief direction; many may know other uses and good
Remedies not here named, but to begin with some, it is I say necessary always
to carry about one, being so great an Antidote against Diseases; being made up
in Balls, from the magnitude of a large Nutmeg or Prune to the bigness of four
or six Ounces weight; they are most conveniently carried about one, being
always ready to refresh our senses and spirits, by smelling to them, and as often
as you please you may shave as much or as little as you will into a Glass of
Wine, Beer or Water, which makes it most pleasant and cordial; the Seamen that
bring it from the East Indies usually put as much Powder as will ly on a Groat
into a Bowl of Punch, which gives it an excellent scent and flavor; it is of
great use to Travelers, because it performs all can be expected from a
Cordial, ready at hand to be taken at any time without danger, being pleasant
to smell to, and not liquid, without danger of breaking Glasses as in other
Cordials, being dry; it is a pleasant Companion which I shall scarce go without.

For Consumptions, It is conveniently taken to the quantity of a scruple or
more three times a day, Mornings, Afternoons, and going to Bed, in a little
Wine, or Ale, or put into a draught of warm Milk from the Cow, with some Sugar
of Roses, and you will rest the better, with a pleasant breathing, and your
food will better concoct.

For the Ague or Fever. If you desire to sweat away an Ague or Fever with it,
put half a Dram or a Dram to an Ounce of Treacle-Water, and dispose your self
to sweat.

For the small Pox, Measles, or Plague. In these Distempers you cannot take a
better Cordial to drive it out than half a Dram of this Powder in one Ounce or
more of Treacle-Water, or good Sack, and every three hours about a scruple in a
little Sack, till safely come out, and sometimes after to uphold the Spirits.

For Pains, Gout, Stone, etc. It is good to take half a Dram Night and Morning
in a little Sack or Whitewine, and sweat upon it.

It Cures the green Sickness, and breeds a fresh Complexion in young and old;
it is very good for all weakness of the back in Men or Women, and will remedy
issuings or wastings, but for gleetings or weakness of the Spermatick Vessels,
I have another excellent Cure that strengthens the Retentive Faculty in a
little time, which I have remedied diverse by; and shall give directions to any
gratis in Venereal Distempers.

The use of this Cordial Stone, or Powder, taken in some Whitewine or Sack,
mightily resists the flatus Hypochondriacus and Melancholy; it strengthens the
Memory, and by comforting the Brain revives the Senses; it is a great helper to
fruitfulness in Men and Women, inclining all to a pleasant disposition.

If taken by those in health it prevents the Gout, Dropsy, Scurvy, all
infections, causing strength and a good Complexion.

For Children, it prevents and Cures Consumptions, Rickets, Liver grown,
Convulsions, Worms, and other infirmities, and no ways dangerous any way taken,
or in quantity also; it does wonderfully help the easy cutting of Teeth in
Children.

Now it is necessary, after acquainting you with some virtues and uses of this
great East India Cordial, that I also acquaint you with the prices, there being
now some in my hands, sent very lately from India, the smallest sort of Balls
are at ten shillings price, some at a Guinny, the largest of the bigness of a
Turkey Egg five pound a piece, they will keep many years without the least decay.

The Ague Pills causing Vomiting, two being the usual Dose, is one shilling.

The Anodine Pill which gives ease in less than an hour, at one shilling each
Pill, to be taken in Bed, and rest upon it.

CHAP. XIII. Of occult Qualities, of Antipathies, that vulgar Magic is
Witchcraft if maliciously used.
TO Answer expectation to these Heads distinctly is my design. First, For
occult Qualities, we say, it is an usual Refuge for Ignorance to take Sanctuary
in, when a reason cannot be given, as to show why such a Cause produces such
an effect; and the cause for the most part is by reason we do not labor nor
search into the nature of things, but for the most part sit down with a
contented Ignorance; if we cannot find our questions and doubts resolved in
other men's Writings, Works and Labors, then we say by occult Quality, it is
done; but truth and knowledge is dear in obtaining, and what our Predecessors
were short in, we ought to discover to our Successors; for we may better and
easier do it than they from their Writings, and our own reason with Experience.

For the general discovery of the nature of things, the Doctrine of Sympathy
and Antipathy Learnedly discoursed by Sir K. Digby, and others, does in some
things much facilitate the Work, showing how by Sympathy a Medicine may work at
distance upon a person by the Effluviums of the Air, which have been
experimented by applying to a cruental Cloth or Weapon, which made the Wound
one while Anodine and Sanative Medicine, at which time, and during that
application, they found ease and amendment; and the applying of Vinegar, or
other Corrosives to the Cloth or Weapon, should presently cause pain and
anguish, though at many Miles distance; it is related the Italians are so well
acquainted with this Magic and Philosophy, that they usually in revenge of him
that has been so unmannerly, as to ease his Body at their Doors, they
presently heat a Spit or Iron-Fork red hot, and many times thrust through the
Excrements of the absent person, knowing that the bruning Iron, acting upon the
spirits of the Body, in the new made Excrements, will corrode the Bowels, and
very often they find the sad effects of it; we all forbid our Children to piss
upon Fire, because it breeds a present inflammation in the Neck of the Bladder,
etc. on the contrary some have accidentally been cured of a Cold Flux of the
Belly, a Looseness, when their Nurses have casually cast hot ashes upon their
ordure to take it away. It is not unworthy the relating an experiment of my own
of this kind, about the year 1660. I being upon practice in Dublin, there came
to my House there, a rich Citizen in the behalf of his Wife, who had lain sick
about two Months, and had made use of most of the Eminent Doctors in Town; but
having no remedy, he desired my assistance and visit; when I saw her in great
agony by an inflammation and burning she complained of in her Belly and Womb,
which she and the Standers by said came to her in fits, holding her about two
hours at a time, Mornings and Evenings: I finding her condition very
deplorable, enquired of her Self, Husband and Friends, what might be the first
cause, which they all being ignorant of, they told me, she being thus left by
her Doctors, her Neighbors, her Mother, and all concluded she was bewitched,
for the violent Fits came so exactly in time, Mornings and Evenings; after I
had considered the Distemper and violent Paroxysms of pain, I sent for a
Surgeon to breath a Vein, and that no methodical means might be wanting, I
directed her Cordials to an Apothecary, but all signified little, she having
used good means before; about that time I read Sir K. Digby, and some other
Books of Sympathy and Antipathy, which did the more fasten it in my mind, that
some strange trick or magic art had been used upon her. Her Husband being a
Soap-Boiler by Trade, it came into my mind to ask the Maid Servant, and made
her show me where she emptied her Mistresses Pots of Water, so I went with her
where was a great heap of Ashes made in Soap-Boiling, this standing nearer to
her by much than the necessary House, she usually threw her Water upon the
Ashes to save her labor of going further; after I saw this cause of her
Mistresses Disease, I told her she was the Witch that had bewitched her
Mistress, and forbad her for the future to empty any more there, and having
found the cause, declared it to them, but advised the sick Woman for some time
after, constantly to Urine in a Basin half full of fair Water, by which only
means she was by Gods Blessing perfectly and presently Cured, to their great
Joy, and my good Reward.

Further to confirm this Philosophy of Sympathy and Antipathy, I knew a Midwife
that usually came to me for some advice for her Women, that got much money by
Curing of Agues, and yet gave them no Medicine, only required their Waters,
which she with flower made a Cake of, and gave it to a great Dog, she always
kept for that purpose, and so she transplanted the Ague and Fever out of the
Man into the Dog, who was affected with hot and cold Fits, that I have seen him
shake, and then the sick party grew well, the strength of the Dog and his
natural heat exceeding the man's, drew the morbid matter from the Man by the
magnetic quality of the diseased Urine into the Dogs Body; this is commendable
magic for the good of Man: but whoever by this Art misimploys it to hurt men,
it is Malice and Witchcraft; but I shall break off from showing too far of this
magic Art, least evil disposed persons learn to do mischief, which is too much
practiced in some Foreign parts, which has been a chief cause we heard so much
noise of Poisoning lately. This Discourse is sufficient to convince those which
believe there is no Witchcraft, or Witches; making void the Law that says,
Thou shall not suffer a Witch to live. To confirm it further, that there are
Witches, I remember a Relation I read of the Confession of Witches, such
Witches that make a compact personally with the Devil, that understand not the
Magical Art which the Devil undoubtedly teaches his Followers and Imps to
practice; for I believe the Devil can do nothing miraculously or above nature,
as the Maxim is, Diabolus non possit efficere supra naturam sed in natura, the
Devil being an old Naturalist knows many secrets in nature which to us are
unknown and occult.

CHAP. XIV. Of Tobacco its use and great strength. Of prepared Tobacco.
TObacco being a Drug now generally used, especially by Melancholians, and
Consumptive People, and many are so accustomed to it, that it is become a
second nature; therefore I think it but necessary to acquaint all for whom it
is good, and that others may forbear it, if hurtful to their Constitutions
before it be too late. I know many Authors have writ of it, have multiplied the
Virtues of Tobacco, ad infinitum, but always remember the old Proverb (what is
one man's meat is another man's poison) which is very truly verified in this
thing Tobacco; yet it certainly is a good vulnerary Herb as can be used to
Wounds in Ointment, or the Leaf it self applied, and especially good against
scab or itch in Man or Beast; but it is so forcible a worker upon the Brain, as
it may be prepared and used, though but only outwardly applied; it is of that
force in its nature, that it can kill some Beasts (as I have seen the
Experiment of twice) and for ought I know it may do it to others; but I forbear
to divulge it, lest evil disposed persons may do mischief by it. Tobacco in its
nature is hot and dry, very penetrating, digesting and cleansing, forceably
purging the upper Ventricle, viz. the Head and Brain, and this it performs by
its hot, penetrative, attractive quality; and this it does, as the custom is,
by smoking in a Pipe, to the benefit of some, and great damage of many others:
now I shall acquaint you who may profitably smoke Tobacco, and others may
forbear; I say if any persons can take it without too great disturbance to
their Constitutions (for I know many cannot) it is most proper for cold, moist,
phlegmatic Constitutions, especially if they have Catarrhs and Distillations,
because it draws forth by heat to the mouth those Rheums, and sharp
distillations which distill (especially by Night) upon the Lungs, and often
ulcerate them, and brings the Body to Consumption and Death, for that is the
worst symptom of a Catarrh when it falls upon the Lungs, which by drawing it
forth it may be prevented, especially if other good things are added to
Tobacco, it may then be a proper Vehicle to strengthen the Brain, and Cure
Catarrhs, Distillations, and prevent and Cure Consumptions; which that it may
the better do, I have composed a prepared Tobacco, which has been much
approved of, and none beside my self ever published or imparted.

CHAP. XV. Tobacco prepared for prevention and Cure of most Diseases.
ALthough common Tobacco be not good for all that take it, yet the greatest
Virtues wherewith this is impregnated, does merit the greatest rank of esteem;
in use most profitable, and by many Years experience approved; it being near
fourteen Years since I first published it, being the Inventor, and have now
much better prepared than heretofore, being most excellent in virtue to fortify
the Spirits, it resists corruption of blood and humors, preserving the noble
parts from decay; for it is the most convenient Vehicle to convey powerful
helps to the Brain and Spirits, renewing strength of nature (if not quite
consumed) because it sends out the vicious salt acrimonious humors, by spittle
and Urine, being more delightful than common Tobacco; for where it is taken it
purifies the air from infectious malignity by its fragrancy, sweetens the
breath, strengthens the Brain and Memory, Cures pain in the Head, Teeth, etc.
revives the sight and other senses in few days using to be found; in
continuance it cures Gouts, Dropsies, pains of the Limbs, Scurvy, Coughs,
Distillations, Consumptions, and preserves the Lungs by drawing forth the crude
salt humors; it strengthens the noble parts, few that use it need Issues,
because it cleanses the Body, drying up sores, it procures sleep, if taken
near Bed time, it opens the Body of most by Stool, but cleanses all by Urine;
it is found admirable in all Venereal Distempers: I have reason and experience
to commend it, by my daily success upon that Disease; for i^ revels to the
mouth those ill humou^ which cause pain and issuing; it does excuss poisonous
Fluxes, raised by Mercury, which is often of worse cons^quence than the
Disease; it is a great help in Cure of Consumptions, and likewise prevents it.
The order of taking it is like other Tobacco. I formerly sold it two shillings
the Ounce, now for public benefit the best sort is but one shilling the Ounce,
to be had from my Self, or Servants. Such as send for pounds to deliver out to
others shall be notified hereafter: this is a safe and pleasant means to cure
and prevent most Diseases arising from corruption of blood, and all vicious
cold humors; it may be had from my House at Knightsbridge, or at the Sadlers
against the Mews, next the Black-Horse by Charing Cross.

CHAP. XVI. A most profitable hot Bath by Steam, being the vapor or airy parts
of Vegetables.
SInce many great Diseases and infirmities are daily Cured by help of sweating,
I do publish this profitable invention of mine, being a most delightful hot
Bath, by steam, which far excels all the common Baths as are now used by none
as I know of yet, being most prevalent against any Disease that sweating can be
proper for; this prevents a necessity of bleeding; the Bath is to be made most
agreeable to the Disease of the person to be Bathed, whether sick or in health,
I cause them to sit in a Closet above the Bath, that nothing but the vapor or
steam can ascend, being conveyed by Pipes it penetrates more effectually than
Water Baths, or any other way because the virtue of the ingredient penetrate
into the pores of the Body powerfully by a hot steam, and refreshes the vital
parts inwardly; Bathing and Sweating especially prevails against all cold
Diseases coming from cold congealed humors, and do render the stubbornest
Diseases more curable; by this means hot and feavourish Distempers also are
breathed out, because the humors are rarefied, and the pores are opened, and
causes transpiration by Sweating; it Cures Gouts of all sorts, Lameness,
Pains, Aches; it helps ill smells, stinking Sweats, opens obstructions,
strengthens the Womb, makes fruitful, by refreshing the Brain; it clears the
sight and hearing, it prevents and Cures the Dropsy and Scurvy, it compleats
the Cure of Pox and Scurvy, and many sad symptoms and relics after Physic;
it Cures Children of Rickets, causing growth, and a smooth clear Complexion;
some Directions you ought to have before, as for preparation, the Body ought to
be soluble before Bathing, or procure a stool by a Clyster, or Milk and Sugar;
the best time to go into it is the Evening, and not to stay so long as to
faint, and take care to cool by degrees, after rest and refresh your self
before Bed time.

Note the Patient may bath as often as strength permits, or the Disease
requires.

For these or any other Directions, you may send to the Author, at his Chamber
against the Mews by Charing Cross, who is certainly there from twelve to four,
at other times at his House at Knights-bridge, being a little Mile from
Charing Cross, where is a good Air for Cure of Consumptions, Melancholy or
other Infirmities.

Thus wishes all health,

Your Friend J. A.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. OF prevention, and Cure of Diseases. Page 1 CHAP. II. The causes of
Consumptions. p. 5 CHAP. III. Of a Consumption, Atrophy, or Tabes. p. 7 CHAP.
IV. Further signs of a Consumption, and different Disease it came from, and the
part first assaulted, most worthy to be known by all. p. 14 CHAP. V. Of the
Scurvy, and manifest Symptoms. p. 20 CHAP. VI. Of Melancholy. p. 23 CHAP. VII.
Of the Lues Venerea, or Frech Pox. p. 26 CHAP. VIII. Signs of Infection by the
Pox, being the surest Rules from my Book aforementioned. p. 29 CHAP. IX. How to
distinguish the Scurvy from the French Disease, and to know which is your
Disease. p. 31 CHAP. X. Of Fistula's. p. 34 CHAP. XI. Of the Piles, etc. or
Verucae Any, Ragades, etc. and Haemorrhoids. p. 38 CHAP. XII. Of the great
East India Cordiat Stone, by some called Antonio. p. 47 CHAP. XIII. Of occult
Qualities, of Antipathies, that vulgar Magic is Witchcraft if maliciously
used. p. 55 CHAP. XIV. Of Tobacco its use and great strength. Of prepared
Tobacco. p. 62 CHAP. XV. Tobacco prepared for prevention and Cure of most
Diseases. p. 65 CHAP. XVI. A most profitable hot Bath by Steam, being the
vapor or airy parts of Vegetables. p. 68
The End of the Contents.

