THE MARQUIS of ARGYLL HIS DEFENSES AGAINST THE GRAND INDYTEMENT OF HIGH
TREASON, Exhibited against him to the PARLIAMENT IN SCOTLAND.

Anno. 1661.

ADVERTISEMENT.
REader, be pleased to know that there was some short Answers printed formerly
to this grand Indytement, as also in answer to the other printed particular
Charge at the instance of Sir James Lamond, which were only penned upno the
first view of the two-charges, and published to give a compendious clearing
till their following defenses should be made ready. You are likewise to expect
additional afterward.

THE MARQUIS OF ARGYLL His Defenses to The maine Charge of High Treason
Preface
THe defender prosesses his sense of the mercy and happiness of the land, that
we are delivered fra the lawles arbitrary power of the armed force of cruel
usurpers, and have restored to us our only lawful sovereign Lord, and in his
sacred person, the authority or law, the order of Legal judgment, and in them
the liberty of legal defenses, thereupon depend, the great security of the
liberties lives and estates of the subject, this gives the defender confidence
to appear in Judgment, nothing doubting of a fair procedure and full hearing
complete time being allowed in all the dyers of the process, and all things
therein so ordered as may be suitable to the justice and gravities of this high
and honorable court, and the importance of the cause justice, not only as to
the defender but justice as to the preparative and consequence, and he with
much confidence expects all justice from his most gracious sovereign the
justest of Princes, and who is represented and acting by so truly noble a
person as My Lord commissioners grace, also hoping the honorable court of
Parliament will without all prejudice Impartizally consider his legal and just
defenses; and that they will proceed so far without all ground of suspicion
therein, that any who is within degrees to persons against whom he is libelled
to have committed any of the deeds which are made the ground of his dittay, or
if any are conscious to themselves of capital enmity or has been any ways
informers against the defender, o^ have predetermined by uttering the judgment
already of his cause, (...) and honor will will make them abstain sitting and
voteing therein, So much the more that they see howunwilling he is to propone
any seculatory aga^^st any member of the house upon these or others grounds in
law, so confident is he of the vindication of his own carriage, So much he
deferres to the ingenuity or generosity, and so high is the honor he bears to
this honorable court.

First it is alleged That there be no process, nor is the defender holden to
answer till the whole lybell and all the parts thereof be given him up to sie
also it is the commissioners instructions and addresses sent and made to his
Majesty by the defender (as is alleged) and the commissioners at Breda are
expressly repeated as a part of the libel brevitatis causa, in the tenth
article, and yet the same we has not been produced nor given to the defender to
see and advise with, Till which be done he cannot be held in to answer like as
where points of the dittay are founded upon wreat. The defender craves that he
may have up the writes whereupon the (...) ^ounded to ^ee* before the beholds,
to answer to the (...) consonant to law* Sect. 2. (...) emma que actor edituras
est apud indicem et I, 3. (...), whereby the persever is ordained, to show to
the defender all that he will use against the defender before the Judg^ Other
wise, the defender cannot prepare himself for his defense which is the reason
given in these laws, P^ulder (...) cent. 16. and the Doctors throughout the
said law^ and l. unius Sect. 9. F. do quest. post al to l. 2 Mun. 3, 4, 5, 6,
co dedendo Bart. ad leg. ubi min. 8. F. de quest Bor so, It is the are
several Article in this ditty founded upon wreat not produced as in the first
articles the prosecution of Mr. John Steward to death, as a leasing maker
between the King and his Subjects lybeled and yet neither libel nor sentance
against Mr. John produced.

Item. Collonell Henrisons commission for keeping Dumbartax Castle is libelled,
and the commissione not produced.

Item. In the sixth Article a capitulation alleged made and subscribed be the
Lord of Ardkinglos and other officers, under the defenders command with the
Lord, of Lawmont and Escog.

Item. The assurance alleged given to the persons within the house, of
Lochhead mentioned in the seventh article, the defender craves ante omnis It
may be produced.

Item. that ordinance of Parliament or committee of estates thereby it is
libelled In the same seventh article that Caillkitoch was ordained to be
brought from the prison where he was for the time etc. to the town of Edenb.

Item. In the ninth a^ticle the defenders protestation Parliament anno. 1648.

Item. in the same article the letter written to Cromwell libelled as being
dated the 6 of October 1648. ^hereby it is lybelled that the defender and his
accomplices wrote to Cromwell, etc.

Item. In the same article Sir John Cheeslies Instructions libelled as being
dated the 17. of October 1648. desiring the persons taken in the engagement to
be detained as pledges of that Kingdoms peace.

Item. Eod. Art. the warrant alleged to be under the defenders hand for a
proclamation against the families of Ogilvi and Rari.

Item. Art. 10. The letter alleged written to Cromwell anno 1650 after his
invasion.

Item. eodem Art: the act of the west Kirk with the declaration whereunto it
relates.

Item. Act. 11. The remission alleged given to John Mc. Dogall of Dimolich.
under the defenders hand

All which the defender humbly alleges ought to be given up to see before he
be held in to answer especially post tanti temporis intervallum so long a time
having intervented between the intention of this persute, and the dates of the
said Act and papers foresaid lybelled on. Some of them being twenty years ago
some fifteen, and the latest ten or eleven years, as has always been the
practice in such cases and may be instanced in my Lord Balmerimo his process,
and was found by this honorable court in Mr. James Guthries process.

Secundo under protestation that the former exceptation may be first discust,
that the papers therein mentionate ante omnia be given up to the defender to
see, it is alleged that as it has been always the Princely care of his
Majestys, royal antesessours, to keep the Laws of this realm certain Ne dum
incerto utemur iurefluctuaret respublica, and least law which is introduced for
the leidges security should become their snare therefore be King. Iac i. that
illustrous Prince Parliament 7. cap. 107. All the interpretation of his
Majestys statutes, otherwise then the samen bears is forbidden, and if
forbidden can be no ground of dittay, and in effect to found a ditty upon
statutes otherwise then they bear were to found it upon such statutes we have
not, bot so it is in the proposition of this libel The Acts of Parliament where
upon the same is founded, are otherwise repeated than they bear for. 1. The
first part of the proposition of the Dittay founded upon the two first Acts of
Parliament lybelled, viz. the third Act of the 5. Parl. of King Iac. 1. And the
first Act of King Iac. 6. does upon the said acts, conclude the pain of
forfeiture and treason. The same is most Irrelevant because in the said Acts,
there is no mention made of any crimes of the nature or quality libelled. The
said 3. Act of the 5. Parl. Iac. 1. being annent the fees of Craftsmen, and the
price of the work. And, the 1 Act of K. Iac. 6. being anent the constitution of
the Earl of Murry Regent, and in neither of the said Acts is there any pain or
punishment inserted, and so far less can the pain of forfeiture or treason be
from the said Acts concluded against the defender; and if it should be said,
That the 5. Parl. of K. Iac. 1. is mistaken in the writing for the first Parl.
And in citing the first Act of K. Ia. 6. the citation of the number of the
Parl. is also omitted, viz. the number 18. The Dittay repeats these two acts
other ways then they bear, for the words of the said 3. Act of the 1. Parl.
being Iac. 1. statutes and ordains, That no man openly or notoriously rebel
against the Kings person, under the pain and forfeiting of life, lands and
goods, which is not at all in the Lybel repeated. And as to the said 1. Act of
the 18. Parl. being Iac. 6. The words thereof are cited, yet with some
difference and transposition lybelled, but thereto is added the sanction and
pain, That whosoever does in the contrary, they are to be punished as Traitors,
and to forfeit their life, lands and goods, whereas there is no sanction or
pain in the said Act, only it is declarative of his Majesty's prerogative, and
of his three Estates to maintain the same.

Item. In the second part of the proposition of the Dittay founded upon the 25.
Act of the 6. Parl. being Iac. 2. and the 75. Act. 9. Parl. Q. M. Is not
repeated as it bears as to punishment, for therein they who attempt to do or
raise any bands of men, of War, Horse or Foot without any special^ license of
his Majesty, and his Successors, are only declared punishable by death, whereas
they are lybelled to be punishable as Traitors, while it is the pain only of
the said 25. Act. Parl. 6. Iac. 2.

Item. In the next Parl. of the proposition of the Dittay founded upon the 43.
Act. 2 Parl. Iac. 1. and the 134. Act of the 8. Parl. and 10 Act. 10. Parl. and
the 205. Act. 14. Parl. of King Iac. 6. None of these Acts are repeated as they
bear, but confounded, both as to the crimes and pains therein contained, to a
very far different sense (as is humbly conceived) from that which the said acts
severally propose. Transferring the pains of the said several acts and crimes
therein contained from one to another, as may appear by what follows, for the
first of these Acts, being the 43. Act Parl. 2 Iac. 1. Is only of leasing
Makers and Tellers of them which may engender strife between the King and his
people, and the pain of the Act is tinsel of life and goods to the King, as is
clear both by the title and body of the act. The second act, viz. the 134 act.
8. Parl. K. Iac. 6. is also the same crime, viz. against those that utter
false, slanderous and untrue speeches, to the disdain, reproach or contempt of
his Majesty, his council or proceedings, or to the dishonor of his Majesty's
parents and progenitors: adding also those meddle in the affairs of his
Majesty, and his Estates, and the pain is the pain contained in the acts of
Parliament made against Leasing Makers and the Tellers of them. The 3. is the
10. Act. 10. Parl K. Iac. 6. Is against th^^e who speak or write any purpose of
reproach or slander against his Majesty, Person, Estates or Government, or
depraves his Laws or acts of Parliament, or misconstrues his Majesty's
proceedings whereby any mis-believing may be moved behind his Majesty and
Nobility, and his loving Subjects. And the pain thereof is only the pain of
death. And by the 205. Act 14 Parl. Iac. 6. These that hears the said words
leasings, and does not apprehend and reveal the Authors thereof, shall incur
the like punishment with the principal offenders, and yet leasing making and
telling which is the crime punishable be the first of these Acts, viz. 43. act
Parl. 2. Iac. 1. Is punishable be the loss of life and goods to the King is
omitted, and false slanders which is the crime contained in the 134 act, Parl.
8. Iac. 6. And only speaking to the dishonor of his Majesty, Parents and
Progenitors, and meddling with the affairs of his Highness Estate is repeated
out of the said Act 134. and joined to the crime contained in the said Acts 10.
Parl. 10. Iac. 6. and to both the pains added of loosing life, lands and goods,
whereas the pain of the said act. 10. is only of death; and the pain of the
said 134. Parl. 8. Iac. 6. Is only the pain contained in the Acts against
leasing Makers which in the said 43 act Parl. 2. Iac. 1. Is only the loss of
life and goods and not of life, lands and goods, but all annerly the Escheates,
of goods movables, as may appear, First, Because whenever the pain of tinsel,
of life and goods is found either in the Acts of Parliament or old Laws, goods
are understood moveable, as is clear from the crimes that are ordained to be so
punished, as Manslaughter. Be the 42. stat. Robert 3. Is prohibited under the
pain of tinsel of life and goods, where Skein explains, that these goods are to
be understood of Movables. And be the Act 90. Parl. 6. Iac. 1. The receipt of
him who is fugitive for slaughter, is forbidden under the pain of tinsell of
life and goods (Where Skein expounds goods to be goods moveable, in his Tractar
of Crimes tit. 2. cap. 6. Parl. 4.) And so it is clear in the other acts of
Parliament that their whole pains are distinct, viz. Tinsel of life and goods
alike, is only extended to movables; and tinsel of life, lands and goods,
which latter pain in the style of our acts of Parliament is commonly thus
expressed: That he who incurs it, shall die and forfeit life, lands and goods,
as the 31. Act, Parl. 7. Iac. 2, and passim alibi forfeiture properly relating
to lands; and in the common signification of our said goods to be understood of
goods moveable.

Secundo. More specially it may appear, that the pain of the said 43. act.
Parl. 2. Iac. 1. given to the said 134. act Parl. 8. Iac. 6. relates in the
pain thereof, is only the pain of escheat of Movables, because the pain of
forfeiting of life, lands and goods, is the proper pain of the c^imes that by
our Laws are declared Treason. And therefore Sk^^^ both in his Index of the
acts of Parliament on the word Treason, refers the crimes that are so
punishable to the head of Treason, as also in his Tract upon crimes in the end
of Reg. Maj. But does not at all mention therein the crime of the said 43 act.
Parl. 2. Iac. 1. nor of the 134. act. Parl. 8. Iac. 6. nor of the other acts
whereupon this part of the proposition is founded. But in his Index hes the
crime of leasing making between the King and his people under a head by it
self, and therein expressly mentions both the said 43. act. Iac. 1. and 134 act.
Iac. 6. like as in the said Tract^^ of ^rimes after the Chapters of Treason and
points thereof cap. 1. and pain of the same, which cap. 2. he expressly says,
is the tinsel of life, lands and goods, and declares, that he understands by
goods, moveable goods, and anent the process and Judge of the crime of Treason,
cap. 3. when he comes to other (...) capital, of all which the pains are either
the ^inse^ of life and moveable goods, or life only, or of some less pain in
body or goods, but never of life, lands and goods, as is clear through the whole
tract at that fol^ows. And in his 12 cap. anent the crime of falsit, (...) the
crime of leasing making between the King and his people. And the same acts of
Parliament, viz. act 43. Parl. 2. Iac. 1. And the 205 act. Parl. 14. Iac. 6.
and in his 25. cap. hes the crime of infamous and seditious Lybels. And the
said 10 act. 10. Parl. K. Iac. 6. cited therefore.

Item. In the last two acts of Parliament whereupon the proposition of the
Dittay is founded, viz. the 37. act. ^2 Parl. Iac. 1, and 144 act. Parl. 12.
Iac. 6. It is lybelled. That all Recepters, Suppliees, or Intercomoners, with
any Trators, are punishable by forfeitu^e, as the Traitors themselves, which is
not as the act bears, for both the crime and pain lybelled out of the said 144
act. 12 Parl. Iac. 6. The act is not simply against those who intercomon with
traitors and rebels, but with such as are declared rebels and traitors from all
which it follows, that the proposition of the lybel is founded upon the acts as
they are lybe^led, is not relevant. And therefore the Defender ought to be
assoliezed in hoc libello.

Tertio. As to the last part of the proposition of the Dittay, the Defender
abhors so much the crime therein mentioned, that he thinks any person who will
conceal any malicious purpose wronging in the least, far more in putting
violent hand in the inviolable sacred person of his Sovereign Lord, were
unworthy to breath in common air, let alone to be defended. And is so conscious
to himself of his own innocence in any (...) things, that he needs no other
defense, but the confident denial of any guiltiness, therein either less or
more, but before a practique pass in this honorable Cou^^ of Parliament of
founding a dittay of Treason upon common Law and Practice. It is under protest^
(...) on foresaid, and with all humility alleged against the relevancy of that
part of the proposition as founded upon the said common Law and practice, That
it is not relevantly founded thereon in so far as by the 28 act. Parl. 1640. it
is expressly found and declared Traitors, but after trial by the Parliament or
Judges ordinary; And finding that the said persons have contravened (...) and
act of Parliament, made under the pain of treason, and therefore a person
cannot be declared guilty of treason on a dittay founded on common Law and
practise^ 2. Poena being ^egis sarctio. And the common Law is known with us to
have only vim rationis, (...) l^gis, and therefore no pain, but especially the
highest of pains can be sounded thereupon; and 3. Specially as the practice
beside the reason aforesaid; because L. 1. ^. 4. fad. Senate. Consult.
Turpilianum facti quidem (...) in (...) judicantis, panae ver^ persecutio non
(...) volun^ati mandatur, (...) legis authorit (...) asservatur; whence
Menochus lib, (...) Presumpt. cap. 29. in principio says expressly, paena
indici non potest nisi expresso jure sit cantum per l. at si quis divus fad.
Reli and sumptibus funerium. And it is the common opinion of the Doctors, That
ever when punishment is not expressly defind in the Law, but is permitted
arbitrio judicis. It cannot be extended to death, far less to the pain of
Treason. And the soresaid act of Parliament 28. act anno 1640. takes away the
relevancy of founding treason upon common Law and practice, as said is.

4. If a dittay to infer the crime of treason might be founded on practice,
either of the justice Court or Parliament, which are two courts, before which
crimes of treason are judged; yet our practice is consuetudo rerum it a
judicatarum, as Craig defines it, lib. 1. de feudis dig. 8. and therefore to it
as to the introducing of all other consuetudtes, there must be Actuum
frequentia, reiterated acts, and practices per l. de quibus ff, de legibus and
Cart, Jason, and other Doctors: on that Law, et p^er l. 1. Cod. qua sit lo^ga
consuetudo and L. and in totum 3. c.de cres. dif. private. 2. illud explorandum.
An contradicto aliquo judicio sit firmata. That is, it would be tried if
decreits in foro contradictorio has been given thereupon. As also says Craig,
dicta disg. 8. in fine; and if in any case, that ought to be far more in
crimes; and if in crimes, yet more in the highest of crimes. And in all
concernments of one of the most eminent Peers of the land, which is clear: for
in matters civil (how small soever) before the session a practice will never be
founded on some decreits given either for not compeirance, or on compeirance
where there is little or no dispute, or it may be great inequality in Advocats
of the two parties. And if in civils where the interest is only pecuniary, this
ought to be much more in lybels of Treason, as has been said; but so it is,
neither in Justice, Court not Parliament will it be found, that it has been
frequently judged, and in foro contradictorio on and dispute where this defense
has been propounded. Yea, it may be well alleged, that there can be no
practice showed of either, of these Courts that any has been found guilty of
treason but on some act of Parliament under the pain of Treason, as is said;
But however the said 28 act. Parl. 1640, is most clear, which is most agreeable
to reason, and the Law of England very laudable in that point; as Cook has it
in his Chapter of Treason, and therefore the lybel as founded on practice is no
ways relevant, and the defender ought to be assoilzed therefrom.

Quarto. Every Lybel both of civil Law, and our Law ought to be clear, distinct
and special, but especially criminal lybels, because of the great importance of
them, ought to be most clear, distinct and special, jure libellus in
criminalibus debet esse clarissimus, says Dam. haud prax. crim. 3. number. 3. And
therefore Libellus Criminalis obscurus part etiam non excipiente extenditur
favore rei Baldus in lege addita, number. 10. c. de edendo, Alex. Consil. 72. col.
versit. and licet volum. 1. hip. Consil. 49. and Battander prax. Cran. Reg. 6.
s. 3. and 4. nec enim debet accusator cum existimationis alienae jactura, and
discrimine vagari. licet L. ^i in rem. ff. de rei unum; so that any obscure
criminal lybel is inept, and the defender ought to be assoilzed, therefrae,
though he did not oppone his defense for that effect, but so it is, this dittay
is most unclear and undistinct, in so far as in the proposition of the dittay
there are many acts of Parliament libel led on, being statutes annent diverse
crimes of very different natures, and inferring different punishments,
according to the article of the crimes, and in the subsumption, the panel is
indyted for several crimes alleged committed by him, contrary to the said
Laws and acts of Parliament in general, without condescending on the
particular acts of Parliament, that the panel has contravened by committing
the particular deeds lybelled, and so leaving him to great uncertainty: whereas
in all Law, reason, and form of process, the defender ought to be certified
what acts and Laws he has contravened by committing such deeds that is in a
multiplicity of crimes, after proposing all the statutes relating to the same
crimes, all the deeds immediately ought to be subsumed, falling under the
compass of such statutes, and thereafter the acts relating to another
indifferent crime ought to be proposed, and the deeds falling under the compass
of these acts immediately subsumzed and throughout the libell which is no way
done here, but first by many different acts accumulat together in the
proposition, and then the most different facts accummulate together
indistinctly in the subsupmtion Not condesending on the Acts by them
contravened and therefrae the libel is in apt and the defender ought to be
assoyled their from.

This defense is further confirmed in law. 2. Because a libell being (...)
quidem practicus; jason and the (...), de act in criminal dittays the
proposition consist i^j^re constitutionis in the Laws whereupon the libel is
founded The manner is in the subsumption of the facts or ^rims under these laws
and the conclusion inferring the pain Because of such a crime as falling under
the law libelled, on a very essential part of every libel, is quo jure petatur
and a libel being uncertain in this is unclear and uncertain in a very
essential point and in apt. 3. In law, a libell ought so to be conceived as
the defender may know aictoms spiciem otherwise it is in apt l. f. de edendo l.
3. c. eodem. And may also know actionis jus, and that he may deliberat how to
defend but in our cases that arises from the distinct application of the laws
to the facts, ex quibus jus oitur 4. If such uncertain libel were admitted the
defender because of the obscurity and uncertainty of the libell should be
prejudged of an certain defense he could make against the relevancy of the same
because the relevancy of it consists in the subsumption of the facts and crimes
libelled under some certain law, which being condescended on be a distinct
subsumption under each law of the crimes that were libelled properly to fall
under the same. The defender would allege why such crimes cannot be subsumed
revelantly under such laws and acts which the otherwise cannot do in such
multiplicity both of different acts and crimes as are libeled in this duty.
There being not only in diverse articles but even in on article a great
diversity of the crimes therein libelled and yet the defender left in
uncertainty under which of all the acts libelled on, The persewer intents the
subsumption thereof and so in uncertainty altogether how to conceive this
desense and if this be not maxim vagari cum maximo alienae vitae et fortunarum
periculo It is hoped as it will be found very evident so it was never the
practice, heretofore used in criminal libels, and which that it should not be
now sustained is of universal concernment, and if sustained might prove of very
dangerous consequence, and the libell as it is now conceived is in apt and the
defender ought to be assoyled therfrom.

BEfore the defender come to his particular answer to the several articles of
the ditay to the effect, the defender his case in his accession to the public
actings of this kingdom during the unhappy ^roubles till the treaty at Breda
and his Majestys home coming may be truly stated, It is humbly craved that the
commissioners grace and honorable estates of Parliament may be pleased to
remember that the Kirk and whole body of this Kingdom entered at first in the
national covenant for defense of religion and his Majestys person and
authority, and mutual defense one of another in maintaining the same, wherein
and in what followed in prosecu^ion thereof til the treaty with his late
majesty, and act of oblivion set dwon at length and ^ati^^ed in the 6 act of
the 2 Paliament anno 1641. His late Majesty did so far acknowledge and approve
their loyalty that in the seventh article of the said large treaty his Majesty
was pleased to appoint that at the close of that traty their said loyalty
should he made known at the time of public thansgiving in all places,
particularly in the Parish churches of his Majestyes dominions. And in the said
act of pacification and oblivion is pleased to declare that their constant
loyalty in their intentions and proceedings should not be hereafter called in
question, and that whatsoever fell forth in those tumultuous times, whether
prejudicall to his Majestyes honor and authority to the Laws and liberty of
the Church, or the particular interest of the subject, might be buried in
perpetual oblivion; and whatever had ensewed thereon, no mention should be
made thereof in judgment or outwith, like as his Majesty for himself and his
successor's promises in verbo principis never to come in contrary of the said
statute nor anything therein contained but to hold the same firm and stable
and to cause it be truly observed and these presents to have the full force and
strength of a perfect and true security, like as thereafter in anno. 1643. The
league and covenant was entered in with the two houses of Parliament upon the
ground of the large treaty by the church and whole body of this Kingdom,
proporting the same ends of the covenant for maintenance of religion King and
Kingdom; which was thereafter approved by the Partia. 1644. And fifth act
thereof, and prosecute by wars both within and without the Kingdom by the
authority of diverse succeding Parliament's, Church and state going unanimously
along together without any apparent public difference till the year 1648. And
even then that Parliam^nt, 1648. so highly homologate the said league and
covenant, that they declare the breaches thereof to be the grounds of their
resolutions of that War, act. 4. 7. and 8. And their desires for preventing
thereof to be the fulfilling of the same Ibidem. The necessary qualification
required in all with whom they would join either in their armies or committies
is that they be such who were of known faithfulness to the cause and covenant
in the said act 7. and that they would oppose and endeavor to suppress the
enemies to the cause and covenant on hands all Ibidem. Witnessing to the world
that they ^werved not from the principles contained in the national covenant,
and league and covenant, and that they resolved closly and constantly to adhere
there unto and to all the ends thereof. So that at that time there was still no
difference as to the cause and covenant, any difference being only in the
manner and not in the matter of that engagement.

Thereafter what straits this poor Kingdom was redacted to be the defeat of
that engagement, and how unable it was to make resistance to that English army
who in prosecution of their victory came to the borders and entered the same is
noture to all, wherewith the whole Kingdom being surprised with amazement, and
in evident hazard it was hard in that juncture of affairs to resolve upon any
course for preventing the same, or rather incumbate hazard of the Kingdom.
Whereupon a quorum of the committed of estates appointed by the said Parliament
1648 were necessitated to take upon them the managing of affairs, and to see
for conditions of peace, not being able to resist by force (the flower and
strength of the Nation being broke by the said defeat) and to accept the same
upon the easiest terms that could be had for the time, which as it was
endeavored upon no other intention, or for any other end, but that which they
were constrained to by inevitable necessity. So at that time it was generally
looked upon as good service, and which at that time was most necessary to evite
very great, and otherwise inevitable evils being either necessitat'd to
condensen^ to their demands at that time, or otherwise to have delivered the
persons of all that did prosecute the said engagements according to the
obleasment of the large treaty together with the forts and strength, of the
Kingdom. The succeeding P^rliament for the time in the year 1649. after
Proclamation of his present Majesty did send commissioners to Holland, and
afterwwds according to his Majestys desire to Breda where there was a treaty
concluded by his sacred Majesty. Wherein he was graciously pleased to approve
of the said Parliament in anno. 1644. and remanner Parliaments and their
proceedings from the year 1641 preceding the said treaty which was thereafter
ratified by his sacred Majesty and his Parliament at Pearth and Starlin and
after the royal example of his ever glorious father an act of oblivion was
indulged whereby all that might be ground of question was buried in oblivione
and pardoned by a general act of oblivion in a most full and ample form.

This being the state of public affairs during the time foresaid, albeit by
the first ten articles of the dittay. The deffender is charged with deeds and
public actings coming within the compass of the said approbation and oblivion
foresaid, yet such firm relyance has he of his Majesty presisting in his
gracious clemency) which does in his royal heart so much abound) That albeit
his Majesty by his Proclamation, Dadet the 12. Of October 1660. Is pleased
graciously to declare that he has remitted to his Parliament the trial of the
carriage of his subjects in Scotland during the late troubles; That the late
troubles has only respect to the time during the usurpers possession and that
trial should be taken during that time of the subjects carriage. The defender
in all humility conceiving that it is no ways to be supposed that his gracious
Majesty did therebey intend to rip up or revive, or to institute any new trial
of old offenses forgotten and forgiven as said is especially, seeing it is not
to be supposed that the bowels of his mercyes should be so straightened to this
his ancient Kingdom, to which he has upon all occasions given so many signal
and recent testimonies of his superabundant favor then they are, and have been
to his Subjects of his other dominions, to whom according to his Majesty's
declarations, he has granted a full and free pardon, from which few, and these
only the unpardonable murderers of his royal father are excluded; for whom, or
any guilty thereof, no punishment can be sufficient, and therefore the defender
in all humility conceives the said articles, though libelled, are not to be
insisted on.

The solemnity of the oaths both of Covenant and League, will be as the
defender hopes, pregnant presumptions to put and end all controversy, anent
the sincerity of his (as of the Church and Kingdom) their loyal intentions for
the maintenance of the person and authority of our dread Sovereign whereunto
they were thereby so religiously engaged, and the constant tenor of his acting
still by virtue of public Orders and Warrants of Parliament, and their
commit^ees wherein his faithfulness in the execution was also in the like
manner approved (will witness, that what he did was not for any private
interest, but for the publich ends; where unto he conceived himself engaged in
manner foresaid, nor was the Defender for continuing of these unnatural civil
discords as he did witness by his inclination to unaccommodation with Montross
in the year 1645. mentioned after in answer to the tenth article, which albeit
fully agreed to betwixt him and the defender, yet he could not obtain the
commitees approbation thereof, which is in evidence, that the defender had not
the chief sway of affairs and was always inclinable to peace (religion being
secured) like as the carrying on the engagement in the year 1648. though the
defender differed in his judgment as to the way and manner upon the grounds
and reasons, thereafter expressed in answer to the ninth Articles) does clearly
evince that he had not the chief sway in publict actings, and what power and
interest he had in the year 1649. he did faithfully according to his bond duty
improve the same for removing these differences betwixt his Majesty and his
subjects, wherein he was pationately earnest as shall be made appear in answer
to the said tenth article and after his Majesty's hom-coming and during his
being in this Kingdom, and thereafter till the enemy had fully prevailed and
that by his articles of agreement he was there prisoner he faithfully served
his majesty, and even during his Majestyes absence, did always and still shall
return loyal duty and good affection to his person, government and posterity.

And what ever these who are grown up may judge, who only see the unhappy and
accidental events that are the effects of the corruption of men, but have not
known the counsels and causes which are the two parts of these things
necessary to be known to all who would judge of human actions arright events
being for the most part uncertain and the worst of events of tyms through the
corruption of agents or others extrinsecal circumstances following upon the
best of actions, yet had they been intimately acquainted with the grounds and
causes and nature of the actings while a doing, the defender is confident that
they would have concurred and been of the same judgment as being clear, that
these proceedings had no native connexition with the sad and unexpected
consequences that has ensewed

And now to come to the particular defenses to the several points of the
subsumption of the Dittay; And first as to the first article of the
subsumption, annent the words alleged spoken at the Ford of Lion which are
lybelled to have been: That it was the opinion and judgment of many Lawyers
and Divines, that a King might be deposit for desertion, vendition or invasion,
and which is alleged to have been meaned by the panel of the then Kings
Majesty, and the presumptions adducit for enforcing that to have been the
defenders meaning, are some words allegit subjoyned, to wit, Mr. John you
understand Latin. It is alledgit for the defender (no ways acknowledging to
the best of his memory, that he uttered any such words) 1. all criminal
dittayes should contain in them at least year, month and place, otherwise they
are inept, Bartol and D. D. ad L. libellorum ff. de Accusatione, because
amongst other reasons, diversitas loci varia argueret facinora, says Battand:
Reg. 6. prax. cum post angel, etc. But so it is, there is no month
condescended on when the defender should have spoken these words, and therefore
the dittay in this article is inept. 2. There is no particular act of
Parliament in the act libellit upon in the proposition condescendit, on which
is contravened by the words libellit, therefore the libel in this article of
the subsumption, is general and obscure; and till the particular Law
contraven^d be condescendit, one can receive no answer. 3. The speeches as they
are libellit, falls not under the compass of the acts libellit on in the
proposition of the lybel, to infer any of the pains therein contained, because
they are but libellit, as the narration of the opinion of others, which is not
relevant to infer so much, that the Narrator is of the same opinion, except it
were also libellit that he did declare his homologation, and that he was of the
same judgment, which neither is, nor can be libellit far les, then is it
relevant to infer a crime, and so high a crime as Treason; for suppone the
defender had said, That they are very learned both Divines and Lawyers, whose
opinion it is, that the Pope is the head of the Church, and that he has power
to dispense with the article of faith, to depose Kings (a horrid opinion) etc.
and that it is their opinion also we may merit heaven by good works, and that
all Hugonites or Protestants are damnable here^ticks, and that he had related
their words in latin, as the latin of of that verse of the gloss of the common
Law, cap. sicut de excess. praelat.

Restituit papa salus deponit, etc. articulus solvit.

And had said to Mr. John Stewart thereupon, Mr. John you understand Latin,
albeit these opinions of these Divines and Lawyers be exec^ably Heretic, yet
no body will say, that the defenders relation of him, would have inferred him
to have been guilty of the same; No more in our case can the relation libellit
infer him to have been of that opinion with these Divines and Lawyers, or in
any way thereby to have contravened any act of Parliament libelled. 2. The
foresaid opinion is libellit only to have been related in abstracto, (nothing
of our Kings Majesty who then was) And whereas it is libellit, that it appears
the sense and meaning thereof appeared to have been of the then Kings Majesty,
in so far, as the defender subjoyned to Mr. John Stewart, the words aforesaid,
that he understood latin. 1. The libel in this part is ambiguous for this may
be interpret, either that it was the meaning of the opinion of these Divines
which he related, (this seems to be most consonant to the words) or else that
his own meaning was, That it was the judgment that the then Kings Majesty our
Sovereign might be so dealt with, as is libelled in the latter part of his
article, and so the Article in this part thereof is ambiguous and inept, and
there ought to be no process thereupon. Nam Libellus (in criminalibus
praesertim) nihil ambiguitatis vel obscuritatis continere debet per cap.
Constitut. 6. extr. derig. don. Bot. 3. If it be understood in the former
sense, it is but still relative of the opinion others; and if in this latter
sense, to wit, that it was his own judgment, the presumption libelled of what
he spoke to Mr. John Stewart, is no way relevant to infer it. 1. Because they
held a more obvious meaning, viz. That it might have been the opinion of these
Divines and Lawyers was related in latin, and indeed Grotius and Berclaius, who
write of that Subject, are both in latin, and that he had subjoyned to Mr. John
Stewart, Mr. John ye understand latin. 2. That such opinions being rather the
fancy of notional Schoolmen, (otherwise not unlearned in their own art) or of
such as are Doctors notionals in the Law, (if there be any of such opinions)
rather then of solid juriscon^ult, who for most do not so much as move these
questions not to be moved. 3. If any such words had been spoken to Mr. John
Stewart, They might have had this more proverbial sense. Some Lawyers and
Divines are of that opinion, but the subtilty of these questions or opinions is
latin to me, that is, I understand it not, as we say commonly of things we
understand not, It is latin to me. But Mr. John ye are a Scholar, and ye
understand it. Now it is a rule in Law, that where the meaning is doubtful or
obscure, that which is the most favorable sense should be followed. L. 9. ff.
de reg. juris and Matheus de afflictis decisione 265. n. 68. 69. and decis.
307. n. 15. and when these words are ambiguous, The declaration of him who
uttered them should be acquiessed unto; M^norchius consilio 197. And the
defender is ready to declare, that if ever he had spoken such words, he was
very far from any such meaning, as is libelled against him. Nor 4. is it any
way presumable that any rational man, who had the honor to know his late
Majesty, could have made application of any of these three causes to so worthy
and illustrious a Prince, seeing the said Grotius, Berclay, and others that
writs upon that subject, acknowledges yea it is obvious to common sense, that
hardly can they fall out in the worst of Princes, if he be but compos mentis:
and as to the presumption that follows, that the defender meaned by the late
Kings Majesty, because the condition wherein the kingdom was for the time. 1.
It is far more presumable that the kingdom was in such a condition of affection
to his Majesty's sacred person, and authority at that time none d^rst have
uttered what might reflect thereupon, seeing it is libellit to have been
shortly after the subscribing of the Covenant, wherein they had solemly bound
themselves by the oath of God to maintain his Majesty's person and authority.
2. His Majesty by his royal judgment in the act of oblivion 1641. hes presumed
the loyalty of his Subjects, both in their intentions and proceedings in these
times, which is presumptio juris, and de pre. As for the defender, his
prosecuting of Mr. John Stewart. 1. It was a judicial process and legal Act and
so can be no imputation to him wherein the process was laid in so fair a course
of Law, That he was condemned not only upon clar probation, but his own
confession, and yet the words whereupon he was indyted and convict, were far
different from these words, as they are here libelled, otherwise the defender
would never have pursued it.

Ultimo adhering always to the alledgance above propounded humbly protesting,
that they may be first discust, and whereupon it is craved, he may be assoyled
in (...) libello, because by act of Parliament in anno 1641. amongst the
imprinted act, anno 70. The same service is appoved and he exonered. It is
alleged, that the defender ought to be assoyled from the whole crimes in the
first article because after the time libelled of the alleged committing of the
same his late Majesty of glorious memory granted that never to be forgotten act
of indemnity and oblivion in anno 1641. Which did proceed upon the preceding
treaty with his Majesty, and which is solemnly confirmed by his Majesty
himself in person and his three estates in his Parliament 1641. 6. act thereof
wherein his Majesty for himself and his successors does promise in verbo
principis never to come in the contrary of that statute and sanction or any
thing therein contained 2. But to hold the same in all points firm and stable,
yea, and to cause it to be truly observed be all his Majesty's leiges for ever
hereupon the defender does confidently rely for all than is libelled as
committed by him in this article; or any other preceding that time, as being
confident it is the greatest imaginable security that he and the rest of the
leiges of the land who are conceived can have.

As to the second article and haill head thereof 1. neither day, month, nor
year of God are condiscended on, and therefore so general that is inept. Nam
generalitas parit obscuritatem, Marent part 6. spec. and de libel. oblat.
quomo^o Concip. and per, textus ibi citatos. 2. It is not condescended which of
the acts of Parliament libelled this article and the several heads thereof
contraveins, which is a general ineptitude and nullity in this libel. 3. As to
the first point; if that article annent the intaking of the house of Airlie,
cuting and destroying the planting, and demolishing the houses. 1. It is not
relevantly libelled in so far as it was libelled that the house was kept for
his Majesty's service, but does not condescend that service, now. 2. Is it
libelled that there was any in it that had a commission from his Majesty,
without which it hes not any color of relevance. 4. The defender never had any
private quarrel, nor parsonal prejudice against the noble Lord James Earl of
Airlie. But if his marching to that house be meaned of that which was in anno
1640. it was by virtue of, and in obedience to a commission put upon him by the
Commit of Estates for the time, nor was the said house at his arrival thereat
kept for his Majesty's service, as is (though wrongfully) libelled. But before
that time was surrendered to the Earl of Montros who had put Colonel Sibbald to
keep the same for the King and Countries use, and which Colonel Sibbald upon
sight of the defender his commission, did abandon the said house: and if there
was any planting cut, it was (...) some few shrubs and bushes which the
defender could not hinder) for hurting to the soldiery, and tho the defenders
commission bare power and warrant to demolish the house he was so far from
stretching, or fully, executing the same, that he did not only slight the
house, and delayed a long time to do the same, in expectation that the Lord
Ogilby should have procured a countermand from the committee, and did slight it
till he was past all hope of obtaining the same; not, as is hoped will be
acknowledged by the said Noble Earl, neither did, so far as the defender knew
or could hinder, the Earl, his friends and followers sustain any other
prejudice then what was usual, and what all places are ordinanarily obnoxions
to where armies or parties of soldiers come but however it is not relevant, as
said is.


Tertio, That part of the said article, though it were true (as it is not) is
no ways relevant to infer the conclusion of the dittay, here being no law nor
statute libellit on, that for cutting ^f timber or demolishing the houses of
private persons though done upon private quarrels, as this was not) inferres
^he pain of treason.

As to that part of the article annent the burning of the house of Forther
beside the exceptions against both the points thereof alledgit before in the
beginning, it is not relevant to say that the defender seized there upon to
infer any crime except it were libelled he seized by force, for he might have
entered in vacuam possessionem. 2 Non relevant to libell that those under him
did seize thereupon or raise fire therein, except it were libelled that the
defender had given express order or wanrrand to raise that wilful fire: who
as he gave not order therefore, so he was not present not near the place, not
knew any thing thereof till after the house was burnt and noxia caput sequitur.
3. In the acts of Parliament libelliton annent burning and wilful
fire-raising, the same can only be understood of burning and raising of fire on
private feuds, and for particular revenge in time of peace, and is not to be
extendit to such deeds done in the heat and fury of wars, seeing inter arma
silent leges.

And as to the aggravation of the defenders hatred against the Earl merely for
his loyalty to his Majesty, it is gratis dictum and against that presumption
qu^ unusqiusque praesumitur bonus and against that loyalty to his Majesty, that
is hoped shall more and more appear in the defender.

Lastly the defender ought to be assoyled from the said article and all deeds
therein mentionat. Because the same precedit the act of oblivion in anno. 1641.
whereby all things that did fall forth in these tumultous times whether
prejudicial to his Majestys (honor and safety) or to the laws and practices
of the Church and Kingdom or to the paticular interests of the subject buried
in perpetual oblivion as more fully is contained in the said act.

3. As to the third article annent the beseiging of dumbration Castle and
trasporting Cannon and ammunition out thereof.

It is alleged for the defender (10) that the assaulting of the said Castle is
not relevant to infer the conclusion of the dittay because as is before
alleged none can be declared triators but these who hes contraven'd a special
act made under the pain of treason. But so it is that none of the particular
acts of Parliament whereupon the proposition is founded, mentions any thing
against these who assaults the Kings Castle nor does any of them infer the pain
of treason therefore. But only the 25 act of Parliament 6. Iac. 6. entitled
sundry points of treason by the which acts they only are to be punished as
traitors who assaults the castle or places where the Kings person is and that
without warant of Estates, but it is neither libelled, nor was the Kings person
in the said Castle the time of the alleged assaults thereof, nor did the
defender assault and lay siege to the same without warrant from the estates,
but by their express order and commission and the truth is the defender
himself did not appear before the said house till the said Sir John Henrison
being straightened with the seige sent for the defender and offered to surrender
the house upon honorable conditions which the defender suffered him to make
himself and which were accordingly kept not without some difficulty the
inhabitans of the town by reason of prejudice done to them being highly
insenced against the said Colonel.

As to that part of the said article annent the transporting of the Kings
Cannon and ammunition none relevat to infer the conclusion none of the acts
libelled, on concluding against any such fact the said crime of treason and the
truth is the defender did never transport any Cannon or ammunition out off the
said Castle but two Cannons which the duke, of Richmont heritable keeper
thereof gifted to the defender and which he would never have gifted if they had
not been his own, and not the Kings 2. The defender ought to be assoyled from
the said article and all deeds therein contained the same having also proceeded
the saidact of oblivion in anno. 1641.

4. And as to the fourth article of the dittay anent the defenders calling or
causing to be called a convention of the estates in anno 1643 entering in league
with his Majesty's enemies imposing excise and subsidies on the Kingdoms
raising an army entering England therewith fighting for and with the rebels
there, It is answered that the whole points of this article of the ditty are
charged personally on the defender so contrary to the notority of the matter of
the fact known to both Kingdoms and to his Majestyes commissioners grace and
to the whol^ Parliament yea to the fifth act of Parliament, 1644, relating and
approving all the acts that are made points of this article, That there needs
no more but propond as known to all, and to repeit out of the said public law
and act of Parliament what is there in libelled to evince that they are not the
defenders personal deeds: but the comittees (comissioners established by his
Masty) convention of estates and of the whole Church and Kingdom of Scotland
and approven by that Parliament 1644. in the said 5. act. thereof first then as
it is noture so it is clear by that act that the said convention of Estates was
called not by the defender as it is libellit, but by his Majesty privy Counsel
Commissioners for conserving the articles of the Treaty therein mentioned, and
Commissioners of common burdens all established by his Majesty's authority in
anno 1641. which Conservators concerning that article (...) the (...) Treaty,
bearing the Kingdom of Scotland their desire for unity in religion, and
conformi^y in Church Government, as a special mea^s for conserving of peace
betwixt the two Kingdoms. In answer thereto, His Majesty with advice of both
houses of Parliament in England does declare his approbation of their affection
in their desire of having conformity of Church Government between the Nations,
and as the Parliament had already taken to consideration the reformation of
Church Government, so they would proceed therein in due time, and this was one
of the main grounds whereupon both houses entered the said League. 2. That the
enacting and entering the League and Covenant, was an act of that convention of
Estates, not the defenders personal act. 3. That the League and Covenant was
entered in with the two houses of the long Parliament, and assistance given to
them in fighting with or for their army, or otherwise, which is libelled
fighting with rebels. The point of fact being thus cleared in opposition to the
ditt^y. 2. It is alleged, that the first two members of this article is
subsumed under none of the acts of Parliament libelled on in the proposition,
there being no act of Parliament libelled against meetings, bands or leagues in
general, or in special betwixt the two Nations or Estates thereof. 3. As to the
remanent members of the article, they can no ways be relevant (with all
submission) except it were qualified, that the two houses of the long
Parliament to whom the assistance libelled was given, that they were enemies
and rebels, but that the defender is confident it will not be said, because by
his Majesty's act of Oblivion 2^ April 1660, his Majesty after his happy
restitution, declares that what was acted even against his Majesty, and his
royal. Father, by his Subjects in England during these times, thereafter shall
not be called in question at all, so much as to the prejudice of their
reputation, in manner at length contained in that gracious act, and how loyal
the long Parliament was, did appear in that the usurper durst never attempt any
thing against his late Majesty's person, till they were broken, as also what
loyalty the secluded Members of that Parliament has (as became them) showed to
his Majesty in his just and glorious restitution, is known to all Europe to
their eternal commendation and renown. No doubt as from conscience of their
oath of duty and allegiance, so of the oath of God whereunto they bound
themselves to maintain his Majesty's person, authority and greatness, as well
as religion in that Covenant. 4. All the foresaid deeds which are the members
of this article. viz. The calling the foresaid convention of Estates as being
the act of the foresaid Council and Commissioners, the entering in the League
and Covenant; raising of the army for assisting the two houses of Parliament of
England, imposing excise, etc. as all being acts of the said Convention of
Estates, together with the same Convention of Estates are all approven by the
said 5 act Parl. 16^4. In respect whereof the Defender ought to be assoyled
from this whole article, and all the crimes contained therein. 5. Not only is
the said calling of the said convention of Estates, and the said convention
entering in the League and Covenant, imposing of excise, raising of forces for
the Parliament of England, and remanent acts of the said Convention approven by
the said 5. act of Parl. 1644. But by his Majesty's Treaty at Breda, and the
act of Oblivion in the Parl. holden at St. Jonston and Sterlin in anno 1650 and
1651, or either of them, all things done during these tumultuous times
intervening betwixt the said act of oblivion 1641. and his Majesty's
home-coming 1650. Whether prejudicial to his Majesty's honor and authority, or
to the Laws and liberties of the Church and Kingdom, or to the particular
interest of the subject are buried in perpetual oblivion. And by the said
Treaty, and act of ratification of the said Parliament, or, one or other of
them the said Parliament 1644. and all acts thereof are ratified, and so
amongst the rest, this which is the 5. act, which approves all the acts,
thereupon this fourth article of the Dittay is founded, and therefore the
Defender ought to be assoyled therefra.

As to the fifth article anent the burning of the house of Menstrie in anno
1645. The defender is so innocent thereof, that if it were libellit relevantly,
he needed no other defense bu^ a simple denial, but the truth is, that it has
been burnt by some of the soldiers, commanded by General Major Bailie, for the
time upon the greatest provocations that could be, two peroches, viz. Muckart
and Doller, having been burnt the night before, and severals, both men, women
and children cruelly killed by the concurse of these that were in that house,
but it is no way relevantly libellit, in so far, as it is libelled, That the
Defender or others under his command burnt it. 1. Because there is no act of
Parliament of all the acts libellit upon in the proposition whereupon this can
be subsumed especially the acts anent the raising of fire, upon which (if upon
any) it seems it is particularly founded, there is no such odd extension of
that so high a crime, as to make any guilty of it, by committing of it by
others, who are under their command, and this were a very universal, terrible
concernment, and in the present case were most dangerous and unjust that a
Commander should be holden to answer for all the illegal deeds done by his
soldiers. 2. It is against common reason, the common Law, by which this
therefore is well established, that delicta proprios tenent authors, and noxa
caput sequitur, and therefore it is not relevant that the defender burnt it by
himself or others by his special direction or particular order for that effect.

2. Though it were made relevant in manner foresaid, yet the dittay is inept as
to this Article, and the defender ought yet to be assoyled therefra, because
the year of God is only libelled, to wit, the year 1645. whereas not only the
month, as in all criminal libels per L. libollorum ff. de accusationibus, and
the Doctors treating thereupon. But the very day ought to be condescendit on
for the omission of the day prejudges the defender of his defense, Specially of
his alibi, which he might and would propone, if the day were condeseneded on;
that being required, the day ought to be condescended on, otherwise the libel
is inept, Nam Libellus debet continere non tantum annum and mensem, sed and
diem si reus'id requisserit cum probaturus suum alibi Dam. hand. cap. 3. number.
4. 5. and battander reg. 6. number. 4. Maranta in spec. del. bell. Obl. 3. number. 12.
per bark. in L. Si quis reus Colum 3. in sin. de publ. judic. and jason, in L.
Ubitraria 2. Sect. Si quis ^xhisi ff. de eo quod Crito loco. But so it is as
that if the day were condescended on of the said burning, the Defender might,
and if need were, would offer to prove that he was that day during all the time
of the burning alibi at a codsiderable distance fra the same place.

3. Absolvitor Because Leivtenant General Bailzie at that time when the house
was burnt, had the Command of the said forces (adhering always to the former
defenses against the aptitude and relevancy of this part of the dittay, and
expressing the same that may be discust ante omnia) In respect whereof the
defender ought to be assoilzed ab hoc libello at least there can be no process
upon that part of the dittay, as it is now libelled. 4. Albeit the defender had
burnt, or given direction only to burn the said house, as he has not yet by
special act and commission of Leiutennendry granted to him by the Parliament
1644. He was empowered to persew the Mc. Donalds, and their adherents, and
accessories with all kind of hostility, by fire and sword, with a dispen^ation
with slaughter, Mutilations, raisings of fire, assailing of houses, taking of
prisoners, and other inconvenments whatsoever, that should fall out in the
execution of that Commission in persuing of them, as the said act and
commission may at length bear, and which commission is ratified by his Majesty
in the Treaty at Breda, in his ratification of that Session of Parliament 1644.
among the other Parliaments and Sessions thereof ratified by his Majesty: all
after 1441. and preceding his return but so it is That the said Mr. Donald
were at that time, at the burning of the said, house joined with Montroiss and
it was in pursuance of both that the said house was burnt as is noture (and if
need be, The defender will offer him to prove) and therefore though he had
burnt or given direction for the burning thereof he ought to be assoiled.

5. By act of Parliament. 30 act 22. March. 1647. it is statute and ordained
that all his Majestys good subjects shall be altogether freed and liberate in
all time coming from being any ways called, convened, pursued, troubled or
molested in judgment civil or criminal or outwith the same for any deed done
or to be done by them against the persons, lands or goods of such as have or
shall be in the rebellion (by which it is noture, that the said armed
opposition made by the deceased Marquess of Montrose, and the said Mc. Donald,
and others under his command; to the Estates is understood) during the time of
their being in the said rebellion, or have been, or shall be guilty with the
rebels in their wicked courses, or of any of them, who came under the first or
second Classes of delinquents contained in the 5 act of the fith session of
that Parliament holden at St. Andrews, in the month of Jan. 1646. But so it
is, the Defender offers to prove, if need be, That a son of the Earl of
Sterlings named Charles or John Alexander, who had, or either of them had right
to Menstre had joined with Montrose and those under him, and so came under the
second Class of the said fifth act of the fifth session, Parliament 1646. Or at
least, went or sent into their ligor, or without compulsion entertained them in
the said house, and therefore the defender ought not to be pursued, even though
he had burnt, or given direction to burn the said house (as he in no ways did)
and being pursued, ought to be assoiled from this article like as it is
conjunction alleged for the defender in fortification of the said act, That
the same is ratified by his Majesty's large Treaty at Breda, as being one of
the acts of that session of Parliament 1647. which amongst the other sessions
of Parliament, and acts thereof since the year 1641. and preceding his
Majesty's return in anno 1650. are ratified by the said Treaty, as also by the
act of Ratification at St. Johnstones or Sterling in annis 1650 and 1651. By
which ratification (or ratification of his Majesty by the Treaty aforesaid,)
the said act of Parliament 30. in anno 1647. comes (as a most solemn remission
granted by his Majesty, and whole Estates of Parliament to the persons therein
contained) and so like as if every one of them had got a particular remission
so solemn: It had been an uncontrovertable remission for what were therein
contained, so must it now be, being in effect of the same nature and virtue,
albeit many be included in one.

6. By the act of Oblivion at St. Iohnstones or Sterling, in the year 1650, or
1651. all acts of hostility whether between the King and his Subject, or
between Subject and Subject, and what things fell out in these times betwixt
the year 1641. and his Majesty's return, whether prejudicial to his Majesty's
honor and authority, or to the Laws of the Kingdom, or the particular
interest of his Subjects, are buried in oblivion. In respect whereof though the
defender were accessory to the said burning, as he is not, yet he ought to be
assoiled.

As to the sixth article, anent the taking of the house of Towart belonging to
the Lord of Lamont, and the house of Oscog belonging to Oscog, and after
articles of capitulation drawn and subscribed by Ardkinglas, and under his
command others under Trust and assurance, murdring a great many of Lamonts and
Oscogs friends. As this is no ways true (the defender being altogether
innocent thereof) so is it no ways relevantly libelled. For 1. Neither day nor
month of these deeds are condescended on. 2. The alternity by the others under
his Command not relevant to infer a crime, far les Treason against the
defender for the reason contained in the first answer to the former article,
viz. That there is neither act of Parliament lybelled, nor common law ordaining
a man be liable to a pain far less the highest of pains, for deeds or crimes by
those under his command, except he gave them special direction: But every one
is to suffer for his own fault, as at more length is contained in the said
answer, which is here repeated. 3. Non relevat, These for whom he is answerable
for the same reasons, because every one is answerable for his own fault and
crime. 4. Non relevat. That others whom he might stop, did it, because there is
neither any act of Parliament lybelled on, ordaining any to be answerable for
all deeds of those whom he might stop (specially the act against Murder under
Trust bearing no such thing) Nor is there any Law not reason for the same, but
delicta proprios tenent authors, as has been said, and no ways granting the
defender could have stopped them, for the truth is, he could not, and was not
near them when what is libelled was done, and albeit indeed, it be contra
officium charitatis, not to stop any doing a mischief, if one may safely do it,
yet that it comes under the compass of Law to infer a crime, especially
Treason cannot be affirmed. 5. Taking of the house of Towart and Escog, is not
subsumed upon any of the acts of Parliament lybelled, there being none of them
anent the taking in of houses belonging to the leiges, and so is not relevant
to infer any of the crimes contained therein. 6. The alleged killing a great
many of Lawmonts and Oscoges friends after the assurance given by Ardkinglas,
is no ways relevantly libelled to infer the crime of slaughter under trust,
because by the act of Parliament, Iac. 6. par. 11. cap. 51. of slaughter under
trust, upon the which it is founded, slaughter under trust is only when the
party slain is under the trust and assurance of the slayer, which is no way
here lybelled, but that the persons who are lybelled to have been stain by the
defender, were under the trust of another, to wit, Ardkinglas, who is he or any
other under the defenders command have done any thing against their own
assurance, they are to answer for it.

7. The defender adhering to their defenses, and craving that they being
against the relevancy be first discust, repeats his former answer founded upon
his commission of Leiutennendry therein mentioned, for they who are designed
Lawmont and Escoges friends, were the Mac Donalds, or their Adherents and
Accessories (as is noture, and the defender if need shall be, offers to prove
it) whom by the foresaid Commission he had power to prosecute with fire and
sword, with dispensation of slaughter, and raisings of fire in manner at length
contained in the Commission, which amongst the other acts of Parl. 1644. is
ratified by his Majesty in his Treaty at Breda, as is alleged in the said
answer which is holden herein repeated, and therefore the defender ought to be
assoiled from this article, and truly what cruelty was exercised, was by the
Lord of Lawmont himself against the Heretors and other inhabitants in the
Shrievdome of Argyl, for the which upon a supplication given into the Kings
Majesty and Committee of Estates at Sterling in August 1651. He was imprisoned
within the Castle of Sterling, till after trial Justice should have been done
upon him, but was released by the English when they took the Castle with the
other prisoners, however the defender is confident, as it is known, so he shall
make it appear, if need be in the other process whereunto this relates, and
wherein it will be more pertinent, and yet the day and time of the committing
of the deeds mentioned in this article being condescended on as it ought to be
when required by the defender, that he may propone his alibi, he offers to
prove if need be, That he was alibi the time of the committing of the said
deeds, at a very great distance, to wit, in England, like as his Majesty by his
Treaty at Breda, has ratified and approved the acts of Parliament, and his
Majesty, and Estates of Parliament, has ratified the said Treaty, and past an
act of Oblivion of all former deeds done by the Subjects, which secures and
indemnifies them for any former actings, in respect whereof he ought to be
assoiled.

As to the seventh article made up of several members or parts, as 1. anent the
men alleged murdered as Lockhead and Dunnavertie. 2. Anent the aggravation
added thereto. Anent an old man begging his sons life and denied him. 3. Anent
the sending 200. men from Illa to starve in Iura. 4. Anent the taking of the
person of Col. Ki^^^ch, out of a ship in Leith Rode, wherein it is libelled,
that he had been brought by order of Parliament.

It is alleged against the seventh article, That 1. The first part thereof
(anent the men alleged murdered at Lockhead and Dinnavertie) is no ways
relevant, not only in respect that the particular month and days whereupon
the same should have been done, are not condescended upon, but also in respect
there is not one particular person by name and surname whereby he might be
known condescended upon, against whom the deeds libelled should have been
committed, without the which this part of the article cannot be sustained as
relevant, it being contrary to all Law and practice, that murder in the
general without nameing the persons murdered should be sustained as relevant
Dittay against any. 2. The slaughter allege a committed upon these in the
house of Lockhead, is not relevantlie subsumed upon the acts of Parliament
lybelled, in so far, as there is no assurance lybelled to have been given to
them, to bring it under the act of murder under trust, and there is no other
act lybelled under which it can fall. 3. It is alleged, That the defender
cannot be charged with any of the deeds lybelled in the said first part of the
article (though they were true and relevantly lybelled, as they are not)
because the expedition made against the rebels in Kintyre in the year labelled,
was by David Lesley, and these under his command, against such, who contrary to
his Majesty's order sent to them at that time, commanding them to lay down
arms, and contrary to their own engagements, not to join with Alister, Mac
Donald did notwithstanding continue in arms and rebelliously (as was then
declared by the Estates of Parliament) resisted David Leslie in the execution
of his said Commission against them, who therefore after defeating of them in
the field, took them out of the said houses of Lockhead and Dunnavertie without
any capitulation, and disposed of them as the Counsel of War then present
with him thought fit (which is noture, and the defender offers to prove, if
need be) for which, and other his services, the said David Lesly got the
Parliaments approbation in anno 1648. as the said approbition and exoneration
bears, which will clearly prove any thing that is herein alleged, and
therefore the defender, nor any in his company at that time cannot be charged
with any deeds lybelled in the first part of this article, but ought to be
assoiled therefra. 4. The defender repeats his third defense made to the fifth
article founded upon his Commission of Leivtennendry, the persons mentioned in
this article against whom the deeds are lybelled, to have been committed,
having been the Mac. Donalds or the Adherents and Accessories which is noture,
(and the defender offers to prove, if need be) to prosecute whom he had the
Commission containing dispensation, and which was ratified in manner mentioned
in the said answer, like as he repeats the 4 and 5 answer made to the said
article, in respect whereof he ought to be assoilied therefra.

It is alleged against the 2, 3 and 4 members of this 7 article, that they are
no ways subsumed, nor cannot be subsumed under any of the acts of Parliament
lybelled, and therefore the dittay herein is inept, and the defender ought to
be assoiled therefra, (and yet in point of fact they are but mere Calumnies) As
to the second part (anent the said old man and his son) it is no ways
relevant, not condescending on the persons names, and therefore can receive no
other answer, but that it is a mere fiction to make the defender more odious,
who ingenuously professes, that he never heard of such a thing, till he saw it
in the libel. The third part of this article has no better ground than the
second, and the defender desires, that for clearing his innocence of the fact
lybelled therein (anent the sending of two hundred men from Ila to starve in
Iura) that the Gentlemen in the said Islles may be examined upon the truth of
the matter. It is alleged that the fourth part of this article, anent Coil
Kittoch.

7. Is of the same nature with the former two, and therefore the simple
relation of the truth is sufficient to refute the falsehood thereof, which is
shortly this, viz. That Coil Kittoch was not brought to Leith either by order
of the Committee of Estates or Parliament, but being taken prisoner in Ila by
the forces under the command of David Lesly, and delivered to the defender, the
defender put him aboard in Captain Browns ship who undertook to deliver him at
Dunstaffnage. But Captain Brown finding the opportunity of a fair wind to
Leith, to which he intended, and not willing to lose the same, did not go to
Dunstaffnag, but came straight to Leith Road, and immediately gave the defender
notice, that he had his prisoner aboard, whom therefore the defender received
from him, and sent him to Dunstaffnage: and the defender desires that Captain
Brown who lives at Weymes, may be examined upon the truth of this matter, by
whom he offers to prove this, if need were.

And whereas it is libelled that Coil Kittoch was hanged it is true, but it is
also true that he was condemned to die in a justice or Liestenant court
judicially which is noture. And the defender offers to prove, if need shall be,
so that this can be a ground of no crime nor ditty what somever, but however
the defender ought to be assoiled therefra.

8. To the first member of the eighth article bearing that notwithstanding the
manifold acts of dignity favor and honor conferred upon him by his then dread
Sovereign his Majesty being redacted to greater straits by that army of
Sectaries, and having cast himself over in the hands of the army of his Scots
subjects for shelter and preservation of his royal person, Nevertheless the
said Marqueis being chief ringleader, of that factious party who then swayed
the estate of affairs both in council and army did so contrive and complor,
and by his influence so prevail, that after all fair offers made by his
Majesty and his desire to have come and lived in Scotland till all differences
in both Kingdoms had been settled, an act of Parliament was made for abandoning
his Majesty to the mercy of his inveterate enemies, the said army of Sectaries.

It is answered that as he must continually acknowledge the late King and his
present Majesty's acts of favor, honor and trust: so must be still deny (as
he safly may in the presence of God who is the searcher of all hearts) and of
all men, that he never entertained any dis-loyall thought or contrived any
treasonable plot or machination against the sacred persons, dignity or
authority of his late sovereign or of his present most sacred Majesty, and
therefore with a clear conscience may answer this dittay.

1. That the same is not special not clear, but very obscure and general, how
and in what manner he was chief Ringleader of any factious party. 2. Who that
factious party were, nor 3. By what deeds, and how he swayed the state of
affairs: nor, 4. These means by which and upon whom the procured his influence
to prevail. 5. The alleged offers, made by his Majesty are not expressed. And
therefore the said articles are altogether general and inept.
2. The act of Parliament which the defender is alleged to have procured to
have been made, is not produced, no indicat by number or Rubric, nor does the
Defender know any act of the tenor and title lybelled.

And the Defender in humidity conceives, that it is not consistent with the act
libelled on, in the opposition of the Dittay, discharging persons to impugn the
authority of the Estates of Parliament, to term the members thereof, especially
in making an act (which being carried by plurality of voices, as the deed on
the whole; and specially such an act, as is mentioned in the Libel (where there
were none, or very few of a contrary judgment) A factious party.

13. The cause of the first member of the said eight Article, anent the
pretended act of Parliament, as is libelled, for abandoning and leaving his
Majesty to the disposal and mercy of his enemies, the Sectarian Army, does
debond from the Acts of Parliament (as clearly appears) and can be subsumed on
under none of the Acts of Parliament libelled: For if the tenth Act of
Parliament, 1647. be understood and meaned, as the Act libelled (that being an
Act of Parliament) the Defender humbly alleges, That an Act of an acknowledged
lawful Parliament, should be made a crime of accession, whereunto a Member of
Parliament shall be indicted (especially for so high a crime as Treason) is
without ground of Law of practice, and is hoped, the honorable Parliament will
no ways sustain it; and therefore, that he needs say no more now in
confirmation hereof.

14. Likewise, all that is in that Act, and substance thereof, being the
Estates of Parliament there declaring their concurrence for His Majesty's going
to Homeby-house, or some other of his Houses in and about London; and that
expressly, to satisfy the desire both of His Majesty himself, and of His two
Houses of Parliament in England: And there to remain (not under the power of
Sectaries) but with such attendance about him, as both Houses should, think fit
to appoint, with respect also had to the safety and, preservation of his Royal
Person. And the Estates therein do also declare against all harm and prejudice,
violence or injury to be done to the same (as indeed it was horrid to think
that any on earth should have done) or prejudice to His Majesty's Posterity:
But thereafter it is clear from the fourth and seventh Acts of the Parliament,
1648. that the Sectarian Army disobeyed, and threatened the Houses of
Parliament, imprisoned and banished faithful Members, and by a sudden
surprising, violently seized upon the Person of the Kings Majesty, carried Him
from His House at Homeby, against His own will, and declared Resolutions of
both Kingdoms, and kept him under their guards, till at length, by their Power
and Prevalency. He was committed, and kept close Prisoner at the Isle of Wight,
this being the true case out of the express words of the Acts before cited.

As to that Declaration, Act. 10. Parl. 1647. The Defender alleges, 1. The Act
bears express, That it was to satisfy His Majesty's own desire. 2. That it is
homologat and approven by the Parliament, 1648. in so far, as by their fourth
Act, institulate, Anext their Resolutions concerning the breaches of Covenant
and Treaties betwixt the Kingdom of Scotland and England, and demands for
reparation thereof; finds the violent seizing on his Sacred Majesty's Person,
and taking Him away from Homeby-house (as appears by Act 7.) by that Army,
against the resolutions of both Kingdoms, a breach: And amongst the
Reparations, they desire expressly, that conform to the former desires of this
Kingdom, the Kings Majesty may come with Honor, Freedom and Safety to some of
his Houses in or near London, that the Parliaments of both Kingdoms may make
applications to him. And in their seventh Act, entitled, A Declaration of the
Parliament of Scotland, to all His Majesty's good Subjects of this Kingdom,
concerning their resolutions for Religion, King and Kingdom, etc. After they
declare, That violent seizing on His Majesty's Person, and carrying Him away by
that Army, against the resolutions, of both Kingdoms; so be a breach: And they
declare, they intend to send to the two Houses of the Parliament of England,
the Desires following; which they call, Necessary and just Desires for
Religion, His Majesty's good, and Peace of these Kingdoms; whereof this is one,
That conform to the former desires of this Kingdom, The Kings Majesty may come
with Honor, Freedom and Safety to some of His Houses in or near London; and
declares, that thereafter they will endeavor it; and Act 8. in their desires
to both Houses Parliament in England, the same desire is repeated, Conform to
the former desires of this Kingdom. By all which it is clear, That the seizing
upon His Sacred Majesty's Person, was the violent deed of that wicked-Army,
done with a violent surprisal, against the declared resolutions of both
Kingdoms. And that His Majesty's coming to some of His Houses in or about
London, where both Kingdoms might make applications to Him, conform to His
Kingdoms desire (which is that wherein the the Estates declares their
concurrence with His Majesty, and both Houses of Parliament in Englands desire
in the said tenth Act) is approven as a just and necessary desire for His
Majesty, and accordingly enacted among that Parliament, 1648. their desires to
the said Houses, and declare it should be endeavored, if refused, so highly is
it approven by the said Parliament. In respect whereof, specially of the
standing Acts of Parliaments, 1648. the Defender humbly craves, That albeit the
Article was relievantly, distinctly, and clearly libelled and subsumed on some
of the Acts of Parliament in the Proposition condescended on (as he humbly
conceives is not) yet he ought to be assolized therefrom.

And for further clearing what was the ground and occasion of that Act, and the
reasons inducing the Defender and the Parliament at that time to go along
therein, and how little ground there is for challenging him thereon, it would
be considered, That when the late King came to the Army before Newcastle, the
Defender was in Ireland, by Commission from the Parliament, 1646. and that His
Majesty's Declarations anent the grounds of His resolution in coming to the
Scots, was sent both to the Committee of Estates in Scotland, and to the
Parliament of England; so that the same being printed before the Defender came
to Newcastle, he neither did not could know any other ground of his coming, nor
what was contained in His Declaration, viz. His gracious Resolution to comply
with His Parliaments in both Nations, and those entrusted by them in every
thing, for settling of truth and peace; and that he would totally commit himself
to their counsels and advises. Upon which terms, both the Committee of
Scotland, and Officers of the Army, declared to His Majesty, and to the
Parliament of England, that they received him: And all this before the Defender
came from Ireland to Newcastle; from whence. His Majesty sent him with
Instructions to the Commissioners at London (of which Commissioners the
Defender was one also) to hasten the Propositions; and privately commanded the
Defenders, to take the advice of the Duke of Richmond, and Marqueis of
Hertford, anent what might concern His Majesty; and particularly, if it was
fit, that the Scots Army should declare for His Majesty; whose judgment and
opinion was (which they conjured him to tell his Majesty) that such a course
was the only way at present to mine his Majesty, for that he himself knew,
That neither the Nobility or Gentry of England, who attended him at Oxford,
wished him to prevail over his Parliament by the sword; and much less, would
they endure the Scots Army to do it, and that it would make all England as one
man against him; And that it was their earnest request to His Majesty, by any
means to give way to the Propositions. Which advice he not only faithfully
told to His Majesty at Newscastle, and many others there, and to our gracious
Sovereign who now is, when he was in Scotland; but also being in the Tower, he
entreated the Lieutenant thereof to propose for him, that the Marquess of
Hertford who was then alive, might be examined in this matter; which was put
off from time to time, because of His Majesty's great affairs. And as it is
most certain, that as neither Independent nor Sectary was able to carry one
vote in the House at that time, so it is notior, that they who tendered His
Majesty most in England were for disbanding the Scots Army, and His Majesty's
(...) in England, wherein the Defender appeals to the particular knowledge of
the Earl of Landerdale, London, Sir Charle Erskin, and the rest of the
Commissioners then there; and it is of truth which all know, that so little
fear; suspicion and jealousy there was of what followed, That the great fear
of His Majesty's friends in both Kingdoms was, That if he fixed on his Subjects
in Scotland, all England would be against him, and probably cast off His
Government and Interest forever: So that under what representation soever the
matter may now appear (because of the sad sequels) (...) to them who know the
matter as it was there shared, what Declarations and Assurances there were from
the Parliament of England, and how little fear of the prevalency of Sectaries,
it did appear to be an act (if not of necessity) at least an act very expedient
and convenient for the time, other ways many who did assent thereto which never
have condescended; and consequently the defendors concurring therein, upon such
probable grounds can be no such crime as is libelled; nor is it releivant to
answer the conclusion of the Dittay.

To the second member of this Article, bearing, that under present for
satisfaction for the arrears of the Army he went to London, and there
treasonably gave up, at least condescended to the upgiving of his dread
Sovereign and Master, as being empowered so to do by the Kingdom of Scotland.

It is answered (...) member is not relevant, because neither the time of this
going to London, (...) of his being these, the persons to whom he condescended
to give up, are not particularly mentioned and set down.

By which generally he is precluded from several defenses (...) arise to him if
the Ditay were clear, and it is a principle in Common Law and of constant
practice, That non et vagandum in crimin^e sed debet certum and speciatim dici,
for that dolus and error (...)in generalibus.

2. No ways acknowledging the relievancy of the subsumption herein, upon any of
the Acts of the Proposition; till the same be clearly condescended on, and
craving the same may be first done, Oppones the Act of Parliament, and the
truth is while the Defendor was at London there was nothing spoken at all by
him of leaving his Majesty in England except what he was expressly commanded by
his Majesty to speak to Richmond and Hertford as aforesaid.

To the third Member of the eighth Article, bearing, That in a joint Committee
of both Kingdoms, where the English questioned whether the Scots Army would
concur with them in their said Treason and Treachery; the Defendor after many
arguments used in their favor, earnestly requested them to have patience for a
little time, and that it would appear how far they intended to concur: And that
within few days thereafter there was a Declaration and Vindication emitted in
name of the said Army, holding forth That in case his Majesty did not
condescend to all the desires of both Kingdoms, which were no less then
divesting himself of all Regal Power, Civil, Ecclesiastical and Military, they
would deliver him up, which immediately upon the receipt of Two hundred thousand
pounds the Defendor and they did.

It is Answered, That adhering to the former defenses anent the subsumption,
and repeating it here, This member although it were rightly subsumed (as it is
not) is most irreleivant and general in time, place, person and speeches,
mention being made of many arguments, and never one produced, and of a Question
and Answer, out of which (even as libelled) Treason cannot be inferred, viz.
That the Defendor requested them to have patience a while, and it would appear
how far the Army intended to concur; but within few days after the Army
declared themselves in manner as aforesaid. Seeing these alleged words of the
Defendor, as they are indefinite and general, so the most they could infer is,
That in a short time it would appear whether the Army would concur or not; and
what can from thence be infered, as to any thing the Army did; if they have
outshot their duty, as it was in regard of him, with the speaking of these
words, a future contingent wherein the Defendor had no causualty, so they must
answer for themselves, and not the Defendor.

And for ought he knows there was never any such Declaration emitted, neither
should there be any captions use made of words, if there had been any such
words spoken, as there was never, especially to infer his Treason, for that
Lubricum linguae, is oftener a frailty then a fault; and that by all Doctors of
both Laws it is constantly held that verba debent intelligi ne sonent in
delictum. And that in dubio they should be interpreted a proferenti. And
therefore no ways acknowleding the words and deeds libelled, except in so far
as concerns the Defendor his vote to the Declaration, and as the circumstance
libelled, That the delivery of his Majesty was immediately after the payment of
200000 l, it is clear that there was no respect to that money in what was done
therein, by the Act of 7. Parl. 1648. wherein the Estates there declare, That
money was never the cause nor motive of any of our undertaking and resolutions,
whatever enemies had falsely suggested of that kind. And lastlly, adhering to
his former defenses oppones to this whole Article the Treaty at Breda, and the
Acts of Parliament of Oblivion and Ratification.

As to the Ninth Article, and whole first member thereof, bearing, That the
Defendor opposed the proceedings of Parliament, 1648 by arguing, voting, and
after the resolutions of Parliament were past in an Act, in protesting against
the same.

It is alleged for the Defendor, 1. It is not condescended under which of the
Acts of Parliament libelled on in the proposition, this Article is subsumed,
and therefore the libel as to that member of the Article, for arguing, voting
and protesting, is inept, and the Defendor has just reason in such an
incertitude to deny it that can be releivantly subsumed on any of the said Acts
of Parliament.

2. Arguing and voting is no ways releivant to infer the conclusion of the
Ditray, because by Divine law, Law of Nations, Statutes and practices of this
Kingdom, in deliberando, a Member of Parliament or other Council should give
advice or suffrage according to his persuasion of the good or ill of the
subject debated on, and under consideration, wherein if his reason cannot bring
him up, nor his conscience admit him the length of others in such public
Counsels; he ought to have charity for the one and excuse for the other.

Like as by the 5. Act Parl. 2. K. Charles the First, It is expressly statute
That every member of Parliament shall faithfully and freely speak, answer and
express themselves upon it and every thing which is propounded in so far as
they think in their conscience may conduce to the glory of God, the peace of
the Church and State, and employ their best endeavors to premove the same.
Under which oath (read in the audience of the late King, and by him approven in
the Parliament 1641.) the Defendor, as a Peer of that Parliament in anno 1648.
was solemnly tied to the Dictates of his Reason and prescripts of his
Conscience, and cannot be called in question as a member, having freedom
therein: and conform thereto, is the oath of this present Parliament, bearing
that every member shall faithfully and freely according to their best judgment
give their advice and vote in Parliament.

To the second part of the first member of the said Articleanent the Defendor
his protesting and dissenting from the said Act, 1648.

It is alleged for the Defendor, The Protestation not produced, as it ought to
be, whereby it will appear that if any was, the same was before the Act of
Parliament past, and that they did only proteste and enter their dissent
against proceeding to the determination of the question then in hand which
evinces the same to have been before the Act was made. Like as the Defender
offers himself to prove by the Members of Parliament then present, That being
asked if they would renew the Protestation after the Act, they shunned to do
the same, the Act being now past.

2 Absolvitor (Though the same were produced) because it is offered to be
proven, That the same was ratified In the fourth Act Parl. 2. Sess. 2. Cha. 2.
which was approven at the Treaty at Breda, and confirmed at Perch and Sterling,
as is said. But for the honorable Parliament, their more full clearing anent
the Defenders carriage in the said particular, It is offered to be proven, if
need be is, That the Defender (before the Commissioners return from the said
Isle of Wight, in the said year) when he heard that His Majesty had satisfied
his peoples desires concerning Religion, in presence of diverse persons of
honor, he expressed himself passionately earnest to engage for his Majesty's
freedom. Like as the only difference of the opinion anent the Engagement was in
the manner the grounds of these that were dissatisfied, being as they are
expressed in the said Protestation, viz. That the Parliament should not proceed
till the Commission of the Church were consulted and aiding also (which is not
therein expressed) till advertisement and three months warning were given,
conform to the large Treaty; until all means of peace had been first essayed,
and while first the lawfulness and necessity of that war should be found by the
Parliament, conform to the 7. Act thereof. And it is humbly conceived that many
in this present Parliament do remember how unanimous all were that His Majesty
should be brought out of the hands of the Sectaries, to some of His Houses in
or about London. And all they differed in was, That the Church should be
consulted anent the securing of Religion, all means of peace should first been
essayed, and warning given in manner aforesaid, conform to the large Treaty,
the breach whereof was made one of the grounds of that Declaration, Act 7. And
it cannot be refuted but that at several meetings the dissenters debated the
dangerousness of of that War (especially if the Army should be defeated) from
the sad consequences that might thereupon ensue to King, Kingdom and Religion,
as immediately, thereafter fell out. Whereas had the Nation been entire and
whole in their power and force that Army of Sectaries in probability would not
have dared to have attempted those matters which afterward they did; so that
the case being truly stated there will appear no malice against his Majesty's
Person, Authority, and Restitution thereof, but an unclearness to enter into a
War of such danger and hazard, and the respect they had to the security of
Religion (as all then prosessed) according to the Covenant,

To the second member of the Ninth Article, whereby it is alleged, That in
contempt of the authority of that Parliament, and against the preservation of
his Majesty's person and Authority; that the Defender convocated an Army of
rebellius Subjects, and therewith committed diverse and sundry outrages,
slaughters and vastations upon the persons and estates of his Majesty's
Subjects, invaded Cities and Castles, seized upon Magazeens; Arms and
Ammunition, and called in an Army of Sectaries to his assistance.

It is answered, 1. That the same is not relievantly subsumed upon any act of
the proposition; at least till the Advocate condescend upon which Act thereof
the same is founded, the defendor is not bound to make answer.

Secondly, The Defendor denies that he did convocate these Forces, or gave
counsel or command therefore; and as to his being with them he must be assolied.

1. Because by a treaty at Sterling betwix^ the chief Officers in the Army then
alive, and out of prison, and a Quorum of Members of the Committee by authorite
of Parliament, 1648. who had power to order the incident affairs of the Nation,
the said meeting, and all acts of hostility, and others thereby committed are
expressly discharged, (...) inde and a mutual Oblivion and Indemnity therefore.

2. Any meeting he had with them was by a call of those of the Committee of
Estates, who joined with those forces, and who in the Treaty is acknowledged
the Committee of Estates.

3. The said meeting and acting thereof, together with the Treaty and Articles
thereof is ratified and approved by the third Act 2 Parl. 2 Sess. Chapter 2.

The third member of the ninth Article, bearing That apprehending his power was
not able to withstand his Majesty's good Subjects, The Defender called in to
his assistance the Army of Sectaries, and that he went into Mordington and
(...) with the Commander of that Army, had private consultations with him, and
prevailed with him to come to Edinburgh with his Army, whose coming he might
have hindered, Because Oliver said That he could not help his lying upon the
Tenants of Mordington, for that his staying and going depended upon the
Defender: And that he did countenance and consult with the Sectaries and their
Commanders in Edinburgh or the Cannygate, in the house called the Lady Humes
Lodging.

It is answered, That as to speeches and consultations in general, not
releivant except they were condescended on^ and as to the words spoken by
Cromwell, if spoken by him, it was a lie, and can infer nothing against the
Defendor, and the occasion of his stay was till he got Barwick and Carlisle;
which could not be restored till the Treaty at Sterling was closed: And as to
his his meeting and treating with him, (...), because he and others did the
same by warrant of the Committee, and which Treaty was ratified in the foresaid
Act of Parliament thereafter.

To the Fourth member, That he concealed and voted to the drawing up of a
letter directed to Cromwell, wherein he and his Accomplices engaged themselves in
name of the Kingdom of Scotland, to do their utmost endeavors, that none who
had been access^ry to the Engagement, or in arms at Sterling in pursuance
there^f should be employed in any place of trust, without the advice and
consent of the Parliament.

It is answered, 1 No such letter produced. 2. Though it were produced, yet
consenting and voting not releivant, Because a vote in the Committee of Estates
can infer no crime against the Defender or any member thereof, nor any Act past
in the said Committee, especially seeing, 3. The Acts of the said Committee was
ratified in the fourth Act of the Parliament foresaid, all ratified thereafter
by the Treaty at Breda, and Acts of Ratification at Perc^ and Sterling; and the
necessity thereof, would be also considered, in respect of the large Treaty,
both Kingdoms having given their public faith that the breakers should be
rendered up to the observers, and that the English Army then upon the borders
required the performance thereof, against the engagers and for further
security, pledg^s and places of strength: It was at that time counted a great
favor (considerin^ their power to have made their own terms) when they might
have imposed and forced to what they pleased more, yet they did accept this act.


To the Fifth member of this Article bearing, That he did draw up, at least did
counsel the drawing of certain instructions, given to Sir John Chiefly,
proporting, That the Noblemen, Gentlemen of quality and considerable Officers
who went into England under Duke Hamilton, and were there prisoners should be
kept as pledges for the peace of the Kingdom.

It is answered 1. Not produced as it ought to be, that it may thereby appear
whether he subscribed the same or not. 2. Not rele^vant (one of the Committee)
except it were libelled present, and voted at that time, for Noxa capu^
sequitur. 3. Not releivant, voted Quia in Senatu nemo tenetur de consilio. 4.
Oppones the Authority of the Committee, Treaty, Acts of Parliament, and
Ratifications aforesaid.


To the last member of this Article, bearing, That he gave warrant under his
hand, for issuing of a Proclamation against the Families of the Lord of Ras
and Vyres.

It is alleged for the Defender, 1. No such warrant produced, if any such
warrant were produced under the Defendors hand, it will certainly appear to be
as President of some Committee, and so not his personal deed, nor such a deed
as can infer any a crime against him. 3. No such Proclamation ensued. 4.
Although ensued, yet that took no effect, and so was Mine tantum et animus ad
effectum non perductus. 5. Oppones the Act of the Committee, and Act of
Parliament, 1649. aforesaid, which Parliament and the whole Act thereof is
ratified in the Treaty at Breda and approved in the Parliament at St.
Iohnstores and Sterling, wherein was also made an Act of Oblivion, oftentimes
before alleged on; in respect whereof the defendor ought to be affolzied from
the said Ninth Article and whole member thereof, and all therein contained. And
because the Defendor has in his defenses so often alleged the Act of
Parliament, 1649. for his vindication, he desires that it may be observed
(which is very observable) that by the printed Treaty at Edinburgh and
Sterling, September 1648. it is agreed and appointed by those of the Committee
at Sterling, 1648, that a Parliament should sit down before the 10. of January
next; conform thereunto they did convene and sit down the fourth of the Month
of Ianu. as by the said Treaty, and the first and third Acts of the Parliament
does appear, whereby it is clear That the said Parliament, 1649. was appointed
to sit by the Committee of the Parliament 1648, who had power by the last Act
of the said Parl to convene the Parliament before the first Thursday in March,
1650. if they thought fit; as also that Sess. of the Parl. 1649. by the last
Act thereof continues the same to the first Thursday in March 1650. at which
day they convened in the next Sessions, and therein ratified the Act of
Parliament made in the former Session, and which day was the diet to which the
Parliament 1648. continued the same with power, to the Committee of Estates, to
convene the same sooner, if they thought fit, as is said. Whence it is evident,
that the said Parliament, 1649. whether as appointed by the uncontroverted
Commit, 1648, at Sterling, in the first Session, or as is continued to the
first Tuesday of March, 1650. in the second Session (both conform to the last
Act of the Parliament, 1648. must subsist and sway the said Defender his just
reason, to found his Defenses upon the acts thereof. It is also further
considerable as to the Loyalty of that Parliament, that therein the murder of
his late Majesty was declared against, his present Majesty proclaimed and
brought home, his subjects of this Nation reconciled to him, and taken into
favor, an Army appointed to oppose his Enemies, the Crown set upon his head,
and that Session of Per^h, wherein the whole preceding proceedings were
approven, was dignified by the presence of his Royal Person.


And to the tenth Article, and that part thereof where it is libelled, That the
Defender in Anno 1649. not daring to oppose in public, or in a direct way His
Majesty's home coming, he procured the Application made, ^o be clogged with
such Limitations and Restrictions, as were most derogatory to Monarchical
Government, as is alleged to be ^^re fully expressed in the Commission,
Instructions and Addresses, which are repeated as a part of the Libel.

It is alleged for the Defender: 1. Seeing the said Commission, Instruction
and Addresses are libelled on, and repeated as a part of the Dittay; in all Law
and form of Protes, they ought to be produced with the Libel, for the reason
adduced in the defense, against the relievancy of the proposition of the
Dittay; and till which be produced, it cannot be consistent with the said
Limitations and Restrictions, and how far they are derogatory to Monarchical
Government, and therefore till then, there can be no Process. 2. It is not
condescended nor cleared on, which of the acts libelled on in the Proposition,
this Article and members thereof are subsumed, and therefore it is obscure and
inept; and in that incertitude, the Defender has just reason to deny, that it
can be subsumed on any of the said Acts, to infer the crime and pain libelled
against the Defender, none of the said Statutes making any mention of treating
or infering any pain therefore; likewise after ruptures and differences betwixt
a King and his Subjects, all Lawyers and Politicians do agree, That the best
and safest way of removing the same, is by Treaty; and being concluded on, it
is also their opinions, That the same are to be observed, at least so far as to
exempt the Subjects from punishment, to whom indemnity has been thereby
promised; and in this Gr^tius de Iure belli and pacis, lib. 3. cap. 19. is most
clear, and many others, who write on that subject; and therefore the said
Treaty being concluded, and after ratified by his Majesty and his Parliament,
the Defender cannot be called in question for his accession thereto, nor the
pain of Treason thereupon inferred; for the said Treaty and conditions thereof
being accepted and agreed to by his Majesty's voluntary Contract cannot be like
as a crime, far less so high a crime as Treason against the Defender. 3.
Absolu^tor from that member of the said Article, because not only after the
said Treaty, did His Majesty ^acitely remit any crime, if any was, in the said
Treaty, by admitting the Defender to places of trust, by receving the Crown
from his hand at the Coronation, and by admitting him to take the Oath of
Allegiance, and to be a Member of his Majesty's privy Council; but also after
the said Treaty was ratified, there was an Act of Pardon and Oblivion by his
Majesty and Estates of Parliament oftimes before alleged, and is here
repeated.


Though the above written defenses be relievant in Law, as to the said member,
yet for the Defenders further vindication, the Honorable Parliament would take
notice, that all along the preceding A^^^^^es, all the public actings from the
year of God, 1640. to the year 1648. (wherein the Generality and
Representatives, both Civil and Ecclesiastic in the Kingdom concurred) are
charged upon the Defender as his particular actings, or as if the Defender had
been special author, whereas in this Article anent the treating with, and home
bringing of his Majesty (therein it is known the Defender, according to his
bound duty) was most active and zealous, and therein he wrestled with all his
might, and by his pains and Gods blessing thereon, overcame many difficulties,
and did effectuate the same. The Libeller does so far detract from the
Defenders faithful discharge of his duty in this so glorious action, and
without libelling the least presumption of any circumstance to make the same
probable, the Defender is accused, as if he had in his judgment been against
his Majesty's home coming; which because he d^rst not avow publicly,
therefore he betook himself to underhand dealing; To clog the Treaty with
Limitations and Restrictions; excluding the Defender from all accession to the
said duty, in so far as it was good; viz. To bring home the King. and making
him to be the sole author of all libelled to be evil therein (to wit of the
limitations and restrictions) whereas the truth is, he was active in the Kings
home bringing, and was passive in the other, having labored what he could that
there should be as few conditions, and the same as satisfactory to his Majesty
a was possible at that time to obtain, which is known to all that did transact
in the said affair, and which if need be, is offered to be proven. And for
further clearing hereof, if this Article shall be further insisted on, my Lord
Advocate will be pleased to condescend who the parties were, that made the
motion for addresses to his Majesty, of whom the Defendent should have been
afraid, if he had been of a contrary judgment, to have opposed openly; for if
the Defender had so great sway in affairs (as all along the preceding Articles
he is allowed to have had: and also, if he had intended (as is broadly and with
foul month alleged) in the said Libel all along alleged, to have extirped and
evacuated the Kings Majesty's Authority, Government and Posterity, and had such
correspondence with those abominable Regicides, as all are persuaded by the
said libel to believe, in the said year of God 1649. when the said Traitors
were strong, and both this land through divisions and otherways very low, and
when the power was in the Defendor and his accomplices their hands (as my Lord
Advocate is pleased to libel and term them) who at that time had the managing
of affairs; then was the fittest time and best opportunity, if they had any
such disloyal thoughts, to have shaken off that Government; but so far did they
abhor any such treachery, That they not only proclaimed His Majesty, and
according to their duty owned His Interest (even with the hazard of their lives
and fortunes) there being noneso shallow but easily might have seen that the
discharge of the said duty would bring upon themselves and the Nation the power
of England (the only power of Arms and Armies being at that time in the
abominable Regicides their hands) who did immediately thereafter invade this
Kingdom.

As to the other member of the Tenth Article, whereby it is libelled, That the
Defendor (to obstruct His Majesty's purpose, yea in so far as in him lay, and
to terrify him therefrom, by his and his accomplices crulelty executed upon the
Marquess of Montross, who as his Majesty's Commissioner did represent his
Majesty's person) caused to murder the said Marquess in anno 1650. in manner,
etc.

1. It is no way releivantly libelled, that the Defendor in general caused
murder him, except it were condescended qu^ modo he caused; and if thereby be
meant his voycing in Parliament 1649. in the said matter; non relevat, because
a vote, Act or sentence of Parliament is no way releivant to infer a crime
against any particular member therein, as has been often before alleged.

Likewise 2. The sentence of the forfeiture of the life and estate of the said
Marquess, was no decree of the Parliament 1649. but of the Parliament 1645,
which was homologat by several other Acts of Parliament, excepting the said
Marquess among other excepted persons, as specially by (...) and by the 22 Act
of the Parliament 1648.

And yet 3. The Defendor did not vote in the business of Montrost, as he can
prove (if need be is*) by the members there present 1649. And as to the
aggravations of the said Murder, the said Marquess being His Majesty's
Commissioner for the time, It is no way a releivant circumstance to aggravate
the same, except it had been libelled, That the said Commission had been shown
to the Parliament, which no body can affirm; but on the contrary, the said
Parliament conceived they had just reason to presume that there could be no
such Commission for his coming against them at that time, because His Majesty
after the murder of His Royal Father, very graciously had admitted their
gracious Applications to him.

Likeas before Montross his coming at that time to Scotland, and always
thereafter, His Majesty had a Committee of the said Parliament, under the name
and title of the Committee of Estates of His Majesty's Kingdom of Scotland.

As to the Defendor his alleged keeping correspondency with Cromwell in the
year 1650. As the same is irrelevantly libelled, no deeds nor acts or
correspondency being condescended on; so there was never any such thing. And
there was one named Hamilton, who vented this untruth, hanged at Sterling, and
at his death did declare, That the same was a most unjust calumny; and it is
not to be believed that at that time he would have charged his soul with a lie,
and in Law the words of a dying man are oriculously believed.

As to the Act of the West-Kirk, the Defendor (no ways acknowledging the
releivance of the said Article, as it is libelled) was so free from having the
least accession to the said Act or Declaration; that so soon as he got
knowledge thereof, to evidence his fidelity to his Majesty, it is offered to be
proved by witness (for their loyalty above all exception) that when the first
news came that the Commissioners were about the drawing of the said Act, the
Defendor gave advice to His Majesty, To draw a fair Declaration, and to go such
a length, as in freedom he could, that thereby he might prevene the said Act,
and obviate the pressing thereof: But as for the other that was pressed, he was
altogether against the same, and dealt with the Minister who came from the
Commission of the Kirk, to forbear pressing. His Majesty therewith, which also
if need were might be proved.

As to the eleventh Article and subsequent Articles, because the same are for
deeds of compliance after the Usurpers had prevailed and were in possession:
Before the Defendor make particular answer it is necessary to premise in
general, that it being notoriously known to the world (to the eternal honor of
this Kingdom) as for that damnable usurpation of Oliver, not only we were not
active in establishing the same, but according to our bound allegiance to our
Sovereign, were to the utmost possibility of our power in arms under His
Majesty, and other ways active against him, and in opposition thereto, many
lost their estates, many their lives, and all of us our liberries; and when we
could do no more, being oppressed by the force of the said Usurper (as a chaste
forced Virgin) we ^ried to God and man, attesting Heaven and earth against
Usurpers, even when their bloody swords were at our throats, he and his Army,
amongst many other execrable mischiefs, were also guilty of this usurpation. We
have suffered, and been only passive under that irresistible force. And as this
was the condition of the Kingdom, so specially the Defendor, who as he had been
most active and instrumental in His Majesty's home-bringing (which was the only
ground of the quarrel, and for which he was looked upon by them, as one of
their capital enemies) even so after it pleased God for our exercise and
punishment, to suffer their power to prevail over all his Majesty's Forces, and
over this Kingdom such aversion had the Defender, even so much as to live under
their power, let be, to comply actively with them, that after Worcester, the
Defender offered to Mr. David Dick, if he could get his company, or the company
of any other honest Minister, that he would never capitulate with any
Englishman, so long as he could subsist in any part of Scotland, either his
lands or Isles thereupon: It is humbly craved, that Mr. David Dick may be
examined; neither did the Defender ever capitulate with them, till August,
1652. having before that endeavored, all that in him lay, to have persuaded
those of Athol, Monteith, and other his Neighbors in the Highlands, to have
concurred with him, that they might have jointly made some probable force for
resisting the overspreading power of the Usurper, but all in vain: Likewise,
long before that time, the whole Forces and Strengths of the Kingdom were
surrendered, yea, the whole Kingdom, by their Deputies and Representatives (who
met at Dulk^ith with the Commissioners of the Parliament of England, so called)
was forced to submit to their power, and accept the tender of the union of this
Nation with England, proffered by them; Neither did he at the said time in
August, 1652. voluntarily come in and capitulate with the said English; but was
surprised (several Regiments of their Forces, horse and foot, having sudden'y
come about his House where he was for the time, lying deadly sick) as can be
testified by Dr. Cunningham, who was with him for the time, and is humbly
craved to be examined thereon: As also, notwith^^anding of the said surprizal,
and the Defenders condition, though they threatened, notwithstanding of his
sickness, to carry him away prisoner, yet all their threatening could not
preva^l with him, but he did absolutely refuse to subscribe the Articles first
offered, which contained the tender of the union, and an obligement upon his
part, to promote the same, and the Government as then established, and to live
peaceably; yea, such jealousy had they of the Defender, that by his
Capitulation, he was prisoner upon demand: Nither during all the time of their
power over th^s Kingdom, had he ever any favor of the said English, but was
always look upon by them with a most jealous eye: And for evidencing hereof,
the Defender humbly craves, that there be Comm^ssion granted for examining of
Lieutenant Colonel Utter (anent what was deponed by Mac Nachtan, and several,
viz. of the Defenders small affection to the English, or any other authority
but the Kings. Likewise, it is notorious how unjustly he was persecuted before
the Exchequer here for the time, for payment of 4^00 l. Sterling, alleged to
be rest and bygon few duties. This being the Defenders true case, it is hoped,
that the honorable Court of Parliament, will take consideration how the
Defender stood out as long as he could, till he was prisoner; and will have a
different consideration of Subjects acting under the lawful Magistrate in
exercise of his Authority by himself, or others lawfully constituted by him;
and of the actions under cruel Usurpation and Tyranny, the lawful Magistrate
being forced for his own safety, to abandon his Dominions and people to the
lust and oppression of the unjust Usurper, (who was Master not only of their
fortunes and persons, but their lives, and all that was dear to them) and had
for a long time detained the possession of his unjust Usurpation, and devouted
the lawful Magistrate: Which case is not only difference by all who write on
that subject, but also Cook, in the third part of the Institutes of the Laws of
England, cap. 10. anent his Treason, in expounding the Statute of the 25 of
Edward the third, upon the words of the Statute Le Roy, puts such weight upon
the Kings being in possession, or one of the same, that he expressly affirms,
the Statute is to be understood of a King regnant, and in possession of the
Crown and Kingdom; as also, that in such cases, a favorable consideration is
to be had of the actions of a subject who was particularly noticed, and
jealously looked upon by the Usurper, for his affection to the lawful
Magistrate and his Government: (All which being remitted to the Commissioner
his grace, and the Honorable Parliament their consideration) he now comes to
answer to the eleventh Article: Against which eleventh Article, and all the
members thereof, as libelled it is alleged, the said Article is general, not
condescending on the day or month, nor on the particular year of God of the
committing of the deeds therein libelled, but only alternative in Anno 1653.
or 1654. and therefore (as has been often before alleged) the same is inept, and
there can be no process thereon. 2. It is not condescending on, nor cleared,
which of the acts of Parliament libelled on in the Proposition, this Article,
and several members thereof, are subsumed, and therefore it is obscure and
general, and in that incertitude, the Defender has reason to deny, that it can
be subsumed on any of the said Acts, to infer the said crime and pain.

As to that which is first libelled in this Article, That the Defender did not
rise in Arms with the Commissioner his grace, and the Earl of Glencarn, who
were Commissioners by his Majesty. The Defender he repeats the two exceptions
aforesaid against the whole Article, being confident this cannot be subsumed on
none of the Acts libelled on: And further alleges, that it is not relievancy
libelled, to infer, ( vel minimam culpam) against the Defenders, far less so
high a crime, except it were libelled, that your Lordships Commissioner had
been showed him, and he required, which was never done: And herein he may refer
himself to the Commissioner, his Graces Declaration, and if his Grace does not
remember, that the Defender sent him word, showing his desire to have met with
his Grace, and to have spoke with him about the business; but had never the
honor to have his Graces answer or appointment.

2. For further clearing, that his not joining, except he had been required, is
no crime, it is evident from the fourth Act of the first Parliament, Iac. 1.
that those only are punishable, who does not assist the Kings Host, being
required thereto: and Craig. page 365, says, that because the King has so many
Vassals, they are not obliged, nor cannot be punished, except the particular
pain to be inflicted upon the away-stayer, be particularly expressed in the Edict
by which they are commanded to appear: and page 365. he says, That these who
come not, being warned by an Edict, shall be counted, and page 370. he says,
That the Vassal should not be obliged to appear at any such services, except
they be desired, which command should be proven by his Peers: These Edicts were
particularly required by the fundamental Law, and were called heri bona, which
is defined by Cujas to be the calling and citation of the Army, and is lib. 3.
c. 10. quart. leg. franc. to be the punishment of him who comes not to the
Kings Host, when he is called, and this assertion is clearly proven from Rague,
in his Treatise de Iur. Reg. page 53. Likewise by the said Act par. 1. Iac 1.
it is expressly ordained, That those who disobeys to enforce the King against
notorious Rebels against his Person, shall be challenged.

1. If they be required by the King, as is said, 2. And except they have for
them reasonable excuses: but sure it is, the Defender not only was never
required, as has been alleged, but there was even pregnant reasons, as he
humbly conceives, the which it seemed very probable at that time, that albeit
it be the duty of all his Majesty's subjects, to rise for his Majesty's
interest, in opposition to Usurpers, yet it was not seasonable, as affairs then
stood, till either they had been defeated by sea in the engagement that they
then had with Holland (whereby both the forces might have been diverted, and
the Transportation of Victuals and Ammunition from England, Ireland, and the
parts of Scotland under their command, and their Army in Scotland, might have
been intercluded;) or that Spain and France had concluded that peace whereof
there was then several reports, and thereupon his Majesty's subjects in
Scotland, might have had hope of some probable assistance in the undertakings
in his Majesty's service; or that division and in consequence confusion, had
fallen out in the English Army amongst themselves, whereof there seemed to be
but little hope, so long as the appearance for His Majesty should meet them as
against a common enemy, as it was. Likeas it would be thought it should have no
other effect; and as in effect the event proved, that that Army never divided
till they had no common enemy, against whom mutual preservation does
necessitate a mutual concinse, but all at amity one with another. And albeit a
particular command had not been absolutely necessary (if His Majesty had been
there in person) yet in a juncture of time wherein such a War was improbable
for many state reasons (which induces the Defendor to believe that there was no
Commission granted at that time) which presumptions excusant a dolo, and
without dole (as has been said formerly) there can be no crime: And though he
had been required, yet could not have been punished for his not obeying, seeing
in effect he was the enemies prisoner upon demand.
But this is conceived only to be libelled as an aggravation of what followed,
which is, That he joined in open hostility with the Usurpers, forces,
especially with the Colonels Overton, and Twisleton, at the least Cobbet and
Twistleton, at the least Twisleton, when he was in the Highlands, and in
opposition to the said Earls.

It is answered, 1. This member is general, not condescending upon the
particular deeds of hostility, and therefore inept, for criminal libelling
ought to be most clear, as is affirmed by Damband, cap. 30. prax. Cron. Number. 4.
and should contain all the qualities of the crime alleged committed. And as to
the alternative, That he joined with one or other of them, it is most lax and
obscure, and therefore in that also this Dittay is inept: And for the
alternative added (at the least he gave counsel) non relevat (because general)
except the counsel were condescended on, and that it were such as might fall
under the Acts libelled on; and the most that can be alleged, if the time
were condescended on of his alleged joining, is, that he was in company (it
may be with Twisleton, and if it was, he was only going along with him to
General Monck (being sent for by him, and that when the Earl of Glencarn was
under treaty with him, if not after the treaty was concluded, which he
conceives will not be denied) and the Defendor being their prisoner upon demand
by his capitulation with General Major Dean.

It is alleged first, That a Prisoner should go in company (being commanded
with, and to those whose prisoner he is) is nothing like a crime.

2. Though that had not been, yet he alleadges in answer to that member of the
alternative, anent his furnishing of several pieces of great Cannon to Alured
Governor of Air viz, That the Defendor and all that was his, or in his
possession, being under the absolute power of the Usurper, they might command
him to go or to call him where they would, with whom to go along, or to bring
whatever he had to them, had it been on his back had he been able to carry it:
And that cannot be imputed to him for any crime (otherwise who should be
innocent) when subdued; must they not give to their Enemy of their goods
whatever he will have? and who in Scotland should be innocent? behoved not all
to bring to them; that is in effect did they not take what they pleased: But as
for my voluntary going or joining in action with Twisleton, or any of the
others named in their service, the Defender absolutely denis the same.

Item, For his taking and releiving prisoners, Non relevat, except the Prisoner
were specially condescended on: Specially relieving of prisoners, is not
releivant to infer any crime, but on the contrary is a good office to the
persons and parties (except it is libelled that he as Officer under the English
service took and releived prisoners, which can never be made appear, whatever
the same might import. But the truth is the Defendor meddled with no such
things, and the Defendor shall truly relate the point of fact which he
conceives hereby to be meant, which is as follows, The Defendor hearing that
his Isle and County of (...) was pillaged, and going up the River Clydde, the
boat wherein he was being followed by another boat, and the Defendor having
asked what they were, they alleged they did belong to the Earl of Glencarn,
but could show no warrant, and thereupon the Defendor having some suspicion
that they were rather Robbers then Soldiers belong to the Earl, and fearing
that General Monck, whom the Defendor was then going to, and whom he had never
seen till that time, might get notice thereof, and make use of the same as a
friare, the Defender advised them to secure their money and arms in the hands
of one of his Servants upon assurance that the same should be delivered to
them, after he should be certified what they were, and thereafter recommended
them (fearing to incur the danger of a private prison) to the Carison of
Dunbarton, not under the notion of Soldiers under the Earl of Glencarn, but as
common Delinquents for injury done to the Country. And at his return after a
few days (being tender that they should incur no danger) procured their
releasement, and their names was never enrolled as prisoners to be exchanged;
and according to his promise caused redeliver their money and arms

As to the following member of that Article, viz. That the Defender took pay
from the Usurper for a company of Scots under them, and in their service.

Adhering to the several exceptions against the releivancy of the propositions
of the Dittay, and exceptions against this whole Article, in the beginning of
the answer thereto; special^y that it is not condescended under which of the
Acts libelled on this member is subsumed, till which be done the Defendor has
reason to deny that it falls under any of them. Neither is it releivantly
libelled, to infer any crime unless it had been libelled, That the defender,
having commission for that pretended Company for the English service at that
time, had levied or kept that Company, inroled their names as a formed Company
under the English and their Regiments, and engaged them to the Commonwealth and
their service; because these are required in a Soldier in any service. 1. That
he be Relatus in numeros, that is to say enrolled, per lexeod. 42. Y. de Test.
milit. 2. Vt praester Sacramentum, that is, that they gave the oath ex milit
11. F. eod. and viget 2. cap. 6. or that the defendor had employed them in the
English military service, or in execution of their orders, all which the
Defendor absolutely denies, they never having been enrolled, given any oath or
Engagement, or employed in their service, as is said.


But on the contrary, and truth is, there uses to be in the said Shire, and all
other places in the Highlands in broken times Watches to keep off depredations,
maisterful reifs, and other oppressions amongst the Country people, themselves
and their neighbors in such times: And accordingly in the year of God 1653. or
thereabout, the Shire of Argile not being able to entertain their Watch, and
pay Sess also (not being as yet well planted after the burning) General Monck
was prevailed with to help to entertain the said Watch (likeas at the same time
also several other Shires bordering upon the Highlands, as Inverness, Perch
shire, Aberdeenshire, Sterling, Dunbarton, all of them had Watches the said
times, and allowance therefore from the said General Monck) who within two
months did withdraw the said allowance from the said Watch of Arguileshire,
because they refused to engage against those who was then in the hills under
the Defenders Son and others, whom the said General Monck also alleged that
they favored; and thereupon withdrew his help and allowance for the said
Watch, and spoke of the Defender what his Grace pleased.

And to evince that this was nothing but a Watch, the men were not in a formed
Comany, but several Gentlemen men in the Shire had the ordering of several
numbers of them at convenient and needful places of the Shire, with
proportionable entertainment, and without subordination as ordinary Soldiers;
All which is not our, and if need be the Defender offers to prove. And the Duke
of Albemarle it is hoped will remember how much offended he was that the
Defender would not engage the said Watch against the said Lord Lorne and his
Parties, and what prejudice he did still entertain against the Defender upon
the said public account. As also Colonel Robert Lilburn, when the Lord Lorn
and Kenmoir went to Ken^yre in the year One thousand six hundred fifty and
three. The said Lilburn immediately upon the notice thereof having come with a
considerable party of the English Army to Dunbarton, and sent to the Defender
to meet him, and to go along with him in Arguile toward Kentyre: If the the
said Colonel does not know and perfectly remember that the Defender shunned the
meeting, and would not go, whereupon he returned back with the forces after he
was at the length of Lothlomond, whereupon the defendor humbly craves that he
may be urged to declare; As also that the Countess of Balcarras may be
examined, if the defendor did not assist her and her Husband in their passage
through Arguileshire, as they were going to a meeting at Finlarig, for the
business in the hills, in the year One thousand six hundred fifty and three.
Neither can it be alleged. That the defender or any of his people did the
least prejudice to any person or party that professed to be for his Majesty's
service; albeit if he had been so disposed, he had and might have had several
opportunities to have done the same.

As for the Member following, That the Defendor called the actings of His
Majesty's Forces against the Usurper, Rebellion.

It is most general, neither condescending on time nor place, and therefore
irreleivant and inept, but when condescended on he nothing doubts, but that
shall appear he spoke no such things, nor had he ever any such construction
thereof.

As to the last deed in the said Article, That the Defender in anno One
thousand six hundred fifty and four, took upon him power to bring off such as
was in that service, and to give remissions therefore, and particularly to John
Mac Dowgall.

It is general neither condescended on time nor person brought off, and
therefore inept, and irreleivant. And if it be meant only of the person named,
viz. John MacDowgall of Dumslich, it will never be made out that he was in that
service, when the Commissioner his Grace, and the Earl of Glencarn was in the
field; nor that ever there was a Remission granted by the defender to him or
any other in relation to that service.

As to the Twelfth Article and first member thereof, anent the defenders
countenancing and assisting by his personal presence the Tyrannical and
Treasonable Proclamation of Richard the Usurper and Protector of His Majesty's
Dominions at the Market cross of Edinburgh and Dunbarton.

The defender is so notoriously innocent of this Member of the Article, that he
might with much confidence (in place of all other defense) simply deny it. But
he will do no more for defense and clearing of his innocence, That where he is
to propone his defense of alibi, that there month and day must be condescended
on, whereof none is condescended on in this member of the Article; and till
this be condescended on it is inept, and the defender ought to be assolzied
therefrom; But the days of the said proclamation at Edinburgh and Dunbarton,
being condescended on, the defender offers him to prove that during these days
he was alibi, and neither at the City of Edinburgh nor Dunbarton all these days.

As to the second member, anent the Defenders procuring himself elected a
Commissioner for the Shire of Aberdeen; and accepting a Commission from them,
to Richards pretended Parliament, and sitting and voting therein as a Member of
his pretended House of Commons.

That the English Usurpation was one of the most horrid Usurpations that ever
has been in Europe, against all Divine and Humane Law, against the most
uncontroverted right of the most Illustrious of Kings, our dread Sovereign, and
his most Royal Father of Eternal glorious Memory, none of common sense or
honesty will controvert^ Next the said Usurpers having nothing but an
unparalleled, unjust detention of that power, whereunto no manner of way they
had the least right, or any title whatsoever; but in place of a title, armed
Violence and Force: The only mean (for title they had none) whereby they both
de facto attained, and violently detained that possession, unjustly, of that
power whereof the only right was, and possession ought to have been our dread
Sovereign. Whosoever by Arms, Counsel or otherways, aided or abetted that armed
Force, in establishing de facto of the power in the persons of the Monsters of
men, and so in setting up of that abominable Usurpation, that he is guilty of
the highest Treason, is heartily acknowledged: But the Usurpers having
treasonably thrust their and our Sovereign, his Majesty, from all possession
of his just right, and having taken upon them the Supreme Power; and being
possesst (though most unjustly) yet most peaceably therein, and keeping the
same by force, as they had taken it, the case then became most singular, as to
what the poor oppressed subjects under their force might do, hoc rerum statu
posito, in this state of affairs wherein the Usurper had treasonably put them
Luck Lama: and most accute Iuvis, Consult. Ecclog. 6. membran. in L. 3. de
Officiis pratorum observes learnedly, that Distinctio fieri debt inter personam
ejus qui Magistratum gerit (cum tamen jus ad Magistratum non habeat) and ipsum
Magistratum quam gesserit, persona enim ejus est privata hic publicus, and in
publicis non tanta persona quam utilitatis publica habenda est ratio, ut enim
tutela ait, Cicero, p. I. Offic. sic procurato rei pab. ad utilitatem eorum qui
Commissi sunt non ad eorum quibus commissa a gerenda est, and sapientes
deficiunt nihil aliud esse imperium ^^si curam rei aliens ut ait Amicanus
Marcellanus lib. 29. that is, ipsiusre^ pub. so Licklama distinguishes betwixt
the person of him who unjustly de facto Magistracy (whose person is still but
in effect private, and in the case of that usurpation a Traitor) and the
Magistracy which he carries, which is public.

Likewise, it would be distinguished betwixt Acts concurring with the Usurper,
transferring de facto in his person the power he usurps (which are treasonable
against the lawful Sovereign) and acts, whereby the oppressed subjects make use
of the power now usurped, wherein the utility, not of the Usurper, but of the
subjects is respected, as Lucklama observes, ubi'sep. And then Grocius, lib. I.
de Jura belli and pacis, cap. 4. number. 15. speaking de juvasove imperii, of any
unjust invades, while his possession remains unjust, says, the acts of power is
binding for the good of the Commonwealth; and because it is probable the lawful
Governors will is, rather the Usurpers command should be obeyed, or take
effect, then that Laws and Judgments should fall in confusion in their terms,
Restat at de invasore imperil videamus nunc postquam long a possessione vel
pacto just noctus est, sed quam diu durat in ju^ae possidenda causa and quidem
dum possidet actus imperii quos exercet vim habere possunt obligandi non ex
ipsius jure (quod nullum sedex eo quod omnino probabile sit eum qui jus
imperandi babet sive est populus ipse, five Rex, five Senatus te male int rim
rata esse que imperat quam, legibus Indusque sub talis sunsman induci
confusionem: and Lessius, who is one of the Authors Grocius cites upon the
place, says, In the place cited, viz. Lib. 2. de Justicia and Iure, cap. 29.
dub. 9, F. 37. That Tyranni usurpatiene potestatis mandatis obtemperandum
propter bonum commune; which is, that the Tyrant and Usurper is to be obeyed,
even from the Law of Nature, for the public good, in such a state of affairs;
and adds, alioqui omnia esset plenalatrociniis and furtis: That is, all would
be full of Robberies, Thef^s and Confusion in that state of affairs, because of
the Usurpers force, the use of no other Government can be had; so that the
necessity of the benefit of Government for the good of the subjects or
Commonweal (especially in what relates ad reipublica statum, in things
necessary for the standing of the Commonweal, or to evite the ruin thereof)
and the interpretative and presumed consent thereupon of the Prince, who has
the right to the Authority which the Usurper has usurped, but is excluded by
the Usurper from benefiting the subjects by it himself for the time, are the
two grounds whereupon the making use of the power now in the hands of the
Usurper is founded, as is said: Whereupon it is subsumed, that in our case, the
Invader and Usurper Oliver having violently taken upon him the power, after he
had put his and our Sovereign from the possession thereof, oppressed by his Armed
Force this Nation (and amongst others the Defender;) and Oliver having kept the
possession all his time, and Richard continuing the same, the benefit of that
power (which now he had usurped, and whereof he was in possession) was, as
always it is, so necessary for the standing of the Commonweal, that without it
men become but as fish in the sea, the lesser a prey to the oppression of the
great; but especially, the said Richard having called a pretended Parliament,
and commanded the Shires to send Commissioners thereto: Meetings and
Representatives of the Nation, as they are of great use at any time, for
treating common affairs of common consent, so transcendently at that time, for
moderating the Arbitrary Tyranny of a Usurper; and that, not being able to
expugn his force, they might by strength of Common-Counsel, overcome and
persuade his reason to things absolutely necessary, for the subsistence at
least for the preventing the ruin of the whole body of the Kingdoms, and of
his Majesty's Leiges therein, as was the stopping that miserable union, which
the Defender knew that it would be, as it had, been before, at even other
Parliaments, so at that strongly attempted, as indeed thereafter it was; which
union was that Vorax, wherein our Religion, our ancient Government Monarchick
in his Majesty's Person and Family, and the interest of Nobilities and our
Liberties; were wholly swallowed up; and under pretext of being united, we were
really enslayed to that pretended Commonwealth: The easing (if they could not
persuade him to the taking off) of the maintenance and Sess (which upon
Scotland, was six triple more then the proportion of England, and in it self so
heavy, with the Excise and other public burdens, laid by the Usurper on it,
that more was exacted in one month, then his Majesty's Royal Predecessors
would have imposed or taken of Taxation for an age, so that the Country could
not subsist under it;) as also taking off some of the Forces under which we
were kept in bondage, if that at least could have been obtained: The prevention
of the alteration and change of our whole Laws (which was vehemently threatened)
yea, and in general, the confounding and ( dolo optimo) circumventing and
defeating of the counsels by which the event proved, it was more hopeful and
easy to overcome that force, then by might or power. And as the liberty of the
Election of the Members in England, at that time of Richards Parliament made
service to his Majesty in it, hopeful to all his Majesty's friends and loyal
subjects; so was it no small encouragement to the Defender to go there for the
same end, and at the meeting in the Committee of Scots affairs, and several
other meetings, when they were upon the debate of the said union, the Defender
(of purpose to stop the same) did propone, that there could be no union, except
it were agreed, that we might enjoy joy our Religion in Scotland without
alteration, as it was established by our own Laws; and that we might be ruled
and judged according to the same Laws, and except our Sess were proportioned
according to theirs in England: All which concerns the Defender knew would
never be granted; and were indeed so utterly improbable at that time, that the
proposition thereof was construed for no other end, then for the end aforesaid,
to stop the said union: Likewise, it did so well succeed, as in effect it did
obstruct it (as the several persons of quality that were present can, and if
need be, will declare;) and at that meeting, the actings and usurpation of the
Usurper Oliver, and the oppressions of that Army were of purpose much called in
question, to make that Government and them odious, which accordingly happily
followed, and such a breach and confusion amongst them was made, that their
affairs thereafter could never come to any consistency, which made considerably
and evidently, way to his Majesty's happy and glorious Restitution: To all
which joining, That the call and command of the armed Force, has Pureness
necessitates, a necessity of obeying lying upon persons under their power; it
will follow from what is alleged out of these abovecited authors, founded
strongly on reason, the Defender in that state of affairs had necessity and
some obligation, to go and essay what could be by counsel, wisdom and prudence
(since now there was no strength nor might left) effectuate for the standing,
at least, to evite the ruin of the Country, in the particulars above
mentioned, and others of that nature; at least, the Defender, as all of us, was
under their force, and for eviting of his own and the Countries ruie, habuit
Parenes necessitatem: and by consequence there was no design of Treason
therein; but by the contrary, most loyal intentions, upon good ground of hope,
and very probable appearance: And therefore it is hoped, the Commissioners
Grace, and the Estates of Parliament, will not find this member relievant, to
infer so high a crime against the Defender ( how maxim attento) that beside
public ends, it was even a necessary self-preservative act, for the Defender
had several other things of personal interest, as that, that they had ordained
him to pay to them about (...). Sterling, for alleged few duties (aughtland;
and in time coming so much, that both joined, he was not able to bear) and if
need be, it is offered to be proven, and that he was most rigorously persecuted
for the same; not only threatening to use real execution against his Estate,
but also to imprison his person.

For eviting whereof, he behoved to go at that time to London, and could not
have his person secured from arrestments there, but by going in Commission: And
it is known, that his Majesty is so gracious, as in not a few, to excuse what
they did of that nature, to evite (though but their own personal ruin) not
imputing it to unfaithfulness in them at such a time; according to whose
glorious and imitable example, it is (with much confidence hoped) that the
Commissioners Grace, and Honorable Estates of Parliament, will have a
favorable construction of what the Defender did in that particular, being
necessitated thereto, both for public and private interest, without any
deceit or fraud, either in the intention or event, there being nothing at that
time, while the Defender was there, done for confirming the Usurpation, or
excluding his Majesty's interest.

Likewise, it may appear, that it was only the concourse both of public and
private interests and necessities, aforesaid, that moved the Defender to go at
that time; because, though he was desired oftimes before to go, yet he still
refused till then: He was one of the last that went to that, being the very
last pretended Parliament under their power; not till long after that
Commissioners had gone for the Nation for several years, and that all had
submitted to their Constitutions, and were of necessity made use of as Laws for
the time.

As for the aggravations of this Member, and to the first, That because of the
Defendants Nobility, he was incapable to have been elected, at least, might
have refused.

It is answered, That it is notor, Nobility was not then respected at all, nor
was any ground of excuse, the meetings to the elections being commanded to all,
as heretofore (and so Noblemen and others heretofore met promisculously through
all the Nation) as is notoriously to all known.

And whereas it is libelled, That he had not his residence within the Shire: it
ought to be repelled as irrelievant, because it is true, and was known to the
Usurpers, and their Ministers and underlings, that he had land within the said
Shire, and that considerable: so that he could not decline the said employment,
without prejudice, the will and lust of the Usurper at that time being
uncontrollable, and tied to no rules of law or justice.

And where it is inferred, That sitting and voting in that pretended
Parliament, he acknowledged his Majesty's power and interest to be in the
Usurpers person. It is answered, 1. He acknowledged the same no otherways, but
as all the Kingdom did, to wit, de facto,; for de facto the Usurper had taken
or possessed himself of the power, as his Majesty is pleased to speak of it, in
his Proclamation sanent commerce with Portugal, in October last, and had
detained the same for a long time: But neither the Defender, nor any other
loyal subject, ever did or will acknowledge, that de Iure the same belonged to
him, or that he had any just right or lawful title thereto (as also Lessius
says in the abovewritten place, speaking of them that seeks from Usurpers that
use of Government, whereunto he says, they are holden in and obliged, once
taking on them the Government, (though sinfully and unlawfully:) they seek the
benefit of it, says he not absolutely, but under a tacit condition, viz. If the
Usurpers will take upon them the Government, Petunt (says he) sub tacita
quadam condition si velit se pro principe gerere, speaking of the Usurper, and
that the Usurper would not give the use of the power he had taken upon him, but
in the way he pleased, was his crime which he continued during his usurpation.
In respect of all whiew, it is humbly craved, That the defender may be
assolzied from the crime of Treason libelled thereupon.

Like as for the defendors further clearing in this particular, it is humbly
desired that certain Ministers and others above exception, whom the defender
shall condescend on may be examined, if after his return from England in Anno
1658. he did not express with great joy his hopes That business in England, did
tend toward His Majesty's advantage.

Item, That a Commission be directed for examining Sir Anthony Ashly-Cooper,
and several other Englishmen above all exception, how the defendor express
himself in private anent his dissaffection to that Usurpation during his being
there the time of the said Parliament, even though to his very great hazard at
that time.

Item, That certain persons upon whose names also he shall condescend may be
examined, if the defender to their certain knowledge the time of Sir George
Booths rising (which fell out immediately after the defendors return from the
said Parliament) did not put himself out of the way, being informed that he was
to be secured, and thereupon delaid his journey to Caithness, and so readier to
have laid hold upon any opportunity that should have offered for His Majesty's
Service and restitution; that time being the most probable that ever offered
after Worcester.

As for the precept of Twelve twonsand pound sterling, which is alleged the
Defendor got from the Usarper.

It is answered, The Defendor did indeed obtain a precept, but not as a reward
of any service (which he never neither did, nor desired to deserve from them)
but for what they had wrongfully intromitted with, of the half of the Excise of
Wine and Strong water (whereunto the defendor had right by Act of Parliament,
before they had any power in Scotland.)

And as to the Thirteenth Article, First, For the whole Article, it is not
consented on what Act of Parliament, the same consisting of three different
members is subsumed, and till it be condescended on, there can be no process
thereupon.

And as to the first member thereof, anent the words alleged spoken at
Innerary.

1. No time condescended on, and therefore the libel in that part is inept for
the reasons before mentioned, for which a criminal dittay ought to be special in
the time at least year and month. 2. Whereas it is libelled, He rebuked the
Ministers for praying for the King; in the words libelled, or some such like
words; Non relevat as to the Ministers, except the persons were condescended on
whom he rebuked. 3. Nonrelevat, Some such like words; some such like being most
general, except the words were particularly libelled, alleged to be such
like, whereby the defender might advise his defenses, and allege why they
were not such like, as he would, if any words ever he spoke were condescended
on. For the truth is he never spoke any such words: And was so far from
rebuking any for praying for the Kings Majesty, That after the defeat at
Worcester (which is the general time libelled, wherein he should have rebuked
the Ministers for praying for the King) he himself caused continual praying for
His Majesty both in his Parish Church and family, yea even in presence and
audience of the English when they came there, though it was to his great hazard
so to do.
As to the second Member anent the words libelled and alleged to have been
spoken by the defendor at London, That he wondered how the people should be so
mad as to call home a Family whom God had rejected, and would never restore; or
some such like words.

First, This is also general, neither time, that is, year nor month, nor
particular place condescended on. Secondly, It is libelled, That it was in the
presence of persons of quality, they ought to be condescended on. Thirdly, In
so far as it is libelled the defender said The people was mad to call home His
Majesty: It is general and inept, not condescending what people, and what was
the occasion; if there was any motion made of calling home the King, whereupon
that should have been spoken, and among whom it was: And Damhanders cap. 30.
prax. com. number. 4. and others says, A criminal Dittay should be most clear and
contain, Omnes criminis patrari qualitates, lib. 30. F. de accus. and Bart. and
others, ibid. That it should contain all the qualities of crimes alleged to be
committed. Fourthly, Some such like words, Non relevat, except the words were
specially condescended on, which if they were the Defender would allege and
evince they were no wise such like, for the truth is, he never spoke any such
words, but on the contrary did all that he could there to make way for His
Majesty's happy Restitution; as has been at length cleared of before.
And was a very suspected person, in so far as in the year One thousand six
hundred fifty seven, Oliver was so jealous of the Defendor, That he commanded
him to stay at London, and not to return to Scotland, till his affairs (as he
was pleased to express) were settled: So that not without great difficulty, by
the mediation of the Lord Brongbil and Charles Fleetwood, he obtained his
liberty; whereupon the Defender desires the said Charles Fleetwood to be
examined, which he also desired at London. And not only was suspected as
odious to the English for his known affection thereunto: As is notorious and
has also before been expressed.

As to the third member of the said Article, anent the alleged speech in
Mastertones.

1. Neither the year nor month condescended on, and therefore general as to the
time, and inept. 2. As to the first member thereof, That he would own any thing
he had done.
First, It is exceedingly general, and not releivant, except what were the
things he had owned were specially condescended, and what time, year and month;
it is an unparalleld generalty, and therefore till made special, no process
thereupon.

Secondly, It can import nothing in common sense wherein to own a thing is to
acknowledge it for a man's own, But what he had acknowledged to be his own
whether word or deed, he would yet acknowledge, which is an expression of
ingenuity, and no crime, and this being the received sense of owning, the word
cannot be strained to any other sense, or if occasion should be taken so to do,
and that another sense could be put on that expression, yet being more
interpretatio capienda est, the most-being interpretation is to be taken. Perd.
ea qua S. I. 1. F. de reg. Iuris, as being both justest and safest by that Law.
And in ambiguous speeches, or such as may receive two sense, every man is the
best expounder of his own mind, and his interpretation ought to be admitted,
per Leg. in ambiguiis F. de reg. Iuris and other laws. But the sense aforesaid
is so plain that there is no place for caption.

As to what follows in the said member, That if what he had owned or done were
to do, he would do it again, albeit he had known that all that has been would
have come.

1. As is alleged against the first part of this member, this is exceedingly
general, but as to the time and month he should have spoken it on. 2. As to
what the things are that he would do if they were to be done, and that time
the things were done or owned to be done, on that the saying that he would do
if they were to do is a crime. 3. What were those things in particular, that
are understood or may be subsummed under the general of all things that has
comed to pass, whereupon it may be inferred, that that were a crime to the
Defender to have said, that notwithstanding of them he would do what he had
done if that were to do; and therefore the Libel in this part of the member is
also general, obscure and inept: And to evince the ineptitude of this
generality, suppose the Defender were thus indicted; You are indicted for all
that ye have done the times bygone preceding your being in James Mastertonnes
house after your coming for London, were not that ditty without all
controversy Irrelevant? Then is it not also Irrelevant to be indicted for
owning in general that he had owned, or saying in general, that he would do
that he had owned during that time if that were to do again, without any
further particular condescendance. Like as 4. There is a very clear and obvious
and benign sense these words may have (if ever he spoke, as he truly never
remembers that he spoke any such words, viz.) that if it had been possible that
times could have returned, and actions to be done under the same circumstances
and representations they had then, it is probable these same might be the
Defenders actions again, though he had known that had comed thereafter, not
having connection with or necessary dependence on these actings, each does not
so much as import his present thoughts or approbation thereof, but is very
consistant with a present disapprobation of the same; And is it not ordinary to
say, that if such times were as has been, or such motives or circumstances of
actions as has been, that it is very like I would be engaged in them as well as
others, or as I have been my self? And yet to say with great consistance I
ought not so to do, like as truly it is known, and if need be, is offered to
be proved, that the Defender, on the just contrary, had said to one Counselor
of Cromwels, and to many other famous Gentlemen, that things had been done
wherein he would have been very far from engaging in, if he had seen what
followed, which was the product of the corruption of evil men, that had abused
what was well intended, for accomplishing of their wicked ends and (till they
brake forth and could not be resisted) unknown designs. And the Defender hopes
the sense aforesaid is very clear, and even though it were not so obvious, yet
Rapienda est occasio quae benignus praebit responsum L -- Rapiend. 168. F. de.
reg. Iuris, That is any occasion should be even rest (as it were, though there
were some violence done to the words) for a benign interpretation, and
therefore by all means that interpretation of the words that may seem to
infer a crime ought to be eschewed, or if the word might be drawn to any
other sense, yet In dubiis benignior^ preferenda sunt, (as has been said) in
speeches dubious, the most benign sense is to be preferred pret. semp. 56. F.
de reg. Juri; or where words are obscure, or may suffer two senses, the parties
own interpretation is to be taken, as the best intepreter of his own mind; Per
ca quae^ ss. 1. F. de reg. Iuri: And odia sunt restringenda favores ampleand^:
what is odious (as that which may infer a crime against any) should be
restricted and favor amplified; and in general, the Judge is always to be
more inclined to absolve then condemn, and so consequently take the sense that
may absolve, rather then that which may condemn, Leg. Corianus F. de oblig. and
47. act. 5. The Doctors say, that voluntas and propositum delinquentis
distingunt facinora per legem expressam Leg. qui in Iur. 53. F. de furtis in
prae: That is the will and purpose of him that commits a crime, distinguishes
it, but velleitas, or voluntas in essicax, as it is called, not a will, but a
would is no purpose to do, and can be the cause of no crime, especially being
about things past, and qualified with an impossible condition, if things
already done were to do (which is altogether impossible) that a deed done can
return to have a new being and so to be done; and even there is some
presumption of that mistake may be in this from the very place libelled, in
which it is alleged to have been spoken, it being such as it is not
improbable, that men may be very apt to fail both in judgment and memory, and
so both wrong themselves and misconstrue others. And as for the aggravations
that follows, that by speaking these words, the Defender took upon him by
outward success, to give judgment upon the secret Counsel of the Almighty. 1.
As it is in nowise true that the Defender spoke any of the words libelled, so
this does (as he humbly conceives) in nowise follow upon the words immediately
going before alleged spoken in Mastertounes, viz: that the Defender owned what
he had owned, or would do the same if it were to do, for that is not any
Judgment given of any hidden counsels of the Lords, but in expression at most
of his own actions. And as for the words before these, albeit he had been so
presumptuous as to say them (as he blessed the Lord he never was) yet it is not
libelled that any thing that is therein alleged to have been spoken, either at
Innerarrey or London, was spoken or inferred from providence and success: For
the Defender blesses the Lord, he has been otherwise taught, then to use (or
rather to abuse) so Turkish an Argument, and which the Lord has by his
Majesty's happy restitution so signally refu^ed.
And as to the last Aggravation, that the Defender thereby hardened others, such
as otherwise was ill disposed, in their wicked courses toward his Majesty, it
is indeed a sad reflection upon others herein not called however. 1. It is so
general both as to these others and their courses, that it cannot, and the
Defender hopes it shall have no weight, especially considering that 2. The
Defender oppones his defenses of before alleged, against all the members of
this Article, whereby it is clear, that as they are libelled they can infer
no such thing, in respect of all which the Defender ought to be assoilzied also
from this Article of the ditty.

As to the last Article. 1. It is not condiscended under which of the Acts of
Parliament libelled on it is subsummed, and till then it is ineptly libelled,
and there can be no process thereupon: Moreover the Defender has the testimony
of his own Conscience, yea and of an higher, that nothing libelled therein is
true, albeit if he had said that the Usurpers hazard was great from his
Majesty, and if his Majesty's designs took effect, they were ruined, the same
were notour truths, and it ought to have been so; that is, it ought to be, and
it was good, they were in hazard from his Majesty's designs; and it was most
just, that his Majesty's designs should take effect to their ruin. And what
crime could be in so saying he cannot apprehend; however he never spoke any
such words to Cromwell or Ireton, which Ireton he never saw with his eyes; and
did far more abhor the least thought of giving counsel to challenge or
question his late Majesty upon his precious Life, and his Innocence shall rest
confident, absolutely to deny the same.

And as to the last part of this Article, whereby it is libelled that in Anno
1649. in face of the Parliament then sitting, he told that the Usurper Cromwell
had told him, that England and Scotland would never be at peace till the King
were put to death. The Defender adheres as to this part to the general
exception against all this Article.

That it is not condiscended under which of the Acts of Parliament libelled on
it is subsummed, till which be done there can be no process, and if it be
intended that it be subsummed under the 43: Act 2. p. Iam. 1. and the 134. Act
Parl. 8. and 10. Act and 10. Par. and 205. Act. 14. Parl. K. Iam. 6. all these
Acts, as both by their titles and tenours, and by Skeine in his Index on the
words leasing makers appears; and it seems by their conjunction in this
libell, they are understood also therein of lying and slandering his Majesty,
and his Progenitors, and the words libelled, though very horrid, yet seems to
be of another nature. And 2. to that Act 205. P. 14. Jam. 6. whereon only
anything can be subsummed against him for concealing and not apprehending. 1.
It is general as to the time when Cromwell should have told it to him, and
therefore inept till the time be condiscended on, which must be, especially
seeing if it be not condiscended on, to have been after the Engagement was
broken; nothing can be subsummed on the said act thereupon against the
Defender, nor on his not apprehending him, for he was not holden thereto by
that act expressly, except (according to Law) it had been in his power: But so
it is, it is known that at that time it was not in the power of the whole
Kingdom to apprehend him, whether his victory or strength be considered, or
the Kingdoms low and weak condition, at that time, wherein they lay open to
ruin by him, if the Lord had not restrained him more nor their power could
effectuate; and as to the concealing and not revealing, the Defender ought to
assoilzied, because by the express words of the act, that revealing is
declared to be such a revealing to some of his Majesty's Privy Counsel, or
some under Officer, etc. as that there through the Authors of slanderous
speeches may be called, tried, and punished; but that cannot be subsummed,
except it were subsummed, that the speeches were spoken before witness,
otherwise could not have been proved, and without probation could not have been
so urged, as that sentence could have been given thereupon, and the Author
punished, according to the words of the act, (which is also according to Common
Law, and which is hereafter cleared); like as if the word thereafter should
have been found treasonable, and the Defender not being found able to have
proved them, he should have brought himself under the crime of treason, for
accusing another of treason, and not being able to prove it, and therefore
could not be holden so to do: As also albeit the Defender had heard any such
words as is libelled (which he altogether denies) and that before witness, yet
through his revealing thereof the Author could not be tried or punished, for it
is noturly known it was above the power of the Kingdoms, at that time as said
is, or for many years thereafter, to punish him; and therefore the Defenders
not revealing cannot be subsummed upon the said act of Parliament, to infer
the pain contained therein, or related unto.

Lastly, the pains of the said Act, and other Acts before mentioned together
therewith, is not the pain of treason (as has been often before evinced) and
therefore the Defender cannot be convened for treason, or the pain thereof upon
the said Acts, but ought to be assoilzied therefrom.

But if this member of this Article be intended to be subsummed under the last
part of the proposition of the ditty, whereby it is alleged, that by Common
Law and practice of this Kingdom, all concealers and not revealers of any
malicious purpose of putting violent hand in the sacred person of his Majesty,
or purposing of killing and putting him to death, are guilty of treason; the
Defender protesting his Innocence in never concealing any such purpose, nor
the words aforesaid libelled (which he abhorres) he is so far from justifying
thereof, judging the horrid murder of his Majesty to have been the very ruin
of our peace and happiness; yet as to the releivancy of that part of the
proposition, in so far as is founded upon Common Law and practice only: The
Defender because of the preparative repeats what was before alleged in the
answer to the proposition, in that part thereof; and adds further, In crimine
lesae Majestatis, in the crime of lose Majesty, Number sciens tractatum
proditionis contra principem vel patriam and illum non revelans sit puniendus
poena mortis, That is, whether he that knows a Treaty about treason against his
Prince and Country, be punishable by death; Clarus l. 5. S. fus. pract. crim.
quest. 57. says, that many hold he is punishable by death: And that Cognol, in
his lib. Culpa caret F. de reg. Fursi number. 2, that it is the common opinion,
citing Alciat. in lib. tacere F. de. verb. sig. and m. l. Bona fide, number. 20.
F. de pass. and in lib. 4. of Cato number. 30. F. de verb. oblig. related also by
Gigas, de crimine lesae majestatis fol. 180. number. 10. Roll. Cons. 88. number. 10.
lib. 2. Careluprac. crim. fol. 253. number. 29. says, that all others follows
this opinion: and Baldus cries out in one certain Counsel, that because Bart^l
held otherwise, therefore his soul for that as a crime is tormented in hell,
where it is clear, that even by Clarus acknowledgement (which is very high
Treason) is not Treason by the common opinion of the Doctors, according as is
asserted by the famous Authors he cites, and whom he contradicts not therein.
2. And Clarus nothing contradicting, but this is the common opinion, albeit he
be of another with Bartol; that is capital to conceal and not reveal, yet it
is only in two cases, to wit, In tractatu qui fiat contra ejus personam vel
statum: That is, where he has been conscious to, and known any Treaty or
Consultation against the Princes Estate or Person: But as for other causes he
holds expressly, that the concealer, and not revealer, is not punishable by
death, in these words, In aliis autem casibus etsi sent comprehens in crimine
lesae majestatis non putatem esse puniendum paena mortis subditum qui non
revelaveret: And that he counsels Princes, even in these cases to use clemency
and humanity rather then severity, and to execu^e their Subjects, upon any
probable cause, from the pain of death. Whence 3. It is alleged, even
according to Clarus his opinion, concealing not releivant, to infer the pain
of death, except where the concealer has been conscious to, and heard some
treaty; that is, deliberate consultation against the Prince or his Estate: But
so it is the words libelled, especially what is alleged to have been heard in
Parliament, 1649. seems not to import that, being, as would appear, but
volitantia verba, if any such thing had been heard, which the Defender
absolutely denies; and importing indeed the author Cromwels thought or
opinion, that there would be troubles still so long as his Majesty ( horrendum
dictum) were not put to death: But Clarus lib. 5. prax. crim. F. fin. number. 87.
distinguishing betwixt cogitationem nudam, a naked thought, and tradatum or a
treaty or consulting, he affirms, that a naked or sole thought is not
punishable in any crime, no not in Lose Majesty, except only heresy, when
guilt is perfected in the mind: And thereafter number. 2. he moves the question,
Sed pone quis non steterit in meris terminis cogitationis sed ulterius etiam
processerit ad tractatum, cum aliquo de ipso maleficio committendo: But says
he, put the case that any has not contained himself within the bounds of a
thought, but has proceeded further to treat with any for committing the crime,
etc. Thereby making a clear difference betwixt a clear sole thought and a
treaty, about committing the crime: Now the words as they are libelled do not
import any treaty with any for committing that horrid Murder, but the
signification only of Cromwels damnable thought, what might be the Consequence
of not taking of the Life of our dread Sovereign.

And hence 3. It will follow, that these words cannot be subsummed releivantly,
under that part of the proposition of the Libell, because that any sense these
words seemed to have as they are libelled, would appear only to import his
naked thought of what might be the consequence of taking the life of our then
dread Sovereign, but no purpose of his to take the same; neither could any
presume, albeit his thought anent that consequence had been true, (as it is
most contrary to the truth) that yet any man, in whom there had been the least
sparkle of common reason, or conscience, would have purposed to commit, or
committed one of the highest evils of sin, to evit (though) very great evils of
punishment, it being a received rule among men, at least among Christian-men,
That the least of the evils of sin should not be committed to evit the greatest
of the evils of punishment.

4. Gomz a most excellent Lawyer is clear in his third tomb-variar. Resolv. de
crimine lesae majestatis, number. 8. That concealing even of treason is only then
punishable, when the concealer might prove it otherwise, not per text. leg.
nostris, in fine cap. de calumniat. and L. quae. accus. capite: cap. de edendo:
whereby it is said, that whosoever counsels to accuse, should have his proofs
ready, and who accuses falsely shall be punished as the party accused would be
if the accusation were proved; Gomz cites the Canon Law, Platia, Hippolatus,
and others for their exception, which a fortiori holds in our Law, whereby by
the 49. Act Parl. II. Iam. 6. accusing of any of treason, not being able to
prove, so that the party accused be acquit, being so far reprobate be our
Law, that it is declared, that thereby the accuser shall incur the same crime
of treason whereof he accused the other, is a sufficient warrant to the
Defender, not to have revealed that of Cromwell, if there had been any such
speech, as the Defender never heard any such, except he had witness to have
proved it; which neither is libelled, nor can be alleged, and therefore he
ought also to be assoilzied therefrom.

5. All these Laws anent concealing and not revealing (as the Defender humbly
conceives) must be understood where the treason is privately plotted, and the
execution thereof is carried on by secret conveyance, and which by revealing
might be crushed and prevented: But it is not our that the Usurper, as he had
the power of armed force, so he had the unparalleld boldness, to carry on his
execrable treason most openly, and that his power was such, as it was
impossible for his Majesty's poor Subjects of this Kingdom to resist (nor yet
his Majesty's other Kingdoms, thoguh far more powerful, and that many
thousands of them from their souls abhorred the said act) or prevent, and
impede the same. And if the Defender had heard any such words of the Usurper
(as he has just reason to deny he never heard) what ever they should import;
what probable reason might have been, for not revealing it at that time, from
the prevalency and power of that enemy, the condition of our poor Country, and
utter impossibility to bring him to punishment, beside the want of probation,
and so what place there were to Clarus his counsel of humanity, the Defender
leaves to the Commissioner his Grace, and the honorable Estates of Parliament
to judge.

6. What ever relievance there were in the Defenders conceiling, yet his
acknowledgement thereof in Parliament 1649. As libelled non relievant to infer
or prove it. I. Because a confession that prejudgeth a party must be Judicial,
that is, In Iudicio, idque, utroque, Iure, and Civili, Canonico, as says
Panormitane, C. Ex part Decret. de confess. number. 16. That it must be in
Judgment in a Process, wherein he who confesses is convened, as is clear by
Leg. 6. F. de Confess. Where the words are, Si dum quis convenitur,
confiteatur, that is, If any be convened, confess, etc. and Panormitane dicto
loco says, That to the end a Confession may prejudge him who confesses, it
must be among other requisites, super re litigiosa, that is, on any thing
letigious, or any thing in dependence or Process per. L. in confessionibus, F.
de Interrog. ait, The words are, Confessionibus falsis respondentes, ita
obligantur si ejus nomine de quo, quis Interrogatus sit came aliquo sit actio;
that is, any in making answer is obliged by false confessions, if there be any
action of dependence against him, upon that whereupon he was interrogate and
confessed, and Panormitane is express, ubi supra, That non valet confessio,
facta coram Iudice tanquam in judicio, nisi Iudex ad hoc sodent per Bartol. in
lib. si confessus, F. de custod. reor. that is, a confession is not valid,
though made before a Judge, as in judgment, except the Judge be sitting on
that business; whence it is clear, That the acknowledgement libelled is no wise
relievant to infer against the Defender what is libelled to have been thereby
acknowledged, except it were libelled that he had been in judgment conveened
thereupon, or that there was a Process depending against the said Defender,
wherein he had confessed what was libelled in judgment; and the Parliament had
been sitting on that Process, but so it is, that neither is it, nor can be
libelled, and therefore his naked acknowledgement not relievant, and in effect,
if in any discourse before the Parliament, any such word had escaped the
Defender, (which he no wise acknowledges) yet that such a passing and
indeliberate word, should infer or prove a crime, or so high a crime against
him, he is hopeful the Honorable Court of Parliament will be very far from
ever finding; for the very reason why confession has so much weight, is because
it is presumed that no man will confess against himself in judgment, that
whereupon he is convened and processed without great deliberation, which holds
not if the acknowledgment be given out of any process, there being no dependant
action or process upon the matter thereof: And therefore the Defender is
confident that he needs not trouble the honorable Court with more legal
dispute against the relevance of the alleged acknowledgment.

7. The words or acknowledgment lybelled as spoken in Parliament, 1649. Can
never be obtruded to the defender, nor that he was conscious to the Counsel of
that horrid murder of his late Majesty, because it is notour, and he offers
him to prove if need be, that the whole Members of the said Parliament, 1649.
And he himself amongst others in plain Parliament were purged by their Solemn
Oaths of all knowledge of, or accession to that wicked design in relation to
the Kings Majesty and House of Parliament.

8. And yet he is so confident he never spoke any such thing in Parliament,
that the day being condescended on, and diet of sitting of Parliament, as by
all Doctors is agreed it ought to be, then the Defender offers to prove his
alibi; he offers to prove (if need be) he was alibi all that diet, and so not
in Parliament, where he is alleged to have spoken these words, and yet that
the Defenders innocence as to the accession or knowledge of that horrid murder,
may yet further appear, it is known to many persons, and to some of the Members
of this present Parliament, that when Cromwell was in Scotland, in Anno 1650.
(notwithstanding it is known what malice he had to the Defender at that time)
In this particular he expressed himself concerning the Marquess of Argyle,
That he thought him a man that had neither Conragenor Honor to have been upon
such a business; and the Defender thanks God he had so much honor and honesty
as in nowise to be accessory thereunto, and to abhor the same.

9. The Defender ought to be assoilzied from their two last Articles, as from
all the other from the year 1641 to his Majesty's home coming to Scotland in
Anno 1650. because of the ratification and oblivion contained in his Majesty's
Treaty at Breda, and most full and ample Act of ratification and oblivion at St
Iohnstone and Strivling, Anno 1650. and 1651.

And in regard the deeds libelled are either such as preceded the Treaty and
Act of Oblivion in Anno 1641. And were thereby pardoned and buried in Oblivion,
or such as intervened after the year 1641. before his Majesty's home coming in
the year 1650. During which time he is in his Lybell charged with several
deeds which are irrelevant, and whereof the Defender is most innocent. And for
such public actings as the Defender is charged with and had accession to, the
Defender is also secured and pardoned by his Majesty's Treaty and gracious
condiscendance at Breda, which was also thereafter ratified in Parliament, or
are deeds of necessary compliance both for the public and self preservation in
that unhappy juncture, which compliance as it was sore against his inclination,
if it had been in his power to have helped, so is not no more then whole
Kingdoms did, and far less then many condescended to; It is in all humility
expected, that the Defender should not be brought under the compassof Law for
the same, which were as to make him the singular sufferer in so universal a
guilt, so there can be no precedent therefore instanced, either out of
Scripture, or holy Writ, the Histories of our own, or of other Nations, That a
Subject not having contributed to the said usurpation, but to his power
resisted the same, when the said unjust usurpation prevailed, expelled the
lawful Magistrate, detained (...), usurpation for many years (...) and
tyrannized over the people when the lawful Magistrate could not (...) for the
time, or protect, or help; That the said subject for his compliance, and using
endeavors for necessary, public, and self preservation, should be indicted of
so high a crime, is in all (...) conceived, without precedent or parallel, and
(...) contrary to the current of example and practice, that may be from
Scripture and other Histories adduced, and not so suitable to that goodness and
natural clemency, whereof his Majesty has given so abundant proof to others,
even the Usurpers and Invaders, and who aided and abated them (without envy be
it spoken) and which is not only most agreeable to his Majesty's gracious
inclination, but very suitable to that advice given by his Royal Father to him,
In whose words in one section there are as follows, Your Prerogative is best
showed and exercised, in remitting rather then in exacting the rigor of the
Law, then which nothing is worse; In respect whereof, and of the Defenses above
mentioned, the Defender ought to be assoilzied from this Libel, and whole
Articles therein contained.


