An Account of the PROCEEDINGS AT THE SESSIONS Of Oyer and Terminer, and
Jail-deliver of Newgate; Which Began at the Sessions House in the OLD-BAYLY,
for the City of London and County of Middlesex, the 10. of October 1683. and
ended the 13th of the same Instant. Where diverse persons were tried for
HIGH TREASON, Murder, Felony, Burglary, and other Misdemeanors. With the Names
of the Persons Condemned, burnt in the Hand, to be Whipped and Transported.
JOhn Derry was Tried for Killing Thomas Robinson, in the Parish of St.
Bartholomew the Great; which upon Evidence appeared thus: the Prisoner and
Deceased working together (being Printers by Trade) upon some Words passing
between them, the Prisoner struck the Deceased with the handle of a Printers
Ball, drawing Blood by the stroke; which happening on the 27. of June last, he
lived till the 23. of August, and then dyed; but no former Malice appearing,
and the Doctor and Chyrurgion giving Testimony, that they verily believed the
Deceased died a natural Death, not being any ways occasioned by that stroke,
the Prisoner was acquitted.

John Knight, John Paybody, and Thomas Edmunds, were Tried upon two
Indictments; for stealing two Horses, one from Sir Adam Brown, and the other
from one Mr. Tapin near Darkin in Surry; which being plainly proved, they were
all found guilty of the Felony.

Hugh Jones, Sidny Vandelo, Edward Williams, Charles Dod, and Charles Roberts,
were Tried for Robbing Richard Littleton of a Castor, and four Shillings in
Money, taking it from his Person in the Parish of St. Michael Cornhill, on the
27. of September the last, which being proved against them, and that Sidney
Vandelo, one of them, had run the Prosecutor into the Body, and that they were
notorious Pick-pockets, they were found Guilty of the Felony and Robery.

Elizahetb Hare was Tried for Clipping diverse Half-Crowns, Shillings, and
Six-pences, of the Lawful and Current Coin of this Kingdom. Upon Trial, the
Circumstances were thus: The Prisoner having a Maidservant living with her
some time since the said Servant swore, That she saw her Mistress Clipping
diverse times in her Closet, as also found Clippings there; with Files, Shears,
and Aqua Fortis: And further, That she had taken a Bond on her, to conceal her
Secrets. It was also alleged, That she had formerly Clipped, and had been
Convicted of it: And that diverse Instruments, and some Symptoms of Clippings,
were upon search found in her House. Against which she pleaded, That it was
done in Malice, etc. But in Fine, the Jury having received the charge from the
Court, they found her Guilty of the High Treason.

Jonathan Parsons, Joseph Roberts, and Robert Thomas, were tried for stealing a
Gelding, valued at 10 pounds, from one John Newman of Hampstead, on the 26th.
of August last; which Horse was sold to another person, by Joseph Roberts; but
upon refusing to toll him, the Horse and Money were stopped, and the true owner
found; but it appearing that Roberts and Thomas had no hand in stealing the
Horse, or that they knew he was stole, but ignorantly upon the word of Parsons,
that he came honestly by him, received him into their custody, they were
acquitted, and Parsons only found guilty of the Felony; but being tried on
another Indictment, for stealing diverse silver Tankards, from Mr. Page of St.
Bartholomew the Great, and there being no home proof against him, he was
acquitted.

Robert Barrier, was indicted, arraigned and tried, for robbing the house of
Nicholas Ransden of Chattam, on the fourteenth of September last, and taking
from thence a silver Tankard, a large silver Cup, and three Dramcups, as also
50 shillings in money; with which, according to the Evidence, he was seized as
he was coming for London by water, his Plea was, that they were givin him in
lieu of a Legacy of 15 pounds; but that not appearing, and he having been
formerly found tardy, the Jury brought him in guilty.

John Thomson was tried for stealing a long laced Scarf, valued at 3 pounds,
from Mary Haburley in the Royal Exchange, on the 18 of September last; against
him it was proved that he took the Scarf, and he being pursued, dropped it; but
he pleaded that he was far from the Exchange when he was taken, and that it was
impossible for him to get so far off in so short a time; but the proof being
plain, he was found guilty of the Felony.

Thomas Atkins was tried for stealing a Tankard from Elizabeth Green in
Foster-Lane, on the tenth of September last: the circumstances as upon Evidence
they appeared were these; the Prisoner watching his opportunity, when the
Prosecutor had turned her back, snatched the Tankard from off the Counter, and
fled, but being closely pursued he dropped it, yet he alleged in his defense,
that he had it not, but the Pursuers mistook the man, and laying hold of him,
permitted the Felon to escape; but those Allegations being confuted by other
Evidence, who swore positively to the Stealing and Party, he was found guilty
of the Felony.

John Smith and William Smith were tried for robbing the House of the Right
Honorable the Earl of Linsy at Chelsy, of Laced Curtains, Mantles, Silks, and
diverse other Goods, to the value of 50 pounds, which Goods, according to what
in Court was sworn by the Evidence, were found in the custody of the Prisoners
at a Bakers house near Newgate, to which the former Smith pleaded that he had
been tried and burnt in the hand the last Sessions for the said Robbery; but it
appearing, that although he was burnt in the hand for stealing a Parliament
Robe from the said Earl, yet this Robbery was committed since, so that his
allegation rather augmented than extenuated the Crime, and the latter not being
able to give any account of his Life and Conversation, they were both found
guilty.

John Piser was tried for killing Susan Roberts, by running over her with the
hinder wheel of his Coach at the turning of Russel Street, on the tenth of
September; but it appearing that he did it not wilful, for that he gave the
Children warning to stand up, and a Coach crossing him, that he could not keep
further from the wall, and that as soon as he heard the people cry out, he
alighted, and run back his Coach; upon directions received from the Court, he
was found guilty of Manslaughter only.

William Williams was tried upon three Indictments; first, for ravishing Sibila
May, a woman of about eighty years old; secondly, for robbing her, in taking a
Peing from her person; and thirdly, for robbing her house: upon the two latter
Indictments, the proof being plain, he was found guilty, but upon the former
acquitted, the party ravished not being able to say he was the man, by reason
as she alleged, he blindfolded her.

Christopher Moor was tried for breaking open the House of William Reeves, in
the Parish of St. Clement Danes, and stealing thence diverse Suits of Clothes,
to the value of 20 pounds; which fact, he confessed before the Justice, upon his
commitment, and not upon his Trial being able to deny it, by reason he had one
of the Suits upon his back, the Jury found him guilty of the Felony and Robbery.

Peter Crown was tried for Killing John Hilton upon Tower Hill, on the tenth of
September last; the which upon Evidence appeared thus, viz. the Prisoner and
the Deceased being together, the former upbraided the latter with his sitting
the Wooden-Horse; whereupon the Deceased calling him Coward, and demanded
Satisfaction; and had Answer returned him, That on the Morrow following, he
should have satisfaction fitting to be received from a Gentleman; but other
words arising, they went out presently and fought, when after diverse Passes,
Hilton was run through the body; but no premeditated Malice appearing, the
Prisoner was Acquitted of the Murder, and found Guilty of the Manslaughter
only.

Bernard Dison was tried for High Treason, for clipping diverse Half-Crowns,
Shillings and Six pences, of the Lawful Coin of this Realm; the Evidence
against him was, That he living with an Oyl-Man in Watling-street, had been
observed to have Shears, and other Instruments not pertinent to his business;
but above all, the Maid of the house searching for old Rags, under the Stairs
in the Cellar, found a bag with Clippings in it, and therewith acquainted her
other Fellow Servants, who told his Master, and upon search, other Clippings
were found about the House, at which the Prisoner seemed greatly concerned,
which gave them occasion to suspect him; but he upon his Trial denying the
Fact, and there being no positive proof of his Clipping, he was acquitted.

James Ogle was tried for stealing Money to the sum of five pounds, from one Mr.
Hauks, from out the Cabin of his Ship lying in Billings-gate Dock, the Proof
being, That the Prisoner was seen to put a Bag in his Pocket, as he came out of
the Cabin, and that the Bag the Money was in, was a while after found in the
Hold of the Ship; but it not being proved, that the Prisoner stole the Money,
and he alleging, that the Bag (...) had was not the Bag afterward found, he
was by the Jury acquitted of the Felony.

Henry Atkinson, John Fitz-James, and John Ruth, were tried for Killing
Nicholas Welsh on the eighth of September last, in the Parish of St. Clement
Danes; the Circumstances that appeared upon Evidence being these; Mr. Atkinson
and Mr. Welsh the day before the fact committed, coming over the Water, had
some Words at landing; but upon the former's promising to beg the latter's
Pardon, at that time nothing further was attempted; but the next day toward
the Evening, Mr. Atkins, Mr. Fitz James, and Mr. Ruth came to a Tavern where
Mr. Welsh was drinking, and according to promise Mr. Atkins begged his Pardon;
but Mr. Welsh afterward being about to depart, one of the Prisoners called him
into the Room where they were drinking, to enter which he seemed shy, but upon
promise, that all Animosities that might create a quarrel were laid aside, he
consented; but after drinking diverse Glasses, and he refusing to drink Mr.
Atkinson's health, Mr. Ruth began to pick a quarrel, by telling him, he had
spoke ill of him, in giving out at such a time he was Drunk, which occasioned
Words to arise, inso much, that Glasses were thrown at each other; and in the
end their Swords drawn, in which action, Mr. Ruth run Mr. Welsh into the Body,
of which Wound he died; but a seeming friendship appearing a little before, and
Mr. Atkins and Mr. Fitz-James, who were Indicted as Principals, not being
actually concerned in the Quarrel, they were acquitted; but Mr. Ruth found
Guilty of Manslaughter.

Thomas Hern, and Jacob Horton, were tried for killing Thomas Harding a Drawer
at the Crown Tavern in Fenchurch-street, the manner thus, as it appeared in
Court: The Deceased and the first Prisoner being Drawers in the aforesaid
Tavern, they quarreled about a Threepence given to the Prisoner by a Company
that drank in the House; whereupon, after some words, they went to fighting,
during which Encounter, Harding was much bruised, and from the 22d. of
September, languishing till the 24th. of the said Instant, died: But no
premeditated Malice appearing, and the person who fought with him being but a
Youth, he was acquitted; as likewise was Jacob Horton, upon the Coroner's
Inquisition.

Elizabeth Green, and William Standback, were Indicted for stealing two Silver
Tankards, two Cups, four Spoons, etc. from John Davenport in West-Smithfield,
on the 12th. of September last, which Plate, upon putting out Bills, was
discovered; but the former Prisoner owning the Felony, and acquitting the
latter, she only was found guilty.

Samuel Matthews was tried for stealing a Silver Tankard, Value five pound, in
Fetter-lane, on the 28th. of September last: Against him it was proved, that he
came into the House, pretending that a Neighbor was coming to him, and going
up Stairs, no sooner had a Tankard brought him, and left alone, but he, by a
Cord, slipped out at the Window, within some days after being apprehended and
committed, he by Letter acknowledged the Felony, and was found guilty.

Robert Delivere was tried, and found guilty, for stealing seventeen Shillings
from Thomas Agriman.

John Griffith, Daniel Reynold, James Warner, and Mr. Bamfield, four Dissenting
Ministers, were brought to the Bar, and demanded, Whether they would take the
Oath of Allegiance? But they refusing, their Refusals were Recorded, and an
Indictment upon the Statute of Praemunire found against them by the Grand Jury
of London; but it being late, and the Petty Jury by the Court discharged, their
Trials were deferred to the next Sessions.

James Rothwell, a Roman Catholic, had the Oath of Allegiance tendered him,
which he offered to take, but when he came to the words mentioned therein,
Asserting the King's Rightful Title to these Realms, and other His Majesty's
Dominions, and that the Pope had no Power or Jurisdiction therein, he bogled,
and would proceed no further, whereupon he was Re-manded to Prison.

James Gibbons having been taken about Yorkshire for Rumbold, was likewise
brought to the Bar, and had the Oath tendered him; which, after some
difficulty, he took, etc.

Mary Phelps was tried for the Murder of John Carleton, which, upon Trial
appeared thus: The Prisoner being, as she pretended, affronted by a Coachman,
who said she kept Bullies in her House, she went home, and fetched one John
Bolger, a Lodger of hers, to vindicate her; but ere he came, the Coachman being
gone, and some words passing between her and the Deceased, who was a Porter,
the said Bolger run him into the Belly, of which wound he instantly died; the
said Bolger thereupon being committed to the Gatehouse, broke Prison, and made
his Escape: But it appearing that the Prisoner was aiding, abetting,
comforting, and maintaining the said Bolger, she was found guilty of the
Murder.

William Clark was tried for speaking Seditious Words, viz. That there was no
Presbyterian Plot, but a Church of England Plot, etc. The which being proved
against him by two Witnesses, he was found guilty of the Trespass and
Misdemeanour.

Ann Walker was tried as Accessory to the Murder of Jeremiah Buller, supposed
to be done by one Owen Vaughan; but there being no positive Proof that she was
there at the time of the Murder Committed, she was acquitted.

John Quarles and Francis Temple were tried for robbing the House of Elenor
Price in Holbourn, into which they came to drink, and breaking open a Chamber
door, took thence to the Value in Money, Rings, and other things, 120 l. as
also two Bonds; which Robbery Temple confessed, and the Proof being plain
against Quarlse, they were both convicted.

Charles Batler was tried upon an Indictment of High Treason, for Clipping,
Filing, and Diminishing Half-Crowns, Shillings, and Sixpences, the proper and
lawful Coin of this Realm; upon which Trial it appeared, that diverse Clippings,
Silver-Dust, Shears, Melting Pots, Running Pots, Files, and the like, were
found in his House, in Lincolns-Inn-Fields; as also at an other House of his in
Fulham, Silver Filings, etc. were found, and about him 4 pound odd money newly
clipped, so that in conclusion, he was found guilty of the High Treason.

Francis Egleston was tried for robbing Richard Jaxon, in Spittle-fields, in
the Highway, of a Hat, Cravat, and other things, which being proved, he was
found guilty.

This Sessions Eighteen persons received Sentence of Death, viz. Edward
Williams, Charles Dod, Sidny Vandelo, Hugh Jones, Charles Roberts, John Smith,
Jonathan Parsons, William Williams, Christopher Moor, John Knight, John
Paybody, Thomas Edmonds, Elizabeth Green, Mary Phelps, Charles Temple, John
Quarles, Charles Butler, and Elizabeth Haer; the last two for High Treason, for
Clipping the Lawful Coin of this Kingdom. Frances Eglestone was reprieved
before Judgment.

There were burnt in the hand, John Thomson, Thomas Atkins, Peter Crown, John
Green, and two others; John Piser being reprieved before Burning.

Ordered to be Transported, R. Valor, Samuel Matthews, William Smith, and
Humphry Hygins.

Six were Sentenced to be Whipped, viz. Thomas Wade, Robert Delevere, John Peech,
Elizabeth Berry, Francis Tailor, and Elizabeth Vincent.

James Rothwell having refused to take the Oath of Allegiance, and thereunto
pleaded Guilty, was awarded Imprisonment during his Majesty's Pleasure, and to
have his Goods, Chattels, etc. seized to the use of the King.

William Clark for speaking Seditious Words against the Government, was fined a
hundred Marks, sentenced to stand in the Pillory in Clare-Market, and to find
Sureties for his good Behavior.

London Printed for Langley Curtis, near Fleet-bridge. 1683.


