My Lord Marquis OF ARGYLE HIS SPEECH UPON THE SCAFFOLD, the 27 of May 1661.
As it was spoken by himself, and written in Shorthand by one that was
present. MAny will expect that I should speak of many things, and according to
their several Opinions and Dispositions, so will their Expectations be from me,
and constructions of me, but I resolve to disappoint many; For I came not
hither to justify my self, but the Lord, who is holy in all his ways and
righteous in all his Works, Holy and Blessed is his Name; neither came I to
condemn others: I know many will expect, that I will speak against the hardness
of the Sentence pronounced against me, but I will say nothing to it; I bless
the Lord I pardon all men, as I desire to be pardoned of the Lord my self, Let
the will of the Lord be done, that is all I desire.

I hope that ye will have more charity to me now, then ye would have had at an
other time, since I speak before the Lord, to whom I must give an account very
shortly; I know very well that my words have had but very little weight with
many, and that many have mistaken my words and actings both: Many have thought
me to be a great enemy to these great works that have of late been brought to
pass; but do not mistake me good People, I speak it in the presence of the
Lord, I entered not upon the work of Reformation with any design to advantage
my self, or prejudice to the King and his Government, or Person, as my Will
which was written in the year 1655, and thereafter was delivered to a Friend,
in whose hands it yet remains, can show. As for these Calumnies which have
gone abroad on me, I bless God I know them to be no more; And as I go to make a
Reckoning to my God, I am free to any of these concerning the Kings Person or
Government, I was real and cordial in my desires to bring the King home, and in
my endeavors for him when he was at home, and I had no correspondence with the
Adversaries Army, nor any of them the time His Majesty was in Scotland, nor
had I any accession to his late Majesty's horrid and execrable Murder, by
counsel or knowledge of it, or any other manner of way; This is a Truth, as I
shall answer to my Judge; and all the time his Majesty was in Scotland, I was
still endeavoring his Advantage, my Conscience bears me witness in it, that
is for that.

At this he turned about and said, I hope Gentlemen ye will all remember these.
I Confess, many look on my condition as a suffering condition, but I bless the
Lord, that he who has gone before me has trodden the wine press of the Fathers
Wrath, by whose sufferings, I hope, that my Sufferings shall not be eternal, I
bless him that has taken away the sting of my sufferings: I may say, that my
Chartor was sealed the day, for the Lord has said to me, Son be of good cheer,
thy sins are freely forgiven thee, and so I hope my sufferings shall be easy;
and ye know the Scripture says, That the Captain of our Salvation was made
perfect through sufferings.

I shall not speak much to these things, I am condemned for, lest I should seem
to condemn others. It is well known, it is only for Compliance, which is the
epidemical fault of the Nation, I wish the Lord may pardon them.

I say there was never an expression in my Submission sent to the Parliament of
the contagion of the times, which may by some be misconstructed, as if I had
intended thereby to lay an imputation upon the Work of Reformation, but I
declare I intended no such thing, but it was only in relation to the corruption
and failings of men, occasioned by the prevalency of the Usurping Power.

Now Gentlemen, I think there are three sorts of People that take up much of
the World, and of the Nation: There are first the openly profain; and truly I
might say, though I have been a Prisoner, yet have not had mine ears shut, I
hear assuredly, that Swearing, Drinking and Whoring were never more common,
never more countenanced then now they are; and truly if Magistrates were here, I
would say to them, if they lay freely forth their power for the glorifying of
God, by the restraining of these they would fare the better; if they continue
in not restraining of it, they will fare the worse; I will say no more, but
either let People shun Profanity, or Magistrates restrain it, or assuredly the
wrath of God will follow on it. Others, they are not openly profain every one
will not allow that, but yet they are careless in that matter, if things go
well as to their private interests, they care not whether Religion or the Kirk
of God sink or swim; but whatever they think, God has laid engagements upon
Scotland, we are tied by Covenants to Religion and Reformation, these that were
then unborn are engaged to it, and in our Baptism we are engaged to it, and it
passes the power of any under Heaven to absolve a man from the Oath of God,
for which Oath I (...) presently brought here this day; they deceive
themselves, and it may be would deceive others, otherwise, (but I will caveat
this) lost people would think this an instigation of Rebellion from me, but
they are very far in the wrong that think so, and that Religion and Loyalty are
not consistent, if any man think otherwise, Religion is not to be blamed, but
they: It is true, it is the duty of every Christian to be Loyal, yet I think
the Order of things is as well to be observed as their Natures; the order of
Religion, as well as the Nature of it; Religion must not be the Coak-boat, it
must be the Ship; God must have what is his, as well as Caesar what is his, and
these are the best Subjects that are the best Christians, and that I am looked
on as a Friend to Reformation is my Glory.

There are an other sort that are truly Godly, and to these I must say, what I
fear, and truly every one has reason to fear, it is good to fear evil; it is
true, the Lord may prevent it, but if he do not, I see little probability of
it. These times are like to be very suffering times, or very sinning times, and
let Christians make their choice, there is a sad Dilemma in the business, sin
or suffer; and truly he that would choice the better party, will choice to
suffer; Others there are, that will choice to sin, will not escape suffering,
they shall suffer, but it may be, not as I do here; (turning him to the Maiden
when he spoke it] but worse; mine is Temporal but theirs shall be Eternal, and
when I shall be singing, they shall be howling; beware therefore of sinning,
what ever ye are aware of, especially in these times: Yet I cannot say of my
own Condition, but the Lord in his providence has minded mercy to me, even in
this World, for if I had been more favorably dealt with, I fear I might have
been overcome with Tenrations, as many others ^re, and I fear many more shall
be, I wish the Lord may prevent it, and so should have gone out of the World
with a more polluted Conscience, then through the Mercy of God now I have: And
hence, my condition is such now, as when I am gone will be seen not to be such
as many did imagine; It is fit God take me away before I fall in these
Tentations, yet blessed be his Name that I am kept both from present evils
and evils to come.

Turing about, he spoke those to Mr. Hutchison, and then spoke to the People.
SOme may expect that I may regrate my own Condition, but truly I neither grudge
nor repine, nor do I desire any revenge: And I declare, I do not repent my
going to London; for I alwise rather had suffered any thing than lie under such
reproaches as I did: I desire not that the Lord should judge any nor do I judge
any, but my self; I wish as the Lord has pardoned me, so he may pardon them in
this and other things, and what they have done to me may never meet them in
their Accounts. I have no more to say, but to beg the Lord, that since I go
away, that they may be blessed that stays behind.

His last words, immediately before he laid his Head on the Block, after his
Doublet was off, were these. I Desire you Gentlemen, and all that hears me
this day, to take notice, And I wish that all who seech me might hear me, that
now when I am entering to my Eternity, and am to appear before my Judge, and as
I desire Salvation, and do expect eternal Salvation and happiness from him;
from my Birth to my Scaffold I am free from any accession by my knowledge,
concerning Counsel or any other way to his late Majesty's Death, and I pray the
Lord preserve his present Majesty, and to pour his best Blessings upon his
Person and Government, and the Lord give him good and faithful Counselors.

And turuing about to his Friends, he said, MAny Christians may stumble at
this, and my Friends may be discontented, but when things are rightly
considered, my Friends have no Dis^^^^it or ^e, nor Christians no Stumbling
block, but rather an Encourage^


