THE ARGUMENT AGAINST A Standing Army, DISCUSSED.

By a True Lover of his Country.

-- Medio tutissimus ibis. LONDON, Printed, and sold by E. Whitlock near
Stationers' Hall, School.

TO THE READER.
HE who Writes Argumentatively, must of course draw a Party against his
Opinion. The Writer hereof Prescribes not to any, but only puts in his Mite, in
order to maintain, That Liberty and Property are an Englishman's Birthright.
And so by consequence you must allow, that he is not for Arbitrary Power; and
would be unwilling to furnish one Board to make a Scaffold for such a Building;
and what he lays down, proves the Truth of it.

But as he makes out the Happiness of our Constitution, to be the Envy of our
Neighbour-Countries; so likewise he agrees, That it is a Limited Mixed Monarchy,
and endeavors in all places to keep an even Balance betwixt the King and the
People.

He owns he has seen several Papers upon this Argument; but he is satisfied,
his Readers will not think he is a Plagiary: some of those who have appeared,
seem to have been angry, and others have not touched upon our Author's Notions.

The Ingenious Author of The Argument against a Standing Army, writes like a
Gentleman of Quality and Parts, at least his Style speaks him so, and he is all
along treated as such: and in return, he requests him, that if he reads this
ensuing Paper, he will be pleased not to wrest any thing to a wrong sense,
because no hardship was intended.

And will only add, that this is the first time he has appeared in Print; and
that no Provocation from any Party ever induced him to this Undertaking. He has
delivered his Opinion, by endeavoring to set all things in a fair Light, and
leaves the Candid Reader to Judge of his Propositions, and so bids him Farewell.

THE ARGUMENT Against a Standing Army, DISCUSSED.
THAT the Author of the Pamphlet, which is here Examined, may not be prejudiced
in the Reading of this Paper, should it come to his Hands, I have thought fit
to assure him on the Word of a Gentleman, That Liberty and Property are
Glorious and Popular Names, and I hold them Sacred in my Opinion; and therefore
I will in all places, treat this Anonimous Author with all the Respect due to a
British Champion.

To begin therefore with him, he meets you Cap in hand, with a fine Compliment,
Page 1.
setting forth the dismal Dissolution which has been on the Theater of the
World, owing to the Growth and Progress of the French Power; and draws from
thence most admirable Conclusions, which are most certainly true, viz. our
thrice happy Situation, which has freed us from the Insults of Foreigners, and
made our Neighbor Nation the Scene of War, who lying open to the Insults of
Enemies, are forced to be upon their Guard, Hercules like, with Clubs in their
Hands. Page 2.
I agree also, that Neptune is our Titular God: That we are Media Insuperabiles
unda, and stand like the Earth, Immovable and Fixed. But in the next Epithet we
part: for though I agree with an Ancient Historian, who says, That our Wooden
Walls are a good Defense; yet I fear, that the Internal Convulsions, which he
says he dreads not, may come to pass, unless some regular Forces (such a Number
as our worthy Representatives see fit;) be continued in Pay. And here I must
beg my Reader to take along with him my Reasons for the same, which may Bias
his Opinion in my Favor.

How long ago is it, That the Disaffected to this Government, boasted of their
Numbers, and of having a Laodicean Party ready to close upon fair Terms? Pray
can you tell, that these Passive Gentlemen (because at present, they vent not
their Malice against the Government so publicly as they used,) are better
Established in the Notion of the King's Right? Alas! there are too many who
look for Promotion on a Change, prompted by Duty (as some call it,) or an
Indigency of Fortune, and will chop about like the Wind upon a prosperous Gale.
Again, ought not means to be taken, to curb these Prancers, who (as our Authors
Title Page has it,) would put a Fraenum in Ore, covering over their sly Designs
with pitiful Shams that will not pass? but if it should, they soon would find
out a Why-not, when the Tables were open, and so carry the Game: And Summoning
the two famous Generals, Liberty and Property into the Field, will soon revise
Old Stories which have been in Man's Memory; and when we are destitute of
Soldiers here, call in a Foreign Aid to back their Pretensions. But of this,
more when it falls in order and course; for now I must follow my Author into
another Room, (and will not part with him where ever I find him Brave and
Loyal.) He says, Nature has been liberal to us in our Situation; our Luxurient
Soil is productive of numerous Commodities, fit for Trade and Commerce: that
Trade makes us Masters of Silver and Gold, which come without toiling in the
Mine for it: that it Breeds us Able Bodied and Skilful Seamen, as much as even
Luxury it self can covet. Methinks he has given us good Reasons not to tempt
any Ambitious Prince to venture at it: And if we have not a Power, (and that in
Regulated Troops, not in his Militia Project, as I shall show anon) pray what
Assurance can we have of Peace and Quiet, longer then Grumblers see fit? Is it
to be thought, that any Advantage in the Articles of Peace, will tempt the late
King to be at Ease? Is he consulted withal? or did he send any Propositions to
the Congress? Is he of a forgiving Temper? Pray put on a good Assurance in your
Countenance, and tell me if he be. Is the Pretense of his presumptive Son
adjusted, or not? Well, I find Silence grants the Point.

This Point then being over, you are next pleased to put us in Mind, That the
King is Mortal; and (to our Grief) we know it. On so sad an Occasion, give me
leave to Remark, That by Virtue of an Act of Parliament, the Crown is likely to
descend at his Death, on a Female; a Princess, who (though she has all the
Inherent and Noble Virtues of her great Ancestors,) yet may labor with
Difficulties, to fix her self Firm, if she has not some Standing Forces of
Regular Troops to oppose a sudden Tumult: or should she Die first, a Prince in
Minority is like to put in his Claim, who may meet with a Youth about his Age,
to oppose him; the contrary whereof (as all good Subjects heartily wish, may
never come to pass:) so we ought to provide against: And what better way can
there be, than having such a Power who served in that Capacity before. But now
to go on with my Author, he says, That we ought to be Freemen, and not Slaves;
and goes here very wide of hisMark: for he tells us, An Universal Deluge of
Tyranny has overspread the Face of the whole Earth. (As for the word Whole, it
might have been left out.) It Is well some Loyal Passages (interlarded like
Bacon with Veal,) do acquit him of a malicious Censure: but as the Captains
that were Assembled on Ahab's Death, to consult in the Choice of a King, said,
(so say I) I know not the Man, nor his Communication, so I am a stranger to his
Person. I hope, as a Person of Honor said in his Charge, That he has not
Jacob' s Voice, and Esau' s Hands: I only use this Expression, because he
sometimes (like a Cow). gives a good Mess of Milk, and afterward throws it
down with his Tail.

But I find I shall be too prolix in this Affair, if I sally too far; and
therefore I will endeavor to be as brief as I can.

To go on therefore with him, I agree, \That our Constitution is a limited mixed
Monarchy: that the King enjoys his Prerogatives: (and why then would you make
them less than they are?) I also agree, That the People claim his Protection:
but unless you assign him a bigger Guard, an Army in disguise at Knightsbridge
will be to hard for him. You own, That he is abridged from the Power of hurting
us; and would abridge him of the Pride he takes in defending you. I also go
along with you, when you say, That ours is an Empire of Laws; that we have the
same Right to our Acquisitions, as he has to his Crown. But here the Jacobites
will differ from you, and say, That they have a better Right to their Estates,
than he has to his Crown. And are there such Men, and must there be no Power to
oppose them? I also agree, That our Remedy is good against him in
Westminster Hall; and I think the present Judges have sufficiently attoned, for
the Crimes and Errors of some of the former. I also avouch, That only Law can
put us in Prison. I think also, that the Romans were free; or St. Paul would
never have boasted of being a Jew, of Tarsus a free City; nor those that whipped
him, have repented of the action. Thus far we go hand in hand. But methinks,
His Majesty's many gracious Assurances to his Parliaments, and the Honor he
has of being known to keep his Word, might put this Point beyond all manner of
Contradiction: and unless our Author had doubted of any Infringement of them he
might have spared himself some trouble, and gone on to the purpose.

Now I find what Aesop observes of Old to be true, that it is an easy matter to
find a Stick to beat a Dog. Now he dreams of Arbitrary Power, but couples it
with the Licentiousness of the People, which he says, may incline to Damocracy.
If our Author keeps a Kennel of Hounds, it is much he did not couple them better
together.

He admires the Prudence of our Ancestors, who made Page 3.
a middle State of Nobility, to trim the Boat of the Commonwealth, to skreen the
People from the Insults of the Prince, and the Prince from the Popularity of
the Commons; and gives a good Reason for what he says, viz. To prevent the Ruin
of either. And pray what is all this to the purpose? unless he would craftily
insinuate, that we were in some manner of Danger at present. What he goes on to
tell us, is an Answer to himself, and spares me the trouble. He says, That
without the States in Parliament, no Laws can be made, nor a Penny of Money
given: that the King summons the Grand Inquest, and the People boldly resent
their Grievances! A softer Word might have done as well.But now we are all one
again, He admires so just a Balance, in making the one not too hard for the
other two.

But now I must not set so close to him, we have a little Difference, and I
must go to the other end of the Table. For after he has spread the Cloth, and
given us a Bill of Fare of very choice and rare Dainties, he begins to
Tantalize us, as if he would not have us eat: for he says, The strongest
Constitutions are most liable to certain Diseases. A shame take it, he had
raised my Stomach, and now I must not have what I expected: for after having
described our Happiness very pathetically, he spoils all, in telling us, That
the Wheel of this Noble Machin is out of order: I am sorry it was not the Wheel
of Fortune: for now he doubts our Wisdom, Integrity, and Courage. But presently
he begins to alter his Tune, and from saying, That an universal Deluge of
Tyranny had overspread the Face of the whole Earth, he says that most Nations
in Europe are oppressed with Tyranny, and at the Will of a Merciless Prince's
Fancy or Ambition, or the Insolence of their Officers. He talks of Nobility,
(but names no Country) that are only the Ensigns and Ornaments of Tyranny; and
the People are the Beasts of Burden, to support the Luxury and Prodigality of
their Master.

Page 4.
Here I protest he has put out the Candle, and left me in the dark, and I know
not which way to turn my self. But hold! I think I hear him again, it is he!
What, are you come to own, that we have the Jewel Liberty still left? then
there is some Hopes: pray let us mind what he says, for this is the
Cornerstone of the Building; and for the sake of such, who may think there is
more Beauty in the Fabric, than you will find when you enter in, let us see
what he has to show, and by the Pattern judge of the Cloth.

He lays it down as a Proposition not to be opposed, That nothing but our
Situation, has defended us from the Inconvenience of a Standing Army: (and pray
may it not do so still?) Have we lost those Conveniences, have we a Prince on
the Throne that we dare not trust, that Jealousies spring up before there are
Occasions? he has certainly a Prospective-Glass, to ken farther than others; or
would raise Jealousies, without any Cause of Suspicion. Can the Actions of a
Prince, whose Fame resounds so loud in the Territories of distant Monarchies,
be rendered Suspicious at home, among such who receive the Benefit of a just
Administration? I must then needs deplore the Misfortune of so Great a Man,
that he should have Subjects not capable to discern the Blessings which daily
shower down so plentifully upon us: and when our Constitution (as he himself
observes) is Balanced by King, Lords and Commons, and that by the mutual
Occasions and Necessities each has of the other; why; I say, should we
mistrust? It is granted on all Hands, That the Commons have the Right of
disposing of our Properties: and can we suppose, that those who have but the
temporary Post of Three Years, and sent from all Parts of England, and above
5000 in number, will give any Money out of their own Estates, as well as ours,
to support what is not convenient, or looks destructive to our Ancient
Constitution. Admitting then this Point to be reasonable, where is the
Inconvenience of a present Standing Force? Let the Commons, when they find an
Apprehension of Danger, (of which they are the most proper Judges) but withdraw
their Benevolence to the Crown: or let them but give it as the Opinion of that
Honorable House, that it is likely to become grievous to the Subject: and then
sure no Man will mistrust, that a Prince, who came over on so Generous an
Occasion, will Eclipse the future Annals of his Glorious Reign, by refusing to
grant their Requests.

This Point then being cleared we will go on to what follows, in which I am
certain I can make it plain that the Militia project can never take effect, and
in this Point I must be very long, because it is his Ladder of Ropes that he
mounts by.

I will not (as near as I can) do my Antagonist wrong: He proposes that the
Militia (which should be the standing Army) should be composed of such as have
the Property. I protest I scarce understand his meaning, but if I do it is
this, That the Yeomanry and the Farmers of England who by Virtue of Freehold
Estates send one, two, three, or four Men to the Militia, should be obliged to
go in person, it is granted that in propriapersona he cannot represent this
Number, but then he must get more where he can, for go he must and leave his
Family to shift for themselves, but here is a harder case yet behind; he who
perhaps never Traveled to the nearest Market Town without a Horse must, take
large Journeys on foot; nor is this all, it will look odd that a Man who
perhaps daily employed three or four Men, must on a small notice leave his
Affairs at sixes and sevens: Nay his dear Wife and Children must put Finger in
Eye at parting, who promised when they Married to be a mutual help and support
to each other, but alas there is no help, they must part. I think before this
be put in practice, you should get an Act of Parliament, or find some other way
to alter the Marriage Service: I may also reasonably imagine he is knocked of the
head before he understands his Trade; the Widows of such People will be
wonderful fond of this Government: But these and many other things, he did not
consider, am ong the rest perhaps the Wives fortune has much contributed to his
Acquisitions, but he (good Man) has his Mouthful of Dirt, and she her Eyes full
of Tears.

But from the Foot let us travel to the Horse, and examine how well those that
Ride will like their Post. Methinks I hear some muttering as if they did not
expect such usage, but they have the property and must go, or find out others
which is as hard. These in general have a real kindness for the Government, but
is no regard to be had at home? There is perhaps an Heir in Minority to succeed
too soon, should he be slain in his Countries Cause, or perhaps the Masculine
Branch of an Ancient Family is in danger by this rash undertaking to suffer a
declension; you see Sir, I have set the Women upon you already but perhaps you
are in hopes there may be some that want an occasion to Marry again, I hope
such good Wives are not strong enough to bring in the late King: for I really
believe, the better sort are greatest in number.

Pardon, Sir, this Digression, and I will sit nearer, that I may hear what you
say. You appoint me my Servant, (I thank you Sir, and that is more than he will)
for you propose, that he must be bound to perpetual Service during Life. Now I
am come to the Point I drive at. I say then, what Servant will ever venture to
take such a Post upon him? and what Obligations can be fixed, to make this
Servant, when he likes not his Master, to continue in Service: perhaps you
would propose to Bore him in the Ear at seven Years standing, (as the Jews did
of Old) but I doubt the Promise of a Rachel and Leah both, will hardly induce
these Itinerant sort of Servants to stay. I my self have heard diverse of them
declare, That a Curiosity to see other Countries in the Kingdom, was the sole
Motive; and that little or no Jars have ever happened in their former Service.
Therefore I think this Project is like throwing Chaff to cunning Birds, it will
not catch them.

Or to go a step higher, do you propose that any could be listed, the advance
upon Wages would be very considerable. And if ever this Projector can bring it
about to put such hardships upon Men of Property, I think I am much mistaken,
but if he do I will averr that he has a Headpiece fit for a States Service.

I cannot have done, yet I have another Supposal, you will sure allow my
Servant the Birthright of an English Man. Then as such he must be told, that
during Life (if his Limbs fail not) he is to be bound to perpetual Service, so
that any thing else will be held a lame Excuse. Had I been with my Author at
his Penning this passage, I would have got him (if he had not been in too much
haste) to allow a common Soldier this Privilege, that if by the Death of any
particular Friend he had aug mented his Fortune to live better, that he might
have had power to put another in his Room; and it was the more reasonable to
expect it, because on occasion, he is such a Champion for British Liberty, but
I find he leaves him to compound with his Officers and will have nothing to do
with him.

But here also you seem to puzzle the Cause, by making no Provision if his
Master and he should fall out, it is no matter to me which may be in the wrong,
but part they will, farewell says the Master to his Servant let me see who will
Hire you, truly if I like the Man I cannot tell where to get him a Service. For
who will venture to hire this Servant, who may on a few Days notice be
commanded to his former Post? His new Master has no Title to him, and what is
still worse, he has no Title to himself: an odd Method to secure Property. The
unreasonableness appears farther: he by this means becomes useful to his former
Master, and he who Pays him his Wages, has no Benefit at all: Looks this like
Freedom and Property? I trow not! These Questions I have proposed to Men of a
deep Reach in other Cases, but never yet met with an Oedipus to unfold the
Riddle.

I am much afraid that those who tell you, you may have Neighbors enough in
whom you may trust, have not spent their Time for 20 Years last past in a
Country-Life, as I my self have done. And therefore I will tell them, that I
have had occasion to make my Observations: and I protest that I am satisfied,
it is not want of Loyalty in the Country People, that they covet Ease, but a
desire to Dye in their own Country Air, which makes them decline such a
Service: and though they have not many of them read Claudian, yet their stiffness
herein puts me in mind of the Happiness which he describes, as peculiar to the
Man that never went beyond his Parish-Bounds. These are their Sentiments: and
so you must look out for other Methods to supply the Militia, to have them
useful.

One Project is, That out of the Disbanded Forces, Men may be procured to enter
your Service. But let me ask you a plain Question: What Reason have I to
venture my Arms in the Hands of a Man you dare not trust? Or what better
Security can I have, that one who proffers me his Service, and is a Stranger,
will be more for my dear Property, than if he were Listed in a Standing Force.
And so (to use his own Words) this Constitution must either ruin the Army, or
the Army ruin the Constitution; which is offering a violence to Nature.

He goes on to tell us, That wherever the Militia is, there is, or will be
the Government, in a short time. I will not be so Dogmatical, as to prescribe
to my Betters: but if you would procure an Interest to bring in a Bill, to make
the Militia useful; those who send Men to it would be pleased with the Project,
to have the Gentlemen of the Country, without the addition of Inferior
Officers, to be appointed by the King. And the Reason for it is plain, which is
this, it is commonly a Trust which diverse Lieutenants of Counties have, to
serve as Representatives in Parliament, either for the County, or some
Burrough-Town to which they may be Neighbors. Now it must be granted, That a
Gentleman has a greater Regard to the County of his Nativity, than a Stranger
can be presumed to have; and those whom they Muster, in order to make useful,
will with greater Alacrity undergo the Fatigue of Learning the Military Art;
when many of those under whom they serve, had their Votes and their Interest to
send them to Parliament. They will then have more Patience to Learn, what a
Stranger might by Blows endeavor to Insinuate. So that upon the whole, it
appears plain, That those who fear Arbitrary Power, ought to find out Means to
put this Project in Practice.

But perhaps a Man may object against this Proposition, though I might think it
fair. He may perhaps say, it gives too much Authority to the People, and may
prove detrimental to future Princes, should the Commons not approve of a
Prince's Administration. Liberty is a Popular Argument; and they will be apt to
say, that we have no Cause to Mistrust, and therefore may banish our Fears. If
there be any thing in the Argument, so good an Historian is capable of
Answering it.

But alas! you fear a small Number may awe Elections. The next time you Print,
furnish your self with better Arguments; or else most People will be apt to
conclude, That a small Number of Standing Forces may be convenient in our
present Circumstances.

That the Number intended or proposed is to be small, it is plain: for Orders
are given to Disband diverse Regiments already. No notice is taken of the Wounds
of such, who suffered on so Public an Occasion: but it were well, if at the
Head of their Regiments, when they are Disbanded, some Speech were made, in
Acknowledgement of their former Service; and to tell them, That the Necessity
of the Crown did not longer require their Aid. This Custom would not deviate
from those Commonwealths, which you admire for their Prudence.

But now having proved my Point, I must endeavor to be Friends with the
Innkeepers, who by this time will begin to Pray for me backwards. Why then
Gentlemen I have this to say, That the Number can never oppress you. It is
proposed to be but a Few, and your Representatives in Parliament will give but
what is necessary. So pray be content, and thank God you are rid of some, and
in time I hope your Arrears will be Paid.

And now having sufficiently proved, that our Author has started Chimaera's
which enter not into other Peoples Heads; and therein proved, that if he shot
at the White, he is far beyond the Mark: I come now to his Gothic Balance,
which I think is sufficiently observed by the Laws of England; and the
Constitution in all Matters so exactly adjusted, that he might have acquiesced
in that Confidence: but since he goes on to assert a new Proposition, viz. That
no Nation can preserve its Liberties, which maintains an Army otherwise
established: I hope he will give me liberty to make some material Objections to
his Hypothesis.

Pray what was the Occasion of the 23 Pitched Battles betwixt the two Houses of
York and Lancaster? but their confiding too much on the fickle Populace: and we
find, that sometimes one House succeeded, and then another: but these many
Revolutions were always owing to the want of a sufficient Power at home, to
suppress the strength of Foreiners; which made it often end to the Advantage of
the Invader. By which we may see, that Military Discipline is an excellent
thing; and that the want of Standing Forces, has been the Cause of sundry
Revolutions. An English Army will always be for Property. Sure that which would
make our Enemies dread us abroad, ought not to be a Bugbear to our selves. Let
us pause a while, and consider; and then we shall find, that Richard the Third,
a King of admirable Prowess, wanting Strength at Bosworth-Field, proportionable
to encounter his invading Antagonist, lost his Life and Crown in the Cause. And
a few Years before, Edward the Fourth put that pusillanimous Prince King Henry
the Sixth to the Expense of his Life, for want of an Equality in Power. This is
certain, that York and Lancaster could not be both in the Right; and yet
Success favored both their Pretensions: and those frequent Changes are
attributed by Historians to the Misfortune of Princes, that wanted a Land-Army
in number sufficient to quell such un happy Tumults.

By these Examples (and more I could add, were I not stinted in Time) it
plainly appears, That a small Number is for the Security of the Kingdom. And
now I shall Methodically follow him.

He talks of some Men, who in the late Reigns asserted Liberty so vigorously,
that they denied Royal Prerogatives; and so very zealously, that they would
scarce allow of the King's ordinary Guards: but since he names not who they
are, we may believe it, or not, as we please. But if such there were, perhaps
they sooner pried into the Court-Designs than other Men; and so took care to
prevent what might be Destructive by ill Management to the whole Constitution.
Here he forgets to make a Distinction betwixt Circumstances that happened at
that time, and how the Case is now.

We had then successively two Princes on the Throne that had no pretenders to
their Title, and though the last had a Perkin started upto give a defiance, yet
the Ridiculous Power he brought made him a Scoff among his Friends; but when
his present Majesty arrived the Cause he came to maintain was so truly great
and Glorious, that the same Prince with the advantage of a much greater power,
was not able to oppose him: Does any one desire a reason for it, why it was in
brief a National Cause he came to support, our Liberty and Property (most
inestimable Jewels) were his attendants, and he had the reward of a just Cause:
For that Army which was raised and kept on foot, as many Imagine for our
destruction, these very Men turned to the Protestant side. From hence then let
us draw this Natural Inference, That when a King of England endeavors to
destroy our established Constitution, (the which he is Sworn to maintain) the
Army (like true English Patriots) will never consent to it. Remember Sir the
fate of Ship money, and end your fears, for Englishmen will never consent to
ruin themselves.

Thus I have I think fairly accounted for the great Phenomenon, that without
Force to back it Tyranny cannot be accomplished; let us be so fair to him (to
whom we owe our eternal acknowledgments) as not to mistrust without Cause, and
let this also be remarked, that when a Prince in possession has an Antagonist
alive who was himself in the Throne, he will not fail to take all the advantage
he can of the misrepresentation of Things. Nay he has also one whom he calls
his Lawful, Son who may in time grow to be Ambitious: This is enough to prove
that it will be to the Nations Honor to have a settled Army, so proportioned as
may seem best to the Judgment of our August Assembly.

Those who ruined the Blessed Martyr King Charles the First, took occasion to
clip his Wings by lessening the Military Power, and then did an Act of
Barbarity, which I wish had reached no further then our Native Country. But my
Author calls me again, and tells me that the Party who have thus veered about
say, that if they do not comply with this method of a standing Force, another
Party will be ready to gratify the Court in this affair. Truly I am sorry any
Party should be against so modest a Request, as a few standing Forces, at least
let them be established 'till the Projectors Friends can find out a way to make
the Militia useful to their Country, and not oppressive to the People, let not
the Kings Enemies have oppertunity to take away his Life, whilst we want a
Force to keep the next Successor in the Throne. I am sure then 'twill be too
late to deplore, our Folly or our Oversight.

And I differagain from our Author in this page also, where he says that
Arbitrary Power is the same in whose hands soever it falls, for hereby he
insinuates that all those who value the preservation of his Majesty's Life are
no better than Valet de Cambres to an ill design. I know none of them, but I am
not so uncharitable, He tells them also that the Party they fear will out
flatter them, being Darlings of Arbitrary power, and whose principles and
Practices teach them to be Enemies to all Legal Rights, To this Point such as
know his meaning are fittest to answer him, because he goes a step higher, for
he says they bring the Materials of Tyranny and are to give place to more
expert Architects to finish the Building: I understand not his Intentions, and
so Iam silent.

Page 6.
But now he is in good humor, and tells us we are free from any such attempts
in this Reign, and gives our Prince Epithets of Praise, which all good Subjects
know how well he deserves.

But straight the Hypochondriac Fit seizes him, and he tells us, That the King
must Pay a Debt to Nature, and he knows not what may follow. Pray Sir, to what
purpose has the Parliament taken such care to Point us out a Successor? or, Do
you doubt of Common Justice? I think, our Moses has brought us within the sight
of our Promised Land; then let us not murmur, 'till we have Cause. What made so
few go into the Land of Promise with Caleb and Joshua? Sure it was, Fearing
where no Fear was. Let us not report our Enemies to be Giants, but glory that
we have a David to defend us. Why then should we mistrust a few Regulated
Forces. It is not proposed to have the Army as big as Xerxes's, nor so
formidable as Alexander's, only a competent number: big enough to oblige such
Officers with Preferment, whose Bravery in their Countries Defense does justly
claim our good Esteem.

Has not Ireland more Cause to complain? a Country which though for some Years it
was the Seat of War, yet has not requested to be Released: the Irish keep
Forces in their own Country without murmuring; and we who have so precious a
King's Life to preserve, would hazard all that is dear to us, to save a little
Charges. It reflects much upon us, I mean, such of us as are not Thoughtful.

Page 7.
Do not impose on us, the Fate of the Israelites, Athenians, and other your
beloved Commonwealths, who though they had wise Laws, yet wanted many Advantages
that we enjoy. Perhaps he has given us some Reasons for their Decay, it might
be, from thinking their Citizens understood this Province: One Trade is enough
to one Man: and it is likely, that if they had not trusted to other Methods,
they had met with better Success.

Ibid.
Then he tells us, That they Fought, pro Aris and Focis; and that their Arms
were lodged in their own Hands: but the Event did not answer Expectation, for
their Discipline could not preserve them.

Ibid.
He farther adds, That the Romans had good Generals, who were taken from the
Plough; and when all was over, returned thither again. This, if the Time would
have allowed, would have looked like an accomplishment of Isaiah's Prophecy,
That they turned their Swords into Plough-shares. But it seems, before they
could reduce them again into Swords, they were in danger of being destroyed.

We need not argue the Difference of our Constitutions, but all agree, that our
Caesar will never pass the forbidden Rubicon, to invade our Privileges: and so
let Surmises cease.

But he comes presently pouring in upon us, and tells us, Page 8.
That Pisistratus by an Artificial Sham, brought Athens into Tyranny; and from
the Favor of those that were of his Guards, increased his Number to their
Destruction. Let the Beef-Eaters mind that. But it looks as if the Citizens
Courage was not great, or the Inhabitants but a few.

You have sure in your Reading met with King Lear, his Story has been so often
represented on the Stage, and acted with such Advantage, that it is probable
most Men of Understanding know his Case; his yielding too fast to the Temper of
a designing Party, reduced him at last to such low Circumstances, that his
Misery was deplored by his Friends, who could not be capable to remedy the same.

There is an excellent Story written in Italian, and from the Original
Translated into our Mother Tongue by a Person of Honor, (now living) and
Dedicated to our late Queen: it is called, The Count De Fiesque' s Conspiracy
to Destroy the State of Genoa; and the nearness of its being accomplished,
shows us how much we ought to stand upon our Guard.

But my Author has put more Work upon my Hands, he has some more fine Stories
to tell us: he says, Ibid.
That Timophanes having but 400 Men, with that number overthrew the City of
Corinth, and made himself King. All things, I see, happen not alike at all
times: for we find, that Claudus Lysias, for the sake of one Man's Life, when
he knew of a Conspiracy, sent about that number to Guard him to Foelix; and
this was one of our Noble Romans.

But perhaps you will say, This was called an Army, and so it was; and such an
Army I suppose you will grant the King, when he thinks it worth asking for.

But yet I cannot tell whether you will or no, when I consider the next Story
you tell us: Ibid.
For Agathocles, from being Captain General of the Syracusans, got such an
Interest in the Army, that he cut the Senators in pieces, and the Richest of
the People, and made himself their King. He had better Fortune than Dennis of
Sicily, or else a late Poet in Verse has done him wrong.

But you have not done yet with your Fears; you say. Ibid.
The Romans, for fear of the Teutones and Cimbri, who threatened their
Territories, chose Marius to be their General; and that he and Sylla,
insinuating themselves into the Favor of the Army, did much Mischief. So that
not a Man or Farthing, is to be granted on this Score.

You say Sir, Page 11.
That the Prolongation of Caesar's Commission in Gallia, made him able to seize
on Rome it self; and also, that he was able to take upon him the Office of
Perpetual Dictator. Those things therefore which were acted so many Centuries
ago, must be a Bar to future Pretenses. Had you been as fair as you ought to
be, you might have told us, what such of our English Kings who aimed at
Arbitrary Power, got by the Bargain. But you are full of your Stories, and say,
That Olivarotto di Fermo having leave of his Fellow-Citizens to enter the Town
with 100 Horse, he put all the principal Citizens to the Sword, and proclaimed
himself their Prince.

You add, That Francis Sforza made himself, from General of the Milanese, their
Duke; and you make ours a Duke of Venice.

But now Sir you come to a more Modern Story, of Christiern the Second, King of
Denmark, who was also King of Sweden; and tells us of his Treachery: and I
think he paid dear enough for his Treachery; for he was driven out of Sweden by
Gustavus Ericson: but alas! Page 10.
you say, they soon found their Mistake, which I think, was not the worse.

Then the late ingenious Authors Story of Denmark, is brought upon the Stage,
which is more to the purpose than any thing has been said; but if they are
miserable, their over Credulity contributed to the Cheat: For as that Gentleman
says, That King was willing to grant what their Modesty never requested. And
why should our King not be thought as fair a Prince? I am of Opinion we are not
half so Modest.

Old Oliver must not rest in his Grave, though an Act of Grace has pardoned the
Transgressors. I really think, that our withdrawing due Relief from King
Charles I. brought those Miseries upon our Heads.

And now to pin the Basket for us; we Journey from our own Country, (and a good
Journey it is we take;) it is only to the West Indies, for nothing, but to
prove, That provoked Servants will be revenged upon insolent Masters, when they
have opportunity, which is no great Matter.

Had his History not ended here, he would have told us, what Robberies have
been committed on the King's High Ways by the Soldiery; but that I think would
not have served his purpose; for then it would have been returned upon him,
that he must be more exposed: for some of them (if Disbanded) are not able to
Dig, and to Beg they are ashamed; so he wisely lets it alone.

But since our Author is silent, I will crave leave to handle this Matter a
little, and let us consider what we shall do for them. Is the Danger they have
undergone to be forgotten? Remember Sir, it was our Countries Cause. No, rather
than that shall be suffered, I will pour some Oil into your Wounds, or at least
afford you a Noble Pity.

Gentlemen, those Commonwealths your Adversary so much approves of for their
good Laws, he owns, had always a good regard to Merit: but he has done with
you, and is not so much as for giving you Thanks, or making any Provision for
you. Holy Writ tells us, That of Ten Cripples which were healed, there was but
one of them grateful to his great Benefactor; and as he is Recorded for his
Goodness, so is his Country taken notice of, for he was a Samaritan: and that
good Samaritan I will be, in owning, That by your Valor and Courage, you have
made other Countries the Scene of War, and left us to possess our Estates in
ease and freedom.

And since he has left Part of the Roman History untold, I will tell you, That
Caius Marius had never been chosen seven times Consul of Rome, had not his
Wounds pleaded his Cause. The meanness of his Birth was twited in his teeth, by
such who opposed him, and were of Noble Parentage. But these wise Romans
observed what Cato told a decayed Nobleman (who had upbraided his Parentage,)
That he had rather be the first of a Family than the last. Here Merit, and not
Birth, got the Ascendant: so true a value they set on Noble Performances.

But to go on with my Author, and to show, that he has read more History than
he has quoted; he owns, That Holland and Venice had met with no Oppressions;
and though they keep large Armies, they have not lost their Liberties. I thank
you Sir, for this Favor.

He goes on to tell us his Reason for it; Page 11.
That Venice cannot be Attacked but by the Sea. And here he might have
instanced in the late Action at Scio; The Venetians we know, after they had
taken it, lost it again suddenly to the Turks. Now, had there been a sufficient
number of Regulated Forces in it, those with the Fleet, might have done
admirable Service.

It Is not my design to reflect on a Fleet; I honor them ever since I read the
History of the Spanish Invasion in 1588. under the Conduct of Sir Francis
Drake; and that Action sufficiently proves the usefulness of them, and serves
to fill up the Annals of that Glorious Reign: No! all my Design is to prove,
that some few Regulated Forces cannot hurt us; and I should have been loath to
have heard, that Expedition-Wind should have proved in our Teeth, because her
Militia might not have met with that Success; and then the case had proved too
late the necessity of Regulated Troops. I hope Neptune will always extend his
Trident in our Favor, and an English Parliament take care of Land Forces.

Then he goes on to tell us, how Fortunate the Dutch are, and that Art and
Nature have done their Parts; and that the Strength of their Towns, and
shutting up of their Gates, can prevent any dangerous Design. Pray have we not
Towns of Strength as well as they? Let Portsmouth and Hull tell him so! And
till we have a visible Cause, let us not be so over cautious as to fear, our
late Prince is now out of doors; and to mistrust the English Prowess, we have
no cause.

What is it then he fears? I wish I knew, that I might tell you. He seems to
acquit the King of any ill Design, (and if he had not, others would have done
it for him;) Why then, I find it must be those that come after that he is
afraid of. I see, that whilst he tells us, The King is mortal, he thinks not of
Mortality himself; or would be more thoughtful of what becomes of his
Posterity, than others, who think it as dear to them. Liberty and Property are
my Darlings; and if I thought them in danger, I assure him, that I would be as
strenuous an Asserter of them as any English Man whatsoever. It was my Zeal for
the Public Good, made me rejoice at this Princes Arrival, and I closed in with
the Government when others stood at Bay, to see what might happen. On this
account, I thought I might have a good pretense to Defend it; and I knew no
time better than now, when I find that so great Merit is like to be Rewarded,
only in making so great a Prince a King of Clouts.

But for all this, our Author remains still in his Fears, lest the King should
be perpetual General. Page 11.
He who has such Precaution, sure takes great care not to put out his Money in
ill Hands; for he who mistrusts Mankind in general, can never be pleased with
any Security.

But now he owns, Ibid.
That the Family of the Medices and Lewis XI. laid a Foundation of Tyranny
without the Assistance of an Army; and this makes me bound to tell him again,
that Englishmen have English Hearts, and British Honesty: so that, if any
Prince should hereafter (for I agree with you, that this will not:) endeavor
to Enslave us, a competent number of them in a Regulated Army, will certainly
prevent any such a treacherous Design.

On the whole therefore, it is plain, That Liberty and a Standing Army are not
such incoherent things; but rather prove a necessity on us, to bridle the
Ambition of any future Aspiring Monarch.

I think by this time you will own, they are necessary, if any Person comes who
has nothing to do here; their Valor proves my Assertion. And the Great Caesar
in his Commentaries, gives us occasion to think well of our selves, when so
many Roman Colonies could not prevent our showing our Resentments.

Page 12.
But now you must make a step along with our Author from the West Indies to
China, and it is on as frivolous an occasion as was that of his French Colony;
for it is only to prove the Misery of Tyranny, as that showed the great Folly of
casting away a necessary Defense.

Our Author next makes a long List, of what Countries are free, and what are
not; of which, he ascribes the Liberty of the one, and the Slavery of the
other, to their having or wanting Standing Armies. It would be tedious to
examine by piecemeal, all that he lumps in this Paragraph: Portugal and Tuscany
have no Standing Armies, nor is Portugal an Enslaved Country. The Venetians,
all but the Nobility, live in more abandoned Slavery than the Chinese. I don't
know what he means by the Seat of the Government, unless he means Amsterdam and
Venice: otherwise it is well known, that both the Venetians and Hollanders keep
Regular Forces within their Dominions. The Liberty of Poland is so little to be
boasted of, that these last 18 Months Experience shows, what Convulsions every
King's Death may probably make, even almost to the Unhinging of the Government;
and no Generation can be morally sure of living Six Months without a Civil War.

But now he comes on to tell us, Page 12.
That some time or other all Countries lie under an unhappy necessity of
Defending themselves by Arms; but he says, It is when Princes Rule with a Rod
of Iron. I see, his present Happiness cannot eclipse his Fears. I hope his
extreme Caution proceeds from a Fear of the late King's coming again, and then
I can excuse him; but 'till then, why should his Melancholy discompose others,
because it disorders him?

At the same time that he owns, that that Nation is safest in Peace, that carry
their Swords by their sides, because they have least occasion to use them, he
cannot be thankful for that Blessing.

Consider, Sir, an old saying, No Penny, no Pater Noster, when Army's appear
dangerous, let the Parliament withdraw their Purses and we are safe, but if he
still urges that they will plunder and take care for themselves, let them if
they are English Men attempt it, and at the loss of their Lives they will pay
for the Project, and then Sir I will be of your side: But he brings the Bravery
of our Nation in question when he says, he doubts our tamely suffering it:
Remember the late King's Fate, if you will not, those that come after and
follow his steps have a fair warning.

Page 13.
But still he has not banished his fears, The Militia he says are not useful though
he thinks them useful enough to defend the King. This Sir I cannot thank you
for.

From one Error he falls into more: He now fears that they will be Capable to
Influence Elections; this is very strange indeed, did he never hear what the
late King got by closetting? and can Inferior persons if they have ill designs
meet with better success than a King in Power? Pray Sir how many Officers on
Honor quitted Honorable Posts when they saw what he drove at, and they ought
to be taken notice of for their Bravery, such again would be quickly found on
the like occasion, and such being backed with right on their sides, would with
the assistance of the Freeholders and Commoners show how much they value
property, by routing a Body of such Ragamuffins as you Term a standing Army.

But when we have chosen our Representatives he fears that they will encompass
the Parliament House; but if his hopes were equal to his fears, he would be
told from good Authority, That perfect Love casts out Fear; and, That Fear
has Torment.

The Misery of Arms in the Hands of Slaves, he says, makes the Government of
the Turks uneasy: and yet he prescribes our Servants, To bear our Arms, for our
Safety. This is going about by the Wood, when a Foot-Path will lead your nearer
to the Church.

But we have not yet done with his Fears, Page 14.
The Advantage the King has, in giving so many Offices, sticks in his Stomach;
in which he is so modest, as not to exempt from the Lash such as are of his
Household, his Revenue, State, Law, Religion, or Navy; and these must of course
stick to the Men that are for Arbitrary Power; and these will bring unhappy
Quarrels among our selves, and put us upon a chargeable War, with a vast
Expense of Blood and Treasure: and for this Reason, he tells us, That we must
arm our selves against the Court. I confess he names not the King, but I
thought he was part of the Court; and then the Author said it, and not my self;
for he tacitly accuses all the Estates of Parliament, for saying, 'That we are
more beholden to Fortune, than our own Efforts, that this has not already
happened.

Then he brings in an Instance of King Charles the First, That if he had had
5000 Men beforehand with us, our Liberties had been gone without striking a
Stroke. Here he arraigns the Justice of the Nation, who solemnized the Day of
his Martyrdom by Act of Parliament; which had they deemed him a Tyrant in his
Temper, it is not to be thought he would have had that Favor: his Exit was
Bloody, but it is more unnatural to Revile the Memory of the Dead.

As for what you say of the late King, no body at this time will stand up to
assert his Actions; but in what you say of him, I differ from you: For I cannot
think that Army would have brought in Arbitrary Power, had not Popery been
intended: for which you had my Reasons before. But we are not now debating King
James's Affairs; he knows better why he withdrew, than I can tell you.

But again, Old Noll is brought upon the Stage, with the Story of 17000 Men,
which he left in Arms at his Death. Pray did these Men hinder the Loyal Party
from bringing back their Lawful Sovereign, No! they were so far from that, that
they contributed to his Restoration. As for the Duke of Monmouth's Expedition,
it seems to have been at first a Trick of State, in which you are silent, he
was perhaps the Darling of the People: but you know his Success, and may have
read, that the Amorites were not destroyed, 'till their Sins were ripe for
Punishment.

As for Caesar's Pharsalian Battle, with 22000 Men, he had Success wherever he
went; and is thought by many to merit what he got. But now the Roman and
Ottoman Empires run in your Head; and what was done there, is a Consequence of
what may be done here: a pretty sort of Argument, as if our Constitutions were
the same.

I have been told, that the Trisling Ceremony of Striking a Flag, was one
Pretense of breaking the late Peace: and according to your own Rule, What was
done yesterday, may again come to pass. The same Prince is now on the Throne,
as well as two Pretenders to ours, in his Territories; and he is so little of
our Author's Opinion, that he purposes to keep a considerable Land-Army: Are
their Swords to grow rusty? or are they all to go into Poland? You give an
Invader great Encouragement to come hither, when you tell him, That little
numbers may effect an Ambitious Design.

But I can tell you this, (of which you seem ignorant) that an Ignominious B
reach of the present Peace, would convince the Aggressor, That an English man
can resent Affronts; and Fight well, when he likes the Cause. And whent he
Torrent of Arbitrary Power seemed at any time floating in a Prince's Head, his
Subjects have soon taken that Occasion to make his Reign uneasy. But you are of
a contrary Opinion, and are commonly ready with a Doubt, or a May be: you
doubt, If the King has an Army, it must ruin us. You forget they are
Englishmen, and repeat your Fears oftener than some do their Prayers.

But you are so fair as to own, Pa. 15.
That those who are for a Standing Army, would not have it made part of the
Constitution, but be kept only 'till Europe is in better Circumstances. But at
this you have also a sling.

You fear, it will last the Life of K. James; and then start a Doubt, which
perhaps we had not heard of; That Prince Prettiman may be in the flower of his
Age, and in full vigor; and is more to be feared, than an unhappy Man sinking
under the Load of Age and Misfortune. And I can find, that on particular
Occasions, you can afford one Prince more Pity than another. It Is much you
should own the French King exhausted; and think, That so soon as he has fetched
Breath, it may be dangerous. Remember Sir, he has engaged the contrary. But yet
I dare lay a strong Wager, that if he furnished the Welsh Gentlemen with a
strong Army, he would help him to as much Ground in England, as he took up when
he was Born. Why then you will reply, What need is there of an Army? I will
tell you, that most Men would think it strange that came to see our Country, to
find that we mistrusted that our Prince would turn Tyrant, and therefore we
kept the power in our own hands, A Suspicion that never entered into the breasts
of those Princes, whose Armies he had lead, but alas this Gentleman only argues
for argument sake. He fears, when France grows stronger, their number must be
doubled. Pa. 16.
Pray Sir reflect not on that Prince, for there may be reflections in prose as
well as Verse, you add, their discontents may continue them; pray what makes
Armies discontented but want of Pay? and that is left to the direction of such
as we see fit to choose our selves, and if here the hinge moves not right,
those who put them in power are in the wrong.

But he continues Angry still: He says that Charles the Second being connived
at for keeping a few Guards (and grudges even his Pensioners and Beef-eaters)
the event was, that he left an Army to his Successor capable to make him
bluster to his Parliament that he would be no longer bound to the Laws he had
sworn too; but as he goes on he tells us, that a Complication of Causes madeit
fall out otherwise; and forgetting his former sentence turns upon himself, and
says, That what happened then, may never happen again.

But though he Confesses we have escaped this Precipice, he fears habit has made
Soldiers too familiar to us, and to go on with you, I must own that it would be
hard to have His Majesty refused as many Men as his Predecessors. And to urge
it as a violation of our laws is not so fair, my reason for it, is this, That
Concomitant Causes (such as this) of having pretenders to the Crown, may make
what might otherwise seem a hardship, now become absolutely necessary.

In a word, it is strange that an Author who writes so Gentleman like should at
the same time refuse Convenient succors, when he sees how absolutely necessary
it is for the preservation of a Kings life on whom so much depends.

But he says, the raising of these Forces was a violation of our Laws and that
his Government is built on the destruction of theirs. I like not the Simile he
gives that it cannot stand, I am satisfied here is no probable Cause of
suspicion and yet a very urgent necessity: Page 17.
You urge that the Conspirators say, we need be in no danger of Slavery whilst
we keep the Power of the Purse in our own hands, in which also I agree with you.

But in his next notion we part again, for he tells us in Latin to this effect,
that an Army will as certainly raise Money, as they will entrench upon our
privileges; or a little nearer to my Authors sense, he who has power will
obtain by force what Right denies. It Is hard to make the Irregularities of some
Armies an Instance to all, but alas it is his precaution, and we must excuse a
good Intention.

As soon as he has done with his fears, I will have done with them too, he
fears the shutting up of the Exchequer; which he says is only disobliging a few
Tally Jobbers, and 3 Millions according to his Arithmetic will he saved by it.
This fear was in order to increase a number of well affected persons to listen
to a Patriot: but to show you that his fears have in them a formal probability
he repaires to the Reign of Charles the Second, but the case is not a Parallel.

From hence he proceeds to his Sentiments of the Exchequer Officers at this
time, and tells us, that the Annuity-People are those who Rely on His Majesty's
Virtue, and not the Justice of the Exchequer Officers. And is His Majesty's
virtue so eminent and cannot we think it to be convenient to preserve his
Person? No better way can be proposed than a few Regulated Forces, and these
receiving their Pay from the Bounty of the Commons, can have it withdrawn when
reasonable, and they then must sink of course.

But having had his fling at the Exchequer Officers, who know best how to
defend themselves, he says, that we ought not to hazard such virtue by leading
it into Temptation, which he says, is our Duty to pray against. And he thinks
it an Age of Miracles if they be not Seduced; for our Heroes, (he says) are of
a coarse Allay and have too much dross mixed with their Constitutions for such
refined Principles. In this say I, qui capit ille facit.

Now the Fit comes on him apace again, he says, that in the little Experience
he has had in the World, he has observed most Men to do as much mischief as lay
in their power; this is a general drawing upon Mankind and this (if nothing
else) should keep him in Cognito.

But if he had proved his Assertion, I own what follows to be a Natural
Consequence, That we ought not to trust our Weapons with Children or Mad Men;
and for this reason his Instance of the Address of the Sheep to Apollo in
Boccaline, is very proper, That they desired for the future that the Wolves
might have no Teeth. But in this, Sir, as you show your Teeth, let them be
Angry whom you Bite.

Then he puts an Argument into our Heads; that it is Tyrant necessity, and that
France is great; and therefore an Army we must have and cannot be without it,
and that if we must be slaves; a Protestant Prince is better than a Popish one,
especially the Fr -- King. I should never have put this question, because I
cannot be so ill Natured as to have any such Melancholy apprehensions; you own
Sir that the Seas may Guard us, it is a Power I honor: but of old the Jews were
amazed to see a Man who at a word could Command the Winds and the Seas to obey
him. And if we cannot be as certain of their assistance as we are of their
Courage, a Critical Minute may happen; and then what Comfort will it be to cry,
this was an unfortunate accident, who would have thought it. On such an
occasion I could borrow your Melancholy (for you have enough to spare) and in
that humor reflect upon the great misfortune; but where would be my Comfort to
say, this was a complication of Causes that may never happen again: for if we
have no standing Forces what can be done on a sudden to oppose this Force of an
Invader? for I will grant with you, that we might know of his coming, but also
I must allow the Managers of such an Expedition would not lose a prosperous
Gale; away he comes, and then I increase my fears for want of Forces.

It Is not so Ridiculous a thing as you make it, to have us entertain the
thoughts, that we may be Invaded? Pray was not the Spanish Armado upon our
Coasts before we expected it; and yet'tis not unlikely but we knew of the
preparation, had the Fleet failed our Militia powers had been tried. As English
Men, I should not have doubted their Courage, but should have suspected their
discipline, and Regularity in Fighting is a great advantage.

But as I gave you some instances of the advantage Invaders have had, where a
Competent Number of standing Forces have not been ready to oppose them: So I
could raise Arguments from Examples that they have been of Excellent use, and
not dangerous in our own Kingdom; but for Brevity sake I omit to name them,
unless you please to assert the Contrary.

I find our Constitutions differ strangly, when you are most secure, then I am
in fear; for whilst you extol our security in a Fleet, I am afraid of a
Contrary Wind. I doubt not of our Marine Bravery but dread their misfortune;
still I am afraid lest Boreas should blow in their Teeth, such things have been
heard of, and you know what has been may be. This is a fair proposition you
must own, and what shall we do in this Case my Masters? why, you will say we
may have the liberty to go to a Politic Coffee-House, and say who would have
thought it. I could also urge, that we may have divisions among our selves
which will do us no kindness; and what advantage we may reap by such a
misfortune, you may guess when you call to mind the old Proverb Divide and
Reign; and sure by this time you will say I have proved that a modest number
makes us secure; and whilst if they Land our Army Fights them, the Wind may
chop about, and make our Fleet do us Service to prevent their Flight.

But you say, That no Wind can deprive us of Intelligence from France: and
pursuing your Humor, you say, There have been Errors in the Management of the
Fleet. It Is well the Land-Army has one to help to bear their Burden: this is
the first Broadside you have given the Fleet.

As you manage your Affairs, you leave no body to take your part: for having
laid the Land Army and Fleet on their backs, then the wretched Statesmen are
put in, to leaven and sour the whole Lump.

Page 20
Then, The Officers of the Fleet may be Corrupted: and pray Sir, then why should
we not be, as Hudibras has it, with Two Strings to our Bow? Who angles, without
a Reserve of Hooks in his Pocket? Who goes to the Tavern, to Drink but once?
Who would make but One Parliament Man, if he could have Two? and in more than
these things, this Rule does hold: And why then should we not have Land, as
well as Sea Forces: for as you observe, Nothing but a Concomitancy of Causes,
can ever make them both betray us.

By the way, Sir, I doubt not of either; but you doubt them both: yet admitting
one to be false, the other may do us service; one God, and one King, is
sufficient: but Land and Sea Forces are best in conjunction.

ibid.
But now you speak what pleases me much, That a Well-train'd Militia may do us
Service. I wish you had acquainted us, in how long time they might have been
made serviceable; for I should perhaps be apt to lay it at a longer time than
you. Must the Army be forthwith Disbanded, and the King have no body but his
Pensioners and his Beef-Eaters to look after him? It Is an odd way of Rewarding
Merit, and will sound but meanly in Foreign Countries.

But you go on with a Method I never heard of, viz Cudgelling a Man into a
Hero: nor is it usual to call those Men Ragamuffins, and Henroost-Robbers,
whose Employments it is to fight for their Country, and who have so
successfully fought for it. But I am in no Post of that quality, and so you do
not in this Clause level at me.

But to Sugar-over his sour Grapes, which have set my Teeth on Edge; he
entertains us with an Account of the detestable Policies of the late Reigns,
That they used their utmost Art and Application, to Disarm the People, and make
the Militia useless to countenance a Standing Army, in order to bring in Popery
and Slavery; and much more, to the same Tune. And then he discovers a strange
Secret, viz. That such Officers as were more zealous in Exercising their
Companies than others, were Reprimanded, as if they designed to raise a
Rebellion. I am apt to think, the Story may be true; and if I met my Author, I
would be out of his Debt, in telling him a Story much of the same nature; That
Fowling-Pieces were thought dangerous Weapons, in the Hands of such as were for
the Bill of Exclusion, or against Arbitrary Power. But now to the Matter in
hand.

And now you are come to your Why nots? which I shall set in their Files, and
Muster them, as well as I am capable. Page 21.
Your first Project is, To have Cross-Bows turned into Firelocks, and a
competent number of them to be kept in every Parish, for the Young Men to
Exercise with on Holidays; and Rewards offered to the most Expert, to stir up
their Emulation. For this Project the Apprentices will thank you, more than
their Masters. Nor is this all the Inconvenience; the Play Houses and
Cheescake-Towns would be much disappointed.

There is also another unlucky Objection behind, which is, That it might be
connived at on Sundays; and then you must reprint the Book of Sports, which did
a certain King no great Credit. I fear also, that the Parsons would catch Cold
in their Pulpits, for want of the Breath of a good Audience.

Then, Item Secondly, You are for reducing the whole Militia of England, to
60000 Men; and the third part of them to be kept to constant Exercise. But be
sure you first make them so useful, as that proper Judges may find no Objection.

But your next Why not I cannot endure, it is mere Stuff; you say, Why may not
a Man be Listed in the Militia, 'till he be discharged by his Master? I will
not dispute, what such a Favor would cost: but I believe, few Men carry so
much Money about them as will do the Business. Nay more, what occasion has a
Master to discharge his Servant? he told him at first, what he must trust to,
and so let him compound as well as he can. And by this time sure you will
grant, that it is not so easy, as to be Discharged by his Captain. But you put
harder on us still, in Proposing to have the same Horse forthcoming, unless it
can be made appear, that he is either Dead or Maimed. And who must be this
Affidavit Man? why who should, but the Man of Property; what has he to do at
home?

More Reasons I could urge on this Head: but lest you think this a Sham, I will
tell you, he who sends to Horse or Foot, must be obliged on the Penalty of a
great Fine, to appear according to his Qualification. If when I have used my
endeavor, and found out a Man, I shall be much more plagued for my Horse; I
must either keep him for sudden Service, or he is useless: he must not serve my
Coach nor Cart, for then the Mark of his Traces will be a Grievance: and if I
keep him too Fat, my Rider cannot Manage him. Hard Terms are these, to Men of
Property.

We had better not have so mean a Character of our King, since there is such a
difficulty in the manner of surbishing our Arms. Our Pistols may lie damp and
so make a false Fire, and then a Surgeon comes upon you for the Cure; A Man
sure would not be fond of his Post, when he heard my last Man was slain in hot
Service, with the accumulated misfortune of leaving behind him a sorrowful Wife
and Infant Children.

But to your next why not you say private Soldiers in the Army when they are
dispersed in the several parts of the Kingdom may be sent to the Militia, and
the Inferior Officers in the Army may in some Proportion Command them.

I suppose Sir the Gentry of the Country are Loyal, but this is a very
Chargable post you six them in, for they must Treat as well as Teach their
Soldiers, and you have assigned them no Salary. No matter you will say, they
are Gentlemen of plentiful Fortunes, but I must remark this, that the Farmers
Wives weresate against you before, and now you have made Ladies of Quality not
fond of your project. Remember Sir a multitude is an ungovernable thing, but it
was your own act and deed, or else you ought for fear of Censure to clear your
self; for you propose they will fight and I must add another supposal to yours,
viz. they may be Slain, and then you must pray to God to keep your Eysight.

But after these Objections, could your Project come to any effect, they would
be as chargeable as a Standing Army.

Your Instances of Jersey, Guernsey, Poland, and Switzerland, nay and your
beloved Country of the Grisons, are wide of the Mark, and hit not your Purpose.

What the London-Apprentices did, is also an Argument against your self; for
there was Major General Property led them on, and Raw Men quickly beat a
Regulated Army. Consider that! the Matter swells upon my Hand. This which I
have said, is an Answer likewise to the Vaudois, Miquelets, and Irish Militia.

You are the first Man that ever doubted of the King's opposing Military Art,
by appearing at the Head of an Army of Young Nobility and Gentry. Your Argument
also, Page 22.
That the Officers durst not trust the English Militia too near the Duke of
Monmouth, is a Proof, That as his Pretenses were plausible; so Popery began to
make them fear the sad Effects of Arbitrary Power.

The Answer you make to an Objection, That the Militia cannot be serviceable,
is insufficient: but that perhaps you will by this time confess.

The Reasons you advance, against keeping an Army 'till the Militia are
Disciplined, is short of the Purpose; and none but a Man full of Fears, would
have urged That other Persons cannot Exercise the Militia with Encouragement,
Whilst there is a Standing Army; and that the same Rule will hold Seven Years
hence: you say, a small Army is enough to oppress the People, and too few to
defend our selves. I could sometimes hope you were not our Countryman, because
you very seldom speak in our Favor. Your Champion Machiavel does you much
Service, and his Borgia is an Honor to your Cause.

I find, when a Man is sinking, he takes hold of any thing: Page 23.
but your Citations out of my Lord Bacon, Mr. Harrington, and a late French
Author, are very little to the Purpose. But yet Sir I must do you the Justice
to say, that you have handled an unreasonable Argument very well. And I hope
with you, That he who Plumes his Feathers beyond a Common Bound, may Mew them
soon after. Page 24.
I wonder much, that you who abhor Numbers, should Muster so many Authors.

I am glad to hear you own, That you think the Artillery of the World is
changed, since some of these Men wrote; and more Experience goes to the making
of a good Soldier, than there did formerly: and yet presently after you say, It
can be acquired in few Weeks; and that the Modern Exercise is more easy than
the Ancient. Then you shift up and down, and say, That a Man may learn it in
his Closet, as well as in the Field.

Page 25.
You say, That Engineers can be made, without the Formality of Standing Forces:
a pretty odd Notion.

You say, Actual Experience in War, is not essential at all to a Standing Army:
and yet you presently own, that This Army has Knowledge. And who I pray would
be at the Charge of sending to School, who has an Army ready formed to his
Hands, an Army that knows Discipline; and who, as Englishmen, cannot be feared.

But an Army will not go down with you; you say, it is not necessary: and for
your Instance of York and Lancaster, as I told you before, so I must tell you
again, That it was owing to their not keeping up a Moderate Force, which
occasioned so many Bloody Fields.

But the Spaniard has put you out of Humor: What makes that Monarchy now seem
to have seen its best Days, but want of Force?

Page 26.
Then you tell us plainly, That the French are our Enemies. A Passage which is
pretty bold, I confess, for the Simile will not justify it. Queen Elizabeth her
Speech to the Duke of Alanson, is to the Purpose: for the King has as entire an
Ascendant on the People; and this does proceed from a well-grounded Confidence.
He aims not at such an Army as may be able to ruin us, but such an one as may
defend us on occasion; and you know, Property is the Word, and ours a Mixed
Monarchy. So that on the whole you may find, That the King keeps not his Army
to Awe his Subjects, but to Correct Invaders, who may pretend to his Crown; and
on that occasion may be quarrelsom.

Here follow a parcel of Insinuating Questions; which relating to the
Parliament, I shall not presume to handle. All I have to say to your Is it not
so, and so? it seems to be written on purpose to prevent an Answer.

But your next Assertion I may speak to, and the rather, because you say it is
your last: viz. That the best way of Restoring King James, is by Maintaining a
Standing Army to keep him out. Page 27.
You lay down your Reason for it, to this Effect, That the Peoples Affection is
the King's Safety, which nothing but a Design to overthrow our Liberties can
destroy; and that a Standing Army depends upon the fickle Humor of the
Soldiery: you quote The dismal Effects in all Ages, in Vsarmed Governments: The
disobliging two or three Officers and a Jacobite, Mistress, or the King of
France Buying Pensioners in the Court and Army; with such a Bead-roll of
Suppositions, that the Book proves it self to be a Design. But these Innuendo's
will affect none but light People.

Then you fear a Rehearsal Revolution, and yet strive to bring it about by
making him a King of Brentford, and so out of the Cloud of your fears bring in
your old King James (not the late King) by the power of the King of France (not
the French King) he was called so in our Articles of Peace, but that being a
sort of Introductory Prelimenary, you might Slip it over in haste.

As your Book ends your Modesty begins, Page 29.
you say That what you have offered against standing Armies is only where they
are Instruments of Tyranny, and say that what you proposed is not to touch on
our own, which was raised by consent. If those you have reflected upon can
forgive you, I shall, because I love an Ingenious manager of a Bad Argument,
and conclude that you would write much better upon what would bear the Test.

Page 30.
At last to make Friends, you propose a Donative, but lament at the same time
our turning to grass a mighty Monarch for breaking the Laws: Your 8 years War
you grudg, though you reap the benefit, as well as 40 Millions of Money spent,
and you will never consent to it, set still then, and see what Men entrusted by
their Country will do, and let you and I rest contented.

POSTSCRIPT.
THE Paper called an Argument against a standing Army, had made some Noise in
the World before it came to my hands, and the quick dispatch I was forced to
use, to have it come out in time, may be the occasion of some mistakes in the
Print, which could not well be prevented, and other things might have been
added, but for have, and leaves the Candid Reader to make a favorable
Interpretation.

ERRATA.
Page Line 12 Titular read Tutelar: P. 5 L. 3 to r. teo: P. 8. L. 2. 5000 r.
500.

FINIS.

