An Account of the Proceedings at the Sessions for the City of Westminster,
against Thomas Whitfield, Scrivener; John Smallbones, Woodmonger; and William
Laud, Painter; for Tearing a Petition prepared to be Presented to the Kings
Majesty, for the sitting of the Parliament. With an Account of the said
Petition presented on the 13th. Instant, and His Majesty's Gracious Answer.
IT being the undoubted Right of the Subjects of England, Vi^e the Resolutions
of the Law, C^k. J^r^sdict o^ Courts 79. Hoba. 1.220 Vel. Magna Chart. Ex 1.
Spencer. 51. Vice he Proclama^^ons or K. Charles the First.
and Warranted by the Law of the Land, and the general practice of all former
times, in an humble manner to apply themselves to His Majesty, in the Absence
of Parliaments, by Petition; for the Redress of their Grievances, and for the
obtaining such things as they apprehend necessary or beneficial, to the safety
and well-being of the Nation. And it being their Duty to which they are bound,
by the express words of the Oath of Allegiance, I Do Swear from my Heart, That
I will bear Faith and true Allegiance, to His Majesty, His Heirs, and
Successors and Him, and Them will Defend to the uttermost of my power against
all Conspiracies and Attempts whatsoever, which shall be made against His or
Their persons, their Crown and Dignity. And will do my best endeavor to
disclose and make known unto His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, all
Treasons and Traiterous Conspiracies, which I shall know or have of to be
against him or any of them.
to represent to Him any danger which they apprehend Threatening his Royal
Person or His Government; diverse persons in and about the City of Westminster,
considering the too apparent and unspeakable danger His Majesty and His
Kingdoms are in, from the Hellish Plots and Villainous Conspiracies of the
bloody Papists and their Adherents, and conceiving no sufficient (or at least
so fit) remedy could be provided against it, but by the Parliament by whom
alone several persons accused of these accursed designs can be brought to
Trial, did prepare and sign a Petition, humbly representing to His Majesty, the
eminent danger His Royal Person, the Protestant Religion, and the Government of
this Nation were in; from that most damnable and Hellish Popish plot, branched
forth into several the most Horrid Villainies: for which several of the
principal Conspirators stand impeached by Parliament, and thereby humbly
praying that the Parliament might Sit upon the 26th. of January, to try the
Offenders, and to Redress the important Grievances no otherwise to be
Redressed, of which Thomas Whitfield, John Smallbones, and William Laud,
inhabitants in Westminster, taking notice; upon the 20th. day of December last,
they sent to Mr. William Horsley who had Signed and promoted the Petition, and
in whose custody it was; to bring or send it to them, for that they desired to
Sign it: and thereupon Mr. Horsesley attended them, and producing the Petition
in which many persons had joined, he delivered it at their request to be by
them Read and Signed, but Mr. Whitfield immediately tore it in pieces, and threw
it toward the fire, and Smallbones catching it up, said, that he would not
take 10 s. for the names, and then they declared that they sent for it for that
very purpose, and owned themselves all concerned in the design.

Upon Mr. Horsley's complaint hereof to a Justice of the Peace, a Warrant was
granted against them, and they being taken thereupon, after examination of the
matter were bound to appear and answer it at the next quarter Sessions of the
Peace for the City of Westminster, and upon Friday the 9th. of January instant
the Sessions being holden, and there being present several Justices of the
Peace that are eminent Lawyers, the matter was brought before them, and the
Grand Jury Indicted the said Whitfield, Small-bones, and Laud as follows,
(viz.)

The City, Borough and Town of Westminster in the County of Middlesex.
THE Jurors for our Sovereign Lord the King upon their Oath do present, that
whereas the Subjects and Liege People of the Kings and Queens of this Realm of
England, by the Laws and Customs of the Realm, have used and been accustomed
to represent their Public Grievances by Petition or by any other submissive
way; And that the 20th. day of December in the One and Thirtieth Year of the
Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, by the Grace of God, of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, etc. at the
Parish of St. Martins in the Fields, within the Liberty of the Dean and
Chapter of the Collegiate Church of St. Peter, of the City Borough and Town of
Westminster in the County of Middlesex; a Petition written in paper, was
prepared and Subscribed with the hands of diverse the said Kings Subjects and
Liege People, (to the Jury unknown) and to our said Sovereign Lord King Charles
the Second Directed, and to our said Sovereign Lord the King to be Presented
and Delivered; by which Petition it was shown, that whereas there had been and
was a most damnable Plot against the Royal Person of our said Sovereign Lord
the King, the Protestant Religion, and well Established Government of this
Realm, for which Plot several of the Principal Conspirators were impeached by
Parliament, and whereby it was humbly prayed that the Parliament which was
prorogued to the 26th. day of January next ensuing in the said Year, might then
sit to Try the Offenders, and to redress the pressing Grievances not otherwise
to be Redressed. And that Thomas Whitfield late of the said Parish of St.
Martins in the Fields in the Liberty aforesaid and the County aforesaid,
Yeoman, John Smallbones late of the said Parish, within the Liberty aforesaid
in the County aforesaid, Woodmonger, and William Laud late of the Parish
aforesaid in the County aforesaid, Yeoman; being persons ill-affected and
Contriving, Devising and Intending as much as in them lay, to hinder the
sitting of the said Parlidment as was prayed by the said Petition, and also to
hinder the Trial of the said Offenders, and Redressing the said Grivances, the
said 20 th. day of December in the said One and Thirtieth Year of the Reign of
our said Sovereign Lord the King, as Rioters and Disturbers of the Peace of our
Sovereign Lord the King, for the Disturbing of the Peace of our said Sovereign
Lord the King, with Force and Arms at the said Parish within the Liberty
aforesaid in the County aforesaid, Unlawfully and Riotously did Assemble
themselves and being so then and there Assembled, with Force and Arms then and
there Unlawfullie Riotouslie and Injuriouslie, the said Petition being
delivered by one William Horsley to them the said Thomas Whitfield, John
Smallbones and William Laud at their Request, and for the subscribing their
Names thereunto if they should think fit, did Tear in pieces in contempt of our
said Sovereign Lord the King, and of his Laws, to the evil Example of all
others in the like Cases Offending, and against the Peace of our said Sovereign
Lord the King his Crown and Dignity.

The Names of the Grand Jury that found the Bill, are these William Jacob
Thomas Trevor Erasmus Brown Henry Dugley Richard Street John Henly John
Weston Martin Frogg John Pierce Robert Pinke Nathaniel Wilkinson Edward
Whitefoot John Gentle Thomas Harris William Fortune. Roger Higdon James Harrold
Cornelius Rickfield George Wright, Apothecary Walter Wright Adam Langley.



Upon Wednesday the 7th. of this instant January many Gentlemen and Eminent
Citizens, who had been concerned for managing the Petition for the Sitting of
the Parliament, upon the 26th. instant met together and agreed upon the method
of finishing the same, and of nominating Fit persons for the presenting it to
His Majesty, which being accordingly done; these Gentlemen following (viz.)
Sir Gilbert Gerrard Barronet, Son in Law to the late Bishop of Durham. Francis
Charlton Esquire; John Ellis Esquire; John Smith Esquire; Johnson of Stepney Esquire; Ellis
Crispe Esquire; Anthony Selby Esquire; Henry Ashurst Esquire; Tho. Smith Esquire;


Gentlemen of Good Worth and Estates, and several of whom have been eminent
Sufferers for His Majesty, did this 13th. of January, attend His Majesty with
it at Whitehall, when being introduced to His Royal presence. Sir Gilbert
Gerrard kneeling, presented this Petition;

To the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, the Humble Petition of Your Majesty's
most dutiful and Loyal Subjects Inhabitants in and about the City of London,
whose Names are hereunder subscribed,

Shows,
That whereas there has been and still is a most Damnable and Hellish Popish
Plot branched forth into the most Horrid Villainies against Your Majesty's most
Sacred Person, the Protestant Religion, and the well Established Government of
this Your Realm, for which several of the principal Conspirators stand now
impeached by Parliament.

Therefore in such a time when Your Majesty's Royal person, as also the
Protestant Religion and the Government of this Nation are thus in most eminent
Danger.

We Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Obedient Subjects, in the deepest sense of
our Duty, and Allegiance to Your Majesty, Do most humbly and earnestly pray,
That the Parliament which is prorogued until the 26th. day of January, may then
sit, to Try the Offenders, and to redress all our most important Grievances, no
otherwise to be redressed.

And Your Petitioners shall ever pray for Your Majesty's long and prosperous
Reign.

And expressed himself to this effect, Sir, I have a Petition from many
thousands of your Majesty's Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, in and about Your City
of London, which I humbly present in their Names, and desire Your Majesty
would be pleased to read it.

To which His Majesty gave this Gracious answer, I know the substance of it
already, I am Head of the Government, and will take care of it, and then
received the Petition, it being a great Roll of above 100 Yards in length, and
carried it away in His Hand.


