An Account of the PROCEEDINGS at White Hall, Guild Hall, In the City of
London, AND AT The TOWER: Together With its SURRENDER upon the Surprising News
of the KING's Secret Departure, etc. on the 11th. of December 1688.
THE Surprising News of the King's secret Departure, together with that of the
Queen, and diverse others, having caused no Little Consternation in the Court,
the Lords of the Council, and other Protestant Lords, thought it highly
necessary to consult what was to be done in so great an Emergency, especially
upon Notice, That the Prince of Orange advanced with his Forces: So that after
having debated this great Affair, it was thought sit to turn out and remove all
Popish Officers, and those that had Places of Trust, with other Regulations,
etc. And the Lord Mayor of London, with the Sheriffs attending yesterday about
Four of the Clock in the Afternoon, it was concluded, That the Court of
Aldermen should Sit this Day, and the Common Counsel were summoned to meet in
the usual manner at Guildhall; when about Ten in the morning a great many of
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal came thither, to devise and consult what was
most material to be done. All Things in order for their Reception being
prepared in the Matted Gallery, amongst whom were their Graces the Archbishops
of Canterbury and York: The Bishops of Ely, St. Asph Winchester, etc. The Lords
Thanet, Shandois, Bartlet, Middlesex, Burlington, Carlisle, Mogrove, and other
Noble Lords: Whither they sent for Sir -- Skelion, Lieutenant of the Tower, to
give an Account of his Charge; when as it was further thought convenient, that
he should surrender that important place in Trust of the City to the Lord
Lucas, thereby to lessen the Fears of the People; and all Popish Soldiers and
Officers ordered to be dismissed and turned out. The Lord Mayor and Aldermen
being in the Council Chamber the greatest part of the Time, these Noble Lords
were in Consult about this weighty Affair, as also the Lieutenancy of the City
attended in the adjacent Chamber: So that about Four of the Clock in the
Afternoon, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal taking their Leave, the Lord Mayor
and Aldermen came into the Mayor's Court, where the Common Counsel were
Assembled in their usual Order and Formalities: And being seated, proceeded to
give them an Account to what End they had been Summoned, etc. And after some
Time the Court withdrew, and in the mean while the Gentlemen of the Common
Council refreshed themselves, when being Re-seated, and the Court again
sitting, several Things were proposed as the best Expedients in this Juncture
of Affairs, for the firmer Settlement and good Order of this great City, and
for the sure Establishment of the Protestant Religion, with which they
generally concurred with joyful Acclamations. There was likewise proposed an
Address to be made to His Highness the Prince of ORANGE, which being highly
approved with the like Acclamations, Persons were nominated to attend His
Highness with all Expressions and Demonstrations of Joy, in the Name and on the
Behalf of the Citizens of London, etc.

The greatest part of the Day the Multitude were gathered together, and
proceeded from place to place, pulling down and burning Popish Chapels and
Mass Houses, carrying the Images and Crosses in Triumph.

It was observed, That most of the King's Soldiers, upon being asked the
Question, Declared for the Prince of ORANGE, and His Highness is shortly
expected in London.

FINIS.

