AN APPEAL TO ALL Protestant Kings, Princes, and States: Concerning the
Apparent Danger of the Protestant Religion; And the Great Decay of its Interest
in EUROPE.

With a most Awakening Account of the Unjust and Cruel Methods for the
Destruction thereof, that are Practiced in several Countries.

LONDON, Printed for Brabazon Alymer, at the Three Pigeons over against the
Royal Exchange in Cornhill, 1700.

AN APPEAL TO ALL Protestant Kings, Princes and States, etc.
NExt to the Blessing of Christianity it self, we have reason to Thank God for
the Reformation, upon many Accounts. Hereby the Holy Scriptures were restored
to us, which for many Ages were kept from the Laity; or locked up in an unknown
Tongue.

Hereby was our Holy Religion restored to its Native Purity; all those gross
Corruptions having been purged from it, with which the Church of Rome had so
defiled it, that it became, in Abundance of Instances, a quite different
Religion from that which the Apostles Preached; and for which they suffered
Martyrdom; and in too many, even a perfectly Contrary Religion.

And hereby, Consequently, our hopes of Heaven are confirmed, and better
grounded. We are hereby put into a much better and surer way of Pleasing God,
and of Saving our Souls. And are not these Unvaluable Blessings?

In short, it was the Reformation that restored to us true Christianity, and
after our Blessed Sviour's Mind; and free us from a Religion which was devised,
merely to serve the Secular Interests of the Bishop and Church of Rome.

Nay we may Urge farther, that all good and useful Learning Revived, and now
Flourishes under it. And we may say also, that it has greatly benefited the
World by establishing Men in their just Rights, those which they were born to,
and which God and Nature most manifestly designed for them; by discountenancing
Arbitrary Power and Tyranny. Nothing has been more observed, than that where
the Reformation is embraced, the Government has kept more within its due
bounds; as where Popery prevails, Arbitrary Power does most bear sway. And no
Wonder; for if Moral Men can dispose Arbitrarily of Heaven it self, much more
allowable is it, that they should Absolutely dispose of the things of this Life.

And before the Reformation, the Church of Rome had so abused the World, that
whatsoever she defined was a Law to all Christians, though never so contrary to
Scripture or Reason. And she being sensible of the Power she had got, had no
Mercy or Moderation, in the exercise thereof; but Abrogated Old Doctrines and
Practices, taught and enjoined by the Apostles, and their Successors; and made
and established new ones as she pleased, and found it her Interest to do. And
Mankind were so captivated in their Understandings, that she could Coin no
Doctrine so Absurd, or Extravagant, but the People were as ready to swallow it.
Witness the Enormous Doctrines of Indulgences for Sins, as they were then
Preached; and Transubstantiation.

And though it pleased God, even in the darkest times, to preserve some few; as
in the days of Ahab, who did not submit to the Romish Churches Monstrous
Doctrines; did not bow the knee to Baal; but were pure as to most of them; as
Primate Usher has most Learnedly showed; that so there might be a visible
Church, or Nmber of Christians together, free from such Errors (which has
been a great satisfaction to those, who think such a visibility necessary to
the Being of a True Church, and to the fulfilling of our Blessed Savior's
Promises concerning it) yet most part of the Western World was greatly tainted
and corrupted with Her Errors. And instead of growing better, she grew every
day worse and worse. New Doctrines were Coined, and worse Practices built upon
them; and little left but outward Pomp and Splendor; exorbitant Riches and
Authority, which our Savior disclaimed; and no Account was made of that inward
Purity, Humility and Meekness of Spirit, which he commended to his Disciples to
follow him in.

But it pleased God, in his good Time, to raise up Martin Luther, and other
Reformers, to oppose the great Corruptions of the Romish Church; not by Humane
Power, not by Fire and Faggot, or any other such Means as she uses; but by
dint of Argument, and the force of Truth; by the Sword of the Spirit, the Word
of God; and by those very means by which Christianity it self prevailed against
Heathenism. And in little more than Forty Years, a Reformation was Established
in Four Kingdoms, viz. England, Scotland, Sweden and Denmark; and in many
Dukedoms, Principalities and Free Cities in Germany; so that about Two Thirds
of that large and populous Country, were become Reformed. And the Reformation
had got also great footing in other Countries where the Government was still
Popish; as in France, Poland, Hungary and Benemia, etc.

But as it was with Christianity in general, that for the first Four or Five
Centuries it did spread farther, than it has done in above a Thousand Years
since. (Nay, it has lost much of that ground, which it had in that time gotten,
viz. in Persia, ARabia, Africa, and in all the Turks Dominions) just so fares
it with the Reformation. The wonderful Progress it made at first is now
stopped, and it plainly goes backward. Which we cannot but ascribe to the just
judgment of God, on the gross Carelessness and Unthankfulness of Protestants;
they being so far from sufficiently valuing so mighty a Blessing, as neither to
take care to propagate it to others, norsincerely to practice it themselves.
And next it is to be ascribed to the Cunning, and Unjust and Cruel Methods of
our Romish Adversaries, for the Ruining of the Protestant Religion, and
Interest every where.

Some of their Methods we call Cunning, in which it is to be wished that the
Protestant Princes and States would imitate them; as their Uniting entirely for
the support of their Religion: However they disagree on Secular accounts, they
agree against all Protestants of all denominations. Those Popish Princes who
are Mortal Enemies to each other, perfectly agree in supporting Popery, and
running down the Reformation. So the Emperor and French King, during the late
long and bloody War, have as it were laid their Heads together, and taken the
same Measures to establish Popery, and destroy the Reformation in their
Dominions, and every where else. Whereas the Protestant Princes, if they at all
think of their Religion, generally only mind that part which themselves are
concerned in; without regarding what becomes of others; as has been too sadly
experimented.

But they use not only cunning Methods, but even the most Cruel, and Unjust
imaginable. And Protestants read of them in the News Papers, and from time to
time hear of them, but how few lay them to heart; or so much as Remember in
their Prayers the deplorable Condition of other Churches! When they understand
the Ruin of the Protestant Religion and Interest in some Places, by Cruel
Persecution, Falsehood, and Breach of Faith; or the decay thereof in other
places, by Undermining Arts, and diligent Applications, they grow never the
Wiser; nor consider how soon this may be their own Case. Nay they will scarce
so open their Eyes, as to take notice of those very Arts that are using against
themselves, by which others have been destroyed.

And now to Awaken all, if possible, out of this Lethargy, we will as briefly
as may be give an Account, of what they of the Church of Rome have done in
other Countries, for the Ruining of the Protestant Religion and Interest; and
perhaps afterward, of what they are now doing against our own Church.

To give Instances of their Cruelties and Plicies, and of their Success against
the Protestant Interest, in the several parts of Europe, is as easy as it is a
Melancholy Task.

As for those beginnings of a Reformation which were entertained, and which
spread not a little in ITALY and SPAIN, the Inquisition was let loose upon
them; and that bloody and barbarous Tribunal soon extinguished them.

In BOHEMIA the Reformation was reciv'd with so much readiness, BOHEMIA.
that in a short time the Protestant Religion became almost the Religion of the
Country. Bohemia indeed was ready for it, having struggled for some Ages
before against the Usurpations of the Church of Rome, and been prepared not
only by the Doctrine, but by the Sufferings of their two Countrymen, John
Huss and Jerome of Prague; who had been burnt for their Religion by the Popish
Council at Constance, expressly contrary to the Faith given them by the Emperor
Sigismund.

This flourishing of the Protestant Religion in Bohemia was a mighty Eyesore
to the Church of Rome, and the Ruin of it was their great aim; and that which
one might have hoped to have been the Eternal Establishment of it there, became
the fatal opportunity of the Ruin of it; viz. the Election of a Protestant
Prince from Germany to be their King.

To understand how this became the Ruin of the Protestant Interest in Bohemia,
it will be necessary to look a little into their sad History. That Kingdom hd
been by their Constitution for many Ages Elective, as that great Statesman (who
had been so often Ambassador abroad, and to Vienna it self) Sir Thomas Roe, has
demonstrated in a Book of his called Regnum Bohemiae Electivum. The Emperors of
Germany had among others been sometimes elected their King by the States of the
Country; but when the Austrian Family became greater, and had Three of them,
Ferdinand, Maximilian and Rodolphus, successively chosen Kings of Bohemia, they
had a mind to join it to their other Dominions by making it Hereditary. In
order to this, Matthias (who had himself been nominated upon the surrender of
the Emperor Rodolphus, with the Consent of the States of the Country)
declares his adopted Son Ferdinand Successor to the Crown of Bohemia, without
any Election from the States at all. This the States of that Kingdom looking
upon as a manifest infraction and subversion of the Liberties of their Nation,
They reject Ferdinand, as their States had formerly done to Vladislaus 3d. for
the same reasons, and Elect Frederick 5th. Count Palatine of the Rhine, a
Protestant Prince, to be their King. This Act of the States is immediately
called Rebellion, and the whole Popish Party catch at this opportunity, not
only of being revenged on the new King and his Party, but of Extirpating the
Protestant Religion out of Bohemia upon it. Popery Flies to its best Argument,
that of Arms. Ferdinand, that bitter Enemy of the Protestant Religion, puts the
new King under the Imperial Ban, raises a too potent Army against him, and
discomifits him at the Battle of Prague. Thus Success puts an end to the New
King's Power, ruins all his Friends, and the Protestant Religion in Bohemia;
and I cannot but say, it is the greatest blot upon the Memory of all the
Protestant Princes of that time, but especially of King James the First of
England: He having been so shamefully wanting to so just a Cause, and to his
own Son in Law in it.

Thus fatal was this War to the Protestant Interest in Bohemia; and to convince
the World what Regard Popery has to Rights and Laws, the Protestant Religion,
and the Civil Rights and Liberties of that Country were ruined together, and
both buried in the same Grave.

The Jesuits, who had before been expelled out of that Kingdom for their wicked
Pranks, the great Governors of that Emperor Ferdinand, have reason to triumph
in that success against the Protestant Interest; since it not only ruined the
Protestant Religion, but restored them there; and gave them for their pains in
it such a share of the forfeited Estates of the Exiled Barons and Protestants
as is almost incredible: They, that self-denying Order, which minds nothing but
the Glory of God, possessing more Lands and Lordships in Bohemia, than the Duke
of Tuscany does in Italy.

They began with Bohemia, where the Protestant Religion is quite destroyed, and
this success encouraged them to persecute the same Religion in HUNGARY; where
it is almost in the same condition.

The Reformation was so well received in Hungary, HUNGARY.
and so well settled there in the Year 1567, that there were ten Protestants to
one Papist, before their late Persecutions; and at least 2500 Protestant
Churches in that Kingdom. The Free exercise of it was established by their Laws,
and their Kings sworn in their Coronation Oaths to maintain and preserve the
same; but what Laws or Oaths signify against the persecuting and bloody
Principles of Popery, the present State of the Reformed Religion there will
plainly tell us.

It looks like madness to attack a Religion, when it is become the Religion of
the Country; when it has the establishment of the Laws and of the
Constitution: but the Popish Clergy were resolved to leave no way untried to
ruin the Protestant Religion in Hungary for all that. They only want a
tolerable pretext to begin their persecutions of them, and such an one they
thought they had got in the Year 1670. There was an Insurrection that year in
Hungary, the Heads whereof Serini, Nadasti, Frangipani, the two Barkoksys, etc.
were known and professed Papists; and though it was about matters purely Civil,
and nothing relating either to the one Religion or the other, yet this
opportunity was laid hold on by the Jesuits and others; the Protestants are
accused vehemently as being guilty, or at least accomplices in it; and as soon as
the Emperor had, upon this Insurrection, Garrisoned all the strong places of
the Kingdom with his Popish German Soldiers, which was contrary to the Laws and
Liberties of their Country, it was thought high time to begin their
Persecution of the Protestants there.

They began with the chief Patrons of the Protestants that were of the
Nobility, and afterward with the Generality of the Gentry and Citizens;
imprisoning the Persons of such as did not fly, and confiscating their Estates,
as guilty of Rebellion, which they proved themselves altogether innocent of.
The rest of the Principal Protestants seeing that Innocence was no Protection,
and that to be accused, was to be sure to be condemned, saved themselves by
flight into other Countries.

They next fell upon Persecuting the Protestant Ministers, and in several
places seized the Churches and Schools into their hands; and by their
intolerable proceedings soon showed that the Inquiry was really not who were
Rebels, but who were Protestants. The Numbers of those that fled were so great,
the Persecutions and Confiscations of all they had in their hands were so
intolerable, and the Insolence, and Exactions, and Outrages of the German
Soldiers so barbarous, that the people were so enraged at last as to take up
Arms to assert their Lawful Liberties against those German Soldiers, that were
brought into their Nation contrary to the Laws of it.

And though the Teuth part of the Protestants neither consented to, nor joined
in these Tumult, yet they must all equally be made the mark of their cruel
Persecutors.

The Archbishop of Strigonium, Lord Lieutenant of Hungary, in 1673, cites some
of the Protestant Ministers and Schoolmasters to appear at Presburg in
September; and in March after, almost all the rest of them in the Kingdom, to
answer such things as were to be laid to their charge. They were accused of
conspiring with the Rebels; and knowing their Innocence, and that they might
publicly, before God and the World, wipe off so foul an aspersion, they
appeared according to their Citations. But when they appeared, instead of being
legally proceeded against, this Archbishop, with the Bishop of Newstad, and
some Temporal Lords, required of them, 1. That they should lay down their
Ecclesiastical Employments, and engage never to resume them again. Or 2dly,
Depart the Kingdom, never to return again, nor Preach or Teach therein, upon
pain of Death and loss of Estates. Or 3dly, Embrace the Popish Religion,
denying and forswearing the Protestant.

Some of those cited the Year 1673. were surpised of frighted into a consent
to relinquish their Ministry, or to go into Exile; but the whole of those cited
in 1674. unaimously refused, judging such a compliance (as the Author of the
Brief Narrative of the State of the Protestants in Hungary, etc. printed with
allowance at London, 1677. well expresses it) not only as contrary to Gods
Will in his Word, and against their Consciences, but also a betraying the Cause
of God, his Church, and people, together with their established Laws and
Liberties. Upon this the Fiscal put in a plea against them, charging them with
calling their King an Idolater, Preaching against the blessed Virgin Mary, and
stirring up the people to Rebellion, and assisting the Rebels.

But this Method failing also, the Fiscal not being able to produce so much as
one Person of Integrity against them, they next tried to bring them by Threats
and Promises to sign the three Propositions; and when these also failed to work
upon them, they then pronounced Sentence against the Protestant Ministers the
4th of April, and against the Schoolmasters the 7th, 1674. That they should
lose their Lives and Estates. A Barbarous sentence this, when no Proof had been
made against them: But where will Popish Cruelty stop, when a Protestant is
thus unhappily in its Power?

A few subscribed to quit their Functions, and the rest were hurried into
several Prisons. Ninety Two of them were cast into most loathsome and stinking
Prisons, their Legs fettered with Turkish Chains, and driven daily to the
hardest labors, and filthiest Employments, cleansing Ditches, emptying
Jakes's, and the like, for almost a Year; and fed in the mean time with course
Bread and Water only, denied the converse of Friends or any others, and none
permitted to show any Charity to them. And as if all these Barbarities were not
enough, they were sometime dragged by the Hair, sometimes driven with Pikes and
Muskets to the Popish Mass, and when they would not kneel there, were beaten
and wounded by the Soldiers, being forbid all Praying and Singing of Psalms,
and disturbed by the Soldiers, howling like Dogs, when they did.

Nor did their Miseries how great soever end here, Forty One of them were sent
by the Emperor to serve the King of Spain as Soldiers in Italy, in March, 1675.
who in a terrible Journey of Seven weeks, were driven chained and fettered
through Moravia, Austria, Stiria, Carntola, Istria and Italy to Naples, and
endured the most Barbarous usage that Brutality and Popery could inflict. Two
dyed in the way; at Triesta in Istria, they were robbed of that little they had
left, stripped of their Clothes, and their Beards cut off, and there pressed to
serve the Emperor in his Wars, which they refusing, were most Cruelly beaten;
at Thiatin Six more were left in Prison unable to Travel further, their Chains
having eaten into their legs, whereof Four soon died.

The rest were sold at Naples for about Fifty Crowns a head, to serve as Slaves
in the Gally's where they were put, their Hair being cut off, Two or Three in a
Gally, enduring all the Miseries of that Condition and place, which is the
nearest resemblance to Hell that this World can afford. Five more soon died in
the Galleys of their cruel and barbarous usages; and when they were released,
after Ten Months Slavery in the Gally's, by the Christian and Generous Charity
of the Dutch Admiral De Ruyter in 1676, only Twenty Six were left alive. Of
which Eight were brought into England, and did furnis us with this account of
their dreadful Persecutions.

This Usage of the Hungarian Protestants is such a Specime of the cruel Spirit
of Popery, as can need no words to aggravate it. And after such a Havoc of
their chief Men, and of their Ministers, one must expect a lamentable account
of the State of the Protestant Religion in Hungary; which was in the beginning
of this Emperors Reign, in such a flourishing Condition there.

The Wars of Hungary gave the Protestants some respite from their Perfecutions;
and the success of the Turkish Arms against the Emperor in Hungary delivered
them quite from them: But in this last War, as success turned to the Emperors
side, the Persecutions of the Protestants began again, who find by dear
experience, that Papists can be more cruel and perfidious than Mahometans
themselves. A Person of Note, who was in Hungary in April 1690. Assures us,
that had the Emperor continued uncontrolled Master of Hungary, most certainly
all the poor Protestant Churches there had been destroyed. Several of their
Ministers declaring to him, that they lived much more easily under the Turks
than under the Germans; and that (in manifest violation of Treaties and Faith
given) the Popish Bishops and Priests daily deprived them of their Churches,
and oppress them; and that their Poverty was unspeakable.

We will add a part of the Letter which the Bishop of Quinque Ecclesiae then
had written to the Protestants of his Diocese, which will tell us, as well as a
Thousand Expresses could, what is the present case of the Protestants in
Hungary. -- Persuadete vobismet ipsis, si quotidie 25 Cumulos auri mihi
effunderetis, non tamen Vos sub Episcopatu meo tolerarem;nam dico Bovem,
Asinum, and omnia reptilia and aquatilia animalia, imo etiam Diabolum
infernalem humiliandum citius Salutem aeternam adepturum, quam unum Calvinistam.

Whether the late Coronation of the Emperor's Son King of Hungary, does
prognosticate any Tranquillity to the Protestant Religion there, we must leave
to time to determine: where He was neither Elected solemnly by the States, as
the Laws and Constitution of that Kingdom did use to require; nor took the Old
Coronation Oath, wherein among other things their Kings used to Swear to
maintain and preserve the Free exercise of the Protestant Religion, established
by the Laws there.

We cannot think it had been unworthy of the care of those Protestant Princes
or Ambassadors, who were the Mediators of the late Peace, betwixt the Emperor
and the Turks, to have interposed their good Offices for the Security and Quiet
of the Poor Remains, of the Protestant Interest now left in Hungary.

Another terrible blow to the Protestant Interest, is the loss of one of the
Protestant Electorates in GERMANY, and the appearent danger of losing another;
we speak of the PALATINATE and SAXONY.

By the devolution of the PALATINATE to a Popish Family, PALATINATE
the Protestants have lost a Vote in the Electoral College of the Empire; and
though such a loss is great, yet the Practices of this present Elector (who had
been yet as mere a Titular Prince without any Dominions, as He was during the
War, but for the Protestant Princes Interest and Care of Him) makes the World
apprehend much greater Mischiefs to the Protestant Interest from him.

Though He is descended from Protestant Ancestors, and when his Father was named
Successor by the last Protestant Elector Charles, He gave Charles the most
solemn Assurances, that there should be no Alterations made in Religion in the
PALATINATE; and though by the Constitution of the Empire the Protestant Religion
is the established Religion of the PALATINATE, all the Churches, Schools,
Church Lands, Tithes, and other Ecclesiastical Revenues, being fixed in the
Protestants hands by the Treaty of Westphalia, and the Popish Religion cannot
so much as be exercised there without a Toleration of the Government; yet this
present Prince could no sooner be restored to his Dominions by the Protestant
Interest, than he set himself to banish the Protestant Religion out of his
Country.

It was great Gratitude to the Protestant Mediator and Princes in the late
Peace, to turn Persecutor of their Religion, which was also by the Laws of the
Empire the established Religion of his Country; but what Actions, how ungrateful
or unjust soever, will Popery boggle at, to Ruin the Remains of the
Reformation! What can Duty and Interest, Faith or Gratitude, signify to any
Prince that is Governed by Jesuits, and the rest of the fry of Popish Priests!

When this Prince was restored to his Dominions by the late Peace, and came
into the PALATINATE, He promised and assured the Protestants, both Laity and
Clergy, that He would maintain all their Privileges; and how he has made good
his word we can already show.

He began with a Proclamation, that the New Style should be observed, and the
Popish Holidays kept through the whole Palatinate, and that the Protestant
Burying places should be common. He has taken from the Protestants the Cloister
and Church at Heidelburg, and the Seven Latin Schools, and is erecting
Cloisters for the Franciscans, Augustins and Capuchins, and a Seminary for the
Jesuits. These are busy to get into their Clutches the Cathedral Church there,
and the Collegium sapientiae.

He has taken away from the Protestants the Cathedral Churches at Weinham,
Frankendale and Ladenburg, and other places, and from the Ecclesiastical
Council (who are reduced to Two, though they should be Six, with a President) and
the Verwaltung their ancient Privileges and Rights, and the Revenues,
Liberties and Properties, and the freedom of disposing the Ecclesiastical
Incomes; and has given to the Romish Priests all Incomes, Lands and Tithes,
which belonged to the Ministers, and allows now only to each Minister for the
Maintenance of himself and Family Yearly, one hundred Gilders, which is not Ten
Pounds Sterling, Twenty Sacks of Corn, and a Fudder of Wine. By such an
allowance He cannot but hope to starve the Ministers out of his Country, and
make them leave their Flocks for a Prey to the Popish Wolves.

At Creutznach He has taken away the Church, with the Latin Schools, which were
built and endowed but Thirty Years ago for their Ministers and Schoolmasters;
all the Houses that belong to Protestant Alms, and Hospitals, are taken away by
force, with those belonging to Protestant Ministers and Schoolmasters. It is
forbidden upon pain of Death to expound the 80th Question in the Palatinate
Catechism, which treats of the difference betwixt the Lords Supper and the
Popish Mass.

He has published a Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, which is the Ape of
that we had in England, and is as much an infraction of the Treaty of
Westphalia, as ours was of the Laws of England. From this one would expect his
people might espouse, or be of, which Religion they should think fit. It Is so
far from that, that they will not suffer any Papist to turn Protestant, and
have already put several persons into prisons for having agian embraced the
Protestant Religion, which they had been forced to feign to quit, by the
violent Persecutions of the French, while they were in the late War in
possession of the Palatinate.

The Minister of Sekenheim was committed close Prisoner, and fined 200 Florins,
because he had at the Request of the Mother admitted a young Woman to the Holy
Communion, though she had been bred a Protestant; and all because her Father
was a Papist.

The Minister of Wiselock (to omit more instances, hundreds of which they write
from thence, they could furnish us with) was carried to Heidelburg, kept close
Prisoner there, and forced to pay a Fine of 50 Florins to get out, because he
had baptized, at the request of both the Parents, their Child, the Father being
a Papist.

In short, for all this Jesuitical Declaration about Liberty of Conscience,
it is already Law there, that if either of the Parents be Popish, the Children
shall be brought up Papists, and compelled to embrace the Popish Religion; and
the Ministers are forbid under pain of imprisonment, and a Fine of Fifty
Rixdollars, to admit any such to their Communion.

Such a Violation of their Laws and Liberties, and such Usages were sure to
beget Complaints from the Protestants to their Prince; and how have they been
redressed? some of the Complainants have been most cruelly beaten, and thrown
into Prisons, and others have had the Elector's Dragoons quartered upon them,
who have broken their Doors and Windows to make forcible entrance, and have
turned their Wives and Children out of doors: and the Inspectors themselves,
when they have complained of such Barbarities to the Governors under this
Prince, have no other answer, but that the Ministers were Rebels, and that they
ought not to concern themselves for them, lest they incur themselves for it his
Electoral Highnesses Displeasure.

What the Memorials at Ratisbon about this matter, and the Interpositions of
several Protestant Kings and Princes in their behalf, have signified, the World
now knows, that Prince wonders at the Impudence of his Subjects for such
complaint; declares he will go on in his own way; which, by what ha been
practiced there already, can end in nothing less than the Extirpation of the
Protesant Religion out of the Palatinate.

What Changes in SAXONY, SAXONY.
the perversion of that Elector to the Popish Religion, is like to produce must
be left to time. Saxony is a Country, where if their Laws are to be regarded,
Popery was never to take root or grow again. However a Popish Governor has
been put over this Country by their Elector, and Mass appears publicly at
Dresden.

The Election and settlement of their Elector as King of Poland has no little
exhausted Saxony of it is Wealth, its Arms and Ammunition; but if its Laws and
Religion must be given up for it too, it will be the dear4est price that ever
was paid for the Crown of Poland; and that this is to be the price of it, there
is too much reason to fear.

The Poles are dissatisfied about the reality of his Conversion; his German
Forces are hated there, and knocked on the head more for being Protestants than
Saxons; they refuse the Crowning his Queen, except she will become Papist: What
will not this King then do to appease the Poles, and please the Pope, and those
of that Religion? If the Queen should be perverted also (which God avert) the
Electoral Prince will questionless be brought up in that way; and then, if not
sooner, Father Vota and the Jesuits of Poland, can teach their Prince how to
trample upon all Laws and Liberties, and to ruin the Protestant Religion in
Saxony, as well as the Jesuits of Dusseldorp have taught the Elector Palatine
to do in the Palatinate.

The Popish party never want will, opportunity is all they want to subvert the
Protestant Interest, wherever they can: and as soon as they can get this in
Saxony, we shall be sure to hear of their Persecutions and Barbarities.

And for the late PEACE at RESWICK, whatever Repose it has given to Europe, the
Protestant Interest is very little indebted to it, That Peace has taken from
its Strength, and from its Security. It has lost by it the Great City of
Strasburgh; which the French King glories in, as restored to the Church of
Rome; and the 4th Article of it is like to be a perpetual bone of Contention,
by giving Popery such an handle to usurp upon the Protestants, wherever they
have a power.

The Elector Palatine has begun in part of his Dominions; the Prince of Salm
has by Dragoons and Arms brought Popery into, and usurpt some Churches in the
Dominions of the Landgravine of Daun; and the Rhingraves of Chamback and
Growiler have carried to Ratisbone as grievous complaints against this New
Persecutor, the Prinoe of Salm, who is a Subject of the Emperors. The
Usurpations and Violences of the Popish party against the Protestants, have
been so many and so unjust, that they have become the Subjects of several
Memorials to the Diet at Ratisbone; and the Protestant Princes Ministers have
received so little Justice, and so little Satisfaction from the Popish ones,
that all business whatever is at a stand in the Diet; and the Protestants have
now generously resolved they will treat no more about any business whatever of
the Empire, till they have had satisfaction for these unjust Usurpations upon
the Protestant Interest.

And it is certainly time for the Protestant Princes and States to look well
about them, when the Emperor, for all his Obligations to the Protestant Allies,
could so readily sign such an Article with the French King. This Article was a
trick fitter for a Popes Nuncio, than for the Baron de Zeiler, the Emperor's
Minister there; but what better could be expected from a Renegado?

We have seen how the Zealots of the Rmish Church, have by their Usage of the
poor Protestants in Bohemia and Hungary, deserved that black Character of
Ravening Wolves in Sheeps Clothing, with which our Blessed Savior Stigmatized
the Scribes and Pharisees: But there is no Nation wherein they have so filled
up the measure of their Fathers, as in the Kingdom of France.

This Country is so spacious a Field of Blood, FANCE.
that to take an exact Survey of it as such, would be an endless Work. But we
shall abundantly expose the Bloody Spirit of Popery, as it has showed it self
there, by that time we have reflected upon, though with all possible brevity, the
Bartholomew Massacre under Charles the 9th; and the Methods that have been
taken for the extripation of the Reformed Religion, from time to time, in the
Reign of the present King.

As to that Masterpiece of Devilish Cruelty, next to the Gun. Powder Plot
here, we will take the Account thereof from Mezerai, who cannot be suspected of
exceeding the Truth, because he was'a Romanist, and Historiographer of France.
It lasted, says he, seven whole days (that is in the City of Paris) the three
first viz. from Sunday (a Blessed day to begin such a work upon) the Feast of
St. Bartholomew, till Tuesday, in its greatest fury; the four other, with
somewhat more of abatement. During which time were murdered near five Thousand
Persons, by diverse sorts of Deaths; and many, by more than one; and, among
others, five or six hundred Gentlemen. Neither the Aged, nor the tender Infants
were spared, nor Women great with Child. Some were stabbed, others hewn in
pieces with Halberts, or shot with Muskets, or Pistols: Some thrown headlong
out of the Windows; many dragged to the River and drowned; and diverse had their
Brains beaten out with Mallets, Clubs, or such like Instruments. Seven or Eight
hundred had thrust themselves into Prisons, hoping to find Shelter under the
wings of Justice; but the Captation, appointed for this Execution, caused them
to be hauled out, and brought to a place near Lavalee de Misere, or the Valley
of Misery; where they knocked out their Brains with Pole-Axes, and cast them
into the River. A Butcher going to the Louvre on Tuesday, told the King that he
had d^^^atched one hundred and fifty the night before; and a Gold Wiredrawer
often boasted, showing his Arm, that he had killed four hundred for his Share.
Opon Tuesday, the third day of the Massacre, the King heard Mass, to return
Solemn Thanks to God for the Precious Victory obtained over Heresy; and
Commanded that Medals should be Coined to preserve the Memory thereof. And
there was wonderful need of a Memorial for that, which can never be forgot
while any thing is remembered.

During two Months, proceeds Mezerai, this Horrible Tempest overran all
France, more or less, according to the dispositions of the Countries and their
Governors: And he computes, that those who were destroyed in the several
Countries were above Twenty Five Thousand; whereas there are other Historians
who will have them, together with those Murdered in Paris, to be no fewer than
Seventy Five Thousand; nay some, at the least, One hundred Thousand.

Then Mezerai tells us what Entertainment the News of this Massacre met with in
Rome, and in Spain. The Court of Rome, says he, and the Council of Spain, were
filled with inexpressible joy upon the Tidings of the S. Bartholomew: The Pope
(viz. Gregory the 13th) went in procession (he should have said on foot too; as
he did, to show the greater Piety and Devotion, upon a so extraordinary
Religious occasion) to the Church of St. Lewis, to render Thanks to God for so
happy a success. And a Panegyrical Act thereof was Represented before King
Philip, under the Title of the Triumphs of the Church Militant. And a Church
Militant she is indeed.

There was also a Panegyric made upon this Glorious Atchievment, which Mezerai
omits, by the famous Muretus, before the Pope, in which he thus Complements His
Holiness, What more acceptable News could you have received; and what more
Auspicious beginning of your Pontificate could we have wished for! And among
other flights of his Rhetoric, he makes the Stars to have seemed brighter than
Ordinary, that night when the Massacre began; and the River Sein to have
swelled it self, to carry off the Carcases of the impure Wretches with the
greater rapidity.

There was likewise another Medal Ordered by the Pope, many of which may be
seen in the Closets of those who are Curious in Coins; the Inscription of which
is Strages Vgonottorum, The Slaughter of the Hugonots: And a destroying Angel
with a Sword in his hand.

From this horrible Massacre, we pass over about Eighty Years, to the time when
the Claws of the Popish Clergy were grown longer, than they had been for many
Years before; and especially during the Reign of Henry the 4th, whose favor to
the Protestants, at last procured him His fatal Stab: And to the Conclusion of
the Minority of the King now Reigning; and till his affairs were such, as would
make it Consistent with his Politics to give ear to the Advice, and pressing
importunities of his Clergy.

And whereas there are large Accounts published, of the Methods that were from
this time taken, to destroy the Protestant Religion by degrees; because the
Protestants were much too considerable a Party, for the Overhastily adventuring
upon Violent proceedings, those Methods are comprised by a very late Author
under twelve Heads, In his History of the Persecutions of t^^ Reformed Church
of France, etc. Printed in London, 1699.
with Enlargments upon each; he saying that it would be a difficult matter to
give an exact account of these Methods; Humane Malice having never produced
such a Multiplicity, and every day having brought forth new ones for Twenty
Five Years together: That is, to the Revocation of the Edict of Nants. The
brevity we are confined to permits the Instancing in but a very sew of them.
One most cruel method was, the putting down of all Protestant Judges, in
contradiction to the Thirtieth Article of the Edict, which establishes an
equal number of Popish and Protestant ones. And by this infraction thereof,
innumerable Protestant Families were utterly ruined by the Partiality of the
Judges. Those of them who were honestly inclined, not daring to do them Justice
in Causes between Protestants and Papists, for the Clamor that was still made
in their Ears, by the Priests and Monks especially, of their being Heretics;
and of a Religion which the King abhors. Another Method of Persecution was, the
making them incapable of holding any Dignities, Public Offices or Employments
whatsoever: And afterward of following any Professions, even that of Midwifry.
Which greatly scared the poor Protestants, as apprehending that the Cruel
design of the Egyptian Midwives Laying the Israelitish Women, was now to be
executed by the Popish ones, upon their Infants. But afterward they did more
than apprehend, by another of their Methods, a design against their dear
Children, which was unspeakably more terrifying. This was their taking the most
effectual Courses they could devise, to scare the younger to the Popish
Religion, and to corrupt the Elder; viz. 1. By prohibiting their Parents to
send them abroad before they were full Sixteen Years Old. 2. By seizing of
Children in many places, to put them into their Seminaries. 3. By ordering that
the Children of Fourteen Years Old and under, of all such as had by any means
whatever embraced Popery, should be Educated therein; and that no Protestant
Minister should dare to receive any such into his Church, on pain of Banishment
and Confiscation. 4. By including in the same Declaration, the Children of
those who should be reported by Priests, to have changed their Religion on
their Deathbeds; from which 'twas impossible to exclude them. And what Priest
of them can be true to his Religon, and boggle at any lie which tends to its
Service? 5. By impowering the Popish Midwives to Christen the Children of
Protestants: By which means the Priests could lay claim to them from their
Infancy. 6. By ordering the Admission of them, even at Seven Years Old, to
abjure the Religion of their Fathers, without any hinderance or molestation. 7.
By ordering that those Children shall have their Choice, either to live with
their Parents, or elsewhere; their Parents paying a Pension for their Education
proportionable to their Estates; to which the Declaration Obliges them. And it
is strange if the Priests could not find out effectual ways, more than enough,
to persuade such poor young things to say or swear any thing, and then to
Inveagle them from their Parents. 8. By ordering Protestant Parents, who have
any Children in Foreign Countries, to recall them home, upon pain of being
deprived of the Profits of their Estates. Here are Instances of Persecution
with a vengeance. We will mention but one more of their Methods, and that is
the Quartering of Soldiers upon the Protestants. And the Outrages committed by
these Instruments of Conversion upon their Landlords and their Families, which
we have certain accounts of, are not only too many to be Enumerated; but also,
a very great part of them, not to be related without horror.

Their first converting Pranks were played in Poicton, and Saingtone in 1681,
and the Town of Bergerac; where Capuchin Friars were quartered with the
Soldiers, to animate those of them, who might happen to be too tender hearted
in the Execution of their Office. And inexpressible Cruelties were exercised on
Persons of both Sexes, and all Ages. The poor Wretches in Poicton that were
overcome by intolerable Torments, did quickly after protest against what they
had done, as that which ought not to pass for an Abjuration of their Religion;
and this brought on them a Second Persecution. The Protestants of Languedoc,
Guienne, and very many other parts of France, did quickly after drink of the
same Cup, with those of Poictou, etc. In all which, by the Bishops, Priests,
and Jesuits Advice to the several Intendants, the Troops treated them alike
barbarously. They set the Soles of the Feet of some against the Fire; or clapped
red hot Shovels to them: They half-roasted others: Others they stripped naked,
and when they had used them with such immodesty, as ought not to be related,
they stuck them with Pins from Head to Foot. They dragged others half dead to
their Churches, where their Presence was made an Abjuration of their Religion:
They took others by their Noses with red hot Tongs: They hung up others, both
Men and Women, by their Feet, or Hair; and smoked them with wet Hay till almost
Choked; and when they were taken down, if they still refused to abjure, they
presently hung them up again: They kept others for a week together, from the
least wink of Sleep, by pinching them, and throwing Buckets of Water upon their
Faces, plucking off their Beards, and by holoding over their Heads Kettles
turned downwards, and making a noise upon them, till they had lost their Senses.

The foresaid Author says, He knew an honest Gentleman, who had been proof
against most of the other Cruelties, overcome at last by this exquisite
Torment. For whole weeks together, they beat Drums by the Beds of Sick Persons:
They, in several places, tied Fathers and Husbands to their Bed-posts, and
Ravished their Wives and Daughters before their Eyes: They plucked off the
Nails of the Fingers and Toes of others: They blew up Men and Women with
Bellows, till they were almost burst. But nothing like a complete List can be
given of the various sorts of horrid Cruelties, the devilish Inventions of the
execrable Miscreants suggested to them.

But the Popish Clergy were put greatly to their Wits, to persuade the King to
any of their most Christian Methods, for the rooting out of Heresy: or to let
them loose to the Converting of Heretics, by the only Arguments they are good
at. Which have since made them so well known by the Title, of the Dragoon
Apostles. And 'twould take up more time than we have here to spare, to set down
all the Motives by which they at last prevailed with his Majesty. It may
suffice to take notice of but one of them; and a very surprising one it is, it
being taken from the extraordinary Merits of the Protestants. For they
pretended to the King, that if they had preserved the State, they might as well
have Overturned it, had they chosen of side with the Prince of Conde; and
consequently, upon the least offense, they may do it hereafter. Wherefore the
Service they had done, ought no longer to be otherwise regarded, than as a
plain proof of the Mischief they may be capable of doing, whenever they may
meet with an Opportunity. And there was a necessity of their pressing this
Argument, because the King's backwardness to a compliance, wa^ chiefly from the
Remembrance he had of his great Obligations to the Protestants; and his having
publicly owned in a Declaration of 1652, their Fidelity and great Services;
and their having been Proclaimed at Court, and in the Field: The Queen Mother
having likewise, upon several Occasions, acknowledged that they had preserved
the State. And (to use the words of the aforesaid Author, who has done us
great Service, in collecting the foregoing Instances of the French Papists
Cruelty) the now mentioned Argument was a refined Piece of Policy, which the
King was so convinced by, that he delivered up his Reformed Subjects, to the
Cruelty and violence of the Ciergy.

And now it is no wonder that after the Edict of Nants had so long retained but
little more than its Name, it should at last lose that too; and be totally
Abrogated, as it was in the Year 1685. Although it was declared to be Perpetual
and Irrevocable by Henry the fourth, who first Granted it to the Protestants,
as owing his Crown to them; and was twice Confirmed by his Son Lewis the
thirteenth (he in the mean time declaring a Confirmation needless) and again,
twice more by the present King, who had the same Reason to Confirm it, were it
needful, that his Grandfather had to Grant it, as has been shown. And
therefore the Treatment which the Protestants have had, first in the
Violations, and now in the Revocation of this Edict, and what has followed
ever since, is far worse than practicing upon the Godly Doctrine of the Council
of Constance, that Faith is not to be kept with Heretics; since there is added
to the horrible Injustice and Perfidiousness thereof, the most Prodigious
Ingratiude.

And now the Floodgates were set wide open, for an Inundation of all manner of
Miseries, not only upon the Protestants in very many Parts of France, (as it
has been shown they were for some years before) but from one end of the
Kingdom to the other. And the Popish Laity of all Ranks, are become very many
of them, every whit as Cruel as the worst of the Clergy; even as the Bloodiest
of the Jesuits themselves. And it is merely owing to the very Special Providence
of God, that all those are not alike Miserable, who have not Abjured, and been
unable to make their Escape out of the Kingdom. Though those who have had the
happiness of escaping (having been forced to leave their Estates behind them)
have multitudes of them undergone great want and penury ever since: The
Charities they have had, bearing but little proportion to the necessities of so
vast a number.

It remains now, that we give some instances of Particular Protestants dreadful
Sufferings: And we shall make a virtue of the necessity we are under of
continuing our brevity, since those good Christians, whose Tempers are very
impressible, may think it a Cruelty next to feeling such things, to be detained
long upon so Terrible a Subject.

We begin with one Mr. Rimbau, an Example of the Second Persecution in the
Province of Poictou, we mentioned but now. He was a Farmer of the Lady
Baroniere, and lived in the Parish of Vanzai. He was not only dragged along
the Streets to the Church, to subscribe his Abjuration, which he courageously
refused; but so besmeared with Blood and Dirt with being haled up and down,
that he seemed no longer a Man, but some strange Beast. Whereupon the Soldiers
cried Halloo to the Dogs, who fell upon him, and tore him almost in pieces. And
thus doing, they had more mercy on him, than he could have expected in the
hands of the Soldiers; for they quickly gave him a deliverance from all future
as well as the present Miseries.

But in the other Instances, we will confine our selves within the Compass of a
few years past. One Elias Neau published here, this Year, an Account of his
extreme Sufferings; out of which we give these following particulars. He says,
that, being bred at Sea, having left France upon the account of his Religion,
in the Year 1679. he was made Captain of a Ship bound for Jamaica; and was
taken on the 29th of August, 1692. by a French Privateer, and put in prison at
St. Malo, where he lay Four Months: That after neither Promises nor Threats
could prevail upon him, he was condemned to the Galleys, and tied to the great
Chain, with men condemned for horrible Crimes, as Murders, Roberies, and
Rapes; and being ordered to Marseilles, there to be put on board, which is near
500 Miles' from St. Malo; in that long Journey, he (with his comfortable
Companions) was lodged every Night like Beasts in a Stable. That at his
Journeys End, being put into the Gally called the Magnanimous, and six other
Protestants joined to him, he was loaded with two Chains, hereas the rest had
but one; because God had made him an Instrument of strengthening three of them,
who had been too timorous and complying; and also of Converting a Popish Slave.
Upon these accounts, his Enemies quickly after obtained an Order from the Court
to transfer him from the Galleys, into the Prison of the Citadel of Marseilles,
where his Condition was far worse than before. And on May 3, 1694. he was put
into a Dungeon, where he lay a whole Year upon the bare Stones; and strict
Orders were given that no body should speak with him. But, says he,
God out of his infinite love afforded me here such Comforts, that I little
regarded the Miseries I was reduced to. There, he says, he saw no body for
near a Year; and the Priest belonging to the Governor at last coming to see
him, he cried out, Lord! in what a Condition are you! But, he replied, Sir,
do not pity me; for could you see the Secret Pleasures my Heart experienceth,
you would think me too happy. The Priest was so Compassionate, as afterward to
send him a Straw Bed. He continued there Twenty Two Months, without Changing
any Cloths. Afterward he was removed into another Prison; and on May 20, --
96, was put into a Hole under ground, till the First of July, where he was sent
with a distracted Man, that had been a generous Confessor, whose Brains were
turned by Cruel Torments, to the Castle of If, about Five Miles from
Marseilles; where they were put into another Hole, on the Twentieth of August.
It was perfectly dark, so stinking and dirty, that, he says, he verily
believes, there is not a more dismal place in the whole World. That all their
Senses were attacqued at once, Sight by darkness, Taste by hunger, Smell by
filthy stench, Feeling by Lice, and other Vermin, and Hearing by the horrid
Blasphemies and Curses of the Soldiers, who brought them their Food. Having
continued Six Months in that pit, his Fellow-Sufferer died; and as that poor
Man was in his Agony, as Crazed as for the most part he was, he testified his
aversion, by making a sign, to the Priest's coming to him, upon hearing the
Soldiers say, the Chaplain must be sent for. By the way, who can express the
Barbarities of those, who could not be satisfied to Torment a poor Creature to
distraction, but must after that persist to use him thus Devilishly? Then he
says, upon the Death of this Confessor, he was put into another Pit, with
Three other Protestants, where their Cloths rotted upon their backs, with the
dampness of the place: But, through the goodness of God, he was released by the
means of the Earl of Portland, then Ambassador in France, on July the Third
following; having been made in the first Year of King William's Reign, a Free
Denison of England.

He next adjoyns a List of the Protestant Slaves, aboard the Galleys, near the
time of his writing this Narrative; and the number amounts to 290, besides very
many whose Names are unknown; it being a difficult matter to write, they are so
strictly observed. He adds, that Twenty Two of them were lately set at liberty,
by the solicitation of the Dutch Ambassador; do^^ they have been sufficiently
recruited by One Hun^^^d and Forty, who came from Orange, whither they went to
pray to God; besides many more afterward. And what the usage of these poor
Gally-Slaves is, he tells us p. 7, 8, 9. viz. That they set them upon a Form,
fettered with heavy Chains of about Ten, or Twelve Foot long: That they have
nothing but Beans for their Food, with about 14 Ounces of Course Bread a Day;
and are devoured in the Winter by Lice, and in Summer by Bugs and Fleas; and
forced to lie one over another, like Hogs in a Sty. But he adds, that he takes
no Notice of the barbarity, exercised toward them by the Officers of the
Galleys; which is beyond imagination.

The sad Story of the Admirable Christian, and French Minister, Mons. Claude
Brousson, is much too long for us to insert; and all we can say of him is, that
he was at last broken upon the Wheel: And a most wonderful Example he gave of
Christian fortitude.

Two Gentlemen, called Trouilla and Laborde, having escaped from France,
certified under their hands, July 25, -- 98, that in the May before, a
surrogate sent a young Gentlewoman, of about 14 Years Old, into the Nunnery of
St. Vrsula, with orders that no Body should see her, or speak with her. That
she was dragged every day to Mass; but not being to be prevailed upon to kneel,
or turn her face before the Altar, the Abbess, with the help of some Nuns,
bound her hands; but the Merciless Nuns regarded not her Cries, till one of
them happened to see her almost dead; upon which she was untyed, and confined
to a dark Chamber; where she was exposed to bad Weather, seen by none, and had
no light for a fortnight; till she was taken so ill, that they began to fear
her life. And Death was too great a favor to be over freely granted.

We have a Copy of an Affidavit, published by ^n, French Protestant Minister,
(to whose Papers we are obliged for several of these Narratives) of Catharine
de Gaudeul, who made Oath before Justice Ellis, August 8, School. That she being
put into the Prison at Paris, called La Salpetriere, for her Religion, two
Protestant Women, born in Meaux, were also sent thither for the same Cause, and
used with great Cruelty. And because they could not be persuaded to turn, one
of them, being clad in a wet Sheet, was shut into a Room with two Mad Women;
who fell upon her, and dispatched her, by plucking her Bowels out of her Body;
which was afterward boiled and dissected by Surgeons. That her Fellow-Sufferer,
named Sarah, was sent next to the said Mad Women; who pacified them a little by
giving them what Money she had; but she afterward received many blows and
wounds from them. That when the said Sarah came out of that Room, she told the
other Prisoners, that she trod upon the Guts of her Friend; and that the Mad
Women threatened her to do as much to her self. And that the said Fact was so
Notorious in the Prison, that many of the Prisoners, Papists as well as others,
did often Charge the Governess and her Assistant with the Murder.

What follows we have in a Letter from Montpellier, November 4, School. New
Style. A great number of Protestants having met together on the Hills of
Vivares, there were killed on the spot 350 of them; one of the Dragoons seeing
a Woman lying dead on the ground, with her Child still in her Arms, drawing
near, it smiled on him; but the Barbarous Wretch was so far from being moved
with the Smiles of the Innocent Creature, that he thrust his Dagger into its
Breast; and lifting it up, cried to his Comrade, hey, do thou not see this
Frog? This Diabolical Action being complained of to the Intendant, he would
take no Notice of it.

This shall be our last instance: But as much haste as we make to be rid of
this most grievous and painful work, we must farther add, that God only knows
when there will be a stop put to these fearful Cruelties; or the least
mitigation of them. For whereas the French Protestants had longed most
vehemently for the Peace, scarce questioning but to have a share in the
Blessings thereof; never were poor Creatures more lamentably disappointed. For
the Peace, which England, and so many other Countries, greatly Rejoiced in,
has not done so well for them as but to leave them as they were; but has made
their case far more deplorable than it was (for at least some years) while the
War lasted: Which diverted the Persecutors from being so closely intent, as now
they are, on the Prosecution of their Devilish Design.

And, to come to a Conclusion of this Tragical Account, As the Prophet thus
bewailed his Country-Mens Babilonish Captivity, Is it nothing to you, all ye
that pass by? Behold and see, if there be any Sorrow like unto my Sorrow,
wherewith the Lord has afflicted me, in the day of his Fierce Anger. So we may
see these poor Christians making their Moan, if it be possible, even more
Pathetically. For in a Letter from Castres, in the Upper Languedoc (Extracts of
which, with many other, are Published by the aforesaid French Protestant
Minister) dated the 18th of May -- 98, are the following heart-piercing
expressions: Who is able to give a full description of our Miseries! It is
impossible for an Humane Soul to reach it. Our Calamities are so great, that no
body can express them, etc. Good God! who would have believed, that so many
Potent Princes, who are our Brethren in Christ, would have Abandoned us! They
might at least have Asked, that we might have leave to depart this Kingdom; or
that they would put us to death all at once. But they think of us no more, than
if we were not in the World. Surely we must needs have greatly offended God,
seeing He permits Princes, and our Brethren in Christ, to forsake us. However
we must hope that God Almighty will come to us in due time. He is a God to help
in Extremity. Alas, He must then Come away very speedily; for we are at our
last Gasp.

And the like we have in another Letter from the same Place, Dated May 10th,
School. But we will only recite a Wonderful, and as Comfortable a passage here,
after dismal Complaints, viz. Good God! why should we not all persist in the
Faith, both Men and Women! For even Children of Ten Years Old hold out; and
there is not one among them willing to yield. This is a Miracle which God
Almighty sets before our Eyes, and which we must make good use of. And well may
We cry, Good God! what Tongue can express the Cruelty of those, who can find in
their hearts to make their Fellow Subjects (we hate to say their
Fellow Christians) to bemoan themselves so as to melt a Stone! What Fancy can
Form a complete Idea of the Savage Fierceness of these Roman Catholics, (as
they will needs be called) what Pencil can draw their Inhumanity to the Life,
when they have Power in their hands proportionable to their Zeal against what
they call Heresy! Wolves and Tigers are gentle Lambs compared with those, who
can be so outrageous upon no provocation; and without pretending any
incitement, but that those they Torture, dare not make so bold with God and
their Consciences, as to Abjure a Religion, the truth of which they have
undoubted Assurance of. Who that are but one remove from the Nature of the
Infernal Spirits, can be so Barbarous toward innocent and inoffensive People,
to say no better of them! Can we call Popery a Religion, that makes its
Professors such Monsters and Originals of Cruelty, as Irreligion it self can
make none like them? Is that the Catholic Church of Christ, or the Chief
Synagogue of Satan, that can excite her Children to the most Diabolical
Practices; and pretend to make them not only Lawful, but even Meritorious?

And is it now possible, since the State of the Protestant Religion and
Interest is such at this day, as is briefly Represented in the Entrance into
this Appeal, that any Protestant Prince or State should want a very vigorous
Sense, of what infinite importance it is, to prevent the farther Growth of
Popery in their respective Dominions? Can they find it difficult to persuade
themselves, to provide to the utmost of their Power, for their security from
again falling under a Bondage, in comparison of which that was a very light
one, the Ancient Israelites felt under the Cruel Pharaoh? Can they think it
worth their while, to be heartily concerned about any Public Affair, and
neglect this which is so apparently of the highest importance imaginable, both
to their own and their Peoples Eternal Welfare, and Temporal too; nay, is (as
these Leaves have shown us) of absolute necessity to their but Tolerable
Condition in this World? GOD FORBID!

We should likewise have given an Account of the late Cruelties which have been
Practiced by the Papists, in the Principality of Orange, and in Piedmont, but
that they are generally the very same with those in the Kingdom of France.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 32. Line 6. for where read when. Ibid. l. 20. for Barbarities r.
Barbarity.

AN Account of the Societies for Reformation of Manners, in London and
Westminster, and other Parts of the Kingdom. With a Persuasive to Persons of
all Ranks, to be Zealous and Diligent in Promoting the Execution of the Laws
against Profaneness and Debauchery, for the Effecting a National Reformation.
Published with the Approbation of a Considerable Number of the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal. Printed for Brabazon Aylmer at the Three Pigeons in Cornhil,
over against the Royal Exchange, 1700.


