APOPHTHEGMATA Aurea, Regia, CAROLINA.

APOPHTHEGMS I. Theological. II. Moral. III. Political.


Collected out of the Incomparable (...). OF His most glorious Majesty King
CHARLES the First.

Vincit qui patitur. Fortior est qui se quam qui fortissima -- (...). Hebr. 11.
4.

LONDON, Printed by William Du-gard for Francis Eglesfield at the Marigold in
St Paul's Churchyard, 1649.

Apophthegmata Carolina. I. THEOLOGICAL.
WHen our sins are ripe, it is just with God to reap that Glory in our
Calamities, which we robbed Him of in our Prosperity. page 4. line 5.

Bare Resolutions of future reforming do not always satisfy God's justice,
nor prevent vengeance for former miscarriages. p. 4. 10.

We ought to depend on God's Mercies to forgive, not on our purposes to amend.
p. 4. 15.

God vindicate's his Glory by his Judgments; and shows us how unsafe it is to
offend him, upon presumptions afterward to pleas him* p. 4. 17.

For want of timely repentance of our sins, God gives us cause to repent of
those remedies we too late ^pplie. p. 4. 23.

Miseries upon persons or Nations are the just effects of God's displeasure:
and yet may be, through God's Mercy, preparatives to future blessings, and
better hearts to enjoie them. p. 4. 29.

Then shall we dare to account our afflictions not the strokes of an enemy,
but a father, when God gives us those humble affections, and that measure of
patience, which becom's his children. page 5. line 8.

God's Grace is infinitely better with our Sufferings, then our Peace could be
with our sins. p. 5. 19.

As our sins turn Antidotes into poison, so God's Grace turn's poison into
Antidotes. p. 5. 22.

No man who will avoid inconveniences of State, by Acts of so high injustice,
as no pulick convenience can expiate, or compensate, is worthy to bear the
name and place of GOD on earth. p. 7. 20.

It is a bad exchange to wound a man's own conscience thereby to salv
State-sores: to calm the storms of popular discontents, by stirring up a
tempest in a man's own bosom. p. 7. 25.

An upright Magistrate is more afraid to take away any man's life unjustly,
then to lose his own. p. 10. 24.

Justice, which is the will of God, ought to be preferred before all contrary
Clamors, which are but the discoveries of men's injurious wills. p. 11. 22.

A Prince ought not for any reason of State, to go against the reason of his
Conscience: which is highly to sin against the God of Reason, and Judge of
Conscience. p. 11, 27.

The Spirit of God subject's the Will of a Prince to none but the light of
Reason, Justice and Religion, which shine's in his Soul. p. 12. 4.

No present importunity, or popular vindications will be subterfuge
sufficient to rescue men guilty of evil machinations from the exact tribunals
of God and their consciences. p. 15. 3.

In obstructions of of Justice among men, we must religiously appeal to God
and men's own Consciences, as being an argument to us Christians of that
afterunavoidable judgment which shall re-judg, what among men is but corruptly
decided or not at all. p. 15. 7.

Afflictions cannot be esteemed (with wise and godly men) any argument of sin
in an innocent person, more then the Impunitie of wicked men is, among good
men, any sure token of their innocence. page 16. li. 9.

As it is one of the most convinceing arguments that there is a God, while his
power sett's bounds to the raging of the Sea: so it is no less, that He
restrein's the madness of the people. Nor does any thing portend more God's
displeasure against a Nation then when He suffer's the confluence and clamors
of the Vulgar to pass all boundaries of Laws, and reverence to Autorie. p. 17.
7.

Good men had rather want any thing they most desire, for the public good,
then obtein it by unlawful and irreligious means. p. 19. 7.

The just Avenger of all disorders often make's men see their sin in the glass
of their punishment. It Is more then an even-lay, that guilty men may one day
see themselves punished by that way they offended. p. 22. 29.

God order's our disorders: and magnifie's his wisdom and mercy, when our
follies and miseries are most discovered. p. 23. 30

Our sins are the Tumults of our Souls against our God. p. 24. 10.

What man cannot, or will not repress, the Omnipotent Justice can and will. p.
21. 30.

Reason sett's bounds to our Passions, Truth to Errors, Laws duly executed to
Sedition, Charity to Schisms. p. 25. 4.

A man that know's the sincerity and uprightness of his own heart, although
he may seem less a Politician to men, yet he need's no secret distinctions or
evasions before God. p. 30. 9.

As many Kingdoms as the Devil showed our Savior, and the Glory of them (if
they could be at once enjoied) are not worth the gaining by the ways of
sinful ingratitude and dishonor, which hazard's a Soul worth more worlds, then
this has kingdoms. p. 30. 9.

God's All discerning Justice see's through all the disguises of men's
pretensions, and deceitful darknesses of their hearts. page 31. li. 12.

Grace will teach us wisely to enjoy as well the frustratings, as the
fulfillings of our best hopes, and most specious desires. p. 31. 23.

The Comfort of God's Mercies often raises the greatest Sufferers to be the
most glorious Saints. p. 32. 26.

I will rather choose to wear a crown of Thorns with My Savior, then to
exchange that of Gold (which is due to Me) for one of lead, whose embased
flexibleness shall be forced to bend and complie to the various, and
oft-contrarie dictates of any factions. p. 38. 14.

I know no resolutions more worthy a Christian King, then to prefer his
Conscience before his Kingdoms. p. 38. 24.

It is God's will that we should maintein our Native, Rational and Religious
freedom. p. 38. 29.

Though God does require us to submit our understandings and wills to His,
whose wisdom and goodness can neither err, nor misguide us, and so far to deny
our carnal reason, in order to his sacred mysteries and commands, that we
should believ and obeie, rather then dispute them: yet does he exspect from us
only such a reasonable service of him, as not to do any thing for him against
our consciences. p. 39. 1.

A good Christian ought to be willing to suffer the greatest indignities and
injuries, rather then commit the least sin against his conscience. p 39. 30.

A Christian King ought not to subject his Reason to other men's Passions and
designs, which seem unreasonable, unjust and irreligous. So shall he serve God
in truth and uprightness of heart, though he cannot satissie some men. p. 40. 8.

Truth and Justice will bring a man at last to peace and happiness with God,
though he has much trouble among men. page 40. line 18.

The scandal of Subjects, who profess the same Religion with their Sovereign,
may be an hindrance to the love of Truth, and hardening others in Error. p. 45.
3.

Constancy in Religion the best Antidote against the poison of ill example. p.
45. 9.

The experience of the vanity and uncertaintie of all humane Glory and
Greatness should make us the more ambitious to be invested in those durable
Honors and perfections, which are only to be found in GOD, and obtained
through JESUS Christ. p. 45. 29.

I desire always more to remember I am a Christian then a King: for what the
Majesty of one might justly abhor, the Charity of the other is willing to
bear: what the hight of a King tempts to revenge, the humility of a
Christian teaches to forgive; keeping in compass all those impotent Passions,
whose excess injure's a man more then his greatest enemies can. For these give
their malice a full impression on our souls, which otherwise cannot reach very
far, nor do us much hurt. p. 47. 25.

No punishment so stain's a man's honor as wilful perpetrations of unworthie
actions; which, besides the conscience of the sin, brand's with most indelible
characters of infamy the name and memory to posterity; who, not, engaged in
the factions of the times, have the most impartial reflections on the actions.
p. 51. 1.

My outward strength, God know's, is little, or none at all: but I have a soul
invincible through God's grace enabling Me: here I am sure to be Conqueror,
if God will give Me such a measure of constancy, as to fear Him more than
Man; and to love the inward peace of My Conscience, before any outward
tranquillity. p. 53. 14.

The least sin has in it more evil, then the greatest affliction. page 59. line
8.

What is Religious and Apostolical, and so very sacred and divine, is not to
be dispensed with, or destroyed. p. 59. 30

Prayers and Tears the chiefest Arms, which the Ancient Christians were wont to
use against their Persecutors, may serve a good man's turn, if not to conquer as
a Soldier, yet to suffer as a Martyr. p. 67. 6.

The many and sore oppressions of My people griev Me: I am above Mine own:
what I want in the hands of force and power, I have in the wings of faith and
prayer. p. 67. 25.

The Sword and Militia are but weak defenses against the strokes of Divine
Vengeance, which will overtake; or of men's own consciences, which always
attend injurious perpetrations. p. 72. 6.

I do not think I can want any thing which Providential Necessity is pleased
to take from Me, in order to My people's tranquillity, and God's glory,
whose protection is sufficient for Me; and He is able by His being with Me,
abundantly to compensate to Me as He did to Job, whatever Honor, Power, or
Liberty, the Chaldeans, the Sabeans, or the Devil himself can deprive Me of.
p. 72. 12.

Though Men take all temporary defenses from Me; yet cannot they deprive Me
of my own innocence, or God's mercy; nor obstruct My way to heaven. p. 72.
28.

When I have declared that I cannot yield to somthings propounded, without
violateing My conscience, it is strange there can be no method of peace, but by
making war upon my Soul. p. 75. 12.

Nothing can repair or requite the loss of the incommunicable jewel of a good
conscience. p. 75. 24.

The love of My people's peace has great influence upon Me; but the love of
truth and inward peace has more. p. 76. 6.

The inward quiet of My Conscience ought to be, is, and ever shall be (by
God's grace) dearer to Me then My Kingdoms. page 76. line 11.

In want of free and faithful counsel, which others are able and willing to
impart, none can hinder us from craving of the Counsel of that mighty
Counselor, who can both suggest what is best, and incline our hearts
steadfastly to follow it. p. 86. 17.

I cannot pleas all, I care not to pleas SOME MEN: if I may be happy to pleas
God, I need not fear whom I displeas. p. 87. 38.

God can as well bless honest errors, as blast fraudulent counsels. p. 88. 25.

Though pressures are grievous, and peace very pleasing; yet we ought not to
avoid the one, or purchase the other with the least expens or waste of
Conscience, whereof God only is deservedly more master then our selves. p. 89.
5.

SOME MEN, out of a covetous Zeal, and uncharitable fury, think it a great
Argument of the Truth of their Religion to endure no other but their own. p.
92. 7.

Some kind of Zeal count's all merciful moderation luke warmness; and had
rather be cruel then counted cold; and is not seldom more greedy to kill the
Bear for his skin, then for any harm he has don. p. 94. 14.

God does not therefore deny our innocence, because He is so far to try our
patience, as he did his Servant Job's. p. 96. 3.

He that look's well to his own Conscience and the faithful discharge of his
Trust, has scarce leisure to consider those swarms of reproaches, which issue
out of SOME MEN'S mouths and hearts, as easily as smoke or sparks do out of a
furnace, much less to make prolix Apologies, as might give those men
satisfaction, who conscious to their own depth of wickedness are loath to
believ any man not to be as bad themselves. page 96. line 7.

Cruelty among Christians acted under the Color of Religion, as if we could
not be Christians unless we crucify one another, an horrid sin. p. 97. 15.

It is not so proper to hew out religious Reformations by the Sword, as to
polish them by fair and equal disputations among those that are most concerned
in the differences: whom not Force, but Reason ought to convince. p. 102. 9.

Conscience can receiv little satisfaction in those points, which are
maintained rather by Soldiers fighting in the fields, then Scholars disputing
in free and learned Synods. p. 102. 24.

In matters of Religion, those Truths gain most on men's judgments and
consciences, which are least urged with secular violence, which weaken's Truth
with prejudices: and is unreasonable to be used, till such means of Rational
conviction have been applied, as, leaving no excuse for ignorance condemn's
men's obstinacy to deserved penalties. p. 102. 29.

If Presbytery in such a supremacy be an institution of Christ, sure it
differ's from all others: and is the first and only point of Christianity,
that was to be planted and watered with so much Christian blood; whose
effusion run's in a stream so contrary to that of the Primitive Planters both
of Christianity and Episcopacie, which was with patient shedding of their own
blood, not violent drawing other men's. Sure there is too much of man in it to
have much of Christ. p. 104. 4.

Wise and learned men think, that nothing has more marks of Schism and
Sectarism then this Presbyterian way of Government. p. 105. 5.

The Repealing of Church-Laws and Constitutions ought to be grounded upon more
Rational and Religious Motives then Soldiers use to carry in their knapsacks
page 105. lin. 12.

I esteem the Church above the State; the Glory of Christ above Mine own; and
the salvation of men's Souls above the preservation of their Bodies and
Estates. p. 105. 25.

Violent motions, which are neither Manly, Christian, nor Loial, ought not to
shake or unsettle the Religion of any man, who know's what Religion mean's.
106. 8.

The proper engine of all Faction is Force, the arbitrator of beasts, not of
reasonable men, much less of humble Christians and Loial Subjects, in matters
of Religion. p. 106. 12.

Men prone to have high conceits of themselves care not what cost they lay out
upon their opinons. 106. 17.

God's justice and Man's folly will at length be discovered, through all the
films and pretensions of Religion, in which Politicians wrap up their designs.
108. 3.

The less cause we have to trust to men, the more we have to trust to God. p.
108. 24.

Pious simplicite is the best policy. p. 108. 30.

In things which are of no clear moral necessity, but disputable and
controverted among learned and godly men, Oaths can hardly be made and
enjoined with that judgment and certainty in ones self, or that charity and
candor to others of different opinion, as Religion require's. p. 111. 9.

Religion never refuse's fair and equable deliberations; yea, and dissentings
too in matters only probable. p. 111. 16.

The enjoining of Oaths upon people, must needs in things doubtful be
dangerous; as in things unlawful, damnable; and no less superfluous, where
former religious and legal engagements bound men sufficiently to all necssarie
duties. p. 111. 19.

None, that have once true touches of Conscience, will endeavor to carry on
the best designs (much less such as are apparently factious and ambitious) by
any unlawful means. page 112. line 28.

We ought not to prefer ambiguous, dangerous, and un-autorized Novelties
before known and sworn duties, which are indispensable both to God and the
Prince. p. 113. 3.

Later Vows, Oaths, or Leagues can never blot out those former gravings and
characters which by just and lawful Ooaths were made upon their Souls. p. 113.
10.

Confederations, by way of solemn Leagues and Covenants, are the more to be
suspected, because they are the common road used in all factions and powerful
perturbations of State and Church. p. 113. 14.

Formalities of extraordinary zeal and piety are never more studied and
elaborate, then when Politicians most agitate desperate designs against all
that is settled or sacred in Religion or Laws. p. 113. 19.

Every man soon grow's his own Pope, and easily absolv's himself of those ties
which not the commands of God's Word, or the Laws of the Land, but only the
subtlety or terror of a Party cast's upon him. p. 114. li. 2.

No man's Lawful Calling can engage him against the Church, the Prince, or the
Public peace. p. 116. 3.

A pious Prince ought to be forward to carry on all due Reformations, with
mature judgment, and a good conscience, in what things he shall, after
impartial advice, be, by God's Word, and right reason, convinced to be amiss.
p. 116. 21.

Bishops and Churchmen, with their Lands and Revenues, as the fattest Deer,
must be destroyed; the other Rascal-Herd of Schisms, Heresies, etc. being
lean, may enjoy the benefit of a Toleration. p. 117. 5.

I see, while the breath of Religion fill's the sails, Profit is the Compass,
by which factious men steer their course in all seditious commotions. page 117.
lin. 11.

Pharaoh's Divinity, and Joseph's true piety abhorred to sell the Priest's
Lands. p. 118. lin. 2.

I esteem it My greatest Title to be called, and My chiefest Glory to be the
Defendor of the Church, both in its true Faith, and its just Fruitions; equally
abhorring Sacrilege and Apostasy. p. 118. 11.

I had rather live, as My Predecessor Henry the third sometimes did, on the
Church's Alms, then violently take the bread out of Bishops and Ministers
mouths. p. 118. 16.

I think it no less then a mocking and tempting of God, to desire him to hinder
those mischiefs, whose occasions and remedies are in our own powers: it being
every man's sin not to avoid the one, and not to use the other. p. 119. 10.

There are ways enough to repair the breaches of the State, without the ruins
of the Church. p. 119. 16.

No Pretensions of Piety and Reformation are sufficient to absolv Subjects
from the observation of those just, moral, and indispensable bonds, which God's
Word, and the Laws of the Kingdom have laid upon their Consciences, nor engage
them to any contrary practices. p. 120. 2.

Nothing violent and injurious can be Religious. p. 120. 6.

God allow's no man's committing Sacrilege under the zeal of abhorring idols.
p. 120. 7.

Sacrilegious designs ought not to have the countenance of Religious Ties. p.
120. 9.

It is hard for a man, that has not innocence and God's protection, to stand
out against those stratagems and conflicts of malice, which by falsities seek
to oppress the Truth, and by jealousies to supply the defect of Real causes.
p. 122. 6.

Popular Preachers think it no sin to lie for God, and what they pleas to call
God's Cause. page 127. line 15.

Differences of persuasion in matters of Religion may easily fall out, where
there is the sameness of duty, allegiance, and subjection. p. 129. 10.

Different professions in point of Religion cannot take away the community of
Relations either to parents, or to Princes. p. 129. 16.

A truly-humble Christian will so highly prize his persecutions, as rather not
to be relieved, then be revenged, so as to to be bereaved of that Crown of
Christian patience, which attend's humble and injured Sufferers. p. 132 4.

A crown of Christian Patience attend's humble and injured Sufferers. p. 132. 7.

God is the only King of men's Consciences. 133. 27

It is no news to have all Innovations ushered in with the name of
Reformation. p. 138. 5.

Prayer and devotion is the Soul's more immediate convers with the Divine
majesty. p. 138. 15.

The Liturgy was exactly conformed to the doctrine of the Church of England:
and this by all reformed Churches is confessed to be most sound and Orthodox.
p. 139. 15.

Constancy abate's nothing of the excellency and usefulness of a wel-composed
Liturgy. p. 139. 29.

In the use of constant Forms, not the words but men's hearts are too blame. p.
141. 2.

A man may be very formal in the most extemporarie variety; and very
fervently-devout in the most wonted expressions. p. 141. 4.

Constant Forms of Prayer are not more likely to flat and hinder the Spirit of
Prayer and devotion, then unpremeditated and confused variety to distract and
lose it.

It is impossible for a Prince to preserv the State in quiet, unless he has
such an influence upon Churchmen, and they such a dependence on Him, as may
best restrein the seditious exorbitancies of Minister's tongues; who, with the
keys of heaven, have so far the keys of the people's hearts, as they prevail
much by their Oratorie to let in, or shut out both Peace and Loialtie. page
147. line 26.

I never thought any Bishop worthy to sit in the House of Peers, who would not
vote according to his Conscience. p. 148. 16.

The Government of the Church by Bishops has of all other the fullest
Scripture-Grounds, and also the constant practice of all Christian Churches. p.
148. 24.

The want of Government the Church can no more dispens with, in point of
well-beeing, then the want of the Word and Sacraments in point of being. 150.
1.

Proud usurpers against true Episcopacie by Popular heaps of weak, light and
unlearned Teachers seek to over-laie and smother the pregnancie and authority
of that power of Episcopal Government, which, beyond all equivocation and
vulgar fallacy of names, is most convinceingly set forth, both by Scripture,
and all after-Histories of the Church. p. 152. 8.

In Religion, Scripture is the best Rule, and the Churches universal Practice
the best Commentary. p. 152. 30.

Not only in Religion, but also in right Reason and the true nature of
Government, it cannot be thought that an Orderly Subordination among
Presbyters and Ministers should be any more against Christianity, then it is
in all Secular and Civil Governments, where p. 153. 3.

Paritie breed's Confusion and Faction. p. 153. 8.

Good Order is no more inconsistent with true Religion, then good features are
with beauty, or numbers with harmony. p. 153. 10.

Ministers have as much of the principles of Schism and division, as other men.
page 153. line 19.

It was not the favor of Princes, or ambition of Presbyters, but the wisdom and
piety of the Apostles that first settled Bishops in the Church. p. 153. 27

Tyranny becom's no Christians, lest of all Churchmen. p. 154. 10.

The whole stream of examples and practice of the Church, or Testimonies of
Histories run's so for Episcopacie, that there is not the least rivulet for
any other. p. 155. 5.

The necessity of times and affairs rather excuses then commends some late
Reformed Churches for their incomformitie to all Antiquity. p. 155. 12.

It is no point of wisdom nor Charity, where Christians differ, to widen the
differences. p. 155. 27.

The Desertors of Episcopacie will appear the greatest enemies to, and
betraiers of their own interest page 157. l. 14.

Presbytery is never so considerable, or effectual, as when it is joined to,
and crowned with Episcopacie. p. 157. l. 16.

All Ministers will find as great a difference, in point of thriveing, between
the favor of the people and of Princes, as plants do between being watered by
hand, and by the sweet and liberal dews of heaven. p. 157. 19.

The tenuitie and contempt of Clergymen will soon let them see what a poor
carcass they are, when parted from the influence of that head, to whose
Supremacy they have been sworn. p. 157. 24.

SOME MEN's zeal for Bishop's Lands, Houses, and Revenues has set them on work
to eat up Episcopacie: which is no less sin then sacrilege or robbery of God
of that portion which devout minds have thankfully given again to him, in
giveing it to his Church and Prophets. p. 160. 23.

The abuses of Episcopacie deserv to be exstirpated, as much as the use
retained. page 164. line 13.

The Revenues of the Church become the object of secular envy, which seek's to
rob it of all the encouragements of Learning and Religion. p. 165. 8.

I would rather with Constantins cover the errors of the fathers of the Church
with silence, and reform with meekness then expose their Persons and sacred
Functions to vulgar contempt. p. 166. 5.

The Counsels of unreasonable men have brought forth and continue violent
confusions, by a precipitant destroying the ancient boundaries of the Church's
peace; thereby letting in all manner of Errors, Schism and disorders. p. 166.
11.

Our Sins sometimes prevail against the justice of our Cause. p. 173. 6.

Personal and private sins may oft-times over-balance the justice of Public
engagements; nor does God account every Gallant man (in the worlds esteem) a
fit instrument to assert, in the way of War, a righteous Cause. The more men are
prone to arrogate to their own skill, valor and strength, the less does God
ordinarily work by them for his own Glory. p. 173. 15.

The event or success can never state the justice of any Cause, nor the peace
of men's Consciences, nor the eternal welfare of their Souls. p. 173. 24.

A Godly Prince desire's that all his Subjects may join true Piety with the
sens of their Loialtie: and be as faithful to God and their own souls, as they
are to their Prince: that the defects of the one may not blast the endeavors of
the other. p. 176. 23.

Different events are but the Methods of Divine justice by contrary winds to
winnow us: that, by punishing our sins, he might purge them from us; and
deferring peace he might prepare us more to prize, and better to use so great
a blessing. p. 178. 3.

The inevitable fate of our sins was (no doubt) such, as would no longer suffer
the Divine Justice to be quiet: we, having conquered his patience, are
condemned by mutual conquerings, to destroy one another. p. 178. 29.

Those Victories are still miserable, that leav our sins un-subdued; flushing
our pride, and animateing to continue injuries. p. 179. 8.

God, sometimes, for the sins of our Peace bring's upon us the miseries of War;
and for the sins of War denie's us the blessing of Peace. p. 181. 5.

The good Laws established, and the Religion settled ought to be the first
Rule and standard of Reforming. p. 182. 12.

Where the Scripture is not so clear and punctual in precepts, there the
constant and universal practice of the Church in things not contrary to
Reason, Faith, good manners, or any positive command, is the best Rule that
Christians can follow. p. 184. 19.

The specious and popular Title of Christ's government, Throne, Scepter, and
Kingdom (which certainly is not divided, nor has two faces, as their Parties
now have at least,) also the nois of a thorough-Reformation, these may as
easily be fixed on new models, as fair colors may be put to ill-favored
figures. p. 185. 14.

Public Reformers had need first act in private, and practice that on their
own hearts, which they purpose to try on others: for Deformities within will
soon betraie the Pretenders of Public Reformations to such private designs as
must needs hinder the Public good. p. 187. 23.

The right method of reforming the Church cannot consist with that of
perturbing the Civil State: nor can Religion be justly advanced by depressing
Loialtie, which is one of the chiefest Ingredients and Ornaments of true
Religion: for next to Fear God, is, Honor the King. p. 187. 30.

Christ's Kingdom may be set up without pulling down the temporal Kingdom of
Princes; nor will any men in impartial times appear good Christians, that
approve not themselves good Subjects. page 188. line 7.

Christ's Government confirm's the Kings, does not overthrow it. p. 188. 13.

Christian Patience know's how to serve God in Honor and dishonor, in good
report, or evil. p. 196. 20.

God is a Christian's chiefest Guard: and his Conscience both his Counselor
and Comforter. p. 198. 5.

The integrity of Conscience is the only jewel worth keeping. p. 200. 1.

A man lose's himself, while he let us out his hopes to others. p. 201. 26.

I care not much to be reckoned among the UNFORTUNATE, if I be not in the
Black List of IRRELIGIOUS and SACRILEGIOUS PRINCES. p. 202. 4.

The Golden Rule and bond of perfection in Prayer, and other holy duties
consist's in that of mutual Love and Charity. p. 208. 16.

I hold it beeter to seem undevout, and to hear no men's prayers, then to be
forced, or seem to complie with those petitions, to which the heart cannot
consent, nor the tongue say Amen, without contradicting a man's own
understanding, or belying his own soul* p. 209. 19.

In Devotions, I love neither profane boldness, nor pious non-sens: but such an
humble and judicious gravitie, as shows the speaker to be at once confiderate
of God's Majesty, the Church's Honor, and his own vileness; both knowing what
things God allow's him to ask, and in what manner it becom's a Sinner to
supplicate the Divine Mercy for himself, or others. p. 209. 26.

I am equally scandalized with all prayers that sound either imperiously, or
rudely, or passionately; as either wanting humility to God, or charity to
men, or respect to the duty. page 210. line 5.

The light of understanding and the fervencie of affection, I hold the main and
most necessary requisites both in constant and occasional, solitary and
social devotions. p. 210. 23.

I had rather be condemned to the woe of Vae soli, then to that of Vae vobis
hypocritae, by seeming to pray what I do not approve. p. 211. 16.

It is infinitely more glorious to convert souls to God's Church by the Word,
then to conquer men to a subjection by the Sword. p. 212. 8.

Confusion in Religion will as certainly follow every man's turning Priest or
Preacher, as it will in the State where every one affect's to rule as King. p.
213. 14.

In the enforced (not neglected) want of ordinary means, God is wont to afford
extraordinary supplies of his gifts and graces. p. 214. 20.

Former sins may be seen in the glass of the present terrors and distractions.
p. 225. 14.

See the hand of Divine Justice: they, that by Tumults first occasioned the
raising of Armies, must now be chastned by their own Army for new Tumults.
225. 16.

Hardly can men be content with one sin, but add sin to sin, till the later
punish the former. p. 225. 22.

Whom the Laws cannot, God will punish by their own crimes and hands. p. 227. 1.

Fatal blindness frequently attend's and punishe's wilful. p. 227. 21.

Men shall not be able at last to prevent their sorrows, who would not timely
repent of their sins. p. 227. 23.

God's constancy is seen in the world's variety and changes. p. 229. 20.

They cannot want enemies who abound in sin, nor shall they be long
undisarmed, and undestroied, who with an high hand persist to fight against
God, and the clear convictions of their own consciences. p. 230. 6.

God can and will exalt and perfect a true Christian by his sufferings, which
have more in them of God's Mercy, then of man's cruelty, or his Justice. p.
231. 3.

Piety will make a Prince prosperous: at least it will keep him from being
miserable: nor is he much a loser, who loses all, yet saves his own soul at
last. 233. 27.

The cup of afflictions we must look upon as Gods physic, having that in
healthfulness which it want's in pleasure. p. 234. 7.

A Prince ought to be well grounded and settled in Religion, that it may be
judiciously his own, and not other men's custom or tradition which he
professe's. p. 234. l. 18.

The fixation of the Prince, in matters of Religion, will not be more
necessary for his Soul's then his Kingdom's peace. p, 234. 20.

The Devil of Rebellion does commonly turn himself into an Angel of
Reformation. p. 234. 29.

Unless a Prince be settled in Religion, he shall never want temptations to
destroy Him and His, under pretension of Reforming matters of Religion. p.
235. 7.

Religion seems even to the worst of men as the best and most auspicious
beginning of their worst designs. 235. 11.

Every one has affectation, by seeming forward to an outward Reformation of
Religion, to be thought zealous hopeing to cover those irreligious
deformities, whereto, they are conscious, by a severitie of censuring other
men's opinions or actions. p. 235. 15.

A Prince must take heed of abetting any Factions, or applying to any public
Discriminations in matters of Religion, contrary to what is, in His judgment
and the Church's, well settled. p. 235. 22.

The King's partial adhereing, as Head, to any one side, gain's Him not so
great advantages in some men's hearts (who are prone to be of their King's
Religion) as it loses him in others, who think themselves and their profession
first despised, then persecuted by Him. p. 235. 26.

Nothing ought to seem little or despicable to You in matters which concern
Religion and the Church's peace, so as to neglect a speedy Reforming and
effectual suppressing errors and Schisms: What seem at first but as an
hand-breadth, by Seditious Spirits, as by strong winds, are soon made to cover
and darken the whole Heaven. page 237. line 11.

A true Christian is not much solicitous what wrong he suffer's from men,
while he retein's in his soul what he believ's is right before God. p. 239.
12.

A Prince ought always to keep up solid Piety, and those fundamental Truths,
which mend both hearts and lives of men with impartial favor and Justice. p.
241. 1.

A Prince ought to take heed that Outward circumstances and formalities of
Religion devour not all, or the best encouragements of learning, industry, and
piety. p. 241. 5.

As the Wo^^ is not less cruel, so he will be more justly hated, when he
shall appear no better then a wolf under sheep's-cloathing. p. 242. 6.

A Power to forgive My enemies is a greater Argument of God's love to Me, then
any prosperity can be. p. 243. 29.

The true Religion established in the Church of England is the best in the
world, not only in the Community as Christians; but also in the special
notion, as Reformed: keeping the middle way between the pomp of superstitious
Tyranny, and the meanness of fantastic Anarchie. p. 245. 22.

The Protestant-Religion established in England, neither give's such Rules, nor
ever before set such examples, as the late War against the Church, the Laws,
and the Prince. p. 246. 15.

Counterfeit and disorderly Zeal ought not to abate our value and esteem of
true Piety, both of them are known by their fruits: the sweetness of the vine
and figtree is not to be despised, though the brambles and thorns should
pretend to bear figgs and grapes, thereby to rule over the Trees. p. 246. 24.

God sometimes punishe's a people with continuance in their sin, and suffer's
them to be deluded with the prosperity of their wickedness. p. 247. 30.

Keep You to true Principles of Piety, Virtue, and Honor; You shall never want
a Kingdom. p. 248. 8.

My Conscience, I thank God, is dearer to Me then a thousand Kingdoms. p. 251.
2.

In Prosperity we should not be wholly strangers to the contemplations of
Mortality: those are never unseasonable, since this is always uncertain:
Death being an Eclips, which often happens as well in clear as cloudie days.
p. 252. 5.

It is the greatest glory of a Christian's life to die daily, in conquering,
by a lively faith, and patient hope of a better life, those partial and
quotidian deaths, which kill us as it were by piece-mea^* and make us over-live
our own fates. p. 253. 9.

A Christian ought not to think that life too long, or tedious, wherein God
give's him any opportunities, if not to do, yet to suffer with such Christian
patience and magnanimity in a good Cause, as are the greatest honor of our
lives, and the best improovment of our deaths. p. 254. 6.

In point of true Christian valor, it argue's pusillanimitie to desire to die,
out of weariness of life; and a want of that Heroic greatness of spirit which
becom's a Christian in the patient and generous susteining those afflictions,
which as shadows necessarily attend us, while we are in this body; and which
are lessened or enlarged as the Sun of our prosperity move's higher, or lower:
whose total absence is best recompensed with the Dew of Heaven. p. 254. 13.

The assaults of Affliction may be terrible, like Sampsons Lion, but they
yield much sweetness to those that dare to encounter and overcom them; who know
how to over-live the witherings of their Gourds without discontent or
peevishness, while they may yet convers with God. p. 254. 24.

Our greatest conquest of death is from the power and love of Christ, who has
swallowed up death in the victory of his Refurrection, and the glory of his
Asscension. p. 258. 20.

Charity is the noblest Revenge upon, and victory over My Destroiers. p. 258.
28.

As the greatest temptations to sin are wrapped up in seeming prosperities: so
the severest vengeances of God are them most accomplished, when men are
suffered to complete their wicked purposes. p. 259. 13.

God's Mercy will more then infinitely recompens what ever by man's injustice
He is pleased to deprive us off. p. 260. 2.

God's righteous judgment will confute their fallacy, who from worldly
success (rather like Sophisters then sound Christians) draw those popular
conclusions for God's approbation of their actions. p. 261. 30.

God's wise providence often permit's many events, which His revealed Word (the
only clear, safe, and fixed rule of good Actions and good Consciences) in no
sort approv's. p. 262. 5.

I shall be more then Conqueror through Christ's enabling Me; for whom I have
hitherto suffered, as he is the Author of Truth, Order, and Peace; for all
which I have been forced to contend, against Error, Faction, and Confusion. p.
263. 16.

If I must suffer a violent death, with My Savior, it is but Mortality
crowned with Martyrdom: where the debt of death, which I ow for sin to nature,
shall be raised as a gift of faith and patience offered to God. p. 263. 22.

The trophies of My Charity will be more glorious and durable over them, then
their ill-managed victories over Me. p. 264. 6.

I look upon the temporal destruction of the greatest King as far less
deprecable, then the eternal damnation of the meanest Subject. p. 264. 15.

It is better for us to be dead to our selves, and live in God; then by living
in our selves to be deprived of God. p. 265. 16.

To contend with death is the work of a weak and mortal man; to overcom it, is
the Grace of God alone, who is Almighty, and Immortal. p. 265. 26.

Apophthegmata Carolina. II. MORAL.
IT is no strange thing for men, left to their own Passions, either to do much
evil themselves, or abuse the overmuch goodness of others, whereof an ungrateful
surfeit is the most desperate and incureable diseas. p. 30. 29.

Unjust hatred and jealousies are able to pervert Acts of greatest Indulgence.
p. 32. 8.

Many men are seldom of one mind: and oftentimes the major part are not in
the right. p. 34. 4.

Sure it cease's to be Counsel, when not Reason is used, as to men, to
persuade; but Force and terror, as to beasts, to drive and compel men to assent
to whatever tumultuarie patrons shall project. He deserv's to be a slave
without pity, or redemption, that is content to have the rational Soveraigntie
of his soul, and liberty of his will and words so captivated. p. 34. 18.

I do not think My Kingdoms so considerable, as to preserv them with the
forfeiture of that freedom, which cannot be denied Me as a King, because it
belong's to Me, as a man, and a Christian; owning the dictates of none, but
God, to be above Me, as obligeing Me to consent. Better for Me to die
enjoying this Empire of My soul, which Subject's Me only to God, so far as by
Reason or Religion he direct's Me, then live with the title of a King if it
should carry such a vassalage with it, as not to suffer Me to use My reason
and Conscience, in what I declare as a King, to like or dislike. p. 34. 27.

I shall never think My self conscientiously tied to go as often against My
Conscience, as I should consent to such new proposals, which My Reason, in
Justice, Honor, and Religion bid's Me deny. p. 35. 30.

Error and Passion is a shadow of Reason, and must serve those that are
destitute of the Substance. p. 36. 25.

Sure that man cannot be blameable to God or Man, who seriously endevour's to
see the best reason of things and faithfully fallows what he take's for
reason: the uprightness of his intentions will excuse the possible failing of
his understanding: If a Pilot at sea cannot see the Pole Star, it can be no
fault in him to steer his coursby such stars as do best appear to him. It
argue's rather those men to be conscious of their defects of Reason, and
convincing arguments, who call in the assistance of mere force to carry on the
weakness of their Counsels and proposals. p. 36. 28.

I can be content to recede much from My own Interests, and Personal Rights,
of which I conceiv My self to be Master: But in what concern's truth, justice,
the rights of the Church and My Crown, together with the general good of My
Kingdoms; (which I am bound to preserv as much as morally lie's in Me) here I
am, and ever shall be fixed and resolute, nor shall any man gain My consent
to that, wherein My heart give's My tongue or hand the lie; nor will I be
brought to affirm that to men, which in My conscience I deny before God. page
37. 30.

The merits of a deserving Lady would serve her for a protection among the
savage Indians: while their rudeness and barbaritie know's not so perfectly to
hate all virtues, as SOME MEN'S subtlety does. p. 41. 27.

This comfort I shall enjoie by the safety of My Queen in the midst of My
personal dangers, that I can perish but half, if She be preserved. p. 42. 12.

Common Civilitie is in vain exspected from those that dispute their Loialtie.
p. 42. 27.

It cannot be safe for any Relation to a King to tarry among them, who are
shakeing hands with their Allegiance, under pretens of laying faster hold on
their Religion. p. 42. 29.

Such is the rudeness of SOME MEN toward their Superiors, that they make up
their want of justice with in humanity and impudence. p. 43. 4.

Afflictions make virtues shine with greater luster, as stars in the darkest
nights. p. 43. 7.

A True wife love's her husband, not his fortunes and bear's a sympathy with
him in his Afflictions. p. 43. 7.

Such is the ingratitude of SOME MEN, that they* scornfully lift up themselves
against those, of whose bread they have eaten, and been enriched with their
bounty. p. 43. 16.

SOME think to satisfy all obligations to duty, by their Corban of Religion:
and can less endure to see, then to sin against their Benefactors as well as
their Sovereigns. p. 43. 22.

It was a policy necessary to some men's designs to drive the Queen out of the
Kingdom, lest by the influence of her example, eminent for love, as a Wife, and
Loyalty as a Subject, She should have converted to, or retained in their love
and Loialtie, all those whom they had a purpose to pervert. p. 43. 29.

It is the most glorious victory, when no disdain nor emotion of passion
transport's us by the indignity of ill carriage, to do or say any thing
unbeseeming our selves, or unsuteable to that temper, which, in greatest
injuries, best becom's a Christian, as coming nearest to the great example of
Christ. page 47. line 18.

Clemency is a debt, which we ought to pay to those that crave it, when we
have cause to believ they would not after abuse it: since God himself suffer's
us not to pay any thing for his Mercy but only prayers and praises. p. 50.
13.

They confess their known weakness, as to Truth and Justice, who choos rather
to contend by Armies then by Arguments. p. 53. 25.

To bind a man's self to a general and implicit consent to whatever shall be
desired or propounded, were such a latitude of blind obedience, as never was
exspected from any freeman: not fit to be required of any man, much less of
a King by his own subjects. p. 76. 21.

The goodness of men's intentions will not excuse the scandal and contagion of
their examples. p. 90. 19.

Some kind of Zeal count's all merciful moderation Lukewarmness: and had rather
be cruel then counted cold; and is not seldom more greedy to kill the Bear
for his skin then for any harm he has don. The confiscation of men's estates
being more beneficial then the charity of saving their souls, or reforming
their Errors. p. 94. 14.

Misconstructions of Actions are prone to find more credulity in men to what
it falls and evil, then love and charity to what is true and good. p. 95, 27.

He that is conscious to his own depth of wickedness, is loath to believ any
man not to be so bad as himself. p. 96. 14.

It Is Kingly to do well, and hear ill. If I can but act the one, I shall not
much regard to bear the other. p. 96. 17.

Roial bounty embolden's some Men to ask and act beyond all bounds of modesty
and gratitude. p. 100. 16.

I thank God, I never found but My pity was above My Anger. p. 123. 14.

Between the malice of My enemies, and other men's mistakes, I put as great a
difference, as between an ordinary Ague and the Plague; or the itch of
Noveltie, and the leprosy of disloialtie. p. 125. 25.

As Liars need have good memories, so Malicious persons good inventions. p.
125. 30.

My patience will better serve Me to bear, and My charity to forgive, then My
leisure to answer the many falls asspersions which some men have cast upon Me.
p. 126. 5.

Liberty, in the Popular sens, is to do what every man likes best. p. 132.
11.

I wish repentance may be the only punishment of evildoers. p. 145. 21.

God's Mercies are full of variety, and yet of constancy. p. 145. 30.

Gods spiritual perfections are such, that he is neither to be pleased with
affected Novelties for matter, or manner, nor offended with the pious
constancy of our Petitions in them both. p. 146. 10.

That Constancy is the Cause of formalitie, is a fallacy. p. 147. 1.

A little moderation may prevent great mischiefs. p. 157. 29.

Pride attend's prosperous, and repineings follow disastrous events. p. 180. 4.

It Is a pious ambition to overcom each other with Reason, Moderation, and
self-denial. p. 180. 29.

Monuments and Inscriptions of the dead serve but to put posterity in mind to
thank God for that clearer light wherein they live. p. 185. 25.

The greatest experiments of Virtue and Nobleness are discovered in the
greatest advantages against an enemy: and the greatest obligations are those,
which are put upon us by them, from whom we could least have exspected them.
p. 190. 14.

The freedom and secrecy of private papers command's a civilitie from all men,
not wholly barbarous: nor is there any thing more inhumane then to expose them
to public view. p. 190. 21.

Secret impressions of shame and dishonor attend all unworthie actions, have
they never so much of public flattery, and Popular countenance. p. 194. 18.

God blessed the modest respect and filial tenderness which Noah's sons bare to
their father: nor did his open infirmity justify Cham's impudency, nor
exempt him from that curs of being servant of servants; which curs must needs
be on them, who seek, by dishonorable actions to pleas the Vulgar, and confirm
by ignoble acts their dependence upon the People. p. 194. 24.

Reason is the divinest Power; I shall never think My self weak'ned, while I
may make full and free use of that; No eclips of outward fortune shall rob Me
of that light: what God has denied of outward strength, his Grace, I hope,
will supply with inward Resolutions, not morosely to deny what is fit to be
granted; but not to grant any thing, which Reason and Religion bid Me deny.
p. 199. 21.

No restraint shall ensnare My Soul in sin; nor gain that of Me, which may
make My enemies more insolent, My Friends ashamed, or My Name accursed. p. 202.
7.

They have no great cause to triumph, that they have got My Person into their
Power, since My Soul is still Mine own: Nor shall they ever gain My consent
against My Conscience. p. 202. 11.

What they call Obstinacy, I know God account's honest Constancy. p. 202. 16.

Should I grant what some men desire I should be such as they wish Me: not
more a King, and far less both Man and Christian. page 202. lin. 26.

The fear of men shall never be my snare: nor shall the love of any Liberty
entangle My soul: better others betraie Me then My self; and that the price of
My Liberty should be My Conscience: the greatest injuries My enemies seek to
inflict upon Me cannot be without My own consent. p. 203. 3.

Neither liberty nor life are so dear to Me as the Peace of My Conscience,
the Honor of My Crowns, and the welfare of My people; which My word may injure
more then any war can do, while I gratify a few to oppress all. p. 203. 19.

Company obtruded is more sad then any solitude can be. p. 206. 26.

Though the justice of the Law deprive's Prisoners and Malefactors of worldly
comforts: yet the Mercy of Religion allow's them the benefit of their Clergy;
as not aiming at once to destroy their bodies, and to damn their souls. p.
207. 8.

My Agony must not be relieved with the presence of any one good Angel; for
such I account a learned, godly and discreet Divine. p. 207. 14.

They that envy My being a King, are loath I should be a Christian: while
they seek to deprive Me of all things else, they are afraid I should save My
soul. p. 207. 19.

Some remedies are wors then the diseas: and some comforters more miserable then
misery it self. p 208. 20.

Brethren in iniquity are not far from becoming insolent enemies. p. 227. 28.

There is nothing harder then to keep ill men long in one mind. p. 228. 1

Plenty is prone to add fuel to the luxuries of populous Cities: their wealth
to make them wanton; their multitudes tempting them to security: and their
security exposing them to unexspected miseries. p. 229. 27.

The most, though they be not good themselves, yet are glad to see the severer
ways of virtue at any time sweetened by temporal rewards. p. 241. 15.

As the quality of a Prince sett's him beyond any Duel with any Subject: so
the nobleness of his mind must raise him above the meditateing any Revenge, or
executing His anger upon the MANY. p. 244. 12.

More inward complacencie to a Prince in pardoning one, then in punishing a
thousand. p. 244. 22.

Apophthegmata Carolina. III. POLITICAL.
THe right way of Parliaments is most safe for the Crown as best pleasing to
the people. page 1. line 17.

A good Prince ought to resolv to give all just satisfaction to modest and
sober desires, and to redress all public grievances in Church and State. p. 1.
l. 24. and by the weight of reason counterpoiz the over-balancings of Factions.
p. 2. 3.

His own, and His Children's Interests are obligations to a Prince to seek and
preserv the love and welfare of his Subjects. p. 2. 23.

The only temporal blessing that is left to the ambition of just Monarchs, as
their greatest honor and safety, next God's protection, is to seek and preserv
the love and welfare of their Subjects. p. 2. 25.

Princes can be no losers by lessening themselves in some things of their just
Prerogative, if they may but gain a recompens in their Subject's affections. p.
2. 29.

Rigor or remissness of Ministers in Church and State, contract upon Government
odium and offenses. p. 3. 9.

It concern's Princes both in Piety and Policy to see Religion settled and
preserved in Truth, Unity and Order, as knowing, that no flames of civil
dissentions are more dangerous then those which make Religious pretenses to be
the ground of Factions. page 3. line 15.

Great abilities in a Minister of State may make a Prince rather afraid then
ashamed to emploie him in the greatest affairs. p. 6. 17.

Great abilities are prone to create, in a Minister of State, great confidence
of undertakings: and great emploiments are like enough to betraie him to great
errors and many enemies. p. 6. 10.

Statesmen, who move in an high sphere and with a vigorous luster, must needs
(as the Sun) raise many envious exhalations, which, condensed by a popular
Odium, are capable to cast a cloud upon the brightest merit and integrity. p.
6. 15.

The importunity of Some people may sometimes necessitate a Prince, though
unsatisfied in his own conscience, to choose rather what is safe then what
seems just: and to prefer the outward peace of his Kingdoms with men before
that inward exactness of Conscience with God. p. 7. 4.

Better one man perish (though unjustly) then the people be displeased, is a
fallacious Maxim. p. 8. 1.

The best rule of Policy is to prefer the doing of justice before all
enjoyments: and the peace of My Conscience before the preservation of My
Kingdoms. p. 8. 28.

Strong probabilities are sufficient to raise jealousies in any Kings heart,
who is not wholly stupid and neglective of the public peace. p. 13. 16.

Popular tumults are not like a storm at Sea, (which yet want's not its terror)
but like an Earthquake, shakeing the very foundations of all, then which
nothing in the world has more of horror. p. 17. 2.

Nothing is more to be feared and less to be used by wise men then
tumultuarie confluxes of mean und rude people, who are taught first to
petition, then to protect; then to dictate, at last to command and over-aw the
Parliament. p. 18. 1.

The midwiferie of Tumults is used by those, who have a mind to bring ruin
upon the Church and State. p. 18. 23.

Men's passions and God's directions seldom agree: violent designs and motions
must have suitable engines: Such as too much attend their own ends, seldom
confine themselves to God's means. Force must crowd in what Reason will not
lead. p. 19. 10.

As it is no strange thing for the Sea to rage when strong winds blow upon it:
so neither for multitudes to become insolent, when they have men of some
reputation for parts and piety to set them on. p. 19. 24.

Such is the petulancy of some men, that they joy to see their betters
out-raged and abused, knowing their only security consist's in vulgar
flattery. p. 20. 8.

Some may interpret it as an effect of Pusillanimitie for any man for Popular
terrors to desert his Public Station. But I think it an hardiness, beyond true
valor, for a wise man to set himself against the breaking in of a sea: which to
resist, at present, threaten's imminent danger; but to withdraw, give's it
space to spend its fury, and gain's a fitter time to repair the breach.
Certainly a gallant man had rather fight, to great disadvantages for number and
place in the field, in an orderly way, then scuffle with an undisciplined
rabble. p. 21. 10.

Some are prone to insult most, when they have objects and opportunity most
capable of their rudeness and petulancy. p. 22. 19.

As swine are to gardens and orderly plantations, so are Tumults to
Parliaments; and Plebeian concourses to public Councils, turning all into
disorders and sordid confusions. p. 23. 15.

Some men occasion more work, then they find to do, by undoing so much as they
find well don to their hands. Such is Some men's activitie, that they will
needs make work rather then want it, and choose to be doing amiss, rather then
do nothing. p. 26. 2.

Good Subjects will never think it just or fit that their Sovereign's condition
should be wors by His bettering theirs. page 26. line 29.

The Commonwealth is kept in tune by preserving the Laws in their due
execution and vigor: wherein the Princes interest lie's more then any man's.
p. 27. 7.

More then the Law give's, a just Prince disire's not to have; and less the
meanest Subject should not. p. 27. 12.

I still counted My self undiminish'd by My largest Concessions, if by them I
might gain and confirm the love of My people. p. 27. 21.

Some men's ambition will not give their fellow subjects leav to enjoie what
their Prince intend's for their good. p. 27. 3.

A Prince is easily persuaded, that he cannot grant too much, or distrust too
little to men, who being professedly his subjects, pretend singular piety and
religious strictness. p. 28. 14.

A Prince's suffering some men to go up to the pinnacle of the temple, is a
temptation to them to cast him down headlong. p. 30. 14.

Better it is to be forced to sea by a storm, though unprovided of tackling
and victual, then venture splitting, or sinking on a Lee shore. p. 33. 8.

Tumults resolv to take the boldness to demand any thing, and not leav their
Governors the liberty of their reason and conscience to deny them any thing.
33. 14.

A Prince is not bound further to agree with the Votes of his Council, then he
see's them agree with the will of God, with his just rights, as a King, and the
general good of his People. page 33. lin. 30.

Though a Prince be desirous to give all just content to his People, yet SOME
MEN'S hydropick insatiableness has learned to thirst the more, by how much the
more they drink: whom no fountain of roial bounty is able to overcom: so
resolved they seem either utterlie to exhaust it, or barbarously to obstruct
it. p. 34. 8.

As to the desires of men, God enjoineth us to try all things by the
touchstone of Reason and Laws, which are the Rules of Civil Justice, and to
declare our consents to that only which our judgments approve. p. 39. 9.

The unthankful importunities and tumultuarie violence of SOME MEN'S immoderate
demands, ought not to betraie a resolved Prince to that degenerous and unmanly
slaverie, which should make him strengthen them by his consent in those things
which he think's in his conscience to be against the Glory of God, the good
of his subjects, and the discharge of his own duty in Reason and Justice. p.
39. 23.

It Is among the wicked Maxims of bold and disloial undertakers, That bab
actions must always be seconded with wors; and rather not be begun, then not
carried on; for they think the retreat more dangerous then the assault; and
hate repentance more then perseverance in a fault. p. 47. 1.

It Is the best policy with patience to bear what we cannot remedy. p. 47. 15.

Apostasy unto Loialtie some men count the most unpardonable sin. p. 48. 30.

Superstitious sourness in matters of Religion so darken's the judgment, that
they cannot see any thing of sin and Rebellion in those means they use with
intents to reform to their Models what they call Religion; who think all is
gold of piety, which does but glister with a show of Zeal and fervencie. p.
49. 22.

Sir John Hotham a notable monument of unprosperous disloialtie; teaching the
world by so sad and unfortunate a spectacle, that the rude carriage of a
subject toward his Sovereign carrie's always its own vengeance as an
unseparable shadow with it; and those often prove the most fatal and implacable
executioners of it, who were the first imploiers in the service. p. 50. 20.

Is there no way left to make Me a glorious King, but by My sufferings? p.
54. 1.

It is a hard and disputable chois for a King that love's his people, and
desires their love, either to kill his own Subjects, or to be killed by them.
p. 54. 4.

Miscarriages in Government may escape, rather through ill Counsel of some men
driving on their private ends, or the peevishness of others envying the Public
should be managed without them, or the hidden and insuperable necessities of
State, then any propensitie a Prince has of himself either to injuriousness,
or oppression. p. 54. 15.

The hazards of war are equal; nor does the Cannon know any respect of
persons. p 54. 29.

Unnatural motions seem to many men rather the production of a surfeit of
Peace, and wantonness of minds, or of private discontents, Ambition and
Faction (which easily find or make causses of quarrel) then any real
obstruction of Justice, or Parliamentarie privilege. p. 55. 8.

The sole exposeing a man to the public odium is enough to ruin any man,
before his cause be heard or tried. p. 56. 17.

The greatest guilt of those which were voted and demanded as delinquents was
this, that they would not suffer themselves to be over-awed with tumults and
their patrons; nor compelled to abet, by their suffrages or presence, the
designs of those men, who agitated innovations, and ruin both in Church and
State. p 57. 5.

Sovereign Power in Subjects seldom agrees with the stomaches of
Fellow Subjects. p. 68. 21.

I desire not to be safer, then I wish My People. p. 69. 5.

They who are conscious to their own evil merits and designs, will needs
persuade the world, that none but Wolvs are fit to be trusted with the
custody of the Shepherd and his flock. p. 69. 13.

Factious distractions must needs follow the manieheaded Hydra of Government,
which, as it make's a show to the people to have more eyes to foresee; so, they
will find, it has more mouths too, which must be satisfied; and at best,
has rather a monstrositie, then any thing of perfection, beyond that of right
Monarchy; where counsel may be in many as the senses: but the Supreme Power
can be but in one as the Head. p. 70. 25.

The Hearts of Subjects the greatest Treasure; and best Ammunition of a King.
p. 72. 26.

I cannot buy My peoples peace, and My own safety at too dear a rate, save
only with the parting with My conscience and honor. p. 75. 1.

Some things, which a King might approve, yet in honor and policy are at some
time to be denied to some men, lest he should seem not to dare to deny any
thing; and give too much encouragement to unreasonable demands or
importunities. p. 76 15.

No man seek's to limit and confine his King in reason, who has not a secret
aim to share with him, or usurp upon him in power and dominion. p. 78 5.

A just Prince ought not so much to look at number and power, as to weigh
Reason and Justice. p. 83. 17.

Tumults are the Hounds that attend the cry, and hollaw of those Men, who hunt
after factions and private designs, to the ruin of Church and State. page 83.
22.

Sudden and vast desires of change must be imputed to those few, who armed
themselves with the manieheaded and manie-handed Tumults. p. 85. 15.

It is the resolution of a good Prince, that nothing of Passion, or
Peevishness, or List to contradict, or vanity to show his Negative power shall
have any Biass upon his judgment, to make him gratify his will, by denying
any thing, which reason and conscience command's him not: Nor on the other
side to consent to more then Reason, Justice, Honor, and Religion persuade Him,
to be for God's glory, the Church's good, His people's welfare, and His own
peace. p, 85. 28.

A good Prince will study to satisfy his People: but will never for fear or
flattery gratify any Faction how potent soever: for this were to nourish the
diseas, and oppress the body. p. 86. 10.

The Interest of a Prince lie's as much in the common welfare of His Subjects,
as some men's does in their perturbations, who think they cannot do well but in
evil times. p 91* 11.

A pious Prince look's upon the effusion of his Subject's blood, as exhausted
out of his own veins. p 96. 30.

It cannot but seem either passion or some self-seeking, more then true zeal and
pious discretion, for any foreign State or Church to prescribe such medicines
only for others, which themselves have used, rather successfully then
commendably; not considering that the same physic on different constitutions
will have different operations; that may kill one which does but cure another.
p. 101. 26.

Men jealous of the justifiableness of their doings and designs before God
never think they have humane strength enough to carry their work on, seem it
never so plausible to the people: what cannot be justified in Law and Religion
had need to be fortified with Power. page 107. line 4.

Inconstancy attend's all minds engaged in violent motions. p. 107. 11.

In vain do men think to build their Piety on the ruins of Loialtie. Nor can
those confederations be durable, when subjects make bankrupt of their
Allegiance under pretens of setting up a quicker trade for Religion. 108. 6.

All Reason and true policy will teach subjects, that their chiefest interest
consist's in their fidelity to the Crown, not in their serviceableness to any
Party. p. 108. 18.

Some men have so much of the serpent's subtlety, that they forget the Doves
simplicity. p. 109. 2.

Ambitious minds never think they have laid snares and gins enough to catch
and hold the vulgar credulity: for, by such politic and seemingly-pious
stratagems they think to keep the populacie fast to their Parties under the
terror of perjurie. p. 112. 1.

No after-Contracts, devised and imposed by a few men in a declared Party,
without the consent of the Prince, and without any like power or precedent
from God's or Man's Law, can be ever thought by judicious men sufficient
either to absolv or slacken those moral and eternal bonds of duty, which lie
upon all subject's consciences both to God and their Prince. p. 112. 11.

Illegal ways seldom, or never, intend the engageing men more to duties, but
only to Parties. Therefore it is not regarded how they keep their Covenants in
point of Piety pretended, provided they adhere firmly to the Party and design
intended. p. 114. 13.

Unjust it is, both in the eye of Reason and Religion, to deprive the most
sacred emploiment of all due encouragements. p. 118. 3.

The worst effects of open hostility com short of the designs of the
stratagems and conflicts of Malice, which by falsities seek to oppress the
Truth, and by jealousies to supply the defect of real causses. p. 122. 13.

A good King can more willingly lose his Crowns then his Credit: nor are his
Kingdoms so dear to him as his Reputation and Honor. Those must have a period
with his life: but these may survive to a glorious kind of immortality, when
he is dead and gone: a good name being the embalming of Princes, and a sweet
consecrating of them to an eternity of love and gratitude among Posterity. p.
122. 15.

When our eyes are blinded with the mists of suspicions, we are soon misled
into the percipices of actions. p. 123. 4.

A Good Prince is too conscious to his own affections toward the generality of
his people, to suspect theirs to him. p. 124. 7.

The sens of the injuries don unto his subjects is as sharp, as those don to a
Prince himself. p. 124. 20.

I had rather prevent My peoples ruin then rule over them; nor am I so
ambitious of that Dominion, which is but My Right, as of their happiness. p.
125. 13.

I had rather suffer all the miseries of life, and die many deaths, then
shamefully to desert, or dishonorably to betraie My own just Rights and
Sovereigntie. p. 125. 20.

Some look so much at the goodness of the end propounded, that they consider not
the lawfulness of the means used, nor the depth of the mischief plotted and
intended. p. 127. 29.

No men were more willing to complain, then I was to redress what I saw in
reason was either don or advised amiss. p. 131. 18.

The nois and ostentation of Liberty, an usual artifice to withdraw peoples
affections from their Prince to innovateing designs. p. 132. 9.

Liberty, in the popular sens, is, to do what every man likes best. p. 132.
13.

The divinest liberty is to will what men should, and to do what they so will,
according to Reason, Laws, and Religion. p. 132. 15.

The bounds of the Laws good men count their Ornament and Protection: others
their manacles and Oppression. p. 132. 30.

It is not just any man should expect the reward and benefit of the Law, who
despises it is rule and direction; loseing justly his safety, while he seek's
an unreasonable Liberty. p. 133. 3.

They are the best preservers of true Liberties, who allow themselves the least
licentiousness against, or beyond the Laws. p. 133. 9.

It is impossible those men should be really tender of their fellow subjects
Liberties, who have the hardiness to use their King with so severe restraints
against all Laws both divine and humane. p. 133. 13.

Proud and arrogant activitie seek's to hatch every egg of different opinion
to a Faction, or schism. 133. 23.

Never were any Princes more Glorious, then those, whom God has suffered to
be tried in the furnace of Afflictions by their injurious Subjects. p. 134. 30.

It Is no wonder, if men not fearing God should not honor their King. p. 135. 21.

God has graven such characters of divine authority and Sacred Power upon
Kings, as none may without sin seek to blot them out. p. 135. 27.

The pride of those that study Novelties can hardly allow former times any
share or degree of wisdom or godliness. p. 138. 12.

Slight and easy is that Legerdemane, which will serve to delude the Vulgar.
page 144. line 8.

No men are prone to be greater Tyrants, and more rigorous exactors upon
others to conform to their illegal novelties, then such, whose pride was
formerly least disposed to the obedience of lawful Constitutions; and whose
licentious humors most pretended conscientious Liberties. p. 144. 16.

The advantage of Error consist's in noveltie and variety, as Truths in unity
and constancy. p. 146. 25.

A King is entrusted by God and the Laws with the good both of Church and
State. 148. 5.

Use, the great arbitrator of words and master of language. p. 151. 5.

Faction and Confusion, Emulation and Contempts are prone to arise among equals
in power and function. p. 154. 21.

Inconstancy a great prejudice against Noveltie. p. 156. 19.

It is a gross vulgar error to impute to, or revenge upon the Function the
faults of times or Persons. p. 158. 6.

Secular additaments and ornaments of Authority, Civil Honor, and estate, which
Christian Princes have annexed to Bishops and Churchmen, are but as just
rewards of their learning and piety; enablements to works of Charity and
Hospitality: and meet strengthnings of their Authority in point of respect and
observance. p. 158. 10.

Respect and observance in peaceful times is hardly paid to any governors by
the measure of their virtues, so much as by that of their estates. p. 158. 19.

Poverty and meanness exposes Governors and their Authority to the contempt
of licentious minds and manners. p. 158. 23.

There is an innate principle of vicious opposition in all men against those
that seem to reprove or restrain them. p. 159. 6.

What I think in My judgment best, I may not think so absolutely necessary for
all places, and at all times. p. 163. 12.

Far better it is to hold to Primitive and Uniform Antiquity, then to complie
with divided Noveltie. p. 164. 15.

The way of Treaties is as a retiring from fighting like beasts to arguing
like men, whose strength should be more in their understandings, then in their
limbs. p. 166. 27.

It is an office not only of humanity, rather to use reason then force; but
also of Christianity to seek peace and ensue it. p. 167. 12.

The events of all War by the sword are very dubious; and of a Civil War
uncomfortable; the end hardly recompensing, and late repairing the mischief of
the means. p. 167. 18.

No success should enhance the price of Peace. p. 167. 22.

Jealousies are not so soon allaied, as they are raised. p. 168. 15.

Some men are more afraid to retreat from violent engagements, then to engage:
what is wanting in equity must be made up in pertinacie. p. 168. 16.

Such as have little to enjoy in Peace or lose in War study to render the
very name of Peace odious and suspected. p. 168. 19.

Some men have that hight, as to interpret all fair condiscendings as arguments
of feebleness, and glory most in an inflexible stiffness, when they see others
most supple and inclinable to them. p. 170. 3.

The highest tide of success will not set a just Prince above a Treaty; nor
the lowest ebb below a fight; though it is not any sign of true valor to be
prodigal of men's lives, rather then to be drawn to produce our own reasons,
or to subscribe to other men's. page 170. line 27.

In the safety and preservation of the Prince and the Laws all honest men
think the welfare of their Country does consist: for and with all which it is
far more honorable and comfortable to suffer, then to prosper in their ruin
and subversion. p. 176. 17.

Neither shows, nor truth of Piety are sufficient to dispens with, or expiate
the defects of Subject's Duty and Loialtie to their Prince. p. 176. 29.

In War the most prosperous successes on either side impair the welfare of the
whole. p. 179. 5.

Our mutual divisions are our common distractions, and the Union of all is
every good man's chiefest interest. p. 181. 2.

A great miscarriage it is, that popular clamors and furle should be allowed
the reputation of Zeal and the Public sens. p. 183. 3.

The study to pleas some Parties injure's all. p. 183. 6.

Freedom, Moderation, and Impartialitie are sure the best tempers of reforming
Counsils and endeavors: what is acted by Factions cannot but offend more then
it pleases. p. 183. 8.

The Vulgar are taken with Novelties, as Children with Babies very much, but
not very long. p. 186. 18.

Good Princes, as they own their Kingdoms from God; so they desire to rule for
his Glory and his Church's good. p. 188. 14.

As good ends cannot justify evil means: so nor will evil beginings ever bring
forth good conclusions, unless God, by a miracle of Mercy, create light out of
darkness, Order out of Confusions, and Peace out of our Passions. p. 188. 21.

A good Prince wishe's his Subjects had a clear sight into his most retired
thoughts, where they might discover how they are divided betwixt his love and
care, not more to preserv his own Rights, then to procure their Peace and
happiness: and extreme grief to see them both deceived and destroyed. p. 191. 1.

Bees will gather honey, where the Spider suck's poison. p. 191. 13.

Subjects can hardly be happy, if their Prince be miserable, or enjoie their
Peace and Liberties, while he is oppressed. p. 191. 18.

Some men's design is like Absalom's, by enormous actions, to widen differences,
and to exasperate all sides to such distances, as may make all Reconciliation
desperate. p. 191. 22.

With the Vulgar, Prosperity gain's the greatest esteem and applaus: as
Adversity exposes to their greatest slighting and dis-respect: as if good
fortune were always the shadow of Virtue and Justice, and did not oftener
attend vicious and injurious actions, as to this world. p. 193. 6.

No secular advantages seem sufficient to that Cause, which began with Tumults,
and depend's chiefly upon the Reputation with the Vulgar. p. 193. 13.

The taking away of a Prince's Credit is but a necessary preparation to the
taking away of his life and his kingdoms. p. 193. 25.

What Providence denie's to Force, it may grant to Prudence. p. 197. 18.

Confidence of an enemy may disarm and overcom him. p. 197. 26.

So various are all humane affairs, and so necessitous may the State of Princes
be, that their greatest danger may be in their supposed safety, and their
safety in their supposed danger. p. 198. 21.

It is some skill in play to know when a game is lost; better fairly to give
over, then to contest in vain. 199. 6.

Restraint, though it has as little of safety to a Prince, yet it has not
more of danger. page 202. lin. 30.

If My captivity, or death must be the price of the Redemption of the Laws, I
grudg not to pay it. 204. 1.

No condition can make a King miserable, which carrie's not with it his soul's,
his people's, and Posteritie's thraldom. p. 204. 3.

I rather choose to suffer for My Subjects, then with them. p. 204. 8.

I had rather hazard the ruin of one King, then confirm many Tyrants over
them, from whom I pray God deliver them, whatever becom's of Me. p. 204. 11.

The evil policy of men forbid's all just restitution, lest they should
confess an injurious usurpation. 207. 2.

The sins of a Prince have the aggravation of his condition, the eminency of
his place adding weight to his offenses. p. 218. 29.

The sins of the People are so far the Princes, as he improoveth not the Power
given him by God, to his Glory and his subject's good. p. 219. 2.

Some little practice will serve that man, who only seek's to represent a part
of Honesty and Honor. p. 223. 14.

A King cannot be so low, but He is considerable adding weight to that Party
where he appears. 223. 18.

Better to swim down a stream, then in vain to strive against it. p. 223. 24.

Impossible it is for lines to be drawn from the center, and not to divide
from each other; so much the wider, by how much they go farther from the point
of Union. p. 224. 1.

Such as will adventure on a King (without any Commission but that of Will and
Power) to take his Person into their custody, must not be thought overmodest
or timorous to carry on any design they have a mind to. p. 225. 5.

Power is above all Rule, Order, and Law. p 226. 14.

We are much more happy to be subject to the known Laws then to the various
wills of any men, seem they never so plausible at first. p. 228. 10.

Vulgar compliance with any illegal and extravagant ways, like violent
motions in nature, soon grow's weary of it self, and end's in a refractorie
sullenness: People's rebounds are often in their faces, who first put them upon
those violent strokes. p. 228. 14.

The ways of Peace consist not in the divided wills of Parties, but the joint
and due observation of the Laws. p. 229. 15.

Sins expose a people to God's justice, their riches to other's injuries, their
number to Tumults, and their Tumults to confusion. p. 230. 13.

We must not measure a Cause by the success; nor a man's judgment of things by
his misfortunes. p. 231. 28.

A Prince that has begun, and spent some years of discretion in the experience
of troubles, and exercise of Patience, has an advantage of wisdom above most
Princes. p. 232. 6.

Piety and all virtues both Moral, and Political, are commonly better planted
to a thriving, in troubles, as trees set in winter, then in warmth and
serenitie of times; or amidst those delights, which usually attend Princes
Courts in times of peace and plenty; which are prone, either to root up all
plants of true Virtue and Honor; or to be contented only with some leaves, and
withering formalities of them, without any real fruits, such as tend to the
Public good, for which Princes should always remember they are born, and by
providence designed. p. 232. 9.

Flatterers are as inseparable from prosperous Princes, as flies from fruit in
summer; whom adversity, like cold weather, drive's away. p. 232. 29.

I had rather you should be Charles le Bon then le Grand; good then great. p.
233. 4.

The best Government, and highest Sovereigntie a Prince can attein to, is to
be subject to God, that the Scepter of his Word and Spirit may rule in his
heart. p. 233. 18.

The true glory of Princes consist's in advancing God's Glory, in the
maintenance of true Religion, and the Church's good: also in the dispensation
of civil Power with Justice and Honor to the public peace. p. 233. 22.

A Prince ought so to order affairs in point of Power, that he need not to
fear or flatter any Faction. For, if ever he stand in need of them, or must
stand to their courtesy, he is undon. The Serpent will devour the Dove: He
may never exspect less of Loialtie, Justice, or Humanity, then from those who
engage into Religious Rebellion; Their interest is always made God's: under
the colors of piety, ambitious policies march, not only with greater
security, but applaus, as to the populacie. He may hear from them Jacobs
voice, but he shall feel they have Esau's hands. p. 236. 5.

The settled Laws of the Kingdom are the most excellent Rules a Prince can
govern by. p. 237. 24.

Ingenuous Liberty consist's in the enjoiment of the fruits of industry, and
the benefit of those Laws to which subjects themselves have consented. p. 238. 4.

A Princes Prerogative is best showed and exercised in remitting, rather then
exacting the rigor of the Laws; there being nothing wors then Legal Tyranny.
p. 238. 15.

I cannot learn that lesson, nor I hope ever will you, that it is safe for a
King to gratify any Faction with the perturbation of the Laws, in which is
wrapped up the Public interest, and the good of the Community. p. 239. 3.

A Prince ought seriously to consider the former Real or objected miscarriages
of his Predecessor, which might occasion troubles, that he may avoid them. p.
239. 27.

A Prince ought not to repose so much upon any man's single Counsel, fidelity,
and discretion, in mannageing affairs of the first magnitude (that is, matters
of Religion and Justice) as to create in himself, or others, a diffidence of
his own judgment, which is likely always to be more constant and impartial to
the interests of his Crown and Kingdom, then any man's. p. 240. 1.

A Prince must beware of exasperateing any Factions by the crosness and
asperitie of some men's Passions, humors, or private opinions, employed by Him,
grounded only upon the differences in lesser matters, which are but the skirts
and suburbs of Religion. p. 240. 10.

Favors and rewards must be distributed, to all men by the Prince with an
equal eye, and impartial hand, as He finde's them for their real goodness both
in abilities and fidelity worthy and capable of them.p. 241. 8.

As a Prince need's no palliations for any Designs (as other men) so He
ought to study really to exceed, in true and constant demonstrations of
goodness, piety and virtue toward the People; even all those men, that make
the greatest nois and ostentations of Religion: so He shall neither fear any
detection (as they do who have but the face and mask of goodness) nor shall He
frustrate the just exspectations of his people: who cannot in Reason promise
themselves so much good from any subject's Novelties, as from the virtuous
constancy of their King. p 242. 13.

None are greater Oppressors of the estates, Liberties, and consciences of the
People then those men, that entitle themselves the Patrons and Vindicators of
them, only to usurp Power over them. p. 242. 30.

The sin and folly of the people will sufficiently punish them in due time. p.
243. 6.

When ever Acts of indemnitie and Oblivion shall be desired and accepted, let
them be granted, not only as Acts of State-policie and Necessity, but of
Christian Charity and Chois. p. 243. 20.

Parliaments, in their right constitution with freedom and Honor, will never
injure or diminish the greatness of the King; but will rather be as
enterchangings of Love, Loialtie, and confidence between a Prince and his
People. p. 247. 2.

The Public interest consist's in the mutual and common good both of Prince
and People. p. 247. 18.

We must not starv our selves, because some have surfeited on wholesome food. p.
247. 25.

A Crown is not worth taking up or enjoying upon sordid, dishonorable and
irreligious terms. p. 248. 5.

The Mask of Religion on the face of Rebellion will not long serve to hide some
men's deformities. p. 250. 5.

Religion to their God, and Loialtie to their King, cannot be parted, without
both the sin and infelicitie of the Subject. p. 250. 13.

There are but few steps between the Prisons and the Graves of Princes. p. 251.
22.

The envy or emnitie of some men make's their own lives seem deadly to them,
while the Prince enjoie's any part of His. p. 252. 2.

A King live's in nothing temporal so much, as in the love, and good will of
his people. p. 253. 19.

No Law of God or man invest's Subjects with any Power of Judicature without
their Sovereign, much less against Him. p. 256. 5.

Some men must pretend Justice to cover their perjurie. p. 256. 10.

Nothing make's mean Spirits more cowardly-cruel in manageing their usurped
power against their lawful Superiors, then this, the Guilt of their unjust
usurpation. p. 256. 24.

No Concessions of a Prince can ever satisfy, or abate the covetous Ambition
of some men. p. 257. 8.

Kings are exposed to as many dangers (being the greatest Patrons of Law,
Justice, Order, and Religion on Earth) as there be either men, or Devils which
love confusion. p. 257. 23.

God will not suffer those men long to prosper in their Babel, who build it
with the Bones, and cement it with the blood of their Kings. p. 257. 28.

I am confident they will find Avengers of My death among themselves. p. 258. 1.

God will not suffer them to go unpunished, whose confederacy in sin is their
only security. p. 258. 15.

The sharp and necessary Tyranny of My Destroiers will sufficiently confute
the calumnies of Tyranny against Me. p. 260. 15.

Good Subjects know how to excuse the Princes failings, as a man, and yet to
retein and pay their duty to Him as their King; there being no Religious
necessity bindeing any Subjects, by pretending to punish, infinitely to
exceed the faults and errors of their Princes. p. 260. 23.

They cannot hope long to enjoie their thumbs and toes, who have, under pretens
of pareing others nails, been so cruel as to cut of their chiefest strength.
p. 261. 9.

Those undertakings of men are many times lifted up to Heaven in the
prosperity and applaus of the world, whose rise is from Hell, as to the
injuriousness and oppression of the design. The prosperous Winds, which often
fill the sails of Pirates, do not justify their Piracie and Rapine. p. 262. 15.

I look upon it, with infinite more content, and quiet of Soul, to have been
worsted in My enforced contestation for, and vindication of the Laws of the
Land, the Freedom and Honor of Parliaments, the Rights of My Crown, the just
Liberty of My Subjects, and the true Christian Religion in its Doctrine,
Government and due encouragements, then if I had, with the greatest advantages
of success, overborn them all. p. 262. 22.

It is very strange that Mariners can find no other means to appeas the storm
themselves have raised but by drowning their Pilot. p. 264. 21

FINIS.

