A SERMON Preached at the Visitation OF The Right Reverend Father in God, JOHN
Lord Bishop of CHESTER, AT CHESTER.

By JAMES ARDERNE, D.D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON: Printed for H. Brom, at the Gun at the Westend of St. Paul's Church,
1677.

A Visitation Sermon.
2 Timothy iv. 5. latter part of the Verse. Make full proof of thy Ministry.
THese words are the summing up of all those advices in general terms which St.
Paul had more distinctly given before in this and the former Epistle to Timothy.

These particulars, as we find them in both, will most sutably become the
matter of this days discourse. And I hope tho both the Text and this Assembly
would fairly allow us to show, that Timothy was a Diocesan Bishop, yet it will
not be reckoned necessary, since the Authority of St. Ignatius's Epistles has
been beyond all just exception fully vindicated; and that other the ancientest
Records of Churchaffairs do prove Bishop and Priest to be not merely two
Degrees, but likewise two Ranks of Clergymen, distinguished by different
Ordinations and Powers, as appears amongst several Writings from the Apostolic
Canons, which I take the freedom to urge by this Name, because they were called
so before the first General Council of the Church, and are referred to by it,
and have expressly this Title given by that of Ephesus, which was one of the
four principal Councils. But to return to the propounded work, the Advices
given to Timothy, which concern all who are placed in the Ministry, may be
brought under these four heads: 1. To keep out of our Religion whatever is new.
2. To improve in Divine knowledge. 3. To be diligent in all Offices of the
received Ministry. 4. To have a Conversation suitable to their Office.


1. To keep out of our Religion whatever is new.

Our Religion is the eternal Gospel of Jesus Christ; therefore suitable both to
Christ, and to every other Eternal; it should be the same yesterday, to day,
and for ever. It being at once, and at first perfect, any alteration or
addition would utterly spoil it. Hence is it that St. Paul bids Timothy, 1 Timothy
1. 3, to charge some that they teach no other Doctrine, and chapter 4. v. 6, that
he should put the Brethren in remembrance like a good Minister of Jesus Christ,
of the words of Faith and good Doctrine; and chapter 6. v. 3, that he should so
teach and exhort, that if it might be, not any man might reach otherwise, but
consent to wholesome words; more directions of the same nature you may read in
this second Epistle, as chapter 1. 13. of holding fast the form of sound words; of
committing the Apostles Doctrine to faithful Teachers of others, chapter 2. 2. the
like charge is given to Titus, chapter 2. 1. and 7. and so before, chapter 1. 9.

Now being new things made part of Religion do plainly destroy the rest of it,
let us inquire awhile whence such innovations arise, and how they betray
themselves, and how they are most popularly carried on; they rise from the same
Original whence wars come, from the lusts within men, from vainglory very often,
and from an ambitious desire of drawing Disciples after them, so the old Canon
Law defines at once a Heretic and a Schismatic to be such, who for the sake
of vainglory either makes or follows false opinions. Such the Gnostics, were
men vainly puffed up in their fleshly minds, professing themselves to be wise;
such an one Novatus was, as Cornelius Bishop of Rome gives an account of him to
Fabius of Antioch, Eusebius. hist. l. 6. cap. 43.
That he was lifted up with arrogance, and that his ambition and longing for a
Bishopric was the cause of his separation. The Heresy of Marcion, as we learn
from Tertullian sprang from another as bad ground, Tertul. de praescript.
Epiphan. li. haeres. 42.
and Epiphanius, to wit, from revenge, because the Roman Church was then more
strict and modest, and judged it unlawful to receive him into its Communion,
who had been excommunicated by his own Father, a Bishop in Pontus, for foul
conversation with a woman of that City. Sometimes Divinity-inventions are
studied out of covetousness, so Simon thought to buy the gift of Healing, that
he might be a good gainer by his practice. And as to the present state of the
Church of Rome, whose innovations are much more modern than any I have yet
named, if we survey the main differences 'twixt them and us, and compute the
large revenues thence arising to their Churchmen, we should think, if their
opinions had been old enough, that they came rather from this Simon than from
St. Peter. If it were not tedious to you to hear what already you fully know,
it would be easy to show a like beginning of all new whims and fashions of
deceivers; for though it were uncharitable to question, but that some may
follow a Heresy or Schism, as some followed Absoloms rebellion, in their
simplicity, and knew not any thing; yet it would be charity mistaken to
believe, that this simplicity and ignorance could furnish out a Leader, that
sets up his Banner in defiance of the Church; no certainly, this requires some
endowments, like those of a fallen Angel fighting against Heaven, a good
understanding and an ill purpose.

Such men do usually betray themselves, and show that they are setting up a new
Doctrine, when they quarrel with the words used by the Church; so the Arrians,
when they were suspected, alleged that they were only offended with the word
(...), fearing lest it favored Sabellius, who taught that there was but one
Person and three Manifestations in the Godhead; and the Socinians, when they
first framed into a body like a Church, pretended they did not find fault with
the Doctrine concerning Christ and the Holy Ghost, but only with the barbarous
School-term Trinity; but for all their simpering, both these enemies of God
appeared afterward barefaced in their own colors; the like may be observed
in those who design an alteration in Discipline, as these other did in
Doctrine. If you knew not the men, and their communication, you would take them
to be harmless and tender, but history and experience acquaint us, by what has
been, that they are not like other dealers, for that they will have more than
they ask. Another way whereby men discover an inclination to something foreign
to the Church of which they appear Members, is, when they would compound with
the Church, that which were all along Articles of Religion, should now be only
Articles of Peace; and what was looked upon formerly to be believed, should be
only not publicly opposed; but this project has too many mischiefs surely ever
to obtain success; it would cast a mighty Reproach upon our first Restorers,
and it would make us one, just as the Interim made the dissenting Germans, not
in Religion, but as then it was fitly called, an Interreligion. And further,
seeing our Doctrines are plainly contained in our Devotions, it would make
these men, who are both for Dissension and Peace, the very worst of Hypocrites.

Having now given you some account of the original and tokens of Innovation, it
remains we consider the fairest Pleas on whose credit the man excepts against
what is well established; these are chiefly two: 1. That what has hitherto been
received in the Church, is contrary to the Rules of Reason. Or, 2. Contrary to
the enlight'ning of the Spirit.


1. Contrary to the Rules of Reason. It was indeed never denied of reason, by
those who might be supposed to have some share of it, that it was very
serviceable about Religion, and it is yielded among us, that it could never
find so creditable employment as in defending that of Christians; but there is
a wide difference betwixt Instrument and Contriver, betwixt Service and
Authority. Reason was very useful in discovering the honesty and infallibility
of the first Publishers of the Christian Doctrine; but then it has no right to
take the Doctrines asunder, and to make an exact search whether these agree to
those apprehensions of things which flow from the alone light of Nature, and to
order that as the Doctrines shall approve themselves upon this trial, suitably
their success shall be either to be entertained or rejected; no, certainly the
Laws of God do not so doubtfully depend upon the sentence of our faculties, nor
is the Scripture a fair proposal only that may probably be received, if we
approve the matter of it. All the power of debate, and that is fully enough,
which God gives to our reason, antecedent to our belief, is this, to examine
the miracles wrought in confirmation of our faith, and so to consider whether
these, and consequently the Gospel which accompanies 'em, can proceed from any
one but the most High God; and after this hearing is over, reason changes its
person, it lays down all its Ensigns of Jurisdiction, descends from its
Judgment Seat, and does homage to this Vicegerent come from Heaven, professing
an entire obedience to its Authority; and afterward if it be found that some
of these Laws so Divinely authorized, shall appear capable of two meanings, or
of none that is plain to us, reason is not to take this advantage for an excuse
to restore it self to its former power, but it must go to consult with those
who conversed familiarly face to face with the Publishers of this Law. or with
their nearest Successors, to know what interpretation they received of this
dark saying, or what Doctrines were delivered them nearest the possible meaning
of this place, and so it believes according to their true report. This is in a
manner the whole process of the Knowledge and of the Faith of Christianity; and
he who will attribute to reason an employment higher than this, must be
requested to tell us, how by reason he arrived at the belief of the Trinity,
and of other mysteries of the Christian Faith. If he say, that he has as
distinct a conception of these, as of any self-evident proposition, we
congratulate his early seize and his being already wrapped up into Heaven;
but if his free answer prove, as we may well suspect, quite contrary, that for
his part he does not at all believe these things, because he cannot clearly
understand 'em, and that Christian Religion has nothing in it, but what is
plain and easy to conceive, it will be expected in the next place he show,
after these incomprehensible propositions are laid aside, what so difficult
truths there are in our Religion, more than were in the world before; that it
should be worthy of God to make a man on purpose, in such a wonderful manner to
preach them, and to communicate to him his own power to do those mighty works,
that men might believe on this score that which mankind believed long before by
the light of Nature. Thus, as the argument derived from divine Revelation, and
the strange attendants of it, proves that more was required to be believed than
reason could suggest; so we shall find, if we look into Scripture, that it
professes to contain more than human reason, even after the revelation given,
can fully conceive.

2. Some plead in behalf of their novelties, that they proceed from the
enlight'ning of the Spirit. They apply hither those promises of the Old
Testament made concerning the latter days, whereas those latter days are by St.
Peter understood of the days of the Apostles preaching, and so they were
applied by the primitive Church in opposition to the Enthusiasm of Montanus and
his fellows. We acknowledge sufficient aids of the Spirit of Grace in the use of
means, but we say it does not give this knowledge by inspiration in our days;
this extraordinary grant being formerly accompanied with the gift of strange
tongues, and with that of working of Miracles, these two, or the like, being
necessary to go along with that Spirit which distinguishes the Divinely
inspired from the pretending Impostor.

Having said thus much concerning Innovations, let me further dissuade you from
them, consider that what is of the greatest standing and continuance is truth
it self; truth is that which is eternal in God, and among men it is the
offspring of Divine perfection; whereas error is modern and an upstart; thus
was it with the Idolatry of the Jews, they served new Gods, newly come up. In
the style of Scripture, the Ancient People signifies the same with the true
Church; Deuteronomy. 2. 19
and the good way and the old way are one and the same. Our Savior makes this
the best trial of Doctrine, whether it be true or no, by seeing whether it was
so from the beginning. The Jews are directed in matters of Religion, to
consider the years of many Generations: ask thy Fathers and they will tell
thee, thy Elders and they will show thee; the whole Church in all ages is but
one Flock, and we that come after, must as Solomon bids, observe the steps of
the old Flock. The first Christian Church is that Pillar of truth on which
Divine Laws were affixed, that they might be made public; whom may we then
with better success follow than those whose bright knowledge of what they
raught was not sullied with lusts, nor swol'n with arrogance, nor envenomed
with malice? How can we suspect their evidence, who knew God's will by doing
it. and who rather chose to dye than betray their Faith given to God, or the
Faith delivered to them, Blessed Saints!

The second Advice of St. Paul is to improve in knowledge.

He would not that they who are Teachers should not understand what they say,
Ephesians. l. 7. Nor would he a Teacher should only begin to understand, so chapter 3.
Not a Novice, lest he be filled with pride. But instead hereof, one who has
well studied his work, 1 Ep. chapter 2. 15. Study to show thy self approved to God,
a workman that needs not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth.
Of all knowledge most principally the knowledge of Scripture is required; this
Timothy had from a Child, which at this day many who profess themselves great
Divines do scarce at all regard. So the History of the Council of Trent tells
us of the Italian Prelates, that they were good School-Divines, but understood
little of Scripture. We should as the Rarraei among the Jews, cleave only to
the Doctrines of Scripture, and exercise our selves herein continually, over
and over again. So the Jews, to intimate so much upon the eight day of the
Feast of Tabernacles, read at the same time the last Section of the Law, and
with it the beginning of the first. We should be unwearied in this frequent
reading, as it is reported of one who when he had read a Book of Aristotle
forty times over, wrote upon it, I will read it again; by doing thus we shall
daily grow in knowledge. For such is the excellency of every Word of God, and
such is the narrowness of our understandings at that end where we receive
knowledge, that though our Souls are made capable of much knowledge, yet we
cannot receive much at once. What has been said of improving in
Scripture-knowledg, concerns all men as well as Ministers, seeing the reasons
given in Scripture why it should be searched, reaches all; but there is a
modesty to be used, as sensible they are more likely to be mistaken now and
then about its meaning, than those whose whole study and business it is to make
it be understood. But all have an undoubted right to the use of Scripture.
Clemens Alexandrinus Stromat. l. 7.
advises all Christians, to grow old in reading these Books, and adds, that as
under the Law those Beasts which chewed the cud, and had parted hoofs were
acceptable to God; so is the Christian who ruminates upon the Oracles of God
day and night, whence in his going by Faith to the Father and the Son, he
receives that steadiness of gate which proceeds from parted hoofs, thus far he.
Many more passages of the like nature are met with among the Fathers, which we
must now forbear. But as for those who are separated to the work of the
Ministry, more is required than reading Scripture and Divinity in English, the
knowledge of Tongues, and of the true state of the primitive Church; this must
be had from an entire reading of the ancient Records of the Church, that we may
not be deceived with false representations under that persuading title; and
human Learning must be retained into the service of Christian knowledge, many
parts of it are of necessary use, and almost all give a good advantage to our
discourses; these secular disciplines were recommended by several, but most
fully by Clemens Alexandrinus Stromat. 6.
, his Scholar in Origin 3 Tom. in Genes.
, and are to good purpose used by most of them. These accomplishments are
helpful in the two great works of our Ministry, to wit, instructing the
ignorant, and convincing gainsayers, which comes under the next advice of St.
Paul, which is,

Thirdly, A Diligence in Ministerial duties. Our duty has three main parts,
Teaching, Praying, and Watching over the People.

These being undoubtedly necessary, we need not enquire which is of the
greatest dignity. As to Teaching, St. Paul requires one apt to teach, 2 Timothy 2.
24. and that he be instant in preaching the word, 2 Timothy 4. 2. he must instruct
with much plainness, and not make the Gospel to return to the likeness of the
Law, with a veil and thick darkness about it; he must exhort with all
heartiness, by the fittest true arguments of persuasion; he must both boldly
and meekly reprove sin, not sparing the fault, but still manifesting he has no
quarrel with the person. In short, in all the instances of teaching there must
appear what St. Paul requires from Titus, chapter 2. 7. uncorruptness, gravity,
sincerity.

2. The second part of duty is Prayer. Thus the Ministers of the Lord are to
cry, Spare thy people, O Lord. This work at this time, when Knowledge is more
plentifully found than Living well, is of the more general usefulness; and as
the profession of the same Articles of Faith in the very same express terms, is
a mark of Communion among the distinct Assemblies of the Church, so praying
unto God in the same words, in our several Congregations, shows that we are not
independent, but members one of another. Such were the primitive Prayers Justin
Martyr speaks of, 2. Apolog.
their (...), their Common Prayer, and Origin of their (...), their appointed
Prayers; and we have greater examples, of John the Baptist and of our Savior,
teaching the Disciples to pray in set words. As the public prayers of the
first Christians had appointed words, so likewise they had Times and Places
appointed. Of both these St. Clemens, the fellow laborer of St. Paul, speaks,
1 Ep. Corinth.
telling us, that our Lord would not have holy Offices performed rashly, nor
disorderly, (...) Hist. l. 10. c. 3.
but in determinate places and hours, where and by whom he would have these
done, he has appointed by his Sovereign will. Several others of them speak to
the same purpose; and Eusebius acquaints us, that these Houses of Prayer were
consecrated. Which I the rather mention, to remedy the mistake of those who
count it Popish, when as indeed it was done in the purest Ages of Christianity.
So much for the place; as for the Hours they were thrice a day, and the day of
the most public Assembly was that which we rightly call the Lords day; of this
St. Barnabas, the Companion of St. Paul, speaks Ep. Catholic.
, we keep (says he) with gladness of mind that day on which Jesus both rose
from the dead, and appeared, and ascended into Heaven. What has been said of
Prayers, why they should be the same, holds as strongly for the administration
of Sacraments in the same words and manner; for these, besides the benefits by
them received from God, are tokens of an agreement among our selves; for as
right Baptism at large is a fixing the person in the Catholic Church, so in
order to his being joined more immediately to a branch of the Catholic Church,
the same form of Baptism which this particular one uses, is required. The like
is to be said of the Lords Supper, it is not only a sign of our Communion with
Christ, but of our Communion with the whole true Church upon Earth, where the
necessaries of administration are observed; and when we practice in this the
same allowable differences, we manifest as by the necessaries that we are of
the universal, so by these allowable differences that we are more immediately
of this or that particular Church, and that (in the phrase of St. Paul,) we
being many are one.

The third instance of diligence is a subordinate watching over the People. I
call it a subordinate watching, because watching implies a care joined with
authority, and neither of them originally in the Presbyter, but the care
assigned, and the authority permitted by the superior order. The primitive
Church called Presbyters, which in our English abridgment of the word is
Priests, (...)
the sacred Officers of the second Throne. These St. Ignatius tells us Eusebius.
hist. l. 10. c. 5.
, might do nothing without the Bishop; but on the other hand, it needs not now
move any doubt what St. Cyprian writes Ignat. Ep. ad trall.
, that he did nothing without his Presbyters. No more do our Bishops, when they
only execute those Canons made by our Provincial Councils, of which the
Presbyters are a part. The care over the people is exercised in private and
personal reproving, comforting, instructing, reconciling, and the rest as they
become necessary; and since the ill times make it highly so, in warning them to
beware of separation from the Church; of this the Apostles and their Successors
took the greatest care that the people should not severally entertain opposite
Teachers, nor forget the assembling of themselves together, and they reckoned
to them Schism equal to the most scandalous and destructive sins. To this
matter St. Barnabas speaks thus Epist. Cathol.
, ye ought not to draw your selves apart, as if ye were justified, for the
Scripture says (quotiog Isa. 5. 22.) woe unto them that are wise in their own
eyes, and prudent in their own sight. The same disswasive is the main design of
St. Clemens's Epistles, and of almost all of St. Ignatius, but most largely the
empty pleas for separation are confuted by St. Cyprian l. 3 Epist. 3.
. and the aggravation and future punishment thereof is displayed by St.
Iraeneus l. 4. c. 62.
. We must likewise warn an indifferent sort of people, that come both to our
public Assemblies and to those set up through a dislike taken causlesly
against our Church; it is no light matter left at discretion to join either to
one or other; we never find that the right Christians went to the Assemblies of
the Montanists, though Tertullion, who too well knew them, vouches that they
were orthodox in Doctrine Non aliquam fidei aut spei regulum evertunt Tertul.
advers. Phychicos.
, only differing in some points of Discipline. We can no more belong both to
the Church and adverse Meeting, than we can serve two Masters; to this purpose
there is an old Canon Canon Apostol. 63. Council.
that by the sixth General Council is reckoned Apostolic Constantinopels 4.
Can. 2.
, that he that prays with them in the Conventicles set up against the Church,
shall be deprived of the Churches Communion.

The fourth and last advice of St. Paul, is to have a conversation suitable to
the Ministerial Office. We must have a conversation which becomes the Gospel
which we preach. St. Paul requires, that we follow after righteousness,
godliness, faith, love, patience, meekness, 1 Timothy 6. 11. and the like advice,
2 Ep. 2. 22. and to Titus, 2. 7. that in all things he show himself a pattern
of good works; when he says a pattern, he means not any thing in our
conversation, wherein no one is bound to imitate us, but in every Moral duty,
as belonging to all men, a Minister is bound to be first, and most remarkable.
As we are to be patterns to others, so we must take those that have gone before
for ours. It was said by our Savior of the Baptist, that he was a burning and
a shining light; the common gloss should teach us, he burned in his zeal, and
shined in his example; it is not only he that Teaches, but who likewise does
that shall be called Great in the Kingdom of Heaven. It is a commendation given
of Origin, that his doctrine and his manners did agree; and of Nazianzen, that
he never gave in charge to his Scholars any thing which he had not first
practiced upon himself. It is certain that all men are drawn more readily by
examples than by fine sayings; and are like Soldiers, who more cheerfully
follow their Commander than his bare Commands. A good life makes a Preacher not
only better heard, but to understand better; if any man will do the will of
God, he shall know of his doctrine, for the secrets of the Lord are with those
that fear him; and the Schechinah (say the Jews) was not afforded but to the
best of men. Real goodness gives a sense and taste upon our minds of what we
recommend to others; and the good counsel we give, being wrought and pointed in
our Hearts, pierces further into our Hearers. By our living soberly,
righteously, and godlily, men will be assured that when we persuade them to the
same duties we are in good earnest, and that we do not merely preach these
things, as customary and expected, or as pretty clean speculation, but as our
and their Duty, as a practical truth, and as such which is not only required
but possible; by this means we shall gain both an esteem and success to our
Ministry, when our actions do not shame our speech, when our Hearers cannot
whisper, why Does he not what he Says? To conclude now with the exhortation of
St. Peter applied to our purpose, Let us have our conversation honest amongst
men, that when they speak against us as evil doers, they may by our good works,
which they shall behold, glorify God. To whom, the Father, Son, and the Holy
Ghost, three Persons, and one God, be all Honor given for ever more.

The End.
ERRATA.
Page 10. line 24. r. 1 Ep. page 11. l. 7. r. Karraei. page 12. l. 27. dele in.

A Catalogue of some Books and Sermons Printed for, and sold by H. Brom, since
the dreadful Fire of London, to 1678.
COmber on the Common Prayer; in two Volumes, octavo.

Dean W. Lloyd's Sermon before the King about Miracles.

-- His Sermon at the Funeral of John Lord Bishop of Chester. 6 d.

-- His Sermon before the King in Lent, 1673. 6 d.

The Seasonable Discourse against Popery, in quarto. 6 d.

-- The Defense of it, quart. 6 d.

-- The difference betwixt the Church and Court of Rome, quarto. 6 d.

The Papists Apology to the Parliament answered. 6 d.

Mr. Naylors Commemoration Sermon for Colonel Cavendish. 6 d.

Mr. Sayer's Sermon at the Assizes at Reading. 6 d.

Papal Tyranny, as it was exercised over England for some Ages; with two
Sermons on the fifth of No. by D. Du Moulin, quar. 1s. 6 d.

-- His Sermon at the Funeral of Dr. Turner, Dean of Canterbury. 6 d.

Bishop Laney's last Sermon before the King.

The Reformed Monastery, or Love of Jesus.

The History of the Charterhouse, with the Life and last Will of Thomas Sutton,
Esquire

Mr. Pindar's Sermon before the Lord Mayor.

Considerations touching the true way to Suppress Popery in England, with an
Historical Account of the Reformation here in England.


