THE Souls Worth and Danger, OR A DISCOURSE Exciting and directing to the Due
Care of its Eternal Salvation; UPON THE WORDS OF OUR BLESSED SAVIOR:

St Mat. 16. 26. What is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole World and
lose his own Soul? Or what shall a man give in exchange for his Soul?

CAMBRIDGE. Printed for the Author. 1677.

THE Souls Worth and Danger.
St Mat. 16. 26. What is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world and
lose his own Soul? Or what shall a man give in exchange for his Soul?
OUr Savior v. 24. tells the Apostle Peter, and all other his faithful
disciples; that rather then deny him, they must deny themselves for his sake;
and that so far as should be needful, they must take up their Cross, and follow
him. In all which they must not be hindered, 1. with the loss of life, for, says
he, v. 25. the words before the Text, Whosoever will save his life shall lose
it, etc. nor 2. should they be hindered with the loss of reputation, for, says
he, v. 27. the words immediately following the text, The Son of man shall come
in the glory of his Father, and reward every man according to his works; and
then there shall be a resurrection of their names, as well as of their persons.
Nor 3. should the loss of the world hinder them, for says he in the words of
the text it self, What is a man profited though he should gain the whole world,
and lose his own Soul? The question is put so as to include a strong denial:
What is a man profited? That is, he is not profited at all. And again, what
shall a man give in exchange for his Soul? that is, there is nothing that he
can give in exchange for it. And therefore our Savior is to be understood, as
if he had said, They that will disobey me, may it is true be gainers in the
world for a while, but if they should be gainers of the whole world, their
gains would not be so great as their loss, the incomparable, invaluable,
irrecoverable loss of their precious Souls Job 27. 8. What is the hope of the
Hypocrite, though he has gained: (though he has gained never so much) when
God takes away his Soul? For as it is Psalm. 49. 6, 8, 17. He that trusted and
boasted in his wealth here, when he dies, he shall carry nothing away, his
glory shall not descend after him. Or if it might, it would not buy his pardon,
or be a sufficient ransom to God. For the redemption of the Soul is precious,
and (therefore thus) cease for ever.

Whence we may observe, as the subject of the following discourse, That each
ones Soul is to them, more worth then the World. Or, that they will be
exceeding great losers that lose their own Souls, though it should be by the
gaining of the whole World. And this may be made out, by considering first,
what it is to gain the World; and the worhtlesness thereof though gained; and
next, by showing what it is to lose the Soul; and the preciousness of that if
lost.

First therefore as to the gaining of the world, we are to remember that

1. By the world, as St John 1. 10. is sometimes meant, the whole visible
fabric of the heavens we breath in, and the earth we tread upon; and thus the
Text must be understood only by way of supposition; for otherwise neither
Ahasuerus, nor Alexander, nor any the greatest Conqueror ever gained so much,
as to become absolute Master of the whole earthly Globe.

2. By the world may sometimes, as St John. 15. 19. be meant the wicked of the
world. And so, but too many think they have gained what they most desire, if
they may but enjoy the frequent Society of the most lewd and wicked people;
concerning whom says Saint Hieron: Discamus Sanctam superbiam, and sciamus nos
esse illis meliores. As if he should have said, Let us Christians learn an holy
pride, and (as it may be without any Pharisee-like boasting) let us know our
selves too good for the Company of such infectious lepers of the world.

3. By the world may here be Chiefly meant the things of the world, worldly
profits, honors, and pleasures; As 1 John. 2. 16. The lusts of the flesh, the
lusts of the eyes, the pride of life.

And so with some to gain the world, is by men-pleasing or time serving, by
flatteries or briberies to get honors and preferment in the world. Not a few
being willing to give away the world in this sense, to gain it in another.

Again with others, to gain the world, is by immodest apparelling, or enticing
behavior, or by the frequent use of unseasonable and immoderate recreation, or
by luxurious and riotous living to get the sinful sensual pleasures of the
world.

And further with the most, to gain the world, is to get the wealth and profits
thereof, by covetousness, or by oppression and extortion, or by fraudulent
unrighteous dealing, or by abusing a lawful calling; or using that which is
unlawful, so as to live much upon the sins of others, in furthering their
pride, or idleness, or prodigality, or quarrelsomness, or wanton lewdness, or
beastly drunkenness or the like.

In a word, to gain the world in this sense, is by any undue means to get
whatsoever in the world the heart of carnal wretches can most desire, and which
is as a world to them. Between whom and sincere Christians there is always this
vast difference; Good and faithful Christians seek the favor and fruition of
God in Christ, and their own Souls salvation, as their main end; and in order
thereunto, make religion their business; and all worldly things, even which may
be innocently used, with them come in but on the by; so as, if it shall seem
good to God, they can either have them, or be without them. Whereas to carnal
people that lose their Souls in the pursuit of the world, their main end is,
the pleasing of the flesh thereby some way or other, which their sex, age,
education, constitution of body, or condition of life most tempts and leads
them to. And with them, Religion, that comes in but on the by; and if they need
it not for a pretense, they can most easily be without it.

Yet after all, when such people have, with the contempt of Gods service, the
wounding of their consciences, and the abuse of their precious Souls, gotten
the most they can of the world; at the last they are forced by their own sad
Experience to confess the vanity and worthlesness of it.

It Is true these outward worldly things, as they proceed from God, and may lead
to him; as they may fit men for great offices, and noble employments; as they
may be used for our own and others welfare, and as they are a means to sustain
us in this life, while we are seeking after eternal life, so they are the good
blessings of God, which we may labor after, and ought to be thankful for. But
as they are abstracted from God, and inordinately loved, sought, and trusted
in, so they have this five-fold vanity, which is but too easily discovered in
them, namely, their unsatisfactoriness, their commoness, their deceitfulness,
their unsuitableness, and unprofitableness.

1. That which speaks the little worth, but great vanity of worldly things, is
their unsatisfactoriness. Ahab had the possession of a wealthy Kingdom, and
yet for want of Naboths vineyard only, how was he heart-sick, so as to take no
content in all his other enjoyments? 1 Kings 21. 4. In like manner, to what a
wonderful height of dignity and earthly happiness was Human advanced, and yet
how did so inconsiderable a thing, as the want of poor Mordecaie's knee, damp
all the delights of his proud heart? Esther 5. 11, 12, 13.

Knock at the door of the Choicest earthly possessions, and they will tell you
one by one, sufficiency is not in me. The creature if parted from God, is
empty, and the Soul too; and what fullness can be had by adding one emptiness to
another? Many a poor man has thought; if I had but enough to supply such
necessaries, and discharge such debts, how cheerfully would I serve the Lord
without distraction, and not care so much for the world any more? But when
these desires have been granted, they have found themselves still unsatisfied;
being ready now to thirst as much after fullness, as before after necessaries.

It is God only who is All-sufficient, both as to his own happiness, and our
satisfaction, Genesis 17. 1. It is Christ the uncreated Wisdom, Prove. 8. 21. Who
fills the treasures of those that love him, and causes them to inherit
substance. And if he do not make God ours, as well as the creature, our
condition will be but like theirs mentioned Haggai 1. 6. Ye have sown much, and
bring in little: Ye eat, but ye have not enough: Ye drink, but ye are not
filled with drink: ye clothe you, but there is none warm: and he that earneth
wages, earneth wages to put it into a bag with holes. Solomon that was so rich
to compass all worldly accommodations, and so wise to find out what was best in
them to be enjoyed; after a full experience, tells us, that if they lead not to
God, they will be but vanity and vexation of Spirit.

2. How does the Commonness of these worldly things abate the value of them?
Eccl. 9. 1, 2. They come alike to all, and none can certainly know by them
either love or hatred; whether they be the friends or enemies of God. You
cannot say, God gives me poverty, therefore he hates me; or he gives me riches,
therefore he loves me; such conclusions are weak and deceitful. For the good
may be afflicted as well as the bad, and sometimes undergo the heaviest burden
of earthly trouble. Luke 16. 15. And on the other hand, the wicked may flourish
for a while as well as the righteous, and sometimes enjoy the greatest measure
of worldly prosperity. Psalm. 17. 13, 14.

Renewing grace is a certain sign of Gods favor, and a special distinguishing
mercy, and therefore highly to be esteemed, and earnestly sought after; but
outward comforts, common natural gifts, and acquired abilities, as a fair
estate, an healthful body, a faithful memory, a quick understanding, a ready
utterance, or the like; these, though blessings in themselves, yet are but
blessings of the left hand, such as are given to the heathen Idolater, as well
as to the Christian Worshipper, to the clean and unclean, to him that
sacrifices and him that sacrifices not. And therefore this their commonness
shows much of their vanity and worthlesness.

3. How is there in worldly things a vanity of deceitfulness which also speaks
them less valuable? How many people come to the world as to a lottery, looking
for a prize, but go away cheated with a blank? How often does the world by
promising much, and performing little, first abuse our Judgments, and then
frustrate our hopes and expectations?

Have you not sometimes found creature-confidences, like the trusting in the
Staff of a brokenreed, whereon if a man lean, it will go into his hand and
pierce it? Isa. 36. 6. Have you not sometimes enjoyed the pleasures of sin for
a season, and flattered your self with the long continuance of them? Whereas
that season is gone, and never returns again. Can you not remember what
happiness you may have promised your self in such a friend, such a purchase,
such a preferment, but some unexpected disappointment or other, some Cross or
other, has much imbittered them unto you, and lessened your comfort in their
enjoyment?

The mutability of the world is the great deceit of it; which that we may
avoid, let us duly consider what the Apostle has written, 1 Timothy 6. 6, 7, 8,
9, 10, 17, 18, 19. And again 1 Cor. 7. 29, 30, 31. Oh let us not suffer our
selves to be imposed upon, counting that to continue long, which he, according
to the experience of all, tells us shall abide but a short while and then pass
away.

Oh let us not think with them Isa. 56. 12. what carnal delights we will have
this day, and to morrow much more abundant. Oh let us not say with him St Luke
12. 19, 20. Soul take thine ease, eat drink, be merry, thou have much goods
laid up for many years. Least we be awakened with that terrible voice of God,
saying, as unto him; Thou fool this night thy Soul shall be required of thee;
then whose shall those things be which thou have provided?

Why should we inordinately set our hearts and affections on that which is not?
for as Prove. 23. 5. Riches (honors, pleasures) make themselves wings and fly
away. When we think our selves most sure of them, when we trust most in them,
when by the abuse of them, we are become most proud, stomackful, secure and
negligent of Gods service, then are we most sadly deceived, then the wing of
prodigality, of oppression, of casualty sweeps them from us; or else the wing
of death carries us away from them in a moment.

But suppose the world to perform more then it promises, and that we could be
sure of it for a very considerable while; yet have we not immortal Souls to
provide for? Have we not matters of life or death to look after? And what can
all the world be to this? Oh therefore how nearly does it concern us to lay up
in store for our selves a sure foundation for the time to come; to anchor our
Souls upon Christ the rock of ages who will never deceive us; and not to hazard
them for any thing, in this worthless, because deceitful and changeable, world.

4. That which further shows the worthlesness of the things of the world, is
their vanity of unsutableness in respect of the precious Soul. Those are
corporeal and fading, this is spiritual and immortal. Those are limited and
finite beings, this a substance of unbounded desires, and can be fully
satisfied with nothing but communion with the Father, and the Son through the
Spirit; with nothing but a state of grace and salvation, and the fruition of
God.

All that worth which silver and gold, and such worldly things have, is not so
much in their own nature, as from our esteem, or from some outward humane
appointment; but we can never thus make them equally excellent with our selves.

It Is true, by a wilful slavery to sin, we may (as the Prophet speaks, Jerem.
6. 30.) turn our selves into brass, and iron, and reprobate silver; we may
unman and unchristian our selves; we may undervalue and debase our Souls,
blotting out the image of God, and writing upon them the superscription of
earth and the world; Thus indeed, the Epicure may greatly delight in sensual
pleasures, and the ambitious mind in flattering titles, and the frothy wit in
abusive lightness; Thus, it is true, carnal and worldly things, to carnal, and
worldly hearts may become but too suitable, dear, and precious. But the desires
of a gracious heart are after higher and better things. For every faithful
Christian considers that God has made even our bodies upright, and our faces
lifted from the earth; that we might conceive how far from it, our heaven-born
Spirits should be elevated toward himself, and Christ, and heavenly Glory,
which are therefore most excellent, because most proportionable and suitable to
our Souls, in their utmost capacities.

5. And lastly, the worthlesness of the world appears by its unprofitableness.
As Samuel said to the people, 1 Samuel 12. 20, 21. Turn ye not aside from serving
and following the Lord; for then should ye go after vain things, which cannot
profit, because they are vain. Too many indeed are ready to think the profits
of the world worth their gaining, even by the loss of their consciences, of
heaven, and God himself. And as for those who make conscience of their ways,
and endeavor to walk circumspectly, closely, and humbly with God; who
scrupulously forbear profane rash oaths and idle discourse, who are sensible
of the least secret sin, who avoid what they can all occasions and appearances
of evil, who withstand the corruptions of the times and places they live in,
though they gain less in the world; these are often accounted, such as know not
what is best for themselves. But St Paul assures us, that such Godliness with
contentment is the truest gain; whereas the world, when you have spent all your
thoughts, and the labor of your lives upon it; though it may further you in
some lesser respects, yet it cannot profit you in the main thing necessary.

It cannot procure us the favor of God, who regards not the rich man more
then the poor, for they are all alike the work of his hands. He accounts of
all, not according to their meanness, or greatness, but according to their real
piety and goodness; Prove. 19. 1. Better is the poor that walks in his
integrity, then he that is perverse in his lips, and is a fool. Prove. 28. 6.
Better is the poor that walks in his uprightness, then he that is perverse in
his ways, though he be rich. Observe, They are the poor that walk in their
integrity, that know, love, and serve God; not that kind of poor who are
grossly ignorant and neglectful of God, and who lead sensual, sloathful, and
heathenish lives; though they above others, might be most easily convinced of
the emptiness and unprofitableness of the world, and so have greater care of
their Souls salvation, seeking out after God in Christ to supply their
Spiritual necessities, that it may be better with them in the life to come.

Again, the world cannot ease the pain of an afflicted conscience; nor can it
give us the grace we want. Ordinarily it is so abused, that it makes people not
more thankful, but more forgetful of God; nor does it (as it ought) draw their
hearts nearer to God, but sets them at a further distance from him; nor does it
make them more humble, but more haughty; nor more constant and sincere in
duties, but more unfit for any good word or work.

Nor can the world profit us in the day of wrath. When the sinful pleasures of
youth are ended by sickness, age, or death, what can be left, but the worm of
conscience bred out of them to torment the Soul for ever?

Have you not sometimes considered with your self, how soon the world and its
pleasures will turn you off? How can you but now and then take notice of your
own frailties which tell you, how certainly and shortly you must lie down in
the dust? Do you not sometimes go to the house of mourning, or stand by dying
people, confessing the world to be nothing worth, and complaining of the loss
of their time and strength spent upon it? And do you not see how little it does
for them in their greatest need? Oh therefore let this prevail with us to prize
our Souls above the world; let this (with what has been considered in the
foregoing particulars) make us set as light by it, as it does, or will do by
us. Let us henceforth make Christ our treasure, and count it our happiness to
honor and worship him as we ought to do. Let us make God our portion, and sit
down content with him alone, and let them who can get no better, take the world
and the pleasures of it.

Having now seen, what it is to gain the world, and the worthlesness thereof
though gained, we are in the next place to consider, what it is to lose the
Soul, and the preciousness of that if lost.

As to the losing of the Soul, the word (...) here rendered, to lose, signifies
to have a mulct or punishment inflicted, and so may import, not only the fatal
final loss or damnation of the Soul, but also any loss or damage that belongs
to it, here or hereafter.

1. Therefore to lose the Soul is to lose ones self. A man's Soul is the
principal part of himself, and so it is in St Luke chapter 9. 25. What is a man
advantaged, if he gain the whole world, and lose himself (Soul and body too)
and be cast away.

2. To lose the Soul implies a being deprived of all further opportunities and
seasons of grace, of all virtuous and gracious endowments, which are as the
life of the Soul. When Christ calls by death or Judgment; they that like the
foolish virgins, have not oil in their lamps, and their lamps trimmed, that
have not their Souls adorned with the saving graces of his Spirit; they shall
not enter with him. Having waited so long already, and all in vain, he will now
stay no longer, till they go and buy for themselves, but will shut the door of
mercy against them for ever.

3. The losing of the Soul implies the loss of all such earthly enjoyments, as
sensual hearts love and prize above their Souls, and for which they undo
themselves for ever. Oh who can express the wretchedness of such people, when
they shall stand before the Judgment seat of God, to receive their just doom,
in the most forlorn and desolate condition, stripped and forsaken of all carnal
comforts, friends, possessions, and outward accommodations whatsoever; which to
the hazard of their Souls, they have grasped at, and used in a sinful way; and
therefore must now lose both the Soul and them too eternally.

4. The losing of the Soul implies the losing of Christ, and Heaven, and the
blessed Vision of God for ever. And this indeed is the loss of losses, such as
there was never the like before, nor ever can be again after it. The
forementioned might be born, but hardly; but this is intolerable. This worst
effect of sin, Depart from me, or go away from me, is as terrible a word, as
everlasting fire. For alas! Whither shall they go, that go from God, when he
alone has the power of eternal life. Ten thousand words cannot speak a Soul
more unhappy, then those two words, without God, Ephesians. 2. 12. Thou may be
without riches, without friends, without health, without liberty, nay, without
all outward blessings, and yet be blessed; but if without God, thou art cursed
with a curse.

The hypocrites hell which is the hottest of all other, is set out by this, Job
13. 16. The hypocrite shall not come before God. When God would most powerfully
persuade to duty, this is his motive, Jerem. 7. 27. Obey my voice, and I will
be your God. When he would most effectually dissuade from sin, this is his
argument, Jerem. 6. 8. Be instructed, O Jerusalem, least my Soul depart from
you. And again Hos. 9. 12. Woe unto them, when I depart from them. How sad a
saying is that of Saul's, 1 Samuel 18. 15. I am sore distressed, for the
Philistines are upon me, and God is departed from me.

How mournfully does Micah bemoan the loss even of his helpless idols, Judges
18. 24. Ye have taken away my Gods, and what have I more, and what is this ye
say unto me, what aileth thee? How sadly is holy David and our Blessed Savior
afflicted at Gods absence in part, and for a while? My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? says the one. Lord (says the other Psalm. 88. 14, 15.) why
castest thou off my Soul? Why hidest thou thy face from me? I am afflicted and
ready to dye, while I suffer thy terrors, I am distracted. Do these so
complain of Gods absence in part, and for a while? how bitterly then will the
lost Soul complain when forsaken of God utterly and eternally!

Some are ready to say to God, as Job 21. 24. Depart from us, for we desire not
the knowledge of thy ways. They think him sometimes too near them in a Sermon,
in a private instruction, in a motion of his Spirit, or in a conviction of
conscience; and could wish him, with his holy Laws farther off, that they might
sin more securely; but let such beware, least he take them at their word, and
give them their wish to their woe, in banishing them everlastingly from his
comfortable presence. Oh with what tormenting grief will they then behold those
Soul-ravishing delights, which the righteous have in the presence of God, the
fountain of all good; whilst they are sentenced to an eternal separation from
him! How sad and deformed a spectacle is the body from which the Soul is
parted; oh how sad then shall the condition of that Soul be from which God is
parted for ever? This though very grievous, yet is not all, for 5. and lastly,
the losing of the Soul implies further its being brought to the highest degree
of sin, and consequently to such a fullness of sorrow, and such a weight of Gods
burning eternal wrath, as no heart can conceive, or tongue express. They that
would choose sin, to save themselves from a little trouble or affliction, will
find, that now what they feared, and ten thousand times more is come upon them.

The wicked could now wish their Souls were so lost as to cease to be, that
they might cease to be tormented; but God by his infinite power will both
uphold them in their being, and make them more sensible of pain then ever, that
they may be the subjects of greater punishment.

And now the Conscience of a lost Soul gnaws to think, so many nights I went to
bed prayerless; so many times I swallowed down unlawful gain; so many hours I
spent in revelling, foolish sporting, or idle unprofitable talking; so many
opportunities of receiving good at the Lord's Supper and other ordinances, I
have lost, because I would not prepare for them, nor so much as defile my foot,
or endure a little cold or trouble, to be present at them. Oh that I had been
more diligent in the practice of religion and holiness; oh that I had kept the
Lord's Day better, and been more innocent in my walking all the week after,
though a less gainer in the world; Oh that I had never known such or such a
sin, which I loved, lived in, plotted and contrived, and by which I have now
wrought my own eternal ruin; Oh that I had spent but half my misspent time in
praying, and studying Gods Word, in doing good, and watching over my ways, then
had I been yonder in Heaven, but now I must be for ever tormented in these
flames.

Thou may now so under value thy Soul, as to spend much more time upon thy
beasts then upon it; though Truth it self tells us in the Text, that it is more
worth then a world. But that which is now despised, in hell will be esteemed;
and the damned shall fully know the price of this Pearl, whether they will or
no. But it is far better to know and believe it now, that we may be more
careful of its preservation.

Consider therefore, I beseech you, in the next place, the preciousness of the
Soul in these several respects. 1. As to God our maker, for did not he at first
make it in innocence, after his own glorious image in knowledge, righteousness,
and holiness, Genesis 1. 26. Ephesians. 4. 14. Col. 3. 10. And ever since, how is it the
body of the Child only, the frailer and viler part, which is from the substance
of the Parents? (as it was at first formed of the dust of the ground Genesis 2.
7.) whereas the precious Soul, which is of a Spiritual nature, and shall never
die, has its immediate being and original from God the Father of Spirits, Heb.
12. 9. Infundendo creatur, and creando infunditur.

How is it God only, from whom it is, who can effectually command the Soul to
subjection? (while the Magistrate can but force the outward man) And God only
who can punish it? (while man can but kill the body, St Mat. 10. 28.)

Still even under the state of corruption, how is it the Candle of the Lord,
and the masterpiece of his creation, showing the dignity of its nature by its
various and noble operations? He that by these knows not what the Soul is,
knows not what a man is. For what is it but the Soul which thus distinguishes
us from brute beasts? What is it but the Soul, by which you are thinking,
reading, or asking, what a Soul is? What is it but the Soul which is the
fountain of precious life, and therefore much more precious in it self? Prove.
6. 26. The adulteress will hunt for the precious life. The words are (...) the
precious Soul.

What is the Soul but the rational nature containing the sensitive and
vegetative; The Principle or first Act by which we move, perceive, understand
and freely will? And how do these acts speak the excellency of the Powers from
whence they flow! and how do those Powers show the worth of the Soul it self?

2. Consider its Excellency in relation to Christ our Redeemer. What can more
clearly demonstrate the preciousness of it, then the greatness of that price
which he paid for it? Being willing to lay down his life to deliver the Soul
from eternal misery. 1 St Pet. 1. 18, 19. The Apostle says we are not redeemed
with gold or silver, or any such corruptible things; but with the precious
blood of Jesus Christ.

The more noble the person taken captive, the larger is the sum required for
his ransom. Our Savior in all likelihood would not have done what he did, to
keep the whole frame of heaven and earth from being dissolved; but to save
those precious immortal Souls from perishing, which were capable of enjoying so
much good from God, and bringing so much glory to him; he was ready, to take
our nature, to suffer his Fathers wrath, to live a painful life, and dye an
accursed death, by all which we may read in most fair and large Characters the
worth of the Soul.

3. Consider its excellency in relation to the Holy Ghost our Sanctifier. Oh
how precious must that needs be, which is cleansed, quickened, and beautified
with precious faith, as it is called, 2 Pet. 1. 1. And so we may say with
precious hope and charity, with precious wisdom, meekness, temperance,
patience. Oh the Excellent supernatural operations of such a Soul! The mind is
busy to know God in Christ, and to understand his will revealed in his word.
The memory thinks of him, the conscience stands in awe of him, the Will
chooses and embraces him, the heart trusts in him and is set upon him; The
affections are taken up in loving him, rejoicing in him, fearing to offend him,
desiring to please and enjoy him. These are the truly noble, and worthy
employments of the Soul as redeemed and sanctified, and renewed after the image
of God.

4. Consider further its excellency with relation to the heavenly Angels. For
why should they attend us as ministering spirits, if our Spirits were not of an
excellent angelical nature, and fit to minister unto God?

Nay 5. may not the fallen accursed angels, and Satan himself tell us the worth
of a Soul, by his being so much the enemy of its Salvation, when he compasses
the earth, Job 1. 7. and goes about night and day to devour and deceive them,
1 Pet. 5. 8.

6. Why should God, if it were not for our precious immortal Souls, give us the
Scriptures, and an excellent religion to show us the way to happiness? Or why
should he in the Scriptures dignifie us with such honorable titles, as to be
called his Friends, his Children, to be called the spouse, and the members of
Christ?

7. Why too should Ministers be appointed by him, to preach, and pray, and
labor for us, if we had not such precious Souls to save or lose? Hebr. 13. 17.
Obey them that have the rule over you, for they watch for your Souls. Why
should they preach in season and out of season, and be so reviled, and suffer
so much to perform their work, but that they know That he that wins Souls is
wise, Prove. 11. 30. And that he which converteth a sinner from the error of
his ways, shall save a Soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins.

8. Moreover, why should such store of other mercies be provided for us? Why
should a world of creatures (whose corporeal substance seems as excellent as
ours) attend and serve us, if we were but an ingenious sort of brutes, and had
not reasonable immortal Souls more worth then the world? Other Creatures are
made for man, and man for God, to glorify him by them, and for them.

And surely they have a right estimate of the Souls worth, who measure by it
the worth of all worldly things; who reckon of their in-comes, their friends,
estates, preferments according as they help or hinder them in the service of
God; counting them more or less excellent, as they are more or less subservient
to his honor, and their own or others Souls everlasting happiness.

9. Consider the precious Soul in its tendency, which is to an eternal
enjoyment of God, an infinite good; and that, as fully as humane nature is
capable of, and that in a state of absolute perfection. Intellectus quaerit
Deum. The Soul reaches after God, and this speaks its excellency that he alone
can satisfy it. O Lord (says St Augustine) thou have made us for thy self, and
our heart is unquiet till it comes unto thy self.

Here, O Christian, thy weaknesses are thy grief, and thy afflictions or
meanness may render thee despicable in the eyes of the world, but being
sincerely converted, thy Soul is in a tendency to that happiness, where it
shall be enlarged, and perfected to partake the more of God. Where its best
faculties shall be united to the best object, in the best and fullest manner to
eternal ages. If sincerely converted to God, thy Soul is in a tendency to that
illustrious heavenly glory, which is only suitable to it, and which will render
far more precious and illustrious, both it, and thy body too, after the
resurrection.

10. Hence we add one consideration more of the Souls excellency, and that is,
in respect of the body here. David speaking of the body, Psa. 139. 14, 15. O
Lord (says he) I will praise thee, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made;
mavelous are thy works, and that my Soul knows right well. My substance was
not hid from thee, when I was made in secret; and curiously wrought (or
imbroydered) in the lowest parts of the earth. Galen more atheistical before,
when he came to see the anatomy of man's body, and considered the excellent
frame thereof, Now (says he) I adore the God of nature.

Yet we know the body is but the case or instrument of the Soul, which so far
exceeds it, that in many things, with God, the willingness and pure intention
of the mind is chiefly looked at, without which bodily exercise profits
little. Though a man give his body to be burnt, if there be wanting the charity
of the Soul, it avails nothing, 1 Cor. 13. 3.

Nay there are several actions of the Soul which are beyond that which concerns
the body at all; as the knowing of God, and the life to come, and many notions
in mathematics and other sciences which are abstracted from bodily substances.

In adversity, there may be solid joys in the mind; as there may be real
torments upon a man's spirit, which the Primitive Christians and Martyrs being
freed from, made little reckoning of their outward sufferings, but endured them
(as Sozomen says) as if their bodies had been other folks, and not their own.
In prosperity too there may be a power in man's Soul to curb the body in that
which is most suitable and pleasing, which a beast cannot do. 1 Cor. 9. 27. I
keep under my body and bring it into subjection, St Mat. 18. 8, 9. Prove. 23. 1,
2. When thou sit to eat with a ruler, consider diligently what is before
thee. And put a knife to thy throat, if thou be a man given to appetite.

Again, when the body faints with age or sickness, the Soul may have strong
desires after God and eternity. And when the body returns to the dust, the
immortal spirit goes to him that gave it to be judged to weal or woe. I desire
(says the Apostle) to be dissolved, and be with Christ. Father (says our
Savior) into thy hands I commend my spirit, St Luke 23. 43. and 46. to the
penitent thief, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise.

The body, you see then, though curiously wrought or imbroydered, is but the
cabinet of a more precious Soul, which as was said, is chiefly the man. Oh
therefore let us not live as if we were all of a piece, and the body was the
man; as if that only was to be adorned, pampered, and provided for. God having
given us Souls capable of all those excellencies which he is pleased to impart
to the best of his Creatures, let us count them richly worth the care and
labor of an holy Christian life. Far be it from us, to be willing of so much
pains for the world, and to call farless for the Soul too much ado. Far be it
from us, to think our precious Souls, no more worth then honor, wealth, or
foolish mirth. Oh, far be it from us, to count them so worthless, as to be
abused to the basest drudgery, to be poisoned with sin and sensuality, or to be
ventured for a thing of naught.

But thus you have seen, both what it is to gain the world, and what to lose
the Soul; as also the worthlesness of the one though gained, and the
preciousness of the other if lost; which if you compare, and duly consider;
you will acknowledge, as our Savior here has taught us, That each ones Soul
is of such worth and excellency, that they must needs be exceeding great losers
who lose their Souls, though it could be by the gaining of the whole world. As
for the more full and particular improvement of this weighty truth, which so
nearly concerns every one of us, you may take it in the following inferences.

Use 1. Is the Soul of any man or woman whatsoever more worth then a world.
Hence then, O Christian, learn to entertain right thoughts concerning the
dignity of thy nature, and let this 1. make thee hate to dishonor thy self, by
thinking, speaking, or doing any thing unworthy of a rational Soul, much more
of a Christian. Let this make thee afraid to live and dye so vilely, as at last
with the wicked to wish thou had been made a toad or serpent, or that thou
had never been born.

2. Rather let this consideration make thee careful to live holily to Gods
glory; and so to praise him for thy Soul, made capable of so excellent a work,
as to love, serve, and honor him here; and of so glorious a reward, as to
enjoy him hereafter.

3. Let the same consideration move thee to praise God also for Christ, the
Lover of Souls, who has done and suffered so much for their eternal welfare;
and in him, to praise the Lord, especially for all other Soul mercies and
advantages. Though he should be pleased to keep thee short of other things, say
with a thankful heart, as Ephesians. 1. 3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly
places in Christ. Gaius had a Sickly body, but was happy in the prosperous
state of his Soul. Beloved (says St John Epistle 3. v. 2.) I wish that thou
may prosper, and be in health, even as thy Soul prospers.

4. Let this dignity of thy humane nature help thee to see the dignity of thy
holy religion. And remember, though every thing else be mean about thee, yet
thy sincere religiousness relating to the precious Soul, is no mean, but an
excellent thing; which as Solomon says, makes the righteous more excellent then
his neighbor.

5. Let this further make thee to carry they self always humbly and
courteously toward the meanest people thou can meet with; considering, that
though thou may differ from them in some outward respects, yet they have
Souls, which in their own nature, are as precious as thine own.

Use 2. Is the Soul more worth then a world? and shall they be such exceeding
great losers that lose their Souls, though by the gaining of the whole world?
See then a great help Christians have to beat back Satan's temptations, when
tempted to evil, as Eve and our Savior, by any thing in the world. Should a
Chapman bid thee for any part of thy goods, not so many pence as they are worth
pounds; would thou not turn away with scorn from one that offered thee so
much to thy loss? Or if but for thy life, thou could have an earthly crown,
or the whole world laid in thy hand; would thou not utterly refuse it,
knowing it could do thee no good at all when thy life was gone? Will thou then
exchange thy so precious Soul to its eternal undoing, when offered for it but a
morsel of base gain, or a cup of stolen pleasure which will vanish in a moment?
Therefore

1. When about to lie, dissemble, curse or swear blasphemously, if the next
abuse of thy tongue would cost thee the certain loss of that unruly member,
would not self-love make thee refrain from such evil? and will thou not do so
much more for the love of God, and to prevent the loss of thy precious Soul.
Take not his name, who made thy mouth, in vain:
It gets thee nothing, and has no excuse:
Lust and wine plead a pleasure, avarice gain:
But the Cheap swearer through his open sluice
Lets his Soul run for naught, as little fearing:
Were I an Epicure; I could bate swearing.


Again 2. when tempted to drink more then will do thee good, if one should
assure thee that the next needless cup was mixed with deadly poison, thou
would certainly refuse it; counting thy life more precious then to be so
vilely cast away; should thou not then much rather, resolutely and constantly
avoid such beastly drunkenness; as manifestly endangers the life and happiness
of thy far more precious Soul?

3. So when tempted next to Alehouse gaming and stage plays, in hopes of a
little sordid gain or pleasures; may thou not remember how deeply thou make
thy own and others Souls guilty of abundance of sin, vanity, and profaneness;
and then think how dear bought thy mirth would be, if that nights laughter
should (as it may for any thing thou know) end in weeping and gnashing of
teeth? As also how little gainer thou will be, when thou have staked and lost,
if not the maintenance of thy family; yet, thy time, reputation, and the credit
of religion, and therewith the favor of God, the peace of thy conscience, and
the happiness of thy Soul.

4. Moreover how powerfully should the same consideration persuade each one to
abstain from fleshly lusts which war against the spirit, 1 Pet. 2. 11. As also
5. not to covet to be rich in a sinful way, because they that do so, fall into
temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts which drown men
in destruction and perdition. For the love of money is the root of all evil:
which while some have coveted after, they have erred from the faith, and
pierced themselves through with many sorrows, 1 Timothy 6. 9, 10. And again,
Jerem. 17. 11. As the Partridge sits on eggs, and hatcheth them not: so he
that gets riches and not by right, shall leave them in the midst of his
days, and at his end shall be a fool.

The next temptation that comes to draw thee, like Esau, Judas, Ahab, or Achan,
to gain some little trifle, or to get some swinish pleasure, Thy conscience may
tell thee, that if thou do deliberately commit such a sin; thou do at the
same time, wilfully in a manner, sell or pawn thy Soul which is of so great
value; or at the best, do for a small matter most sadly venture the loss of
it. For thou know, that the sin is damning in its own nature; and thou can
not tell but thou may dye with the guilt of it upon thy conscience; being
thou can not tell, whether God will give thee time, or an heart to repent of
it or no.

Which of us should not be afraid to consent to any wilful sin, if we verily
thought we should dye presently upon the doing of it? Should the Tempter offer
us all the Kingdoms of the world, as a reward of our iniquity; surely we
should see sufficient reason, like our Savior, to refuse to fall down and
worship him, or any ways to yield unto him; considering that by dying instantly
upon the deed done, we might lose a Soul, as our Savior tells us, more
precious then the world. Or as in an ancient inscription upon a certain
monument in this Land: Who so him bethoft,
Inwardly and often,
How hard it were to flit,
From bed unto the pit,
From pit into pain,
That nere shall cease again,
He would not do one sin,
All the world to win.


If therefore tempted to any of the forementioned evils, or any other, think
seriously with thy self, would I now do this if I were to leave this world
presently, and my Soul called to an account as soon as it is done? And then
think further with thy self, that thus it may be for ought thou know; for
thus in Gods just judgment it has been with many a one. Many like Belshazzar,
Elah, or Amnon have dyed in the midst of their drunken Cups, Dan. 5. 6. 1 Kings
16. 9, 10. 2 Samuel 13. 26. More like Corah and his company have been swept away
in their rebellious courses either against Minister or Magistrate. Others like
Zimri or Cozbi have been smitten with death in the act of their uncleanness.
Not a few have begun frivolous and malicious lawsuits, and dyed in the
prosecution of them. In some peoples mouths, a lie, a curse, or a rash oath
have been their last words. In other peoples lives, a fraud or oppression have
been their very last actions.

Christian Reader, surely this should lay a constant restraint upon thee, and
make thee watchful against all vicious practices; least thou be tempted, so to
sin against thy own Soul at any time, that on the morrow it will be too late to
repent thee of it; least on any worldly account, for a thing of naught, thou
hazard thy Soul more worth then a thousand worlds. Oh resolve henceforth
steadfastly with thy self, however tempted to any destructive wickedness of
life, by Gods assistance, to keep thy precious Soul safe and innocent, whatever
thou gettest, or whatever thou losest, in this worthless and perishing world.

Use 3. Is the Soul so precious, and the loss of it so dreadful? Let this then
be further improved to make every faithful Christian watchful against error in
Judgment, as well as against wickedness of life and conversation. Heresies are
reckoned by the Apostle among the works of the flesh, Gal. 5. 19, 20. And some
are said to be damnable, 2 Peter 2. 1, 2, 3. and 2 These. 2. 10, 11, 12. Because
they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved. For this
cause God shall send them strong delusions, that they should believe a lie.
That they all might be damned who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness.

This Use much concerns thee, if thou live near or among Seducers, who by
their often gainsaying in private what thou hear in public; by their
interest and familiarity with thee; by their seeming piety and
sheeps-cloathing; by their confident assertions and proud pharisaical
boastings; by their cunning reasonings, their fair flattering words, or their
terrible threats, would bear thee down from truth and unity. But to keep safe
thy Soul be entreated to these few things. 1. Forget not how error leads to
schism and separation, which is full of horrible impiety. For is not schism or
causless dividing from the congregations of Christian people; a breach of
peace; and so a violation of the very Testament of our Lord? St John 14. 27. As
also of love, and so a disowning the Chief badge whereby Christ's disciples are
known from the infidel world, St John 13. 35.

Is not schism further a subdividing of the Church into factions and parties,
who expose and discover each others infirmities to the wicked, and to the
common adversary? so that they are scandalized, and entertain hard thoughts of
religion, and of God the Author of it, and are prejudiced against all the
persuasions of the Gospel though designed for their own good. Oh how heavy an
account will such discredit of religion, such dishonor of God, such
frustrating of Christ's Gospel-designs, and the miscarriage of such a multitude
of Souls amount to!

Again, is it not schism and division that lessens the Common strength by
dispersing it into many smaller societies? Did those who withdraw from us, join
with us, and strengthen our hands, (as they may do, and be never the less
holy, but the more) we might hinder more evil, and more convince the ungodly,
and do much more good. But now separating from us, and speaking all the evil
they can against us, and against what we do, they hinder much the work of
Christ in our hands, and must sadly answer for it.

Moreover, do not they who run into ways of schism hinder discipline, and bring
contempt upon authority, and weaken it, and so make great liberty for all the
vices and scandals of wicked men, by a consequent impunitie? And thus are they
not guilty of increasing those sins in others, which they themselves complain
of, because they disrespect and weaken that Authority, whether of Magistrates
or Ministers, which might otherwise restrain or reform them.

Besides, are not all divisions, hatreds, animosities, and such like
filthinesses of the spirit, which are to the tearing and rending of the Church,
most passionatly disclaimed by our Savior and his Apostles? And do we not find
in St Jude v. 19. Separation joined with a wanting of the Spirit of Christ?
Surely they who have the Spirit of Christ dwelling in them, they love the
Church, Order, Discipline, Ordinances and Ministers of Christ, and will not
easily be drawn from them. That one spirit of his inclines them to unity, and
makes them fear divisions, as a man fears the mischief of dividing and wounding
his own body. By this they feel such insufficiency and ignorance in themselves,
that they rather think themselves exceedingly beholden to Ministers that will
teach them, then grudge or scorn to be taught. And by the same spirit they have
that sense of their own unworthiness, that humility, and that charity to
others, that they are far readier to say, we are not worthy to join with the
Church; then to say, The Church is not worthy to join with us. Now that thy
Soul may not be subverted with error, remember this in the first place, the
great impiety of separation which it leads to.

2. Beware of an itching ear after newfangled opinions. He is half gone to
error that covets, and lissens after novelties. We read of itching ears, 2 Timothy 4. 3, 4. For the time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine;
but after their own lusts shall heap to themselves Teachers, having itching
ears. And they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned
unto fables. We read also of following after another Gospel, Gal. 1. 6. But
repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, and sincere
holy obedience, is that Good old way which we, with other Christians, must walk
in to heavenly glory.

3. Take heed of pride, conceitedness, and confidence in thine own judgment or
understanding. The humble God will teach, but he resists the proud, 1 Pet. 5.
5. Pride usually is the mother of heresies: it was of old the condemnation of
the devil, 1 Timothy 3. 6. the ruin of our first Parents; and therefore no wonder
if it ruin so many Souls in these days.

4. That thy Soul may not be subverted with error, labor to be well grounded
in the foundation-truths of the Christian religion, and to turn thy knowledge
into practice. And to this end, be entreated to make good use of the foregoing
Book, and especially, study the Scriptures with humility, and be much in
prayer, that God would guide thee by his holy Spirit into all saving truth, and
keep thee from falling into error. And remember, That what has been commonly
received by the people of God, and embraced and practiced by the Saints in all
ages, is not lightly to be rejected and deserted.

We agree with the first and best Christians. We have the same God, the same
Christ, the same Holy Ghost. We have the same Ministers, and Doctrine, and for
the main, the same Worship, Discipline, Prayers, Praises, and Solemn
Assemblies. We have the same Scriptures, the same Baptism, the same
Lord's Supper, Lord's Day, Lords-prayer; as also the same Creed and Ten
Commandments; We have, blessed be God, in many of us, the same holy and
gracious disposition of heart which they had; and there is nothing in our holy
religion hinders, but it may be so with the rest. Moreover there is no sin,
which they disliked which we do not dislike; neither is there any duty of
holiness, which they (or any other) could justly commend, which we do not also
commend and allow, and by Gods grace many of us more safely practice, then
those who accuse and separate from us. How can any rational man think God would
leave the generality of his people in all ages and places thus seeking him,
thus as careful of their Souls welfare as any other, thus as earnestly desiring
to be led by his word and spirit into the ways of truth and holiness; how, I
say, can any rational man imagine, that, till of late years, God would leave
the generality of his people to error and seduction of mind. And then consider
with thy self, whether it be not safer to follow the footsteps of the flock of
Christ, then to be led away by pretenders to any new light whatsoever.

5. When tempted by cunning deceivers which thou art not able to grapple with,
seek the assistance of others; That they may help thee to be valiant for the
truth, and to contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to the Saints; and
that both on thy own behalf, and for the benefit of posterity, Jerem. 9. 3.
Jude v. 3. People are careful to leave their lands to their children; and
should they not be much more careful to leave them the saving knowledge of God.

Gospel Truth is the treasure of the Soul; will thou then so tamely and easily
part with it, or suffer those crafty persons that are now abroad to rob thee of
it, without so much as repairing to those, who would help thee in the defense
of it? If thou fear the loss of any part of thy estate thou take the
Lawyers advice; If but thy beast be ill thou will ask of others; and if they
direct thee to a cure in writing, which thou can not read thy self; will thou
not diligently get others to read it to thee again and again, till thou know
what it is, and how to use it. Much more, if thy own, or thy child's bodily
health be in danger, thou carefully consultest the Physician; why then art thou
not willing, when thy own or thy Relations Soul is much more in danger, to go
to them for direction, whom God has made by their office spiritual Physicians
and Guides in the ways of truth and holiness; being ready to learn and
practice the directions which they shall give thee?

Oh what a wretched thing is it, that people should so contemn their own Souls,
as to part with their religion before they have thoroughly understood it; or
before they have sincerely and humbly tried and practiced it; or when they have
only heard what is cunningly said against it, and not what may be truly and
rationally said for it! Oh that any should be so unjust and cruel to their
precious Souls, as prodigally to cast them away, and not take the pains to hear
and read that, whereby they might come rightly to know the things which concern
their everlasting peace!

6. That which I would chiefly, and in the last place entreat for thy Souls
safety is this; Expose not thy self to the temptations of Seducers. The Soul is
more precious then to be hazzarded upon the mistaken sense of the Apostles
words, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. To try all things thou needst not be of all religions
how false or dangerous soever. Among several poisons thou would not try any
of them, whether it would kill thee or no. Therefore the meaning of this place
must be, that we are to examine the Doctrines that are delivered unto us, by
the Scripture, whether they are built thereon or no. Like the Bareans
commended, Acts 17. 11. who searched the Scriptures whether those things were
so, that were delivered to them for the truths of God.

And let that place, Romans 14. 1. be considered by all such as are not thoroughly
grounded in the Principles of Christianity. Him that is weak in the faith,
receive, but not to doubtful disputations. Every private Christian is not fit
to cope with heretics, and such as are skilful to destroy the faith of others.
You would not allow a man to come and undermine the foundation of your house;
This do they, and worse, that go about to undermine your Faith, and labor to
shake and unsettle you in the grand truths of the Gospel. Therefore I say
again, Expose thy Soul as little as may be to the temptations of seducers. It Is
in vain for any to pray to God to keep them from the infection of error, if
they wilfully (against the express word of God) and without any just warrant
and call, run into the company of Seducers and read their Books.

Observe well, how God in the Scripture bids us, To beware of them, St Mat. 7.
15. not to go after them, St Luke 21. 8. To avoid them, Romans 16. 17. To turn
away from them, 2 Timothy 3. 5. If they come to us, not to receive them, or bid
them God speed, or encourage them, 2 Ep. Joh. 10. Though they come with seeming
zeal, Gal. 4. 17. They zealously affect you, but not well; Yea they would
exclude us, that you might affect them. Though they come with pretenses of Gods
Spirit, this they may easily do who are led by their own spirit or a worse. 2.
Cor. 11. 3. But I fear lest by any means, as the serpent beguiled Eve through
his subtilty, your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity, which is in
Christ. v. 4. For if he that comes, preaches another Jesus whom we have not
preached, or if ye receive another spirit, which ye have not received, or
another Gospel, which ye have not accepted, ye might well bear with him. v. 13.
For such are false Prophets, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into
the Apostles of Christ. v. 14. And no marvel, for Satan himself is transformed
into an Angel of light. v. 15. Therefore it is no great thing if his Ministers
also be transformed as the Ministers of righteousness, whose end shall be
according to their works. And to this we may add but two Scriptures more and
so finish this use. The one 2 Pet. 3. 17, 18. Ye therefore, beloved, seeing ye
know these things before, beware lest ye also being led away with the error of
the wicked, fall from your own stedfastness. But grow in grace, and in the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. The other Jude v. 24, 25. Now
unto him that is able to keep you from falling, and to present you faultless
before the presence of his Glory with exceeding joy. To the only wise God our
Savior, be Glory and Majesty, Dominion and Power, now and ever, Amen.

Use 4. Is the loss of the precious Soul so exceeding great and dreadful? How
very careful then, so far as concerned, should we be of the welfare and
salvation of the Souls of others? And how fearful should we be to have any hand
in their utter undoing? If thy friend, after thou have warned him, will take
such ways, as but to ruin his estate, do thou not think it well, when thou
can say; praised be God, in that I am not guilty of it. Much more, if any of
thy relations, neighbors, or acquaintance, after thou have endeavored thy
duty toward them, will follow such courses, as to ruin their Precious Souls,
is it not a great mercy, when thou can say; blessed be the Lord, in that I
have had no hand in it.

In a Country, a Parish, a neighborhood, a family, by setting a good example,
and so furthering the work of Christ in the hands of his Ministers; thou may
not only benefit thy self, but be always doing good to others, as long as thou
live; and the Souls of those, whom, time after time, thou have encouraged in
the ways of holiness, may come to bless God for thee, and with thee for ever.

Whereas by showing a bad exampl, thou hinderest the messengers of Christ in
his work and service, and art continually doing mischief to thy self, and
others about thee, all thy life long. And the perishing Souls which thou have
any way drawn to sin and ruin, may curse thee eternally, as a wretched
miscreant doing more hurt, then if thou had ruined a whole Kingdom, as to
the outward estate of it. Oh therefore if thou have enticed any to sin, and
they be yet a live, seek to do their Souls as much good, as thou have been a
cause of evil. But if they be dead, and swallowed up in the torments of Hell,
think what a case thou art in, and how justly thou may fear to follow them,
if a great repentanee prevent it not.

But this chiefly concerns those who in a more special manner are entrusted
with the Souls of others, whether Ministers, or Parents and Family governors.

1. As for every faithful Minister of Christ, how exceeding careful should they
be for the Souls committed to their charge? How exceeding careful should they
be to save themselves, and those that hear them? And to keep themselves (as St
Paul says he did) pure from the blood of all men.

It Is true God has made our Calling excellent and honorable; but people would
see little cause to envy us that double honor of respect and maintenance which
the Apostle would have given 1 Timothy 5. 17. did they rightly consider, how
weighty our charge is, how dangerous our condition, how many and difficult our
duties, and how troublesome our fears and cares touching the estate of their
Souls.

I know some may think, we take more care then needs; wishing we would meddle
less with them in their ignorant, careless, and secure ways; which we could
wish too, if it would consist with Gods honor, the credit of religion, and
their and our own safely. But, I beseech you, consider, if any of you was
entrusted with a Jewel of five or ten thousand pound price, would you not see
it needful to watch all ways and by all means to keep it safe and secure? and
if you had many such in your custody, would you not be the more sollicitous,
especially if you saw they were in continual danger; and if further, you knew
that if any of them should be lost by your default, you should certainly lose
your life for it? But now, which is much more, we are entrusted with many, very
many precious Souls, each of them more worth then a world; and they are, we
see, in great and apparent danger to be ruined for ever, by manifold error and
wickedness, and by innumerable temptations of the flesh, the devil, and the
world; and we know moreover, that if any of them perish through our neglect,
our own Souls may come to perish with them, and for them; as was said to him
who had one to keep, 1 Kings 20. 39, 42. If thou let this man go, or be
missing, thy life shall go for his life. Have we not then need to be watchful
to the uttermost of our power, and to be careful all the ways we can, for
their safety and preservation? Consider well Acts 20. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 26,
27. -- Ye know after what manner I have been with you at all seasons, serving
the Lord with all humility of mind, and with many tears and temptations which
befell me. -- And how I kept back nothing that was profitable unto you, but
have showed you, and have taught you, publicly and from house to house;
Testifying both to the Jews and also to the Greeks, repentance toward God, and
faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. Wherefore I take you to record this day,
that I am pure from the blood of all men. For I have not shunned to declare
unto you all the counsel of God: and Ezekiel. 3. 17, 18, 19, 20. 21. as also
Ezekiel. 33. 2, to 9. O son of man, I have set thee a watchman unto the house of
Israel: therefore thou shall hear the word at my mouth, and warn them from me.
When I say unto the wicked, O wicked man thou shall surely dye: If thou do
not speak to warn the wicked from his way, that wicked man shall die in his
iniquity: but his blood will I require at thine hand. Nevertheless, if thou
warn the wicked of his way, to turn from it; if he do not turn from his way, he
shall die in his iniquity; but thou have delivered thy Soul. If we be faithful,
as every honest man should be in his trust, we may (you see) deliver our own
Souls; but if we be negligent watchmen, there are these things (among many
others) which will sadly aggravate our condemnation.

1. When admitted to places of employment, we take upon us the cure of Souls
for their edification and salvation.

2. That we may attend this care the better, we receive a benefit piously given
to free us from all other cares.

3. In order to this (I mean, the care of Souls for their edification and
Salvation) our Masters and Tutors instructed us; and our parents devoted us to
the service of Christ.

4. To this too, we devoted and gave up our selves, professing or hoping, that
we were thereunto inwardly called and moved by the Holy Ghost.

5. For this end we have also been outwardly called, or set apart by the Church
for the work of the Ministry.

6. Moreover when ordained we did solemnly promise and engage this way to bend
our studies, and to use both public and private monitions and exhortations, as
well to the sick, as to the whole within our cures, as need should require and
occasion be given.

7. And which we may add in the last place, we were then by the Bishop
ordaning, most gravely charged, and exhorted, in these words: Brethren, we
exhort you in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that you have in remembrance,
in how high a dignity, and to how weighty an office and charge ye are called:
That is to say, to be messengers, watchmen, and stewards of the Lord; to teach
and to premonish, to feed and to provide for the Lords family; to seek for
Christ's sheep that are dispresed abroad, and for his Children who are in the
midst of this naughty world, that they may be saved through Christ for ever.

Have always therefore printed in your remembrance how great a treasure is
committed to your charge. For they are the sheep of Christ, which he bought
with his death, and for whom he shed his blood. The Church and Congregation
whom you must serve, is his Spouse and his Body. And if it shall happen, the
same Church, or any member thereof, to take any hurt or hindrance by reason of
your negligence, ye know the greatness of the fault, and also the horrible
punishment that will ensue. Wherefore consider with your selves the end of your
Ministry toward the Children of God, toward the spouse and body of Christ;
and see that you never cease your labor, your care and diligence, until you
have done all that lies in you, according to your bounden duty, to bring all
such as are or shall be committed to your charge, unto that agreement in the
faith and knowledge of God, and to that ripeness and perfectness of age in
Christ, that there be no place left among you, either for error in religion,
or viciousness of Life.

Now after all this, If we do our utmost for the Souls health of them committed
to our charge; if we leave no good means thereof unattempted; If we should
labor for this night and day with tears, as the Apostle says he did; If we
should never so often and earnestly beseech you to practice the fore going
printed Directions put into your hands, and what ever Christian duties our
Savior requires of us; If we should follow you from the Church-house to your
own houses (if no better could be) with the most passionate entreaties, as for
the life of our own Souls and yours; who could justly think us too importunate?
who could reasonably count us too earnest or too busy? who could justly blame
us for making more a do then needs? for all this would be but enough as to
some, and as to others it would be too little.

2. Parents and Family-governours, how carefully should they look to it, lest
any under them should perish by their negligence or wickedness. Be assured
Christ will erelong say to the, as Eliab to David, with whom have thou left
those few sheep in the wilderness? what are become of those precious Souls of
thy Children or Servants which I entrusted thee with? Nor will it be enough for
thee only to answer, For my children, I brought them up without the charge of
the Parish; I put them out to trades, or I left them competent estates or
portions. And as for my servants, I paid them their wages, and gave them meat
and drink according to my agreement with them. For all this, chiefly respects
but the body; and thy heart would be filled with horror, if the blood of their
Souls should be required of thee.

Oh the cry of a lost Soul is a dreadful thing. Suppose any of thy Servants
should now be in hell cursing the time that ever they came into thy family,
where they saw so much wickedness, where there was no worshipping of God, or
means to come to the knowledge of him, whereupon they went on securely in sin,
and are now swallowed up in the bottomless pit of destruction. Or suppose any
of thy children following thy steps in wickedness, and contemning Gods word and
worship as they saw thee do, should now be sunk down to eternal misery, there
cursing the day that ever they were born of such a Parent, or crying out
against thee for neglecting them, for suffering them to swear, lie, and do evil
without severe rebukes, for letting them profane the Lord's Day, for neither
instructing them thy self, nor causing them to be instructed by others in the
ways of God.

Were this so, it might make the most flinty heart to ache and tremble.
Therefore that it may never be so with thee, resolve duly to promote godliness
in thy family however thou stand therein related. Dwell with thy wife as a
man of knowledge, as heirs together of the grace of life, that your prayers be
not hindered, 1 Pet. 3. 7. Labor that thy servants may know and serve God; they
will be to thee more faithful. Bring up thy children in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord; they will be to thee more dutiful. Pray with them, and
for them, put them upon learning such verses of Scripture as will further their
holy walking.

Encourage all under thy roof to observe better the Lords day. Suffer them not
to misspend so much of that precious time in such idle, trifling, and unlawful
practices as too many do. Thou had need choose a right path that have thy
servants, and children, or others near thee, following thee to heaven or hell.
Be therefore exact in thy actions, that they may have the fairer copy to write
after.

Weigh thy words, considering that they will learn thy language. Remember that
Faith and Troth sound not so well as yea and nay, our Savior being Judge, St
Mat. 5. 37. Be afraid to have the Devil so often in thy mouth, lest others
about thee have him, both in their tongue and their heart too. Repeat not
others oaths, nor speak irreverently of the great God and his Word: Let no
corrupt communication proceed out of thy lips, but that which some ways tends
to good.

In all thy religious performances be very serious and sincere, that they may
see thou art in good earnest about Soul-affairs, and matters of eternity. Oh be
careful thus if it be possible, by thy pious exhortations, thy devout prayers,
and thy exemplary behavior to bring the Souls of all under thee, and near
thee, unto Christ. And make that still thine, which once was good Joshua's
resolution and practice, Josh. 24. 15. As for me and my house, we will serve
the Lord.

Use 5. Is each ones Soul of so great worth, and the loss of it to them so
dreadful and undoing, as not to be recompensed with the gaining of the whole
world? See then further how exceeding careful we should every one of us be of
our own Souls; and how we may not always count them the happiest people, who
have all worldly things here for a while that heart can wish; but those rather
who are most careful of their precious Souls everlasting happiness in the world
to come.

Now if thou would understand, whether thou thy self art herein rightly
careful, or no; thou may know it by looking to the sincerity of thy
conversion, or thy due care of believing such truths, exercising such graces,
and performing such duties as God requires of all regenerate Christians. And
which thou may find set down in the Directions, Questions and Answers of the
foregoing Book, especially from page 84 to page 93. As also in the prayers
thereof, which teach us at once both what to ask, and what to do, and be, in
order to the Souls eternal welfare. For having such prayers to use, we may
study our petitions before, and so the sense of our minds may keep pace with
our words; and our affections go along with our sense. Thus Gods Spirit
assisting, our devotion would beenlivened; and our prayers become the rule of
our conversation; and when we swarve from them, they would make us blush into
amendment.

But more particularly, to know that thou art in good earnest desirous to save
thy Soul.

1. Being Christ the Physician of Souls works not a cure upon one every whit
whole, nor is prized by them that feel no need of him, St Mat. 9. 12, 13. have
thou had an imbittering sense of the evil and danger of sin, and an humbling
sight of thy Souls lost condition by nature, as fallen from God, and
inordinately set upon worldly vanities? Have thou seen that this is not a state
to be rested in, and therefore been solicitous after a better, carefully in
effect asking like them, Acts 2. 37. what shall I do to be saved?

2. Have thou hereupon been heartily willing to receive Christ as offered in
the Gospel, for thy Lord, as well as thy Jesus or Savior? And as thy Lord,
do thou yield to the sanctifying work of his word and spirit? and art thou so
guided by his Laws, as ordinarily to practice the most strict, holy, costly,
and self-denying duties which thou know him to require of thee?

And again as thy Jesus, do thou feel the power of his death killing sin in
thee? does he by his bloodshed not only pardon thy sins, but also save and
deliver thee from them? so that thou heartily strivest against all known sin,
and overcomest all gross sins; and when fallen under any prevailing
temptation, risest again by repentance, begging forgiveness of God in his
blood, and resolving by his grace to watch and resist more carefully for the
time to come? Acts 16. 30, 31. Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26, 27, Acts 3, 26 Tit. 2. 11, 12,
14.

3. Art thou so sensible of what Christ thy Redeemer has done and suffered for
thee, and of thy many engagements to him upon that account, as to love him
above all, and constantly to cleave unto him in every condition. And has
Christ so brought thee back again to God, that thou take him for thy portion
and love him with all thy heart, Soul and strength; and chusest to live with
him in his favor and glory, without sinning, or offending him any more; rather
then sinfully to enjoy the delights of the world, and want the favor of God?
Ephesians. 6. 24. Phil. 3. 8. St Mat. 22. 38. Psa. 73. 25, 26, 27, 28.

4. Moreover art thou so convinced of the Souls worth, and the worlds vanity;
of the certainty and excellency of heavenly glory, and the intollerableness of
eternal misery; of the goodness of the Divine precepts, and the need of obeying
them; art thou (I say) so convinced of this, as sincerely to set thy self to
perform all those holy spiritual duties in heart and life, which God has
absolutely commanded thee; being sorry thou can perform them no better, no
more evenly, and cheerfully; yet holding on with a settled resolution, and a
constant spirit, to do thy best, though with thy present loss of esteem, or
ease, or worldly enjoyments, or life it self? Hebr. 11. 25, 26. 1 John 5. 3.
Psa. 19. 11. Romans 2. 6, 7. St Mat. 10. 37, 38, 39.

If this be thy condition thou rightly prizest thy Soul above the world, and
providest for its welfare; but if it be not; oh how earnestly should thou
labor that it may speedily be so! Delays are dangerous, and thou have too long
dishonored God, and hazarded thy Soul already; should thou go on in
presumption and security, might not the Lord be provoked to cut thee off
suddenly? or give thee up to a spirit of slumber and stupidity? Or leave thee
to thy self, to follow thy own hearts lusts? Or cause thy day of grace to end
before thy natural life?

Or may not the love of the world be deeplier rooted hereafter, and the
encumbrances of it hinder thee more, as it has done too many before thee. As
for some of the meaner sort, which it may be, do not so much as learn to read
in their younger years, or if they do, soon forget it again, without making up
that want by their diligence other ways; when they are grown to any bigness,
either they are set to trades or otherwise to work for a livelihood. And when
they come to be settled in the world, and to have wife and children, then they
have no heart, or leisure, to mind the welfare of the Soul; but think all their
time, labors, thoughts, and strength little enough to provide a bodily
sustenance for themselves and families.

And if they live to be aged, though we would take never so much pains to teach
and guide them in the ways of Christ, they (some of them) think themselves too
old now to learn; and are too deep rooted in their own secure and sensual ways,
to be drawn to forsake them, without little less then a miracle. And though
they have all their lives the gracious opportunities, of the whole Lord's Day,
yet they spend the most of it in idle talk, or sports, or trifling worldly
occasions; and if they chance upon a fair day, to come now and then to Church,
for an hour or two; yet it is but in a customary manner, without considering
seriously what they hear, or come thither for; and so they spend their days in
sorrow and vanity, and pass out of the world, before they know that great and
good and blessed errand they were sent hither about.

And as for some others, when they should resolve to forsake every wilful sin,
and unfeignedly devote themselves to the service of God, and mind the one thing
necessary; how is some or other of those many unnecessary things which they
trouble themselves about, still ready to stand in their way? Either they are
eating or drinking, sleeping or playing, dressing or undressing, or have some
whither to go, or some body to speak with, or some bargain to drive, or some
work or company which they cannot leave, Or they are casting in their heads how
to disintangle their estates, or raise their families, or to avoid the
Crosse-blows of their adversaries.

Or else they are under violent sickness that unfits them for action; or some
disappointment, or quarrel, or lawsuit, or some such trouble has befallen
them which puts their minds out of order; or some worldly success and
prosperity which puffs them up with a foolish flashy joy. Or they have some
brave things in expectation which they are musing on, and pleasing themselves
with before hand, till they find themselves deceived, when they feel that sting
which they bring with them in their enjoyment. How do such matters as these
fill the heads and hearts of many from year to year; in the morning they crowd
first into their thoughts; and when they are up, they accordingly set about one
or other of them, or fall into some company which takes them up for that day,
and the like happens to morrow and the next day; thus still the multiplicity of
earthly cares, prevail against the care of their Souls; and the love of their
sins and pleasures, still prevails against the love of God; and for many
superfluous things, any time is thought convenient, but none is found
convenient for the one thing necessary, till it come to be too late; so that
the forementioned Soul-saving work must cease for ever.

Oh therefore let it (I say) be done speedily, and withal sincerely and
thoroughly; or else the loss of the Soul may have these further aggravations;
to be wilful and shameful, unexpected and unpitied, incomparable and
irrecoverable.

1. It will be a wilful loss. St John 5. 40. Ye will not come unto me that ye
might have life. Ezekiel. 33. 11. Turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye
die, O house of Israel? It is a great vexation to a man in this world to see
himself ruined merely by his own wilfulness: but if thou should obstinatly
destroy thy self to eternity; suppose, by thy wilful ignorance, when thou
might have been taught better; or by any wicked courses, when thou wast
advised better; oh what inexpressible anguish will seize upon thy perishing
Soul for ever!

2. It will be a shameful loss. What can follow but confusion of face, when
thou shall see thy neighbors and acquaintance most happy, and thy self most
miserable? What a grievous shame will it be to hear some of those that lived
near thee, or with thee, joyfully praising God; and as it were pointing to
thee, and saying, Lo, this is the man, or the woman, that made not God their
stay. They had the same word, the same means with us, but they loved their sins
more then their Souls or God; and therefore while we are raised to everlasting
life, they are laid under shame and everlasting contempt.

3. It will be an unpitied loss. If thou losest a friend, or liberty or
livelihood, it is a comfort, that thou may find those who will pity and
condole with thee, and be ready to supply thy necessities; but if thou losest
thy Soul, in that sad condition thou will have none to help or pity thee. Now
the gracious God and merciful Redeemer of the world, and all good Christians
pity thee, but thou pitiest not thy self, nor wilt leave thy sins to save thy
Soul; shall not then the very mercies of God and bowels of Christ be hereafter
most justly turned against thee? and shall not the Saints and Angels, be so far
from pitying, as rather with rejoicing to glorify Gods Justice in thy utter
destruction?

4. It will be an unexpected loss. How grievous to cry peace, and then be
overtaken with trouble, and sudden destruction unawares? Prove. 29. 1. How
grievous to lose thy Soul, when perhaps thou were near the saving it? or when
thou groundlessly flatteredst thy self, thinking thou should do well enough?
what amazement seiseth on that man's spirit, who being in a fair way of
thriving, hears unexpected news, that all he had is lost and gone?

5. It will be an incomparable loss. What will it profit a man though he gain
the whole world, and lose his own Soul? It will be a great loss for a small
matter; the loss of that which is most precious for that which is most vile,
should thou set thy Soul to sail, not for a few pence, or a lie, or a base
lust, but for a kingdom or a world, thou would be such a loser, as to be
utterly undone by the bargain.

6. It will be an irreparable, and so an eternal loss. If thou losest one eye,
thou have another; if thou losest one limb, thou have another. If thou losest
thy goods thou may recover them again; or if thou losest thy life, thou may
be a gainer by it, thou may find it again, Mat. 16. 25. but if thou losest
thy Soul, thou have not another, and all is lost with it, and nothing left to
redeem it. Thy Soul once lost is lost for ever; and its ruin is most
lamentable, because irrecoverable. If thou missest at death, thou missest for
ever and for ever; there is no aftergame to be played, but thou must suffer the
vengeance of eternal fire. If the great work for which thou were born be not
then done, thou art undone to all eternity. O eternity, eternity! they that
here could never have enough of the world and sin, in thee shall have wrath
enough, and pain enough. After a thousand millions of years space their misery
shall be never the nearer an end, because it shall have none, being easless,
endless, remedyless.

What shall a man give in exchange for his Soul? why there is nothing at all he
can give in exchange for it; the redemption of it is so precious, that it
cease for ever. Oh that the careless world did but believe and consider the
word of God, and in particular, these words of our Savior, surely they would
mind their Souls otherwise then now they do.

Therefore, good Reader, be entreated not only to suffer others who are, or may
be entrusted with the care of thy Soul, to be very solicitous for the welfare
thereof; but be thou as careful too thy self, resolving as he did, who said,
volo servare animam meam, I will, O God, by all means save my Soul. Say with
thy self, and look up unto God for his grace and spirit to enable thee, to say
it sincerely; O Lord, I am sensible of the evil of my ways, and of my lost
condition without thee; and therefore with a penitent Soul I flee unto thee,
trusting in thy mercy, and the merits of thy dear Son Jesus Christ. I believe
him making satisfaction to thy Justice for the sins of the world, to be the
only Savior thereof; and thereupon, with the full consent of my heart, I
accept him for my Lord-Redeemer; to save me henceforth, as well from the power,
as the guilt of my sins. I am unfeignedly willing, that henceforth he should
rule in me, and reign over me by his word and spirit. I am, O God, willing to
be saved through him, in forbearing to my utmost, all that evil which thou have
forbidden; in using all those ordinances which thou have instituted; in
performing all those duties which thou have commanded; and in doing to my
utmost all that good which thou have required. And I further resolve by thy
grace assisting, so to love thee, and believe in thee my God and Savior, as
henceforth while breath is continued, to serve, please, worship, and glorify
thee, all that I can, and all the ways that I can.

If thou have thus resolved heretofore, yet do it again, and do it often in the
course of thy life; it cannot set thee back at all in thy gracious estate, it
may and will much further and quicken thee in thy holy walking. Such an earnest
care of thy Souls welfare let it be thy principal care, because, among others,
it may have these deserved commendations, to be holy and easy, safe and
successeful, prudent and profitable.

1. It is an holy care, making them that have it desirous to be holy in all
manner of conversation and godliness.

2. It Is a prudent care, being most earnest for that which is most precious,
and best deserves it. He in the parable might be justly commended for his
wisdom, who cared not so much what became of other things, so he might obtain
the pearl which was of great price, and purchase the field which had a rich
treasure hidden therein.

3. It Is a blessed and successeful care. Many are at much care and pains for
the world, but all in vain; but here Christ has made such provision by the
covenant of grace, that if we sincerely believe in him, and endeavor to be in
will, word and deed, what he requires, we shall without fail obtain the end of
our faith, even the salvation of our Souls.

4. It Is a safe and satisfactory care. And if thy Soul be first set a right
Godward and heavenward, if thou art first devoted unto Christ, steadfastly
purposing to observe his word and will in all things; thou may in the next
place, mind that which concerns thy ingenuous education, or the works of thy
honest calling more seasonably, piously and regularly; and by far more safely
then others can do. For who can with such safety and comfort, follow those
studies or labors which concern the preservation of life, or their natural
welbeing; as they who have first made sure as to the main stake, that which
concerns their everlasting well-being?

Others, though in the strongest castle, or highest dignity, are not free from
the danger of hell one minute of an hour. But such as these, God will keep as
the apple of the eye, and none can take them out of Christ's hands, St John 10.
28, 29. Deuteronomy. 33. 27. Zach. 2. 8. They may say upon good grounds, our Souls are
safe to eternity, our salvation we shall not miss of, and other things we
shall have too, as God sees best for our spiritual good, and his own glory,
Mat. 6. 33.

5. The care of the Soul is comparatively an easy care. It Is the ready way to
provide also for our bodily welfare, not only hereafter, but for the most part,
here too. Religious temperance is cheap and healthful. Exodus 23. 25. Ye shall
serve the Lord your God, and he shall bless thy bread and thy water, and I
will take sickness away from the midst of thee. We are sure that the body has
no annoyance which we can prevent; and for that the most trades are followed
with restless care and toil; but certainly the Soul being much more precious,
deserves the far greater diligence. Yet, be but at half that pains to do well,
which others are at, who weary themselves in doing evil; take but half that
care for thy precious Soul, which some do about the affairs of the body, and
thou may be most happy for ever.

6. And lastly, it is a delightful and profitable care, and that as to whatever
befalls the Christian either in this life or that to come. If in this life God
give prosperity, this care of the Soul will make thee use all outward blessings
soberly and temperatly. This will make thee ready to honor God with them by
works of piety and charity, Prove. 3. 9. This will make thee endeavor to enjoy
God in all such enjoyments; and to taste in their sweetness the sweetness of his
love in Christ Jesus. And thus thy earthly comforts will prove doubly
comfortable, and thy gaining in the world become the greatest gain to the Soul.

Or if God send adversity, this will make all thy troubles and calamities to
work together for thy good. He that lost all by shipwreck, and then was more
careful for his Soul and eternity, said well, I had been undone, if I had not
been undone. The world by its hard using of Gods servants, gets nothing; nor do
their Souls lose any thing. If it turn our breath into sighs and groans, we
shall with the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5. 2. groan more earnestly, desiring to be
clothed upon with our house which is from heaven.

And after death the holy Soul cannot but be well. Christ who has redeemed it,
and prepared heaven for it, and it for heaven, will thither receive it unto
himself, where jointly with the glorified body, it shall be most happy for
evermore.

Thus, my beloved neighbors, you have seen the Souls worth and danger, and
what care we should have of its eternal salvation; to which end, you have
nothing urged but such solid and weighty truths and duties, as are generally
owned, and manifestly tend to make us holy and happy. And now, though I be
separated from all troublesome affairs, that I may thus wholly attend the
welfare and service of your Souls; and though my eternal life lies out, as
indeed yours too, I can do no more then what I have been endeavoring, and am
further, according to this printed gift, ready to do for you. The things herein
contained, still abide to be read and considered by you, as often as you
please; but if any be unwilling thereunto, slighting and refusing whatever may
thus profit them, who can help it?

How many of those who saw the miracles, and heard the sermons of our Blessed
Savior himself, and his holy Apostles, continued unconverted? with what
unwearied patience and diligence did the great Evangelical Prophet Isaiah
preach above sixty years together, to a rebellious and a gainsaying people?
Isa. 65. 2. Romans 10. 21. Their profitings for a long time, did not answer his
labors among them; but he might comfort himself with a remarkable passage in
his own prophecy, Isa. 49. 4, 5. Then I said, (the words are meant chiefly of
Christ sent to the Jews and complaining of them) I have labored in vain, I
have spent my strength for naught, and in vain, yet surely my judgment is with
the Lord, and my work (or my reward) with my God. And now says the Lord that
formed me from the womb to be his servant, to bring Jacob again to him. Though
Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of the Lord, and my
God shall be my strength. God will reward his faithful servants both according
to what they have done, and moreover according to what they truly desired and
endeavored to do. If a few, if but any one be really advantaged by what I am
endeavoring, I shall count my labor well bestowed; as it is said of the
reverend and learned Dr Hammond, a passionate Lover of Souls, that he used
often to break out in these words with an extraordinary vehemence. O what a
glorious thing, how rich a prize for the expense of a man's whole life, were it,
to be the instrument of rescuing any one Soul?

But (which I often and humbly pray) if God shall bow the hearts of more,
making us all a willing people in the day of his power; making us seriously
mind our Souls salvation in the forementioned ways of true Christian piety; oh
how greatly should we rejoice in his goodness, and in one another happiness! O
how blessed a thing would it be, when the Lord our maker should thus have the
Souls which he has created, and be glorified by them; when Christ our Savior
should thus have the immortal spirits which he has redeemed, and be magnified
in them; when further his unworthy servant should come thus to have the fruit
of his ministerial labors; and you your selves to have the comfort and
everlasting gain.

FINIS.

