THE Arraignment, Trial, and Condemnation OF THOMAS HARRISON Late Major
General, and one of the pretended Judges that signed the Warrant for the murder
of King CHARLES the first, of ever blessed memory, and appointed the place for
that fatal Execution to be at White Hall Gate.

For which Bloody, Horrid, and Barbarous Fact, he was on Thursday, October. the
11. 1660. Sentenced to be drawn, hanged and quartered, to have his heart and
bowels ripped out and burnt before his eyes, and now lies in Irons in the Dungeon
in Newgate until Execution.

TOGETHER With the Indictment, Names, and several Pleas of the rest of that
Infamous Crew.

Printed for T. Vere, and W. Gilbertson. 1660.

The great Trial of the Grand pretended Judges that signed that Barbarous
Warrant for the murder of our Sovereign Lord King Charles the first.
WEdnesday the ninth of October, 1660. was appointed for the Trial of all those
which signed the Warrant for that horrid murder of His late Majesty, Charles
the first, of ever blessed memory: In order whereunto, Warrants being signed
for the Lieutenant of the Towers delivery of the Traitors unto the Sheriffs of
London, who accordingly repaired to the Tower, guarded strongly with their own
Servants, and part of the Lieutenant of the Towers own Regiment, where the
prisoners being put into several Coaches, and a party of Musketeers on each
side of the Coach, the rest of the said Regiment making a Lane in Newgate
Market to keep them from the fury of the people: one Troop of the Army Horse
before, and another following after, and about nine of the clock they were
brought to the Presse-yard at Newgate, and after a survey of them taken by the
Master Keeper, they were brought through a passage for that purpose into the
Sessions yard to Justice Hall in the Old Bayley, where Sir Thomas Allan sat
Chairman, the Duke of Orlando on the one hand, and Sir Orlando Bridgeman Baron
on the other, the Court consisting of Peers, Judges, and Aldermen, near the
number of forty, the Court being sat, the prisoners were brought by turns to
the Bar, and their Mittiments read as follows.

O yes made, and silence to the Court; The Indictment was read by the Crier.
THat whereas you Hardresse Waller Knight, Thomas Harrison, Henry Heveningham
Esquires, Isaac Pennington, Henry Martin, Gilbert Millington, Robert Tichburn
Esquires, Owen Row, Robert Lilburn, Adrian Scroop, Augustine Garland, Gregory
Clement, Peter Temple, John Jones, James Temple, John Cook, John Carew, Thomas
Scot, John Downs, Henry Smith, Vincent Potter, Hugh Peter's, Simon Meyne, George
Fleetwood, Francis Hacker, Daniel Axtel, Edmund Harvy Esquires, having not the
fear of God before your eyes, and being instigated by the Devil, did
maliciously, treasonably, and Felloneously, contrary to your due allegiance and
bounden duty did sit upon, and condemn your late Sovereign Lord Charles the
first of ever blessed memory, and also did upon the 30th of January, 1648. sign
and seal a Warrant for the execution of his late Sacred Majesty of blessed
memory, where also the aforesaid, Hardresse Waller Knight, Thomas Harison,
Henry Heveningham Esquires, together with some other person unknown, did appear
for the rest upon the Scaffold at the execution of his late Sacred Majesty of
ever blessed memory, which said person yet unknown, being disguised by a Frock
over his body, and a Vizard over his face, did then and there sever the head of
his most sacred Majesty of blessed memory from his body, and you the said
Hardress Waller Knight, Thomas Harison, and the rest of the Traitors, did
afterward most traitorously and felloneously assume the Government of the
Kingdoms, contrary to all right and justice, and to the known Laws of the Land,
and against the person of our now Sovereign Lord King Charles the second, His
Right and Title, Crown and Dignity.

Crier. Hardresse Waller Knight, hold up thy hand, what say thou, art thou
guilty of this horrid Act of Treason whereof thou stand indicted, or not
guilty.


Hard. Wall. My Lord, I cannot say, I am not guilty.


Cler. Then you plead, you are guilty.


Hard. Yes my Lord, I am guilty.


Cler. Set him aside.


Thomas Harison, Hold up thy hand, art thou guilty or not guilty. Har. If I
should say I am not guilty, I should wrong my own conscience, yet in matter and
form as it is laid down in this Indictment, I am not guilty.


Cler. Then you plead not guilty.


Har. My Lord, I desire I may have counsel afforded me, and time to make my
defense, for I have been kept close prisoner in a dark Chamber, and had no
notice of my Trial till five of the clock in the morning, that I am altogether
unprepared.


Judge, You are to plead guilty or not guilty, for in cases of Treason Counsel
is not to be assigned, for that would make it justifiable, and that it were not
Treason, and you would be quit, but if it be treason, then it is not
justifiable.


Har. I am not guilty.


Cler. How will thou be tried.


Har. By the Lords Laws, and by the good and wholesome Laws of the Land.


Cler. Will thou be tried by God and the Country.


Har. He answered that was a profane word.


Then the Judge answered, he shall be turned over to God and the Country. Har.
No Sir, I will be tried by God and the Country.


Cler. God send thee a good deliverance, and turned him aside. Henry
Heveningham, hold up thy hand, guilty or not guilty.


Hev. Not guilty.


Cler. How will thou be tried.


Hev. I will present an humble Petition to His Majesty and the Parliament, and
desire your Lordships to let me return to my lodgings in the Tower, for I have
some infirmities upon me.


Judge, We can give you no answer to that,


Cler. How will thou be tried?


Hev. By God and the Country.


Cler. God send thee a good deliverance.


Set them by, Bring Isaac Pennington, Henry Martin, Gilbert Millington, Robert
Tichborn, and Robert Lilborn to the Bar. Cler. Henry Martin, Hold up thy hand
to the Bar, what say thou, art guilty of this horrid act of Treason whereof
thou stand indicted or not guilty.


Mar. My Lord, I desire the benefit of the Act of Imdempnity.


Judge, First you are to plead before you can have the benefit of any thing,
and for your pleading the Act of Indemnity that makes you guilty.


Mar. My Lord, If I plead, I loose the benefit of that Act.


Judge, Your name is in that Act.


Mar. My name is not there my Lord, my name is Henry Marten, not Martin, then
the Judge said there is no difference between Martin and Marten in Law, the
difference is very little in the sound, then said the Clerk, art thou guilty or
not guilty.


The Judge bid him be advised, for it makes no difference if there were two
names of the like form, the difference is betwixt the six Names, and 'twill but
make you a Mute in Law, and a Mute in Treason, Sir, you must have Judgment
passed on you. Cler. Are you guilty or not guilty.


Mar. I desire Counsel my Lord in that which is matter of Law.


Judge. What do you desire counsel for? you are indicted for matter of Treason,
for Contriving and Composing the Kings death: you have justification to plead
if it be Treason, it is not justifiable; or if it be justifiable, it is not
Treason.


Mar. Then my Lord I plead not guilty.


Cler. How will you be tried?


Mar. By God and the Country.


Cler. God send thee a good deliverance.


Judge, You may give any Evidence, but in a Case of this nature you can give no
Evidence.


Cler. Gilbert Millingtoun, Hold up thy hand, what say thou art guilty of
this horrid Act of Treason or not guilty.


Mil. I humbly crave your Lordships pardon in some few words.


Judge. Sir we must do in this case as in all other cases, either you must plead
guilty or not, if you plead not guilty, you shall be heard hereafter: but you
must plead guilty or not guilty.


Mil. There is something in that Indictment which I am not guilty of.


Jud. Then plead not guilty.


Mil. I am not guilty my Lord.


Cler. How will thou be tried?


M. By God and my Country.


Cler. God send thee a good deliverance.


Cler. Robert Tichborn, hold up thy hand, art thou guilty of this horrid Act of
Treason, or not guilty.


Tich. My Lord, I have for some space been kept close prisoner, and I am
altogether unable in the Law to speak for my self.


Jud. You must plead guilty, or not guilty.


Tich. Spare me one word, if the Trial be matter of Law, give leave for Counsel
to plead for me: if I should plead my own case in Law, I might be overpowred,
since there are many persons of great eminency and honor will plead against
me, but I will not trouble you long if this be the case in matter and form as I
am here Indicted, I am not guilty.


Cler. How will thou be tried?
By God and the Country.

Cler. God send you a good deliverance.


Cler. Owen Roe, Hold up your hand, art thou guilty of this horrid act of
Treason or not guilty.


Owen Roe, My Lord, I will rest upon the Judgment of the Court, in matter and
form as I stand indicted, I am not guilty.


Cler. How will thou be tried?


Owen Roe, By God and the Country.


Cler. God send thee a good deliverance.


Cler. Robert Lilburn, Hold up thy hand, art thou guilty or not guilty?


Lilburn, I have been close Prisoner my Lord these twenty days, and none
suffered to come to me, and I am told that I ought to have counsel before I
plead.


Judge. You are misinformed, you cannot have it, you must plead guilty or not
guilty, for if this be your argument, and this answer return of Judgment will
be given against you, for the rule is set before us.


Lilborn, My Lord, if you over rule me, I cannot help it.


Judge. Sir, Pray let no such words fall from your mouth.


Lilborn, My Lord, I must say in matter and form as I stand indicted, I am not
guilty.


Cler. How will thou be tried?


L. By God and the Country.


Cler. God send thee a good deliverance.


Cler. Call Adrian Scroop, Augustine Garland, Gregory Clement, Peter Temple,
John Jones, James Temple, John Cook, John Carew, all which held up their hands
as others before by degrees, pleading not guilty?


Afterward was called Tho. Scot, Henry Smith, Gregory Clement, Vincent Potter,
Edmund Harvy, Tho. Wait, Hugh Peter's, to hold up their hands and read the
Charge, are ye guilty or not guilty? Pet. I cannot say I am guilty my Lord, for
I would not be guilty of the murder for ten thousand Worlds.


Cler. How will thou be tried.


Pet. By the word of God; at which the Court smiled.


Cler. Art thou guilty, or not guilty.


Pet. Not guilty.


Cler. How will thou be tried.


Pet. By God and the Country.


Cler. God send thee a good deliverance.


George Fleetwood being called to the Bar, held up his hand as before, and
confessed himself guilty: But the others pleaded not guilty. UPon Thursday October.
11. the Court being sat, and the Jury called, Tho. Harrison was again brought
to the Bar, where Sir Henadge Finch the Kings Solicitor General, in a most
excellent eloquent speech opened altogether the heinousness of his fact
committed against God, the King and Kingdom.

To which he answered, that what he had done, was by Authority and Act of
Parliament, and that it was done at noon day, and not in a corner, that the
Parliament ought to hear him out, and thereupon desired Counsel to plead for
him, but then being told by the Judges of the Court how invalid and vain his
desires were, and that the Parliament he pleaded for were not really so, but by
usurpation did assume the power to themselves, and that if Lords and Commons
had power to condemn one peculiar man, the King had power to pardon him,
therefore for Lords and Commons to murder their King and Sovereign, was a most
horrid and unmatchable piece of villainy, which when he heard, he had nothing
to say for himself, but excepted against 35. of the Jury, and cast himself upon
12. of his own choosing, who after they had heard over all the witnesses who
made it apparent, declared him guilty immediately at the Bar for that horrid
Treason, and Barbarous Murder whereof he stood indicted: whereupon my Lord
Chief Baron stood up and told him he had received a fair trial, by casting
himself upon his Country, who according to the fundamental and well known Laws
of the Land had brought him in guilty, and therefore demanded of him what he
had to say for himself, and why Judgment should not be pronounced against him
aacording to Law, who answered again he had no more to say; Then my Lord gave
sentence to this effect.

That he should be conveyed back again to the place from whence he came, and
from thence to be drawn upon a Hurdle unto the place of Execution, there to be
hanged by the neck, then to be cut down alive, and his heart and bowels ripped
out and burnt before his own face, then his body to be divided into four parts,
and hung in the view of all the people, where the Kings Majesty shall please:
He seemed to be no whit dismayed at the Sentence, but stood with an audacious
countenance all the while, and being taken from the Bar, the Sheriff
accompanied him to Newgate, where he commanded strong Irons to be put upon his
legs, and told him he would do well to prepare for his death, it might be
nearer to him then he was aware of, to which he answered, that it was not the
first time he had ^^ok^ death in the face, and that his body was full of scars,
but yet he had remaining a good heart, and so he took his leave of him.

FINIS.

