THE ARMIES Vindication of this last CHANGE. WHEREIN, Is plainly Demonstrated,
the Equity, Power and Right of the Army to settle these Nations upon the
Foundations of Righteousness and Freedom. TOGETHER, With Answers to the most
material Objections made against them.

I will also make thy Officers Peace, and thy Exactors Righteousness,

Esa. 60. v. 17. Published by special Command.



LONDON, Printed by T. M. and are to be sold at the Greyhound in Paul's
Churchyard, 1659.

The Armies Vindication of this last Change.
THe late King by his Writ called the long Parliament, and that not by any
voluntary act of his own, but as forced thereunto, by the coming of the Scots,
with an Army into England: This Representative thus Convened were the Body of
the People, of whom he was Head: But afterward, the King, instead of joining
himself with this great Counsel through pretended fears and jealousies, did
most unnaturally separate and estrange himself from it, withdrawing Protection
from the People; forfeited all obedience due to him as King: For as much as he
betook himself to force and acts of open Hostility, by setting up his Standard,
by which he put himself into the condition of a private Person, laying claim to
no more than he could purchase to himself, by force and Military Power: Thus
wholly laying aside his Civil Government, turning it into a Military; at
length he, as Saul, perished by his own sword, by sheathing it in the bowels of
his own body politic

By this means the Parliament became possessors of the Sovereignty, Greatness,
Honor and riches of the King: whereby there was a plain transmitting or
translating of power from the King to the Parliament, the peoples
Representatives; who at that time was as a nursing Mother to succor and
tenderly embrace the well-affected, and good people of the Nation: by which
means the hearts and affections of all the people of God in the land were
gathered up to, and went along with them; because they were a Bulwark to keep
Tyranny and Oppression from all that did adhear unto them; and gave
encouragement and Protection in the external Exercise of Religion and the
service of God. These things not being forgotten, we cannot but mention the
long Parliament with Honor.

The Parliament not being able to go on in their work without the assistance of
an Army, were forced to make several Appeals to the people, whose
Representatives they were; and those of them that were well-affected to the
cause of Religion and Liberty, willingly accepted of the Parliaments Call, and
did join a helping hand by concurrance of their good affections and prayers;
also by their purses and persons, to carry on the great work that was on foot.
The Parliament being thus constrained to constitute a Military body, different
from their own; and to make a Power of much greater force and strength than
that which was Civil: The power and greatness of the Parliament did hereby
necessarily descend into the Army, and the good people thus called to their
assistance, and adhearing to them; and they themselves became a lesser and more
inferior power, by pouring out and devolving their greatness and strength into
another Society of men, more formidable than themselves; and their acting, as
it were, in away of subserviency to them; for what considerable thing did the
Parliament else, but to raise money for the Army, and supply it with such
necessaries that were suitable to their work and design.

The Army being thus taken out of the good people of the land, and united in
such a formidable body, obtained great Victories and success; and through the
rich mercy and blessing of God, overcame all their Enemies in the three
Nations: the King and his party, together with the Irish and Scots were wholly
subdued. This being done, there was no legal form of civil Government left;
the King being taken away, both in Person and Office, the House of Lords
dissolved: the Sovereignty must needs fall into the hands of the People; from
whence it first sprange: The Kings party, and such as were Neuters having lost
their Right and Privilege, the good people imbodied in an Army, together with
those that adheared to them, must of undoubted right, be receptable of all
Power and Sovereignty: For all greatness and Authority that takes its rise
from the people, when its shattered and broken, must necessarily return thither
again, as retyring to its true Center. As the Sap of a Tree, after it has put
forth it self into the Branches, and comes to be nipt by Winter storms, its
course is to sink down again into the root; so it fares with all Governments,
Honors and greatness in the world, when they are broken and ruined, they
dissolve into their first principle and beginnings.

The principal thing to be cleared is, that the Sovereignty should resolve it
self more into the people imbodied in an Army, than into the peoples
Representatives in Parliament.

To evince this, consider, that the Parliament had no legal Constitution or
Right to Government by any law of this Nation, that is most evident; the Office
and Person of the King being taken away, the House of Lords being dissolved, as
I said before: It was not in the power of the Commons (being but a third State
in the Government) to Constitute themselves a Commonwealth, without some new
act of the people, to make them so; unless they had a Power of themselves
inherent, that they might do such things as was never entrusted them, by those
that chose them: The Kings Writ calling them, and the Peoples election waxed
old, and antiquated, as out of date: And hence their standing as a Government,
after the death of the King, was only as they were upheld by the power and
necessity of the Army; and when they were of no farther use to the Nation, they
were by the Army gently laid aside: and the great approbation the people gave
to their dissolution, did clearly recall their former elections, and all
further trust reposed in them.

The next thing is to prove, that the Army is the principal body of the
People, in whom the Sovereignty does at present reside. That such a power
should naturally descend into the Army, and much superior to that of the
Parliament that raised them, will appear by all humane and divine reason.

I. The Members of the Army, for the most part of them, were raised out of the
ordinary and common bulk of the people, which are the greatness and strength
of the Nation, in whom lies the greatest, and the most common Interest of the
whole, with all its concernments.

II. The Army were such, as did answer the call of the Parliament, when they
made their appeal to the people for to judge of their Cause: Now to whom I make
an appeal, I make him superior to my self; I set him as a Judge and Lord over
me; thus did the Parliament by their Declarations to the people, calling upon
them to be Judge of their own Rights and Liberties: These of the Army being
more valiant than others in the great concernments of the Nation, they have the
just title of the people of England, having interposed between the peoples
Rights and Liberties, and that slavish Tyranny that was breaking in upon them.

III. The Army are a constitution of more vigor and strength than any other;
the Parliament of it self could act but in a low, weak, inconsiderable way;
their greatest Authority lying in the Camp: The Military Sword being always
more sharp, than that of the Civil; more able to do justice and to give
protection, than any Civil Sword, or instituted power could. The Parliament had
the form, but the Army had the power of the highest administration of justice,
as having more intrinsical and fundamental strength in it, than any other; The
Malignants felt the power, and by experience know that this is true: Could the
Parliament overcome the King, beat him out of the field, bring him to trial
and execution, but by the power of an Army? by this its undeniable, that the
power of the people thus formed into an Army, are the strongest power.

IV. A Fourth consideration proper for this, is, that the Army are the people
in an active body; not in a bulky, heavy, sluggish heap; but the people
gathered up into heart and union, filled with spirit and life, for work of
their generation, very useful and active; men of public spirits, carrying
the interest of the people of God, and the good of the Nation in their aim and
eye. To this may be added, the concurrence of the hearts and affections,
prayers and good desires of the honest party of the Nation, going along with
them; these have contributed their best assistance to help them in their
progress. Although of late, many, partly through weakness and passion, or
divisions and factions amongst them; and partly from the Armies miscarriages
and apostacies, have been offended with them; but when the Lord shall blow away
these mists, and lead forth the Army in the ways of righteousness, he will lead
his people back, to their former hearty concurrence of their affections to, and
their prayers for them: As being such in whom the Lord has treasured up their
great interest, with their Lives and Liberties.

V. There is a peculiar right of Government or power due to them in the Army,
in that they have ventured their blood, and have with the Jeopards of their
lives, rescued themselves and the honest party of this Nation from Tyrany; and
have purchased Liberty, both civil and spiritual with the price of blood; so
that God and Nature have put Authority into their Hands: The former slavish
Government that denied Liberty to men as men, and to Christians as Christians,
being thrown down by them: the privilege of Rule belongs therefore to honest
men, as such, and to the Army, as such; by the most undoubted Right that can be
imaginable.

VI. I shall add one thing more, and that is, the designation of providence,
which first brought forth the honest people of this Nation into a Military
body, and that distinct from the Civil power: and these accompanied with many
signal Deliverances, Victories, and successes; the produce and issue whereof
does entitle the Army and honest People to the most unquestionable Right of
Power and Government in these Nations: I would not by all this, draw men to
adore an Army, or arm of flesh; but the Lord in the midst of his People,
whether in the Army, or without; all the Saints in the Land are the Army of God
they are public persons, that mind a public good; and have all one Common
interest: These are the men God has designed for Government.

Thus we may plainly see where the Power and Right of Government is seated, in
the good People; and especially to those in the Army: who was pleased to recall
the Members of Parliament to a further exercising of their Trust, formerly
reposed in them? this the Army did, at least tolerate or condescend unto:
though this act of theirs did not proceed so much from judgment and wisdom,
as from urgency and necessity: being tossed to and fro by the vicissitudes and
changes of things; and being in some darkness; having at that time no better
thing in their eye, they chose this as the next expedient, hoping some good
might have been done by them; but sinding, that instead of going forward to
settle the Nation, they were carried on to many precipitate actings, to throw
down many things done, in point of Reformation; and not only so, but they went
about to destroy and alter the whole Conduct of the Army, though they were the
very legs that bore them up, and the Power that called them together: And when
the greatest part of the Nation was ready to rise up against them, the Army
only did interpose by their power to uphold them: Now if the Army had power to
gather them, they had also power to scatter them: for the same power that sets
up may pull down; it was no breach of law to dissolve them that sat by no law;
Especially, when their proceedings were Diametrically opposite to those ends
for which they were called.

The Army a Military body, so owned of God, united in strength and courage,
carried forth with just and honest intentions; standing upon their own feet;
being a distinct power, raised by God, by his immediate power (for it was not
the King that called the Parliament, but his necessity: neither was it the
Parliament that raised the Army, but their streights; and both these, as the
product of providence; and not the intentions of either the one or the other of
them) If then this Army (being the ordinance and appointment of God, to secure
our Liberties and Lives) should have given back their power to the Parliament,
as once the Parliament would have given theirs to the King; it had been the
highest breach of trust that could be imaginable both to God and his people:
And surely the Lord would have brought deliverance some other way; and would
have left them and their houses to have been trodden under foot, at the lusts
and wills of men; the foot of pride should have trampled on them like mire in
the streets.

I shall now come to Answer all the material Objections (that I can think of)
that are made against the past and present proceedings of the Army.

Object. 1. The first is this, The Army owned the Parliament as the Supreme
Authority, received Commissions from them, and called themselves their Servants.

Answ. The Parliament were the Supreme Authority of the Nation, only as the
Army did own them so; but as the Army did set them up, tolerate and condescend
to their Authority for a time; yet by no act did confirm or perpetuate them,
nor I believe never intended it. The Army having so much of Power and
Government devolved upon them, as we have already shown; having the life, the
spirit, the virtue of all the good People gathered up into a military body, and
being of public spirits, for the good of the honest interest in the Nation:
Its beyond question, to ask by what law or Authority the Army could dissolve
the Parliament? they were obedient while they set them in Power over them; but
when they thought of changing their Masters, they might do it without breach of
any law; where there is no law, there is no transgression.

And had the good People known the bottom of the Parliaments proceedings, and
how they were about to espouse a National Interest, intending to have thrown
the Government upon the spirit of the Nation; no question but all unbyassed
good men in the Nation would have concurred as much with the Army in this last
breach, as in the former: but here one precipitant action draws on another; and
many men's judgments were surprised in this last action of dissolving the
Parliament, more than in the former. But when good men have their eyes open to
see, that their Lives and Liberty, their safety and security is wrapped up with
the Armies Interest; as ever the peoples did in King and Parliaments, No
question, but as one piece, as one body, as one soul and spirit, they will
agree to such a Government as may best secure their own safety, and the good of
the whole Nation.

That which causes men of carnal and earthly minds to rage and fret, and to
strive like a Bull in a net because we setle not upon a worldly foundation, a
Constitution that may take in the spirit of the Nation, in all its filth and
corruption, in all its malignity and enmity, that we may not make up a
Heterogeneall body, a mixture of Iron and Clay: What were this but to return to
Egypt, to the Oynions and Garlic; a going back to the house of bondage, to be
entangled with the customs and manners of Egypt: this were but to be brought
to the place where we first begun; and so to suffer loss, yea, all the price of
Blood and Treasure, the fruit of all the Prayers and Tears that have been
spent; but the way is to go forward; we must to Canaan, the Land of peace and
truth, of righteousness and justice, and short of this, we must not sit down.

Object. 2. In the second place, Some charge the Army of a second Apostasy and
back sliding; which they seemed of late to repent off; and that they confessed
they lost the presence of God ever since they first interrupted the Parliament.

Answ. That the Presence of God went a long time with the Actions of the
Parliament, this is acknowledged by all good people, as well as by the Army,
and this was one of the grounds of the Armies inviting it to sit this last
time: but that they lost the presence of God, by breaking the Parliament, or
ever since they were broken, this was never acknowledged by the Army: they must
then have been falls to their own experience; for all know, that the good people
did as much rejoice at the Parliaments first breaking, as at any act of
Providence, that had been done amongst us; and the presence of God appeared
much more in the time of the Little Assembly, than in the latter end of the
long Parliament. But the Apostasies and backslidings the Army did bewail, was
for dancing after the pipe of a single Person, and together therewith espousing
a worldly Interest; and so building up the broken walls of the City Jericho,
that they made them a Calf in the Wilderness, this was the sin of the then
General and the Army: though most of the Army were passive, as to the setting
up of such a Single Power. But the last act of Apostasy in the Army, was to
give a new Resurrection to this Parliament, which was so signally disowned of
God and his people long before (not but there were good things, and good men
found in it) but what was this, but to return to Egypt for help: Why do we
speak so high for a Parliament, is it not a worldly Constitution, a Body sitted
for a King, the Interest of the Nation, not of the people of God; and every
whit as Babylonish as Kingship it self: at best, the most of them are men of
estates, under some prudent qualifications. This Constitution has been
excellent in its season; and while there was life and power in it, we could not
but honor it; but that having been the hand that brought us out of Egypt into
the Wilderness; it must die at mount Nebo, it cannot carry us into the land of
Rest and Settlement; to strive about it, is to raise the body of Moses, to
honor a dead Carcass, to repair a broken Idol, that can no longer be the
Interest of the kingdom of Christ or his people.

I would not be mistaken, as if I had not great respects for those Members in
this last Parliament that were worthy: I speak not against their Persons, but
am only showing the weakness of a worldly Constitution: I do desire in my
heart, that those who were Members would come a little beyond that old form of
Government, and espouse themselves with the Cause they have heretofore managed,
and to act under such a Form of Government, that Providence shall design,
which by love and union may prove much more comfortable and safe both for them
and us.

Object. 3. Again, its commonly said, that the Army is bound to subject to such
as raise moneys and pay them.

Answ. For Answer hereunto; Its well known, that this Army (for the most part
of them) took up Arms out of Judgment and Conscience, and not as a Mercenary
Army: but who goes a warfare at his own charge. If the Pay of the Army should
make them serve the wills and lusts of men, and let go the Interest of good men;
they could not answer the end of their pay; it is rather the end should commen
surate the action, and will more do so, than the means can direct to the end:
and it is not so considerable who pays the Army, as for the Army to consider
wherefore they are paid.

If they keep their eye to the right end, the safety and Liberty of honest men,
this will more crown their actions, then to serve the humors of such as pay
them. The Malignant, Neuter, and malecontent cry out against Taxes and excise,
not so much from the Burden of them, as from their enmity against the Army:
who are as a girdle of strength to the righteous in the Land, and a bank to
keep out that sea of misery that an enraged enemy would inflict upon them. But
when shall we hear any of these men complain of the corruption of the Courts
of Justice, or of the oppression of the common Lawyers, Who sell the poor for
shoos and the needy for silver: Little complaint is made of these, though I am
very confident, they pick as much moneys out of the pockets of poor people, as
would in a very great measure maintain the Armies in the three Nations: this
oppression men love and plead for, as being most natural to them, as most
suitable to an old corrupt interest But I dare say, that no honest man
interested in the cause of God, and of his people, of an unbyassed judgment, of
a public spirit, truly minding his own welfare, and the lives and liberties of
his brethren, can be against convenient pay for the Army: Considering they
carry themselves with love and tenderness, not Robing nor Plundering those
under their power, but defending the rights and properties of all; being under
a severe discipline, they are civil and of good behavour; I say no man that is
in his right mind, can be against their pay, except he be an enemy. It Is well
known they grounded great necessities, to save the purses of the people; and
there is the same reason of their pay, as of their continuance, and both are of
an indispensable necessity.

Object. 4. In the next place, it is said, that be the intentions of the Army
never so good, yet they must not do the least evil, that the greatest good
should come thereby.

Ans. It Is true, we must not choose the least evil; yet howere evil may cleave
to our actions, so there may appear to be much weakness and darkness in some
actions of the Army, their work being to destroy and pull down, as those that
pull down old houses, cannot but trouble the eyes of the stander by; so that
some of their ways may be accompanied with precipitancy and rashness; but who
is it, that does not plough with an Ox and an Ass in his best services, and
does not blemish his best duties with some notable defects, Moses smote the
rock twice, Numb. 20.11. And Rahab concealed the two spies, by telling an
untruth; yea, and she seemed to do it with unfaithfullness to her own country;
But the Author to the Hebrews tells us, she did it by faith, that is, she by
warrant of some particular revelation received from God, did this, believing
that the Lord was the author of the War, was with his people in the
Wilderness; and would give them their Land; and therefore God does cover her
defects, and declares it an Act of faith. So I believe many in the Army act by
faith, believing the Lord will shake all Nations until the desire of Nations
come; and hence the Lord will overlook all irregularityes and weaknesses, that
mhy cleave to theer actions, in pulling down worldly powers. The men of the
world are chiefly offended, because the kingdom of Christ is at the very door,
its so conspicuous and bright, that it makes men rage and fume, they know not
how to resist it, because its unresistable, and they cannot own it, because it
suits not with the Worlds wisdom and policy. Its likely to be much rejected of
this generation, to whom its first offered: Men are pleased to view Christ's
kingdom at a distance, as the Jews could converse with Christ in types and
shadows, but when he comes indeed they reject him; so will it be with this
Generation.

5. Object. It is farther urged, that we must be subject to eivil powers, as to
the Ordinance of God: the powers that be ordained of God, Rom, 13.1. The
usurped powers of the Roman Emperor was ordained of God.

Answ. The answer for this is at hand; A Military power is us truly an
Ordinance of God, as any other, and superior to it. The ancient Government
being irrecoverably lost: the Army, with the good People in the condition of
Conquerors, being an Army clothed with the peace, freedom, and privileges of
the good people; this is as rational and as just as any other Government, and
much better, and most suitable then any other for us, at this day, as I shall
show hereafter.

It Is therefore necessary for us to know, that a Military power is as much an
Ordinance of God, as the Civil, if not more; and the Lord does as usually
delight to appear in this form of Government as in any other: he is styled the
Lord of Hosts very often: he does also manifest it in the Creation, casting his
work into the mould of an Army, when he had finished the heaven and earth, and
the Host of them, Genesis 2.1. In his Providence, he is said to pitch his Tent
about them that fear him: when he redeems; he comes as a man of War, with his
garments dipped in blood, Isu. 9. When he comes to destroy Antichrist, comes with
his Arm es in heaven; when he comes to judge, he comes with thousands of
Angels: And thus the Lord rejorceth to come forth in a Military clothing. And
therefore know, that an Army is an Ordinance of God, appointed by him, as the
most absolute and perfect power on earth; having the substance of all
Governments contajned in it. This was Rubens portion, and it is called the
Excellency of Dignity, the Excellency of Strength. Hence, all Governments are
called powers, and in Scripture, called, the Sword. The Apostle speaking of the
Civil Magistrate says, He bears not the sword in vain. By this we see the
Sword is an Ordinance of God, and must be subjected unto, as well as Civil
power.

6. Objection. In the next place it is often demanded; How it was such a
heinous crime in the King to demand but five Members; and no breach at all in
the Army to dissolve the whole Parliament.

Answ. It is answered thus: When the King came to pluck out the Five Members
out of the House, he came in a hostile manner, in a time of Peace, when the
Government of the Nation was whole and entire, standing in its full strength
and luster. But now the Act of the Army is quite another thing, the Government
being broken and shattered, and that remaining part of the Parkament was very
lame and defective: and this standing only by the Armies power, this lessens
the Crime, if not wholly obleterated.

7. Object. Another Objection to be removed is this; Did not Essex and Waller
disband at the command of the Parliament? and why not this Army?

Answer. The Earl of Essex, with others, were called in by the Self-denying
Ordinance, as they were Members of Parliament: and the Government was in the
same condition, as whole, as entire, as when they were first sent out. Besides,
they were not crowned with such victories and success, as the Army since was;
and moreover, there had been never such a breach of Trust committed by the
Parliament, as after all those victories; they were about giving all up to the
King again, as by the personal Treaty was like to be done, and so those that
had ventured their lives, should have been left to the mercy of an enraged
enemy. Upon this the people make their Appeals to the Army, to interpose in
those concernments. Now if the Army had disbanded at such a time, it would have
been to subjected their lives and liberties, so dearly purchased, to the lusts
and designs of evil men: all which in conscience and duty to God and man, they
were bound to preserve.

Besides, the case of the Nine Officers that made the breach now, was quite
another thing then that of disbanding; it was by an Executive Authority the
Parliament took upon them while they owned themselves to be the Legislative
power, going about to turn out Nine Eminent Officers upon a Criminal Account,
without any trial, or so much as a hearing; it being a high piece of Injustice
so to do. The old Protector would always labor to satisfy any dissenting
Officer, before he would dismiss him from his Command. If these Nine had gone
off quietly, they should suddenly have had more fellow sufferers, the design
being to break the whole Conduct of the Army, who had as it were a natural
Right to their Places, being such as had hazarded their lives, and the like:
Now for these to have suffered themselves to be thus trodden under foot, and
together with themselves the interest of all good people, had been a greater
crime then can at this time be laid to their charge.

8. Object. In the next place it is said by some, That if self-love, particular
interest, and necessity had not stirred, the general good, would not so much
moved them. To this I answer.

Ans. First, as to self-love, as it is mentioned in 2 Timothy 3.2. is an Evil, when
it is either fixed on wrong object, or runs after a good object inordinately:
But self-love in its due latitude and measure, is no sin, but a virtue rather,
because it is made the Rule whereby we must regulate our love to others: Thou
shall love thy Neighbor as thy self: If then it be a duty that I love another,
it is also necessary I should love my self. This Principle of self-love (duly
regulated) is so necessary, that the World could not subsist without it; for
from the same Principle that I love my self, I love another; and if I did not
love my self, I would not love mankind; for that I love my own flesh, my life,
my good name, and the like, from the same principle I com to love the body, the
life, the credit of another, so that take away Self-love, self-preservation,
and you take away mercy, love and tenderness out of the World; No man ever so
hated his own flesh, as to suffer it to be trodden down by pride and injustice,
if it lay in his power to redeem himself.

Secondly, the same may be said of particulor interest, If any particular
interest be a prejudice to the whole, I must pass it by; but when it is for the
good of the whole, I am bound to stick fast to it. Now it is evident, that
together with the Interest of those Nine Officers, with others that share in
the Conduct of the Army, lies wrapped up with it the Interest of all honest men;
for if such as had with the hazard of their lives rescued the people from
slavery and bondage, should have delivered up their place of Office, which is
so naturally and providentially their own, and have given up their own with our
conquering Sword, into the hands of others, it had been a high breach of trust
committed against the good people of this Nation.

Thirdly; Lastly, as to an Act drawn forth through Necessity, it may be very
acceptable to God when our Will is brought to consent to a necessiry; We come to
choose obedience, being called thereunto by an Act of Providence, so that when
necessities meet with an obediencial frame of heart, necessity become a virtue,
as we say; and obedience thus drawn forth by an Act of Providence, is as
acceptable with God as Obedience grounded upon Gods Word. In the last of John
Christ tells Peter he should be carried whither he would not. There was a
necessity but his Will being drawn forth to meet the Necessity, made it
acceptable with God. Sometimes, nay often God works greatest things by man's
necessities; for as necessity has no law, so it needs none, being a Law to its
self.

9. Obj. In the ninth place, that which is strongly opposedly opposed is, That
we should be ruled by the Sword.

Ans. The Sword its true, when it is drawn forth to kill and destroy, to eat
flesh, and dring bleod, it is a dark and most sad dispensation; but as it is
only used to keep down enraged, Enemies, and keep off destruction, and when
it is accompanied with Wisdom and Goodness, with Righteousness and Justice, then
it comes to be good and desirable. But what do we speak of a Government by the
Sword? Is the Government of the world any other? Have not Emperors, Kings, and
Commonwalths their Militia's to force obedience when their Civil Sword is
contemned, being blunt and dull? Do they not draw the Military Sword, which is
far sharper? Did not the late King draw this Sword to force the Scots to
uniformity. All the Government of the Sword is but this, That a convenient
number of the Forces be kept under pay, to keep down a turbulent Enemy, and to
protect honest men in their Rights and Liberties, that would live in peace if
they could. This is all the Rule of the Sword: Are not the Civil
Administrations of Justice kept up and exercised amongst us? Is not every man
secured in his peculiar rights: Since I have mentioned the Sword, I shall speak
a little of it.

First consider, the Sword is the Original and beginning of all Governments in
the world, and is the only Protection and Preservation of them. Whither do
Emperors, Kings, or Common-Weelths retire themselves in case of tumults and
insurrections, but unto a Military Power, there being only succor and
defense: They cannot in such cases subsist, but as it were resolving into their
first principles, the Sword, from whence they had their first rise.

Secondly, Consider what special hand of Providence raised the Sword first: It
was not man, but God raised up his People into an Army, when they were at peace
and quiet. The King being great in Worldly Pomp and Glory, did bend all the
force of his Government to oppress a poor harmless people that could not live
in the Nation unless they would defile their consciences, these lived as sheep
among Wolves, and were as Doves and Lambs; they had no horns to push, or hoofs
to tread under; they had no sword to destroy, but were willing to lie down
under all their oppresions. But the Lord calling forth these to war, and that
not from a private spirit, but with the stamp of public Authority, the Lord
raised up their spirits, and made them men of War like himself, who is styled
the Lord of Host. The Lord took his people (as he did David, from the
sheepfold) to make them men of War, put a mighty spirit into them, affording a
great manifesttion of his own presence, going along with them, before whom all
earthly Powers are fallen and broken to pieces. Thus the Lord clothed himself,
with Zeal as with a garment, and has endued his people with such Masculine
virtue and strength, that their Horns have been as Iron, and their Hoofs as
Brass, whereby they have threshed the Mountains and the Hills as Chaff. And
this has not been by Might and Power, but by the spirit of the Lord, it was
not an arm of flesh that could do this, but a Divine presence, the Word and the
Arm of the Lord going along with an Army.

Thirdly, Consider the necessity of an Army, and that in these respects.

First, the ancient Hedge of Civil Power is broken down, and men's hearts and
minds full of rage and revenge, the army is the only bridle to restrain it,
and is as a wall of fire to keep the exhorbitant and beastly fury of
evil-minded men, that they would exercise upon a remant of people, that God
would preserve in the Land.

Secondly, it is a time of breaking, and pulling down all worldly
Constitutions: God is staining the pride of all glory, and treading down
strength; for this reason God gathers his people into the form of an Army: as
he said to his people of old, Ier. 51.20. Thou art my Battle-axe and Weapons of
war; with thee will I destroy Nations, and break Kingdoms. And again, Fear
not, thou worm Jacob, and ye men of Israel, I will make thee a sharp threshing
Instrument, that has teeth, and thou shall thresh the Mountains, and beat them
small, and make the hills as chaff; thou shall fan them, and the wind shall
carry them away, and the wilderness shall scatter them, Isa. 41.15. The Lord
seemed to sleep in former days, suffering his people to lie under oppression;
but now he awakes, as in ancient days, cutting Rahad, and wounding the Dragon,
breaking the bands, and bringing his people from under Egyptian burdens; This
cannot be done but by an Army.

Thirdly, our condition at present is not a fixed Station, but a posture of
direct motion; we are upon our March from Egypt to Canaan, from a Land of
bondage and darkness, to a Land of Liberty and Rest: Now the Army is a Body of
Activity of life and motion, and so fit for such a Work; being full of Spirit
and vigor, enlarged in love and kindness, separated from the old Forms and
Customs of the world; so that while the Lord leads us in a troublesome
wilderness, in dark and ruff paths, amidst wild beasts, and enemies on every
side: How comfortable is it to all good people, to be led by the hand of an
Army, in the ways of Justice and Freedom.

Fourthly, The Army, being as the Sword of Gideon, before whom three Nations
fell, in whom there is Majesty, Justice and Protection; they are engaged to
dispose and frame an Order of Government for these Nations: would not the King
and his party, think you, had they prevailed, made his own terms, and that
without control? And have not the Army the reason to secure themselves, their
Friends, their Estates, Lives and Liberties, by the best security they can
possibly provide for them: it is reason that they which give Protection should
give Law: This also must be done by the Assistance of an Army.

That which subjects the Army most to contempt and reproach, is, that they
hardly own that Power that God and nature has given them: it being the most
Superior, the most absolute in the world: but how can the world own it so,
when it does not own it self? this renders it inconsisting with it is own being,
and it is own Actings. This is the true reason of present Troubles and
Perplexities; but let the Army but own it is own Power, and it is own Friends,
and it need not to fear it is success and happiness. The Law of the Land, the
Privileges of Parliaments, old and rotten Customs not regarded: Hence those
of poor, low and drossie spirits cannot own you, nor love you; but those that
can see beyond the vail of these outward things, that know what true liberty
and peace is, and what the Foundations of Righteousness are, these know how to
have charitable Opinions of you, and your Actings; therefore be in union with
such as these, and your Foundation cannot be shaken, by any opposition
whatsoever.

10. Obj. In the last place, many complain, that upon every change we look for
much, but the Issues and Effects are very little.

Ans. We always expect more from men then they are able to give us: as for
instance; Some think a Free Parliament will do the work, because they have been
useful heretofore; but let any man rightly consider the Temper of the people,
how Malignant some, how Neutral others; how divided and broken the rest of men
are, at this day, this remedy by Parliament, would prove but a killing
distemper, it might wound us, but could not cure us. Again, others expect much
from such and such men in the Army; but we little consider how much darkness
and blindness possesses men's minds, how little knowledge they have of the
Kingdom of Christ, which is at the very Birth, and no man knows how to give it
a deliverance Neither do we well consider how unfit the world is to receive
that which is truly Righteous and good, being froward, stubborn and perverse:
The work of Righteousness shall be peace, only to those that embrace
Righteousness, with love and liking: Now alas, what can we expect more from
man, then to be diligent in his place; to exercise humane wisdom, to keep
peace, and the like. The best Government we can expect from man will be mixed,
having something of Christ and his Kingdom, and something of humane prudence,
and of a worldly concernment. Expect no more then this, and you may not be
deceived.

To conclude, with a word to the Army.

First, Open your bosoms and hearts to all the people of God in the Land, that
ace one with you, in your Cause and Interest; your strength lies in perfect
union with them. The Governors of Judah shall say in their hearts, the
inhabitants of Jerufatem shall be my strength, in the Lord of Hosts their God,
Zech. 12.15. Judah that had formerly many populous Cities, and great Armies;
being now without Walls, and almost without Inhabitants: yet even they, shall
with courage and with confidence say, the Inhabitauts of Jerusalem (be they
never so few or despised) shall be our strength. This also will be the strength
of the Army, A sirme Union with the Faithful. here you can never loose your
Interest; he that will save his life shall loose it, but he that will thus
loese his life shall save it.

Secondly, and Lastly, be sure you make some progress in your way, by every
opportunity: Wherefore cryest thou unto me, says God to Moses; by this
question God does not find fault with his Prayer or Supplication for the
people; but rather the Lord does hasten them to action; Speak unto the children
of Israel that they go forward, says he: and I will fall in with my power,
miraculously to preserve my people; and destroy their enemies. Then let it be
the work of those in power to pluck up eveoy plant the Father has not planted,
let no destroying interest remain; God says to you, as to Israel of old, Go
up, and possess the Land which I have sword, I will give you. Go on, reform the
Law and Ministry, purge all Courts of Judicature, break every Yoke, ease all
burdens, banish all profaneness, release the Prisoner, releeve the poor; Fill
the Land with Righteousness, what ever is good, holy, just, Honorable, let it
be brought forth and exercised; and the Lord your God will go before you, he
will fight for you, according to all that he did for you in Egypt. And your
Enemies shall bow at the soles of your feet, they shall call you the City of
the Lord, the Sion, the holy one of Israel, Isa. 60. You see besides your
encouragement, you have reward in your Work.

FINIS.

